KISSING THE ROD.




CHAPTER I.
DAZZLED.


There was no name on the doorposts, nothing beyond the
number--"48"--to serve as a guide; and yet it may be doubted
whether any firm in the City was better known to the postman, the
bankers'-clerks, and all who had regular business to transact with
them, than that of Streightley and Son. The firm had been Streightley
and Son, and it had been located at 48 Bullion Lane, for the last
hundred and fifty years. They were money-brokers and scrip-sellers at
the time of the South-Sea bubble, and were among the very few who were
not ruined by that disastrous swindle. So little ruined were they that
they prospered by it, and in the next generation extended their
business and enlarged their profits; both of which, however, were
consider curtailed by rash speculations during the French Revolution
and the American War. Within the first quarter of the present century
the business of Streightley and Son recovered itself; and, under the
careful management of old Sam Streightley and his head clerk, Mr.
Fowler, the house became highly esteemed as one of the safest
bill-broking establishments in the City. It was not, however, until
young Mr. Robert, following the bounden career of all the eldest sons
of that family, joined the business, and, after close application, had
thoroughly mastered its details, that fortune could be said to have
smiled steadily on the firm. Young Mr. Robert's views were so large
and his daring so great, that his father, old Mr. Sam, at first stood
aghast, and had to be perpetually supplicated before he gave
permission to experiment on the least hazardous of all the young man's
suggestions; but after the son had been about two years a partner in
the firm it happened that the father was laid up with such a terrible
attack of gout as to be incapable of attending to business for months;
and when he at length obtained the physician's grudging assent to his
visiting the City he found things so prosperous, but withal so totally
changed, that the old gentleman was content to jog down to Bullion
Lane about three times a month until his death, which was not long in
overtaking him.

Prosperous and changed! Yes; no doubt about that. Up that staircase,
hitherto untrodden save by merchants'-clerks leaving bills for
acceptance or notices of bills due; by stags with sham prospectuses of
never-to-be-brought-out companies; or by third-rate City solicitors
giving the quasi-respectability of their names to impotent
semi-swindles, which, though they would never see the light, yet
afforded the means for creating an indisputable and meaty bill of
costs;--up that staircase now came heavy magnates of the City,
directors of the Bank of England, with short ill-made Oxford-mixture
trousers, and puckered coats, and alpaca umbrellas; or natty
stockbrokers, most of them a trifle horsy in garb, all with undeniable
linen, and good though large jewelry, carefully-cultivated whiskers,
and glossy boots. In the little waiting-room might be found an Irish
member of Parliament; the managing director of a great steam-shipping
company; a West-end dandy, with a letter of introduction from some
club acquaintance with a handle to his name, who idiotically imagined
that that handle would serve as a lever to raise money out of Robert
Streightley; a lawyer or two; and, occasionally the bronzed captain of
a steamer arrived with news from the Pacific; or some burnt and
bearded engineer fresh from the inspection of a silver mine in Central
America. A long purgatory, for the most part, did these gentlemen
spend in the little waiting-room, or in the clerk's room beyond it,
where they were exposed to the sharp fusillade of Mr. Fowler's eyes
and the keen glances of the two young men who assisted him. The only
people who were shown by the messenger at once into Mr. Streightley's
presence were the City editors of the various newspapers, and a very
prettily-appointed young gentleman, wise withal beyond his years, who
occasionally drove down to Bullion Lane from Downing Street in a
hansom cab, and who was private secretary to the Chancellor of the
Exchequer.

Robert Streightley had done all this by his own talent and
exertion--"on his own hook," as the Stock Exchange men phrased it. The
keenness of his business intellect was astounding. He seemed to sift a
proposition as it was being laid before him; and as soon as the
proposer ceased speaking, Robert Streightley closed with or
pooh-poohed the offer, with incontrovertible reasons for his decision.
He spoke out plainly and boldly before the oldest and the youngest who
sought his advice; he was neither deferential nor patronising; and
never sought to please--simply for the sake of pleasing--any of his
clients. The young men looked up to him in wonder, and spoke of him
over mid-day chops and sherry as a "cool card," a "long-headed chap,"
"just about one," and in other complimentary slangisms. The older men
scarcely knew what to make of him; they hated him for his daring and
success, for the dashing manner in which he was passing them all in
the race for wealth and distinction; and they would have well liked to
have shrugged their shoulders and hinted about his being "fast," and
"going ahead," and finally making a grand smash of it; but they had no
pretext. So long as Robert Streightley's business relations were
thoroughly sound and wholesome it would have been against that _esprit
de corps_ which largely prevails among City men to breathe a word
against him; and as for his private life, they could scarcely bring a
charge of reckless extravagance against a man who went home to a
seventy-pound-a-year house at Brixton in the "Paragon" omnibus, and
there indulged in the dissipation of a "meat-tea" in the society of
his mother and sister. So they found another vent for their spleen,
and talked of him as a "doosid close-fisted fellow," a "mean
narrow-minded hunks," and a "niggardly screw." He merited none of
these appellations. He was a straightforward, honourable business-man,
bred in a narrow circle, which his own innate business habits were
narrowing year by year. As a boy he had had instilled into him the
value of money and the secret of money-getting; as a young man the
whole scope of his faculties had been directed to this end. Such
little fancy as he possessed--and with such a father the smallness of
that fancy could be easily divined--had been ruthlessly eradicated,
and all the nascent tendencies of his mind had been directed into one
strong channel of fact. That Jack had ever found giants to slay, that
glass slippers were ever worn by cinder-wenches, or pumpkins could by
any possibility become carriages, were fictions not to be found in
Bonnycastle and ignored by Walkinghame; but that two and two made
four, or that a talent of silver hid in a napkin remained an
unproductive talent of silver, whereas a hundred pounds invested in
Consols produced yearly three pounds as interest to its holder, were
as demonstrable as the light and heat of the sun at noonday.

He lived but for his business, nothing else. He was in his office at
ten o'clock, and he never left it, save on some business errand, until
six. He never took a holiday except on Christmas-day and Good Friday,
when the newspapers proclaimed all business suspended; he never dined
out save twice or thrice a-year at the anniversary banquets of the
directors of some of those companies in which his stake was large. His
enemies wronged him when they said he had no heart. He had sincerely
grieved for the old father who had brought him up and loved him deeply
in his own peculiar way; his purse-strings were always at the command
of those good Samaritans on the Stock Exchange who do so much in such
a quiet and unassuming manner; and the clergyman at Brixton knew he
might always count upon Mr. Streightley for a handsome subscription to
any charity brought under his notice. His manner was odd and
_brusque_, arising partly from his preoccupation, partly from his
having never mixed in society; but there was nothing pretentious or
vulgar, fast or underbred in him: he might have been thought an
oddity; he never could have been set down for a snob.

See him now as he sits at his desk, poring over his diary, a tall
strongly-built man, with long limbs lacking in due amount of muscular
development from want of exercise. With a high forehead, a head
prematurely bald, but surrounded with a thick fringe of brown hair,
with sharp gray eyes looking out from overhanging brows, a thinly-cut
aquiline nose, and rather full lips. He has a full whisker, after the
ordinary respectable "mutton-chop" outline, and might, if he so
pleased, have a large beard, as you can tell by the dark-blue outline
round his chin; but Robert Streightley would as soon think of coming
up to town outside the Paragon omnibus in a turban as of committing
any such unbusiness-like atrocity as growing a beard. One other person
is in the room with him just now--Mr. Fowler, his chief clerk, known
in the City as Downy Fowler; an old gentleman, who is looked upon as
the essence of knowingness, and to whom the fortunes of Streightley
and Son are not a little attributable. When this is hinted at, old Mr.
Fowler smiles enigmatically; but only in strictest confidence, and to
one or two very old friends, declares that, whatever he might have
been to the old gentleman, he does not pretend to hold a candle to Mr.
Robert, "whose head, my dear sir, is something won-der-ful!" A short
sleek gray-headed man, Mr. Fowler; with a high-collared coat much too
long in the sleeves, a waistcoat with traces of bygone snuff-pinches
lingering in the creases, gray trousers, and gaiter boots. A silent
little man, rarely speaking, but in the habit of calling his
principal's attention to matters under consideration, such as letters,
invoices, and share-lists, with his pointed forefinger. That
forefinger was at work at the very moment when they are first
presented to reader. It rested on an entry in the diary, and Mr.
Fowler looked up into his principal's face inquiringly.

"Well?" said Robert Streightley, "I see. Markwell, 1350_l_.; Baxter,
870_l_.; Currie and Tull, 340_l_.; Guyon, 180_l_. 17_s_. 3_d_.; Banks,
97_l_. 6_s_. Total, 2888_l_. 3_s_. 3_d_.--paid to us by Davidson--due
to-day--what of that?"

Mr. Fowler did not answer, but placed his forefinger more decidedly on
one of the items of the account.

"O, I see," said Streightley; "Guyon's acceptance! Ay, ay; I recollect
now. You called my attention to that, and declared that it was
doubtful at the time that Davidson paid it in. Of course you made
inquiries?"

Mr. Fowler nodded.

"And they were unsatisfactory? Well, that's no matter to us. The usual
notice has been served, of course? Very well, we look to Davidson; but
let Boswell's people have the usual instructions to proceed. So Tierra
del Fuegos stand the same, do they? All right then; hold on. Ocean
Marine have gone up; so that advance to Walton and Pycroft is well
covered. Let Brattle step round to--well, what is it, Brattle?" this
to the junior clerk, who, after knocking at the door, entered the
room.

"A lady, sir, to speak with you," said Mr. Brattle, in whom his
brother lunch-_convives_ at the Bay Tree would scarcely have
recognised the youth who now stood blushing before his principal.

"A lady to speak with me?"

"With Messrs. Streightley and Son, sir, she said, and in private,
sir."

"Must be some mistake," said Robert Streightley. "Never mind. Show the
lady in through the private door, Mr. Brattle. Leave me, Fowler, and
don't let any one in till I ring."

If Mr. Fowler could have expressed astonishment, he would have done
so, for never had woman entered that sanctum since he had been
connected with Streightley and Son. But his training did not admit of
any such vagary; so he retired without a word, and the door closed
behind him as Mr. Brattle admitted the visitor into Robert
Streightley's presence.

Robert Streightley, who had been pretending to be absorbed in the
diary, looked up, and carefully scrutinised his visitor. She was a
girl of about twenty, above the ordinary height, slightly and
gracefully built. She threw up her veil as she entered, without the
smallest sign of coquetry, and showed a strikingly-handsome face, very
pale, with greenish-gray eyes, delicate Grecian nose, small white
forehead, over which her dark-brown hair was drawn in flat bands,
short upper lip, and small rounded chin. She was dressed in a
dark-brown silk, with a black-lace cloak; and Streightley--usually
unobservant of such things--noticed the wonderful fit of her lavender
gloves. Streightley rose as she entered, and pointing to the usual
client's chair, begged her to be seated. She bowed, and seated
herself. Then there was a little pause, and Robert said, "You wished
to see me, I believe?"

"You are Messrs. Streightley and Son?" said the lady interrogatively,
in a musical but slightly timid voice.

"I am Mr. Streightley, the representative of the firm."

"That is what I wished to know," she replied a little haughtily. "Of
course I--what I would ask is--I am not accustomed to business
terms--You are the--the person--who sent this?"

She laid her parasol on the table as she spoke, and took from the
purse which she carried in her hand a small printed paper. Glancing at
it, Robert Streightley saw that it was an ordinary commercial
document, intimating to Edward Scrope Guyon, of 110 Queen Anne Street,
that a bill for 180_l_. 17_s_. 3_d_., drawn on him by Davidson
Brothers, lay due at Streightley and Son's, 48 Bullion Court, Lombard
Street. As he returned it to her he said, "It is quite right; it was
sent out by this house. It is the usual notice given in such cases,
stating where the money is to be paid."

She was very pale as she said, "It means then that money--that the
amount named--must be paid?"

"It does indeed."

"And at once?"

"This is the day for payment," said Streightley. Then noticing her
deadly pallor, and the trembling of her lips, he said: "May I ask how
this came into your hands?"

With a visible effort at self-control, the young lady replied: "I--I
should have mentioned it before. I am Miss Guyon, daughter of Mr.
Guyon, to whom that paper is addressed."

She hesitated for a minute, and Streightley, whose eyes were fixed
intently on her face, said:

"Ye-es! I think I understand; and he has sent you here to----"

"My father is not in the habit of sending me about on his
business-errands, sir!" interrupted Miss Guyon, flushing scarlet
(Robert thought that in his life he had never seen any thing so lovely
as she looked, with heightened colour, swelling nostril, and curved
lip.) "Mr. Guyon is out of town on--on very important and pressing
business; and as he will not be back until late at night, I thought it
best to come here to explain his absence, which will account for the
money not being ready."

"Which will account for the money not being ready!" repeated Mr.
Streightley absently. "O, of course, of course. Pray do not say
another word about it, Miss Guyon. I am very sorry that you should
have had the trouble of coming here, except that it--it has procured
me the--the great pleasure of seeing you!" (Robert had never before
paid a woman a compliment, and was horribly awkward in his first
attempt) "I'll call on Mr. Guyon to-morrow morning about eleven,
and----"

"And you'll bring your bill with you, will you?" said Miss Guyon with
supreme _hauteur_.

The word "bill" was in itself always disagreeable to her; but she had
no idea but that this was an ordinary tradesman's account, and thought
Robert Streightley was the tradesman to whom it was owing.

"Ye-es!" said he; "I'll bring the bill with me, and----"

"There is nothing more to be said, I think," interrupted Miss Guyon.
"Good morning."

"Good morning, Miss Guyon. Permit me to see you downstairs."

She did not speak; but he construed a very slight bow into a gesture
of assent, and proceeded down the staircase. Arrived at the door he
called the cabman, who was slumbering on his box; but the man's
movements being slow, Streightley opened the cab-door himself, and
bareheaded held it as Miss Guyon, with just the style of
acknowledgment that she would have given to the shop-walker who handed
her a chair at a linendraper's, passed in. Old Mr. Pommylow, chairman
of the West India Plantation Company, who was crossing the street at
the time, gave him a great nod and a sly wink; and made them all laugh
at the Board five minutes afterwards, by telling them he'd seen Bob
Streightley "doing the polite to a doosid fine gal."

She was gone; but Robert Streightley still stood on the pavement,
gazing after the cab that had carried her off. Then, after a minute,
he turned slowly round and retraced his steps up the staircase,
pondering over the interview.

After remaining for about half-an-hour in a brown study, he touched
the small handbell by which he was accustomed to summon Mr. Fowler,
and, without raising his head, said to that worthy gentleman when he
entered:

"Give me that acceptance we were speaking of, please."

"Guyon's acceptance do you men, sir?"

"Mr. Guyon's, if you please," said Streightley rather sternly, the
familiarity jarring on his ear.

"Will you want the others, sir?" asked the old man. "Markwell's and
Banks's are paid; but they haven't sent about the others yet."

"Only Mr. Guyon's, thank you, Fowler. I--I want to make a few
inquiries about it."

"I don't expect you'll hear much good of the acceptor, sir," said old
Fowler with twinkling eyes. "I suspect it's one of Davidson's private
discounts, and we know what they are--he, he!" and the old gentleman
laughed quietly.

"Let me have the letters, if you please, Mr. Fowler, and any thing
else there may be for signature. I shall be going soon."

"Going, sir!" said old Fowler in the greatest astonishment. He had
never known Mr. Robert leave before six o'clock since he had been in
the business, and now it was only four.

"Yes! I'm not very well. I think I want a little fresh air, so I shall
go and get it. And I shall probably not be here till twelve to-morrow,
Mr. Fowler."

"Very well, sir." He said it most mechanically. If the equestrian
statue of the Duke of Wellington had descended from its pedestal and
cantered up Threadneedle Street, Mr. Fowler would have been scarcely
more astonished.


Mr. Robert Streightley went in search of fresh air through Holborn and
Oxford Street to the West-end. He so rarely quitted the City, he was
so seldom out any where in the daylight, that the bright sun and the
splendid shops, the pleasure-seeking crowds idling through the
streets, the handsome carriages, and the general life and bustle
amazed, and under any other circumstances would have amused him. Even
now he felt that he was wasting his life, letting his days pass by
without any adequate enjoyment, and he determined that to a certain
extent he would remedy that for the future by curtailing the hours
devoted to his business, which had hitherto had his every energy. At
the Regent Circus he paused and asked his way to Queen Anne Street;
for he had determined to see the house where dwelt his lovely visitor
of the morning. How lovely she was, and how confused and ridiculous
she must have thought him; how different in manner to those with whom
she was in the habit of associating; and how delightfully ignorant she
was of all business-matters! He wondered whether he should see her the
next day when he called on her father. He would like to see her again,
he thought; and what would he not give to be able to talk to her, and
to get her to talk to him unreservedly, as no doubt she did to--to
those of her own class! Yes, there was some good in his money and his
business, after all. They had brought him in contact with this lovely
girl; and in his transactions with her father he might perhaps be able
to get to know her on other terms than those of mere business
acquaintance. That was the house, No. 110, with traces of her presence
in the lovely flowers in the balcony, and in the splendid Indian
work-box standing on the gilt table in the drawing-room window. A
handsome house, looking like the expenditure of two thousand a-year at
least, Streightley thought to himself; the expenditure, mind, not the
income,--his business education had taught him to look at those
matters in their right light; and he remembered what Fowler had said
about Mr. Guyon, and knew that the old clerk never spoke at random. A
carriage was at the door of No. 110; and a footman standing by it said
to his mistress as Streightley passed, "Not at home, my lady. Ridin'
with Miss Wentworths and the Major in the Park." Not at home! that of
course meant the lady of the house. But was there a Mrs. Guyon, or did
the young lady whom he had seen do the honours of her father's house?
He should imagine so; for she had come alone, and mentioned nothing of
her mother. Riding in the Park, eh? Then he might have a chance of
seeing her again! The Park was free to all, any one might go there,
and--and the Major! who was the Major? Robert Streightley's spirits
fell to zero again, as he remembered Miss Guyon's manner to him that
morning, and reflected how wide was the gulf between them.

He asked his way to the Park, and took up his position by the railings
near the Achilles statue, gazing round him in wonder at all he saw and
heard. The easy familiarity of the conversation between the ladies in
the carriages, or on the chairs, and the gentlemen attendant on them
was very different from the prim politeness of Peckham, or the
boisterous _bonhomie_ of Brixton; and he was particularly struck with
the general acquaintance that nine-tenths of the people lounging about
seemed to have with each other. Robert felt painfully out of his
sphere; he imagined that he was stared at as an interloper. For a long
time he could not muster up courage to take his place at the railings,
until he saw two carpenters returning from work in their flannel
jackets, stop for a minute to look at the passing pageant, and take up
their position at the railings, next to an old gentleman with a very
blue coat; and a very red face, who turned round and muttered
something about "d--d impudence," which delighted the carpenters
immensely. When they moved off, with grins at the old gentleman which
reduced him to the verge of apoplexy, Robert slipped into the place
they had left vacant, and remained there for some time, gazing in
wonder at all he saw, and wishing--O, how fervently wishing!--to see
_her_ again.

At last his perseverance was rewarded. In the midst of a large
cavalcade which came sweeping out of the Row, turning their horses'
heads towards the Marble Arch, sat Miss Guyon, looking, in her neat
hat, with her hair drawn off her face and gathered into a large knot
behind, even more lovely than she had looked in the morning.
Streightley's heart beat hard, and his mouth grew dry as he recognised
her. As she rode past, her glance fell upon him, but she did not take
the smallest notice of him; merely shifting her whip as she held out
her pretty little gauntleted hand to a young man riding between her
and the railings, and who, as he lifted his hat in adieu, said, "Will
you be at the Opera to-night?"

She replied, "At the Opera! O yes; box No. 70. Shall we see you?"

"Delighted!" he replied, bowing low, and turning his horse's head.
"Good day, Major!" and as the old gentleman on the other side of Miss
Guyon acknowledged his salute, the young man turned his horse's head
and rode away.

"At the Opera! she was going to the Opera!" Robert Streightley found
himself vaguely repeating these words as he hurried down Piccadilly.
He left the Park so soon as the cavalcade of which Miss Guyon formed
part had passed out of sight. Good heavens, how lovely she was! how
unlike any thing he had ever seen before! how elegant and graceful! He
remembered noticing how closely her dark-blue riding-habit fitted her,
and he could see the pretty dogskin gauntlet as she put out her hand
to--Ay, who was that she shook hands with? Not the Major; he was the
old gentleman. Who was that who asked her if she were going to the
Opera and--? What on earth was it to him? he was nothing to Miss
Guyon; very probably he should never see her again, and--Yes. He
stopped suddenly in his hurried walk. Yes; he would see her again, and
that night too. He had never been to the Opera; but any one could go
there by paying; and, if he could not speak to her, he should at least
be able to gaze upon her lovely face. He was a fool, and was losing
his senses. What would they say in the City if they knew of this
egregious folly? Here was a man of six-and-thirty running about, like
a schoolboy in his calf-love, after a girl whom he had only seen that
morning, and had scarcely spoken to! It was very ridiculous, he
acknowledged, and he would give it up. He would just call on Mr. Guyon
in the way of business in the morning because he had promised to do
so, and the affair would be at an end. But he thought he would go to
the Opera that night. You see, he had never been there, and had often
wanted to know what the place was like.

He went into a well-known dining establishment and had some dinner,
and--an unusual thing with him--drank a pint of wine. He had learned
of the waiter what time the Opera commenced; and as soon as the
clock-hands reached half-past seven he hurried off and presented
himself at the pit entrance, where, on account of his morning costume,
he was refused admittance. He was told, however, that there would be
no obstacle to his admission into the amphitheatre; and he accordingly
climbed into that wild region, and there secured a front seat. He had
hired a glass from the check-taker, and with it he now proceeded to
scan the house, as yet cold and nearly, empty. Miss Guyon was not
there. The opera commenced, and still she did not arrive. Streightley,
plying his glass at two minutes' intervals, at length saw her advance
to the front of a box on the first tier and take the seat with her
back to the stage. With her was the lady whom he had seen in the
carriage at the door in Queen Anne Street; and they had scarcely been
seated ten minutes before they were joined by the young man who had
been of Miss Guyon's party in the Park. Streightley recognised him in
an instant, and hated him for his easy manners and his good looks; for
he was a good-looking young fellow of six-and-twenty, with fair hair
parted in the middle, regular features, and brilliant teeth. Other men
visited the box during the evening, but this young fellow only went
away once, and then Streightley saw him in the stalls with his glass
rivetted on Miss Guyon, who, as he also remarked, attracted a great
deal of attention. Then he returned to the box and remained there
during the rest of the evening, until nearly the close of the opera,
indeed, when Streightley saw the party preparing to move. Robert
instantly seized his hat, and rushing downstairs arrived at the door
in time to hear loud shouts of "Lady Henmarsh's carriage stops the
way!" and to see the visitor of the morning on the arm of an old
gentleman, and Miss Guyon closely escorted by the fair-haired
equestrian. As she stepped into the carriage Miss Guyon looked up at
her attendant cavalier with a smile that Robert Streightley would at
that instant have sacrificed all his wealth to have had directed at
him. He was mad with rage and jealousy, and could have struck down the
simpering fool, who muttered something inaudible under his breath, and
raised his hat as the carriage drove off.

What had he said in return for that look? That Robert Streightley
could never know. Who was he who created the first pang of jealousy
that had ever rankled in Streightley's heart? That he would learn at
once; he would follow the man, and see where he lived, and learn who
he was.

The young man lit a cigar and strolled leisurely eastward. Following
him at a little distance, Streightley never took his eyes from him,
saw him stop at the Temple gate, and reached the door as it closed
behind him. To the porter Mr. Streightley gave the name of an
acquaintance who resided in Brick Court, and on being admitted saw his
quarry just ahead of him. He needed caution now, for theirs were the
only footsteps that echoed through the courts; but the young man,
without looking round, made his way to Crown-Office Row, and entered
one of the end houses nearest the river. Streightley entered after
him, and remained at the bottom of the staircase listening to his
ascending footsteps, which paused when they reached the topmost story;
and then the listener heard the grating of a key in a lock, and
afterwards the clanging of a closing door. He waited a few minutes,
and then crept softly to the highest story, where were two sets of
chambers. One set, as announced by a painted tin placard, was to let;
over the other were painted the names of Mr. Gordon Frere and Mr.
Charles Yeldham.




CHAPTER II.
A MORNING CALL.


At nine o'clock the next morning, an hour later than his usual time,
Robert Streightley entered his little dining-room and sat down to
breakfast. He looked pale and fatigued; and there was an unnatural and
unusual brightness in his eyes that at once attracted the notice of
old Alice, who had been the nurse of his childhood, and was now the
housekeeper and confidential servant of the little family. The old
lady was jealously careful of the health of "her boy," as she always
spoke of him, and was accustomed to use the license of tongue allowed
her in many caustic remarks. She came into the room just as Robert
seated himself at the table, and at once commenced to address him in
her least conciliatory manner.

"O, you have got down at last, have you, Master Robert? I thought you
was never coming, and there you might have lied before I'd have come
up to help you! That's what I say, and what I mean."

"What's the matter, Alice? you don't seem pleased this morning."

"Pleased? Who should be pleased, and a lovely steak and mushrooms left
to burn itself away to a cinder, and you never coming home to dinner.
To dinner, indeed!--not coming home till all hours of the night. I
heard your key in the lock, though you thought I was asleep, as all
good Christians ought to have been at such an hour--but I heard you.
And not foreign-post night either, nor West Indy mail, nor one of them
City dinners, else you'd have been home to dress or took your bag with
you to the office. Well, it's not for an old woman like me to say, but
there's no doubt you're doing too much, slaving like no blackamoor
that ever I read of, and all for what? All for---- It's as good bacon
as ever was cured, though you do push your plate away in that fashion.
Try a bit, Master Robert--come now!"

"I can't, Alice. My mouth's out of taste. I've no appetite this
morning; give me a cup of tea,--there's a dear soul,--and let me be
quiet."

"Let you be quiet! You don't think I'd bother you, do you? Cup of tea,
indeed. You'll want more than a cup of tea if you go on in this way,
sitting up till all hours and fagging yourself over your business. I'm
sure your 'ma and Miss Ellen will think you looking quite ill, when
they come back from York; and it's all that dratted office as is doing
it. I should like to see any body else who sticks to it as you do, and
all for what--that's what I want to know? All for what? If you was a
struggling on with nine children to educate and do for, you couldn't
grind at it harder than you do; and you'll find it out sooner than you
expect. Ah, Robert!" exclaimed the old woman, suddenly softening in
her tone, and coming up close to him, "Robert, my own dear boy, don't
be so headstrong, deary; don't work your life away in this fashion.
There's no one knows you so well as I do, and I see you're doing too
much, and you're beginning to show it. Don't work so hard, my boy, my
own dear boy!"

Robert Streightley put up his big arm and pulled down the old woman's
head, and pressed her hard rough cheek, down which the tears were
flowing silently, close to his own. Then, with an affectation of
cheerfulness, he said:

"Why, Alice! why, nurse! you must not fancy such foolish things, old
lady. I am perfectly well and hearty; only a little done-up this
morning, perhaps, after an extra pressure of business yesterday, which
kept me up rather later than usual, but otherwise all right."

"I'm a foolish old woman, I know, Robert; but I love you very dearly,
and you're all I've left to love; and when you don't come home, I get
frightened and nervous, and fancy you're doing too much, and, that you
ought to be here, in the dining-room, reading your newspaper or having
your little nap, as usual, in the evenings, instead of working away at
that horrible office to all hours. And you won't be home to-day again,
I suppose?"

"O yes, indeed I shall! What made you think that?"

"Why, you've got on that blue frock-coat, and a white waistcoat, and
your best cravat; just for all as you dress yourself when you go to
them ship-launches, or Greenwich dinners of your companies, or other
places which keep you away from where you're best--at your own home."

Streightley smiled, rather a ghastly smile, as he said: "O no I'm only
going to call on some rather particular people who--it's best to--at
all events--I mean who are accustomed to something different from
us--City fellows, you know!"

It was feebly said, and feebly received by old Alice, who looked very
grim, and only remarked: "Ay, ay--ay, ay!"

He made but a very poor apology for a breakfast, and said not a great
deal more to his old friend, who stood by, vainly hoping for that
"chat" with her boy which was the prime event of her day. But this
morning Robert Streightley was preoccupied; he sat over the table long
after he had finished eating, idly playing with the crumbs, and
evidently buried in thought. At length he roused himself, and after
referring several times nervously to his watch, he started for town.

It was his habit to go by omnibus; and from his long residence at
Brixton he was known to all the coachmen on the road, each of whom on
passing gave him a semi-respectful semi-inviting salutation. But
Robert Streightley was not inclined for an omnibus-ride this morning;
he felt somehow that such a mode of conveyance would not accord with
the world a glimpse of which he had had on the previous day, nor with
the errand on which he was proceeding; so he hailed the first
disengaged hansom, and was driven rapidly to Queen Anne Street. So
rapidly, that when he alighted from the cab at the corner of the
street he found it yet wanted twelve minutes of eleven, the hour he
had named for his interview with Mr. Guyon. He could not be before his
time; that would be as much against the strict business rule in which
he had been brought up as being behind it would argue either leisure
or a strong interest in the matter then on hand, and neither
supposition he thought advisable in respect to him. So he determined
to eke out the time; and for that purpose strolled up a side street,
and found himself gazing vacantly on the dressing and exercising of
horses and the washing of carriages, in a mews, at the entrance to
which he stood for some little time. After walking round and round,
and circling a very narrowed square, he found that the back part of
Mr. Guyon's house looked into this mews; and then he busied himself
with wondering which was Miss Guyon's room, and whether she were there
at that time, and whether she had thought of him since the interview
in the City, and what she had thought of him, and---- And then looking
at his watch, he found the eventful hour had arrived; so he walked
boldly round, and, ringing the bell, demanded to see Mr. Guyon.

A colourless footman with light hair and weak eyes, in a very
washed-out lilac-striped jacket and dusty gray trousers, answered the
bell, and showed Streightley into the dining-room. This was a
cheerless apartment, painted salmon-colour, with a dozen Cromwell
chairs in faded American cloth and spurious oak ranged round the room,
but with some genuine ancestors, a Lely, a couple of Knellers, a
Reynolds--such a conception of female childish purity and grace!--and
a Lawrence, hanging on the walls. The Turkey carpet was faded and
patched; the green table-cover was stained and torn; the window-blinds
were yellow, and damp-stained; and every where there was a _laissez
aller_ which generally bespeaks the absence of female government.
The mantelpiece was covered with purple velvet blurred with sticky
rings made by overflowing glasses; in the centre of it lay an
oxydised-silver cigar-ash holder in the form of an open spread leaf,
in which still remained the ends of a couple of half-smoked cigars;
and in the looking-glass, between the glass and the frame, were
invitation-cards, photographs of boxers, and ladies of the Parisian
theatres, all wearing the same scanty drapery and leering the
selfsame leer,--applications for payment of queen's taxes, and
notices that the "collector had called" for the water-rate. Robert
Streightley had gazed round him; and with the power of appreciation
innate in him had remarked these various objects and indications when
the door opened quickly, and Mr. Guyon entered the room.

Mr. Guyon, none but he; no mistaking him. In the bold face that
flashed upon him Streightley recognised a coarser and stronger
rendering of Miss Guyon's every feature: the delicately-cut slightly
aquiline nose, the small rounded chin, the vivacious green-gray eye.
Mr. Guyon's hair, which was rather sparse and thin, was of a different
colour from his daughter's; was indeed in itself of two distinct hues,
being very black and glossy in certain lights, and very purple and
lustreless in others. His complexion, too, was peculiar,--mottled and
speckled, something like a plover's egg, save just under the eyes, on
the top of the cheekbones, where it had a very roseate hue. He was
dressed in a loose blue-silk jacket with a red collar and red
sleeve-linings, and wore a pair of Turkish trousers, tied round the
waist with a cord like a bell-rope. His turn-down collar was cut very
low, showing a great deal of bony throat; his wristbands were long,
fastened with elaborate carbuncle studs, and coming far down over his
white, well-shaped hands. He wore striped-silk socks of the rather
loud pattern,--which, seen at the theatre under the loose garb of the
mandarin, enables us to make a tolerably accurate guess at the
identity of the person in the pantomime who is to be "afterwards
clown,"--and natty red-morocco slippers. He came into the room with a
rush, had Robert Streightley by the hand in an instant, and forced him
into a chair as he said,

"Mr. Streightley, this is kind indeed! This is an honour I can never
forget!"

Streightley, rather taken aback at the warmth of his reception,
said, "it is nothing, Mr. Guyon. I can assure you I merely called
because----"

"I know, my dear sir, I know. My daughter explained to me what she did
yesterday, and how generously you received her." Robert's eyes
brightened as he listened. "Women, you know, my dear sir, are all
impulse. You are a married man, my dear Mr. Streightley? No! well,
still, my dear sir, I daresay--ha, ha!--that you have thorough
experience of the other sex. When a man is young, and pleasing, and
rich--O yes, by George, rich ha, ha!--he has opportunities of studying
the other sex, even if he be not married. Not married? Let me see,
what was I saying? O, my daughter--who is the prop and sunshine of my
life, the dearest and most devoted creature in the world--my daughter
has told me of the document which caused her such fright. It was--it
was merely the--usual notice, I suppose?"

"It was the usual notice."

As Streightley said this, a loud peal at the door-bell attracted his
attention.

"And the amount?"

"A hundred and eighty pounds odd--stay, I have the bill with me;" and
drawing out his pocketbook, Robert produced the document. As he did
this, he heard the street-door opened, and the sound of a man's
footsteps passing the dining-room and going upstairs. His heart sank
within him. He would swear to that footfall--swear to it any where;
had he not heard it twelve hours before echoing up the hollow
staircase in Crown Office Row? It was that man; and he was going
upstairs to see Miss Guyon, doubtless in fulfilment of some
appointment made during the exchange of bows and glances at the
carriage-door last night. He turned deadly pale, and his lips
trembled.

"Will you allow me to look at that bill?" said Mr. Guyon in his most
mellifluous tones. "Thank you. How your hand trembles!--a little chill
perhaps. Draw closer to the fire. We seem to have begun the cold
weather already. For my own part, I could always endure a fire--O,
this is really very bad of Davidson; very bad indeed!" He had been
surveying the document which Streightley had handed to him through a
pair of gold double eyeglasses perched on the bridge of his nose; and
he now looked over them at Streightley as he repeated, "Very bad
indeed!"

"I--I beg your pardon--my attention was diverted. What did you say?"

"I said, Mr. Streightley," said Mr. Guyon with increased sternness,
"that this is a very bad business of Davidson's. I gave him this
acceptance, sir, to help him in--the what do you call it?--the hour of
need, under the full understanding that he would meet it. It was for
his convenience, not for mine. I never had a shilling of the produce;
and now he leaves me to discharge it at a time when he knows that----"

"That it will be inconvenient to meet it?"

"You anticipate my words, sir. What with paying calls on shares, and
investments in certain other affairs which I have authority--almost as
good as yours, my dear sir--for believing in, my balance at my
banker's is at its lowest permissible ebb."

"If it will be any accommodation to you, Mr. Guyon, I'll send my
cheque to meet this acceptance; and I'll take another from you at
three months," said Streightley nervously. If he were ever to be
received upstairs, it must be through the father's influence.

"My dear sir, a thousand thanks! I'm really very much obliged to
you--very much obliged. I'm sure any terms which----"

"I think the Bank rate is three and a half just now," interrupted
Streightley with a slight smile; "we money-brokers charge one per cent
in advance of that. So that you see I make something of you after
all."

"My dear sir," said Mr. Guyon, advancing towards him with outstretched
hand, "you endeavour to make light of an obligation; but I'm too much
of an old soldier not to know the service you have rendered me. And I
thank you for it--I thank you for it! In these levelling days, when a
gentleman meets a gentleman, they should close ranks and march
together, by George! Give me your hand, sir. I'm proud to make your
acquaintance. I hope to renew it. There are not many that Ned Guyon
sees at his table, because, perhaps, he's infernally particular, and
does not choose to mix with cads. But those who come are of the right
sort; and he'll be proud to see you among them."

"You're very good, I'm sure," said Streightley. "Perhaps you'll give
me a call in the City in a day or two, and we'll put this matter on a
business footing. And now I must be off. I shall be delighted to come
whenever you ask me--and--my compliments to Miss Guyon. Good-day!" and
with a warm shake of his new acquaintance's hand--a shake which was
enthusiastically returned--Robert Streightley took his departure.

Left to himself, Mr. Guyon plunged his hands into the pockets of his
Turkish trousers and strode several times up and down the room,
finally stopping in front of the looking-glass and soliloquising: "A
rum start,--a devilish rum start! I thought I'd seen every variety of
discounters, but I never met one who behaved like that before. What
the devil was his motive? he had one, of course; but what the devil
was it?"


Meanwhile a very different scene was being enacted in the
drawing-room. Robert Streightley's prescience had not deceived him.
The ring at the bell, which acted with such electrical effect on
Streightley's nerves, was given by the young man whom he had followed
to his chambers on the previous evening; the footstep passing up the
staircase was his footstep; and the colourless footman, throwing open
the drawing-room door, announced him as "Mr. Gordon Frere." Miss Guyon
looked up from the flowers she was tending, and her cheek slightly
flushed. The flush was very becoming to Miss Guyon--at least Mr. Frere
approved of it highly, as he did of her high-cut mouse-coloured plush
dress, her neat linen collar fastened with a handsome dead-gold
brooch, her long cuffs, and her simply-arranged hair.

"You are early, Mr. Frere," said Miss Guyon, as she extended her hand
to her visitor; but she made the remark in a tone which marked her
approval of the circumstance.

"Yes," he replied; "I feared you might have gone to the Park, if I
came later."

"I don't ride to-day," said Katharine with a bright smile; "papa is
busy, and I did not make any other arrangements."

She moved away from the table over which she had been bending as she
spoke, and seated herself in a low chair, happily placed in the shade
of the window-curtain. Gordon Frere took his seat upon an ottoman near
her, and contemplated the lining of his hat with close attention. Not
that he was at all awkward--awkwardness was not in Mr. Frere's nature,
certainly not in his habits--but he was not a particularly ready
talker, and under the circumstances this seemed the correct thing to
do. Katharine Guyon's manners were, in certain respects, perfect; they
were, indeed, rather too perfect and independent; she presented too
complete a contrast to the drooping-lily style of girl; and she never
suffered from a sense of embarrassment. It was not, therefore, shyness
which lent her downy cheek that beautiful flush it had worn at the
entrance of her visitor, and continued to wear, or that softened
glance which darkened the colour and deepened the expression of her
eyes. She was very glad to see him, and she showed her gladness; and
there was a pleasant gleeful ring in the tone in which she talked to
him of the various but trivial events of the preceding day, of their
common acquaintances, and of the delights of last night's opera.

Her voice and accent were remarkably refined, and the tone of her
conversation, though its matter was only of the ordinary kind, was far
removed from the commonplace. She touched her topics lightly and
easily, let them go without too much handling, and gradually infused
into her companion some of the brightness and buoyancy which animated
herself. Gordon Frere had seen her sufficiently often to be familiar
with most of her moods, and with all the variations of her appearance,
for hers was by no means the "beauty for ever unchangingly bright,"
which is also undeniably uninteresting; but he began to think that he
had never seen her to so much advantage as on this occasion, and to
discover new charms in her, as she sat and talked to him, in her clear
fresh voice, and her low happy laughter broke every now and then the
tenor of their dialogue.

What did they talk about? That would be difficult to tell; and the
discourse, written down, which suffices to charm and engross two young
persons, already very well disposed to regard each other as the most
bewitching and delightful individuals in the world, would have
singularly little attraction for a third party outside that enchanted
pale, which encloses within a magic circle the sayings and doings of
those under the spell. The pleasantest "talks" are those which have
the least in them; the best-remembered interviews are frequently those
in which there have been no salient features, of which it would be
hardest to render an account,--those in which acquaintance passes into
knowledge, and grows into friendship after a strange fashion,
distinctly felt, but not to be described. When the transition is not
from acquaintance to friendship, but from liking to love, the process
is even more difficult of description; and a transition of this kind
was taking place in the pretty, if not particularly neat, drawing-room
which formed so striking a contrast to the apartment beneath it, in
which Mr. Guyon and Robert Streightley had held a parley, destined to
influence the future fate of Katharine and her visitor very
materially.

What did they not talk of? that is to say, within the wide range of
topics possessing interest for their young light hearts. The
festivities performed during the past week, and anticipated for that
to come; the prospects of a charitable bazaar, at which Miss Guyon had
kindly consented to take a stall (Mr. Frere was very happy in his
anticipation of the unqualified success of the speculation); the Opera
_rpertoires_ for the season; the last new varieties of flowers at the
Botanical (Miss Guyon loved flowers and understood them); the last new
novel, and the forthcoming poem by the Laureate. Then they discussed
Tennyson in general, and Katharine quoted him in particular--an
achievement in which Gordon Frere could not imitate her, his
appreciation being vague, though genuine; and Katharine "tried over"
one or two of the airs which they agreed to prefer among those in
fashion just then; and time flew, and the young people felt decidedly
happy.

Miss Guyon played brilliantly; her music had a great deal of the
"dash" about it which characterised her appearance and her general
demeanour. She was one of those women who do every thing well which
they undertake at all, and the finish of her manner extended to all
she did. She had another peculiarity; perhaps not a safe or
advantageous one in the end, but pleasant and effective then. She
could do certain things with impunity which girls in her position,
however effectually "come out," could not have attempted. She set
conventionality aside when it suited her to do so; but the boldest and
most ill-natured critic would never have accused her of outraging it.
The men who tempt women into departure from the rules, made and
appointed for their conduct and customs by a society more remarkable
for suspicion than for intelligence, are precisely those who most
severely condemn them for yielding to the temptation. But there was
neither guidance nor following in Miss Guyon's case. She was an
exceptional woman, placed in circumstances which are, fortunately, not
very common; and she went her own way, and kept, to it unmolested; and
if not uncriticised, criticised as little as any one possessing youth,
beauty, talent, and individuality of character, could expect to be.

So Miss Guyon talked to Gordon Frere, and played for his delectation,
and quoted poetry to him, and made herself most agreeable; and his
stay prolonged itself much beyond the customary limits of a morning
visit; and yet she never felt that this was any thing unusual, or was
conscious that her self-possession was beyond that of other girls, or
her manner more assured than theirs. She never thought about it at
all; she enjoyed the present time and the young man's society; she
accredited him with all sorts of social talents and bright congenial
tastes; and no suspicion ever occurred to her that he was merely
reflecting some of her own readiness, brilliancy, and versatility. And
Gordon Frere, was not "he too in Arcadia"? Over the girl's whole
bearing an indescribable softness, a winning grace was thrown,--the
subtle, all-powerful charm created by the desire of pleasing; perhaps
the most potent, and frequently the most unconscious, in a woman's
possession. She looked her best, she talked her best, the animation of
her manner never passing the bounds of perfect refinement, but ever
spontaneous and unsubdued; the simple grace of her figure, the
sensitive beauty of her face must have touched and warmed a duller man
than Gordon Frere. There was a delicious flattery in her undisguised
pleasure in his society which he felt with a subtler sense than he had
ever before experienced; for there was no one to share it here. She
was shining, she was sparkling for him alone. This was something
different, something much more delightful than the ride in the Row,
or the dance in the ball-room, to which he was tolerably well
accustomed, and which he might have gone on enjoying for some time
longer without being inspired by the intense admiration which began to
possess him as he looked at her, and listened to her, as he recognised
the genuine charm of her manner, unspoiled by the faintest tinge of
self-consciousness or coquetry.

"Do you know much of the City?" Katharine said, after a slight pause
in their conversation; "do you often go there?"

"No, indeed," said Frere; "I seldom have occasion; and my rambles
eastwards rarely extend beyond the Temple. But why do you ask? Do you
take an interest in the City?"

"I do," she returned thoughtfully; "I should like to explore it
thoroughly for the sake of its present and its past. I have never seen
any thing of it since I was a child, and they took me to the Tower,
and Guildhall, and the Thames Tunnel all on the same day; and I
remember nothing but a hideous figure of Queen Elizabeth, the
block--which frightened me--Gog and Magog, and my own fatigue. I was
horribly tired when I came home; and when, on another holiday, they
wanted to take me to St. Paul's, and told me about the winding stairs
and the whispering gallery, I positively declined the proposed
diversion. So I have never really seen the City. I drove through a
part of it yesterday, and a very dingy part it was too; and I thought
how much I should like to see it all and think over it all."

"I don't suppose many people think of it in that way," said Mr. Frere;
"to the world at large it's only a huge counting-house, a busy
beehive, a crowd of places where money is to be made, and of men
intent on making it."

"But even in that aspect it is very interesting," said Katharine; "and
in that aspect I was considering it when I looked at the great
warehouses and offices, and saw the names whose very sound is golden,
the names famous all over the world. But, after all, these people must
lead horribly stupid lives, for ever toiling at money-getting. I don't
suppose they have time to enjoy spending it when it is made. Only
fancy how dreadful to have to go to these dingy places every day, and
stay there all day long."

"That is true," said Gordon Frere. "The lives of City men do not seem
very enviable, or indeed bearable to us; but there must be a
compensation in them. Some of them must absolutely _like_ plodding,
for they go on with it long after they need not, as a matter of
choice."

"Do they?" asked Katharine in a tone of surprise. "I saw a 'City man'
when I was there,--I had a little business to attend to for papa, as
he was not at home,--and he had such a settled, business-like look,
though he was not at all old. I could not fancy him ever taking any
pleasure or amusement, or being like other people--of course, I mean,"
she added explanatorily, "any of the pleasures of his class."

"O, I suppose not," said Frere; "a regular grub, who will be what he
will be content to call rich when he's gray and gouty. But they have
one consolation, Miss Guyon: as their business and their pleasure
alike consist in money-getting, the one is not purchased at the
expense of the other."

"Like ours," she said with a laugh, "when we have any business." Then
she went on again, thoughtfully as before: "I should like to go all
through the City. Not for the sake of seeing the places where all the
money that I have nothing to do with is made; but because so much of
our old history was acted out there. I suppose in the City one can get
a sight of the old landmarks; and they are certainly not to be found
outside it. It is rather odd that every thing that is most dignified
connects itself in one's mind with City places, and every thing that
is most vulgar with City people. If one could only see it after all
the money-grubbers are gone away, and when it is still and quiet in
the evenings, as they say it is----"

"And when, accordingly, the most ingenious and charmingly-sensational
robberies are perpetrated," said Gordon Frere, laughing. "Well, that
is a wish easily gratified. Who was the man who always said, when any
place was mentioned, 'Let's make a party and go'? No matter, we will
echo him. I know a man who knows lots of City men, who would be
delighted to show you every thing worth seeing; and then there are
books, you know, which tell one the history--I was going to say the
pedigree--of every place. But I suppose Mr. Guyon has City
acquaintances also?"

Gordon Frere asked the question inadvertently, and felt rather guilty
when he had done so; for he had heard certain rumours which left him
in no doubt at all as to the nature of Mr. Guyon's acquaintance with
the far east.

"I daresay he has," replied Katharine carelessly; "but I don't know
any thing of them. My business was only with a tradesman, a person
named Streightley, and I have never heard papa mention his business
friends."

And then the conversation drifted to other topics, and Gordon Frere
shortly after took his leave. This morning visit had been unlike the
ordinary events of his days, and he felt towards Katharine Guyon as he
left her as he had never felt before. And Katharine? She had reseated
herself at the piano as he left the room, and her fingers had strayed
for a few momenta over the keys; then her hands fell idly into her
lap, and, in the sunshine of the summer day, unbroken by the stir and
noise in the street, there came upon the fair young girl that
wonderful waking trance whose vision is "love's young dream."

The trance was broken by the entrance of her father. Mr. Guyon's
manner, always light and airy, was on this occasion lighter and airier
than usual. He walked up to the piano, bent over his daughter, and
giving her a paternal kiss, said, "Who was your visitor, Kate?"

Not without a repetition of the blush, Katharine said, "Mr. Frere,
papa."

"Mr. Frere!" repeated Mr. Guyon,--"ay, ay, a good fellow, Gordon
Frere,--a good fellow! Wants ballast perhaps!" added he reflectively,
as though he himself were provided with more than an average amount of
that commodity,--"wants ballast; but that will come. By the way, Kate,
I've had your City friend of yesterday with me,--Mr. Streightley."

"Indeed, papa!" said Katharine carelessly. It was a great descent from
Gordon Frere to the City man, Mr. Streightley. She rose from the piano
as she spoke, and crossed to the mantel-shelf, on which she leaned her
arm.

"Indeed, papa! Yes, and indeed, papa, and no mistake. It's a most
remarkable thing, and I can't make it out. You don't understand
business matters in detail, but you'll be able to follow me when I
tell you that this Streightley, who has the name of being a deuced
sharp man of business, has behaved to me in a deuced liberal and
gentlemanly way--a deuced liberal and gentlemanly way! And what on
earth can have been his motive--for of course he had a motive--what on
earth can have induced him to show me any special favour, I can't
divine."

"Can't you, papa?" said Miss Guyon. She was looking at herself in the
glass, pushing back the hair from off her temples. A slight smile
curved her lip, and she looked splendidly handsome. Mr. Guyon,
glancing at her, caught the expression reflected in the glass and
sprang to his feet.

"By George, Kate, I've hit it! the man's in love with you!"

"Is he?" said Katharine simply. "I noticed him in the Park yesterday
afternoon, and standing outside the Opera last night."

"You're an angel!" said Mr. Guyon, again performing the paternal
salute. "What are you going to do to-morrow?"

"I thought of going to the Botanical Gardens in the afternoon--it's
the last _fte_ of the season."

"You shall go! I'll take you myself! You--you have not asked young
Frere to call again, have you?"

"No, papa. I----"

"Of course. I only wanted to know. Don't, until I tell you. And now I
must be off. God bless you, my child!"

But though Mr. Guyon took farewell of his daughter he was not "off"
yet; for he spent half an hour in his dressing-room, his head resting
on his hand, and his busy mind full of thought.




CHAPTER III.
WITHIN THE PALE.


Three days had elapsed since the interview between Katharine Guyon and
Gordon Frere, which had gone so far towards deciding the destiny of
both, when that haughty young lady learned, with some astonishment and
more disdain, that her father had it in contemplation to invite Mr.
Streightley, the "tradesman" on whom she had called "in the City," to
one of his quiet and limited, but very _recherch_ dinners. She heard
the announcement with such surprise that her father actually took the
trouble of observing the expression of her face, and laughed quite
spontaneously at it.

"That person, papa?" asked Katharine.

"Yes, my dear, 'that person,' as you call him, with the pretty
insolence which is more becoming than reasonable. And more than that,
Kate, you must make yourself agreeable to that person, and we must
have pleasant people to meet him, for he has done me a great service,
and is likely to do me several good turns, and to be a very useful
acquaintance."

"But, papa," pursued Katharine, who was accustomed to hold her ground
in words, as well as to have her way in actions, "he is not in our
set, or in any set, I should think. A City person, a tradesman! I
really cannot see----"

"I daresay not, Kate," said her father, with a perceptible knitting of
the delicately-traced eyebrows over the fine eyes, which indicated
that this exquisite gentleman was not precisely the soul of patience
and good temper. "I daresay not, but _I_ can; and that is the chief
matter just now. I daresay Mr. Streightley is not in any 'set,' as you
say; but when you talk of him as a 'tradesman' you make a very silly
and an ignorant mistake. Yes you do," he continued, in reply to an
indignant look from his daughter, "though you are very clever,
Katie,--almost as clever as you are handsome, my dear. Mr. Streightley
is a very rich and a very influential man, and no more a tradesman
than I am."

"Well then, papa," asked Katharine, "what did he mean by sending in a
bill in that extraordinary way? If he is not a tradesman, what
dealings with him had you, and what services has he done you?"

Mr. Guyon smiled. His daughter's _navet_ amused him. "Never mind,
Kate," he said. "Men have money transactions outside their household
bills, my dear, or even their tailors and bootmakers; but women do not
need to understand these things, and I should only bore you if I
explained them. Mr. Streightley's 'bill' was a very different thing to
what you imagine, and his position is, I assure you, a most
respectable one. Take my word for that, Kate, and don't trouble your
pretty little head about the matter. I hope we shall see a good deal
of Mr. Streightley, and I wish this dinner-party to be a success; so
make out your list, and see Watkins about it at once."

"Do you wish any people in particular to be asked to meet this new
friend, papa?" asked Katharine, in a tone which was a little sullen,
and just the least in the world impertinent, "or shall I take them, as
usual, from the visiting-book?"

Mr. Guyon ignored the tone of his daughter's question, but replied to
its matter by saying: "No, no one in particular; either Lady Henmarsh
or Mrs. Stanbourne, of course; but you need not have any girls. I
fancy Streightley knows very few people; they'll all be new to him."

"Bar, Bench, or Bishop, like Mrs. Merdle,--eh, papa?" said Katharine,
as she rose from the breakfast-table, at which this dialogue had taken
place. "Very well, I'll let you see my list when it's done. And now,
the day?"

This point was fixed, after a little discussion; and then Katharine
went to talk with her housekeeper, Mrs. Watkins, to write her notes,
to dawdle over her flowers, until the horses came round; and she
started for the Park with the reasonable expectation of seeing Gordon
Frere--an expectation which was fulfilled before she had been five
minutes in the Row.

During the days which intervened before that named for the
dinner-party, Katharine never gave a passing thought to the subject of
her father's strange and incongruous guest; but when the day came, she
felt rather ill-humoured about the whole thing.

"What on earth can papa want with him?" she thought, impatiently; "and
I am to make myself agreeable to him! Well, that generally comes easy
to me; but not in this case. I can't even talk to him about the City,
which I really should like, because that would be talking shop, though
he's not a tradesman. However, it will soon be over," she thought,
brightening up, and with an exquisite smile of happy anticipation
lighting up her face, moody till then; "and the ball can't fail to be
delightful."

Miss Guyon was going to a ball in the evening, after her dinner-party
at home; and her toilet was made with a view to that festivity. An
ornament or two, and a magical touch added to her head-dress, were all
she would require for the perfect brilliancy of her appearance, in
addition to the white dress, arrayed in which she appeared to the
enchanted gaze of Robert Streightley, when he was ushered into her
drawing-room, like a vision from another world. And it was quite true
that he had never seen so beautiful, so graceful, so elegant a woman
as the girl-hostess, who played her part with perfect self-possession,
while he felt miserably embarrassed in his.

Katharine was seated on an ottoman, placed between the long narrow
windows of the front drawing-room, talking to an elderly lady, whom
Robert Streightley's quick eye recognised, as he advanced from the
door. Mr. Guyon left the group with whom he was talking, on the
announcement of Robert's name; and went forward to meet him with a
decided _empressement_ of manner which had its effect on the other
guests assembled. He led Robert up to Katharine, and presented him to
her. She bent her graceful head, said a gracious word or two, and
resumed her conversation with the lady--whom Robert had recognised,
and who was Lady Henmarsh--with well-bred imperturbability. Did she
remember him? Robert thought. Had she ever thought of him since that
day which had meant to him so much, but to her so little? So little!
nothing! and yet not nothing, if she had only known it, for he had
discovered things about her father since. Robert found himself
thinking these rambling thoughts, and gazing helplessly at Katharine,
unheeding the smooth flow of Mr. Guyon's talk, as that gentleman, in
his very best and airiest manner, addressed himself to the
entertainment of his new and useful guest, and to the task of putting
him at his ease in this strange sphere. With a sudden consciousness of
his absence of mind came self-command to Robert, and before long he
began to examine the other guests with much more of attention and
curiosity than they were at all likely to bestow on him. To the dozen
persons assembled in Mr. Guyon's drawing-room Robert Streightley was
merely a stranger,--well-dressed, well-looking, and though deficient
in the air of fashion, which more or less marked themselves, a
gentleman in whom there was nothing to provoke any adverse or sneering
criticism. To Robert they were all interesting. These were Katharine's
friends,--the people she lived amongst, the people who could influence
her by their tastes and opinions, the people whose manners, and dress,
and conversation she liked. In every man in the room Robert saw a
possible rival, in every woman a possible enemy. He was very foolish,
not only in the ordinary sense in which every man who is in love is
foolish, but in an extraordinary sense,--the result of his peculiar
position, and the isolation of his life. He was possessed by his one
idea; and he allowed it to become a centre round which every thing
revolved. When the announcement of dinner told him that the party was
complete, and relieved him from the apprehension of seeing Gordon
Frere's handsome face amongst the number, he actually sighed audibly
with the sense of relief. He listened eagerly, as Mr. Guyon or
Katharine addressed their guests, and learned with absurd satisfaction
that three of the six gentlemen who composed the male portion of the
company were married to three of the six ladies who composed the
female portion.

Robert Streightley was a very clever man, but there was a dangerously
weak side to his intellect, all the more perilous that he had never
suspected it, and did not suspect it now; and that weak side was
about to be stormed by a strong passion, all the more ungovernable
because it attacked him for the first time. He had never played
with this dangerous enemy; he had not known any of the feints, the
mock-surprises of love, and he was hopelessly at its mercy. Mingled
happiness and misery,--the happiness of this delicious, unexpected
excess to Katharine's presence, the misery of his uncertainty
as to her relations with others, with one terrible other in
particular--the sense of his strangeness in the scene familiar to
her,--ravaged and divided his heart between them. For a time the
misery was predominant; and then Robert, an impressionable man, and
one in whom social tastes were not non-existent, only dormant, yielded
to the charm of the present, and gave himself up to admiration of
Katharine, who never showed to greater advantage than on such
occasions. The _aplomb_ of her manner, the brilliancy of her
conversation, the taste, elegance, and fashion of her dress, the easy
and pleasant grace with which she made the dinner-party "go off" with
a success utterly beyond his experience of any festal occasion
whatever, were full of a marvellous charm for the man who looked at
this girl through the glorified medium of a first and overmastering
passion.

Robert took little heed of the other guests, except as one or other of
them engaged Katharine's attention, and so divided his. He had the
good fortune to be seated near Miss Guyon; and but that Lady Henmarsh
directed much of her conversation to the young hostess, and so won
Streightley's enthusiastic gratitude, she would probably have found
her neighbour rather a dull companion. But Lady Henmarsh was never
dull, and never suffered from other people's dulness. In the first
place, she dearly liked and thoroughly understood a good dinner; and
Mr. Guyon's dinners were invariably and remarkably good. She made it a
practice to eat systematically and steadily through all the courses,
and to do justice to all the wines. She was too fashionable and too
impervious to other people's opinions to care what any body thought;
and so she ate and drank precisely as much as she pleased, and gave
her opinion of the comestibles with perfect candour. She was intimate
with every one there, except that good-looking new man, who was
probably clever in something, but whom nobody knew, and who did not
seem to want to talk much or to be talked to; and she therefore joined
in all the general conversation, and did not mind him particularly,
thereby increasing Robert's gratitude. Lady Henmarsh talked remarkably
well. She was naturally quick and intelligent--well-informed too, for
a woman of fashion, with, of course, no time for improving her mind;
and as she knew every one and had been every where, and probably had a
more extensive epistolary correspondence than any other woman in
London who did not play at either literature or politics, she was
never at a loss for news to communicate or subjects to discuss.

With the exception of Mr. Guyon, whose like was not quite unknown
within the circle of Robert's experience, every type there was a novel
one to him. Few were interesting after a little,--after a cursory
examination extending to their personal appearance and the grooves in
which their conversation ran. There was a new member, who talked
"House" a good deal, and his wife--pretty and well-dressed--who talked
"Ladies' Gallery," who hoped her husband would soon "speak" on the
great topic of the day, and who seemed to regard every one not "in the
House" as in the "butterfly of fashion" and general inutility line.
There was a country gentleman, not at all stupid and not in the least
fat; and a country lady, almost as sprightly as Miss Guyon herself,
though by no means so handsome. The country lady and gentleman were
also going to Mrs. Pendarvis's ball; and from their talk about it at
dinner Robert learned that Katharine was going to another
entertainment that evening, and the tortures of his infatuated state
recommenced. She would disappear, then, after dinner, and he should
see no more of her, thought Robert in his innocent ignorance of
fashionable hours; and she would go and glitter among a crowd of happy
people, and that handsome fellow with the light hair would be one of
them. And so Robert once more stretched himself upon the rack, and
gave himself an excruciating twist. He was miserable from the time the
ball was mentioned. Did he wish that he could go there too? Hardly; he
felt he would be too much out of place in such a scene; and where
could he be more hopelessly parted from her? No, he did not wish to be
going to Mrs. Pendarvis's house; he only wished she were not going.

"Have you a card, Mr. Mostyn?" he heard Katharine say in a charming
accent of interest to a gentleman seated near her, whom Robert had
already regarded with some surprise and amusement.

"Yes," returned Mr. Mostyn in a supremely languid tone, at the same
time permitting his eyes to raise themselves towards Katharine, as if
in slow acknowledgment of the complimentary accent. "I think I shall
look in for an hour very late. Will you give me a dance, Miss Guyon?"
He said this as if he felt bound to make a concession to a wish of
hers. Robert Streightley had very quick eyes, and he saw her steal a
glance of sly, mischievous amusement at Lady Henmarsh as she replied,

"I don't see how I can, Mr. Mostyn, if you only look in for an hour
very late, for I mean to do my looking in rather early."

"Very sorry, I'm sure," said Mr. Mostyn in a slow, measured, would-be
modulated tone, which sounded to Robert's ears like the very voice of
fatuity. "But one has so much to do of an evening just now. It's Lady
Ismaeli's night, and I promised to look in and----"

"Of course, of course," said Miss Guyon, and her eyes danced with
mischievous glee; "who would for the world interfere with Mr. Mostyn's
gaieties? We all know they are but gravities in disguise. He is the
slave of the season only to be its satirist, the pet of society to
requite its indulgence by his teachings as a philosopher and his
dulcet lays as a poet. Who would lay a tax on time spent in the
service of society like Mr. Mostyn's, studying character in a
cotillion, piercing the thin disguises of intrigue at a picnic, and
reading the female soul in the evening lounge on a balcony? Ah, Mr.
Mostyn, what triflers are we all beside you, the _potephilosophe_,
not only _sous les toits_, but of our dinner- and toilet-tables!"

Lady Henmarsh was listening, pleasure in her face. There was something
under this lively talk, this seeming compliment; and Robert would have
liked well to know what it was. It was something that amused
Katharine, therefore interesting to him.

"Come, Mr. Mostyn," she went on, "you might tell _me_--I am a friend,
you know. When is the new novel coming out? And what and who is it to
be about? Only intimate friends this time, or have outsiders any
chance?"

She paused for a reply, and an expression of candid curiosity was all
her face betrayed. Mr. Mostyn did not look perfectly comfortable; a
dawning doubt showed itself in his smooth features. It was only
momentary, though. It cleared away, and he replied,

"Really, Miss Guyon, you embarrass me. I was not prepared to find you
so much interested in my humble performances. I shall not publish
again, for some little time. I regard the writing of a poem or a novel
as a serious undertaking, and I undertake it in a serious spirit. I
wait for the inspiration, Miss Guyon; I wait until a favourable moment
when my mind is attuned----"

"And when you have got some very good models, Mr. Mostyn; isn't that
so? Your acquaintance is so large, it must be quite delightful and not
at all difficult. Don't be shocked, please, by my talking of such a
little thing as difficulty in the case of such a grand thing as
inspiration; but it must be so easy and pleasant just to sit down and
put your friends in a book. People hardly expect it, do they? They let
you see them as they are, and then that is charming; for you find out
all about them, and they never suspect it; and all their circle
recognise the portrait, and every one talks about it. I have quite a
woman's curiosity about writers, you must know, Mr. Mostyn,--I quite
admire and envy them,--and I should like to know all about them; and I
have heard that even a totally worthless book will be read if it is
very personal indeed. What a comfort that must be, Mr. Mostyn I--of
course I mean to the persons who write worthless books; shouldn't you
think so?"

Katharine threw a perfect tone of interrogation into her voice, and
deliberately awaited an answer. Once more a shadow of doubt came over
Mr. Mostyn's face, and once more a beam from the never-setting sun of
his vanity dispelled it.

"I cannot imagine there being any consolation in or for writing a
worthless book, Miss Guyon," replied Mr. Mostyn with even increased
sententiousness. "For my part, I could only be satisfied with doing
the very best----"

"_The_ very best, or _your_ very best?" said Katharine with
undisguised sauciness. Then recollecting herself, she dropped her
voice to the serious tone again, and went on: "Of course no one is
easily satisfied with his own work; but you really must not be too
modest, Mr. Mostyn,--you mustn't indeed. Every one says your portraits
are wonderful; and what can be more interesting than to depict
accurately persons who are very widely known, and place them in the
most trying situations? The popular authoress, for instance, who makes
love to your last hero--dear, what an exquisite creature he is!--how
odd she must feel it to be 'put in a book' and recognised by every
body! Ah! you are a dangerous man, Mr. Mostyn; perhaps you'll put me
in a book some day, if I am good enough, or bad enough, or ask you
here sufficiently often to do all my sittings properly--but--Lady
Henmarsh looks as if I ought to have moved before this;" and so saying
Katharine rose, and, like "fair Inez," took all the sunshine and light
of every description with her, so far as Robert Streightley was
concerned. Whether Mr. Mostyn was quite so sorry for her departure was
another question. Robert looked at this gentleman with some curiosity
and a little dawning compassion, for it struck him that Katharine had
not spoken altogether _de bonne foi_, and he was curious to ascertain
whether he too was aware of the fact.

Robert had little experience of _persiflage_, and was not behind the
scenes on this occasion; but two or three of the other guests were,
and they enjoyed the quiet little performance which had just been
enacted greatly. As for Mr. Mostyn, his momentary discomfiture passed
off with the characteristic reflection, that jealousy made all women
spiteful, and Miss Guyon had really not had so much of his attention
lately as she deserved,--he must be more considerate of her feelings
for the future. The ladies gone, the gentlemen drew up into the usual
cluster, and commenced the ordinary after-dinner conversation; and
Robert would probably have found the affair very wearisome on its own
account, not to mention that he was longing to be in Katharine's
presence again, had not Mr. Guyon exerted himself to the utmost to
draw 'him out, and to give the conversation a general turn, so as to
include him, and to make it evident to the whole party that the "new
man" was one whom he delighted to honour.

When the ladies were passing through the hall, Lady Henmarsh had said
laughingly to Katharine, "For shame, Kate; you were too hard on the
young author."

"Nonsense!" replied Katharine. "You enjoyed it immensely, and he
deserved it richly."

When the gentlemen came into the drawing-room at Mr. Guyon's that
night, Katharine was seated at the piano. Had any portion of Robert
Streightley's heart remained unvanquished, she would have conquered it
by her music: but he was already as much in love as he could be. Soon
the business of leave-taking commenced. Robert was reluctantly
advancing to make his adieux, when Mr. Guyon took him familiarly by
the arm and said,

"Don't go just yet, Streightley. We'll see the ladies to the carriage,
and then have a chat and a cigar in my room."

Miss Guyon left the room with Lady Henmarsh, but returned in a few
minutes, wrapped in a soft white mantle. Every alteration in her
appearance made her more beautiful in Robert's eyes. He had the
felicity of taking her downstairs; and as she bowed and smiled from
the corner of the carriage in which she had ensconced herself, and was
then borne rapidly away, Robert needed Mr. Guyon's "Come along,
Streightley; don't stand there in the cold," to rouse him from a sort
of trance of admiration.

The ball at Mrs. Pendarvis's was crowded and brilliant, and
Katharine's hopes were realised. Gordon Frere had waited her arrival
on the staircase, and claimed her for the first dance. The hours
passed like a dream to them both; and when Mr. Alured Mostyn "looked
in," and at length succeeded in finding Miss Guyon, he saw her so
radiant with beauty, so sparkling with animation, that he was quite
touched at the idea of the effect produced by her pleasure in seeing
him.

Another person noticed the unusual beauty and the increased animation
of Katharine Guyon that night, and formed a truer estimate of its
origin. This was Lady Henmarsh. She made certain observations, drew
certain conclusions, and determined on a line of conduct which will
develop itself in the course of events.

And Robert? Well, Robert had his chat and his cigar with Mr. Guyon,
and then he went home--home to the house which he had never before
thought vulgar or insignificant, which he had never thought about at
all indeed, and which was in truth much more solidly comfortable than
the gaudier abode which had suddenly been converted into a shrine to
his fancy. He shrunk from it now as he thought, "I wonder what she
would say to this, and our mode of life here?" and he returned the old
nurse's greeting with grudging ill-humour, being inclined to resent
her sitting up for him, though it was not an abnormally late hour, and
her opening the door for him, which, though not her business, was, as
he well knew, her pleasure.

"Any news, nurse? any letters?" he asked, in a tone wholly devoid of
interest in the reply.

"No, Master Robert," said the old woman; "there's no letters, and
there's nobody been but Miss Hester Gould, a-wantin' to know when Miss
Ellen's comin' home."




CHAPTER IV.
MR. GUYON'S FRIEND.


The astonishment of Mr. Guyon at the liberal treatment which he had
received at the hands of his new creditor was by no means feigned.
That worthy gentleman, in the course of a long career of
impecuniosity, had become acquainted with all the various plans of all
the leading discounters of the city of London; knew what he called
their "whole bag of tricks;" understood the different ways of getting
time or obtaining renewal, according to the various idiosyncrasies of
the holders of his stamped paper; and gave to the subject an amount of
talent, industry, and attention which, otherwise employed, might have
brought him in a very fair income. A very fair income was not a thing
to be despised by a gentleman in Mr. Guyon's position, whose actually
reliable income was represented by one figure, and that a round one. A
sum of five thousand pounds indeed stood in the Consols in Edward
Guyon's name; but on that pleasantly-sounding amount was laid a
_distringas_, a horrible legal instrument preventing its withdrawal by
the said Edward Guyon, while the annual interest, which would at least
have kept him in cigars and gloves, found its way into the clutches of
Messrs. Sharkey and Maw, attorneys-at-law, who had a few years
previously advanced a sufficient sum to free Mr. Guyon from an
unpleasant incarceration in the Queen's Bench, leaving him a few
pounds over to convey himself to the Newmarket Spring Meeting, whither
he proceeded immediately on his release. All that pleasant estate
known as Bedingfield, in the county of Cheshire, with its three
thousand acres of arable land, its salt- and coal-mines, its
since-made railway bit, its punctually-paying tenant, and its various
sources of revenue; which belonged to the Honourable Piers Rankley,
and which every one thought he would bequeath to his cousin, Edward
Guyon, had been left to a distant relative of Piers Rankley's
childless dead wife, one Jacob Long, a member of the Plymouth
Brethren, and originally a hide-dresser in Bermondsey, who under the
influence of qualms of conscience agreed to allow his reprobate
connection Edward Guyon a sum of a thousand a-year, "at his pleasure."
It had been a matter of acute annoyance to Ned Guyon that he had no
legal claim or hold on this allowance; so that it was impossible for
him to mortgage or anticipate it in any way, save by a three months'
acceptance for the amount of the quarterly instalment--less commission
and discount--payable on the day that instalment was due; but in
reality it enabled him to pay renewal fees, to have occasional
ready-money for certain _menus plaisirs_ of his own and little treats
for Kate, and to give such an air of respectability as it possessed to
that old house in Queen Anne Street, the lease of which, with its
dingy furniture and ten pounds for a mourning ring, had been his sole
legacy from Piers Rankley.

But no income, however fair, would have tempted Mr. Guyon to undertake
any honest work, or, as he phrased it, any "d--d low ungentlemanlike
slavery;" and the consequence was that, what with an accumulation of
gambling-table (he was a member of the Nob and Heels Club, where they
play whist for twenty-four hours at a sitting, pound points and a
tenner on the rub) and turf debts, he was just at the time of his
introduction into this story in a really desperate condition. It had
been an unlucky season with him. His racing information had been bad
throughout. Commencing ill last Chester, he had been hard hit at
Epsom, had dropped more money at Ascot, and could only pull off a
stake at the coming Doncaster by a most unlikely fluke. He had had
frightful ill-luck at cards. Acknowledged to be one of the best
whist-players of the day, he had scarcely held a trump since the
winter, and had been beaten by the merest tyros. That very acceptance,
which his new acquaintance Streightley held, had been given to
Davidson for a card debt; and Guyon had forgotten all about it,
having, contrary to his usual custom, omitted to enter it in his
book. However, that was staved off for the present; and the few words
which he had had with his daughter on the subject had opened a new
well-spring of life in Mr. Guyon's breast. If what Kate surmised, or
rather half hinted at, were true--and, with all her pride and
wilfulness, she had wonderful common-sense and shrewdness--it might,
with judicious management, be turned to wondrous advantage. It was but
in embryo yet, to be sure; but, with Kate's beauty and his own tact,
it could be brought off at any moment, and the value of it would
be--well, he would see at once what the value of it would be by
representing it as a certainty to his chief creditor and principal
discount-agent, Mr. Daniel Thacker.

Who was Mr. Daniel Thacker? If you had been heir to an entailed
estate, with as large a taste for pleasure and as limited resources as
such heirs usually possess; if you had been an officer in either of
the Guards regiments, or any of the crack _corps_; if you had been a
member of any of the West-end government offices, with fast
tendencies; or an author; or an actor frequenting fast society; or a
theatrical manager; or a pretty _coryphe_ fond of suppers and
admiration,--you would not have had to ask the question; for without
doubt you would have possessed Mr. Thacker's acquaintance. A man
combining the sharpest practice (in a gentlemanly way) as a
bill-discounter with the keenest pursuit of pleasure of a strong,
full-flavoured, not to say of a gross kind, was Mr. Thacker. A man who
made cent per cent of his money by judicious investment, and who at
the same time "parted" freely; living in capital chambers in St.
James's Street, keeping horses and carriages, entertaining frequently
and well, having an Opera-stall for himself and frequently an
Opera-box for a female friend, visiting the theatres, riding to
hounds, and carrying out every thing he attempted in very excellent
style. Life seemed a broad and pleasantly-turfed path for Mr. Daniel
Thacker, down which he could stroll in his easy polished boots without
the smallest stumbling-block to cause him annoyance. But there was one
thing which wrung and chafed him, which he could never shut out from
his happiest hour, which proclaimed itself whenever he looked in the
glass (which was not seldom), which lay like a hideous pitfall for Mr.
Thacker's friends, into which they were perpetually tumbling and
coming out covered with inarticulate excuses, which pointed the
sarcasm of little boys in the streets at first overwhelmed by his
splendour, and edged the repartee of insolent cabmen, to whom he
called to clear the way for his high-stepping steeds,--a fact which
nothing could hide, a brand which no money could obliterate;--Mr.
Daniel Thacker was an unmistakable Jew. Unmistakable! as unmistakable
as if he had retained his old family name of Hart; as if he had
remained in his old family neighbourhood of St. Mary Axe; as if he had
continued his old family occupation of contracting with the government
for the supply of rum and lemons for the navy, and uniforms for the
postmen. In that choice neighbourhood, and out of those apparently not
very meaty contracts, had old Simeon Hart, Daniel's uncle, made all
the wealth which he bequeathed to his nephew; and when, long before
the old gentleman's decease, the young man's aspirations led him to
declare to his senior that he thought the Hebraic name stood in their
way in certain matters of business, and that he had some idea of
taking some less-recognisable cognomen,--the old gentleman remarked,
not without a touch of sarcasm in his voice, "Do ath you like, Daniel,
ma tear; do ath you like. You're a threwd lad, and are thure to turn
out right; but underthand one thing, ma tear,--you may change your
name if you like, but you'll never be able to change your nothe." Mr.
Simeon Hart was right; nothing short of cutting off that feature
could have disguised Mr. Daniel Thacker's nationality. He was as
distinctly marked as is the African; and though, with the addition of
splendid sparkling black eyes, bright scarlet lips, a quantity of
tightly-curling hair, and a fine flowing beard, he passed for a
handsome man among certain of the other sex, there was no man to
whom he had ever rendered a service--and he was in the main a
kindly-disposed fellow so far as his profession permitted--but set him
down for a "d--d Jew."

He never forgot this, it was never absent from his thoughts. If he saw
any one regarding him attentively, he felt at once what they were
thinking about; it haunted him in the theatre, in society, wherever
there was a chance of casual mention of his forsworn race. He had
tried to laugh it over in his business discount-dealings with
money-borrowers, asking them in a light and airy manner "why they came
to the Jews," of whom they must have had such serious warnings: but
the raillery always fell flat and heavy; and sometimes, from cubs of
fashion, produced unintentional clumsy sarcasms which stung him to the
quick. The renegade paid the penalty of his cowardice. With the
blunted notions of an unrefined mind, he thought that the prejudice
was levelled at his race, not at the character which the dealings of
some of his nation had won for it, and which he himself was
supporting. In his blindness he ignored the fact that amongst all
those whose good word was worth having, the prejudice had died out;
that the names of certain proud old Jewish families, who could trace
their pedigree far beyond the barber-surgeon or border-robber founders
of Norman or Scottish families, were honoured amongst the honoured;
and that in any case a man who, brought into contact with a set
socially superior to his own, took up his position calmly on the
strength of his own acquirements, be these what they might, was
received with a courtesy and a kindness which were naturally
refused to the most glowing impostor. With Mr. Guyon Thacker had
long had extensive dealings--dealings which had extended over a long
course of years; but of late he had been a little doubtful of his
client's solvency, a little delicate in the matter of renewals and
holdings-over; and with a clouded brow he heard from his clerk the
announcement that Mr. Guyon was waiting to see him in the ante-room.
He reflected for a moment, and seemed half disposed to deny himself to
his visitor; then carefully shutting the right-hand drawer of his
desk, in which he kept his checkbook, and placing the morocco-bound
volume, which was a ledger, but looked like a diary, close by him, he
said, "Show Mr. Guyon in, James; I've just five minutes at his
disposal."

Dressed in the most perfect manner, with all the latest improvements
of fashion sufficiently tempered to his time of life, calm, collected,
bland, and airy, yet with a certain amount of anxiety visible about
his eyes and in the shifting corners of his mouth, Mr. Guyon entered
the apartment and shook hands warmly with his friend.

Mr. Thacker received him civilly but not cordially, and expressed his
hope that he saw Mr. Guyon well.

"Thanks, my dear Thacker," said that sprightly gentleman; "I think I
may say, never in better case. I was getting a little pulled with the
gaieties of the season--we old fellows can't carry it through like you
young ones, you know--and I was, to tell truth, knocking up a bit; but
last week I went down for a couple of days to Maidenhead--Orkney Arms,
Skindle's, you know--where there was a particularly jolly party, all
of them friends of yours, by the way,--Bob Affington and Adle, and
Dalrymple and O'Dwyer, and Hattenheim and the Marchesa--a droll lot of
people of the right sort--and we had great fun; and it quite set me
up. Every body said they wished you'd been down there."

"Every body's very good," replied Thacker, sufficiently grimly. He
hated hearing of any pleasure which he had not shared. "Every body's
very good; but every body seems to forget that I've my business to
attend to."

"Business, my dear boy," said Mr. Guyon, stretching out his legs and
clasping his lavender-gloves in front of him; "and have we not all
business to transact? I know, for one, that my time is nearly entirely
devoted to business. Case in point, what brings me here to-day?"

"That's exactly what I can't understand," said Thacker with a rather
sardonic smile; "if it had been this day week," he continued,
referring to his ledger, "I should have known at once; because on that
day your acceptance for three hundred and fifty pounds falls due, and
you would have come down to take it up."

"Or to get you to renew," said Guyon insinuatingly.

"O, in that case you would have wasted your visit," replied Thacker;
"that bill has been renewed once, and it is the rule of my house, as
you know very well, never to do these things a second time."

He looked more than serious as he said this; but Mr. Guyon met his
frown with a cheery laugh, and said in his most off-hand manner,
"Well, my dear fellow, then it will be paid. Gad! you look as black as
though thirty thousand instead of three hundred pounds were coming due
from me next week. It's not for three hundred pounds that Ned Guyon,
who has weathered one or two storms in his time, is going to pieces."

"N-no," said Thacker slowly; "but you see, though only three hundred
and fifty are due next week, I hold a great deal of your paper, Mr.
Guyon, in addition to other mortgages and advances on securities
impossible to realise at once, and altogether I--in fact I----"

"Don't hesitate, sir," said Mr. Guyon, rising with a flushed face and
buttoning the lavender glove with a trembling hand, "don't make any
favour of it, I beg. It's been a pure matter of business hitherto, Mr.
Thacker--a pure matter of business, convenient to both of us, though
I'm sure out of respect for you I've endeavoured to import a friendly
element into our negotiations; a friendly element which, I may say,
and indeed was one of the causes of my visit to you to-day; which
might have been the means of--however, since you choose to look upon
Ned Guyon with suspicion, Ned Guyon wishes you good morning." And Mr.
Guyon settled his hat on his head, and was starting off in his usual
easy swagger when he was stopped by the touch of Mr. Thacker's hand on
his arm.

"Stay one minute, my good sir. Don't misunderstand me, if you please.
I simply tell you that an acceptance of yours will be due next week,
an acceptance which you avow your perfect readiness to meet, and you
talk about my looking on you with suspicion. I am perfectly ready to
allow that our relations have been of a business nature; but I thought
that I might take credit for having introduced into them some of the
elements of private friendship. You have done me the honour of dining
with me, and----"

"I have," murmured Guyon absently; "and doosid good dinners they
were."

"And yet you talk about suspicion. This is not fair, Mr. Guyon; this
is any thing but fair."

"'Pon my soul, I didn't mean any harm; didn't, 'pon my life," said Mr.
Gluon; "always found you doosid good fellow, Thacker, and that kind of
thing----"

"And yet you were going away without telling me of something which, if
I understand you rightly, might be to our mutual benefit, and which
you came down expressly to submit to me? Is that so?"

"Dev'lish stoopid and childish of me to take affront so easily, more
particklerly from good feller," said Mr. Guyon. "Yes, I did want to
say word to you upon matter of importance.--matter on which I think
you'll congratulate me."

"Sit down quietly, then, and let's talk it over.--The dry sherry,
Evans, and a biscuit.--Any thing which benefits you interests me, Mr.
Guyon--though all between us is 'pure matter of business,' eh? O,
unkind, sir; very unkind!"

"There! forget that, Thacker, and listen to what I've got to tell you.
You know my daughter,--at least you've seen her," added Mr. Guyon,
with a rather painful recollection of several broad hints which
Thacker had given of his wish for an introduction to Katharine--hints
which Mr. Guyon had always carefully ignored.

"I have seen Miss Guyon," was the cold reply.

"Yes, of course, yes. Strange girl, very reserved, and--afraid of
society."

"Indeed?"

"O very been a great drawback to her; but at last she has consented to
come out, and--well, I don't know that I ought to say it to any one,
but you're a man not likely to break confidence--she's going to make a
splendid match."

"A splendid match, eh? A title?"

"A title? Pooh much better than that! A millionaire! one of the
merchant princes of the City! A man whose name is good on 'Change for
I don't know how much. What do you say to that, Thacker? Ned Guyon's
in luck at last, eh?"

"It sounds very well, so far," said Mr. Thacker quietly, "Might one
venture to ask the name of the modern Croesus?"

"To any one else I should decline, peremptorily decline to give it;
but it's different with you, Thacker; you're an old friend. The
gentleman's name is Streightley--of the firm of Streightley and Son."

"Is it, by Jove!" cried Mr. Thacker, startled out of his usual
quiescence. "Bullion Lane?--I know him well--by repute, that is to
say, not personally. If you've hooked--I beg your pardon--if Mr.
Streightley is going to marry Miss Guyon, you've done a splendid
stroke of business."

"You think so?"

"Think so--I'm sure of it. They say that there's no more far-seeing
man in the City, and his profits must be tre-mendous."

"Well, that's the man. Now look here, Thacker, I'm open and aboveboard
with you, as two men of the world, or rather two men of honour. Not
the same thing, eh?" and the old man's eye twinkled; "should be. This
thing is well on, a little more will bring it to completion. One
mustn't, as they say, spoil the ship for a pennor'th of tar, eh? One
mustn't let a fine chance slip through one's fingers for want of a
little gold-dust to put on one's hands to render the grip secure, eh?"

"I see your drift," said Thacker; "but you must speak more plainly."

"More plainly to you?" said Mr. Guyon in a whisper--unconsciously each
man had lowered his voice. "Well, what I mean is this. If this scheme
turns out well, as it will undoubtedly, if it be only properly carried
out,--well--Katharine is devoted to me, she will rule her husband--O,
never fear, she has the spirit of a dozen women!--and I shall be in
clover once more, with all my arrears cleared off, and a handsome
annuity! But the thing must be properly managed. Streightley must not
take fright at any aspect of poverty, or want of means rather; he must
not for an instant imagine that I am in any way hampered" (the thought
of the 180_l_. bill flashed across him, but he never changed
countenance); "and he must be properly entertained; and Katharine must
have a proper _trousseau_. He's not the man to speak about
settlements," added Mr. Guyon; "and if he did, he must be told that
there would be nothing until my death."

"And how is 'the thing to be properly managed,' and all the rest of it
done?"

"I only know one way--and that is----"

"Speak out; you're not generally reticent on the score of modesty, Mr.
Guyon."

"Well--that is--by you're holding over the three hundred and fifty due
next week, and making me a further advance of--say a thousand, payable
three months after my daughter's wedding-day."

Mr. Thacker was silent for a few minutes, nor could Mr. Guyon,
intently scanning his face, derive the smallest idea from its
expression. Then he made a few rapid calculations on the blotting-pad
in front of him, and said:

"You play for a big stake, Mr. Guyon, and don't stick at asking
trifles from your friends. Now, I like a big game; it at once invests
any scheme with an interest for me which I cannot give to mere
pottering petty hazards. And I don't say that I won't help you in
this--on certain terms--only----"

"Your terms will be your own, my good fellow," cried Guyon, his eye
sparkling at the thought of success. "But I don't like that 'only.'
What is it? Only what?"

"Only that I should like to be introduced to Mr. Streightley, and have
a little talk with him; of course not on the subject under
consideration, but on general topics, just to get an idea of him, you
know. It's a large sum to advance, in addition to outstanding matters;
and I'm a man of business, you know, Guyon, and like to see my way in
these things."

"All right. Come down with me to the City, and we'll hunt him up in
his den."

"No; I think not. We business-men don't like being hunted up in our
dens, as you call them, unless our visitors bring us a carcass or two
to growl over. You go over and see Streightley, and bring him here to
lunch to-morrow at two. I leave you to find the excuse; your ready wit
serves you always in such matters."

There was a tinge of sarcasm in Mr. Thacker's voice as he uttered
these last words, but Mr. Guyon was in far too excited a state to
perceive it. So he took his leave with much exuberant hand-shaking,
and started off with much self-complacency. After his departure Mr.
Thacker sat for some little time, leaning his head on his hands and
his elbows on the desk, immersed in thought. "He's an unscrupulous
vagabond, is Guyon!" said he to himself after a pause. "He's going to
sell that handsome daughter of his, as he would a bit of land, or a
diamond-ring, or a reversion under a will, or any thing that would
bring him money. A determined heartless dog! But he seems to have
either played his cards well or to have had great luck in hooking so
big a fish as Streightley. Robert Streightley! Yes, yes; they say he
pulled the Ocean Marine through when Overend Gurneys had given them up
and the knowing ones looked for an immediate windup, and now their
shares are at 13 premium, and there are no end of the clever things
he's done. He might be useful to me, might put me up to two or three
wrinkles in the City, where all is big and where one's own natural
talent has some chance of showing itself. Hitherto I've been pottering
on with hard-up swells, and men of the Guyon stamp--safe business
enough, and remunerative so far as it goes; pleasant too in its
introductions to good people; but I know enough people now, and must
look to making money as the chief thing. And this Streightley is the
very man who could help me in such a matter. If I now see him, I'll
back myself to read him like a book, and then I'll see how far this
investment of Guyon's is worth my backing."


A telegram found by Mr. Thacker on his arrival at business the next
morning announced that Mr. Guyon and Mr. Streightley would lunch with
him that day; and at two o'clock the meal was on the table and the
_convives_ were assembled. In addition to Guyon, Streightley,
and the host, there were Lord Bollindar, a pleasant old nobleman,
younger brother of a deceased and uncle to a live duke, who had a
limited income of two hundred a-year and lived at the rate of two
thousand--never owing a penny--on the strength of the handles to his
name and a perennial flow of small talk; Sir Harvey Falmer, a
lieutenant in the 2d Life Guards, who had dealings with Mr. Thacker,
and who was kept to lunch on the strength of a recently negotiated
bill; Mr. Wuff of the Theatre Royal, Hatton Garden; and Mr. Tocsin,
Q.C., the celebrated Old Bailey barrister. The lunch was admirable in
itself and admirably served; and after the champagne had circulated
freely, the conversation, which at first had been rather slow,
improved considerably.

"Doosid good champagne!" said Sir Harvey Falmer, tossing off his
glassful; "that's what I always say about you, Thacker; when you give
a man a drink, it's a good drink, and you give it him; don't stick it
in--swipes and gooseberry, you know--as part of your balance."

Mr. Thacker smiled somewhat ghastlily at this witticism; but Lord
Bollindar came to the rescue by saying, "Good, good! devilish smart,
Falmer! but you fellas are in clover now. Why, I reckleckt the
Dook--you reckleckt the Dook, Mr. Streightley?"

"I--I beg your pardon--the Duke?"

"Dook of Wellington I mean. He used to say, 'Hang your still
champagne!'--only his Grace used a stronger term--'Hang your still
champagne! Champagne without froth is like man without woman!' Said so
indeed, begad!"

"Did he indeed?" said Mr. Tocsin in his strident voice: "I should have
liked to have had his Grace under cross-examination to prove that."

"I don't think you'd have made much of him, Tocsin," said Mr. Thacker,
"What do you think, Mr. Streightley?"

"I? I can't say, of course, so far as my knowledge of his Grace was
concerned; but I'm sure--that--the presence of ladies elevates--and
refines--and----"

"Of course it does," cried Mr. Wuff. "Put on a fellow--I mean a male
fellow--to dance, and see where you are. Patron of mine--noble lord
who shall be nameless--said to me the other night, 'Never again, Wuff;
never again. Many petticoats as you like; but if ever I see again a
fellow in a low-necked dress with grapes in his hair dancing at your
theatre, damme, I leave the house.'"

"The sentiment did him honour, whoever he was," said Mr. Tocsin. "I
don't want to pry into your secrets, Wuff, but the man was right, and
spoke like--a man. What is it nerves to our best efforts? What is it
makes us exert ourselves? Not the thought of the jury--I speak for
myself--not the thought that we are--are--bending the minds of a few
stupid men in--in a box; but the feeling that we are looked up to and
gaining renown in the eyes of--of--those bright eyes which we wish to
shine in delight upon our labours."

"Bravo!" cried Sir Harvey Falmer, who was rapidly falling into a
maudlin state.

"Look at our friend here," said Lord Bollindar, pointing to
Streightley; "one of--as I'm given to understand; never had the
pleasure of meeting him before--pillars of British commerce. Ask him
what prompts his men--Jack Tars and all that kind of thing--to brave
storms and billows and typhoons, and whatever they're called, and
carry British commerce from pole to pole. Is it the mere paltry
gain, wages, advance-rate, whatever it is? No; the poet, what's
his name?--Dibdin--has told us different: Jack's delight is lovely
Nan,--And the wind that blows,--And mill that goes,--And lass that
loves a sailor--and all that."

"There can, I think," said Streightley, "be little doubt that the
influence of a--a wife--can scarcely be overrated. I--I think," he
added in a lower tone to Mr. Guyon, who was his next neighbour, "that
I've not sufficiently appreciated feminine influence; but that is a
fault which can be remedied, eh?" And he said this rather nervously.

"To a man with your advantages, my dear boy," said Guyon, "delay,
instead of being dangerous, has been, I may say, a safeguard. I was
making this very remark--for, curiously enough, I've taken a strong
interest in you--to my daughter this morning, and she perfectly agreed
with me."

This for a sample of the conversation. When his guests had gone, Mr.
Thacker stood looking at but not seeing the _dbris_ of the banquet.
He was calmly feeling his chin with his hand, and saying to himself,
"So far so good. The man is weak as water, and seems inclined to mould
himself as old Guyon pleases. But I must have a look at the girl
before I throw myself into the scales."




CHAPTER V.
HESTER GOULD.


"No one but Miss Hester Gould," the old nurse had answered, in reply
to Robert Streightley's question; and he had never bestowed a thought
upon the answer. What was Hester Gould to him, or he to Hester Gould?
To the first section of this inquiry the present chapter will furnish
a reply; to the second, time only; time, just then busy with the
beginning of many complications in the life of a man whose career had
been singularly even, uneventful, and interesting only so far as it
had developed his abilities and the results of their employment.

The young lady, whose brief parley with Alice had simply consisted of
the words reported to her master and darling by the old nurse, had
known the unpretending little family at Brixton for several years, and
had been, for the chief of that number, intimate with Mrs. Streightley
and her daughter Ellen. This intimacy, however, was one-sided; Hester
Gould was completely in the harmless and unimportant confidence of the
two ladies, but they were not in hers. This was no treacherous,
insidious distinction, no deliberate preference of other friends, on
Hester Gould's part; for she was a woman who gave her confidence to no
one; a woman of a self-sufficing nature, and the safest possible
confidante, because she never felt sufficiently interested in any one
person to betray another for his or her sake. No one could justly
accuse Hester Gould of flattery or fawning, yet she induced her
acquaintances to conceive enthusiastic friendships for her, and to
tell her their most intimate concerns, to discover that she was
indispensable to their comfort, and the dearest creature in the world;
to declare that they did not know what they should do without her, and
that her advice was always the best. How did the girl, without
descending to the despicable meanness of toadyism, achieve popularity
in her narrow sphere, though she was undeniably handsome, and that too
after a fashion that was capable of development into downright beauty
of a high type, if circumstances had been more favourable to her? She
achieved it by "masterly inactivity." Whether she had thought over the
life that lay before her, had formed a philosophy of her own, and
decided upon a line of conduct as the result of her meditations,
before she left the second-rate boarding-school at Peckham, where she
had acquired all the technical education she possessed, it would be
impossible to say, and the supposition that she had done so appears
unnatural and far-fetched. It was probably partly by the instinct of
native shrewdness, and partly by the exercise of precocious powers of
observation, that Hester Gould discovered that the great art of making
herself agreeable consisted in letting her friends talk to her of
themselves, without claiming a reciprocal right. However that may have
been, she observed as a rule strict reticence concerning her own
affairs, and endured with smiling patience, paying her friends that
subtlest of compliments, undivided attention; and displaying interest,
which if not demonstrative was practical, in the fullest details
concerning theirs. She was of a cold, silent, repressed nature, not
exactly unamiable or false; but a woman who might become either under
circumstances more disadvantageous than hers were at present, or might
expand under favourable and fostering influences into a higher type of
womanhood than she either physically or intellectually indicated now.

Hester Gould was a handsome woman at twenty, a period of life which
she had reached only a few days before that on which she had made
affectionate inquiries for Ellen Streightley; but she would probably
be a handsomer woman at thirty, and if she then fulfilled the latent
promise of beauty, would have a fair chance of retaining it long past
the period at which the loveliness of women, in all but very
exceptional cases, ceases to be a fact, and becomes a memory. She was
tall and full-formed; but as yet she wanted gracefulness. She had
handsome features and fine keen dark eyes; but her face had not
sufficient colour, and her eyes had too little depth; they lacked
intensity; not that they were shifty and uncertain, but that they bore
the vague, absent expression which tells of discontent, not particular
but general. Looking attentively at Hester Gould, one given to
studying character in faces would know that there was incongruity
between the actual and the potential position of the girl. Without
restlessness, without impatience, always ruled by common sense, she
seemed to be a person who had something in view, which if not a firm
resolve, was at least a cherished purpose. The tenor of her life was
even and simple enough, and there was nothing remarkable in her
history. Her parents had been plain people: her father, secretary to
an old-established insurance office, had patronised the concern to the
extent of securing a decent sum for the maintenance of his sister and
only child. Her mother, who had "disobliged her family," as the phrase
is, by her marriage, had died when Hester was a baby; and the only
member of the disobliged family now living was a wealthy shipowner,
who had declined to take any notice of the sister who had disgraced
herself by wedding a poor man. Mr. Gould came of parents quite as
well-born as his wife's: they were all of the respectable tradesman
class; but their standard was one of money value, and he did not come
up to it. They might have helped him to approach it, without
inconveniencing themselves; but they did not consider or care about
that, and the breach had been complete; indeed it had soon become
irremediable; for Mrs. Gould had survived her marriage only four
years, and had died, taking her infant son with her away from all
family quarrels and human affairs. Hester grew up, under the kindly,
timid, narrow-minded charge of her aunt; a meek spinster given to the
perusal and distribution of tracts, and to the frequentation of
meeting-houses where the doctrine was strong and the preaching
unctuous. The child became "too much" for her timid aunt and her
depressed father at an early period of her existence, and even
rebelled against the vicarious authority of Miss Gould's favourite
"ministers;" so she was sent to school, and there also she gave no
little trouble for a time. But common sense was always Hester's strong
point; and it came to her assistance. School was far from pleasant,
she reflected, but home was worse; and as she had no power to provide
herself with a third alternative at present, she would abide by the
lesser of two evils, and turn it to all the advantage she could. The
result of this rational conclusion was that Hester Gould profited to
the utmost by the limited quantity and mediocre quality of the
education administered at Laburnum Lodge, and acquired at least a
foundation on which to build afterwards according to her taste.

The discretion evinced by the schoolgirl was a clue to her character.
No one was more popular among the small and far from distinguished
community; but only the girls whose social position was a little
higher than her own could claim Hester as an intimate friend. The
gushing nonsense of school friendships had little attraction for her,
and she contracted none that she did not contemplate maintaining when
the association which had produced them should have ceased. Hester was
not brilliantly clever, there was not the least _soupon_ of genius
about her; but she was certainly a superior person in intellect, in
manners, and in appearance, to the companions of her studies, the
sharers of her school life, in that most unbearable kind of intimacy
which means contact without companionship. When she went home for the
holidays, things were not much better. She had been fond of her father
in a quiet way, though she had taken his intellectual measure pretty
accurately, and almost as as soon as she had arrived at the conclusion
that their life was on a dull mean scale, had recognised his inability
to elevate or enliven it.

"We should grub on like this all our lives, if it depended on _him_,"
the girl had said to herself in emphatic, if not elegant soliloquy;
and there had been no wilful disrespect to the honest, humdrum,
unobservant father in the remark, only Hester's unclouded perception
and resolute custom of telling herself the truth. When she was a
little over fifteen years old her father died, and she had to endure,
in addition to her natural grief, which was unfeigned and sore, a
declension in position, and a narrowing of the narrow income, which at
its best she had regarded with impatience, very keen though never
expressed, or permitted to escape her by so much as a gesture. Her
aunt moved into a smaller house in an inferior situation, discharged
one of the two female servants who had composed their modest
establishment, and told Hester she hoped she had profited sufficiently
by her music and singing lessons to go on without a master, for she
could no longer afford to continue them.

Hester bore the alteration with apparent equanimity, but she took a
resolution and acted upon it. She was a musician by nature, and music
was the one branch of study to which she had taken with avidity,
and which she had pursued with unrelaxed industry. She went to the
schoolmistress (the establishment had not yet attained to the
distinction of possessing a "lady principal"), and asked her to put
her in the immediately-to-be-vacated place of a pupil-teacher,
allowing her to continue her own music and singing lessons as an
equivalent for her services. The proposition took Miss Nickson by
surprise; but she knew Hester Gould's abilities and popularity, and
though she did not like the girl particularly, she trusted her fully.
It never occurred to the schoolmistress--a simple woman, and a
favourable specimen of a generally disagreeable class--that Hester had
not made the proposition at her aunt's suggestion, while that young
lady contented herself with informing Miss Lavinia Gould by letter of
what she had done. "I don't lose caste by it here, where they all know
me and I have been on equal terms with them," thought Hester; "and my
only chance of getting out of our odious mean existence is by making
all I can of such education as I can get. I shall have to teach
anyhow, and I can fit myself for teaching a better class of people
here." It was not a stupid calculation for so young a head, and it
turned out perfectly correct. Hester did not lose caste when her
schoolfellows became her pupils, and her teachers in their turn took
additional pains with her when they knew the object with which she was
learning.

Among Hester's intimates for several of her school years was Ellen
Streightley, a girl who loved and worshipped one who was in most
respects her opposite with a kind of enthusiasm not rare among
unworldly natures, in which the intellect is much less powerful than
the feelings. The boarding-school at Peckham was not altogether such
an establishment as Miss Streightley should have been kept at beyond
the period of primary instruction; but her mother was a shy, gentle,
unworldly woman, who did not understand any thing about social
ambition, and provided she found her daughter brought up in sound
morals and good manners would not have considered for a moment whether
her associates were of a higher class than her own, or came of richer
or poorer people. Mrs. Streightley had never changed her mode of life
in accordance with her increased means; she had but a narrow circle,
which was, however, quite satisfactory to her, and she regarded the
commercial and financial magnates with whom her son associated on the
rare occasions of his "going into society," as completely out of the
sphere of herself and her daughter. This daughter was very dear to
her; a tranquil, gentle, congenial companion, a child who had never
given her an hour's true anxiety in her life, and had even had the
measles and the whooping-cough much more lightly and favourably than
other children. Ellen Streightley was short, slight, and extremely
fair. She was not exactly pretty, but the calm sweetness of her face
was very winning, and the perfect candour and gentleness which sat
upon her smooth forehead and looked out of her full blue eyes had an
unwearying charm for those who knew how true these indications were of
the mind and heart within. Ellen Streightley loved her mother and her
brother Robert with all the devotion and dutifulness of her nature;
but Hester Gould she loved with enthusiasm in addition. From the first
Hester's strong mind had charmed and swayed her, and the imagination
of the girl, not very vivid and but rarely awakened, had surrounded
her with a halo of its weaving. Had Hester's moral nature been much or
openly defective, she never would have won this tribute of love and
worship from Ellen Streightley, who had good sense to come in aid of
her high principle, and her perfect purity of heart, but who succumbed
to the superiority of Hester with a delighted submission. When they
were children together, Hester's word had been the other's law, and
had any thing been needed to perfect her love and admiration, Hester's
conduct in voluntarily assuming the position of pupil-teacher in order
that her aunt might suffer as little as possible from their narrow
circumstances would have supplied their complement. There was no
falsehood in this statement, made by Hester to her friend. It was
quite true, only it was not the whole of her motive, but a part, and
not the chief part of it.

And Hester--what was her share in this strict and loving alliance?
Decidedly she liked Ellen Streightley very much, and she prized
highly, without comprehending it altogether, the enthusiastic
affection of which she was the object, the unreserved confidence of
which she was the recipient. She liked the Saturdays and Sundays which
she passed at Mrs. Streightley's house at Brixton, when Ellen's
schooldays had come to a conclusion, and her friend coaxed Miss
Lavinia Gould to spare Hester to her; a request that lady did not
hesitate to grant, as she had very little need of her niece's society;
her "Sabbaths," as she punctiliously called them, being passed in hot
untiring chase of popular preachers, according to her notions of
popularity and estimate of preachers. She declined to join the family
party on Sundays, firstly on Sabbatarian principles, secondly because
the Streightleys were "Church of England," and she hated that
persuasion only a little less than the Roman Communion, and the
opposition chapel which set itself against the ministrations of her
own particular pastor and saint, the Rev. Malachy Farrell, a powerful
controversialist, and a convert from the Romish heresy and abomination
of desolation. Ellen had enjoined her mother to exert herself to "make
a connection" for Hester, when her days of pupil-teachership came to a
conclusion; that lady had obediently exerted herself; Miss Nickson had
done as much for the girl, with whom she had never had occasion to
find a fault, but who, she rather remorsefully admitted to herself,
had never "gained on her" in all the years of their association; and
Hester, at twenty years old, when we meet her first, was established
as a teacher of music, with a respectable connection, and occupied
with her aunt a pretty small house near the Brixton Villa, which, in
elegance and habitableness was a considerable improvement on that in
which her father had lived and died.

Ellen Streightley had never cooled or wavered in her love for Hester;
and her mother liked the girl very much, though she sometimes had an
uncomfortable sort of feeling that she did not understand her
perfectly, that Hester might perhaps be "too much" for her and Ellen,
if she should think it worth her while to be so. But the kind lady was
little given to mental exercises of any troublesome description, and
never thought of analysing her sensations. That she was an exceptional
person, singularly unsuspicious, and unlike mothers in general, may
surely be conceded, when it is stated that it never occurred to her to
think that Hester might possibly be a dangerous intimate for Robert,
her beloved and precious son, or could cherish any design or idea
whereof he made part. Mrs. Streightley loved her son better than she
loved Ellen; a preference which the girl accepted as a matter of
course, and believed to be perfectly just and well founded. He was
Robert, their Robert, the most important, the most beloved of men, and
of course it was all right; and the two women did but follow the
example of thousands of their sex, whose perceptions and ideas are
confined within a small circle, and whose social sphere and enjoyments
resemble a mill, and the going round therein performed by patient and
tolerably well-fed beasts. Robert was an amiable man on the whole; he
gave no more trouble in the household than was inseparable from the
circumstance that he was a man and "didn't understand things," as the
household phrase has it, and he loved his mother devotedly, and Ellen
very much indeed. It had never occurred to him that her life was a
dull one, and that he was rich enough to make it a very different
life, if he would but waken up and look away from his counting-house,
learn sympathy, and consider what was the real meaning and worth of
money. He had never thought of the light and colour, the stir and
healthful pleasure he might diffuse through the decorous, comfortable,
neutral-tinted existence of the Brixton Villa; he had never noticed
their absence; and as he had no notion of the life led by other girls,
on whom money was lavishly expended, and for whose delectation whole
household systems were organised, there was no standard of comparison
in his mind. He was so much older than his sister, so much nearer his
mother's age than hers, that while perfect affection had always
subsisted between them, it had not been accompanied with much
intimacy, and his confidences, which were wholly confined to business
matters, had been restricted to his mother, on whose mind it had never
dawned that any improvement in their household affairs could be
desirable, who had never looked or desired to look outside the circle
in which she moved, and who would have received any suggestion of an
increase of Ellen's social opportunities and enjoyments with entire
incredulity. To her Ellen was as yet little more than a child; and
though if he had been asked what was her age, and had paused to think
the matter over, Robert would have perceived the absurdity of so
regarding a girl of nineteen, by no means childish of her years,
though simple and unworldly as few children are in these progressive
days, he practically shared her delusion.

Robert was almost as much accustomed to see Hester Gould as he was to
see Ellen. The girls were together as much as possible, due
consideration being had to Hester's occupations, and the social duties
and privileges of her "connection," which she never neglected. She led
an infinitely pleasanter life than did Ellen; for she was very popular
among her pupils, and many of their number contrived to extend to her
their own amusements and pleasures. She had not much leisure, but she
was under no painful necessity to overwork herself; her occupation
need never degenerate into slavery, and such hours as she could devote
to recreation she could always find recreation to fill. She possessed
perfect health and an even temper; not according to the cynical
saying, "A good digestion and a bad heart,"--not yet, at least. Up to
the present time nothing in Hester's conduct had indicated badness of
heart; a little coldness perhaps, but unperceived, and resolution
whose inflexibility might have been suspected, but that her resolves
had all been in the direction of right and duty. If any body had
asked Robert Streightley whether he was acquainted with Miss Hester
Gould, he would have unhesitatingly replied that he knew her most
intimately--as well as his own sister; and he would have made such an
answer in perfectly good faith. It would not have been true,
nevertheless. If any one had asked Hester Gould whether she knew
Robert Streightley, she would have replied that he was an acquaintance
of hers, being the brother of one of her dearest friends--(Hester
would not have said her "dearest friend," for such a sweeping phrase
might have been repeated to her detriment); and she would have said it
in a tone calculated to convince the questioner that her acquaintance
with Mr. Streightley was of the most formal and conventional kind. In
this instance the reply would only have had the exterior of truth, for
no one in the world--certainly not the man himself--knew Robert
Streightley as well, as thoroughly as Hester Gould knew him. Not his
sister, who would talk cheerily about her brother, and extol his
genius, his temper, and his personal appearance; not his mother, who
would tell Hester a dozen times in a week that he had never caused her
an hour's anxiety, and who never admitted that he had a fault, except
his tiresome-objection to sitting for his photograph; not the old
nurse, who would scold Robert freely enough herself, but in whose
hearing no one would have had the boldness to declare him subject to
the faults, the misfortunes, or the maladies of humanity. It was a
fortunate circumstance that Hester Gould had perfectly read Robert
Streightley's character, and had, without any thing like impertinent
inquisitiveness, acquired a thorough knowledge of the family history
and his personal antecedents; for, some time before the period of her
friend's visit to Yorkshire, Hester Gould had made up her mind that
she would marry Robert Streightley if possible, and Ellen's last
letter had induced her to think of doing so at an earlier period than
she had previously contemplated.


"I don't know that Ellen's marriage will not be the best thing that
could possibly happen for me," said Hester to herself as she walked
briskly away from Robert Streightley's house, after her parley with
old Alice. "Of course her brother won't oppose it,--though the girl is
a greater fool than I thought her, to marry a man with no greater
ambition than to spend his life among filthy savages, teaching them a
religion entirely unsuitable to their condition of life and status in
creation. I hope they won't eat him--at least I hope they won't eat
_her_; but she will be better away--I should never succeed in curing
her of Brixton ways, and she has really no tastes to be developed. It
will be a good opportunity, when she will be divided between love for
her Decimus--what a name to be in love with!--and distress at leaving
her mother, to furnish her with a suggestion concerning a substitute:
it must come entirely from her, of course."

Thus thinking, Hester Gould reached home. She greeted aunt Lavinia
kindly; she was scrupulously dutiful and attentive to her wishes,
except in respect to meetings and ministers;--sat down cheerfully to
her tea, during which meal she quite enlivened the pensive spinster by
her gaiety, and then went to her piano for what she called a "real
good practice." Hour after hour she sat there, filling the room and
the house with music; and at length she sang, at her aunt's request,
the very same song--of a trifling kind, which Hester rather despised,
but sang because it was popular--with which Katherine Guyon was at the
selfsame hour achieving the "final pulverisation" of Robert
Streightley's heart.




CHAPTER VI.
IN CHAMBERS.


The summer sun, bright, warm, and cheering, only just past the zenith
of his annual glory, illumined the Temple Gardens; still further
withering the turf, which had been worn by the promenaders of the
season into a very bald and ragged state; gladdening the hearts of
country-bred nursemaids with reminiscences of their earlier days, when
their virgin hearts were yet untouched by the charms of deceivers in
military or police uniforms; loved and cherished by the
valetudinarians, poor and old, to whom this city garden was the
nearest imitation of God's country which they were able to afford, and
who, secluded during the winter in Strand side-street lodging-houses,
ventured thither for their daily meed of light and air; glancing
merrily on the turbid Thames; and even throwing enlivening glances
into the topmost story of the house in Crown-Office Row, which Robert
Streightley had visited one memorable night, and wherein one of its
joint tenants now sat hard at work.

And indeed, let him come when he might, in his spring weakness, in his
summer glory, in his autumn grandeur, in the feeble struggles which he
made during winter, the sun would never have found Charles Yeldham in
any other condition. Work was his life, his idol. As a very young man,
when he first quitted Oxford, he had prayed to be successful in the
profession which he had chosen, and which he had gone into heart and
soul. He had vowed that if his labours were only rewarded with
success, there should be scarcely any end to them; and now, when he
had no rival as a conveyancing barrister among his coevals and very
few superiors among his seniors, he still kept grinding on. Not
intended by nature for such slavery, as you can tell in one glance at
his _physique_, at his broad chest, long sinewy arms and legs, and big
white hands; not destitute of an appreciation of fun, as you can see
in his bright blue eyes, his large happy mouth, and the deep dimples
of his cheeks; what would be generally called a "jolly man," with
thick brown curling hair, and a clear skin, and a great hearty laugh,
breaking out whenever it had the chance.

Which was not very often. There is nothing very humorous in
conveyancing, and in conveyancing Charles Yeldham's life was passed.
Gordon Frere, returning from a ball, a supper, or one of his
"outings," would hear the roar of Yeldham's shower-bath as he came up
the stairs, or would see him, bright and rosy, deep in his books or
scratching away with his pen, as he, Frere, with his gibus hat on one
side, his collars danced down into a state of limp despondency, and
with a faded camellia in his button-hole, peered into the common
sitting-room before he crawled to bed. Five in the summer, six in the
winter,--these were Charles Yeldham's hours of rising. Then, after his
cold bath and his hurried toilette, what he called "treadmill" till
eight. A sharp run five times round the Temple Gardens, no matter what
the weather, a hurried breakfast--chop, bacon, eggs, what-not, and at
it again, "treadmill" till two. Bread-and-cheese, a pint-bottle of
Allsopp, a pipe--generally smoked as he leaned out of the window
looking on to the river--and "treadmill" till half-past six. Old
shooting-coat changed for more presentable garment, hands washed, and
Mr. Yeldham walked to the Oxford and Cambridge Club, where he would
eat a light dinner, take a very small quantity of wine, and walk back
to the Temple to have a final turn of "treadmill" until half-past
eleven, when he would turn into bed. He had reduced sleep to a
minimum, ascertained that five and a half hours were exactly
sufficient for a man, and never wasted a wink.

There was no absolute occasion for Charles Yeldham to slave in this
manner; but when he commenced his work he had had a powerful incentive
to industry, and he had found the work grow on him until he absolutely
took delight in it. He was the only son of the Honourable and Reverend
Stratford Yeldham, a cadet of the Aylmer family, who had been content
to marry the daughter of the clergyman with whom he read during one
long vacation, and afterwards to go into orders and take up the family
living in Norfolk. The living was not a very rich one, and Charley,
who loved his father after a fashion not very common now amongst young
men, and who knew that the old gentleman had somewhat pinched and
straitened himself to send his son to college with a proper allowance,
had made up his mind not only that all that had been spent on him
should be repaid, but that his sister Constance--his own dear little
sister--should have such a dowry as would enable her to decline any
offer whose advantages were merely pecuniary, and at the same time to
bring an adequate income to the man of whom her heart should approve.
The hope of accomplishing this end lightened Charles Yeldham's labour,
mid kept him at his desk and among his law-books without an idea of
repining, generally indeed with a sense of positive pleasure.

He was at his desk that pleasant summer afternoon, when all nature
outside was so bright and gay, so deeply engaged, that he paid not the
slightest attention to the sound of the key in the outer door, and
only looked up when he felt a hand on his shoulder and saw Gordon
Frere standing beside him.

"Grinding away, Charley," said that young gentleman; "hard at it as
usual."

"Just the same as ever, old boy," replied Yeldham; "but just as ready
as ever to knock off for five minutes--exactly five minutes, mind--and
have a chat with you. So there!"--laying down his pen--"now then,
let's begin. Where have you been all the morning? I say, you're rather
a greater swell than usual, are you not, Gordon?"

"Eh--swell? no, I don't think so. Emerged just a little bit from the
chrysalis state perhaps, but not much. But the least bit of colour
lights up tremendously and looks radiant beside your old blacks and
grays. What a fellow you are, Charley! I wish you'd go in for another
style of toggery, and just go to Poole."

"Go to Poole? God forbid!" said Yeldham with ludicrous energy. "Why,
my dear fellow, if I were to be seen in a coat of that sort"--touching
the silk-lined skirts of Frere's frock--"or in a pair of trousers that
fitted me like those, there's not an attorney in London would give me
any more employment. No, sir! In Store Street, Tottenham-Court Road,
resides the artificer who for years has built my garments on what he
assures me are sound mathematical principles, and I shall continue to
employ him until one of us is removed to a sphere where clothes are
unnecessary. And now, once more, where have you been all this
morning?"

"Ah! that's exactly what I came home to talk to you about. I've been
calling on a deuced pretty girl, Master Charley, and I want to tell
you all about it."

"A very pretty girl, eh?" said Yeldham in rather a hard tone of voice.
"A very pretty girl! All right, my boy; tell away."

"I think I've mentioned her before, Charley," said Frere; "Miss
Guyon--Kate Guyon, daughter of old Guyon, whom you've heard me speak
of; a member of the club, you know; fellow who plays a deuced good
game of whist, and that kind of thing. And the girl's really
wonderful; very handsome, and with a regular well-bred look about her.
None of your dumpy, dowdy, slummakin women--I hate that style--but
tall and elegant; carries herself well, and has plenty to say for
herself--when she chooses."

"When she chooses, eh!" said Yeldham, with a slight smile; "and I
suppose she does choose--to you."

"Well, you know, that's not for a fellow to say. She's always been
very civil; and I rode with her yesterday in the Park, and was in her
box at the Opera last night--when I say her box I mean Lady
Henmarsh's, the old cat who is her principal chaperone--and we got on
capitally together, and I think it was all right. I should have told
you of it when I got home, but I looked into your room, and you were
sound as a top; or this morning, but you were closeted in the office
with some fellow on business. So I went off to call on her--there was
a kind of tacit arrangement that I should do so--and, by George, I
really think I'm hit this time, and that I mean more than ever I did
before."

"Mean more! In what way, Gordon?"

"In the way of marriage, of course, you old idiot. Mean that if I were
to ask her, I think she'd have me. And she'd be a deuced creditable
wife to have about with one; and the governor must just stir himself,
and use his influence and get me a consulship, or a commissionership,
or something where there's a decent income, and not very much to do
for it. There are such things, of course."

"I don't know, Gordon. Recollect these are the days when every thing
is won by merit, and not won without a competitive examination."

"O yes; competitive examination be hanged! I'm not going in for any
thing of that sort. If a man who's sat for the same borough for
five-and-twenty-years, and never voted against his party except once,
by mistake, when he'd been dining out and strolled into the wrong
lobby--if such a patriot as this can't get a decent berth for his son
without any bother about examination and all that kind of thing, where
are our privileges as citizens? O no; that'll come all square, of
course. But what do you advise me about the girl?"

"It's difficult to give such advice off-hand, Gordon, more especially
as I have never seen the young lady, and have scarcely heard of her.
But though you're not particularly learned, young un, you've plenty of
knowledge of the world, and are one of the last men likely to be
entrapped into a silly marriage, or to let yourself be made miserable
for life by giving in to a mere passing fancy. So if you and the young
lady are really fond of each other, and if your father can be
persuaded to give himself the trouble to get some tolerably decent
Government appointment for you, I should say, 'Propose to her like an
honourable man; and God speed you!' I--I think I should see my father
first, Gordon, and make sure of what he would do; for, from all I've
heard, I don't think Mr. Guyon is a man of resources--I mean pecuniary
resources."

"N-no," said Frere; "I should not think he was. He's a remarkably
chirpy old boy, tells very good stories, and is always well got-up;
but I shouldn't think his balance at his banker's was very
satisfactory. However, Kate's simply charming; stands out from all the
ruck of girls one knows, and is in the habit of meeting and dancing
with, like a star. I'll write down to the governor and sound him about
what he'd be inclined to do; and I'll just go round before dinner to
Queen Anne Street; not to go in, you know,--of course not; but there's
the last Botanical Fte to-morrow in the Regent's Park, and Kate asked
me if I was going, and I said I'd go if she went, and she said she'd
try and get some one to take her. I suppose the old woman who's always
about with her doesn't care for dissipation by daylight. I say,
Charley, fancy if it comes off all straight! Fancy me a married man!"

Yeldham smiled, but said nothing. There was scarcely any occasion for
him to speak; for Frere was full of his subject, and rattled on.

"How astonished your people will be! I can see the Vicar reading your
letter announcing the news through his double eyeglass, and then
handing it over to little Constance and exclaiming, 'Won-derful!' And
Constance with her large solemn gray eyes, and her pert nose, and her
fresh little mouth; Constance, whom I used to call 'my little wife'
when I was grinding away with the Vicar in those jolly days--ah what a
glorious old fellow he is!--won't she be surprised when she finds I've
got a real wife! And you,--you'll be left alone in chambers, Charley,
old boy; all alone!--though you don't see much of me as it is, do you,
old fellow?"

"No, Gordon; not much," said Yeldham rising; "not so much as I should
wish. But it's pleasant to me to look forward to your coming, to bring
a little of the outside world's life and light into these dreary old
rooms, and to prove to me that I am not actually part and parcel of
these musty old books and parchments, as I'm sometimes half inclined
to believe. However, I could not expect to have you always with me,
any more than I could expect it to be always summer; and indeed, if
you were always here, I should not know what to do with you. Come, my
five minutes' rest has been prolonged into a perfect idleness. Out
with you, and let me get to work again!"

"No, no; not yet, Charley. It's so seldom I have the chance of getting
you to take your nose off the paper, and to open your ears to any
thing that is not law-jargon, that I'm not going to give in so soon.
Besides, I've been talking all this time, and now it's your turn. I
want your advice, and you're going to give it me; and that's all about
it."

"It's a great pity you don't stick to your profession, Gordon," said
Yeldham, half laughingly, half in earnest; "you would have made a
great success at the Old Bailey. You've all the characteristics of
that style of practice charmingly developed; plenty of cheek, plenty
of volubility, and supreme self-reliance. If you had done me the
honour of listening to me instead of thinking what you were going to
say next, you would have heard me advise you half an hour ago."

"Stuff! I heard you fast enough. Propose to the girl, and all that;
very honourable and straightforward, you know, Charley, but a little
old-fashioned, you know,--at least you don't know; how should you,
shut up in this old hole? But what I mean to say is, fellows don't
propose to girls nowadays, old fellow, except in books and on the
stage, and that sort of thing. You understand each other, you know,
without going on your knees, or 'plighting troth,' or any rubbish of
that kind. But what I want to know is, what is my line towards the old
party--Guyon pre?"

"Hold on a minute, Gordon," said Charles Yeldham rising from his
chair, plunging his hands into his trousers' pockets, and taking up
his position of vantage on the hearthrug. "Granted all you say about
my being old-fashioned, you yet seem to think that there is a phase of
courtship sufficiently unchanged--I was going to say sufficiently
natural--for me to be able to advise you upon."

"He-ar, he-ar!" said Mr. Frere, knocking the table on which he was
seated.

"But before I attempt to give you any advice, I must know whether you
are really in earnest in this business. Yes; I know you say you're
'hard hit,' and 'serious this time,' and a lot of stuff that I've
heard you say a dozen times before about a dozen different girls. What
I want to know is, do you really think seriously of marrying Miss
Guyon? Has it entered your mind to regard it from any other point than
the mere calf-love view, what you in your slang call 'being spooney'
upon her? I mean, Gordon, old fellow,--I'm a solemn old fogey, you
know; but it's in the fogey light that such a solemn thing should be
looked at--are you prepared to take Miss Guyon as your wife?"

"On my sacred honour, Charley, there's nothing would make me so
happy."

"Then the honourable way to go to work is to see Mr. Guyon at once and
speak to him. Tell him your feelings and----"

"And my prospects, eh, Charley? He's safe to ask about them."

"Well, you can tell him what you've just said of your father's
position, and what you intend to ask him to do for you. And then----"

"Yes; and then?"

"Well, then you'll hear what he's got to say to that."

"Ye-es; it won't take me very long to listen to an exposition of Mr.
Guyon's views on my financial position, I take it. However, I'm almost
certain--quite certain, I may say--of Kate; and as you think it's due
to her to speak to her father----"

"I'm sure of it, Gordon. It's the only honourable course."

"Well, then, I'll do it at once, though I don't much like it, I can
tell you."

"Whatever may be the result, it's best you should know it soon,
Gordon. Nothing unfits a man for every thing so much as being in a
state of doubt."

"I'll end mine at once, Charley. No; not at once. I must first see if
that Botanical-Fte arrangement is coming off, and after that I'll
speak to her father. Devilish solemn phrase that, eh, Charley!"

"It won't be so dreadful in carrying out as it sounds, my boy. Clear
out now; you shan't have another instant!"

Gordon Frere nodded laughingly at his friend; and after making a
hurried toilet in his own room started off for Queen Anne Street,
while Charles Yeldham seated himself at his desk.

But not to work; his mind was too full for that. The short light
conversation just recorded had given Charles Yeldham matter for much
deliberation. When a man's life is thoroughly engrossed by mental
work, the few humanising influences which he allows to operate on him
are infinitely more absorbing than the thousand fleeting affections of
the light-hearted and the thoughtless. When Charles Yeldham gave his
thoughts a holiday from his conveyancing, and turned them from the
attorneys who employed him and the work which they brought him to do,
his mind reverted generally to the loved ones in the vicarage at home
or to the two men whose friendship he had time and opportunity to
cultivate. Never was younger brother better loved than was Gordon
Frere by the large-hearted, large-brained philosopher whose chambers
he shared. It was indeed from the elder-brother point of view that
Yeldham regarded Frere. As a boy Gordon had been the one private pupil
whom the old vicar had admitted into his house; and later in life he
had passed two long vacations reading at the seaside with his old
tutor and the members of his family. Charley loved the young man with
all the large capacity of his loving nature, looked with the most
lenient eye on his boyish frivolities and dissipations, and had
hitherto never feared for his future, hoping that he would settle down
into some useful career before he thought of settling himself for
life. But the conversation just held had entirely changed his ideas.
Gordon, unstable, unsettled, without any means or resources, had
announced his intention of taking a wife. And what a wife! Of the
young lady herself Yeldham knew nothing; but certain pleadings which
he had drawn some twelve months beforehand in a case which never came
into court, and which had been settled by mutual arrangement, had
given him a very clear insight into the character of Mr. Edward Scrope
Guyon, and into that worthy gentleman's resources and manner of life.
With such a man Yeldham felt perfectly certain that an impecunious
scion of a good family like Gordon Frere coming as a pretender for his
daughter's hand would not have the smallest chance of success; and it
was with a heavy heart that he sat idly sketching figures on his
blotting-pad, and turning over all that he had recently heard in his
mind.

"I don't see my way out of it," said he, throwing down his pen
at length, and plunging his hands into his pockets. "I don't
see my way out of it, and that's the truth. Gordon is hard hit, I
believe,--harder hit than he has ever been yet, and means all fairly
and honourably; but fair play and honour won't avail much, I imagine,
in carrying out this connection--at least with the male portion of the
family. A man with the morals of a billiard-marker and an income of a
couple of thousand a-year would have a better chance with old Guyon
than a Bayard or a Galahad. He's a bad lot, this Mr. Guyon, but as
sharp as a ferret, and he'll read Gordon like a book. All the poor
boy's talk about what his political influence and what his father must
do for him, and all that, won't weigh for an instant with a man like
Guyon, who is up to every move on the board, and who will require
money down from any one bidding for his daughter's hand. I wonder what
the girl's like, and how much of the play rests in her hands. That old
rip would never be base enough to make her his instrument in advancing
his own fortune? And yet how often it's done, only in a quieter and
less noticeable manner! Gad! I begin to think I am a bit of a cynic,
as Gordon chaffingly, calls me, when I find these ideas floating
through my head; and I'm sure any one would imagine I was one, or
worse, if; knowing my own convictions, they had heard me advise that
poor boy to see old Guyon and lay his statement before him. But I'm
convinced that that is the only way of dealing with such a matter as
this. Have the tooth out at once; the wrench will do you good and
prevent any chance of floating pains in the future. Guyon will handle
the forceps with strength and skill, and poor Gordon will think that
half his life is gone with the tug. But once over, when he begins to
find that the gap is not so enormous as he at first imagined, when he
sees people don't notice the alteration in his appearance, he'll begin
to think it was a good job that it happened while he was yet young,
and he'll settle down and get to work, and perhaps make the name and
reputation which his talents, if they had any thing like fair play,
entitle him to. It's wonderful the different light in which men see
these things. There's my boy there just mad for this girl, raving
about her beauty, going into ecstasies about her hair and eyes and
figure; and here am I, his chum and intimate, who can safely say that
never in the course of a life extending now to some six-and-thirty
years, have I had the faintest idea of what being in love is like.
Lord, Lord! what a queer world it is! and what is for the best?
Perhaps, if I had had nice smooth fair hair instead of a shock-head of
bristles, I should have been kneeling at ladies' feet instead of
stooping over my desk, and writing sonnets for girls instead of
drawing pleas for attorneys. I know which pays best, but I wonder
which is the most interesting. 'Never felt the kiss of love, nor
maiden's hand in mine,' eh? Well, I don't know that I'm much the worse
for that. Maidens' hands seem to lead one into all sorts of scrapes;
and as for the kiss of love---- Why, what time's that?"

The striking of the clock on the mantelpiece roused him from his
reverie; and looking up, he discovered that his intended five-minutes'
absence from work had been extended over two hours, and that the
daylight of the late summer time was beginning to fade. So, with a
heavy sigh, he lit his reading-lamp and settled down to his desk
again. Like every other man accustomed to hard work, he found it
immediate relief from thought, and soon became immersed in his
writing, at which he slaved away until it was time to get some dinner.
He had no heart to walk up to the club that evening. He might meet
some fellows of his acquaintance there,--very possibly Gordon himself;
and he was not inclined to chatter upon trivial subjects. So he put on
his hat, and strode over to the Cock; the quiet solemnity of the old
tavern at that hour of the evening, when the late diners had departed
and the early supper-eaters had not yet arrived, being thoroughly
congenial to his feelings. After his dinner he went back to his
chambers; and after smoking a pipe, during which process he again fell
a-thinking over Gordon's trouble, he returned to his work, and was in
full swing when he heard a key in the lock, and the next minute Mr.
Gordon Frere entered the room.

"Hallo, Gordon!" said Charley, looking up at the clock; "why, it's not
eleven; what on earth brings you home so early, young un?"

"Happiness, Charley! jolliness, old fellow! It's all right about
to-morrow; Kate's going to the _fte_, and---- After dinner at the
Club I went up into the strangers' smoking-room, and there wasn't any
one there I knew--only a couple of old fellows, who sat and smoked in
silence; and so I got thinking it all over; and what a stunning girl
she is, and how sure I am that she's fond of me, and how fond I am of
her--regularly hit, you know; and so I thought it would be horrible
somehow to go any where after,--to the theatre, you know, or to hear
the fellows chaffing in the way they do about--women and every thing;
and so I came home."

"Just in time to wish me good-night, my boy. I'm off to bed."

"Not until I've extracted a promise from you, Charley, old fellow."

"And that is----? Look sharp, Gordon; I'm sleepy."

"And that is, that you'll come with me to-morrow to the Botanical
Fte."

"To the--to the Botanical Fte! I? Ah, I see, poor Gordon! too much
Guyon has made you mad."

"No, Charley, I'm serious. You know you're my best and dearest friend,
the only real friend I have in the world--for my own people are like
every body else's own people, full of themselves and not caring one
rap for me--and I want you to see my--to see Miss Guyon, and to give
me your real opinion about her."

"By which, of course, you'll be thoroughly influenced, and if I won't
approve give her up at once. No, Gordon, I'm not much experienced in
these things, but I _do_ know enough not to commit myself in the way
you suggest. However, I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll make half
holiday for once, and go with you to the _fte_--reserving my opinion
of the young lady to myself."

"Well, it's something to have got you to leave that old desk for an
hour, to get you to look at trees and flowers instead of foolscap and
red-tape. And as for Miss Guyon--well, you'll say something about her,
I've no doubt."


"I'm not sorry this opportunity offered," said Charley Yeldham
to himself as he was undressing. "I've not much curiosity; but I
confess I'm anxious to see the girl who has so captivated Master
Gordon--partly on her own account, and partly to see if I can trace in
her manner any suspicion of a---- No; no woman could be bad enough to
lay herself out to entrap a man at her father's desire! And besides,
Gordon Frere's not worth snaring!"




CHAPTER VII.
KATHARINE GUYON.


So, three men, all good fellows in their way, and two possessed of
qualities not common, and destined to be influenced throughout all
their lives by the seeming chance that had made them acquainted with
her, were thinking of Katharine Guyon, rather than of any or all their
more immediate and important concerns. She had dawned, a new luminary,
on their horizon; and two were conscious worshippers of the bright
visible presence, the other had not yet turned his eyes that way. He
will do so before long, and then----?

As for Katharine Guyon herself, she had thoughts at present for but
one person, and speculations only on one subject. Her warm, impulsive,
wholly undisciplined heart had accepted Gordon Frere as its tenant
and ruler, after a sudden fashion, which was not to be defended or
excused if judged by the standard of conventionality, or indeed of
common-sense. When the latter quality shall be in any one instance
admitted into a case of love-at-first-sight, it may advance a claim to
invariable acknowledgment; certainly not otherwise. As for
conventionality, Katharine in no way bowed to its authority; and it
was fortunate indeed that her good taste and innate good-breeding
preserved her from any boldness or vulgarity of demeanour; for those
were her only safeguards. Legitimate rule over her there was none, and
she would not for a moment have brooked usurped authority. Her
position was peculiar, and, though there was a good deal of the
glitter of fashion and the reality of enjoyment about it, to
clear-sighted eyes, looking below the surface, pitiable.

Katharine's mother had brought her husband no advantages in their
short, not remarkably happy, marriage, except those attached to an
extensive and distinguished family connection. She had no fortune, no
possessions of any kind, except some handsome jewels, which were
secured to her, to descend to her children. She lived only a short
time; but it is probable she thought the period sufficiently
prolonged; for she died, when Katharine was born, with no further
expression of regret than that she wished she could have taken the
child with her; but was consoled by learning that the physicians
thought the feeble infant very unlikely to live. Isabella
Stanbourne--for such was the name of Katharine's mother--was a
handsome woman, of fine mind and high principles. These qualities had
not availed to prevent her making the tremendous though not unusual
mistake of a wholly uncongenial marriage; but they did her the
questionable service of opening her eyes to the blunder she had
committed before she had been Edward Guyon's wife many weeks. Once
opened, Mrs. Guyon's eyes were not the sort of optics ever to be even
partially closed again; and they perceived and scrutinised every
particular of her husband's character and conduct with merciless
clearness and vigilance. That gentleman furnished them with ample
material for their scrutiny; and from the close of the honeymoon to
the termination of her life Mrs. Guyon held the partner of her
existence, whom she knew to be a liar and a profligate, and suspected
to be a swindler, in quiet, undemonstrative, but supreme contempt. She
was a woman in whom the existence of any kind of regard or even
compassion was incompatible with the least feeling of scorn; and so
she never tried to persuade herself that she entertained either
towards her husband, from the day she found out that the man she had
married was a being of a totally different order to the idol which her
fancy had set up and worshipped. She did not leave him, even when she
made further and more serious discoveries: in the first place, because
she disliked the scandal of a separation; in the second, because she
was conscious of great delicacy of health, and had a strong
presentiment that she should not survive the birth of her child. She
determined to give herself the chance, if, contrary to her conviction,
she lived; she could then decide upon her future. The chance
befriended her, and Mrs. Guyon died. Her last days were undisturbed by
her husband's presence. He had gone to Doncaster when the event which
made him a father and a widower took place; and having made rather a
good thing of the expedition, he returned to town in very tolerable
spirits, and felt that he should now be more interesting and
irresistible than ever as a young widower, and could easily get over
the inconsolable stage by a trip on the Continent. His dead wife's
sister-in-law, the Hon. Mrs. Philip Stanbourne, undertook very gladly
to look after the little motherless infant, at whom the elegant Ned
barely glanced, during her days of babyhood; and she redeemed her
promise well.

It is unnecessary to inquire into the career of Mr. Guyon between the
period of Katharine's birth and that of her _dbut_ in society. It was
evident that, however well-founded his anticipations of success, it
had not been in the matrimonial direction; and indeed some rather
amusing anecdotes were current in society concerning "Ned's" audacious
attempts and egregious failures. His wife's relatives had never
particularly admired Mr. Guyon; but they were kindly, unaffected
people; and Mrs. Guyon had been strictly and uniformly silent on all
her domestic concerns; so that, though they surmised that the brief
marriage had not been the altogether ecstatic union Isabella had
imagined it would prove, they had nothing but surmise in their minds
respecting it; and they never thought of withholding from the
motherless girl any of the advantages derivable from their social
position and influence. These were far more important to Katharine's
father than her guileless uncles, aunts, and cousins imagined--to whom
a life of shifts, scheming, and pretence was an utterly unknown and
unsuspected possibility--and much more important too to Katharine
herself, as regulating her father's conduct towards her, than the girl
ever knew or dreamed of. She would probably have been placed
economically out of sight, at a foreign boarding-school, and left
there to attain the age of womanhood, unnoticed by her father, had not
the kind relatives under whose care her early childhood had been
happily passed given her consequence in Mr. Guyon's eyes, causing him
to regard her as a valuable possession, a court-card in fact. So,
instead of a cheap foreign school being selected as an _oubliette_ for
the child,--in virtue of whom Mr. Guyon had a seat at the tables of
many who were more great than wise,--an expensive establishment for
young ladies in the Regent's Park was honoured by Mrs. Stanbourne's
choice; and there Katharine was brilliantly, if not solidly educated,
the larger portion of the _pension_ and her personal expenses being
paid by her uncle. In Katharine's early girlhood the Hon. Philip
Stanbourne died; and she sustained by this calamity a double loss:
not only that of her kind relative and friend, but of her aunt's
counsel, training, and protection in the perilous time which lay
before her,--the time of early womanhood, and her entrance into
society. The widow went abroad with her daughter, who was some years
older than Katharine; and though she was in London when the events
just related took place, she was not likely to be again a settled
resident in England, as her daughter had married an Austrian nobleman,
high in the diplomatic world, and desired to have as much of her
mother's society as possible.

The fashionable "establishment" had turned out few girls so well
calculated to do it credit and extend its fame as Katharine Guyon,
when, at a little more than seventeen, she appeared in a circle of
society where, though her father, with all his cleverness and _savoir
faire_, received little more than toleration, she at once made a
favourable impression. In her appearance she combined the personal
attractions of both her parents: she had her mother's high-bred look,
her father's vivacity and his fine features; she had the elegant
carriage, the delicate hands and feet, the refined voice of Isabella
Stanbourne, and the airy easy manner which in Mr. Guyon had a
_soupon_ of impudence. In disposition she resembled her mother
exclusively; but there were strong points of difference between
them,--difference deepened no doubt by the circumstances of
Katharine's girlhood, by the fact that she had never been the object,
as her mother had been of exclusive and conscientious female care
since she had ceased to be a child. She had not the clear, direct,
keen perception of her mother; but she was her equal in resolution,
and more than her equal in implacability. She was high-spirited now,
and impatient of contradiction to a degree that indicated some
violence of temper; her feelings were keen and impulsive, and her
affections strong and passionate, though undeveloped; for indeed who
had the girl to love? She had gone through the ordinary schoolgirl
friendships, and also through the customary flirtations since the
former had come to a natural end; but she did not really love any body
in the world, except perhaps Mrs. Stanbourne, and of her she had seen
but little for some time.

Her feelings towards her father were of a mixed, and, on the whole, of
an unsatisfactory character; such as any one watching the girl with
anxiety and experience must have recognised with regret. She was fond
of him after a fashion, and there was a good deal of _camaraderie_
between them; but she had an intuitive distrust of him, and she knew
instinctively that all his indulgence, all his flattery, all his
yielding to her wishes and furnishing her pleasures, were superficial
compliances. He liked the kind of life she liked; she knew him well
enough, without formally reasoning upon her knowledge, to feel
convinced that if their tastes or wishes clashed in any way, hers and
not his would be expected, if not obliged, to yield. She admired her
father's pleasant manners and social talents; she had but rarely any
opportunity of contrasting his fulfilment of the paternal relation
with that of other men; and she was full of youth, health, spirits,
and capacity for the enjoyment of every kind of pleasure that offered;
so she went her way carelessly and joyously, and reasoned little upon
the present or the future. Katharine and her father were not real
friends, but they were always technically "good friends;" a result to
which the underlying violence of the girl's nature no doubt
unconsciously conduced. Mr. Guyon hated trouble and detested scenes;
and he had a tolerably correct occult sense that he might find himself
"in for" both if he interfered much with Katharine: consequently he
did not interfere; and as she was totally in the dark respecting his
pecuniary circumstances, and never asked any troublesome questions,
they got on very well together. Real companionship they had none, but
they did not miss it; and while her father's chief anxiety about
Katharine was that she should make a good match before she "went off"
in looks--a good match implying a rich son-in-law, conveniently
indifferent about settlements, and ready to "do" bills to any
reasonable or unreasonable amount--Katharine's chief anxiety about him
was, that he should dye his hair and whiskers with greater success,
and drink less wine on evenings when he went to parties with her. She
knew he was proud of her beauty, and thought her "doosid good
company;" but she did not for a moment imagine he had any sentimental
love for her; indeed she fancied he had not much feeling, for he had
never mentioned her mother to her in his life. Their relation, in
fact, was pleasant, hollow, and heathen; and when Katharine abandoned
herself to her newborn love for Gordon Frere, she never thought of
her father's feelings or wishes in the matter, or had a more dutiful
notion in her mind than that it "made it pleasant that papa liked his
coming about the house." You see she was no exceptional being, no
angel alighted for a little on a sphere unworthy of her footsteps and
her wings; but an interesting, captivating, self-willed woman,--such
as circumstances had made her; a woman whose weaknesses were as
visible as her charms, whose strength was latent and unsuspected.

It was not to be supposed that a girl like Katharine--handsome,
clever, dashing, and independent in her ideas and manners, of
a not precisely-to-be-defined position in society, and with a
not-exactly-to-be-commended father--should escape sharp and not kind
or altogether candid criticism. She was very much admired; she
commanded admiration indeed, however reluctantly accorded; and men
liked her very much, even men who were not in love with her, and with
whom she did not take the trouble to flirt. Women did not like her;
and yet the girl gave them no fair excuse for their prejudice. She was
not a determined coquette, conquering and monopolising; she was not
rudely inattentive to women, as "beauties" and "blues" usually are:
she was smiling and agreeable, and perfectly indifferent to them all;
and, with a host of acquaintances, had but one female friend, her aunt
Mrs. Stanbourne. With Lady Henmarsh, who was a distant relative on her
father's side, Katharine lived on terms of great intimacy,--the lady
was indeed her constant, her official _chaperone_,--but it was an
intimacy of the kind which more frequently precludes than includes
friendship.

Lady Henmarsh was a woman of the world, in every possible meaning and
extent of the term. She was the exact opposite of Mrs. Stanbourne, in
manners, mind, tastes, opinions, and principles; and she disliked Mrs.
Stanbourne so cordially, that she might have endeavoured to influence
Katharine in a contrary direction to that of her wishes, simply to
annoy that lady; but she was saved from any thing so unphilosophical
by the fact that it suited her in every way to appoint herself
high-priestess of Miss Guyon's world-worship. As no one ever saw, and
many had never heard of Lady Henmarsh's husband, it was a pardonable
mistake, frequently made by strangers, to suppose that she was a
widow. This, however, was not the case. A miserable invalid--whose
migrations, if not quite confined to Goldsmith's _itinraire_, were
only from his dull house in Hampshire to his dull house in Cavendish
Square; a cross, palsied, querulous old man, called Sir Timothy
Henmarsh, who had long since lapsed out of the sight and the memory of
society--still existed, not altogether to the displeasure of his lady,
who would be seriously impoverished by his death; existed in a
condition of illness and suffering which rendered it indispensable
that his wife should, in deference to what society calls common
decency, provide herself with some further excuse for her neglect of
him, and her constant presence at gay and festive scenes of every
description, than the real, but unproduceable one, that she liked
dissipation and disliked him. Lady Henmarsh and Mr. Guyon had been
very good friends indeed in former days, when he was a young widower,
thoroughly consoled, and Hetty Lorimer was a pretty portionless girl,
who knew that she had nothing to look to but marriage, and that if she
desired to secure the enjoyment of such things as her soul loved, she
must take care that it was a "good" one. A marriage with her handsome
cousin would have been any thing but one of the required description;
and indeed neither of them ever contemplated such a possibility. They
were persons of a discreet and practical turn, and Mr. Guyon went to
Hetty Lorimer's wedding (a solemnity at which Sir Timothy Henmarsh's
son, a gentleman some years the bride's senior, sternly declined to be
present) with perfect alacrity and good humour. They had been
excellent friends ever since; and when, the time having arrived at
which Mr. Guyon found it convenient to transfer his daughter from the
"establishment" to Queen Anne Street, Lady Henmarsh gave him her
advice, and offered him her services with enthusiastic friendship,
what more proper and satisfactory arrangement could possibly have been
entered into than that Lady Henmarsh should "do the maternal" by
Katharine?

"I've no doubt you'll do it to perfection, Hetty," said Mr. Guyon, as
he rose and terminated the interview; "only you won't look the part
within a dozen years." And the good-looking deceiver went down the
stairs with a smile, which expanded into a grin when he reached the
street; for Miss Hester Lorimer and Miss Isabella Stanbourne had been
girls together, and the former was a little older than the lady who
had married the irresistible Ned Guyon.

This unexceptionable arrangement had now lasted a considerable time,
and no likelihood of its coming to a conclusion by the marriage of
Katharine had yet presented itself. Lady Henmarsh was better pleased
than Mr. Guyon that it should be so, and less surprised. She
understood Katharine better than her father understood her; she knew
how entirely unscathed she had been amid the lightning flashes of real
admiration and simulated sentiment which had played around her girlish
head; she knew that in Katharine's perfectly impartial brightness, her
frank acceptance of the incense offered before her, her smiling
pleasure and indifference, consisted the barrier to Mr. Guyon's
wishes. For her part, she was in no hurry about the matter; indeed,
the longer Miss Guyon should require some one (meaning herself) to go
about with her, the better pleased she would be. But though Lady
Henmarsh did not disquiet herself because Mr. Guyon's wishes remained
unfulfilled, she would very seriously and earnestly have disapproved
of their being traversed and thwarted. She did not particularly care
that Katharine should marry soon, but she fervently desired that she
should marry well; and it was with a new and very unpleasant sense of
misgiving that she observed the eager and vivacious pleasure which
Katharine evinced in the society of Mr. Gordon Frere, and watched the
faces and the manner of the two from the alcove, whence she beheld the
dancers at Mrs. Pendarvis's ball. Lady Henmarsh knew very little of
Gordon Frere; indeed, only one fact, beyond the good looks and the
good manners patent to all observers. But in that one fact lay the
only important item of knowledge, in the estimation of Lady Henmarsh.
Gordon Frere was a poor man, with no income to speak of, and only very
desultory, undefined, and contingent expectations. Clearly this would
not meet either Mr. Guyon's views or her own. She hoped, she trusted,
nay she believed, that Katharine would not be so infatuated as to
think of marrying Frere; she trusted Frere was too much a man of the
world to think of marrying Katharine. It was only a flirtation,--it
must be only a flirtation; but even that, if she carried it to such an
extent as she had done at the ball, Katharine must be induced to give
up. It would be remarked, it would keep off other men: of course it
was quite foolish to be afraid of any thing serious; so Lady Henmarsh
hoped, and trusted, and believed, and yet she doubted and feared. She
did not altogether like to acknowledge to herself, perhaps, how little
confidence she felt in her own power of "inducing" Katharine to do any
thing which did not accord with her own inclination and humour. The
tie between them was formed of mutual complaisance, not of influence
and respect. Lady Henmarsh did not understand either the strength of
Katharine's feelings or the determination of her temper; she had
never seen either roused into action, and she regarded her as rather
shrewder and more worldly-minded than most girls, as well as cleverer
and better-looking. So, though she knew her to be self-willed, she
calculated on her sense and shrewdness overcoming her obstinacy in a
matter in which her worldliness would teach her that obstinacy was
injurious and misplaced.

Lady Henmarsh pondered these things one fine summer's day, while
Katharine rambled about the Botanical Gardens with Gordon Frere and
others; while every glance caught from his blue eyes, and every
sentence intoned especially for her ear by his earnest musical voice,
bound the girl's heart more closely to him, and rendered the task
which Lady Henmarsh proposed to herself more difficult of fulfilment,
more infructuous in result.

"At all events, it shall not go on like this beyond to-night," said
her ladyship to herself: "if she looks at and dances with him as she
did at Mrs. Pendarvis's, I shall tell Ned Guyon about it, and find out
what he thinks; but my decided opinion is that it is full time _some_
steps were taken." And then she went to visit Sir Timothy.


Mrs. Streightley and her daughter had returned to the Brixton villa,
had been affectionately received by Robert, and had heard from him the
history of all his doings in their absence. Of course Ellen had,
allowed the briefest possible space of time to elapse between her
return and the despatch of an eager summons entreating Hester Gould to
come to her with the least possible delay. Hester arrived about two
hours before the ordinary dinner-hour; and the young ladies passed
that space of time in the interchange of delightful confidences;
complete and heartfelt on the part of Ellen Streightley, and as meagre
as might be on that of Hester Gould. All the particulars of Ellen's
engagement, which she had already detailed by letter, were again
confided to Hester; all the particulars of the visit from which they
had just returned, and which had been made to certain relatives of
Mrs. Streightley's, of the agricultural persuasion, were once more
related in full.

"I used to think Thorswold rather a stupid place, dearest Hester,"
said Ellen, and a fine blush overspread her pretty honest face:
"little did I ever think I should meet my fate there. I do so long for
you to see Decimus. You will think him so delightful."

"I shall be very much pleased to see him, Ellen," returned Hester;
"and I rejoice, as I am sure you know, in your happiness. But tell me
about your brother,--what does he say to it all?"

"Well, indeed, Hester," said Ellen, hesitating and laughing, "that is
what I hardly can tell you, he has said so little. He kissed me, and
pulled my ear, and called me a little goose, in his own kind way, you
know; but he is so taken up with some new friends he has made, I
cannot make him out. He looks quite different, I am sure; and is so
particular about his dress! A lot of new clothes have just come home
from his tailor's, and a whole boxful of lavender-kid gloves. Isn't it
funny, Hester? Dear old Robert, he talks a great deal about _Mr_.
Guyon; but I suspect he thinks more of _Miss_. Though indeed I only
found out there was a Miss Guyon quite by accident."

Hester Gould's face flushed with sudden anger, and into her calm
calculating heart there came a pang of unaccustomed doubt and fear.
But it was quite in her ordinary tone she said:

"So your brother's friend is Mr. Guyon, is he? Does he live in Queen
Anne Street?"

"Yes, yes; I am sure that is the street I have heard him mention.
Stay, there's an invitation stuck in the chimney-glass--here it is.
'Mr. and Miss Guyon request'--and so--yes, '110 Queen Anne Street' Do
you know them, Hester?"

"No, not personally; but I have seen Miss Guyon frequently. I used to
teach singing to the Miss Morrisons in the next house, No. 109--it is
vacant now, and shut up since Sir Christopher died--and I often saw
her going out to ride. She used to go just about at my hour."

"And is she nice, Hester,--is she pretty? Robert never has told me any
thing particular about her. Men never can describe any one."

"She is very handsome, very elegant, and very fashionable," replied
Hester; and then she departed from her usual cautious reticence so far
as to say, "and I heard the Morrisons say Mr. Guyon was very 'fast,'
and lived beyond his means."

"Indeed," said Ellen in a very grave tone, for to her the accusation
of living beyond one's means sounded very portentous; "I am sure
Robert would not approve of that."

Hester Gould watched Robert Streightley quietly and closely the whole
of that evening. She saw him different to any thing he had ever been;
preoccupied, absent, but not unhappy. A smile played frequently over
his features; and though he sunk into frequent fits of abstraction,
they were evidently not painful. He was as kind and affectionate as
usual to his mother and sisters, as attentive to herself; but a change
had passed upon him which she fully understood. In her cold repressed
way, she was bitterly angry.

She went home rather early. As Robert Streightley saw her to the cab,
and bade her good-night, she said to herself:

"Daniel Thacker knows this Mr. Guyon,--his sisters may know something
about the girl. I'll go to Hampstead to-morrow; they don't mind Sunday
visitors; and I may have a chance of seeing their brother. Really that
girl Ellen grows sillier every day."




CHAPTER VIII.
AMARYLLIS IN A MARQUEE.


The prettiest public _ftes_ in London are those given in the gardens
of the Botanical Society in the Regent's Park. There is to be found
plenty of fresh green turf; there are myriads of lovely flowers
blooming in open beds, or tastefully arranged beneath the marquees;
there are solemn old big trees stretching out their umbrageous arms,
and in their majesty making one think even less favourably than usual
of the perky straggling sticks at South Kensington; there are the
bands of two or three guards regiments, having sufficient compassion
on the visitors to play one after the other, and not, as in some
places, at the same time; and there is generally a collection of the
nicest-looking people in town. There are few _savans_, and not much
literary or artistic talent; but as _savans_ and the professors of
literary and artistic talent are for the most part any thing but
nice-looking, and as flirtation is the science to which at these
gatherings attention is principally devoted, their loss is not felt;
indeed it may be safely said that the general company is happier for
their absence.

Although the last _fte_ of the season is scarcely to be compared to
its immediate predecessor, the warm weather of the two preceding days
had done very much in contributing to its gaiety on the first occasion
when Mr. Charles Yeldham found himself making holiday from his work,
and taking part in a grand ceremony of nothing-doing with those whose
lives were passed in never doing any thing; and, like most men who
rarely emerge from the business of their lives to seek a temporary
respite from perpetual work in a few brief hours of enjoyment, Charley
was determined to make the most of his time, and to reap the full
value of those precious hours which he had grudgingly given up. With
his chum leaning on his arm, he made his way through the fruit-tent
and the flower-tent, round the American garden, where the glorious
azalias, so lately a mass of magnificent beauty, now stood bare and
drooping; now attracting the attention of a group of faded dowagers by
his energy and volubility; anon pausing in rapt attention, listening
to the strains of the melody-breathing "Sonnambula," as performed by
the Grenadiers, or nodding head and beating hand in sufficiently
ill-kept time to a whirlwind galop rattled through by the band of the
Artillery. Into his holiday, as into his work, Charley had thrown his
whole heart; he had determined to shut out temporarily all thoughts of
attorneys, pleas, work, and worry, and he went in for the pleasures of
the day with an eagerness and an impetuosity that perfectly astonished
his companion.

"I'll tell you what it is, Charley," said Gordon Frere, after they had
careered round the gardens, and were standing once more by the gate at
which they had entered--"I'll tell you what it is; you're like a
country cousin, by Jove! or one of those horrible fellows that come up
to town with a letter of introduction. You want to see every thing,
and all at once. It's a deuced good thing that you don't often give
yourself an outing, or you'd be wanting me to take you to the Thames
Tunnel, and the Monument, and Madame Tussaud's, and all sorts of
wonderful places. Here have we been rushing about from pillar to post,
or rather from tent to tent, and from band to band, and you've never
yet given me breathing-time to look round and speak to any of the
people I know. Now you really must hold on for a moment, for it's just
upon three o'clock, and that's the time that Kate--Miss Guyon, I
mean--said she should be here; and I promised to be near the entrance,
to join her at once."

He spoke with animation, and his bright eyes glowed with fire as he
seized his old friend by the shoulders and used a feigned force to
arrest his progress. You see Mr. Gordon Frere was brimming over with
happiness. To be six-and-twenty years of age; to be good-looking; to
have high animal spirits; to have indulgent tradespeople, and a
tolerable sufficiency of pocket-money; to be in love with a very
charming girl, and to have your passion returned, are all things
calculated to make a man content with life, and disposed to regard
human nature from its best point of view. He was pleased to speak of
himself as a "creature of impulse," and, by some accident probably, he
rightly described himself. Whatever best pleased him for the time
being he took up and went in for earnestly and vigorously. He had
done so all his life, in cricketing, rowing, riding, at school and
college--actually once in reading, when he studied so hard and to so
much purpose apparently, that old Mr. Yeldham wrote to Charles,
anticipating for his son's chum and his own pupil the highest
University honours; but Gordon slacked off, and when the class-list
came out, a double-third was all the position awarded him. Up to
this time the "impulse" had not been shown very strongly in any
love-affairs: he had had his ball-room flirtations, involving
bouquet-sending, Rotten-Row riding, Opera-box haunting, &c., as all
men have; but he had never--to Charles Yeldham's idea at least--been
so really smitten with any one as he announced himself to be with Miss
Guyon. So his honest old chum, albeit he had his own views of the
probable reception of Gordon's proposal by Mr. Guyon, could not find
it in his heart to check him, and only smiled pleasantly as he said:

"All right, Gordon; all right, my boy. But you talk of my taking
you about here and there, as though I were not a mere child in
leading-strings in such a place as this, to be shown each separate
sight in the proper order. Now we've seen the fruit and the flowers,
and listened to the bands, let us take a look at the people.
Tremendous, what you call 'swells,' are they not? No end of crinoline,
and flowers, and finery. By Jove! just turn a few of these young
ladies to walk through the Temple Gardens, and there would not be much
work done that day. Every clerk's nose would be glued to the window;
and I verily believe that even old Farrar, our underneath neighbour,
would leave his books and his papers for such a refreshing sight. Now
there's one,--look there! that tall girl just coming in, with--hallo!
steady, young 'un; what's the matter?"

Charley Yeldham might well cry "steady;" for Gordon gave a visible
start as he turned in the direction indicated by his friend; and his
tone was thick and hurried as he said, "That's Miss Guyon and her
father--and--who the devil's that man with them?"

"Now that's a curious thing," said Yeldham with provoking placidity.
"I don't suppose I know another soul in all this large gathering; but
I do know that man intimately, and I can tell you who he is. That's
Robert Streightley, the City man, that you've so often heard me speak
of, and--but what has come to him? Talk of 'swells,' why, I should
scarcely have recognised Bob Sobersides, as they used to call him, in
that costume. And so that is Miss Guyon, is it? that's Miss Guyon I
say, young 'un, she's--she's wonderfully lovely."

"For God's sake, don't stand staring there with your mouth open,
Charley; but let us go up and speak to these people. They've seen us
already;" and Mr. Frere, passing his arm through his friend's, led him
up to the group, and after making his own salutations, freely
presented him to Miss Guyon and her father. Immediately after his
introduction, Yeldham turned and shook hands with Robert Streightley;
and after a few words of astonishment from each at meeting the other
in such a place, they commenced a conversation, in which Mr. Guyon
took part, leaving Gordon Frere and Katharine walking together a
little in advance of them.

There are few things more embarrassing than having something very
particular to say, knowing that you will have great difficulty in
saying it, and being perfectly convinced that if ever it is to be said
at all, the exact time has arrived. This was Gordon Frere's position.
He knew that the end of the season had arrived; that another fortnight
would see Miss Guyon flown, with the rest of the fashionable world, to
some English sea-board, foreign watering-place, or country-house,
whither he could not have the remotest excuse for following her; he
knew the proverbial danger of delay, especially in love-affairs; he
fully shared in Charley Yeldham's only half-expressed doubts as to the
reception of his proposal by Mr. Guyon, and in the sudden and
unexpected appearance upon the scene of Robert Streightley whom he had
never met before, but of whom, his wealth, his talents, his City
position, he had heard frequently from Charley--he saw a new and
important element of danger. If he intended to make his _coup_ for the
winning of this peerless beauty, now was the time. So he screwed up
his courage and began.

"You are a little late, Miss Guyon,"--this in a low, deep, tremulous
voice; "you said you would be here at three."

"You don't pretend to say that you recollect any thing I said about
it, Mr. Frere?" in the same tone. "I scarcely remembered we had
touched upon the subject."

"Don't you pretend to imagine any such thing so far as I am concerned,
Miss Guyon. No, no; pardon me for one instant; you know that whatever
concerns you, in however trifling a degree,--and more especially when
it relates to the chance of my seeing you,--is always of importance to
me."

He had bent his gaze upon her, as he said this, and he received a
faint fluttering glance as his first reply. Then she said,

"I was scarcely conceited enough to think so, and--and of course I
feel the compliment. However, we _have_ met, you see."

"Yes; and so long as that has come about, no matter how late you are;
for you see I still hold to my original opinion. However late or
early, I must be doubly thankful for the chances of meeting you now.
For the season's at an end, and I suppose you will be off with the
rest?"

"I suppose so; though nothing is settled, I believe."

"And where do you go?"

"Papa talked of Scarborough some time ago. He has not said any thing
about it lately; and as I am wholly indifferent on the subject, I'm
very good to him, and let him have his own way."

"Are you similarly complaisant to Mr. Guyon in all things?"

There must have been something special in the tone of his voice; for
she looked up quickly with a slight flush, and said,

"In all matters in which I take no particular interest. Where I am
concerned I am _exigeante_, and--I am afraid--stubborn."

"Let us call it 'firm,' Miss Guyon," said Frere, with a slight smile.
"Firmness is a quality by no means reprehensible, even when exercised
towards one's father. It's a horrible thing this break-up of the
season, especially as one gets older. All the little pleasant--well, I
suppose I may call them friendships--are nipped in the bud until next
April, when one has to begin again and struggle on until August, when
we find ourselves in exactly the same position in which we were a
twelvemonth before."

"That is, unless we take up with a different set of friends," said
Katharine; "and I believe there are instances on record of such a
change."

Gordon Frere looked at her again, and threw an additional warmth into
his voice as he said, "Granted that fidelity is uncommon, Miss Guyon,
it should be the more prized when it is found. You are going to-night
to Mrs. Tresillian's?"

"Yes; Lady Henmarsh has promised to take me. It is almost my 'last
rose of summer;' positively the last of our ball-engagements this
season."

"Let us trust it will be one of the pleasantest. You will come early,
and you will give me the first _valse_, and as many afterwards as you
can."

"I--I shall be very happy; but we shall leave early. Papa has a holy
horror of having his horses kept out late, more especially when he is
not present; and he will not be there to-night, I think; for he's
going to ask Mr. Streightley to dine with us, and I believe he wants
to talk business to him afterwards."

"Mr. Streightley going to dine with you! By the way, who is Mr.
Streightley?"

"Mr. Streightley? he's a horror--I didn't mean that. He's a City
friend of papa's, and, as I'm told, a very rich man."

"Very rich, and in the City, eh!" said Gordon Frere, looking over his
shoulder at the object of their remark. "He's better got up than most
of his genus. I think I could swear to Poole in his coat. Very rich,
and you've been told so, Miss Guyon! He's a lucky man."

"Is he, Mr. Frere? You'll excuse my saying that I don't follow you;
that I don't know why Mr. Streightley is lucky."

"Did you not yourself say that he was very rich, Miss Guyon, and that
you had been told so?" said Gordon, with more warmth than he had
previously exhibited. "Society acts as this gentleman's
_avant-coureur_, and repeats his claim to respect wherever he goes;
and of course he finds people prepared to proffer him ready-made
honour."

The bitterness in his tone jarred on Kate's ear. His face was averted,
so that there was no need for her to restrain the half-inquiring,
half-loving gaze with which she looked up at him as she said,

"I never knew you cynical before, Mr. Frere, and I don't think the
mood becomes you. Surely the notion that wealth is the most desirable
of all possessions is utterly exploded. For my own part, I think
that riches in a man--I mean when they are so great as to be talked
about--are something against him; something to be got over, like his
being black, or having a hump-back."

"This is a very refreshing doctrine, Miss Guyon; but I'm afraid it has
not many disciples; and even you would lean to the side of the modest
competence and----"

"I would lean to nothing; I would give way to nothing so palpably
sordid and base."

"You are strangely in earnest on this point, Miss Guyon."

"I am thoroughly in earnest about it; and I----"

"You cannot tell with what delight I hear it, Miss Guyon. I--you have
removed a certain distrust which has prevented me from----"

"As you say"--broke in the strident voice of Mr. Guyon, as he with
Streightley and Yeldham "formed up in line"--"In a formal dinner-party
you may sit side by side with people and never know any more about
them than if they were at opposite ends of the table. You're quite
right, Streightley, quite right. But to-night we're quite alone.
Katharine, my dear, Mr. Streightley has promised to take us as he
finds us, and come home to dinner to-day."

Miss Guyon bowed, and murmured her delight. Then said _sotto voce_,
"It is Mrs. Tresillian's night, papa, you recollect; and Lady Henmarsh
is coming to fetch me."

"O yes, my dear; of course, of course. Lady Henmarsh coming, eh! But
that won't make any difference."

"No, papa; only you won't mind my running away."

"Of course not, my dear; of course not, And how is my young friend
Gordon Frere? Blooming as usual. No need to ask that. Give your arm to
an old boy, Gordon; and trot him round, and show him all the--the
beauty of the day."

Gordon, who was eminently disgusted at the interruption of his
conversation with Kate, and who was showing his feelings in his
knitted brow and puckered mouth, had any hopes of a further _causerie_
which he might have entertained dashed to the ground by Mr. Guyon, who
passed his delicate lavender-glove through his young friend's arm and
led him off in triumph, while Streightley and Yeldham followed on
either side of Miss Guyon.

Few men could make themselves pleasanter companions than Ned Guyon
when he was so inclined. He had not merely a capital flow of animal
spirits, a store of what in women is called small-talk, but what in
men may better be described as broad talk, a keen perception of the
ludicrous, and a sufficient power of satire, but he had the great
knack--learned in his long experience of life--of exactly suiting his
conversation to his audience. He possessed in perfection the slang of
the clubs, which nowadays passes current for what is called "swell
talk," and which is not merely a peculiar _argot_ with special words
meaning special things, with excised pronouns and abbreviated nouns,
but which, to be perfect, must be spoken in a voice specially pitched
for the purpose. The voice and the language none had studied better
than Guyon; there were few men of his age, indeed, who had taken the
trouble to master either; but in the fashionable sinner's worldly
experience he had found the greatest profit in keeping himself _au
courant_ with the ways and manners of men of the rising generation.
Once let any of them perceive that he was a fogey, in the least
antiquated in his ideas or pursuits, and all hope of influence over
them was gone; but so long as he could take a leading part in their
follies, and blend undoubted past experience with apparent present
enjoyment, their houses, horses, purses were at his disposal; and it
was considered rather an honour among the subalterns of the Rag or the
Plungers from Aldershott to have dropped their money at _cart_ or
_baccarat_ to such a cool clever hand as Mr. Guyon.

Perhaps the old diplomatist had never been in better force than on the
present occasion, although there was apparently little opportunity for
the exercise of his powers. Frere, _distrait_, if not savage, at
starting, found himself first listening to his companion's remarks;
then laughing at his stories; finally answering him, and leading him
on to further banter. With a fair proportion of the company present
Mr. Guyon had some acquaintance, and of nearly every body who was any
body he had some racy anecdote to whisper laughingly into his
companion's ear. It did not strike Frere until long afterwards
that all these piquant stories were indebted for their piquancy to a
half-sneering cynicism, a half-avowed libertinism; that in all the
broad principles of honour were ridiculed, and the scampish shifts of
so-called "gallantry" exalted; that the whole conversation, in fact,
was such as might have been expected from a _blas_ youth or a
battered rake, but scarcely to be looked for in a gentleman whose
marriageable daughter was walking within a few feet of him.

They remained in the gardens until past six o'clock, promenading,
visiting the tents, stopping to speak to friends; but never on any
occasion had Gordon Frere another chance of approaching Miss Guyon. He
made several attempts; but invariably her father had something to say
to her--or to him--and cut in between them with the pleasantest smile
and the cheeriest remarks possible. It was not until just as they were
getting into the carriage that Mr. Guyon suddenly turned aside, and
saying, "Ah, by the way!" took out a card, wrote on it in pencil, in
his airiest manner borrowed an envelope from the ticket-taker standing
at his desk in the entrance, and despatched it by a commissionaire who
was in waiting. In that short interval Gordon Frere managed to slip
round to Miss Guyon's side and whisper, "The first valse, to-night?"
and to receive in reply an almost imperceptible acquiescence in the
glance of her eyes and the bending of her head. Then Mr. Guyon,
wheeling round, took a very affectionate leave of Gordon, and made a
polite bow to Charles Yeldham, handed his daughter into the carriage,
motioned to Streightley to follow her; and finally jumping lightly
in himself, they were whirled off, with much door-slamming and
horse-pawing.

The concluding episode of the little drama in which he had asserted
his position with Miss Guyon had reanimated Gordon Frere, and rendered
him happy and amiable. "Such a lord is Love, and Beauty such a
mistress of the world." So he turned cheerily to Yeldham, on whom he
had not bestowed so much as a glance or a thought for the past two
hours, and gripping his arm, said:

"Well, old boy, and what do you think of her?"

Mr. Charles Yeldham was seldom absent or preoccupied: he was far too
practical for that. But on the present occasion his thoughts must have
been engaged, for he started, with something like a flush on his
cheeks, as he said:

"Who? what, Gordon? I wasn't attending, I fear."

"I was asking you what you thought of Miss Guyon, Charley?"

"She is wonderfully beautiful."

"Well said, old fellow. Quite enthusiastic, by Jove!--for you, at all
events. But what I mean is, seriously, is not she something to be
proud of; something different from the ruck of grinning, simpering,
yea-nay girls one meets about--in such places as that we've just
left, for instance?"

"She is, indeed."

"I hope you talked to her. Not that I think--no offence to you, old
fellow--not that perhaps your talk would be exactly suited to her--too
deep, you know, and all that kind of thing--but still you would be
able to make out that she had a head on her shoulders. Doesn't she
talk well?"

"Well, to tell truth, I had not much opportunity of judging, for she
remained tolerably silent; and the conversation--such as it was--was
between Robert Streightley and myself."

"O, by the way, that fellow Streightley,--I've heard you speak of him.
Who is he, and what's all about him? What the deuce did old Guyon
bring him here for? and why has he gone home with them to dinner?"

"Ha, ha!" laughed Charles Yeldham. "'Beware, my lord, of jealousy!'
Here's an Othello for you! I don't think, Gordon, you need look with
much suspicion on Robert Streightley, unless you've fixed your
affections on good investments or early information; and then you
would stand no chance with him, I can tell you. But he's been too long
engaged to Capel Court to waver in his allegiance."

"But what on earth brought him here?"

"What? Who? you should ask, and I would answer, your intended
father-in-law. There's no man with a clearer head for business: what
will be more explanatory, I will say there's no man better able to put
a friend on to 'a good thing' than Streightley; and I fancy Mr. Guyon
would not be above a little stagging if he could act on Streightley's
information."

"But people don't get City information or talk to each other on what
you call 'stagging' topics at Botanical Ftes. Why did he bring him
here?"

"O impetuous youth, 'still harping on my daughter!' don't you see that
there must be a _quid pro quo_? If Mr. Streightley is to assist Mr.
Guyon, why should not Mr. Guyon show Mr. Streightley the elevated
position which he holds, the society in which he moves?"

"Yes, that's all very well; but I say, Charley, Streightley don't know
Mrs. Tresillian, does he?"

"Who's Mrs. Tresillian?"

"The wife of the member for Penmouth; people who live at Rutland Gate,
and entertain perpetually. He's not likely to be going there to-night,
this Streightley, is he?"

"No more than he's likely to be going to Kamschatka; not so likely.
Why?"

"O, nothing; only Miss Guyon is going there--and so am I."

"Is Miss Guyon going? Ah, well, I hope you'll enjoy yourself."

And during their ride to chambers in the hansom, both men were
singularly silent.


Mr. Streightley had plenty of time to make himself acquainted with the
features of the private friends and the public celebrities who were
enshrined in Miss Guyon's photographic album; with the views of the
Rhine and the Moselle; with the cards of callers "lurking within the
bowl;" with the tastefully-arranged flowers and their elegant basket;
with the paper-knife, like a golden dagger; with Gustave Dor's latest
sketches; and with all the innumerable nicknacks of a lady's table.
Miss Guyon had gone straight to her room; and Mr. Guyon, begging to be
excused, as he had a few little matters of business, had retired into
what he called his "study,"--a very gloomy little den behind the
dining-room, furnished with a battered leather writing-table, a
cane-bottomed chair, a grim bust of a deceased friend powdered with
"blacks," a boot-jack, a clothes-brush, a glass-case of stuffed birds,
and the Court Guide for 1850. Streightley had been shown, at Mr.
Guyon's suggestion, into a spare bedroom, where he had performed a
brief toilet, and then mooned about the drawing-room, occupying
himself in the manner just described. Mr. Guyon was the first to break
in on his solitude; and shortly afterwards Miss Guyon entered the
room, looking so lovely that Robert Streightley remained spell-bound,
and could not take his eyes from her. She wore a pale mauve-silk
dress, with soft _tulle_ half-way over it, looped up with real Cape
jasmine, a tiny _bouquet_ of the same flower in her bosom; and her
hair gave her a certain air of peculiarity, and shed around her a
subtle and intoxicating perfume. Round her neck she wore a string of
pearls with a diamond clasp; and the same on each arm completed her
jewelry. Looking at her, Robert Streightley seemed to lose his
identity, and to become part and portion of some fairy story which he
had read, some picture of _moyen-ge_ pageant which he had seen.
Women? Yes, he had known women before--his mother, Ellen, Hester
Gould. What had they in common with this soft, delicate, queenly
creature, the touch of whose hand on his arm thrilled him to the bone,
the sound of whose voice sent the blood rushing to his heart, the
glance of whose eye--light, fleeting, and uninterested though it
was--he would have purchased at the price of a king's ransom.

The dinner was good, and Mr. Guyon was gay; but neither succulent
dishes nor brilliant sallies had much effect on Robert Streightley.
They were scarcely seated before he learned, from a chance observation
uttered by Miss Guyon, that she was going to Mrs. Tresillian's ball;
and the knowledge that Gordon Frere would probably meet her there--a
fact which he divined intuitively--weighed heavily on Streightley's
mind. He tried to exert himself to respond to his host; he tried to
talk lightly and pleasantly to Kate, who seemed in the highest
spirits, but all unsuccessfully. Whenever there was a lull in the
conversation, he fancied her in Frere's arms being whirled round the
room, or listening to his low voice with such a pleased expression on
her face as he had seen there that night in the Opera-box. Those
bright eyes, that flow of spirits, that general happiness, which even
prompted her to be far more agreeable to him and far more recognisant
of his presence than she had yet ever deigned to be, were not
they all due to the fact that she was going to meet his--well, why
not?--his rival? As he was thinking thus the servant entered the room
bearing a letter, which Miss Guyon read, opened, and flung on the
table with an air of vexation, that contrasted strongly with her
recent good-temper.

"It's too bad!" she cried in a petulant voice; "too bad and I don't
believe a word of it."

"What's the matter, Kate, my child!" asked Mr. Guyon in his blandest
tones.

"After dressing myself, and setting my heart upon it--the last ball of
the season too--it's--it's most horribly annoying!" and Miss Guyon bit
her lip very hard, and threw back her head to stop her tears.

"My dear Kate," said Mr. Guyon, looking like a modern edition of
Lucius Junius Brutus, "you seem to forget that, besides your father,
there is present a gentleman who--no, pardon me, my dear Streightley,
allow me to speak--who should be--hem!--thought of. _What_--if I may
again be allowed to put the question,--_what_ is there in that note
that can have so very much discomposed you?"

"I beg your pardon, Mr. Streightley--I--but it is so annoying! Here's
Lady Henmarsh, papa, writes to say she cannot go to Mrs. Tresillian's
to-night. She's got one of her headaches--those horrible headaches
that I don't believe in one bit--and she knows I was looking forward
to her taking me, and that it will be impossible for me to go without
her. It _is_ so vexing!"

Mr. Guyon was about firing off an elaborate remark; but hearing
Streightley commencing to speak, he stopped himself, and waved his
hand towards his friend.

"I was--eh, you're very kind--no, I was only going to say," said
Streightley, with a hesitation which was quite strange to him, "that
I'm sure I sympathise with you, Miss Guyon--sympathise with you
thoroughly. It is very annoying to be balked in any thing that
we've--set our minds on, as I may say. But what I was going to say
was--I don't know about these kind of things, of course, as you know,
Mr. Guyon, and no doubt you too, Miss Guyon; but could not your papa,
Miss Guyon,--could not your papa be your escort to this ball?"

It was a really grateful glance that Kate shot at him as she said, "O,
thank you so very much for the suggestion, Mr. Streightley. Of course
he could. Papa, do you hear?"

"I do, my dear. I hear Mr. Streightley's suggestion, which is exactly
in accord with that--that--high-mindedness and--and suggestiveness for
which I've always given him credit. But unfortunately it's impossible,
Kate; perfectly impossible to-night. I have some documents in there,"
jerking his head towards the den behind, "the perusal of which will
occupy me until--ah, daybreak."

Miss Guyon said not another word, but rose from the table as her
father ceased speaking. She wished Mr. Streightley "good-night,"
and after a moment's hesitation gave him her hand; she kissed Mr.
Guyon's forehead--the little space which was not covered with his
carefully-poodled hair--with her lips, and left the room. But as she
passed the glass, Streightley caught a glimpse of the reflection of
her face, and saw that every nerve in it was quivering with repressed
passion. He knew the reason well enough, and it did not tend to raise
his already-drooping spirits; so he shortly afterwards took his leave
and went home, where he found his sister Ellen waiting up for him to
tell him that Hester Gould had been spending the evening with her,
having previously been to the Botanical Fte, where she had seen the
beautiful Miss Guyon.

"And you were walking with her, Hester says, Robert," said Miss Ellen;
"she saw you, though you didn't see her. How I should like to see her,
Robert! Now tell me all about her. Is she so beautiful? and is she
going to be married?"

"My dear child," said Robert in rather a harsh tone, "do you imagine I
tell you the names of a tithe of the people I know in business? Mr.
Guyon is a business acquaintance of mine; and I have been introduced
to his daughter. So far as I am a judge, she is very beautiful; but
really though I have seen her a few times, she has not yet confided to
me whether she is going to be married or not."

On the receipt of which short answer, Miss Ellen Streightley, telling
her brother "he need not snap her head off," handed him his candle and
went to bed.

Mr. Guyon had said that the "perusal" of certain "documents" would
occupy him until daybreak; but long before the first faint thread of
dawn appeared in the eastern sky that gentleman was sleeping the sleep
of the just, having immediately after Streightley's departure slipped
down to his Club, and returned lighter in heart and heavier in purse
after playing a few rubbers with consummate skill and great luck. But
gleaming on certain characters in this veracious history, the first
rays of the rising sun found them defiant of sleep, if not actively
engaged. Found Katharine Guyon with her dark hair streaming over her
pillow, bedewed with tears of rage and disappointment, and her eyes,
under their swollen lids, bright and staring; found Robert
Streightley, racked with sharp pangs of jealousy and doubt, vainly
courting repose; found Gordon Frere lounging homeward up Piccadilly,
his hands plunged in his trousers-pockets, his opera-hat hanging
listlessly on the back of his head, a cigar in his mouth, and a faded
flower in his coat, chafing bitterly against the absence of his
heart's idol from Mrs. Tresillian's ball, and at the postponement of
the love-avowal which he had determined to make; finally, found
Charles Yeldham, bright, fresh, and glowing from his morning bath,
just settling down to his desk, with his mind filled partly with
thoughts of the work he was about to commence, partly with
reminiscences of a queenly figure, a stately walk, and a bright pair
of eyes, seen yesterday for the first time.




CHAPTER IX.
INVESTMENTS.


It was seldom that Robert Streightley allowed himself the luxury of
thought. He was so much in the habit of deciding, after a rapid
business calculation, upon any thing that was submitted to him, of
accepting or rejecting the proposition at once, that he scarcely knew
what it was to ponder, and weigh, and calculate chances. In his
business he had never, apparently, had occasion to calculate them. The
knowledge which guided him seemed to come to him intuitively, and
hitherto had scarcely ever failed in producing a good result. But in
these recent days he had proposed to himself a venture such as he had
never previously contemplated, a risk which was a risk indeed, a prize
for which he should have to enter against sharp competition, and
which, even if he gained it, he yet felt would be uncertain and
difficult to deal with. It was a troublous time for this honest,
straightforward, simple man of business, who for the first time in his
life found himself possessed by a mania over which he had not the
least control; this long-headed, cool, calculating fellow, who was
accustomed to look far ahead, and see clearly what would be the end of
any step he proposed to take before he took it, and who now found
himself irresistibly impelled to rush blindly on, ignoring
consequences, content to leave all to Fate, and to console himself
with the victory of the moment. Never before during his career had he
felt the smallest pang of jealousy; never before, when bidding for
great contracts, involving such an amount of capital as made the
boldest hesitate before speculating, had he, after a few minutes'
rapid calculation, wavered for an instant. But the present case was
different: it was "the house" then; it was "the heart" now. Luck,
carefully steered by prudence and by foresight, and acumen more than
prudence, had brought his ventures safely riding over the billows, and
through the shoals and shallows; would it do so now?

He was desperately in love with this girl--this bright, brilliant,
haughty, wilful girl. Even in all the mad fervour of his passion he
allowed to himself that she was haughty and wilful, and he loved her
all the morel--loved her with a depth and earnestness, with a wild
passionate longing such as he had never believed he could have felt.
Haughty and wilful! were not these very qualities great ingredients in
her charm? Had he not for nearly forty years been living with the tame
and commonplace women among whom his lot had been cast, and had any of
them ever had the slightest influence over him? had they ever caused
his heart one extra vibration--his pulse one extra throb? Why should
he not enter the lists and tilt amongst the others for the hand of
this Queen of Beauty, who sat smiling so superciliously in the
balcony? It was an open course, and he brought amongst his attributes
a stout heart and a willing hand to the encounter. In curvettings and
caracoles, and all the dainty manoeuvres of the _mange_, in courtly
skill and trick of fence, there might be his superiors; but when the
issue of the combat came to sheer hard fighting, where courage and
persistency won the day, he would give way to none. And, carelessly
fluttering over the leaves of his ledger, as in his dim City office he
revolved all these thoughts within his mind, he felt--not without a
blush of shame--that he had secured the services of a most potent ally
within the citadel. In these portentous leaves the name of Edward
Guyon, Esquire, of Queen-Anne Street, now had a small space reserved
to itself, the details covering which, though insignificant in such a
business as that of Streightley and Son, were multiplied amazingly
since the first "transaction" which had brought the siren to the abode
of Plutus. Over Robert Streightley Mr. Guyon had obtained an
extraordinary influence; due, let it be stated, of course to a certain
extent to the young merchant's infatuation, but also in a great degree
to his own admirable tact. During the course of a life passed in
business Robert had seen many specimens of _tracasserie_ and humbug,
which his good nurse had enabled him to estimate at their real value;
but he had never been brought in contact with any of their professors
who had, or seemed to have, the real charm of social influence. In Mr.
Guyon's society--and of late he had been admitted into a great deal of
Mr. Guyon's society--Robert Streightley seemed to feel himself a
different being. There was nothing rough or unpleasant in his new
friend and those to whom his new friend introduced him; he became for
the first time in his life aware of the existence of another world,
where well-bred ease, polished manners, and refined conversation
were substituted for that eternal strife and fight and wrangle for
money-getting in which his whole previous existence had been passed.

And she--Katharine--his adoration--she was of this world, and yet not
of it so much as she might be; held not that queenly position in it
which she might hold, were circumstances different. It would have
taken a mind much less acute than Robert Streightley's to perceive at
once the influence which the possession of wealth had among those who
affected to despise it. In an instant he saw--few so rapidly--how many
of the new society into which he had been introduced, while merely
electro-plated and veneered, were endeavouring to pass themselves off
as the genuine article; and he ascribed, correctly enough, the sneers
at money, in which most members of the society indulged, to their lack
of it. Why should he not be the means of giving her the position which
she would so thoroughly adorn? She looked a duchess; why should he not
give her the power of gratifying the tastes of a duchess? Robert
Streightley, constantly engaged in the accumulation of money, had
given very little thought to the amount that he had accumulated.
Confident in the security of his investments, he left the heap to
gather in rolling; his simple life and the even more simple life led
by his mother and sister in the Brixton villa were provided for at a
comparatively infinitesimal cost; and of the bulk of his possessions
he had taken little heed, knowing that it was there "to the good." But
recently, within the last few days, he had looked through his
accounts, and found that he was the possessor of what would be
considered, even in "the City," to be a large fortune. Money he had in
funds, and stocks, and securities of all kinds; money in ships bound
on antipodean voyages, and in semi-cleared Canadian forests; money in
loans to Egyptian viceroys and Nicaraguan republics; money in an
English estate, "all that house and estate known as 'Middlemeads,'
in the county of Bucks, with five hundred acres of parklike land,
well-preserved coverts, lake with fishing-temple, large stabling,
forcing-houses, hothouses, orangery, delightfully situate on the brow
of Holcomb Hill, with the silver Thames winding in the distance," as
it was described in the auctioneer's advertisement. The auctioneer,
whose descriptive powers are here recorded, had not the opportunity of
bringing this "lot" to the hammer; for finding the previous bidding
dull, Robert Streightley, to whom the estate had reverted on the
foreclosure of a mortgage which he held upon it, determined to
withdraw it from public competition, wisely thinking that he could
sell it a better bargain to some private purchaser. When the bold idea
of asking for Miss Guyon's hand first entered his head, the
recollection of this property flashed upon him at once. He had never
seen the place, but he knew from his agent that it was essentially a
gentleman's house, and that the entire estate was large, productive,
and one of which any one might be proud. "Mrs. Streightley of
Middlemeads;" "Middlemeads, August;" "Mrs. R. Streightley
presents"--Robert Streightley found himself sketching these words on
his blotting-pad as these thoughts passed through his mind; and though
he gave a short laugh of semi-contempt at the wildness of his fancy,
the idea had so far possessed him, that he wrote off to his old
friend and legal adviser Charles Yeldham, begging him to be at the
Great-Western station at a given hour on the next morning, and go with
him to see a place down the line which he had purchased as an
investment.

At the appointed time Mr. Streightley walked on to the platform, and
found his friend already awaiting him. Mr. Charles Yeldham was indeed
instantly recognisable. In all the crowd of pushing anxious passengers
he stood perfectly calm and self-possessed, heeding neither the
porters wheeling heavy barrows, who shouted to him "By your leave!"
and charged straight at him with the obvious intention of grinding him
to powder; the grooms, vainly endeavouring to hold their braces of
pointers, which invariably came to grief through disinclination to go
the same side of the columns supporting the roof; the helpless female,
or the excited male passengers. There were men in every variety of
travelling-dress, in wide-awakes, and pork-pie hats, and cloth caps,
and fezzes; in suits of dittoes in every conceivable variety of check,
in knickerbockers and gaiters, in tightly-fitting 'horsy' trousers,
and wearing couriers' bags or slung race-glasses. But among them
placidly walked Charles Yeldham, in his broadish-brimmed chimney-pot,
his high-buttoning black waistcoat, his Oxford-mixture trousers very
baggy at the knees, and his Wellington boots--among them, but not of
them--with a pleasant smile on his cheery face, and with his head full
of the case of Marshland _versus_ the Bagglehole Improvement Company,
the pleadings in which he had to draw. But he saw Streightley at once,
and as he caught sight of him he again noticed the change in his
friend's style of dress, which he had not thought of since their
meeting at the Botanical Gardens, and laughed quietly to himself.

"This is good, Yeldham; I knew you would come," said Streightley, as
the train moved out of the station. "You're just the man I want for a
sound practical opinion."

"On an estate which you've bought, Robert? Yes; my knowledge of the
value of land, derived from occasionally looking out on to and running
round the Temple Gardens; the quick eye with which, from constant
practice, I shall be able to detect any shortcomings in the building,
and suggest improvements; my general acquaintance with farming-stock
and agricultural produce, will enable me to give you some very
valuable advice."

"You're laughing at me, old friend; but it don't much matter; and I
know of old that you always will have your joke. No; it was not
exactly on these points that I wanted to consult you,--in fact,
not at all upon them. With all your pretended ignorance, you are a
country-bred man, and one able to give a thoroughly practical opinion
on the value of Middlemeads and its capabilities; and moreover, by
this means I get you out quietly into the air and away from these
stivy chambers, and have the opportunity of a long quiet talk with you
about--about any subject that may turn up, without the risk of your
being worried by perpetual visits of attorneys' clerks, or the
annoyance of seeing you constantly fidgetting to get to your desk
again and get to work at something else."

"O ho, Master Robert! then this is a trap, is it? a kind of perforce
holiday into which you have led me?"

"Not at all. Wait until the day is over, until I've said all I've got
to say, and you've heard it, before you complain. And even if it
were--supposing it were a holiday, you don't take so many of them that
you need grudge yourself this outing."

"So far as that goes we're both in the same boat, I think; but I have
had a holiday, and only a couple of days ago, when I was at the
Botanical--Why, by Jove! you were there too."

"Of course I was. That _is_ good! our each giving the other credit for
constant industry, and then recollecting that we had lapsed into
idleness together. By the way, that Mr. Frere--who lives with you,
doesn't he?--what sort of fellow is he?"

"A capital fellow," said honest old Charley Yeldham; "a good deal
younger than we are, you know, Robert, and consequently more
impulsive, and what he would call 'gushing'--and yet older in some
respects too; older in cynicism and so-called knowledge of life,
and--; but a very good fellow, a capital youngster. I've known him
since he was a boy. He was a pupil of my father's."

"O, indeed! Has he--has he been very long intimate with Mr. Guyon's
family, do you know?"

"No, not very long, I should say. By the way, I did not know until I
met you with him that you knew Mr. Guyon, Robert."

"Didn't you? Q yes; a business acquaintance of mine."

"Business acquaintance? Hem! I can understand Mr. Guyon's popularity
from a social point of view, but in matters of business I confess I
think that----"

"Don't you fear, dear old Charley; I know all about that; and--and
does Frere go often to the Guyons'?"

"N-no; not very often, I think. He's been once or twice lately; but
he's not likely to see much more of them this season, as he's gone out
of town--down to his father's--on a matter of business. What do you
think of Miss Guyon?"

"She is very handsome--at least I suppose so; I'm not much of a judge
in those matters. And how are we getting on with Hamilton's action?"

Upon which question the gentlemen plunged into a conversation full of
business details, which occupied them until they arrived at their
station, where alighting, they hired a trap and drove over to
Middlemeads.

Passing through a little village, and turning sharply to the right
after sighting the old church, they came upon a quaint one-storied
stone lodge. Standing out from the ivy, in which it otherwise was
buried, stood a sculptured knight in fall armour treading on a
serpent, the well-known crest of the Chevers of Middlemeads, the
glorious old family whose ancestral seat had passed to strangers, and
whose last scion was now dwelling in a little cottage at Capcure near
Boulogne. A few short words of explanation to the old portress gained
them admission, and they entered a long drive leading through groves
of noble trees and over undulating ground--where the deer, half hidden
in the deep fern, were quietly feeding--to the house. Then under the
principal gateway with its long range of gables and unrelieved wall,
through the double arch in the first court, which was carpeted with
greensward, to the second or paved court, fronted with its pure Ionic
colonnade, where the old housekeeper, already apprised of their
coming, was in readiness to receive them. Charles Yeldham's heart,
albeit somewhat incrusted with legal formul and a long course of Doe
and Roe, yet filled with reverence for antiquity and appreciation of
architectural beauty, thrilled within him as, preceded by the old
housekeeper, they walked through the great hall, now denuded of its
glorious family pictures, its Holbeins and Lelys, its Jansens and
Knellers, its grand Vandyke, its "Animals reposing" by Snyders, and
its "Riding-party" by Wouvermans--all long since dispersed at the
hands of Christie and Manson, but still retaining its fireplace with
the ornamental fire-dogs bearing the arms and initials H. A. of Henry
VIII. and Anne Boleyn, royal guests of the Chevers in the good old
days. Through the Brown Gallery and Lady Betty Chiddingstone's
chamber, through the Spangled Bedroom, and the King's Room, where
James I. had passed a night, through the Organ Room, where still stood
the ancient instrument which had been used for divine service in
connection with the adjoining chapel, long since dismantled and half
in ruins, they passed; and in each the old cicerone poured forth her
oft-told tale of byegone glories.

While in each of these rooms, Yeldham indulged in retrospect, peopling
them according to his fancy with those who might have inhabited them,
picturing to himself how the stately lords and ladies lived and moved
and had their being; and smiled half-cynically to himself in the
thought that, other differences allowed, they were doubtless swayed by
the same passions, victims of the same hopes and fears and doubts,
moved by the same temptations, and acted on by the same impulses as we
of these degenerate days. He was surprised to find that his companion
was going through the house in the most practical manner, apportioning
the rooms one by one to their several purposes, deciding upon the
Brown Gallery for a drawing-room, the King's Chamber for the principal
bedroom, planning the furniture and fittings for the great hall, and
altogether comporting himself as though he were the head of a large
family come down to make the necessary arrangements for its immediate
induction. This notion struck him at first comically, but when he saw
it persevered in in every detail, he began to think more seriously of
it; and after they had left the house, and were again in the trap
driving back to the station, he turned to his friend and said,

"Why, Robert, what on earth is in your head now? I've been perfectly
astonished in watching you ever since we entered Middlemeads."

"Have you? In what way have I excited your astonishment? Did I swagger
too much about my purchase? did I what they call 'gush' about my
place?"

"Not a bit; and if you had, there would have been every excuse for
you. A more delightful old house and more perfect grounds never were
seen."

"Well, then, what did I do?"

"Well, it seemed to me that you didn't regard the place from a
bachelor point of view. You were planning drawing-rooms, and bedrooms,
and dining-halls, and----"

"You know that my mother and sister form part of my belongings?"

"Ye-es; but I didn't hear any mention of your mother and sister,
and----"

"Speak plainly, Charley, and say that you think I contemplate
matrimony."

"And suppose I were to say so?"

"Suppose you were? Well, then, all I could say would be--that I felt
myself a sneak for not having owned the fact before to you, my dear
old friend. But in any thing out of my regular routine of business I'm
as shy as a great schoolgirl; and I could not bring myself to tell
even you about it."

"Then it's a case, Robert. A case at last with you, of all men in the
world. I feel now that even I myself am not impregnable, after 'Bob
Sobersides' has surrendered at discretion."

"Chat away, old fellow. I've no reply to make, save that the opposing
force was irresistible--as I think you'll allow."

"My dear Streightley, I hope I'm a true friend, but I don't think you
could have a worse confidant in an affair of this kind, so far as
giving any opinion on an unknown young lady is concerned----"

"But suppose the young lady is not unknown to you?"

"Not unknown to me! Well, that alters the case of course. But, God
bless my soul, who can--who can have won your love in this sudden way,
Robert? You're not a man of impulse; you're accustomed to think
deeply, and weigh and balance before committing yourself--you would
not do any thing rash. Who on earth can it be?"

"I'm a bad hand at concealing any thing of this sort," said
Streightley with a half-rueful smile. "Indeed, I think I must seem
awkward about the whole business; but the truth of it is, old
friend--I'm madly in love with Miss Guyon, and I hope to make her my
wife."

"Miss Guyon?"

"Ay, Miss Guyon. It has not been a long acquaintance, I know; but I
believe those things never are--I mean that--you know what I mean. But
you know her; at least you've seen her, and--that must be my excuse
for the rashness, and the folly, and whatever the world chooses to
call it. For she is very lovely, isn't she, Charley?"

"Very lovely, indeed!" said Yeldham.

And then, as though by a tacit understanding, both men leaned back in
the carriage, and delivered themselves up to their own reflections.

Needless to say what were Robert Streightley's. Vague desires to call
up well-remembered expressions of Katharine's faze, which yet refused
to be recalled at the moment; dim distrusts and doubts of his own
chance of winning her hand; soul-disturbing thoughts of her friendship
with Gordon Frere; wild plots of laying Mr. Guyon under even greater
obligations to him, and thus making sure of his alliance and support;
dreamy reminiscences of how she had looked and moved, and what she had
done and said on the several occasions when he had seen her.

Charles Yeldham's thoughts were of a very different kind. Here was
this simple girl, of whose existence he had scarcely known a few days
ago, now exercising influence over the future fate of three--no, of
two men: as for himself--bah! the chambers and the pleadings, the hard
work which was to make up little Clare's dowry,--that was his fate,
and there was an end of it so far as he was concerned. But Gordon?
Poor Gordon, who had gone off full of life and hope to urge upon his
father the necessity of "doing something for him," actuated thereto
solely by the hope of propitiating Mr. Guyon by being able to show
himself in a position to ask for Katharine's hand; poor Gordon, who
was at that moment doubtless promising and vowing all sorts of things
in his own name to his father, and who, if he succeeded in getting
promise of an appointment, would write off triumphantly in prosecution
of his suit, or who, if he failed, would come back to town and try and
pursue it without the necessary qualification, but who in either case
would have a cold shoulder turned upon him and the door shut in his
face so soon as a suitor of Streightley's calibre was known to have
entered the lists. "I hope to make her my wife." Those were Robert
Streightley's words; and from them Yeldham could not gather whether or
not the final question had been asked; but be that as it might, he
knew sufficiently of Mr. Guyon to feel certain that Gordon's hopes
were destined to suffer utter wreck. Would not the girl herself
be true to the--to the what? What could this poor lad adduce in
support of the flame which he had nourished but the ordinary
flirtation-phrases indulged in night after night in hundreds of London
ball-rooms? How could he (Yeldham) tell whether Katharine loved Gordon
or not? He had no clearer indication than the readiness of a joyous,
enthusiastic, rather trivial nature to believe in the existence of
what it hoped and desired; he shrunk from the idea of the lad's
disappointment, but, after all, he knew Gordon Frere too well to
suppose that he would be unlike the remainder of mankind, that he
would not get over it in time--in perhaps no very long time. Had it
been himself now,--had he loved Katharine Guyon and another came to
win her from him by his superior wealth--but he would not pursue so
futile a thought as that,--he had nothing to do with love. Hard work,
and not the indulgence of fancy, was his lot; and he was content. He
wished it was over though, and that Gordon knew the worst.

These and many other thoughts resembling them chased each other
through Yeldham's brain, and rendered it difficult to him to keep up
even the desultory conversation for which only Streightley was
disposed. The friends parted at the railway station, and Yeldham
betook himself at once to his chambers. It was a still, hot evening,
and the airlessness of the rooms oppressed him. He was a man little
influenced by such things ordinarily; yet this evening the grim
cheerlessness, the dust, the ungentle disarray, in whose
disorderliness there was a kind of order, of which he held the key;
the harsh bundles of papers, the very fittings of the rooms, in which
all was scrupulously designed for use, and as devoid of ornament as
only true British business upholstery knows how to be,--all these
things made themselves suddenly apparent. He revolted against them,
against his life in general. It suddenly seemed alike hard and
useless: what was he grinding away like this for? supposing his object
accomplished, _cui bono?_ An unwholesome frame of mind to be betrayed
into, even for a little while--a relaxation, a renunciation of the
great principle of duty which had upheld and guided him so long; and
Charles Yeldham knew that it was so, and felt afraid of himself. He
shrank from the first insidious chill of the advancing tide of
discontent; he recognised the deadliness of it.

"Yes, that's it," he said thoughtfully, when, having emptied his
letter-box, and looked over the memoranda left for his inspection by
his clerk, he sat moodily by the open window, through which faint
sounds from the river reached his ears: "Yes, that's it. I have seen a
fine place to-day, and talked with a rich man--a man who hardly knows
how rich he really is, I fancy--about what he is to do with his money;
and I suppose I am actually envious, cut up by the sight of something
desirable that never can be mine. He is going to invest in happiness,
is he?--to buy a beautiful idol, and set her up in a splendid shrine?
he's rich enough to do it, if he likes. I wonder how it is really. I
wonder whether he will be as happy as he believes. But no--I don't
wonder any thing of the kind, of course; no one ever was or will be,
since life is limited, and faith is infinite. It's a dull business, I
fancy, even at the best--as dull perhaps as it is to me, who am so
very far off the best."

And then Charles Yeldham rose, shook off the unusual and perilous mood
which had held him already too long, and sat down resolutely to his
work. It was very late that night when he went to bed; and sleep kept
away from him in a harassing manner. The events of the day reproduced
themselves in his thoughts, which escaped his control, and dragged him
in their course. The strange imbroglio in which he found himself
engaged; the clashing interests of two friends, in whom he was greatly
though not equally interested; the certain crash of the hopes and
projects of one of them; his uncertainty of the extent to which
Streightley had received encouragement, but which his knowledge of
Robert's real diffidence of character and unconsciousness of his own
value in the eyes of a scheming and mercenary society, induced him to
believe must have been considerable; his doubts as to the course he
ought to pursue towards Gordon;--no wonder he could not sleep while
these conflicting thoughts battled with each other in his mind.

The practical result of his cogitations was, that Charles Yeldham
decided on postponing any communication with Frere until his return.
Gordon was not likely to write to him--he hated letter-writing rather
more than he hated any other kind of mental exertion; and whether his
application to his father might have good results or not, he would no
doubt return without delay. On the other perplexing question--had
Streightley proposed to Miss Guyon?--Yeldham ardently desired
information; but for the present there was no means of attaining it
within his reach. He must wait like the others--only not like them in
this, that he did not wait and hope. He was only an outsider, an
inconsiderable person, the recipient of half-confidence on one side,
the confidant of baseless hopes, as he feared, upon the other; while
to one principally concerned he was nothing. No conjuncture of affairs
could make him an object of importance in the life of the proud
beautiful girl, whose fair face came between him and every thing on
which he strove to fix his attention; the only woman's face which had
ever charmed Charles Yeldham.


Hester Gould had seen a good deal of her friends at Hampstead since
the evening on which she had made so favourable an impression on Mr.
Daniel Thacker. She had accompanied her dear Rachel and Rebecca to the
Botanical promenade, whither they had repaired arrayed in much
splendour, and with the gorgeousness of colouring and richness of
material affected by their nation. Mr. Thacker had joined the party,
and had exerted himself to the utmost to be agreeable to Miss Gould,
whom he admired more than ever, when he contrasted the taste and
propriety of her dress with the splendid array of his sisters, from
which he shrunk with dismay. As it suited Hester's plans for obtaining
information that Daniel Thacker should succeed in these efforts, he
did succeed, and she had enjoyed an opportunity of observing Miss
Guyon closely and attentively, during her animated conversation with
Gordon Frere, and also during her father's _empress_ introduction of
Streightley to her notice. She had decided, with characteristic
readiness, on entering the grounds, that she would tell Thacker that
she wished to see Miss Guyon; and she had done so. Mr. Thacker had
entertained a distinct purpose of business, in addition to that of
pleasure, in coming to the _fte_; and it was a source of
conscientious gratification to him that he found himself enabled to
serve both. He had been informed by Mr. Guyon that Streightley would
be there, and he resolved to see for himself how that gentleman stood
with Miss Guyon. Thus he and Hester were each bent upon a similar
object. There was, however, one material difference between their
modes of pursuing it. Mr. Thacker did not begin to watch Katharine
until Streightley joined her. Hester Gould watched her from the first
moment she distinguished her figure amid the gay group, which was one
of the most conspicuous in the gardens. She watched her, not with the
jealous gaze of an angry woman watching a dangerous rival, but with
unclouded, unprejudiced senses, with close admiring attention, and the
keen perception of a woman gifted with intuitive knowledge of the
world, a cool temper, and unusual discretion. She had seen expectation
and pleasure in every line of Miss Guyon's expressive face, as Gordon
joined her; she had marked the heightened colour, the brightened eye,
as they passed and repassed each other; she had heard the note of
irrepressible gladness in the sweet musical voice; and Hester Gould
knew that Katharine Guyon loved the fair-haired young man, in whose
air and figure she recognised the ease and self-possession, the
simplicity and frankness, which made Gordon so attractive, as well as
the girl who was giving herself up to all the unrestrained happiness
of young love knew it. Hester did not ask her companion who Gordon
Frere was; she did not attract his attention to the young gentleman at
all; on the contrary, she engrossed it so completely, that when she
said quietly, "There is Ellen Streightley's brother talking to your
friend's daughter now, Mr. Thacker," Daniel looked round with a start,
and felt that he had almost forgotten the business part of his
purpose.

A bow of recognition had passed between Mr. Guyon and Mr. Daniel
Thacker, but Robert Streightley had not seen Miss Gould. It had not
been her intention that he should see her; her purpose was to observe
him closely, and she had effected it. She was no more mistaken in her
estimate of his sentiments than in that of Katharine's; and it vas
characteristic of her that, though her observations changed a vague
surmise into a positive certainty, a threatening risk into a certain
present danger, she betrayed not a sign of uneasiness or
discouragement. Neither her colour nor her countenance changed, though
she saw before her eyes the overthrow of a scheme cherished long and
deeply--though she could only calculate the chances in her favour by a
vague speculation on the possible fortune and position of the young
man she had seen with Katharine; or, supposing he had neither, on
Katharine's strength of determination in opposition to her father. It
was also characteristic of Hester Gould that, though she had
determined to marry Streightley without permitting herself to love
him, she told herself that night that she felt a degree of dislike to
Katharine Guyon, which might, if she did not take care, grow into
hatred.

"She is my unconscious and involuntary rival," said the strange woman,
whose candour towards herself was never laid aside, "and I must not
hate her; for hatred is troublesome--a passion--and I will never put
myself under the tyranny of a passion."

Hester Gould was at the Brixton Villa when Robert returned from his
visit to Middlemeads. Mrs. Streightley and his sister were aware that
he had gone into the country, but they knew no more. When he examined
the letters sent by his orders from the City, he found among them one
from Mr. Guyon, requesting him, if possible, to call on him on the
following day, leaving the hour to his selection, but urging his
attention to the request. The letter was a dainty missive, with a fine
coloured monogram on the seal, and expressing in its appearance as
wide a difference between itself and Robert's ordinary correspondence
as it was in the power of stationery to convey. Ellen Streightley was
one of those young ladies blessed with a taste for simple pleasures,
and who rated the possession of crests and monograms very high among
them. Accordingly she exclaimed,

"O Robert, that's something in my line. Do let me have it!"

He handed her the envelope.

"O, how delightfully intricate! I can't make it out. What are the
letters, Robert? Whose name is it?"

"The letters are K.S.G.," said Robert, rather reluctantly.

Hester watched him closely: "O, that's it, is it? but what is the
name?"

"Katharine Sibylla Guyon," replied Robert; and still Hester watched
his embarrassment. "But the note is from Mr. Guyon--he wants to see
me. I suppose he wrote it at his daughter's desk."

Ellen perceived nothing of her brother's embarrassment, and went on:

"Robert, you never saw Hester the other day at the Botanical Fte, but
she saw you; and you were talking to such a beautiful girl; she says
she is sure it was Miss Guyon,--was it?"

"Yes," returned her brother, "that was Miss Guyon; it must have been,
for I did not know any other lady who was there. I am sorry I did not
see you, Miss Gould. Did you enjoy the _fte_?"

"Very much indeed," said Hester. "I was particularly struck with Miss
Guyon. She seems to be very much admired. I saw a gentleman with her
before you arrived,--a very young man with fair hair, very handsome.
He seemed completely captivated, I thought. You must excuse my talking
such nonsense, ma'am; but I really was amused looking at them. Do you
know who he is, Mr. Streightley?"

"I fancy from your description the gentleman in question is a Mr.
Gordon Frere," Robert answered in a formal tone, whose bitterness and
displeasure Hester Gould did not fail to recognise. She turned the
conversation at once, and took her leave early, having received all
Ellen's confidences before Robert's return, and having duly admired
the mingled piety and sentiment of the Reverend Decimus Dutton's
latest letter.

Ellen retired immediately after Hester's departure, and was soon fast
asleep, with a neat packet of the missionary's love-letters under her
pillow, and a locket containing a photographic likeness of that
apostle, which might have taken a prize for feebleness, resting upon
her innocent breast.

Robert Streightley sat up late with his mother, and told her of his
visit to Middlemeads, his purposes respecting the estate, and the
hopes which had led to their formation.




CHAPTER X.
STRUGGLE.


Robert Streightley slept but little on the night after his visit to
Middlemeads; for that note which he had found awaiting him from Mr.
Guyon sat heavy on his soul. Wanted to see him on particular business,
eh? What did that particular business mean? Not more money advances,
surely? Such transactions as he had had with Mr. Guyon were small
enough to a man accustomed to the particular kind of business, the
loans and contracts and subsidies, with which the firm of Streightley
and Son were in the habit of dealing; but yet Robert, however wilfully
blind, could not shut his eyes to the fact that he had already
supplied Mr. Guyon with loans for which he had nothing like adequate
security. Could Mr. Guyon possibly mean to touch upon that other
subject, which, as a man of the world, he must have already divined
lay very close at Robert Streightley's heart? Could he intend to
broach the question of his daughter----? As the idea crossed
Streightley's mind he felt his cheek flush, and the cold beads of
perspiration start out upon his forehead.

For he was an honourable man, brought up in an honourable school,
where "a fair fight and no favour" had been the motto from time
immemorial, and where any one taking undue advantage or seeking to
compass his ends by unfair means toward his rival would have been
scouted with ignominy. And he felt--how could he but feel?--that the
struggle in which he was at that moment engaged was scarcely being
conducted in the same open manner. He felt that he was creeping up
towards the assault under the protection of a hireling guerilla force,
which, with all the advantage of the knowledge of the ground, was
pushing its renegade advantage, furthering his advance here, throwing
out earthworks for the hindrance of the enemy there, and all from the
mere sordid love of gain and chances of plunder, but without the
smallest heartiness of feeling in the matter. Not a nice feeling
for a man of Robert Streightley's sense of punctilio. It galled him,
and he chafed against it sadly during the long watches of that night.
What was it? a caprice, a sudden fancy, a madness which had stung
him,--that he, a mature man of confirmed bachelor habits, with his
own household gods around him, and his own life completely settled
and hitherto sufficient, should suddenly break through all his
customs--yes, that would be nothing, but break through them in a weak
and feeble manner--break through them in a way in which he, so far as
he read it to himself, took no active part, but suffered himself to be
the mere tool and instrument--for his own purposes indeed--in hands
which were certainly not exempt from suspicion of being soiled. This
was bad, very bad indeed. What should he say to himself suppose a
parallel case in the business world--that world which he understood,
which had hitherto been his sole life, and out of which he felt he
could not with safety emerge--had been submitted to him? Why, he would
have declared that, as a point of honour, a man in that position ought
at once to set himself free from such trammels. And if in business,
surely in love there was all the more reason for his doing so. For his
part he would hesitate no longer; he would at once drop the Guyon
acquaintance, sinking the advances which he had up to that point
made to Mr. Guyon, and writing them off as salutary experience
lightly paid for, and---- And then, as he lay tossing on his fevered
pillow, rose before him a vision of Katharine in all her grace and
beauty--Katharine saucily laughing at Mr. Mostyn's solemn vanity;
Katharine the cynosure of all at the Botanical promenade, queening it
amongst the loveliest and the best-bred, evoking admiration from all;
Katharine with earnest face and downcast eyes, then with flushed cheek
and sparkling glance, in conversation with Gordon Frere--No! that last
thought was too much. In Robert Streightley's nature there lay
hitherto latent an amount of mad, blinding, unreasoning jealousy,
whose existence was suspected by none of his friends, by him least of
all; but it leapt into flame as this last picture crossed his mind,
and all thoughts of withdrawal from the career in which he had
suffered himself to be embarked shrivelled up before its scorching
heat. It should not be from want of perseverance on his part, nor from
want of employment of all the resources at his command, that he would
fail in this the--yes, the really first scheme in his life in which he
had taken hearty interest. He would need all his skill, and tact, and
patience to carry it through--ah if he could only sleep now--if he
could only forget for an instant those haunting eyes, that queenly
form, that sweet winning smile!

He lay awake during all the early hours of that morning; and it was
nearly five o'clock before he sunk into a heavy, unrefreshing slumber,
from which, despite old Alice's repeated warnings, he did not wake
until long past nine. Then he had his bath and dressed himself, and
went slouching down to breakfast with pale face and red eyelids, and a
wearied anxious look. Mrs. Streightley had ere this sallied forth
armed with a complete library of little red books, over which she
waged weekly warfare with the neighbouring tradespeople; and Ellen had
an "early service" on, followed by a little light recreation of
district-visiting and a small interlude of first meeting Of coal and
flannel fund; so that Robert had only his old nurse to watch over him
at breakfast, and render every mouthful additionally distasteful by
her comments.

"Well, Lord knows I never thought to have lived to have seen this
day," said the old woman, when Robert, after a vain attempt at eating,
pushed his plate away from before him--"that any child of your
father's, let alone you, for whom he thought, and cared, and slaved
most, should have quarrelled with the victuals provided for him in
this house, I didn't expect."

"Ah, nurse!" said Robert, trying to smile, "it's not what's
provided--I'm not well just now, somehow--I----"

"Not well, indeed! I know what's the matter with you. You're in love,
and pleased with ruin as the saying is,--that's what ails you. O,
don't frown and look so; do you think the old woman don't know those
signs, Robert, my boy? No appetite, and looking a long way off, and
never speaking when spoke to? Lor' bless yer. And do you think old
Alice don't know what that means? Come, they're all out, Robert! tell
me who it is. Tell the old woman who nursed you when you couldn't
speak, or scarce cry, for the matter of that, you was that weak; and
the doctor never thought to have brought you through it, and wouldn't
if it hadn't been for me, though I say it as shouldn't; tell old Alice
all about it, deary; tell her and trust her, as you used to--O, so
long ago."

"There's nothing to tell, Alice," said Robert with a forced laugh,
rising from his chair; "you've made a pretty story for yourself,
nurse, but I'm too old now to be amused at it even, much less to think
of taking one of the characters. I'm a little overdone with business,
that's all."

"Is it?" said the old woman shortly. "Well,--if it's business, that's
all right. But it's the first time since ever I've been connected with
the house of Streightley and Son, and that's nigh fifty year, that I
heard it was necessary to forward the business of the house, or to
captivate the brokers and the shipping-agents and that like, by
dressing oneself up in fal-lal clothes, and by dancing attendance at
opera and play houses (I found the papers of them in your pockets)
until all hours in the morning. And I'm thinking that if that is the
way, your father made but a poor hand at it, Master Robert; and it's a
great mercy that he didn't ruin the whole concern." And so saying, and
with a sniff of great meaning, the old lady retired from the room.

By no means reassured or made more comfortable even by this short
interview--for he was a nervous man in some things and very much
disliked what he called "being upset"--Robert Streightley pushed the
breakfast things away from him, and started off for town. He had
dropped the omnibus long since, and took a cab as a matter of course;
and as he journeyed along he could not help contrasting the splendour
of the house he had yesterday visited with the meanness of that one
which he had just left. Both were his own, and both were to a certain
extent typical of his life: in the latter with frugal commonplace
people his money had been made; in the former with one bright being
it should be spent. Yes; he had had enough of this daily grind of
business, this sordid strife; and he had determined that
henceforth--if his hopes were realised--he would live a different
life. If his hopes were realised? what forbade their realisation? This
man,--this Gordon Frere, was younger it is true, better-looking, more
of a "lady's man" than he; but he himself was not so old, not so
hideous, not so--Ah! good God! What a fool he was for arguing the
question in this way, even to himself! He felt that he loved this
girl, and that on that deep love and earnest devotion alone must he
rely for the success of his suit.

He found Mr. Guyon awaiting him in the dining-room, with the _Morning
Post_ on the very verge of the table; and a large blotting-book, a
portentous inkstand, and a perfect armoury of steel pens close in
front of him. The flavour of Turkish tobacco hung round the apartment,
and a cut-glass goblet containing the remains of a draught that looked
suspiciously like brandy and soda-water stood on the velvet
mantelpiece. Mr. Guyon himself, dressed in the loose lounging jacket
and the Turkish trousers, lay on the sofa with the butt-end of a
cigarette in his mouth, and extended his hand to his friend in cordial
greeting.

"I take this doosid kind of you, my dear Streightley, coming round in
this way when I asked you. Doosid kind!" said Mr. Guyon; "and I show
my appreciation of it by receiving you without the least ceremony or
the least humbug--which is the greater compliment. When one says to a
fellow, 'I want to see you on a matter of business,' the fellow who's
good enough to come round naturally expects to see the fellow who sent
for him in a state of business--stiff shirt-collar, and almanac, and
all that kind of thing. That's what I myself should do to some
fellows; but I don't to you. I say to myself, 'He's above all that
sort of dodgery. He's a real man of business, and would see through it
at once. Let him take me as I am. I'm an idle, nothing-doing,
pleasure-seeking son of a gun: he knows it; why should I attempt to
disguise my natural self from him and prove myself to be somebody
else? Let him see me as my natural self."

Here Mr. Guyon paused for an instant to take a sip from the cut-glass
goblet and to throw away the butt-end of the cigarette. Feeling it
incumbent on him to say something, Robert Streightley murmured, "Very
kind!"

"No," said Mr. Guyon, raising himself on his elbow, and looking lazily
across the table at his visitor, "not very kind. Shrewd, perhaps, but
not kind. When a man is in want of serious advice, and goes to the
fountain-head for--that kind of thing--boldly and without scruple, he
may be said to be shrewd. Now, that's my case; and I come to you."

This, so far, was so like the commencement of Mr. Guyon's
conversations when loans were in question that Streightley had made up
his mind that more money was required; he changed his opinion,
however, as his host proceeded.

"Now, my dear Robert,--you'll forgive an old fellow's familiarity,
won't you? I don't often indulge in a fancy, but when I do I'm like
the--ivy, damme, I cling. You can see, you must have seen plainly
enough long since, that I'm not a man of business. In three words, I
hate it. If I had been a rich man, I'd have had a fellow to do all my
business for me while I smoked my cigarette and looked on; and
hitherto whenever it's been a question of business, money, and all
those horrible details arising from the want of it, I've shirked it as
long as I could, and then stumbled through it in a devilish blind,
stupid, haphazard kind of manner. That's been all very well so far;
but now another question arises,--a very different question--one
touching the heart and that kind of thing, and the welfare of a person
who--however, I'll go into that by and by;--a question on which, I
feel so deeply, that I've determined to be guided by the advice of the
clearest-headed man of my acquaintance--and so I've sent for you."

Robert Streightley bowed, and murmured a few words of incoherent
thanks. Not money! Question on which he felt so deeply! What was Mr.
Guyon driving at?

"I will be perfectly plain with you, my dear Robert," said Mr. Guyon,
"frank as the day, all open and aboveboard. I won't disguise from you,
I don't attempt to disguise it from myself, that perhaps there never
was a man less fitted than I am to have been blessed with what would
be a crowning solace to many men--a daughter." Streightley
involuntarily started as these words met his ear; and Mr. Guyon
noticed the start, but he did not betray himself, and proceeded. "I'm
not a domestic man, and not cut out for domestic happiness. I believe
my enemies call me a loose fish, and 'pon my soul I think they're
right. I like my rubber and my club, and--in fact, my freedom. I'm a
sort of claret-and-_entre_ butterfly, and was never intended for the
roast-joint and bread-and-cheese _menag_ of respectability and home
consumption. However, what was intended and what is are two very
different things. I have a daughter, and--well, you're a man of the
world, and I won't bore you with a father's maudlin praises of his
child. She is--there, I was very near breaking into what I had just
declared I would not do!--what I mean to say is, her future is my
greatest care. I've been a man of the world myself, and I know all she
will be exposed to, and, my dear Robert, I tremble when I think of it.
I've only to refer to my own conscience to see what might be in store
for her. Her poor mother--of whom she is the very image--was weak
enough to marry me; and though--though I always treated her as a
gentleman should treat his wife, by Jove! I know I--many
shortcomings."

Here Mr. Guyon buried his face in a large white pocket-handkerchief;
and Streightley, not knowing what to say or do, drummed vacantly on
the table.

"You follow me, my dear boy? Of course, I knew you would," resumed Mr.
Guyon after a momentary pause. "Now wait and hear the rest. A girl
like Katharine, possessing--well, what I suppose even I may call many
attractions--will necessarily receive a vast amount of admiration from
all sorts of men; and it will be my duty--and a duty which I shall
perform with the greatest strictness; she has no mother, you know,
poor girl! and I must be doubly vigilant--to see that she does not get
led away and tempted into any foolish alliance by any good-looking
young fashionable fop with nothing but his good looks to recommend
him. What my girl requires in a husband--for she is light and giddy,
like the rest of her sex--is ballast, my dear Robert; a man of matured
experience and not too young in years; one whom she could look up to,
who could give her the position which her beauty, and--I may say her
birth--entitle her to;--that's the sort of husband to whom alone I
should be happy in giving my Katharine."

Mr. Guyon paused once more, and Streightley bowed again in an absent
manner, his right hand all the time plucking at his chin.

"The--the ideal, if I may so call it, that I have just drawn by no
means resembles the writer of a letter which I received this morning
honouring me by a proposal for Katharine's hand." Streightley's arm
dropped upon the table, and he leant forward with an eager gaze. "Yes,
my dear Robert, the Goths are already in full march upon the--what
d'ye call 'em?--Capitol; and it is under these circumstances that I
have sent for you to ask your advice."

"You--you're very good," murmured Streightley; "and of course any
thing that I can do--but I really scarcely see in such a matter as
this--and without knowing--knowing any thing of the--the parties----"

"My dear Robert, you don't think I would have sent for you with the
notion of making any half-confidences. You shall know every detail.
The writer of this letter," pursued Mr. Guyon, producing a packet from
his desk,--"of these two letters rather, for there is an enclosure for
Katharine which I have not yet delivered--is a young man whom you may
have seen with us--a Mr. Gordon Frere. A doosid good-looking,
well-born, well-connected young fellow, who seems tremendously in
earnest about it too," continued Mr. Guyon, balancing his trim gold
eyeglasses on the bridge of his nose; "for he writes to me to say--to
say that--there, I need not read his letter--the gist of it is that
he's been down to his father, at some place in the country where he
writes from, and his father, who is a member of the House, has promised
to use his influence with Government to get him a decent berth. Now
that's plucky and honourable--I like that, eh, Robert?"

"O yes, sir--very honourable indeed," said Streightley nervously. "I
think you mentioned that you had not forwarded the enclosure to Miss
Guyon?"

"Not yet,--no. I was desirous of having your opinion--as a man of
business--on the proposal."

It had come at last then, this long-expected blow to that dream of
future happiness in which, spite of his own better reasoning, he had
dared to indulge. She would be wrested from him--be taken to the heart
of that smooth-spoken dandy whom he had loathed from the first instant
of seeing him. All her loveliness--ah, how he remembered each
brilliant charm!--would go to grace the life of that silly fop. The
blood rushed back to Robert Streightley's heart as he thought of all
this; his teeth were clenched, his pallid lips trembled and shook, and
he thought that if he had had Gordon Frere before him at that instant
he could have killed him without remorse. For an instant his better
feeling struggled with his passion--the struggle was short and sharp,
but the passion was victorious; and he said, in a strange dry voice,

"This gentleman scarcely fulfils the requirements you named just now,
Mr. Guyon?"

"Admirably put, my dear Robert--clearly and admirably put! I must
allow it, he does not."

"If there were some one who, by his age and position at least, was
calculated to--to be to this young lady--what you----"

"Yes, my dear Robert, yes I--"

"Who----" Then with a great gulp----"I'm a bad hand at beating about
the bush, sir. What I have seen of Miss Guyon has so enthralled me,
that--that I would give my life to win her for my wife."

He sought his handkerchief to wipe his fevered lips, but Mr. Guyon
caught his hand and pressed it warmly. "You, Robert, you? My dear boy,
those are the happiest words that my ears have heard this many a day.
You? Why, in a father's--what you may call fondest dreams, I could not
have hoped for such good news as this! You? Why, of all people on
earth, the very man!"

"The very man" looked any thing but happy as he sat there with pallid
lips and puckered forehead and rapidly-beating heart--sat there silent
and downcast, only occasionally raising his eyes to glance at the
letter which Mr. Guyon had placed on the table before him. At that
letter he stole long wistful glances; it seemed to possess for him a
kind of baleful attraction; and after a short interval his regard
fixed on it so directly that his companion could not fail to notice
it. But though Mr. Guyon fully comprehended what was passing within
Robert Streightley's breast, it by no means suited him to refer to it
at once.

"My dear Robert," said he, after a few minutes' pause, "the unexpected
delight of your communication just made has really taken me--even old
stager as I am--what I may call off my legs! I understand you to
propose for my daughter's hand?"

"The very man" said never a word, but bowed his head abstractedly.

"Then I congratulate you and myself, my dear boy!" said the elder man,
again seizing his companion's passive hand--"and I think we may regard
it as a settled thing. My daughter has not seen much of you at
present, but I am quite certain that when she once comes to know the
qualities of your head and heart, she will----"

"What about that letter, Mr. Guyon?" said Robert Streightley in a
cold, hard voice, pointing to the envelope still lying on the table.

"That letter!" echoed Mr. Guyon, his face falling considerably. "Well,
my dear Robert, there's no denying that--eh? That letter--you see that
young man Frere, Gordon Frere, gentlemanly fellow, good address, and
all that kind of thing, has had opportunities of--in fact making his
way, which--wilful woman and so on. Gad, if that letter were
delivered, there's no knowing how things might turn out!"

Streightley's heart sunk within him, and he turned faint and sick; but
he controlled himself sufficiently to say:

"Then you were a little rash in your congratulations, Mr. Guyon?"

"Not at all, my dear boy, not at all. Recollect--I spoke of a
contingency. I said--_if_ that letter were delivered."

"_If_ that letter were delivered to Miss Guyon? Do you mean to say
that you would dare to Withhold it from her?"

"'Dare' is a very awkward word, my dear Robert. It appears to me that
if one could select two men as judges of what should or should not be
addressed to a young lady, they would be her father--and her intended
husband."

"But that letter!"

"Well, my dear fellow--that letter? Shall I give it to Katharine?
Shall we instal Mr. Gordon Frere into what should and what will be
your position?--shall I subject myself to a fortnight's confounded
rows, and finally saddle myself for life with a 'detrimental'
son-in-law? or shall I quietly put it by, and acquaint my daughter
with your very delightful proposal? My dear Robert, you look aside
and shake your head; but I am an older man than you, and know that I
am--that we are--acting for the best. Recollect what the fellow--Kean,
I think--says in the play: 'He that is robbed not wanting what is
stolen, let him not know it and he's not robbed at all.' Doosid good
that, and doosid appropriate. So we'll settle upon that course, eh?
and you'll leave all to me?--What! you're not going, my dear
boy--you'll stay to luncheon?"

"Not this morning, thank you; not now, Mr. Guyon--I--I must go now!"
and Robert Streightley passed into the street, and for the first time
in his life felt a sense of shame at his heart, and a desire to shun
the glances of those whom he encountered.

Mr. Guyon, so soon as the door had closed behind his friend, drew his
chair to his desk, carefully read through Gordon Frere's letter to
Katharine, hitherto unopened, replaced it and the letter to himself in
their envelope, which he carefully endorsed with the words "Shown to
R.S." and the date, and locked them away in a private drawer. Then
he wrote a rather long and elaborate letter to Mr. Frere, addressed
it with great care, was very natty in his arrangement of its
postage-stamp, sealed it with a large splodge of red wax bearing his
coat-of-arms, and went upstairs.


On the third night after the events just recorded Charles Yeldham and
Gordon Frere were walking up and down the departure platform at London
Bridge, by the side of the mail-train just about to start. Frere was
dressed in travelling costume, and looked, as most young fellows do in
such garb, sufficiently picturesque. But his face was deadly pale,
save where there were blotches of bright red under his eyes.

"Now listen, Charley," said he, "and hear my last words. I go away,
cursing that woman. You know I'm not romantic, or melodramatic, or any
thing of that kind; but she's spoilt my life for me, and I curse her
for it. It's too bad,--by the Lord, it's too bad! You know how I--yes,
damme, how I loved her. Followed her about like a spaniel, and she
could have done any thing with me. And then never to keep her
appointment, never to send me a line; and then when I write and make
her a regular offer, never to take the least notice--not a line, by
Jove!--and to leave her infernal old father to write to me that she's
engaged to that cold-blooded, mannerless beast, Streightley! O, I know
he's a friend of yours; but, damme it's too bad! And when the
governor, dear old boy, had actually got me a nomination to the
Treasury, and--however, that's thrown up, and I'm going out to an
infernal German principality to be secretary to that bewigged old fool
in that carriage, and leaving you, and all through the tricks of that
heartless coquette! O yes, all right! I hear the bell, and I'm going
to get in. Now, God bless you, old boy; but recollect my last words. I
leave this place cursing that girl, and I'll be even with her yet!"

Mr. Frere wrung his friend's hand and sprang into the carriage as the
train began to move. Charles Yeldham waited until the last glimmer of
its red lamps had died away, then turned slowly round, and walked
towards his dreary chambers.

"It's very bad for you, Gordon, my poor boy!" said he to himself as he
strolled along; "very bad indeed, just now! but I sadly fear it will
be worse for others in the long-run--and for poor Bob Streightley
worst of all!"




CHAPTER XI.
LEFT LAMENTING.


The morning sun, which arose on the world with its accustomed
regularity, shone steadily on to its noonday splendour; but found
Katharine no more resigned or peaceful than she had been on the
previous night. She had been little used to opposition or
contradiction, and she did not brook them easily. That she should have
been disappointed in the matter of Mrs. Tresillian's ball was natural
enough; but that she should have been put so completely out of temper
and out of spirits by the disappointment as to have made the fact
glaringly apparent to her father and the "City man," was not at all
natural to Katharine's well-bred self-command and sense of what was
due to good manners and her self-respect. She was discontented with
herself, provoked with Lady Henmarsh, and miserable in reflecting upon
the disappointment which Gordon Frere had doubtless sustained, and in
fancying that he might have imputed her absence to coldness or
caprice. Love had taken possession of the girl, had utterly humbled
her, and she had no thought of her own charms, her own importance, no
notion that Frere might hesitate to ask her to share a destiny which
could not be represented as brilliant; she never considered or
questioned his position for a moment. She knew he was well-born,
well-connected, and in good society; but she knew and cared to know
nothing beyond. She had acquired the enchanting certainty that he
loved her; she felt that the next time they met he would tell her so;
and her heart had no room for any thing but the mingled rapture and
suspense which proceeded from the delightful experience of the
preceding day, and the pitiable disappointment of the preceding
evening.

Katharine did not see her father on the morning after the Botanical
Fte. When she went down to breakfast the dusty footman gave her a
message from Mr. Guyon, to the effect that he found himself obliged to
go out early on particular business, and as he could not say how long
he might be detained, she must not expect him to ride with her--he
would return to dinner. This message was a fresh annoyance to
Katharine, a new exacerbation of her already irritated temper. There
now, she should be unable to ride, and no doubt Gordon was looking
forward to meeting her in the Park, and would be again disappointed;
indeed he might think she was purposely avoiding him,--who could tell?
Katharine pushed her untasted breakfast from her and hurried upstairs
to the drawing-room, where she paced up and down before the long
windows with an impatient tread. Would he come? Would he call on her
at the delightfully unconventional early hour he had selected for his
first well-remembered visit? Perhaps--nay surely, he would! It was not
far from eleven now; she glanced at the chimney-glass, smoothed her
glossy hair, inspected the condition of her neat morning-dress; and
then sat down to her piano to play all the tunes which he liked, and
so get over the interval before his coming would be possible. But the
expedient was not successful; the gay strains died away in harmonised
reveries, sometimes into silence, as the girl sat and thought of her
lover--glorified by her imagination and exalted by her own fervent
nature into a very different being from the real Gordon Frere. If
Katharine could but have seen him at that hour, what a difference
might it not have made to them and to others! He was turning over the
leaves of a Railway Guide, and talking away to Yeldham in all the
newborn impetuosity of his approval of his friend's advice, and his
resolution to act upon it. Yes, he would go at once; he would not
delay an hour, he would not trust himself to see Katharine again. If
he had met her at the Tresillians, he should certainly have committed
himself; and Yeldham was right, quite right; of course Mr. Guyon would
only laugh at him; and very justly, unless he could put forward some
decided prospect for his consideration. Perhaps it was better that he
had had no understanding with Katharine as to meeting within a day or
two; he might not have been able to resist seeing her again. He would
write her a note though, just a line saying he should be out of town
for a few days--he must indeed, for she had asked him to inquire for
some music she wanted at Cramer's: he could just write the note and
get the music, and send both to Queen Anne Street before starting for
the station. He flung down the Railway Guide, took up his hat and
departed, whistling as he descended the staircase with an invincible
light-heartedness, whereat Charles Yeldham smiled. The smile was not
gay, however, and it vanished quickly, and the barrister laid down his
pen, leaned his chin upon his folded hands, and gazed out of the
window with eyes that saw nothing they looked upon. It was a most
unusual thing for Charles Yeldham to indulge in a fit of abstraction,
and the indulgence was brief. He brought his gaze and his thoughts
back again with an effort, shook his hair from his forehead, and
resumed his work doggedly.

Mr. Guyon, returning from his business expedition at about one
o'clock, and proposing to let himself into the house by means of his
latch-key, as he did not feel particularly desirous of an interview
with Katharine just then, and feared she might come down to seek him,
if she heard a ring, found a commissionaire just in the act of pulling
the bell.

"Wait a minute, my man," said Mr. Guyon in his cheery way; "I'll open
the door," and he suited the action to the word. "What have you got
there? O, I see,--a parcel and a note for my daughter. You're paid,
are you, eh? Never mind; here's another sixpence--good-day."

The man turned away, well pleased, and Mr. Guyon, carrying the parcel
in his hand, went on into his own room. There was a note with the
parcel; which was evidently a roll of music. Mr. Guyon looked at it,
considered it, finally, muttering "It will always be easy to say the
fellow must have lost it," he opened and read the missive. As he did
so, his face brightened up. "Out of town, eh? on important business;
trusts to see her the moment he returns, eh? Not if I know it, Mr.
Frere,--not if I know it." Then Mr. Guyon put the note carefully away
in his pocketbook, for destruction at a convenient season.

He next proceeded to search among a heap of cards stuck into the frame
of the chimney-glass for one bearing the inscription "Mr. Gordon
Frere," passed it under the riband with which the parcel was fastened,
and rang the bell.

"Take this to Miss Guyon," said he to the footman, who answered the
summons. "A commissionaire brought it just now."

Katharine was standing by one of the windows when the man entered the
drawing-room, salver in hand. Her tall graceful figure and proud head
expressed eager anticipation and waiting in their attitude.

"A parcel, ma'am," said the man; "a commissioner 'ave brought it."

"Put it down," she said, without turning her head; and several minutes
elapsed before she looked round, or remembered the interruption. At
length she sighed impatiently, and said aloud: "He will hardly come
now, it is too near lunchtime; and if he comes later, the room is sure
to be full of bores, as usual. However, I had rather he came, no
matter who may be here. But it is very stupid of him not to call
early." At this moment her eye lighted on the parcel, and the card
attached to it. The colour rushed violently into her face, and then
subsided, leaving Katharine many shades paler than usual.

Mr. Guyon was in very good spirits when he met his daughter at lunch.
He talked and laughed and made himself as agreeable as if she had been
somebody else's daughter and worth cultivating. He congratulated
Katharine on her appearance both at the _fte_ and at dinner on the
previous day; he asked her where her bonnet came from, and whether her
milliner was determined to ruin him completely this season? To all
these sallies Katharine replied little; she was pale, _distraite_,
decidedly out of humour. Mr. Guyon shot sharp inquiring glances at her
across the table, wholly unperceived. He was a little surprised at her
mood. "By Jove!" he thought, "she has been harder bit than I
suspected, and this has been a near thing, I fancy. I've only given
Hetty the office just in time. Something must be done before this
dandy fellow comes back,--and it won't be too easy to manage Kate
either."

These reflections troubled Mr. Guyon a little, and repressed the fine
flow of his spirits; but his daughter took as little notice of one of
his moods as of the other.

"Have you heard how Lady Henmarsh is to-day?" she asked absently; and
the seemingly harmless question brought a more impartially diffused
colour to Mr. Guyon's face than the evenly-defined bloom which usually
embellished it.

"No," he replied decisively; "have you?"

"I have not," said Katharine. "I was thinking of walking round there
to inquire for her; but James makes out that there is so much to do,
after yesterday, that I saw he would only grumble if I took him
out,"--Mr. Guyon breathed rather quickly, and then looked
relieved,--"and, as I knew if any thing serious had been the matter
with her or Sir Timothy, she would have put us off for to-day, it
didn't matter."

"Ah, by the bye, yes!" returned her father, "we dine there to-day."

It was rather odd that Mr. Guyon should have said this in a tone of
reminiscent surprise; for his particular business of that morning had
included, if not entirely consisted of, a long interview with Lady
Henmarsh; which interview had concluded with these words:

"Well, then, good-bye until seven. You quite understand?" on the part
of the gentleman; and "Yes, I quite understand," on the part of the
lady.

It will be remembered that Mr. Guyon had despatched a note to his
complaisant cousin in the course of the preceding day, which note had
borne fruit in Katharine's disappointment of the evening. It had also
prepared Lady Henmarsh for Mr. Guyon's visit, and had convinced her
that he "meant business." It is unnecessary to go into the details of
the interview, which had taken place while Katharine had watched and
waited throughout the dreary hours, and in which her fate was settled,
so far as it was in the power of her father and her chaperone to
settle it. Its bearings will all be clearly developed by the results;
it is enough at present that each of the parties was satisfied with
the views entertained and the promises made by the other.

Katharine looked very bright and beautiful that evening, and her
manner was as gay and gracious as if Lady Henmarsh had not inflicted a
severe disappointment upon her and seriously disconcerted all, her
plans and hopes for one day and night at least. Her pride had received
a slight wound, not a deep or deadly one as yet, but it was keen, and
sensitive, and thrilled to a touch; and that card, without note or
message, had touched it. She recalled her last words to Gordon Frere,
his last words to her, and their tone, which meant so much more; and
she could not but recoil from this incident. There was some relief in
fancying that he might have taken this way of evincing pique at her
absence from the ball; and when this idea occurred to her she
cherished it, and at last it gave her complete comfort. There is a
sort of charm in such piques and pets, when they are not carried too
far, and Katharine did not care to remember that had Gordon been
offended, and taken such a way of showing it, he must have indulged
temper at the cost of sense, as he must have known her absence arose
from no fault of hers. But Katharine, a remarkably clear-sighted
person in most cases, was as blind and as silly as the rest of the
world in this, and caught with eagerness at a reason which seemed to
exalt her lover's devotion at the expense of his common sense. Yes,
that was it of course! How foolish she had been! they would meet
to-morrow; even if he did not call, he always went to Lady Tredgold's
"evenings," and there they should meet, and "make it up." Katharine's
girlish spirits rose, under the influence of the conviction that she
had been worrying herself unnecessarily, and she was even unusually
charming. The dinner-party was a pleasantly-assorted one; Sir Timothy,
a perfect gentleman, old and invalided as he was, prosed away indeed,
at the end of the table, but she was not near him at dinner, and he
never appeared in the drawing-room. She talked brilliantly; her low
well-bred laugh was heard like frequent music amid the buzz of
conversation; and Mr. Mostyn, who honoured Lady Henmarsh on the
present occasion, made up his mind that Katharine should be his next
heroine. He calmly contemplated her animated face, and studied the
details of her dress, considering whether she should be wedded to a
clever Irish political adventurer (he knew a man whom he could "do"
for the part admirably, and what was more and better, every one else
knew him also), rescued from his brutality by the hero (Mr. Mostyn
would be his own hero), and suffered to die of a broken heart in
consequence of her hopeless passion for her rescuer; or whether she
should merely retire, in her maiden bloom, into a convent, when the
hero marries the duchess, out of compassion, and hangs wreaths of
_immortelles_ on the bell-handle of the holy house of our Lady of the
Seven Dolours on each anniversary of the double event. While his mind
was agitated by this dilemma, he heard Mr. Guyon say to Lady Henmarsh,

"Yes, we saw him yesterday at the Botanical Fte. I don't know that he
mentioned your invitation. Katharine, did Mr. Frere say whether he was
to dine with Lady Henmarsh to-day?"

Katharine turned her head quickly towards her father, and there was a
slight frown on her fair brow as she answered,

"No, papa,--certainly not! I did not know he had been asked. When did
you invite him, Lady Henmarsh?"

"Several days ago, Kate;--when I asked you all. I suppose he had
something better to do; and really he is so horribly conceited, and
represents himself as in such request every where, he is quite welcome
to stay away for me."

The matter dropped there, but Katharine was very silent now; and Mr.
Mostyn, attributing her depression to the near termination of dinner,
and the inevitable move, decided that her pensive tenderness was even
more charming than her sparkling allurement.

In the drawing-room she was silent still. When opportunity offered she
said to Lady Henmarsh:

"How did you send Mr. Frere your invitation?"

"How? Why, Kate, how inquisitive you are!" and her ladyship
laughed,--rather a forced laugh;--"by post, of course. To the Temple;
that's all right, isn't it? I said, to meet a few friends, the Guyons,
and one or two others. But, my child, I can't stay gossipping with
you; there's Mrs. Weldon preparing to consider herself neglected and
to take offence."

Katharine was not so much annoyed as she was puzzled by this incident.
It is hardly necessary to tell the intelligent reader that no such
invitation had ever been sent to Gordon Frere, and that the
fabrication had been a happy idea of Mr. Guyon's, and hurriedly
imparted to his colleague by a note before dinner. Frere's absence
might be very short, and was undoubtedly very precious; and Mr. Guyon
had determined to play a game which, if not exactly desperate, was
very daring. This was the first card; he had played it, not with
perfect, but with tolerable, success. With increased eagerness
Katharine looked forward to the morrow; with such eagerness as took
the healthy colour from her cheek and the limpid brightness from her
eye, and replaced the one by a flickering flush, and the other by a
look of anxiety and absorption. The morrow came, and she rode in the
Park with her father, but did not see Gordon Frere. The routine of a
London day followed; she drove out with Mrs. Stanbourne, and on her
return looked over the cards which had been left during her absence,
but there was not one bearing the name she longed to see. At dinner
her father was in the gay spirits which had distinguished him since he
had made Robert Streightley's acquaintance, and took no notice of her
silence and dejection. She went to Lady Tredgold's reception, and
there endured such pangs of expectation, suspense, mortification and
anger, love and longing, as only a mind totally undisciplined by
sorrow, and unaccustomed to finding its calculations disturbed by
conflicting results, could undergo.

The history of the two days which succeeded that of the Botanical
Fte, which had been such an eventful date in Katharine's life, and
was destined to remain fixed in her memory for ever, was repeated in
those which followed them. Weary waiting and wondering, heartsick
longing and anger, the blind wrath of a proud heart stung and
outraged, the remorseful relenting of a girlish passionate
heart,--through all these, and numberless other phases of feeling and
suffering, Katharine Guyon struggled friendless and alone. Pride ruled
the girl outwardly, as much as love reigned in her inwardly; and the
only person to whom she would have spoken, Mrs. Stanbourne, had left
town suddenly, having been called away to a friend who was dangerously
ill. Katharine might not have spoken to her indeed, had she been
available for purposes of confidence--the calmness and steadiness of
the lady's nature might have repelled her, for this was an unfortunate
effect which those qualifies had frequently produced upon the
impetuous and passionate young girl; but now that she was away, she
felt that she would have done so, and regarded Mrs. Stanbourne's
absence as an additional grievance and aggravation of the bitterness
of her lot. The season was over, town was thinning fast, their own
particular set had all broken up, and autumn engagements were either
being eagerly discussed or busily entered upon. Days wore on--how
wearily, they only who know how long time is to those who watch and
wait, can tell--and Katharine did not see the face of Gordon Frere or
hear his name. The girl changed visibly under the suffering of this
period; the anxious look, so strange to her lustrous eyes, became
fixed in them; the soft music of her laugh ceased to ring in the ears
of her companions; her girlish gracefulness hardened into something
defiant, very attractive to strangers, but which would have made one
who loved her sad to see, and apprehensive for her future; but no one
who loved her was there to watch the change in Katharine Guyon with
prescient eyes.

The day was hot, sultry, breathless; the autumn had fairly set in, and
beat fiercely upon the weary Londoners; the sense of oppression
produced by the immense circumference of stone and brick was heavy
upon such of the world as had any chance of escaping from it. Such as
had no chance probably did not like it; "but then," in homely
expressive speech, they had to "lump it;" and very few were likely to
trouble themselves about them. The last flicker of the gaieties of the
season had died out; and even Mr. Guyon had found it impossible to get
up a Greenwich dinner-party to comprise more than four individuals,
including Robert Streightley and Daniel Thacker. He had avoided his
daughter as much as possible of late; and Mr. Streightley had
sedulously sought her society, with every kind of tacit encouragement
within her father's power to give him. It was the day named for the
Greenwich dinner; and Katharine, glad to be alone, and yet feverish
and miserable in her solitude, had refused to go to Lady Henmarsh's,
there to hold a _causerie_ on their several autumn plans.

"She will drag poor old Sir Timothy to some German baths or French
watering-place, and she wants me to back her up in the cruelty,"
thought Katharine, as she contemptuously twisted up the note, which
had contained the invitation, and desired Lady Henmarsh's page to tell
his mistress she was busy and could not come; "but I won't. Why can't
she go down to Deanthorpe and keep quiet?" She had been dawdling over
her luncheon and feeding her Skye terrier, without taking any interest
in either occupation; and she now leaned idly against the window-frame
and gazed out wearily. She saw the hot, baked streets; she saw the
poor old woman opposite sitting by her basket of full-blown blowsy
nosegays, sheltering them and herself under the shade of a huge
umbrella, fallen from its high estate on some family coach-box, and
displaying sundry patches ignominious in their discrepancy with each
other and general incongruity with the original fabric. The old woman
was yawning, and sleeping by snatches, and Katharine's impatient
weariness was increased by watching her. She turned away, and went
upstairs to her own room. A newspaper lay on the table in the hall,
and she took it up mechanically, and carried it with her. Her own room
was spacious and airy, and physical ease and refreshment at least came
to her with its stillness and its shade.

She sat down in an arm-chair by the window, and fell a-thinking on the
invariable subject; wondering, yearning, raging, as she had done now
for days which had run on into weeks, during every hour which had not
been tranquillised by the anodyne of sleep. After a while she looked
idly at the newspaper in her hand; and in a few minutes her eyes
lighted on a paragraph which announced the departure of Lord A---- as
British _charg d'affaires_ to the court of F----, accompanied by Mr.
Gordon Frere, who attended his lordship in the character of private
secretary, and a numerous suite.

Katharine Guyon was not a fainting woman. She had never fainted in her
life, and hysterical affections she held in equal suspicion and
disdain. No merciful weakness came to lessen the physical anguish she
experienced, when these few lines conveyed to her shrinking soul the
full assurance of the fate that had befallen her. The physical
suffering of a sudden grief is always terrible, most terrible where
strength reigns with tolerable equality in body and mind. Her flesh
crept and burned; acute, agonising pain darted into her eyeballs, and
transfixed them; a slow shivering anguish seized upon her limbs, and
caused her lips to part and shudder over the clenched teeth. No cry
escaped her, nor sound except a moan, half of mental pain, half of the
deadly sickness, the actual nausea, which every one who has ever
sustained a severe shock of pain or fear knows is its invariable
accompaniment. Black rings formed themselves in the air, and dropped
from under her eyes, into what seemed to her like infinite space. She
wondered dimly whether this could be any thing like death; and sat
there, so feeling, so wondering, she had no idea what length of time.
Her maid came to her when the hour for dressing for dinner arrived,
and found her pale, motionless, and tearless.

"I'm not well, Marwood," she said; "as papa is out, I need not go
down. If you'll help me to undress, I will go to bed."

The woman was utterly surprised. Illness was unknown to Katharine's
vigorous frame and eager spirit. She acknowledged that her mistress
looked ill, and suggested sending James for a doctor.

"Not on any account," said Katharine; "I am suffering for my obstinacy
in riding too long in the sun yesterday, and eating ices last night. I
shall be quite well in the morning."

The woman assisted her to undress, and left her, and Katharine lay
down in her bed, feeling as if she should never rise from it again.
The evening fell, the beautiful autumn night succeeded the brief
twilight, and the fair morning dawned, and still she lay quite
motionless, tearless, sleepless; speechless too, but for one short
sentence whose agony of anger and outraged feeling defied restraint.
It sounded strangely in the quiet of the room:

"He was only amusing himself, after all. He _dared_ to amuse himself
with ME!"


Hester Gould had fulfilled her intention of finding out all she could
about Robert Streightley's new friends, as she usually fulfilled all
her intentions, quietly and completely. She had paid a friendly visit
to Daniel Thacker's sisters, resident at Hampstead; and having timed
her visit fortunately, or it would be more correct to say judiciously,
she had met Daniel, and extracted from him all the information he was
disposed to give. She was not in the least deceived in her estimate of
his frankness; she knew that he had more to tell respecting Mr. Guyon
and his handsome daughter (Mr. Thacker called her "stunning") than the
general facts into the disclosure of which she led him; but she was
not unreasonable, and she read character accurately. She had not seen
much of Daniel Thacker; for not being mistress of her own time, she
could rarely visit the dwellers at Corby House at the hours which
found that gentleman in the bosom of his family; but she had seen
enough of him to understand him much better than most of his
acquaintances did, and to feel a comfortable assurance that she could
gain an influence over him, if any thing should occur to make it worth
her while to do so.

Daniel Thacker possessed at least one sterling virtue--he was an
excellent brother. Nothing in reason and within the compass of his
means did he deny the handsome, red-lipped, dark-browed girls, who
strongly resembled him, and were even more Jewish-looking than he.
They had a good house, a comfortable establishment, a sufficiency of
society among their own persuasion generally, a sufficiency of
theatre- and concert-going, and plenty of the savoury meat which their
souls loved. They would have been happier perhaps--or they thought
so--if their beloved brother, whom they devoutly believed to be the
handsomest and most elegant man in Christendom or Jewry, had lived
with them at Corby House; but he had fully explained the impossibility
on "business" grounds, and the docile Hebrews, Rebecca and Rachel,
acknowledged the plea without hesitation. They were among the firmest,
warmest, and most useful of Hester Gould's friends, and they had been
for a time her pupils. They had perseveringly spread her fame abroad
among their _habitus_; and as music is an invariable taste among the
Jews, and their musical entertainments are splendid and numerous,
their praises had done her solid service, and Hester's time was fully
filled by very lucrative engagements.

Rachel and Rebecca had been infinitely delighted by Hester's arrival
to pass the evening with them, and had gushingly expressed their
pleasure.

"Tuesday evening too, Daniel's evening: how delightful!--he hardly
ever misses. I am so glad; isn't she a dear?" said Miss Rachel in a
sort of monologue, while she applied her large red lips several times
to Hester's olive cheek.

The calculations of the sisters did not deceive them. Daniel came,
smooth, good-humoured, affectionate, and obliging; and they passed a
very agreeable evening. Miss Gould had what she called a "confidential
cab," which attended her on special occasions, of which this was one;
and as she drove away, having accepted an invitation to accompany the
sisters to a Botanical "promenade" (it was the last of the season they
said, and dear Hester must come), she made a little calculation of the
gain of her visit, thus:

"Mr. Guyon is a fast man out at elbows, and a great friend of Daniel
Thacker's. That means that he is largely in Daniel's power. Miss Guyon
is a handsome, high-spirited girl, much admired, and with no fortune.
I can see that Daniel has no notion of her--he would be snubbed, rich
as he is, I suspect, even by the out-at-elbows father. But he has seen
Robert with Mr. Guyon, and for some reason or other--I don't know what
reason _yet_--he is concerned in promoting a match between him and
Miss Guyon. Can I prevent this? I fear not. We shall see; I must be
most cautious not to purchase even a fair chance of doing so too
dearly,"--here she thought intensely, and her brow clouded over
heavily. "If I could find out that the girl does not care for him, I
might make my way to her and put her on her guard; but suppose she
does? No, no; I must not risk _all_ until I know _all_."

Mr. Daniel Thacker's perfectly appointed brougham was conveying him
rapidly to St. James's half-an-hour later; and as he smoked a choice
cigar (part of a bankrupt lot dirt cheap at the price), he pulled his
silky beard, and meditated upon Hester Gould and her questions.

"Knows Streightley and his mother and sister very well, does she?
Thinks him a 'nice' man, but easily led--thinks his mother is _so_
anxious he should marry, eh? Now what the deuce is _her_ little game?
Can't be to marry him herself, I should think, or she's just the
woman to do it--to have done it long ago. Devilish nice girl; real
good-looking, and a rasper for determination, I should say. 'Gad, I
should like to see a good deal more of Hester Gould."




CHAPTER XII.
VICTORY.


Mr. Guyon was not troubled with sensitive feelings, and bashfulness or
hesitation in the carrying out of any project on whose execution he
had decided were completely foreign to his character. He possessed a
happy mixture of hardness and effrontery, which enabled him to do very
cruel things with charming lightness of heart and an engaging
unconsciousness of demeanour, which had occasionally even deluded his
victims themselves into thinking his intentions more harmless than his
acts. He was a man whom even remorse, the evil form of repentance, had
never visited, and who had never believed in any agency more
supernatural than _luck_. He had been accustomed to watch the
variations of that divinity pretty closely, and had arrived at a sort
of scheme of its operations; and just now he regarded good fortune as
in the ascendant--a conviction which received signal confirmation by
the success of his interview with Streightley. He had not distinctly
acknowledged to himself that he dreaded finding an obstacle in
Robert's conscientiousness; he had rather put his apprehensions to the
score of the "City man's" pride.

"I can't pretend that she likes him, or that she does not like Frere,"
he had said over and over again, as he turned the hopeful project,
which had succeeded so perfectly, in his mind. "He is not quite such a
flat as to believe any thing of that sort. It all depends on his being
satisfied to have the girl at any price; and he knows so little of the
world and of women, that I do believe he'll be idiot enough to take
her against her will. A pretty life she'll lead him; but that's no
business of mine."

Mr. Guyon possessed one trivial and negative virtue--he never tried to
deceive himself. Perhaps one reason why his hypocrisy had frequently
been crowned with success was, that he reserved it entirely for his
transactions, sternly extruding it from his meditations. _Vis--vis_
Ned Guyon, he was the soul of candour. True to this characteristic,
when screwing up his courage to the inevitable interview with his
daughter, which was the next performance in his programme, Mr. Guyon
did not try to persuade himself, as a more shallow scoundrel would
have done, that he was in reality doing the very best thing within his
power for her, and establishing, in truth, a clear claim to her
gratitude. He did not repeat that the man she loved was a frivolous
fellow, who could never fill the heart and the intellect of such a
woman, and was unworthy of her affection. He said nothing to himself
of all he had said to Robert Streightley. He knew nothing, and he
cared nothing about Frere's character; and the consideration of
Katharine's unhappiness did not concern him in the least.

"She will be very rich," he thought; "and if that does not make her
happy, she is a greater fool than I take her for--a greater fool even
than Streightley."

Callous and unhesitating as he was, nevertheless Mr. Guyon felt
considerable apprehension about the impending explanation with
Katharine. No material disagreement had ever taken place between his
daughter and himself. He had always had a sense of Katharine's
intellectual superiority which had governed him in certain respects;
and an unexpressed unwillingness to rouse a temper which he felt a
tacit conviction he could not rule had restrained him from opposing
her unnecessarily; so that his daughter had always given him credit
for much more amiability and complaisance than he actually possessed.
He was not afraid of her in any actively restraining sense, or he
would not have entertained such a design as that he was now
prosecuting against her; but he was afraid of a war of words with her;
he was afraid that her keenness might lead her to suspicion; above
all, he dreaded her girlish ignorance, her disregard of wealth, when
wealth only was what he had to urge upon her acceptance.

The announcement of Gordon Frere's departure was the cause of almost
as profound an emotion to Mr. Guyon as to his daughter. To her it
meant the extinction of hope, the blighting of joy, the outraging of
love and pride, the awakening of passionate anger and agonising grief.
To him it meant the termination of a period of most unpleasant
suspense, during which he did not dare to take a step towards the
furtherance of his plans, lest at any moment they might collapse, and
defeat insure detection. But all had turned out rightly for him; he
was safe; the young man--"the biggest fool of the lot" Mr. Guyon
called him, with coarse contempt for the pliability of his victim--had
received his sentence in silence and without protest, and had left
England; a circumstance beyond Mr. Guyon's hopes, which had extended
only to his keeping out of Katharine's way until the scheme should
have succeeded.

On his return from the dinner at Greenwich, which had been rather
tedious, and during which Robert Streightley's abstracted look and
dispirited manner had excited Mr. Guyon's scorn and apprehension,
inducing him to think that if there were much delay Robert might
become troublesome and scrupulous after all, he, too, read in the
evening journals the announcement which had come upon his daughter
like the stroke of doom. Unmixed satisfaction was rapidly succeeded by
a determination to act at once. He had seen as little as possible of
Katharine for some time, pleading engagements and business when the
rapid "thinning" of London prevented his procuring the presence of a
third person to insure him against a _tte--tte_. But he had watched
her; he had observed her restlessness, her anxiety, her abstraction
and indifference. He had noted the shadow on her beauty, he had heard
the harsh tone which now sounded in her voice, the unreal ring of her
laugh,--had noted them without one touch of pity or hesitation, and
been satisfied with the result. He recognised grief in all these
symptoms, but he saw still more anger, pride, and defiance. Every
thing that he observed gave him encouragement; and Lady Henmarsh, who
did not know the whole truth, but had guessed at something very like
it, had made satisfactory reports. She understood Katharine much
better than her father understood her, and had played the irritating
game, in his interests, with a charming air of unconsciousness, and
complete success. The first thing to be done was to see Lady Henmarsh;
and as she was going to take Sir Timothy out of town in a day or two,
no time was to be lost. Mr. Guyon could be an early man when it suited
his convenience, and it happened to do so just then. He presented
himself at Lady Henmarsh's breakfast-table, much to the surprise and a
little to the confusion of "cousin Hetty," who had never quite lost
the habit of liking to look well for "cousin Ned," and was conscious
that she might have looked better than on this occasion. But "cousin
Ned" had neither time nor inclination for the revival of _ci-devant_
sentiment, and Lady Henmarsh soon perceived that "business" engrossed
him wholly.


"My dearest Kate," said Lady Henmarsh, as, three hours later, she
entered Miss Guyon's room, and found her up and dressed, indeed, but
sitting icily by her bedroom-window, and looking as though a month's
illness had robbed her eyes of their lustre and her cheek of its
bloom,--"what is wrong with you? Clarke tried to prevent my coming
upstairs, but of course I knew you would see _me_. My dear girl, you
look shockingly!"

"Do I?" said Katharine, forcing a smile; "I feel wretched enough. It
is only the heat, I suppose, and the season. It is time for every one
to leave town."

"Every one seems to think so," returned Lady Henmarsh; "except
yourself and ourselves, almost every one is gone. I had such a number
of callers yesterday, I was quite sick of them. So sorry you could not
come round, dear; but you did quite right to keep quiet, if you did
not feel well. By the way, Mr. Mostyn--I must not say your admirer, I
suppose; but the gentleman who kindly permits you to admire him--came
in while the Daventrys were there, and he looked quite sentimental
when your message came. He actually condescended to ask why you did
not go to Mrs. Tresillian's ball, and to say, but for Miss Guyon's
absence, he should have pronounced it the best ball of the season. You
know his formal way. I am sorry you missed it, Kate; they all agreed
that it was a brilliant affair; and Lily Daventry was in ecstasies
about it. To be sure she's new to balls; but how she did go on about
Coote and Tinney's band and Gordon Frere's waltzing!"

Katharine winced. Lady Henmarsh played with a ring-stand, took up the
rings one by one and examined them, keeping a close watch on the girl
as she talked on.

"What a goose that girl is, to be sure, but so pretty! and if the men
admire her so much, though she has not any sense, she is as well
without it. What a flirt she is too! It amused me to watch her trying
her ringlets and her attitudes upon Mr. Mostyn. Now that Gordon
Frere--as great a flirt as herself--is out of the way, she tries her
hand upon him; and he is so horribly vain, that though he was at the
Tresillians' and saw her flirtation with Frere, he actually believes
she is quite captivated. Why do you wear an opal ring, Kate? you were
not born in October; it's unlucky, my dear."

"Is it?" said Katharine languidly. "I did not know. Are the Daventrys
going to Leyton?"

"Yes, they start to-morrow. By the bye, I was so surprised at Gordon
Frere's appointment; weren't you? I never heard him mention it, and
yet it appears it had been settled a long time. I am sorry I did not
see him when he called."

"How do you mean that his appointment was settled?" asked Katharine,
with great self-command. Lady Henmarsh turned her head away from the
dressing-table, and looked full at her, as she answered:

"Why, Lord A. had promised to take him as his private secretary, when
his turn should come; you know those diplomatic people have their
regular order of succession; he told Lily Daventry all about it at the
Tresillians' ball. He had been idling through the season, he said, and
amusing himself the best way he could, in anticipation of going to
work in earnest. He rather thought he should have gone a little
earlier; and to tell you the truth, Kate, I wish he had." There was
meaning in the speaker's tone, and Katharine understood it. Her eye
lighted angrily, as she asked, in the coldest possible voice:

"Indeed! may I ask you why Mr. Gordon Frere's movements are of
interest to you, Lady Henmarsh?"

"Come, come, Kate, don't speak like that to me," said her friend; "you
know perfectly well how dear you are to me, and what an interest I
take in every thing that nearly or remotely concerns you. I'm sure you
can't deny that, my dear."

A bend of the head, a softened expression in the face were the sole
answer.

"And I must say," continued Lady Henmarsh, "I am very much mortified
at the way Gordon Frere has set people talking about you."

"About _me?_"

"Yes, my dear, about you. He paid you very marked attention, and you
received it with quite enough complacency to set people talking--don't
be angry, Kate, I don't blame you; you were not to know that he meant
nothing. And then, for you, and me, the nearest friend you had--a
friend standing, in the eyes of the world, in the place of a
mother--to be the only people of his acquaintance, as it appears we
are, ignorant of the fact that he was going abroad immediately. Just
suppose, Kate, you had cared for him as much as he tried to make you,
and as I am very much afraid many people think you do! No, a male
flirt is my abhorrence, and Gordon is one _aux bouts des ongles_.
I assure you, Lady Daventry--and you know she is not at all an
ill-natured woman, or given to scandal--asked some very unpleasant
questions. I really wish I had seen the gentleman; every one else
seems to have seen him. He was in town only three days, and I really
believe he called in person on every one else, though he only left a
card for Sir Timothy. Did he call here?" Lady Henmarsh asked the
question very suddenly; and as Katharine answered it, her cheeks
reddened with a painful blush, which did not fade again during the
interview.

"No, Lady Henmarsh, he did not."

"Ah, I thought so. And now, my dear Kate, let me speak to you, as I
feel, with the affection of a mother and the experience of a woman of
the world. Gordon Frere has treated you very ill; he has exposed you
to comments, very injurious and painful to any girl, still more so to
a girl situated as you are. He might have made you miserable, as well
as ridiculous, if he had succeeded in making you love him. Now you
must defeat his unmanly triumph, and silence all the talk among our
countless dear friends who are amusing themselves at your expense.
Your being ill just now is peculiarly unfortunate; I know they will
say you are shutting yourself up, and doing the _Didone abbandonata_.
You have rather unfortunately good health, Katharine, for this sort of
thing, and have long defied hot suns and iced creams too successfully
to escape suspicion by pleading them now. I really wish, my dear girl,
you would come out for a drive; there are still many people to see
you--take an old woman's advice, Kate, and don't disdain precaution,
because you are not conscious of its need. _No one_ can afford to be
laughed at; and if you are wise, you will reject Mr. Gordon Frere's
legacy of ridicule."

Lady Henmarsh spoke earnestly and with much mental trepidation. She
had ventured very, very far; much farther than, when she entered
Katharine's room, she had believed she would dare to venture, for she
too knew that Katharine had what her father called "a devil of a
temper;" and there were few things she would not have preferred to
rousing it. But the silence of the girl, something of forlornness
under her pride, the patience with which she had borne her first
approaches, had given Lady Henmarsh courage, and Katharine's demeanour
satisfied her that all her suspicions had been more than just, that
she had loved Gordon Frere frankly, fully, and with all the truth and
ardour which were characteristic of her better nature. A moment's
silence ensued when she had ceased speaking, and then Katharine,
stately, cold, and graceful, rose from her chair, and, placing her
hand upon the bell to summon her maid, said:

"I appreciate your kindness and your advice, Lady Henmarsh. If you
will come back for me in half an hour, I will go with you any where
you please. But--this subject must never be spoken of again between
you and me."

Katharine's maid entered the room, and Lady Henmarsh left it, merely
saying in an assenting tone, "Very well, my dear," and descended the
stairs to the hall. There she met Mr. Guyon, who attended her to her
carriage with great solicitude. A whisper only passed between them,
for they treated servants with systematic caution. It was from Lady
Henmarsh, who said:

"I don't think you will have much trouble, Ned."

Several persons of her acquaintance met Miss Guyon driving in the Park
that afternoon, and had ample leisure to observe her amid the
diminished throng. A few regarded her with curiosity--for though Lady
Henmarsh had grossly exaggerated the facts, she and Gordon Frere had
been "talked of" in their own set--many with admiration, and remarked
that she looked particularly well and blooming, not at all cut up by
the season. None knew that something had gone out of the beautiful
face that was never to return to it--that the woman they admired that
day was not the same they had been accustomed to see and to admire,
but who was now a thing of the past, never more to have any terrene
existence.


"Katharine," said Mr. Guyon to his daughter on the following day, as
she sat opposite him at breakfast, while he furtively watched her
countenance from behind the defence of a convenient newspaper, "I have
something to say to you."

"Have you, papa? What is it?"

She looked at him uninterested and unconcerned. Mr. Guyon threw down
his newspaper, left his chair, and took up a position on the hearthrug
suggestive of wintry weather. He felt and he looked awkward; he
cleared his throat, and pulled at the blue-silk ribbon which encircled
it, as though its pressure incommoded him. His daughter did not move,
and the expression of her face was still uninterested, unconcerned.

"Yes, Katie," he recommenced. "I have indeed, my dear, something very
particular to say to you. I don't often speak seriously to you, you
know, and never bother you about business. So you must not think I
want to bother you now, and you must really attend to me."

"If it's about going out of town, papa, I really don't care where----"

"No, no, Kate, it's not that," said her father, interrupting her;
"it's nothing so easily settled as that. The fact is--Kate," he said
abruptly, and in a changed tone, "what do you think of our friend
Streightley?"

"What do I think of Mr. Streightley, papa? I can hardly tell you; I
don't think I know,--I don't think I have any thoughts about him. But
what has that to do with any thing important or particular that you
want to speak to me about?"

"It has every thing to do with it, Kate. Robert Streightley is the
best friend I have in the world, and he is the best fellow I know."

Katharine looked at her father with surprise. She was very far from
understanding him perfectly; but she certainly had a notion that Mr.
Streightley did not resemble the sort of person to whom she would have
expected her father to apply the favourite epithet, "good-fellow." She
said nothing, however; and Mr. Guyon, watching her more eagerly than
he suffered his features to tell, continued:

"I need not weary you by explaining the services Streightley has
done me in detail, but I must tell you that I have been unfortunate
in money matters in many ways; I have trusted friends, and been
deceived--" again Katharine's face expressed surprise, which she
certainly felt, and yet would have been puzzled to explain. "I have
been speculating, and have been ill-advised; the result has been
disastrous; in short, Katie, I must have gone to the wall had it not
been for Robert Streightley."

Katharine had become exceedingly pale now, and she fixed her eyes on
her father with more steadiness than he liked. He leaned his right
elbow on the chimney-piece, and kept his right hand hovering about his
mouth and chin, ready to cover an undesirable expression of candour or
embarrassment.

"Do you mean that Mr. Streightley has lent you money, papa?" asked
Katharine.

"Yes, my dear, he has, and large sums too; and I have lost so heavily
by those speculations I mentioned, that I cannot pay him without the
greatest inconvenience indeed almost ruin. He does not know how I am
situated; and of course it would be painful and humiliating to me to
tell him, unless I could also tell him the best news he could hear,
Kate----"

"What is that, papa?" she asked, perfectly without suspicion. Mr.
Guyon found his change of attitude very useful now, and he critically
examined his boots before he said:

"Well, my dear--I know you will be surprised, and indeed I was
astonished when he mentioned the subject to me. The best news that Mr.
Streightley could hear, Katie, would be that you had consented to
become his wife--" and at the last words he raised his head and looked
at her. Katharine started up, and exclaimed:

"Me! I!--O papa, what are you saying?"

Her father approached her, put one arm round her waist, and took her
hand in his. He seldom caressed his daughter, and she instinctively
shrunk from the encircling arm, as if a danger threatened her; but he
held her firmly, and she stood still and listened.

"I daresay you can't understand it, Kate, but it's quite true for all
that; and you know you are a doosid sensible girl, and doosid lucky
too, I can tell you." Mr. Guyon was recovering himself. "Now look
here. You've always lived like a lady--a long way better than many
ladies, by Jove--and you don't know what difficulties and poverty
mean; and it will be your own fault if you do know now, or ever.
You've no fortune, Kate; and a girl who hasn't can't choose for
herself--that's a fact. Men can't and won't marry without money; and
though you don't know much of the world, except the ball, supper,
promenade, and park side of it, Katie, I daresay you know enough of it
not to deny _that_. You don't know much of Streightley; and I daresay
he's not the sort of fellow you would fancy if you _did_ know ever so
much of him. But then, you see, the sort of fellow you would fancy
can't marry you, because you have no money, or won't, which comes to
the same thing,--at all events doesn't--" Here Katharine released
herself, and sat down. Still she turned her white face and attentive
eyes steadfastly upon him, and showed no sign of emotion, save the
occasional twitching of the hand which she laid upon the table.
Immensely reassured by her quietness, Mr. Guyon went on, quite
cheerily:

"It's all nonsense thinking about love-matches in these days; and
indeed at any time I don't think they turned out well. Now, Kate, this
is the real fact. If you don't marry Streightley, who is a first-rate
fellow, and immensely rich, and ready to do all sorts of generous and
noble things, in addition to giving me time to look about me until I
can pay him the money I owe him, absolute ruin is staring me in the
face, and you too. Don't speak, Kate; don't say any thing in a hurry;
and don't say I ask you to marry Streightley for my sake; but just
listen to the alternative. Well, suppose that you determine not to
accept Streightley;--and remember, beautiful and admired as you are,
he is the first man who has ever asked you to marry him--a pretty
strong proof, I think, of the truth of my statement that men won't
marry without money, especially if you will take the trouble to count
up the number of ugly heiresses married since you have been out, and
to several of your own admirers too;--we all go to smash here; I must
shift for myself the best way I can--get off abroad, and escape
imprisonment; though I can't escape disgrace--and never hope to show
my face in England again. And as for you, Katie, don't think me hard
or cruel--I must tell you the truth; I must tell you the whole truth,
that you may know what you really reject or accept. I see nothing for
you but becoming a companion to a lady--which I take it is the most
infernal kind of white slavery going--or being dependent on the
charity of Lady Henmarsh. You can't live with your aunt, because she
is going to live with her daughter; and you can't come abroad with me,
for many reasons, the chief being that I could not afford to take you.
Cousin Hetty is very pleasant and nice now, and a capital chaperone;
but you are, as I said before, a doosid sensible girl, and I daresay
you can guess what cousin Hetty would be to a poor relation, with a
shady father, living on her charity,--so I won't dwell upon _that_."

He paused a little, but still she did not speak. Still she looked at
him, her face white, her lips firmly closed, and the hand on the table
twitching occasionally. Once or twice there was a sound in her throat
as if she swallowed with difficulty, but she uttered no word. Mr.
Guyon felt exceedingly hot and uncomfortable, but he went on, less
glibly perhaps, and looking rather over than at her.

"The other side of the medal is this, Katie. You have the opportunity
of marrying a rich man, in an honourable and advancing position, so
desperately in love with you that you may choose your own manner of
life. He is very good-looking and well-bred, and I don't see any
reason why you may not like him quite well enough to get on with him
as happily as any woman gets on with any man. Let me tell you, my
dear, the strength of your position will be incalculably increased by
your not being in love with him; in nine cases out of ten a woman in
love with her husband bores him horribly, and brings out all the bad
points in his temper, which she might never find out, or at all events
might easily manage, otherwise. You will have every material of
reasonable happiness, and the power of indulging your tastes--and they
are not economical, Kate. And now choose for yourself; and remember I
don't play the sentimental parent, and urge you to this for my sake.
We have always been good friends, Katie, but I don't expect a
sacrifice from you; and I don't talk the absurd nonsense of
representing a splendid offer like this, involving advantages which no
girl in London knows better than yourself how to appreciate, as a
fearful trial, affording you an opportunity of performing martyrdom to
filial duty."

There was a coarse sneer in his voice, which he would have done well
to repress, which was dangerous; but his temper was getting the better
of his prudence. Katharine shrunk from the tone, and felt even in that
moment of tumultuous emotion that the love she had for her father was
but a weak affection. It was dying while he spoke, dying as her fresh
knowledge of him was born; it would soon be dead she knew, with that
other love now for ever lost to her; and only the hopeless pain, the
weariness of contempt, would live where the two honest natural
affections had sprung up, to be blighted. Mutual avoidance, something
like mutual fear, was in the faces that looked at each other, and were
so strangely like, now that the expression of each was one of its
worst. With no enviable sensations Mr. Guyon waited for Katharine to
speak. She rose from her seat before she did so; then she said:

"Mr. Streightley does not imagine that I entertain any feeling of
regard for him, I suppose?"

This was a puzzling question, and Mr. Guyon allowed the embarrassment
it caused him to be evident.

"Except as a friend of mine, and--" he stammered.

"I understand," said Katharine, and she bent her head slowly and
emphatically. "And he is willing to purchase me on those terms? It is
well the bargain should be distinctly understood."

If Mr. Guyon had ever understood, had ever cared to understand his
daughter, these words must have taught him how great a change had
passed upon her. They would have been impossible of utterance to the
Katharine of three weeks ago; but a wide gulf, never to be spanned, of
pain and injury lay between that time and the present. He felt afraid
of the girl; but rallying courage for a decisive effort, he said:

"Your answer, Katharine; you see the case as clearly as I do;--what am
I to say to Mr. Streightley?"

"Nothing," she answered, "but that I will see him myself. Tell him to
come here this evening, to-morrow, any time you please,--I will see
him, I will hear what he has to say. There must be no mistake in
_this_ case, no self-deception, no mutual deception. The truth is not
beautiful or holy, but at least it shall be told."

She left the room as soon as she had spoken the last words. Her father
remained as she had left him; an ugly dark shadow had spread itself
over his face. After some minutes he looked up, shrugged his
shoulders, and strolled over to one of the windows. He looked out idly
for a little then roused himself, and went into his own room. There he
wrote two letters, bestowing considerable: time and pains on the
first, which was addressed to Robert Streightley, but scribbling the
other off with careless rapidity. It bore Lady Henmarsh's name upon
the envelope, and contained the following words:

"DEAR HETTY,--I have done my part of this business, and _I think_
things look well. As to my having very little trouble, perhaps if you
had heard and seen, you would have continued to think so; but I should
be devilish sorry to do it over again.--Yours, E. G."


Katharine did not appear at dinner that day, and Mr. Streightley
partook of that meal, for which he had a very moderate appetite,
_tte--tte_ with her father. When the two gentlemen adjourned to the
drawing-room, Katharine was seated by the window, and they could
hardly discern her features, so rapidly was the autumn twilight
deepening into darkness. While Mr. Guyon was calling rather angrily
for lights, Robert Streightley advanced towards the motionless figure,
awaiting his greeting; and as Mr. Guyon heard his daughter reply to
the confused and agitated words which Robert addressed to her, he
started at the changed tone of the voice, as if a stranger had spoken.



END OF VOL. I.
KISSING THE ROD.




CHAPTER I.
MARTIGNY.


"I wish you were going to the wedding, dearest Hester," said Ellen
Streightley to Miss Gould, as the two girls stood in attitudes of
critical examination before a heap of gay-looking wearing-apparel,
which was destined to resolve itself into the costume of a modern
bridesmaid.

"You have said that several times already, Ellen," returned her
friend, with a touch of impatience in her voice very unusual to her.
"But you know I can't be at your brother's wedding, so there is no
good wishing about it."

"Well, I think Robert might have asked Miss Guyon for an invitation
for my dearest friend. I can't understand his standing on such extreme
ceremony with her. He really seems afraid of every mortal thing he
says and does, lest he may offend her; and I don't think she's
bad-tempered either. I'm sure I hope not, for Robert has never had to
put up with a bad temper, and he'd be sure to be miserable. O Hester!"
said Ellen, with a sudden gush of feeling, "what should we do if she
did not make Robert happy!"

Miss Gould replied in rather a hard voice: "But there's no danger of
that, is there, Ellen? Miss Guyon is very handsome, and very
fashionable, and very clever; and your brother is--what is the proper
phrase?--desperately in love with her, is he not?"

"Why, of course he is, Hester; you can see    that for yourself."

"And she is desperately in love with him, I suppose?"

"I suppose she is," said Ellen, and this time her tone was impatient;
"but no doubt fashionable people have a fashionable way of being in
love. I only know it's not mine, and it is not Decimus's, and I'm glad
of it. I wouldn't have him hesitating about what he might and what he
might not ask me to do, I can tell you, for any thing. What nonsense
it all is, as if Miss Guyon mightn't just as well make your
acquaintance now as afterwards! she will know all about you then, I
suppose."

Ellen's zeal had outrun her discretion, and told Hester Gould more
than she intended; but Hester did not take any notice of the
information she had gained, beyond one sudden gleam of anger which
shot from her shallow dark eyes.

"Mrs. Streightley is not going?" she said; and the simple girl, whom
she could always lead, was as docile as usual, and turned to the new
theme, under her guidance.

"No; mamma does not like weddings (she could not even go to Robert's,
she says) since my father died. Decimus and I go with Robert; and Mr.
Yeldham, he is to be the best man, you know; and the three other
bridesmaids are all strangers. Miss Guyon has no near relatives; she
is like me in that, but not like me in having a dear, darling Hester,
as good as any sister."

"At least as any sister-in-law, I hope," said Hester with grave
emphasis, when she had quietly submitted to the hugging with which
Ellen invariably accompanied her effusions of affection.

"Yes, indeed; a thousand times better," she impetuously exclaimed. "I
don't think my sister-in-law will ever care much for me, or I for her.
She's too grand for me, Hester, and too clever; and when I am with her
(the few times I have been), I feel afraid of her, though she is very
polite to me; but I had rather she was less polite, and more kind; but
I suppose politeness is fashionable, and kindness isn't. As to
Decimus, he is quite wretched when he is with her, because he thinks
she will make me worldly; but I am sure he needn't be afraid of that,
for I shall never like the things she cares about, and I'm sure I
shall not care for staying at Middlemeads, even if she asks me.

"It is a beautiful place, is it not?" asked Hester absently.

"Yes, lovely. Only Decimus is quite distressed about the church; it is
_high_, you know," and Ellen's voice sank into a mysterious whisper.
"He says he will feel such anxiety when I am there, lest it should be
a snare to my feet."

"Yes, yes, I know," said Hester, who was apt to weary of the Reverend
Decimus's opinions, hopes, fears, and doctrines; "but the house and
grounds, I meant. Miss Guyon has seen them, has she not?"

"No, she would not go down, though Lady Henmarsh--(she's a nice woman,
Hester, and has a way of making you feel comfortable; and Decimus has
hope of her spiritual state),--though she offered to go to
Middlemeads, and Robert would have persuaded mamma to go; but it was
all no use. And do you know what he said?--I did not like it--he said:
'When Miss Guyon says "No," Ellen, it is not you or I who will induce
her to change her mind.' I did not care about this, Hester, for my own
sake--why should she mind _me_?--but I did think she might alter a
purpose for Robert."

Miss Gould smiled--it was not a pleasant smile--but said nothing; and
then, the dress-parade completed, the two girls went downstairs to the
drawing-room, where they found Mrs. Streightley and her reverend
son-in-law expectant in placid converse.

Mrs. Streightley had accepted the intelligence of her son's intended
marriage, as she accepted every thing in which he was concerned, with
perfect confidence and approbation. Miss Guyon was his choice; she
must necessarily be as charming as she was fortunate. Miss Guyon's
manners were too finished in their elegance to render it possible for
her to treat the mother of her intended husband otherwise than with
perfect respect and courtesy. Had the Handbook of Etiquette included a
chapter devoted to the proprieties of demeanour on the part of a
daughter-in-law elect, doubtless it would have been found that Miss
Guyon's behaviour was in precise conformity with its rules. The elder
lady did not feel exactly happy or at ease in the society of the
younger, but that was her fault, not Miss Guyon's; she did not
understand fashionable people, that was all. It would be hard to part
with Robert; but was she, his mother, to murmur at, to put any
consideration in the world in comparison with, his good and happiness?
Surely not. To have been capable of doing such a thing would have
been a treason to the whole ordering of her dutiful, pious,
conscience-guided life. She was very much pleased, and perhaps a
little proud, with that beautiful vicarious pride of mothers, to think
of her son in the dignified position of a country gentleman, owning a
fine estate, and holding his head high among men. She should be glad
to see his beautiful and luxurious home; but the comfortable Brixton
villa satisfied all her individual wishes. She would not be present at
her son's wedding, she would be out of her place among the other
guests there; but he should go forth that day with his mother's
fervent blessing, and his marriage should be hallowed by her prayers.

The state of mind of the Reverend Decimus Dutton was not so calm, not
so complacent. He disapproved of the connection. It was worldly; it
was, if any thing, "high:" the family circle of the Guyons included a
bishop of ritualistic tendencies; on its outer edge to be sure, but he
was a relative; and "any thing of that kind," said Decimus to Ellen
rather vaguely, "is so very shocking." Again, the diversion of large
sums, presumably disposable for missionary purposes under happier,
"more consistent circumstances" he called them, according to a
phraseology in use among persons of his persuasion, and which is
rather oracular than grammatical, into the mundane channels attendant
on a "fashionable" marriage, was also "extremely sad." Decimus had
come up to town hoping to induce Robert to share his own burning zeal
for the mission to the Niger, and he found him engaged to a young lady
who looked extremely unlikely to approve of the diversion of any of
his wealth in a religio-philanthropical direction; and who had calmly
remarked, "Of course you would not suffer your sister to go to such a
fatal climate," on hearing that the Reverend Decimus proposed to
convey his bride to "Afric's burning plain."

The Rev. Decimus Dutton was a youngish man, with a face which would
never look much older or much wiser than it looked at present. It was
rather a handsome, and decidedly a good face; and it presented an
absurd resemblance to that of Ellen Streightley, though there was not
the slightest relationship between the amiable enthusiast and his
betrothed bride, who believed him in all simple sincerity to be the
noblest, best, handsomest of mankind. Perhaps there was a little
veneration, due to habit, which is very powerful over such minds as
Ellen Streightley's, in favour of Robert; but Decimus was decidedly
more pious, there could be no doubt of _that_. A more prejudiced, a
narrower-minded, or a better-meaning man than Decimus Dutton probably
did not exist; and so admirably matched were he and Ellen Streightley,
that those who saw their perfect adaptation to each other were apt to
be tempted into using the gentle missionary's cant phrase, and talking
of their proposed union as "providential."

"O, Decimus dear," began Ellen, as she and Hester entered the
room--Miss Streightley was apt to emphasise her speech with
interjections,--"Hester is _so_ pleased with my dress. Not that _you_
care about that; still one may as well be decent. Hester must go home
now; so just ring and send for a cab."

Then followed adieux, and Miss Gould departed. Her face was dark and
angry as she drove away; but it cleared after a little, and her
thoughts shaped themselves into these words:

"After all, no one can rule destiny; and supposing I had loved him, I
must have borne it all the same."

Hester Gould witnessed the marriage of Robert Streightley and
Katharine Guyon; not in the capacity of a guest indeed, but in that of
a spectator. It was characteristic of Hester that, though she had
determined to be present, she made her attendance at the church appear
to be the result of Ellen Streightley's importunities. That young lady
threw looks of confidence and affection, and blew kisses off her
finger-tips at her friend at furtive intervals during the ceremony,
after the fashion of the Peckham boarding-school, somewhat to the
discomposure of the devoted Decimus, who maintained a plaintive and
under-protest air throughout. Hester Gould acknowledged, with ready
acquiescence, the exceeding grace and beauty of the bride, as she
advanced with an assured and steady step, leaning on her father's arm,
and took her place before the altar-rails, where the Bishop with
ritualistic tendencies, stood ready to consecrate that awful promise
so familiar to us all, and also to realise the utmost fears of
Decimus, for his lordship read every word of the service, and wore the
fullest of canonicals. Hester bent an eager gaze upon Katharine Guyon;
but, under all its wrath and bitterness, there was the candour, there
was the justice which never failed this exceptional woman; and she
acknowledged fully and freely to her own heart the exceeding beauty of
her unconscious rival.

Katharine was paler than her wont; but her eyes shone with their
accustomed light, and her tall figure drawn up to its full height and
proudly motionless, was full of indescribable dignity and grace. The
rich folds of her dress, of lustrous white satin, with its garniture
of swansdown and its fastenings of diamonds, did not so much adorn as
they received grace from her. And the noble outline of her features
showed like that of an antique statue under the filmy bridal veil,
which softened but did not conceal them. When Hester looked from the
bride to the bridegroom, she acknowledged, too, that no external
incongruity was evident. Robert Streightley looked like a
self-possessed gentleman; not very handsome, not strikingly elegant,
but not too much inferior to the beautiful girl whom he led away, in a
few minutes, his wedded wife. It was quickly done and over, and the
crowd was pressing round the carriages, and peering into the aisle of
the church. Mr. Guyon, the very picture of gaiety and juvenility, led
out Lady Henmarsh, quite affected, and remarkably well-dressed; then
came Charles Yeldham and the bridesmaids--the unappropriated
bridesmaids, be it observed; Decimus had paired off with Ellen the
moment the bride and bridegroom had reached the church-door. Then the
general crowd drifted out; and in the porch Hester found herself face
to face with Mr. Daniel Thacker, who testified great delight at the
_rencontre_.

"You are here as a spectator, like myself, Miss Gould?" said Mr.
Thacker.

"Yes," replied Hester, "I am very much interested in this marriage.
Mr. Streightley is one of my oldest, and his sister is one of my
dearest friends."

"Just so," said Mr. Thacker. "I don't know much of Streightley; but I
know something of the bride, and more of her father. A capital match
for her and him."

"Meaning Mr. Streightley?"

"Meaning Mr. Guyon, Miss Gould. I am going to Hampstead: could I
prevail on you to visit my sisters to-day? My phaeton is at the door.
Do let me have the honour, Miss Gould; a visit from you is such a
pleasure to them."

"Thank you, no; not to-day. My time is not my own, you know, Mr.
Thacker, and I have an appointment at one o'clock a good distance from
here."

"I am so sorry, so disappointed. Perhaps later in the day; I can be at
your service at any hour."

"No, thank you." Hester smiled slowly as she spoke. "I promised to
give this evening to Miss Streightley. She will have so much to tell;
and she will come home as soon as possible after the bride and
bridegroom are gone."

"Ah, by the bye, where are they going to?"

"Where? To Paradise, of course; but _en attendant_, I believe, to
Switzerland."

And Hester Gould, who had for the first time in her life been wanting
in caution, bade Mr. Thacker "good morning;" and that gentleman
watched her as she walked away, and said under his breath:

"By Jove, she _did_ play for Streightley, and Miss Guyon beat her!"

So those twain were one flesh, and departed according to prescribed
routine for their bridal tour on the Continent. So far the contract
had been carried out, the price paid, and the goods delivered into the
carriage by Mr. Guyon, who converted a broad smile of triumph into a
doleful look of farewell; and who, as the happy pair drove away,
turned back into the dining-room to expedite the departure of his
guests, in order that he and Lady Henmarsh might have a quiet talk
together over the past and the future.

So far all had gone well, thought Robert Streightley, or rather
endeavoured to think so, but felt a sad depression and sense of
failure at his heart, as, leaning back in the railway-carriage
whirling them to Folkestone, he stole occasional glances at his bride,
who, paler but lovelier than ever, kept her eyes fixed on a book, the
pages of which she never turned, and of which she read never a line.
How much did she know, he wondered, of all that had taken place? Not
all; he himself had resolutely shrunk from hearing any thing in detail
about the transaction in which that man Frere and his proposal were
involved; and she--he knew her well enough to know that if she had the
smallest suspicion of foul play she would leave him then and there on
her marriage-day. No! she knew nothing of that,--she never should
know. But there was a something in the dead calm of her face, in the
cold clear look of her eyes, in her set lips, and in the quiet tones
of the voice in which she briefly replied to his occasional questions
after her welfare,--something that made Robert Streightley's heart
give a guilty throb, and told him that the first phase of retribution
had begun. She might live it down, it would probably pass away; under
different circumstances, and surrounded by all the luxuries that money
could purchase, the haunting memory of the past might soon be laid at
rest; but there are few men, let us hope, who on their wedding-days
have, as Robert Streightley had on his, to face the conviction that
not merely the love but the tolerance of his wife had yet to be won by
him, and that between them lay a mine, partly of his own preparation,
any accidental spark blown on to which would shatter their happiness
for ever.

And she? In a charming but perfectly natural position, her head bent
so as to screen her face as much as possible from her husband, her
eyes fixed on her book, she sat there, outwardly cold as a statue,
inwardly raging with slighted love, hurt pride, horror of the past,
and dread of the future. The occurrences of the last month, so often
revolved in her mind, were, as she sat in the railway-carriage, once
more brought out of their storehouse, and passed in dreary review:
Gordon's strange silence, his absenting himself from their house, his
abrupt departure for the Continent, her father's confession of his
embarrassments, his proposition for getting rid of them, her
friendlessness and despair, the few words spoken to her in the
deepening gloom by Robert Streightley, and her reply, which decided
all and settled her future--her future! ah, good God! Even the outward
semblance of calm was gone as the thought rushed across her; the hot
tears welled into her eyes, she set her lips tighter than ever, and
with great difficulty restrained a cry of mingled anger and despair.

There was her fate sitting opposite to her: with that man, with whom
she had not one thought in common, for whom she had, if any feeling at
all, rather a feeling of abhorrence--with him was the rest of her life
to be passed. He had bought and paid for her--paid for her? No! a
great deal of the purchase-money was yet to come, was to be placed at
her disposal; and she would take care that it was speedily spent.

It was some time, however, before she found an opportunity of spending
any of the large sum of pocket-money placed at her disposal by her
husband, so eagerly were all her wishes anticipated by him. Previous
to their marriage he had made his future bride many valuable
presents--of dressing-case, jewels, travelling-desk, and elegant
costly feminine nick-nacks--all of which had been examined, appraised,
and duly extolled by Mr. Guyon; and their bridal tour was almost as
expensive as a royal progress. In Robert Streightley the
_ober-kellner_ at the Htel Disch in Cologne found an easy prey, and
sold to him more wicker-covered bottles of the _eau_ than he had ever
previously palmed off upon any Englishman. All along the Rhine-border
the fiery cross was sent by couriers, and conductors of steam-boats,
and drivers of _eilwagens_; and the landlords of the hotels knew that
one of those _tolle Englnder_ who mind no expense was coming on, and
forthwith prices were trebled, and cellars were ransacked for the
precious wines, the Steinberger Cabinet and the Johannisberg, which
none but mad Englishmen ever pay for. No town which they stopped
at--and they stopped at nearly all, for the small amount of romance in
Katharine's nature was roused by the sight of the castles and crags,
of which in her school-girl days she had so often read; and it was the
nearest approach to pleasure which she could experience to push aside
actual practical life and he dreaming of the past--no town which they
stopped at was so poor as not to furnish some trophy for Robert
Streightley to lay at his bride's feet. Accompanied by the courier,
who made cent per cent upon every transaction, he would go blundering
through the narrow streets, looking through the windows at the wares
displayed in them, rushing in here and there, and making wild and
incongruous purchases, to the intense astonishment of the pipe-smoking
burghers, all unaccustomed to such energy. Robert Streightley's
greatest pleasure seemed to lie in purchasing presents for his wife;
and when they reached Frankfort he was never out of the jewellers'
shops on the Zeil, and his courier's whole day was taken up in running
to and fro with little packets of hirschhorn and coral trinkets.

It was at Frankfort, a month after their marriage, that they received
their first news from home. Streightley had wished to pass his
honeymoon untroubled by thoughts of business, and Katharine had been
too indifferent to give any directions about her letters; but when
Robert called on the British Consul, who was an old correspondent of
their house, he found a packet waiting for him, and hurried back with
it to Katharine. She was reading a Tauchnitz edition of a novel, and
looked languid and _distraite_.

"Here are letters from home, dearest," said Robert, rushing in with
his usual energy; "two of them for you."

She thanked him as he handed them to her, and took them without other
remark. One was from her father, full of parental gushing and
expressive of intense anxiety to see her again; the other was from
Lady Henmarsh, and was filled with the gossip and tattle of the
watering-places at which she and Sir Timothy were staying. She read
them through, placed them on the table beside her, and was reverting
to her novel, when her husband, still busily engaged in reading his
correspondence, said,

"You don't ask me who my letters are from, Kate? I thought all women
were curious in such matters."

He tried to throw a tone of raillery into his voice, poor fellow! as
he said this. It was not very successful; for no answering smile
beamed on Katharine's face, as she said,

"I thought they were business letters."

"Business letters! no, dearest; you may be sure I should not bore you
with those. Here's one from your father; but he says he has written to
you; and--yes, of course; and here's one from Ellen, my sister, full
of news. You would like to read it?" And he held it out to her.

"There seems a great deal of it," said Katharine, looking blankly at
the sheets crossed and recrossed with Miss Streightley's spidery
writing.

"Yes, there is a good deal of it; and some, perhaps, that might not
interest you. But there was one thing I wanted to tell you--O yes,
here it is. You recollect Miss Gould--Hester Gould?"

"I have heard you mention her; I never saw her."

"Never saw her? never saw Hester Gould? Dear me! How can that have
been, I wonder? Well, Ellen writes that Hester Gould's uncle is dead,
and has left her all his fortune. Hester is an heiress now; and though
of course very quiet as yet, Ellen says she thinks Hester intends what
Ellen calls 'making a splash.'"

The announcement had apparently no interest for Mrs. Robert
Streightley; for she merely said, "Indeed!" and took up her book.

What had any interest for Mrs. Robt. Streightley? In good truth,
nothing at all. Her pleasure in life seemed to have died out; and her
cavaliers of the preceding season would scarcely have recognised the
queen of the cotillion, or the beauty of the Row, in the cold
passionless woman who would sit for hours looking straight before her
without speaking a word, and only by an occasional gleam in her eyes
or a fleeting movement of the muscles of the mouth giving evidence of
existence. Her pleasure in life had faded out; and she almost hoped
that her life itself would fade out too, so hopelessly wearied of it
did she feel. "Would to God that I were dead!" was her constant cry
from the solitude of her chamber; and one night her wish was nearly
fulfilled.

They had "done" all the usual Swiss places; and at Katharine's first
and only request Robert had postponed their contemplated return home
in order that his wife might have a glimpse of Italy. They selected
the Simplon pass as the easiest, and left Chamounix in the early
morning on mules, purposing to rest that night at Martigny. Katharine
had been ailing for the last few days, but had said nothing to her
husband. Ten hours' journey on a jolting mule, the terrors of the Tte
Noire pass, despised by mountaineers, but sufficiently horrific to
young ladies out of health, and the absence of food--for it was
impossible to eat the hard goat's-flesh or to drink the sour wine put
before them at the _auberge_--finished the little strength left to
her; and as her husband lifted her from the mule at the door of the
hotel at Martigny she fainted in his arms. The kindly people of the
inn were round her in a moment, carried her to their best room, and
were unremitting in their attentions. Under restoratives Katharine
recovered for a few minutes; only to fall again into a fainting-fit so
prolonged, so deep, so dismally like death itself, that Robert,
horribly alarmed, bid them rush off and fetch the first doctor they
could find.

The doctor came; a tall thin man, with a light straw hat on his head
and buff slippers on his feet; a solemn man, who made a solemn bow,
and took his place by the side of the patient solemnly. He touched
poor Katharine's pulse; he peered into her face, and he announced that
mademoiselle--he begged pardon--madame, was not well, and that he
would send her a _tisane_. He took up his straw hat, bowed solemnly,
and went out.

Robert Streightley had stood by watching this performance with
impatience; but when the door was closed behind the doctor, Katharine
gave a long low moan, and said in answer to his fond inquiry, "O, I
shall die!" He saw that no time was to be lost in doing something more
effectual than what was proposed by M. le Docteur Grabow, and at once
summoned the landlord.

"That doctor is an idiot. Is there no other in the place?"

"But no, monsieur. And the Doctor Grabow--"

"Is there no English doctor in the hotel?"

"But no, monsieur. You and the suffering lady are all of English whom
I have now the honour to---- Ah! let us not forget! There was an
English doctor of medicine who left here yesterday morning----"

"Do you know where he has gone?"

"Certainly, monsieur,--to Geneva; did not I myself recommend him to
the Htel de l'Ecu,--me?"

"Do you know his name?"

"I can show monsieur the name in the strangers' book. It is a name of
English, which nobody but English can pronounce."

The book was brought; and five minutes after a telegram was despatched
to Dr. Hudson, at the Htel de l'Ecu, Geneva, imploring him to come
and see an English lady then lying dangerously ill at Martigny.

That night never faded out of Robert Streightley's memory. To his last
hour he recollected the dead solemn calm, broken only by an occasional
moan from the half-insensible figure on the bed, the position of the
furniture, the subjects of the prints on the walls. As he kept his
watch grim and solitary (for the doctor, after the failure of the
tisane to produce immediate cure, gave up the case and refused to
attend again); as he looked at Katharine, with her face whiter than
her night-dress, with blanched lips, and hair flung in wild disorder
over her pillow, his heart sunk within him and he shook with fear. Was
this to be the end of it? Was that lovely prize, which he had
accomplished with so much difficulty and at such a sacrifice of
principle, to be taken from him now? Was he to lose her,--to lose her
without ever having had the chance of winning her love; of letting her
see that he was something more than the mere rich City man, who had
triumphed by the influence of his money; that he worshipped her with
all his soul---- Ah! she must be spared until she had learned that!
And Robert Streightley fell on his knees by the bedside, and prayed to
God to hear his petition.

The next day at noon Dr. Hudson arrived. Katharine was at her lowest
ebb about this time, and Robert was nearly mad with anxiety; but he
derived infinite comfort from the sight of the English doctor's honest
cheery face and from the sound of his voice. A wondrous voice; so
clear and yet so soft, ringing with comfort and encouragement and
hope; a voice at the first sound of which Katharine opened her
long-closed eyes and looked with interest at the speaker--would have
spoken herself, but that Dr. Hudson raised his finger with a
cautioning gesture, and then laid it on his lip. He did not permit her
to speak until he had felt her pulse and heard the account of her
seizure from her husband; and then he only asked her a few questions
which needed very short replies. And then Dr. Hudson took Robert
Streightley into the next room, and said:

"She may recover--I think she will; but the next four-and-twenty hours
will decide."

"You--you will not leave her, doctor! Any sum which----"

"My dear sir," interrupted Dr. Hudson, laying his hand on
Streightley's arm, "I will not leave her bedside until the crisis is
over."

And he did not. Independently of the attraction of the case itself
(and Dr. Hudson loved his profession, and pursued it with an
ever-increasing fondness for its study), he found himself very much
interested in the beauty of his patient, and profoundly touched by the
adoration of her so quietly, so unceasingly shown by her husband. It
was a little new to him this worship of a woman by the man who was
legally bound to her; for Dr. Hudson lived habitually in Paris, and
had a high repute amongst the French aristocracy, amongst whom there
was indeed a great deal of the tender passion, though it generally
flowed in the wrong channels. He was pleased too with Streightley's
sound sense and straightforward honesty; and after the crisis had
passed, and Katharine was in the earliest stage of convalescence, she
would hear the doctor and her husband discussing politics, and
commerce, statistics, and science, far into the night. The doctor was
a widower, had no domestic ties, all his patients were away from
Paris; and he was so pleased with his new friends that he extended the
period of his holiday, and remained with them as their guest.

So a fortnight passed, at the end of which Katharine was pronounced in
a fit state to journey homeward; and they started, travelling by easy
stages to Paris, where they remained three days. At the "Nord"
railway-station, just before their train left for Paris, Dr. Hudson
bade them farewell.

"Remember!" said he, holding Katharine's hand, "I've seen you in an
important crisis of your life, and I want to be associated with it!
I'm an odd old fellow, with no one to care for or to be cared for by,
and I've taken a fancy to you and your husband. If ever you're very
ill, or in any state in which you think I can be of service to you,
you'll promise to let me know?"

Robert was settling the wraps in the carriage; but Katharine pressed
the doctor's hand, and said, "I promise you."

The next moment the whistle sounded, and the train moved on.

When and where was that promise kept?




CHAPTER II.
AT MIDDLEMEADS.


Cultivated taste and the tender sentiment which finds delightful
occupation in preparing a house for a beloved object had not been
called into operation in the arrangement and decoration of the abode
to which Robert Streightley brought his bride in the early spring
which succeeded their marriage. These motive powers had, however, been
efficiently replaced by the care and experience of a first-rate London
upholsterer; and a more refined and _exigeant_ taste than that of the
young mistress of Middlemeads might have pronounced a favourable
judgment upon the result. There was, indeed, nothing ancient about the
mansion but the mansion itself. Its family associations were all with
those from whose keeping it had passed, and by the change had lost the
subtle touch of dignity which lingers about a residence within whose
walls many lines of the same race have begun and ended. It had none of
those grand though dingy _pieces de famille_ which lent an air of
refinement and meaning to the faded house in Queen Anne Street; but it
was a home which any man might be proud to inaugurate--a home to which
all these things might be suitably added in time. Seen as Katharine
Streightley saw it first, with the tender glory of the spring upon the
woods, with the sunshine pouring down upon the grand old faade, and
the joyous music of innumerable birds piercing the pure air, her new
home elicited an exclamation of delighted surprise from her, which was
eagerly welcomed by Robert. He had seen but rarely of late any
evidence of the enthusiasm and freshness of heart which had been among
the first and most potent of Katharine's charms for him. He had looked
for them in vain when new scenes and new impressions might have been
expected to call them forth during their travels; but they had
rewarded his search so rarely, that he had begun to wonder if he was
ever again to see that peculiar smile, like sudden sunshine, in the
eyes whose beauty had grown sombre of late, or to recognise that keen
trill of girlish pleasure in the voice whose refined intonation had
acquired depth and seriousness since he had heard it first. Robert
Streightley knew very little of the woman he had married, as little of
her strength as of her weakness; and the passionate ardour of his love
for her, the undiminished admiration with which he regarded her, were
accompanied with all the interest and curiosity attendant upon a new
study. His narrow experience of life, his little knowledge of women,
preserved him from much pain in the present at least. It never
occurred to him to impute the alteration in Katharine to its true
source. He had taken Mr. Guyon's word for the trifling nature of the
sentiment entertained by his daughter for Gordon Frere, though even at
that period it is probable he would have hesitated at taking Mr.
Guyon's word upon any other subject; and though he could not deceive
himself so far as to believe that his beautiful wife reciprocated the
feelings with which he regarded her, he never ceased to hope that in
time she would come to love him. At least he would deserve her love,
if unlimited indulgence, if ceaseless observance, if the gratification
of every wish, every fantasy could merit it. At least he would
atone---- And when Robert's meditations reached that point they were
apt to become very uncomfortable, and he would fall back upon the
recollection of his wealth, and of all that he intended to do with it
solely for Katharine's benefit and pleasure, and he would say in his
heart, "At all events, Frere could have given her nothing that she
values; for she likes luxury and pleasure--she is quite a woman of the
world." In saying which he, the poor fellow, believed he passed an
eulogium upon her; for that "world," seen through the medium of his
passion, had quite bewildered his fancy and obscured his judgment.

It was, therefore, with intense pleasure that Robert observed the glow
of satisfaction, the eager alacrity with which Katharine inspected the
house and grounds; that he noted the bright eyes and glowing smiles
with which she praised all the arrangements made for her comfort, and
approved of the scale and order of the household. The irrepressible
girlishness of her age aided her in these circumstances. It was quite
impossible not to feel pride and delight in such possessions; and she
felt them to the full. Ignorant as she had been of the real state of
her father's affairs, and guiltless of the false pretences of their
life in London, she had always had a vague sense of insecurity; she
had always been annoyed by a dearth of ready-money; she had constantly
found herself wishing papa would give her a cheque when she went out
shopping, and would not oblige her to remain so long and so deeply in
her milliner's debt; and now she felt the contrast in the sense of an
unexplained but intense relief. The perfect order, the luxury, the
quiet of her house, the beauty of the gardens and the woods, the
deference, the observance with with which she was treated--differing
widely from the capricious caresses of her father, under which her
keen intelligence detected the unscrupulousness, selfishness, and
the contempt for her sex from which her pride and her delicacy
revolted--the novel sense of the importance of her position,--all
these united to rouse Katharine from the coldness and bitterness of
feeling which had succeeded the awakening from her love-trance. She
thought in after-days that during the time which immediately succeeded
her arrival at Middlemeads she had not been far from loving her
husband. Certain it is that she thought less of her false lover, that
she nourished her anger against him less sedulously, that she fed less
upon the poisonous fruit of pride, rage, and mortification. She took
pleasure in the beauty and luxury which surrounded her: she owed it
all to Robert; she could hardly look upon and enjoy it without feeling
some gratitude to the giver, without some softening of the pride of
her resentful heart, without some more tender and womanly sentiment
than that she had purchased all this at the price of herself, and it
was but her right. The love which she could not deny, which she was
forced to acknowledge, to wonder at every day since she had been
Robert's wife, had at first inspired her only with contemptuous
wonder; she treated it with disdain in her thoughts, as another proof
of the reckless selfishness of men. Here was one ready and willing to
pay any price for the gratification of a fancy. So much the better! He
had his reward; and her father's needs were supplied, and her defeat
and mortification covered by the same means. But was she bound to feel
any affection or gratitude to this man in consequence? He loved her
for his own sake, not for hers; it was a selfish passion, and he was
rich enough to buy its object; that was all. It suited her to be sold;
and there was the whole transaction. Love and gratitude had no part in
it, could never have any part in any thing in which she should be
concerned any more. Gordon Frere was a poor man, she believed: well,
she could have been grateful to him if he had shared his narrow means
with her, and incurred the anger of his family for her sake; she could
have been very happy and very good. But what was the use of thinking
of these things? He had only amused himself with her. Was she to be
grateful to this man, who had merely purchased her, as he might have
purchased any other expensive object which it pleased him to possess.
They would get on very well together, no doubt. She had no fear of any
disagreements; she trusted, with reason, in her own high breeding and
her entire indifference; and then rich people never need quarrel and
be disagreeable to each other, the restrictions of life were not for
them; finally, it did not much matter, after all. Katharine believed
that she had discovered life to be a swindle, and that she should
never more be deceived. This was already a sufficiently lamentable
effect of the disappointment she had sustained. With such a character,
what might not result from a discovery of the whole truth--from a
discovery that the man she loved had never been false to her, and that
the marriage into which she had entered in self-defence was the basest
of transactions!

For the present no such discovery was within the reach of calculation
or apprehension, and Robert revelled in the new-born graciousness of
Katharine's manner and in the revival of her girlish brightness. A
little sense of duty now; a little of that training in principle, that
discipline in well-doing, which only a mother's care, or that of a
woman fitted to replace a mother, can bestow; and a life of happiness
and usefulness might have begun for Katharine. But all such influences
were wanting; and the instincts for good which made themselves heard
occasionally in her tempestuous soul were but impulses--they had no
root in themselves, and they withered away. The future process by
which they were to be planted, and watered, and given increase, would
be full of pain no doubt, as every such process of cultivation of the
human soul must be; in those early days at Middlemeads it had not
begun. The joyous, gracious manner which shed sunshine into her
husband's heart was but the ebullition of Katharine's girlish
pleasure, and the natural demonstration of a perfectly well-bred
woman, to whom it was pleasant to be gracefully grateful, and to whom
polished prettiness of speech was "free as bird on branch." It
sufficed to create an Elysium for Robert, who found it easy to
accommodate himself to the change in all his habits and in his manner
of living, and to whom each day brought a renewed opportunity of
ministering to his wife's tastes and pleasures.

Among the earliest of their visitors was Ellen Streightley, who had
received a polite invitation from Katharine, a few days after her
arrival in England. This invitation had included Mrs. Streightley; but
there had been no serious wish on the part of Katharine that it should
be accepted, and a satisfactory conviction that there was no danger of
such an event. Any thing like _rapprochement_ between his mother and
his wife was beyond Robert's expectation, almost beyond his desire.
They belonged to two distinct worlds of thought, feeling, habits, and
ideas; and though he comprehended the fact rather by instinct than by
perception, he did comprehend it too fully to be led into any danger
of making an effort to bring them together, which must be
unsuccessful, and might be disastrous. Mrs. Streightley's naturally
quiet temper had made her accept Robert's marriage with tranquil
acquiescence. Her son would be less widely parted from her than most
sons from their mothers, under such circumstances; they would still
have many subjects of common interest, and she must be content with
that. She had never seriously expected that Robert would make a
selection from their narrow circle; she had not expected that he would
be attracted by the Miss Pratts and the Miss Perkinses of the Brixton
connection, who exchanged patterns for Berlin-wool work and manuscript
music with Ellen, who wore Oxford-Street bonnets, and took notes of
Sunday's sermon and Wednesday evening's lecture. She had been content
so long as Robert made no choice at all, but devoted himself
exclusively to his business; and now that he had chosen a beautiful,
fashionable young lady, whose habits, whose pursuits, whose very
speech was all but unintelligible to her, she would be content still.
Her religious principles were largely assisted by her natural
temperament; and their combined action made her the most inoffensive,
the most distant, and the most silent of mothers-in-law.

"But you have never seen my fine country-house, mother; you will
surely come and see it," Robert remonstrated, when his mother
requested him to bear her excuses to Katharine.

"I shall see it in time, my dear," she answered, "never fear; but you
must let me have my own way; you know I have always had it;" and she
smiled gently, with the touching smile of the old looking back upon
the past "Your wife must have many friends whom she wishes to see. I
could neither bear to find myself among fine people, to whom I am
totally unaccustomed, nor to feel that I was excluding her friends.
You will be constantly in town, Robert, and you will come and see me
very often." And then she began to speak of his health, to inquire
into the details of Katharine's illness at Martigny; and Robert saw
that the matter must remain as it was for the present. It was,
however, decided that Ellen should accept Katharine's invitation; and
accordingly she made her appearance at Middlemeads within a fortnight
of Katharine's installation in her new house. It would have needed a
less kindly nature than Katharine's--in which, perverted as it was,
true womanly feeling had its place--to resist the frank and innocent
gaiety of Ellen, the _naf_ pleasure which she showed in the
inspection of the house, her admiration of the luxurious furniture,
and her surprise at finding herself in a scene of such unaccustomed
splendour, and yet, after a fashion, at home there. All this was her
brother's--all this was Robert's, who had been so well content with
the modest comfort of the Brixton villa; and the beautiful young woman
who had inspired him with tastes thus gratified, and admitted him into
a circle of society of which Ellen had never before had even a
glimpse, was her own sister-in-law. She had a kind of prescriptive
right to be intimate with her; she wondered whether she might venture
to call her "Katharine." Not on the first day of her visit certainly;
for though Katharine was perfectly polite, there was no approach to
familiarity in her manner; and she inquired, at luncheon, whether
"Miss Streightley" would drive, in a tone which seemed to render any
such sisterly appellations as "Ellen" and "Katharine" hopeless. But
this did not last: they were, after all, two young girls; and the very
superiority of intellect and of breeding, of which Katharine was
conscious, made her readier to thaw towards Ellen, whose admiration of
her brother's beautiful wife was as sincere and single-hearted as it
was warm and humble. The warnings of the Rev. Decimus lost their power
over the girl's imagination; she yielded to the charm which Katharine
exercised over all whom she chose to attract, and was almost as much
dazzled as her brother. To Robert the good understanding which
subsisted between the two was a source of the purest pleasure; he
loved his sister dearly, and he had a sense of her piety, her
gentleness, her humility of mind, and the beneficence of such an
influence, though he had never defined these things to his own mind or
reasoned upon them. On the whole, these early days at Middlemeads were
good days; they were a fair seedtime, and the harvest might have been
blessed; but the enemy had sown the tares early, and they were
destined to flourish in sinister strength.

As for Katharine, the genuine affection and admiration with which her
sister-in-law regarded her soon began to be sweet and precious to her;
her former life had been isolated from all such ties of girlish
friendship and confidence, and she had despised them in theory,
holding them among the missish follies which she laughed at and held
herself above. She had aspired to the reputation of a woman of the
world, and she had attained it; and in right of it had no intimacies
except of convenience, and no relations with her own sex except
those of the most superficial social observance. To Katharine,
therefore--who had not, since she left the elegant establishment in
which she had acquired all the graces with which nature had not
previously supplied her, had any more congenial companion for the
hours not absolutely demanded by society than Lady Henmarsh--the
novelty of such a friendship as that offered her by Ellen Streightley
possessed an ineffable charm. The purity, the simplicity, the very
narrowness of the girl's mind pleased her; the unquestioning
submission with which she received her opinions, the unqualified
admiration which she evinced in every look and word, conveyed, by
their simple sincerity, the subtlest charm of flattery. Katharine felt
that Ellen's presence did her good; that the peace of mind which
pervaded her diffused a tranquil and wholesome atmosphere around her:
she did not know whence came the salutary influence; she had never
been taught to recognise piety and principle by their peaceable
fruits; but she felt all that she did not analyse; and above all she
became conscious that she was beginning to live less for herself--that
she was acquiring new, unselfish, and harmless interests. Her heart
had begun to soften in those days; she was won by the artless
confidence of the girl to whom she was an object of wondering
admiration, and the wrath and bitterness of her soul began to subside.

The last thing in the world to occur to such a mind as that of Ellen
Streightley would have been such a possibility as a marriage without
perfect affection and confidence. She had never met with an instance
of any thing so dreadful and unnatural out of a novel; and the Rev.
Decimus disapproved of novels, so that she had discontinued their
perusal, and had even had the hardihood to endeavour to induce
Katharine to do likewise, and to substitute the interesting details of
the _Missionary Record_, over which she was accustomed to shiver and
cry a good deal. Thus, Ellen never doubted for a moment that
Katharine's had been, in the language of young ladies, "a love-match;"
and the matter-of-course way in which she took this for granted,
founded all her talk to Katharine upon it, and treated her brother and
his wife as absolutely one in undivided interest and unreserved
confidence, though, no doubt, a conclusive evidence of Ellen's own
dullness of perception, had all the good effect which an opposite
quality, and the exercise of the most perfect tact, could have
produced. It was impossible to resist the influence of this frank and
perfect belief in the mutual good faith of their relation; it was
impossible to resist the gay and happy simplicity which persisted in
believing in its ideal; and, but for the sore spot in Katharine's
heart, so obstinately hidden, and the sorer spot in Robert's
conscience, which ever and anon pained him horribly and vainly, the
angel of peace might have found an abiding resting-place with them
then. The soft rustle of his wings was often audible to both in those
early days; to which they were destined to look back in the future
with vain yearning and regret.


"Were you not surprised, Robert, to hear of Hester's good fortune?"
said Ellen Streightley to her brother one morning, as the little
party were engaged in the pleasing occupation of reading their
letters, of which an unusually large number had been laid upon the
breakfast-table.

"Yes," said Robert, raising his eyes from a letter which he had been
reading with a moody and troubled expression. "Yes, I was indeed, and
very much pleased. She was an admirable example of industry and
courage. I never could bear to think of a woman having to work; that
is a man's part in life. Is your letter from Hester?" he asked, in a
tone of interest.

"O yes," said Ellen; "Hester is just the same to me as ever, though
Matilda Perkins said she wouldn't be, and I must be very silly to
imagine a rich heiress would care about me. I can't think how people
can be so mean; can you, Robert? Only fancy any one imagining that
money can influence people in that way! I am ashamed to say she made
me feel almost afraid of Hester; and I cannot tell you how relieved I
was when I found her just the same. I was very near confessing to her
that I had wronged her in my thoughts; but then I knew they were not
my thoughts, but Matilda Perkins's; and I had no business to tell
her sins, you know; and after all, perhaps she was not so much to
blame,--she did not know Hester as well as I do."

Katharine, who had laid aside her letters, and was now busily
crumbling bread into a saucer half-full of cream--an operation which
her beautiful little Maltese dog, Topaze, watched with placid but
appreciative interest--smiled at the ingenious eagerness with which
Ellen sought to exculpate one friend and to exalt another. Robert's
attention strayed from his sister; his eyes were following the
movements of his wife's slender fingers. She placed the saucer on the
ground and called her dog.

"Here, Topaze, come and eat your breakfast!--And now, Ellen, tell me
all about this wonderful Miss Gould. She is tremendously rich, isn't
she, and very handsome, blue, and _bel esprit_, and all the rest of
it?"

Ellen looked rather puzzled as she said, "Hester is very rich,
certainly; but I am not sure about her being very handsome; she always
seemed so to me, of course--but then I knew her so well."

"And every one is handsome whom you know well?" said Katharine
laughing. "What a beauty your brother must be, and Mr. Dutton, and
I--after a while, when you know me long enough!"

"You know quite well that you are a beauty now and always, to me and
to every one," said Ellen with beaming eyes; "and it is wicked of you
to laugh at me because I cannot exactly express what I mean. Hester is
not beautiful like you, so that every one must acknowledge and no one
can deny her beauty; but I love her face. And she is very clever,
wonderfully clever. Robert, have you never told Katharine about
Hester? She used to be quite one of ourselves, you know. She knows all
about you, Katharine, and takes the greatest interest in you."

"Does she?" said Katharine with rather a vacant smile.

"O yes; and--Katharine," said Ellen timidly, "I should so like
her to know you, I should so like my two best friends to be
acquainted--and--and she is so accustomed to be with me and
Robert--and I have told her so much about Middlemeads, that--if you
don't think I take a liberty in asking you----"

"You would wish me to invite Miss Gould here, you mean, my dear
Ellen?" said Katharine with her most graceful air; "and you stammer
about it as if I were a tigress, and you were afraid to ask so
trifling a favour in your brother's house. You are a dear silly little
goose,--go pluck one of your own quills, and send off your invitation
to your friend immediately. Ask her for Tuesday--Lady Henmarsh comes
to-morrow, and we must have her and Sir Timothy _cass_ before any one
else arrives."

Katharine rose as she spoke, and Ellen did the same, turning with
sparkling eyes to her brother.

"O, Robert, do you hear what Katharine says?" she exclaimed. "She
desires me to invite Hester to Middlemeads; and I hardly dare tell you
how I longed for her to come here. Is she not kind?"

"Yes, indeed," said Robert; but he spoke rather absently. "She is--I
am sure we shall be delighted to see Hester here."

"Come, Ellen," said Katharine; "I am going to look after my hyacinths:
leave your brother to his letters, and come with me."

A minute later the two girls passed by the window of the room in which
Robert sat, still engaged in what was apparently no pleasant task. He
looked up as their voices caught his ear, drew near to the window, and
followed the graceful figures with thoughtful, regretful eyes, until
they disappeared. Then he sighed deeply, and gathering up his papers
left the room.

Half an hour later Robert sought his wife and sister in the garden,
and found them in deep conversation with the gardener, a Scotchman of
unparalleled skill and obstinacy.

"I beg your pardon, Katharine," he said, "but I overlooked this letter
this morning. It is from your father, enclosed to me, from Paris. It
must have fallen out when I opened his."

"Thank you," said Katharine carelessly, as she took the note from his
hand and stuck it into her belt; then resumed her conversation with
the gardener. Ellen felt rather surprised that Katharine could
possibly defer the reading of a letter from her father, and recurred
to the matter again as she sat down to her desk to enjoy the delight
of sending off the longed-for invitation to Hester Gould. She had seen
Mr. Guyon at his daughter's wedding, but only on that occasion, and
she had not been particularly attracted by him.

"Could it be possible that he was not kind to Katharine, and that she
is not very fond of him?" thought the guileless Ellen, to whom any
perversion of the relations and duties of life was almost
inconceivable and incredible. She shook her simple head gravely at the
suspicion, and then proceeded to write a gushing letter to Miss Gould,
in answer to that which she had received, and in which, had she
indulged a second person with its perusal, that individual would have
discerned a very distinct intimation that the writer expected and
exacted from Ellen that she should obtain precisely such an invitation
as Katharine had so readily and gracefully suggested.




CHAPTER III.
HARDENING.


"My dear Kate, what a perfect paradise of a place you have here!" said
Lady Henmarsh to her young hostess, when, having made a tour of
inspection of the house, the two ladies found themselves alone in
Katharine's morning-room. "I had no notion Mr. Streightley meant to
_mner grand train_ after this fashion. You are a fortunate girl,
Kate, and I hope you understand and appreciate your luck."

Lady Henmarsh spoke with the accent of strong conviction, and looked
around her approvingly as she did so. She and Sir Timothy had arrived
by a midday train from London: the first hours after their arrival
had been passed in the manner usual on similar occasions,--in seeing
the house, dawdling about the gardens, and inspecting the hothouses;
and now the moment had arrived which Katharine and her guest had each
felt disposed to defer as long as possible--that of a _tte--tte_,
in which the discussion of the past and present must necessarily have
its place.

Katharine was standing by a window which opened like a door upon a
small perfectly-kept flower-garden, and looking musingly out upon the
fair expanse of park and woodland which stretched away into the
distance. Lady Henmarsh was looking at her with more curious scrutiny
than she had ventured to indulge in in the presence of others; and the
result of her examination was, that Katharine was more beautiful than
ever. The assured demeanour, the perfect gracefulness, the lofty ease
of manner, which had been perhaps a little too pronounced in the girl,
were perfectly in their place as attributes of the young matron, who
did the honours of her splendid house with faultless elegance and
_aplomb_. The taste and richness of her dress, the judicious
assortment of her ornaments, the air of dignity and calm which dwelt
about her, made her indeed a being to be regarded with almost
wondering admiration. And Lady Henmarsh admired and wondered--wondered
how she liked it all; wondered how she and Robert got on together;
whether he was afraid of Katharine (she put the question to herself in
just such plain words),--thought it very likely, all things
considered; wondered whether Katharine ever heard of Gordon Frere, and
what she thought of him if she did; and finally wondered whether she
might venture to question her on these points: but while the thought
passed through her mind the answer passed through it also, and Lady
Henmarsh knew perfectly well that she would never dare to mention
Frere's name to Mrs. Streightley.

"This room is perfectly exquisite," Lady Henmarsh began again; "and I
suppose you keep it strictly to yourself; that you give audience here,
queen of Middlemeads, when it suits you; but shut out the profane
vulgar,--eh, Kate?"

"Yes," answered Katharine carelessly; "it is a pretty room, and I use
it a great deal,--that is to say, Ellen and I."

"Ellen and you!" repeated Lady Henmarsh with profound astonishment.
"You don't mean to tell me, Katharine, that you have really taken to
be intimate with that uninteresting creature--that sheep-like young
lady, the veriest type of the most detestable class of society girls
that I have ever encountered! A silly, pious, underbred girl, engaged
to a vulgar missionary preacher! Really you amaze me, Kate. Perhaps,"
she said, with a covert glance at Katharine, and a strong effort
to be perfectly familiar and natural, dictated by an instinctive
feeling that she had lost ground with one whom she had formerly
influenced--"perhaps you are doing the model wife, acting on the
'love-me-love-my-dog' principle, and cultivating this very modest
flower for her brother's sake. If so, I admire you for it, Katharine.
I am glad to see you have a due sense of the value of 'thorough' in
you; there is no more precious quality; but I confess I did not expect
it."

Katharine had fixed her large bright eyes upon Lady Henmarsh at the
beginning of this speech with an expression of cold surprise, which
succeeded in making the speaker feel very uncomfortable before she
reached the end of it. A few moments elapsed before Katharine answered
gravely:

"Miss Streightley is a person whom I like and _esteem_. I fear I shall
never imitate her good qualities; but I am glad to know that I have at
least the grace to admire them. Of course, as Mr. Streightley's
sister, I should have shown her every attention; but such a duty soon
became a pleasure."

Katharine spoke in a cold and dignified tone, which produced an
exceedingly unpleasant effect upon Lady Henmarsh, whose face assumed a
certain comical expression, suggestive of an instantly-repressed
inclination to whistle. Her feeling towards Katharine had always
hovered on the borders of dislike; but from the present moment it
crossed them, and she never tried to deceive herself more about its
nature. She had been a party to the wound inflicted upon the pride of
this haughty woman; she had witnessed her suffering, had spoken to her
of her humiliation, had had cognisance of the "transaction" of this
marriage; and Katharine would never forgive her. In her she would find
a polished, hospitable, and attentive hostess, observant of every
social duty, and resolute against every attempt on her part to
reestablish an intimacy which had never been more than superficial and
of convenience. Lady Henmarsh perceived the state of the case clearly;
but as she had no feelings to be hurt in the matter, she took very
kindly to a hearty dislike of Katharine.

"It is a comfort to know that Ned has got what he wanted, at all
events," she thought, as she looked at the moody frown which had come
over Katharine's countenance as she spoke the last sentences; "and if
she's fool enough to _filer le parfait amour_ with this City lout and
all his kin, or hypocrite enough to pretend to do so, so much the
better,--things will be easier for Ned, and that's the main point."

But Lady Henmarsh said aloud, and with the most perfect suavity,

"My dear Katharine, you are surely not so silly as to suppose I blame
you for any attention to Mr. Streightley's sister. I daresay I shall
like her very much when I know her better; and I'm sure it's quite
charming to find you getting on so admirably with your people-in-law.
And now, I think, having seen as much of your beautiful house as I can
manage for to-day, I will disappear until dinner-time. I must look
after Sir Timothy. Thank you, dear; I know my way to my rooms. How
delightfully you have chosen for me, Kate! just the situation and
aspect I like best. Sir Timothy is perfectly charmed."

Lady Henmarsh, safely secluded within her own apartment, proceeded to
indite a piquant epistle to her "cousin Ned," in which she painted the
Streightley _mnage_ in colours highly agreeable to that gentleman's
feelings, and indulged herself with some of the ridicule of Ellen and
her brother, whose flow had been so peremptorily arrested by
Katharine. She knew that it would be rather agreeable than otherwise
to Mr. Guyon to be told, on the authority of an eye-witness, that his
daughter was perfectly happy; so she gave him that pleasant assurance,
inquired affectionately when he proposed coming to witness the
felicity of Middlemeads in person, and hinted that his presence would
add considerably to the attractions of that sojourn in her own
estimation.

Robert's reception of Sir Timothy and Lady Henmarsh had been all that
the most exacting guests could desire. The poor fellow felt unbounded
gratitude towards Lady Henmarsh, who had, as he said to himself,
"always been his friend,"--gratitude which it was a pleasure and a
relief to him to feel,--gratitude which he could not extend to Mr.
Guyon,--no; he was an accomplice, not a friend; and the tie between
them was, one of pain, which made itself felt, and of shame, to which
no effort, no triumph, could render him insensible. He was totally
ignorant of Lady Henmarsh's complicity in Mr. Guyon's manoeuvres; he
knew only that he had received the warmest welcome from her when his
pretensions were announced; that she had appeared to regard his
marriage as all that it should be; and even now that the prize was
won, the treasure he had paid so high a price for all his own, he
attached an unreasonable importance to Lady Henmarsh's presence, to
her approbation. He did not say so in plain terms to himself; but he
felt that she would support his cause with Katharine, that she would
lend him additional importance. In the timidity of his sore
conscience, he felt that it was a great thing to be strengthened by
the presence of a person unconscious and unsuspicious of the means by
which his success had been effected, and who had welcomed it on its
own merits. So little did he understand his wife's proud isolation of
heart, that he mistook her courtesy to her guest for respect for her
opinion, and looked to Lady Henmarsh's aid in gaining Katharine's
heart as ardently as he had hailed her support in his suit for her
hand.

The truth was just the opposite of that which Robert believed it to
be. From the moment Lady Henmarsh arrived at Middlemeads, Katharine's
mood underwent a change unfavourable to the prospect of domestic
happiness which had begun to dawn upon her. An atmosphere of
heartlessness and worldliness surrounded this woman; and then she was
associated in Katharine's mind with all the bitterness and humiliation
of the past. The pain, now grown almost old, began to revive again;
the restlessness and weariness of spirit, the terrible anger, the
unavailing self-contempt, which rendered Katharine unapproachable to
all, despite her suave and gracious manner, and especially to him who
had afforded her the occasion to incur it. These feelings did not
return in their intensity all at once; but their first approach to the
invasion of Katharine's heart was made when the girl perceived the
hardly veiled contempt with which her _ci-devant_ chaperone regarded
her spontaneous effort to be good and happy. It needed little to turn
the balance in which the fate of Robert and Katharine Streightley hung
at that moment, and Lady Henmarsh's disdainful touch did it. Not
directly--she had no direct influence with Katharine now--but
indirectly, by the pain of humiliating association, by the sudden
revival of the old bitterness, and the sense that all this was but a
sordid bargain after all. The evil leaven began its work when Lady
Henmarsh left Katharine, still standing by the window of her morning
room, in the self-same attitude in which she had stood by the window
in Queen Anne Street, and watched in vain for the coming of Gordon
Frere. She moved away at length, with a restless and impatient sigh,
and went to seek for Ellen.

Ellen Streightley had been rather frightened by Lady Henmarsh, whose
rapid talk on a variety of subjects removed from Ellen's comprehension
and experience had oppressed her considerably. She had accordingly
kept out of the way, since she had contrived to make her escape during
the tour of inspection; and Katharine ultimately discovered her in a
quiet corner of the library, deeply engaged in the manufacture of an
unspeakably hideous pair of embroidered slippers. She laid aside her
work at Katharine's approach, and they proceeded to discuss the time
and manner of Miss Gould's expected arrival on the ensuing day, Ellen
losing herself in conjectures as to what Katharine would think of
Hester, and what Hester would think of Katharine. She had most of the
discourse to herself, and also enjoyed a secret satisfaction in the
reflection that to-morrow she would have her friend--a more important
person than Lady Henmarsh--too, to make a fuss about. She wondered how
Robert could like that woman so much, and be so deferential to her;
she might be very grand and all that, but she had a way of making
people feel small and uncomfortable, which was not like a real
lady--not like dear Katharine, for instance; however, there was one
comfort, she could not put down Hester.

"Is Miss Gould likely to marry, Ellen?" asked Katharine in the course
of their conversation. "It would be a terrible take-in for the
fortune-hunters, you know, or rather you don't know, if the prize of
the season were found to be already won."

Ellen looked at her sister-in-law with the half-solemn, half-stupid
gaze habitual to her when she was puzzled. Katharine had never uttered
any such _banale_ sarcasm to her before; that she did so now was the
first symptom of the evil influence that was upon her.

"No," said Ellen slowly; "I do not think Hester ever cared for any
one; she gave all her mind, she used to say, to her work. But O,
Katharine, how nice it is to think that she can marry a man as poor as
Decimus now, if she likes!--that is the only thing that makes it worth
while to be an heiress, is it not?"

"I am not sure of that, Ellen," said Katharine; "it is a great
recommendation certainly, but heiress-ship has some other advantages
too. But there's the first bell; let us go and make ourselves
beautiful for Sir Timothy."

"And for Robert, Katharine," said Ellen archly; "but you are always
beautiful for _him_."

"Ay, she may marry a poor man if she likes," thought Robert's wife, as
she sat before a long glass in her room, and looked at her beautiful
face framed in the unbound masses of her glossy hair. "She may buy,
instead of being bought--that's all the difference; the distinction is
valuable, however."

          *           *           *           *           *

Robert Streightley drove his sister to the station where he and
Yeldham had hired a trap on the occasion of their visit to
Middlemeads, to meet her friend on the day following Lady Henmarsh's
arrival. The drive was a pleasant one, for Ellen talked of Katharine,
with only occasional and brief interludes and digressions in favour of
the absent missionary; and Robert was ready to extend his sympathy to
his sister to a degree which would have seemed incredible to him a
short time before. He was very happy that day; his face showed the
gladness that was at his heart, as it reflected the smile with which
Katharine had nodded a farewell to him and Ellen, as the open carriage
passed the window where she was standing with her little white dog in
her arms. How bright and beautiful and girlish she looked! he thought;
how truly she harmonised with all around her! surely she was happy
now--happier than at first.

"There's the smoke, Nelly; we are just in time," said Robert; and in
another minute they were on the platform, and Ellen had caught sight
of Hester's dark eyes, with a smile of recognition in them, as the
train came slowly up, and stopped. Robert stood aside while the two
women exchanged their greeting, after the manner characteristic of
each; and during that brief interval he regarded Hester with some
interest and curiosity. He had not seen her since she had so
unexpectedly inherited her uncle's wealth,--he had hardly thought of
her; the old time in which they had been familiar, if not intimate,
seemed very far past now; he had lived all of his life that had been
worth living since then. It occurred to him now for the first time
that it might be curious to see how this young woman had borne a
transition which could hardly fail to be trying. In the first place,
he recognised that Hester Gould was elegantly dressed. He had become
skilful in such observation now; he who had not formerly had an idea
on the subject, and could not have told whether his sister was attired
in velvet or cotton; but his close attention to every thing in which
Katharine was concerned or interested, his ceaseless admiration of
her, his keen perception of every thing which adorned the beauty which
he worshipped, had educated his eyes, and he perceived at once that
Hester's toilette was perfect in its taste and appropriateness.
Nothing appeared in her which could annoy Katharine's refined ideas;
not the least touch of vulgarity, not the most transient embarrassment
or pretension of manner, nothing to convey the smallest suggestion of
the _nouveau riche_. With the same frank courtesy that she had
displayed in their former relations Miss Gould received her host's
welcome; with precisely the correct degree of interest she inquired
for Mrs. Streightley; and with a totally unchanged manner she entered
into conversation with Ellen, during the necessary delay which took
place while the servants were securing the luggage.

As they drove to Middlemeads, Robert talked with his guest of the
country around, of the gentlemen's seats which they passed, of the
Buckinghamshire backwoods, and other topics appropriate to the
occasion, but which had little interest for Ellen, who was anxious to
put one of her idols _en rapport_ with the other as soon as possible.
Hester had said something very civil, and perfectly sincere, about the
pleasure she anticipated from seeing Middlemeads, and was listening
attentively to Robert's anecdotes of the historical importance of the
place, when Ellen said, in her peculiar interjectional fashion,

"O yes, it's all most delightful, and ever so grand, Hester; so
different, you know, to Brighton and that, that I really should have
been half afraid of it if it hadn't been for Katharine. She is so
delightful, you can't think, Hester. I think she could make a cabin
feel like a palace. I do so long for you to see her."

"You forget that I have already seen Mrs. Streightley several times,
Ellen; and I cannot believe that my admiration can be increased on
better acquaintance."

Robert looked delighted, but surprised; and was just about to speak,
when Ellen began again.

"Yes, yes, I remember; you saw her at the famous _fte_--that _fte_
which I shall always think, in spite of Decimus, a most fortunate and
praiseworthy piece of worldliness and dissipation, for there Robert
fell in love with Katharine, and there I am sure Katharine fell in
love with him, though I have never got her to tell me any thing about
it--I suppose it's not the correct thing among fashionable people to
talk about falling in love!--and then you just had a glimpse of her on
her wedding-day; but I mean I want you to see her constantly in her
own house, and to admire her as we do."

"I could hardly venture to do that, Ellen," said Miss Gould, in a tone
which conveyed the lightest possible suggestion of ridicule of Ellen's
enthusiasm, and would, therefore, have betrayed to any one thoroughly
acquainted with Hester--supposing such an individual to exist--that
her temper was momentarily disturbed. She was instantly conscious of
the tone herself; and turning to Robert with unaffected good-humour,
she said:

"The occasions which Ellen mentions were not the only ones on which I
had the pleasure of seeing Mrs. Streightley. I think I know her by
sight longer than you do."

"Indeed! how was that?" asked Robert rather eagerly, for every thing
in the past, as in the present, which regarded Katharine had a potent
interest for him.

"I taught music to the Miss Morisons, who lived next door to Mr.
Guyon, during two seasons," said Hester simply; "and as they seized
upon every conceivable opportunity for neglecting their lessons, they
made it a point to rush to the windows to see Miss Guyon going out to
ride, and I never could resist the temptation of looking out with
them. I like to see a woman on horseback who looks and rides as she
does. I am not sure that I did not envy the gay cavalcade sometimes,
when I used to see them set off, and had to turn to 'one, two, three,
four--pray attend to your fingering,' and so forth, again."

"You will have horses in town too, Hester, won't you?" said Ellen;
"and have cavalcades on your own account, and gallant cavaliers to
escort you, as Katharine had?"

"I am not so sure of that," said Hester demurely; "the Morison girls,
who were very slang, used to talk about Miss Guyon's escort being
always the 'best' men in London; and there was a Mr. Frere--her
cousin, is he not?--whom they used to admire almost as enthusiastically
as they admired her. Caroline, who was horribly silly, used to quote
Tennyson's 'Guinevere' as they went by the windows: very appropriate
to a London street, was it not?"

"Look, look, Hester!" said Ellen, jumping up in the carriage, "there's
the first glimpse of Middlemeads;" and then the young lady occupied
herself with pointing out every detail of the approach, until the
carriage passed under the arch and drew up at the entrance, where
Katharine was standing in the open doorway, pleased to gratify her
sister-in-law to the utmost by the demonstrative kindness of her
reception of Miss Gould.

"We were in capital time, Katharine," said Ellen, as the three ladies
passed through the hall, "and had a delightful drive, hadn't we,
Robert? O, he's gone off to the library, I suppose."

Katharine was much pleased with Hester Gould, and the little party at
Middlemeads was apparently composed of the most harmonious elements.
The great heiress was naturally an object of curiosity in that
character; and Katharine was no more slow than Hester herself to
perceive that her guest's presence lent an additional attraction in
the eyes of the neighbourhood to the newly-mounted _mnage_ at
Middlemeads. It was not every country-house which had two such
specimens of womanhood to show,--the one so beautiful, the other so
rich; and the neighbourhood proved itself not undeserving of its
opportunities. Lady Henmarsh had experienced some not unnatural pangs
of apprehension lest the dignified dulness which her soul abhorred
should beset her at Middlemeads. She had had her doubts about Robert
Streightley's fitness for his new _rle_ in society; she had dreaded,
she did not exactly know what, in Katharine; but her apprehensions
proved utterly unfounded. She did not care to look beneath the
surface, and that was all that could be desired. Mrs. Streightley
dispensed a splendid hospitality with perfect grace, and Robert had no
desire save that in all things her pleasure should be done. Her
pleasure was to fill her house with company, and to pass her life in a
round of such amusements as were attainable in the country, previous
to entering upon the London season with a brilliancy and splendour
which should convince the world that she was one of the most fortunate
persons in it, and leave herself no time to recur to any of the absurd
fancies which had once beguiled her for a little. How absurd they
were! She laughed at them now, and at herself; and yet the laugh was
not entirely real. And sometimes she would think of Hester Gould's
wealth with a dreadful pang of envy, but in which there was not an
atom of sordid feeling.

Hester Gould turned every hour of her stay at Middlemeads to account.
She was incapable of such a blunder as copying any one's manner; but
she studied the best types with which she was brought in contact, and
profited by them. She knew exactly the extent and value of such
personal attractions as she possessed, as well as she knew the exact
sum of money which she owned; she understood her own advantages and
defects to a nicety; she appreciated the utility of the interval thus
attained for studying phases of society hitherto unknown, before
entering on the great world; and she made the most of it. Impossible
to unite self-possession, simplicity of tastes and manners, and sound
common sense, more admirably than they were combined in Hester Gould.
Impossible to be more popular and more impenetrable. Had she been in
possession of all the truth, she could hardly have understood the
"situation" more clearly than she understood it, aided only by her
remarkable penetration and the quickening influence of concentrated
anger. Had her heart been concerned in the scheme in which she had
been defeated by the unconscious Katharine, and in which only her
brain and her will had been active, she would have felt more acutely
and more transiently; but as it was, her anger neither cooled nor
decreased. It was characteristic of Hester that her changed position
made not the least difference in her feelings. She knew that her
wealth gave her opportunities in comparison with which a marriage with
Robert Streightley would have been but a meagre triumph; she knew that
her defeat had been practically rendered no defeat at all by the freak
of fortune winch had endowed her with riches; but the knowledge had no
effect on her. The ruling principle of her character, the egotism of
an inflexible will, had suffered a deep wound, and she admitted no
balm in such considerations to heal it. Katharine's had been the hand
to deal this wound. As for Robert, "he never would have loved me," she
said in her heart; "but I should have married him for all that." And
she would punish Katharine--unless, indeed, fate should spare her the
trouble. Of this vicarious vengeance she discerned a promising
probability; for day by day she saw that Katharine was hardening. She
was satisfied to perceive the result, without analysing the process
very closely; and she discerned that her own presence, though the most
unexceptionable relations subsisted between her and her hosts, had as
sinister an influence as she could desire. She was not the woman to
employ unnecessary activity. If she could do mischief passively, so
much the better, so much the safer. Hester's character had received by
her defeat the impulse towards the development of evil which had
hitherto been wanting, and more than once she had to recall her
determination never to permit any passion to gain dominion over her.
Hitherto her will had been stronger than any indication of passion she
had ever felt; if it only proved so for the future, life would have no
great harm in store for her.

Lady Henmarsh had taken the young heiress under her especial patronage
(she had a genuine admiration for rich people); and before her visit
to Middlemeads had terminated, it was arranged that Miss Gould should
be promoted to the place vacated by Katharine, and should make her
_dbut_ in London society under the auspices of Lady Henmarsh.




CHAPTER IV.
CANAAN FROM PISGAH.


The month of April was nearing its close, and the party at Middlemeads
were beginning to think of separating, to meet again in the more
exciting scenes of London life during the season.

A programme, including entertainments which should combine splendour
and originality, to be given at the mansion in Portland Place, had
been agreed upon, and perfect harmony reigned among the ladies. Miss
Gould took a deep interest in the preparation of Mrs. Streightley's
town-house, and had frequently accompanied Katharine to town, when she
visited Portland Place to give new orders and observe the fulfilment
of old ones. Katharine threw herself into this novel and decidedly
exciting occupation with all the fervour of her age and character. She
interpreted and acted upon Robert's permission to do precisely as she
pleased, to its fullest extent.

"Please yourself, dear, and you will please me," he had said to her;
"you know I have not much taste for such things."

"Perhaps your mother--" Katharine had considered it polite to say----

"O no," Robert had answered hastily; "my mother would be less useful
to you than myself. She has lived in a plain house and in a plain way
all her life, and she would not in the least understand how the cage
for so bright-plumaged a bird as you are should be decorated."

It was an awkward metaphor, an unfortunate pleasantry; and Robert felt
it so as soon as he had uttered it, and hastily left his wife on the
plea of letters to be answered, having received the briefest, coldest
acknowledgment from her of a permission on which she proceeded to act
immediately with much animation and entire recklessness of expense.
While she was engaged thus, and when the time for the removal of the
establishment to town was drawing near, Katharine learned that Mrs.
Stanbourne had arrived in England, and was desirous of seeing her, and
making the acquaintance of her husband. The letter which conveyed this
intelligence to Mrs. Streightley was not altogether and heartily
welcomed by her. The one single individual in the world for whom
Katharine felt perfect respect, respect in which her intellect was as
active as her heart, was Mrs. Stanbourne; and yet, even though
affection mingled largely with that sentiment, she could not feel real
pleasure in the prospect of seeing her. She did not tell herself what
it was she dreaded; but she knew in her heart that it was her true
friend's clear-sightedness and her unbending rectitude. She had so
shrunk from announcing her marriage to her, that Mr. Guyon had found
himself obliged to undertake that very unpleasant task; a substitution
which had surprised Mrs. Stanbourne much and hurt her a little; but
she was a woman in whose disposition the small susceptibilities born
of self-love had not much place, and she put the light mortification
aside, and wrote to Katharine just such a kind motherly letter as,
under other circumstances, would have added to the happiness of a
bride. But Katharine had read it hurriedly, with a flushed brow, and
her rich red lip caught under her white teeth, and had put it away out
of her sight. Nay more, she had put off answering it, until she might
venture to disregard its tone and substance; and treating her marriage
as an affair whose novelty had quite worn off, and to which any
further reference would be out of place, had filled two sheets of
paper with a pleasant, flippant account of her continental trip, and a
lively sketch of some of the costumes which took her fancy among the
Swiss peasantry. Katharine's letter pleased Mrs. Stanbourne as little
as her father's had done; but she was a sensible as well as a
feeling-hearted woman, and she recognised that explanation of any
thing which excited her misgivings was not just then attainable. It
must be waited for it; had better be waited for patiently; she would
see Katharine as soon as possible after she should reach England, and
in the mean time would write to her, as usual, not very often, but
very frankly and affectionately. She had adhered to this resolution;
and now she was about to see and discern for herself whether this
marriage, whose exterior advantages were undeniable, was all that she
could desire, or any part of what she had desired for this impetuous,
unmanageable girl, whom she had always loved, and for whom she had
always been apprehensive, with the well-grounded fear which is taught
by experience and the knowledge of the human heart; with that fear
which can hardly fail to be awakened when one who has travelled far on
the journey of life looks back and sees the young beginner joyously
setting forth in delusive hope, and with the courage of ignorance.

The prompt invitation to Middlemeads by which Katharine replied to
Mrs. Stanbourne's notification of her arrival in England was all that
it should have been, in words; and the acceptance was as prompt and
affectionate.

"This day week, then, she will be here," Katharine said to herself, as
she sat before her writing-table with the letter in her hand. "This
day week. I am glad the house is likely to be so full--I don't want to
be alone with her. It is all so unlike her ideas--and she is so
quick." Here Katharine sighed. "Well, after all, she knows I always
liked money, and what money gives one in this world--and she knows I
never was romantic. It's all very gay and splendid here; and if I
don't care quite so much about it as I used to think I should--I must
be a worse actress than I think I am, if she finds that out. One thing
at least she does not know, and can never discover; one secret is at
least inviolably my own. No one can ever guess that I cherished the
delusion of love and truth, of a life lived for their sake; a life
lived with a man who amused himself all the time, who made me love him
_pour rire_."

So far as it went, Katharine's argument with herself was frank and
well founded; but it did not go far enough, it did not extend to the
acknowledgment of the real blot which she dreaded her friend's
hitting. That Mrs. Stanbourne should regard her in the gravely
responsible position of a wife, as wholly given up to empty
amusements, the pursuit of pleasure and excitement, and the lavish
expenditure of money upon every trifle which took her fancy, was, she
chose to persuade herself, what she dreaded. And this certainly was an
impression to be deprecated; but it was only secondary, though she put
it first. It was her conduct towards Robert which she really feared to
find exposed to the keen, unembarrassed scrutiny of Mrs. Stanbourne,
whom she knew to be a woman incapable of trifling with the ideal of
duty either in theory or in practice. That she would discern her to be
a wife without love for her husband, without gratitude for all his
affection and observance, without sympathy for his tastes, observance
of his wishes, or consideration for his feelings; a woman hardened,
wilful, and selfish; who had made a marriage which was a bargain, and
was not faithful to the spirit of her share in that bargain. If Mrs.
Stanbourne's customary penetration did not fail her, this was what it
would show her, under the surface of a life of gaiety, extravagance,
and luxury. She felt in her conscience, whose voice she could not
stifle, that she was unjust towards the man who had given her not only
money but love. True, she did not care for the love, she did not want
it; but after all, it was the vehicle by which the money which she did
want and did care for was conveyed to her; and there was an undeniable
baseness, a failure of duty and propriety in her conduct, only the
more flagrant because the sufferer by it was compelled to endure it
uncomplainingly, because the injury was, so to speak, impalpable.
Katharine was too clear-sighted not to perceive and understand her own
shortcomings perfectly; and in her inmost heart she dreaded that Mrs.
Stanbourne would understand them too. Plainly put, she knew the truth
to be, that she was revenging on the man who had given her a brilliant
and enviable position before the world; who had effectually screened
her from scorn and malice, and made her an object of envy instead; the
man who loved her with a fervour of admiration and devotion which
served only to provoke and embitter her,--the deadly injury inflicted
upon her by another, the baseness of whose conduct every womanly
instinct should have taught her to requite with contempt. She had done
Robert Streightley the tremendous wrong of marrying him without loving
him; true, he knew it and accepted it, but it was none the less, in
the light of a pure woman's conscience, a deadly wrong--and she had
not made the slightest effort to retrieve or repair that wrong. If a
transient impulse, ascribable to the elasticity of spirit of her age
more than to any real motive of her conscience, had drawn her nearer
to him for a little while, she had fallen away from him again in
impatient weariness, and now each day seemed but to set them farther
apart. And she could not even regret it; she could feel no repentance,
no wish to be different--that was the worst of it; it was not that she
desired the conditions of her domestic life to be altered, but only
that she dreaded their discovery by Mrs. Stanbourne. Katharine's
meditations were not, therefore, of the brightest; and a second cause
of embarrassment arose to trouble them. Lady Henmarsh and Mrs.
Stanbourne were utterly uncongenial to each other, and yet each
occupied an exceptional position as regarded her: they would be
certain to clash unpleasantly. It would have been easier to bear, had
Lady Henmarsh not been there. Katharine must announce the expected
visit to her _ci-devant_ chaperone, and she felt exceedingly
uncomfortable at the prospect. She had on several occasions narrowly
escaped quarrelling with Lady Henmarsh _apropos_ of Mrs. Stanbourne;
and she thought it extremely likely that on this occasion they might
quarrel outright. Katharine was not a person likely to defer doing any
thing of the kind because it was unpleasant, so she went immediately
to the south drawing-room, where she found Lady Henmarsh, Ellen, and
Hester Gould. Lady Henmarsh was doing nothing, so far as her hands
were concerned. Sunk in the luxurious depths of an easy-chair, she was
looking out on the flower-garden and the statues, and talking to
Hester Gould, who was seated on a footstool in the embrasure of the
large window, and pulling the ears of Topaze, who was lying
contentedly in her lap.

"Look at this faithless little creature, Mrs. Streightley," exclaimed
Hester, as Katharine entered the room. "He actually followed me out of
the breakfast-room this morning, in preference to you. Can you fancy
any thing so base?"

"Topaze prefers lying on a silk dress to lying on a muslin one, Miss
Gould," returned Katharine smiling; "and she is particularly fond of
having her ears pulled. I have had no time to indulge her this
morning; I have been busy with my letters. I have heard from papa,
Lady Henmarsh."

"Indeed, my dear! I thought all his correspondence was reserved for
his son-in-law. When is he coming?"

"Not just yet; indeed I fear he will not be able to manage to come to
us before we go to town at all. But I have also heard from Mrs.
Stanbourne. She has come to England, and she is so good as to promise
us a visit. She names this day week for her arrival at Middlemeads."

"O, indeed!" said Lady Henmarsh in a satirical voice, and directing a
glance at Hester which satisfied Katharine that she had indulged in
sarcasm concerning Mrs. Stanbourne to her new friend. "Well, I shall
not have the pleasure of seeing her, and I daresay she will not
particularly miss me. I was just going to tell you, my dear Kate, that
Sir Timothy and I must really take a reluctant leave of Middlemeads on
Wednesday. Sir Timothy has had letters from his steward requiring his
immediate attention; and you know he is rather fidgety, and never
satisfied unless he is on the spot."

Katharine did not know any thing of the kind, but she was quite
content to take Sir Timothy's inquietude for granted; and she received
Lady Henmarsh's explanation with perfect grace, and much internal
satisfaction. The four ladies then had a great deal of animated
conversation about all they intended to do, and the constant
intercourse they hoped to establish in London; and the morning wore
away very pleasantly. Katharine's spirits recovered their tone when
she discovered that the meeting under circumstances of close
association between Lady Henmarsh and Mrs. Stanbourne, which she had
so much dreaded, was not to take place. Hester was looking forward to
her _dbut_ in the character of a great heiress, under the auspices of
the most agreeable married woman she had ever met, but whose character
and disposition she read with equal precision and indifference. Ellen,
who was to return to town with Hester, was sunk in a charming reverie
of anticipation; for the Rev. Decimus hoped to be in London when she
should arrive, and to be able to tell her to which of the most
unhealthy and savage regions of the known world it was his desire and
intention to convey her. Hester's visit would terminate a day or two
after Mrs. Stanbourne's arrival. Ellen was very glad not to leave
Middlemeads before; she was very anxious to see Katharine's friend and
kinswoman. Hester did not care in the least about the matter. It was
not likely that Mrs. Stanbourne could ever be of any importance to
her; she had nothing to gain and nothing to lose by her; and Miss
Gould was very little given to thoughts or surmises or the taking of
interest concerning any matter which did not immediately concern her.
When the bell rang for luncheon, the ladies obeyed the summons; and
Lady Henmarsh asked where was Mr. Streightley.

"Robert is gone to London," said Ellen. "He went by the first train,
did he not, Katharine?"

"Yes, I believe so," answered Robert's wife carelessly. "He had
business in town, I understood, and will probably not return until
to-morrow."

She neither knew nor cared what the business was that had called her
husband away; but Lady Henmarsh knew, and cared enough to feel
irritated, if not sorry. She had had a letter also from Mr. Guyon--a
more confidential one than the brief chatty epistle he had written to
his daughter; and she knew that at the moment at which they mentioned
him, he and Robert Streightley were closeted together, in the office
in the City, in deep, and by no means pleasant, conversation. Miss
Gould also had had some letters that morning, and one of them offered
her at least a suggestion of the nature of Robert's business in town.
It was written by Mr. Thacker; and among its rather voluminous
contents Miss Gould read: "Old Guyon is going the pace tremendously;
it must kill in the end;--even Robert Streightley--his patience can't
hold out, I should think, if his purse can."

The week passed, unmarked by any remarkable incident. Lady Henmarsh
carried off Sir Timothy on the appointed day, and bade Hester Gould
farewell with much demonstrative affection; which that young lady
received with well-bred acquiescence, and which Katharine observed
with mingled amusement and contempt.

"She never was half so fond of me," she thought; "but that is easily
understood. I never was rich while she could make any use of my
money."

During this week Hester observed that Robert Streightley was more
silent and dispirited than usual, and that not a day elapsed without
his receiving a letter from Mr. Guyon. She felt some curiosity
concerning the nature of these communications, for she by no means
imputed them to Mr. Guyon's affection for his son-in-law; but she was
quite satisfied to wait for its gratification. Mr. Thacker was
expected at Middlemeads, and she knew that she should discover much,
if not all she wanted to know, from that gentleman; over whom her
sagacity, firmness, and coolness of disposition, being qualities which
he particularly admired, had secured her considerable and increasing
influence. It was finally settled that Mr. Guyon should not visit his
daughter at her country residence until the close of the season; an
arrangement to which Mrs. Stanbourne's arrival had largely
contributed. He was not afraid of her now; he had carried his point,
and her influence was no longer to be dreaded; but he disliked her
excessively, to an extent which amounted to antipathy; and he would
not have encountered a week in a country-house in her society, and
exposed to her observation, for any but a very large consideration. A
slight to his daughter was a small one, so Mr. Guyon stayed away; and
his daughter was decidedly relieved by his absence.

The apprehensions with which Katharine had regarded Mrs. Stanbourne's
visit were fully realised. Her true friend discerned the change in the
girl, for whom she felt sad and genuine interest; the woman whose life
was full of duty steadily done perceived at once that in Katharine's
that mainspring was wanting. She had felt apprehensive before; but her
fear for Katharine's future grew with every hour of personal
observation, with every fresh evidence of her total indifference to
her husband which presented itself. She studied Robert Streightley
closely, and she found in him much to like, to respect, and to esteem,
but still something which puzzled and distressed her. She could not
comprehend that a man could bear indifference, hardness, almost
disdain, from a woman upon whom he had lavished such proofs of love,
with so much submission as Robert endured them from Katharine withal.
"If the man had done her a wrong, and she was graciously exercising
some forbearance towards him, his manner might be what it is, with
some reason and appropriateness; but as things are, I cannot
understand it. It is ruinous to her, fostering every evil tendency in
her nature, putting her in a false and unnatural position; and it is
positively unmanly on his part."

Mrs. Stanbourne meditated a good deal upon these things before she
made up her mind to speak to Katharine. "_Entre l'arbre et l'corce ne
mets pas le doigt_," was a wholesome saying, and she bore it in mind;
but "a word in season, how good it is!" had equal wisdom and superior
authority; and compassionate affection for the young wife, who was
blindly laying waste her own life and another's, who was pursuing the
phantoms of pride, vanity, and pleasure, and turning her back on love
and duty, carried the day over caution and mere worldly prudence. "I
will tell her the truth," said Mrs. Stanbourne to herself. "It may
turn her against me, she is so proud, and so violent in her temper;
but no matter for that, if my speaking the truth may only do her good,
and spare her something in the future. Katharine used to love me once,
I sincerely believe; but I doubt whether she loves any one now. What
can have come over the girl?"

Among the many valuable qualities possessed by Katharine's one true
friend, tact was conspicuous; and she exercised it on the present
occasion. She selected her opportunity well, and she employed it with
admirable discretion. There was no assumption of superiority, no
"lecturing" tone in the grave, kind words which she addressed to
Robert Streightley's wife, and in which she appealed to her sense of
right, of duty, of delicacy, and of gratitude. Katharine could not
deny the truth of any thing she said. She had married Robert
Streightley because he was a rich man, and she had given him nothing
in return, not only for all the money, but for all the love, which he
lavished upon her, that it was in her power to withhold. The interview
was a painful one to both parties; especially painful to Katharine,
who had to hide from her friend the real motive which had actuated her
in her marriage and in her subsequent conduct--a motive in which not
only did there not exist the smallest excuse, but which in reality
increased her guiltiness towards the man whom she had married. She
could not deny the truth; she could not impugn the force of the
contrast presented by his conduct, which Mrs. Stanbourne painted to
her in all the glowing colours of generosity, devotion, patience, and
forbearance. Katharine felt, as she promised, that she never could
forget the picture as drawn by her friend; it appealed to all that was
best in her nature; it touched her innate nobility of soul. Nor did
she forget it: in the time to come she bore it, every hue, every tint,
in her memory.

Mrs. Stanbourne was surprised and delighted at the result of her
hazardous interposition.

"I will not pretend to feel towards him what I do not feel," said
Katharine, in her softest tones, as their conversation drew to a
close; "but I will be more considerate of him--I will be less
selfish--I will try to make him happier."

"Do so, my dear Katharine," said her faithful friend, "and depend on
it, your own happiness will be the result. You have only to do your
duty to your husband, and the feelings to which you could not pretend,
and ought not to feign, will arise in your heart spontaneously. Try to
make him happy, because it is right and you owe it to him, and you
will soon find your own happiness centred in him as his is in you."

The elder lady kissed the younger gravely, and left her. Katharine
covered her face with her hands, and burst into tears. She very rarely
wept; and now, though she thought, "Ah, if she only knew--if she only
knew that love is dead for me!" there was refreshment in the transient
passion of grief and self-reproach, and a new dawn of better days in
the frank resolution with which Katharine determined on the fulfilment
of her promise.


Mr. Thacker's promised visit to Middlemeads was duly paid. He seldom
allowed himself a holiday; but this visit was an agreeable combination
of pleasure and business, in which he thought he might very safely
indulge. Besides, to have it known that he was staying with
Streightley of Bullion Lane; to have letters addressed to and to
date them from "Middlemeads, Bucks;" to do the _grand seigneur_ for
a few days, and simultaneously to do a very excellent stroke of
business,--all these things were pleasant to Daniel Thacker's soul. He
arrived late, only in time to dress for dinner; during which repast he
contrived to impress Mrs. Stanbourne, next to whom he was seated, with
a holy horror of his appearance, manners, and conversation; for Mr.
Thacker had what his sisters were in the habit of calling his "company
manners" towards ladies, and which consisted either in repulsive
insolence and would-be sarcasm, or rather more repulsive adulation.
Something had tended to put Mr. Thacker into great spirits on this
particular evening. The dinner had been very good, the wines
excellent; there was an air of luxurious refinement all around him,
and his immediate proximity to Mrs. Stanbourne was specially grateful.
He knew her as a woman of mark even among persons of mark; and "he
liked that kind of thing, damme!" as he was accustomed to remark in
moments of confidence. It mattered little to him that he received at
first merely polite and at last chilling monosyllabic replies to his
advances; he saw his way towards concocting a paragraph for the
fashionable weekly paper in which his name should be included amongst
a list of "swells" as being entertained at Middlemeads; and for what
Mrs. Stanbourne really thought of him he cared but little. With the
person with whom it was essential to him that he should stand well, he
made much greater progress. Before the ladies retired for the night,
and while Katharine was playing, he had flung himself on an ottoman
where was seated Hester Gould, and had said in the nearest approach to
a _demi-voix_ which with his natural nasal intonation he could
command----

"Are you an early riser, Miss Gould?"

Hester looked at him with a little astonishment, and without the
slightest affectation of hauteur, at the sudden question, and replied,
"Always, Mr. Thacker. I was compelled, as you know--who better?--to
get up early to go to my pupils; and since I have lost the necessity I
have not discontinued the practice."

"That's right; it's a good habit; though, I suppose, one not much
indulged in here. However, that's so much the better. I want a quiet
half-hour's chat with you. Could you be in the grounds at eight
to-morrow morning?"

A properly-regulated young lady would have blushed and exclaimed at
this proposition; a flirt would have manipulated her fan, and nodded
assent behind it. Hester Gould was neither, and did neither. She
simply looked Mr. Thacker straight in the face, and said "Yes."

"All right," said Mr. Thacker. "There's a sun-dial, or something of
the kind, I think I noticed, at the end of the house which fronts the
bay-window of this room. If you could meet me there at eight, we could
stroll on and have our talk without fear of interruption."

To which Hester Gould merely replied: "I know it; I will be there."

Daniel Thacker prided himself on his punctuality; but when, attired
in an unmistakably new suit of morning-dress, he arrived at the
trysting-place the next morning, he found Miss Gould there before him.
After the ordinary salutations they turned their backs on the house,
and walked on side by side. Then Mr. Thacker told her that since she
had been pleased to honour him with her confidence, and to employ him
as her man of business, he had been incessantly turning in his mind a
scheme for employing some of the large sums of ready-money which were
lying at her command; and that after great cogitation, and while he
was even thoroughly undecided what investment to recommend to her, by
the merest chance an opportunity had offered which ought not to be
missed, and which, unless she was warped by silly sentimentality, she
ought certainly to profit by.

Miss Gould listened attentively, and then said: "Unless I am warped by
silly sentimentality? I don't think that would ever stand in my way,
Mr. Thacker. Of what nature is the investment you propose?"

"A mortgage on an estate, worth at least a third more than the money
required to be raised."

"There seems very little sentimentality in that. So far as my small
experience of business matters goes, I cannot conceive any thing more
safe and prosaic. What can you mean, Mr. Thacker? Is it a case of
widow and orphan, or of family estate held since the Conquest passing
into the hands of a _parvenu?_ Believe me, I'm adamant on both those
points. If husband and father squanders and dissipates, widow and
orphan must pay the penalty; if Hugo de Fitzurse is sold up, why
should not Jones of Manchester buy Bruin Castle, moat, portcullis,
battlements, and all?"

Such a sentiment as this delighted Daniel Thacker amazingly. He looked
at his companion with intense admiration, as he said, "Of course; why
not? But it's scarcely that sort of sentimentality that I alluded to.
Suppose the estate in question, on the mortgage of which the money was
to be lent, had belonged to a friend--one whom you had--liked very
much; what then?"

"What then? Now really, my dear Mr. Thacker, this appears to me to be
slightly childish. Of course I should be extra glad to know that my
loan of the money had been serviceable to my friend. He, she, or it
would be glad to know that I had good security; and as to the
sentimentality of the affair, I don't see the least occasion for it,
unless the friend could not pay, and there arose a necessity for--what
do you call it?--foreclosing."

Daniel Thacker laughed outright--a short, sharp, shrill laugh of
intense enjoyment. "Miss Gould," he said, "I cannot tell you how
immensely I respect you. You are out and away the best woman of
business I ever met. Then you seem to entertain this notion of the
mortgage?"

"If you prove to me that it is all sound and sufficient. But what
about the sentimentality? Where is the estate on which the money is to
be lent?"

"I should say," said Mr. Thacker, stopping short, and looking fixedly
at her,--"I should say that at this moment we are standing in about
the very middle of it."

Hester Gould had stopped when her companion stopped; and as he said
these words a bright flush overspread her cheeks, and a bright light
flashed into her eyes. That was all the outward and visible sign of
the prospect which Thacker's speech had conjured up. Robert
Streightley pressed for money--that money lent by her, and not
repaid--she the mistress of that much-vaunted estate--she the heiress
in due course of time dispossessing the man who slighted, and humbling
the woman who rivalled her. All these thoughts glanced through
Hester's mind, but the only sign of their presence was the flush of
her cheek and the gleam of her eyes. Daniel Thacker marked both, but
it was not his game to be reckoned appreciative in such matters; so he
said:

"You are silent, Miss Gould. I thought my last announcement would
settle the question."

"Then you for once thought wrong, Mr. Thacker," said Hester with an
effort. "I am sorry to hear that Mr. Streightley requires this money;
though probably a loan under such circumstances is the commonest
thing in his experience of business. I am glad I am able to let
him have it. I only make one stipulation, that my name does not
appear in the matter. You will lend the money, if you please, and Mr.
Streight----the borrower will only hear of you in the transaction.
Details we can arrange at another opportunity. Now shall we turn
towards the house?"

"One moment, Miss Gould. I'm a bad hand at expressing myself in this
kind of thing, but--but--" to his intense astonishment Mr. Thacker
found himself turning very red and stammering audibly--"but the fact
is, that there is a charm about you which--which--the way in which you
adapt yourself to business, and your knowledge of the world; and--I
can assure you I've never been looked upon as a marrying man, but if
you would do me the honour to accept my hand, I would----"

"You would actually sacrifice yourself," said Hester with a slight
smile. "No, Mr. Thacker; I must say no. Believe me, I'm fully sensible
of the honour, but I think we know a little too much of each other for
a happy match. I should not care very much to be valued by my husband
for the manner in which I 'adapted myself to business,' as you call
it; and I've little doubt that when you take a wife, it will be some
pretty girl whose want of 'knowledge of the world' will not be her
least recommendation. No; we will be very good friends, if you please,
and as my man of business you will--but let us be candid--you will
always make a good thing of me, without----. I think we understand
each other?" And to this plain speech Mr. Thacker made no other
protest than a shoulder-shrug.

Before Hester Gould went to bed that night she stood in the bay-window
of her room, looking out upon the garden and the park beyond, bathed
in the bright moonlight. For more than a quarter of an hour she stood
thus, calmly contemplating the scene before her. Then she said, as she
turned away, "Mistress of this place, which that proud woman
downstairs exults so in!--mistress of this place, and Robert
Streightley's creditor! It could not have been very deep-rooted, my
love for that man. And yet I don't know; I think at one time it
equalled my present hate of him--and of her; and then, God knows, it
must have been deep enough!"




CHAPTER V.
CITY INTELLIGENCE.


Robert Streightley's preoccupation and loss of spirits were not
without due cause. In the half hour that had lapsed between his
parting with his wife and sister, and his rejoining them when in
colloquy with the Scotch gardener, he had gone through a phase of
mental torture such as he had never before experienced. The Irish
gentleman of good birth and vanished fortunes, who comes to London
with just sufficient money to pay his entrance-fees to a fashionable
club, to keep a garret in St. Alban's Place, and to hire a hack for
the season from a livery-stable, and goes in to win the heart, or at
all events the hand, of an heiress, gets to work at once, finds his
_coup manqu_ ever so many times during one season, and soon begins to
look upon his rejection as a mere matter of chance, and falls back on
the grand principle of "better luck next time." The starving student,
living from hand to mouth by the preparation of badly-paid work from
grinding booksellers, eats his ninepenny plate of boiled beef, and
hurries back to the reading-room of the British Museum, convinced that
the day will come when his talent shall be appreciated and remunerated
as it should be. The parish-doctor's assistant sings over his pestle,
and slaps his spatula cheerfully on the china plate, confident that
the retired Indian nabob, the wealthy widow with the quinsey, the
measles-struck child of the countess, his successful care of all or
one of whom will insure the pair-horse brougham, the M.D. degree, and
the house in Saville Row, are all gradually working up towards him.
"Hope springs eternal in the human breast;" and so long as we perceive
no symptoms of dry-rot in our dearest aspirations, we are for the most
part content to grind away, facing present difficulties manfully, and
awaiting the result. But if you were to prove to the Irish gentleman
that his fascinating powers were on the wane; to the student that his
overtaxed brain was giving way; to the doctor's assistant that he was
every where considered a hopeless quack, you would cut away all their
hold on life, and they would be whirled into that abyss of despondency
in which thousands, similarly unfortunate, yearly perish.

A phase of torture very much allied to these described was being
undergone by Robert Streightley. The "transaction" between him and Mr.
Guyon, under which Katharine had become his wife, was constantly
rising in his mind, and the heart-ache consequent thereon was only
allayed by the thought that his possession of wealth enabled her to
indulge in the extravagance which seemed to form a part and parcel of
her life. He knew thoroughly well that, under her father's influence,
he had won her by his riches, that they constituted his sole claim to
respect in her eyes, that the fact of her having made "an excellent
match," as bruited abroad by Lady Henmarsh and her set, meant that she
had married a City man in a large way of business and with a large
amount of ready-money at command, which would be at her disposal, and
enable her to indulge all the freaks and vagaries of her fancy. It
was, after all, a poor shifting foundation, a mere quicksand, on which
to base any structure of future happiness; but within the last few
weeks, marking the improvement in his wife's spirits, and the increase
of kindly feelings towards him, Robert had been content to accept it
at all events as an instalment of conjugal bliss, and had flattered
himself with the idea that when Katharine found all her thoughts
anticipated, all her wishes gratified, she might have some--he did not
like to think of it as gratitude, he wanted a feeling with a warmer
name--towards him who lived only to do her bidding.

Feeling then against all his hopes and attempts at self-deception that
in the money which he was enabled to place at his wife's command, and
in the position which she was thereby enabled to obtain, lay his only
chance of obtaining favour in the eyes of her, to gratify whose every
whim was the only pleasure of his life, it may be imagined with what
feelings Robert Streightley read through a letter which came to him by
the same post as brought Hester Gould's missive alluded to in the
preceding chapter. It was from his confidential clerk, Mr. Foster, and
ran thus:


"Dear Sir--Mr. Delley, the City editor of the _Bullionist_, who, as you
know, has for many years supplied the house with reliable information,
called in at 2 P.M. to see you; but learning you would not be at
business to-day, he sent for me to your private room, and told me he
understood that Messrs. Needham, Nick, and Driver were in a very shaky
state, owing to the failure of the Dublin branch of their bank,
announced in to-day's City Intelligence. Knowing how heavy our account
was against them (28,917_l_. 7_s_. 9_d_.), I started off at once to
Fenchurch Street, but found the doors closed, the shutters up, and all
business suspended. Mr. Delley has been here just now (5:30 P.M.), and
talks of a shilling in the pound. Old Mr. Nick's death, and the large
sums taken out of the bank by Mr. Needham junior, who was only
admitted as a partner two years ago, are said to have led to the
wind-up. Please come up at once, if convenient. Your obedient servant,
J. FOSTER."


When Robert Streightley laid down this letter his hand trembled, his
mouth was parched, and a film seemed to come over his eyes. It was not
the sum lost, though that was very large, but a horrid sensation
crossed him that retribution was attacking him in his most vulnerable
part, that the joints in his armour had been spied out by the enemy,
and that--Good God! if he were to lose that one hold upon his wife's
gratitude! if he were compelled to tell her that the mere wretched
substance to which she had been sacrificed was a sham and a swindle,
that he---- Pshaw! he sank down in his chair as these thoughts rushed
through his mind; then he wiped his damp brow with his handkerchief,
and shook himself together as it were with one strong effort, and
rising, began to pace the room. What a weak, cowardly fool he was, he
thought, thus to give way This was a blow undoubtedly,--what some of
the Stock-Exchange fellows called a "facer;" but what of that? It
could be met; and even if he lost all--if things turned out as badly
as Foster predicted--well, thirty thousand pounds would not shake the
credit of Streightley and Son. The mere repetition of the name seemed
to rouse up innate business instincts which had been slumbering for
some months--to call into action all those qualities which had made
the man what he was; and he determined to go up to the City at once,
and see for himself how the business stood. He waited for a minute or
two until Ellen had strayed off into a bye-path in search of some
flower, and then he said to his wife:

"I must leave you, Katharine, for a short time--four-and-twenty hours
or so--not longer, dear."

His voice dropped, and quivered a little with the natural emotion
which he felt. He looked tenderly up at her, and drawing near her,
tightly laid his hand on her arm. She was binding together a few
flowers as he joined her. She did not cease from her little task; but
as she leisurely made the knot, and drew it tight with her teeth, she
said, without looking up,

"O, indeed! business, I suppose?"

Robert Streightley started as though he had been shot. What else could
he have expected? Did he anticipate a few tender words of regret at
his necessitated absence; a tear or two dimming the bright eyes; a
little pouting or peevishness at being left alone? Did he imagine that
his wife might have made some inquiry as to the nature of the business
which caused him to absent himself for twenty-four hours from his
home? Such might have been the case in those preposterous matches
which are arranged thoughtlessly and frivolously by two young people
without calling their elders into council--in those ridiculous unions
of hearts. But there was nothing in Robert Streightley's bargain, no
clause in his bond, to warrant his expectation of any thing of the
kind. "To have and to hold," certainly; but to create sympathy, to
awaken interest--no mention of either of these superfluities in the
marriage-contract. So he simply said, "Yes, dear; business;" and laid
his lips to her cheek, and ordered his clothes to be packed, and drove
away to the station.

He was uncomfortable, vacillating, wretched, all through the journey;
but he became his old self as he entered his offices. As the door of
his private room closed behind him, as he marked the letters lying
unopened on his desk, as he took his seat in the birch-framed,
cane-bottomed chair which had been his seat ever since he first
assumed his junior partnership, and as he saw old Foster standing at
his elbow, with his paper of memoranda in his hand ready to read
from,--Robert Streightley felt more genuine pleasure than he had for
months. The mere fact of there being a difficulty--a hitch--something
towards the elucidation of which the play of his business talents
might tend--gave him life; the _gaudia certaminis_ inspired him;
and he set to work with such a zest, that old Foster, who had been
shaking his head dolefully for the past few months, and thinking
to himself--he would not have breathed such an opinion for the
world--that the glories of the great house of Streightley and Son were
on the wane, took fresh heart, and indulged that evening in the
enormity of an extra half-pint of stout at the chop-house where he
took his dinner, in token of his delight.

Robert Streightley had not been more than a couple of hours at work,
when a junior clerk entered, and told him that Mr. Guyon was outside
in a cab, and had called to know if Mr. Streightley was in town.
Bidden to show Mr. Guyon in, the junior clerk retired, immediately
returning with Mr. Guyon, looking ten years younger than when Robert
had last seen him; with his brown-black whiskers, and hair a little
red-rusty from travel; with the strong trace of a silvery beard; with
a rakish Glengarry cap on his head, a travelling suit and a courier's
bag on his body. He entered with his usual impulsive bound, and had
Streightley by both hands almost before the latter knew he had
entered.

"The merest chance, my dear Robert,--the merest chance that I should
have called in to-day. Returning from Paris by the tidal, and having
to stop at that most confounded of all confounded stations, London
Bridge, and having to go through this cursed City,--no offence to you,
my dear boy, but it's a dreadful hole,--I thought I'd just drop in and
see whether you were in town."

Mr. Streightley assured Mr. Guyon--a somewhat supererogatory
assurance--that he was in town, adding--of which there was no such
corroborative testimony--that he was glad to see him.

"And Katharine?" asked Mr. Guyon, carefully smoothing his chin
with his hand, and looking up under his eye-glass at his
son-in-law,--"Katharine is well?"

Katharine was quite well, Mr. Streightley thanked Mr. Guyon.

Mr. Guyon devoutly thanked heaven for that news. All the traces of
that horrible--eh? at Martigny--quite gone, eh? Thought he should
never have been able to dress himself that morning when he opened
Streightley's note about Katharine's illness. His man thought he was
going to have a fit, and wanted to hasten for a doctor. Told the man
he was a consummate ass; that what he, Mr. Guyon, was suffering from
was feelings; and what the devil did he, the man, know about them! And
Katharine was well; and their place, Middlemeads--eh?--was perfection?
O, he'd heard it here, there, and every where. Saw Roger Chevers at
Boulogne, _en passant_, and had heard him say what a lovely place it
was, and how leaving it had smashed up his old governor, root and
branch. He was always talking of it, sir--said Roger--and wondering
whether they'd cut into the avenue, or whether they left that view
clear top of Two-Ash Hill, looking out the south way; or whether
they'd put the stables in order, or built others where the Red Barn
stood. That's what he should have done, if that cursed Brazilian mine
had only turned up trumps! "Poor old Gov! he'll never forget
Middlemeads!" said honest Roger, who drowned all thought of his lost
patrimony in cheap brandy and the delights of perpetual pool, and
dances at the _Etablissement des Bains_.

Ignoring the opinions and speculations of Mr. Roger Chevers, Robert
Streightley acknowledged that Middlemeads was a fine place, and that
he thought it had improved since it had been in his hands.

"Of course, my dear Robert, of course!" said Mr. Guyon; "your princely
munificence, and what I think I may say--although my own child is in
question--Katharine's excellent taste, would be certain to do wonders
for any place to which both could be simultaneously applied. _Allez,
toujours, la jeunesse!_ a French phrase which is roughly but not
inadequately rendered by our own maxim of 'Go it while you're young!'
As for me, I'm an old bird--an old bird, begad, come back to an empty
nest, to find the sticks and the straw and all that, but my young
fledgling flown." Mr. Guyon seemed quite affected at the allusion
which he had thus made, and turned away his head, touching his eyes
lightly with his handkerchief.

"I trust you will have no cause to repent of your sanction to your
daughter's flight, Mr. Guyon," said Streightley, in a somewhat marked
tone. "You recollect, before she left your roof, that----"

"My dear Robert! my dear Robert!" interposed the old gentleman; "do
you think I have forgotten the confidence in which I told you that I
was unworthy of the blessing of such a daughter--that I was by nature
more fitted for--for less domestic delights. And indeed I--in Paris I
have enjoyed myself most amazin'ly, most amazin'ly! That fellow,
sir--whom I recklect when he lived in King Street--used to drive a
doosid good cab, I recklect; he certainly has improved Paris
wonderfully. But it's horribly expensive, my dear boy, horribly
expensive. I--I ran rather short before I came away, and I was obliged
to draw on you for a hundred--I was indeed!"

Streightley's face looked very stern as he heard this. "Do I
understand you to say that you have drawn a bill on me for a hundred
pounds, Mr. Guyon?"

"Yes, my dear boy, at a month; it'll be due----"

"That is a liberty which I permit no one to take, and which must never
be repeated."

"A liberty, Robert?"

"A liberty, Mr. Guyon. Any man who draws a bill on another without
first asking his friend's permission, takes what we of the City think
an unwarrantable liberty. I am sure you erred in ignorance; but I must
ask you to put a stop entirely to what seems to have become a habit
with you--the reliance on me for money. I cannot make you any further
advances, at least for the present."

This was a great blow for Mr. Guyon, who had been boasting, as
was his wont, amongst his English acquaintances in Paris of the
great wealth and generosity of his son-in-law. Nor had his French
friends been unenlightened on the subject; "eel a milyonair--com
voter Roschild vous savvy," the old gentleman had remarked with great
self-satisfaction. And now to find his milch-cow refusing her supply,
and as it were threatening him with her horns and heels, was any thing
but pleasant. However, Mr. Guyon's temperament was light and elastic;
he thought this determination of Streightley's would not last; that
some business matters had "put him out;" that his anger would soon
"blow over:" so he assured his son-in-law that he would remember what
he had said; and shaking hands fervently with him, skipped back to
the cab, with the pleasant feeling that at least a quarter of the
hundred pounds so judiciously drawn was at that moment safe in his
trousers-pocket.

Then Robert Streightley called Foster into his room, and over books
and ledgers, and commercial documents of all kinds, they held a
consultation which lasted until late in the afternoon, and which
proved to them both that the financial position of Streightley and Son
had recently had the hardest blow, in the stopping of Messrs. Nick's
bank, which it had received since it commenced operations of any
magnitude.

"It comes at an awkward time too for you, sir," said old Mr. Foster.
"We wanted all the ready cash we could lay our hands on just now;
there are the calls on the Benares Railroad, and the deposits upon the
Indian Peninsular--we're pretty deep in both of them--and there's six
thousand for the lease in Portland Place, which of course must be paid
at once. However, there's no reason to hold the Indian lines; they're
both at a high premium; and as this bothering bank has crippled us for
a bit, perhaps we had better sell and----"

"Not one share, Poster! not a single share! we'll stand to our guns,
and the money shall be forthcoming when it's wanted, I'll take care of
that. 'Forward!' has been the motto of Streightley and Son, Foster, as
you know very well, and they're not going to change it now! You shall
see the thirty thousand replaced, ay and doubled, before you retire on
a pension, Foster, I promise you."

"There never was any one like you, Mr. Robert," said the old man, his
eyes sparkling with pleasure; "when you say a thing will be, I know it
will be, ay, as sure as the Bank of England." And so closed the
business consultation.

The lease of the house in Portland Place, which Mr. Foster had alluded
to, was one of Robert Streightley's wedding-presents to his bride.
They must have a town-house, of course, one befitting her position in
society; and partly because of its proximity to her father's
residence, partly because the substantial appearance of the
Portland-Place houses, and the knowledge that they had been for years
in great demand among the moneyed classes, pleased him, he bought the
lease of this house then in the market, had the house splendidly
decorated while they were away, and on their return home had given
Katharine _carte-blanche_ as to its furniture. Katharine had gone
twice to London during their stay at Middlemeads, and had held long
consultations with the upholsterer, but Robert had not seen the house
since he had purchased it.

He walked there now; and though it was still in disorder, he was
astounded at the magnificence of the decorations and the splendour of
the furniture. Under the direction of Katharine's excellent taste, the
_carte-blanche_ given to the upholsterer had worked wonders. No
duchess could have had a more perfectly-appointed house, with nothing
new or perky-looking about it: for what would be the use of money
nowadays if it could not purchase antiquity in every thing save
family?--and even that can be manufactured to order at the Heralds'
College. So Robert Streightley walked in pleased astonishment among
the high-backed chairs in the dining-room, and past the dark oak
bookcases in the library, and through the pale-green drawing-rooms
with the lovely hangings, the elegant _portires_, the buhl cabinets,
the splendid glasses, the _tagres_, and all the nick-nackery of
upholstery. It was in this last paradise that Mr. Streightley found
one of the partners of the upholstery-firm, a gentlemanly-looking man,
who was surveying his men's work with much complacency. He bowed to
Robert, and hoped he was pleased with what had been done. Mr.
Streightley expressed himself as thoroughly satisfied; and Mr. Clinch
then ventured to hope that he should not be considered troublesome if
he were to ask for a cheque--not for the total, of course--just
something on account, as workmen's wages must be paid, &c. Certainly;
what amount did Messrs. Clinch require? Mr. Walter Clinch "for self
and partners" ventured to name the sum of twelve hundred pounds. Mr.
Streightley, after the smallest possible start, made a memorandum in
his pocketbook, and said that a cheque should be sent the next day.

Twelve hundred pounds for decorations and furniture--"on account" too,
showing that there was perhaps as much again to pay! Katharine had
certainly understood the word _carte-blanche_ in its widest and most
liberal sense. Twelve hundred pounds! and until his marriage he had
lived in a little Brixton villa, the entire furniture of which was not
worth one-third of the sum. Should he speak to his wife, should
he----? Not he! now she was his wife, why was she his wife? Simply for
the sake of his money--that money which he had placed at her command.
The one happiness that he could offer her was the power of spending
money, and should he refuse her that? The only salve that he could
apply to his never-quiet conscience was that he had been enabled to
supply her with the means of gratifying extravagant tastes which must
have remained ungratified had she married that--had she made that
match which seemed so imminent when he had that never-to-be-forgotten
interview with Mr. Guyon. No! Katharine had married him because he was
a rich man, and a rich man he must remain to her. Besides, after all,
what was her expenditure? what were these few hundred pounds to him?
This horrible bank business had frightened him, he supposed; had it
not happened, should he have given the smallest thought to such a
trifle as Mr. Clinch's account?

Nevertheless, all that he had said to Foster he determined on carrying
out. There should be no "drawing-in their horns," no curtailment in
the operations of Streightley and Son. The money necessary to meet
this bank failure must be raised somehow. He could get it in the City
at an hour's notice. From the Bank of England downwards there were
plenty of establishments ready to help the old-established firm. But
such matters are talked of in the City, chatted over in the Bank
parlour, whispered on 'Change, give matter for gossip and
shoulder-shrugs and eyebrow-liftings; and Robert's spirit shrunk from
the idea that he or his firm could form the subject of any such
speculations. And yet the money must be had. Where could he turn for
it? Ah, a lucky thought! That man--Mr. Guyon's friend--what was his
name? Thacker: a shrewd, clear-headed, clever man. He would go and see
him, and talk the matter over.




CHAPTER VI.
THE END OF THE CLUE.


And what was Charles Yeldham doing with himself during all these
months? What indeed, save pursuing his "treadmill," daily increasing
in reputation and practice, and accumulating more and more money for
little Constance's dowry. The attorneys' clerks who climbed up his
black staircase were more numerous than ever. Though never relaxing
from his work for five minutes more than usual, he found himself
compelled day by day to postpone the acceptance of cases, with the
alternative of rejecting them altogether; and by the sheer force of
perseverance and industry he was on the high road to fame and wealth.
He did not relax now any thing like so much as when his old chum
Gordon Frere shared his chambers with him: there were no five minutes
of chat and chaff and raillery; no listening to poor Gordon's
confidences on love, debt, future career, now. The only time which
Charley Yeldham allowed himself for talking of unprofessional matters
was the half-hour during which he smoked his final pipe, and drank his
glass of grog before going to bed; and then he would pass in review
the curious events that had happened eight months before, and wonder
at and reason over them. Three men running after one girl--three!
Well, he could hardly count himself; though, certainly, he had thought
more about Katharine Guyon than of any other woman before or since
(and, let it be noted, that at this stage of his reflections he
invariably produced from his desk a photographic _carte_ which he had
obtained of her, and gazed at it with great tenderness)--two men,
we'll say, in hot pursuit, and Bob Sobersides winning the race! She
must have been an outrageous flirt, that Miss Guyon, though! Dear old
Charley Yeldham, with all his partiality, his romantic fondness for
Katharine, is constrained to admit--an outrageous flirt. Did not she
carry-on with poor Gordon, fooling him to the top of his bent; meeting
him at the Opera, at Botanical ftes, at balls, and what not; flower
from her bouquet, hand-pressure, appointment for the next day? And,
after all, did she not whistle him down the wind, throw him away as
one does a split-pen, and marry Robert Streightley? Ay, ay! ay, ay!
Better the old desk and the long "treadmill"--better the flirtations
with attorneys, and _billets-doux_ from Bedford Row, all of which have
some satisfactory result, at least, than the pinning of your faith on
a woman's word, and the breaking of your heart by a woman's tricks!
After all, it was perhaps better that such a girl should have married
such a man as Robert Streightley. His steadiness would guide and
control her; his wealth would enable her to indulge her taste for
extravagance; and her dash and beauty would give pleasant _status_
amongst his acquaintance. Nothing of that kind could have happened had
she married poor Gordon Frere. Both young, extravagant, and reckless;
both accustomed to have their own way; both fond of flirtation;
neither understanding the theory of "give and take"--dear me! dear me!
thought Charley Yeldham to himself, when the honeymoon was over, that
would have been a disastrous business and a wretched _mnage_.

He had had several letters from Gordon, then private secretary to
Lord ----, acting minister at Rudolfstadt; letters full of complaints,
which were ludicrous to the reader, though evidently insufferable to
the writer. "It's a dull, wearying, dreary place, dear old boy," said
Gordon; "a beastly hole, with no one but besotted Germans to talk to,
who all are either professors, when they bore you to death with their
metaphysical cant, or half-fed dragoon officers, who make you long to
kick them for their infernal impertinence. Old Wigsby, who has nothing
to do, and who never opens a book or gives what ought to be his
brains, but what I firmly believe is either tow or wool, the smallest
exercise, passes his days in calling on the Frau Ober Consistorial
Directorin or the Hochgeborner Herr, and his nights in sitting in
their wretched twopenny theatres listening to their squealing singers.
He expects me to attend him on both occasions, and airs himself to
this German-silver nobility, this veneered _haute noblesse_, in his
patronage of me, d--n him (that's by way of parenthesis). On Wednesday
nights we go to the Jger Hof, where the Duke von Friedenstein lives
when he is visible; and the entertainments there are something which
would be too much even for you, Charley, old fellow--and you know you
can stand a lot in the way of dulness! The old duke stands at the end
of a big room, and bows away like mad to every one who comes in, until
I wonder how his old spine holds out; and then the company wander
through the rooms, and look at the curios and the pictures in the
Kunst Kammer, which they've all of them seen a thousand times before;
and then the squealing singers from the theatre tune up and shriek
away for dear life in the music gallery. And then there's not a bad
supper of a queer kind: big hams and potato-salad and herring salad,
and hot salmon and cold jelly, and cold rice and jam, and some very
decent light wines; and it's all over by ten o'clock, and we're off to
bed. Old Wigsby goes to these lets-off _en grande tenue_, and is, I am
sure, seriously grieved that etiquette does not permit him to wear his
court suit. He is the most stupendous ass you can conceive, and is
always haranguing me about 'the position of a diplomatist,' and the
'representative of her Britannic Majesty;' he makes a _prcis_ of his
washing-bills, and tells me that Lord Palmerston would not 'suffer my
handwriting, which is frivolous and unformed.' What the deuce do I
care? I only wish I was back in England--not for the reasons which you
probably assign for the wish. All that is past and gone, and I
sometimes grow hot all over when I think of the melodramatic farewell
which I took of you, my dear old Charley, at the London Bridge
station. I was an idiot then; but now that fire has burnt out, and
left very cold ashes. I hope Mrs. Streightley is well and happy, with
her charming husband. You'll grin at this, you old sceptic; but on my
honour it's true. I haven't the smallest shadow of regret for K.G.,
and I don't care one straw for any woman in the world. But I do long
to be out of this infernal place, to be rid of old Wigsby and his
pomposity and patronage, and to be out of earshot of this hard grating
German cackle, which sometimes makes me stop my ears and kick with
sheer rage. How are the old chambers looking, and how is their old
owner? O, if I could only put my hands on his dear old broad
shoulders, and have half-an-hour's chat with him, it would do me a
deal of good! Yours always,--G. F."

_Ex uno disce omnes_. This was a specimen of Gordon Frere's letters,
and the perusal of which left Charley Yeldham any thing but satisfied
with his friend's position. It was a good thing to think that he was
cured of his love infatuation,--so cured that he could write calmly
and even kindly of the traitress and his successful rival; but the
monotony of his life, and the dull dreariness of Rudolfstadt, were
evidently eating into his soul. No good could come of the continuance
of such distasteful work; and if Gordon Frere's career were to be any
thing but one of blighted hopes and miserable vegetating, he must
begin anew, and that too with all possible speed. So Yeldham, after
cogitating deeply over the matter, at last wrote to his friend, and
told him he felt that the sooner he put an end to the business in
which he was at present engaged, the better it would be for him, and
the greater likelihood he would have in adopting some new profession,
which he might pursue with pleasure and profit to himself. It was
evident that Gordon was wasting his life in Rudolfstadt; and his
friend's advice to him was, to make his adieux to his patron Wigsby,
and return at once to London. Here the old chambers were ready to
receive him; and if he were to make up his mind to go to the bar,
Yeldham thought he might do well enough. "I don't mean to say that
you'll soon be Attorney-General, young fellow, or that your opinions
are likely to outweigh Chitty's; but you used to be fluent enough at
the Apollo Debating Society; you've a certain knowledge of the world,
and unparalleled impudence; and with the possession of these
qualities, and with the aid which I can give you among the attorneys,
I think you're likely before long to be able to gain your
bread-and-cheese at the Old Bailey: at all events, you will be in
London, where a man ought to be, if ever he wants to profit by
chances; and you'll be relieved from that harassing depression which
seems to me to be sapping your character, and rendering you utterly
degenerate."

It was a great relief to honest Charles Yeldham's mind to find that
Gordon Frere had so readily, and to all appearance so effectually, got
over his disappointment in regard to Katharine. Often and often in the
few leisure minutes stolen from his work had Yeldham sat, with his
pipe in his mouth, pondering over the curious history of Robert
Streightley's marriage, and wondering how it might be influenced by
Frere's return. For, recluse as he was, unworldly in the "society"
sense, and nearly entirely given up to his work, Yeldham knew enough
of human nature to feel perfectly certain that the marriage which Mr.
Guy on so prided himself in having brought about was no love-match;
that Streightley was by no means the kind of man to have awakened any
passion in the breast of such a woman as Katharine; and that when any
strong opposing influence might be brought into play, his tenure on
her fealty would be slight indeed. The only thing that puzzled
Yeldham was, how the marriage had been managed, and how Kate's
consent to it had been obtained. Unless Gordon Frere's vanity was most
self-deceptive, this girl had undoubtedly been hotly in love with him
within an ace of her engagement to Streightley. She was not by any
means the sort of girl to be prevailed upon by parental coaxings or
threats (though her father was exactly the man to employ both); and
Robert had only his honesty of purpose, which was nothing to women
in general--and his wealth, which was nothing to this woman in
particular--to back his suit. There was something in the whole affair
which was inexplicable to Charles Yeldham; and being inexplicable, he
resolved never to rest until it was explained.

He had not seen Streightley, save in one or two casual
street-meetings, since the marriage; and though he had received a warm
invitation to Middlemeads, pressure of business had prevented him from
availing himself of it. Pressure of business, he said; but he wasted
the whole of the evening on which he received the invitation (and on
which, with his powers of working, he might have got through a great
deal of work) in handling the dainty note, and conning it over and
over, and in smoking many pipes, and thinking over many strange
things. The note was in Katharine's hand, and ran thus:


"My Dear Mr. Yeldham,--Finding that his own efforts at inducing you to
visit us are completely useless, Mr. Streightley asks me to try mine.
I think I need scarcely say how happy we shall be to see you here, and
how our utmost endeavours will be used to compensate you for your
absence from those legal studies, in which, I am assured, you find
your sole delight.--Very faithfully yours,

"Katharine Streightley."


A simple note, with a very slight touch of very mild badinage. But
Charles Yeldham was unaccustomed to the receipt of letters from
ladies, and this one certainly had a singular effect on him. What a
pretty hand she wrote! how refreshing were the thin, slight, angular
strokes after the rounded fists of the attorneys' clerks! how the
dainty paper and brilliant monogram contrasted with the blue-wove and
the wafer-stamp seal of his ordinary correspondence! And then, as he
puffed at his pipe, and watched the blue vapour curling up around his
head, Charley remembered the first, almost the only time he had ever
seen her in that soft diaphanous dress at the Botanical Fte, where,
even before he knew who she was, he had been sensible of her presence,
and where he had felt himself completely subjugated by her loveliness,
her elegance, and grace. They would laugh at him, Frere and some
fellows of his acquaintance, as a stoic and a cynic,--not that he was
one or the other,--but, after all, was it not better to go through
life unvexed and untroubled by thoughts of lovely women, who were as
far removed from you as the stars, than to endeavour to win them, and
find yourself cast down from star-height as the reward of your
presumption? It was a dull life his, no doubt; with nothing to cheer
it but the success of his work, and--good God! how beautiful she was!
(here he took the photograph out); what perfect grace in the pose of
her head, in the resting of her hands, in the long sweeping folds of
her dress! Ah, if little Constance ever grew up to be any thing like
that, there would be less need of the dower which her brother was so
carefully putting by for her! No wonder Gordon Frere, young,
impressible, buoyant, and hopeful, was desperately in love with such a
beauty; no wonder that, looking at her, Robert Streightley forgot his
ventures, his shares, his cautious dealings, and his longheaded
speculations, and rushed into the matrimonial market, determined, at
whatever cost, to carry off the prize.

How had Robert Streightley accomplished this result? The desire of
being successful was intelligible; but how was the success arrived at?
As Yeldham pondered over his question, during his midday interval of
rest, and while smoking his midday pipe, there came a knock at the
oak; and opening it, Yeldham admitted the man of all others most
likely to be able to answer him--Robert Streightley himself.

He came in wincing a little at the clouds of strong Cavendish which
filled the barrister's room, and seated himself in the attorneys'
chair. He looked pale and a little careworn, but he greeted Yeldham
certainly as heartily as usual, and smiled as he said, "For once in
his life!--bravo! for once in his life, I've found the machine without
the steam up, and Charley Yeldham _not_ at his desk!"

"Sir," replied Charley, "you come at a peculiar time; these are the
five minutes of relaxation; so let us relax together! Robert, my boy,
you're looking very seedy, white and peaky!"

"Well, I have been rather seedy; but I'm not very bad after all. I've
had a good deal of worry lately, in one shape or another, and worry
tells on me more than it did. Getting old, I suppose!"

"You ought to take a partner, Robert; I mean a business partner. That
affair of yours is too big to carry on single-handed. O, tell me, by
the way--you won't misconstrue the reason of my asking--that
confounded bank failure? Rumour says you were hit hard by it. Is it
true?"

"Yes; for once in the course of events rumour hasn't lied. Our house
was in heavily, and has suffered with the rest."

"That's part of your trouble, Robert?"

"Well, perhaps part; though I should scarcely say so, as the
money-loss has been replaced, and Streightley and Son have passed the
sponge across the slate, and look upon it as an unutterably bad debt."

"Lucky for them that they are able to do so; had it been my case, I
should either have been playing rackets in Whitecross Street, or
wearing a black wig and whiskers, and hiding myself as much as
possible in a steamer bound to a country without an extradition
treaty. I often think if you great commercial swells only knew how we
professional men live, and the amount of the balance presently
standing to our credit at our bankers----"

"Yes; and if you professional men only knew how the commercial swells,
as you call us, envy you your freedom from responsibility."

"Freedom from responsibility, indeed! By the way, how's your wife?"

"_Apropos_ of responsibility! She'd take that as a compliment. She's
very well indeed, old boy, very well; not up in town yet. Still
staying at Middlemeads, where you've never yet been, though both of us
have done our best to get you there."

"My dear Robert, what on earth would be the good of my arriving at
your country place with a blue stuff bag full of papers, and enjoying
my holiday in the country by sticking to your library from morning
till night, reading cases, drawing pleas, and giving opinions? I feel
perfectly certain that at your library-table, which is probably
virgin-free from ink-blots, in your library-chair, which is probably
comfortable, and surrounded by your country atmosphere, which of
course is pure and fresh, the few wits which I possess would leave me,
and the most which I should do at Middlemeads would have the effect of
utterly depriving me from ever earning five guineas again. No, I won't
come to Middlemeads until I can--with a comfortable conscience--leave
my blue bag behind me, and when that will be heaven only knows!"

"And in the mean time, and for the mere sake of your work, you drag
your life on in these solitary chambers?"

"Listen to him! listen to Benedick the married man; so full of
domestic happiness that he must crow over us poor bachelors. Very
well, old fellow, as fate has willed it, is my life; the more work I
have the happier I am: if I had not any, I should stick my head into
the Temple fountain, and thereby incur the odium of the Benchers. No,
I must not do that quite, while I've the old governor and Constance
left, lest I should be supremely wretched; whereas in my work I'm
thoroughly happy; and as for solitary chambers--well, they are
solitary now, but they wern't once, and won't be again soon, I think.
My old chum's coming home."

"Your old chum? Who do you mean?"

"Why, the man who lived with me in these rooms before, and will share
them again, I hope. Gordon Frere."

"Gordon Frere? Is he coming back to England--to London?" Robert
Streightley's face turned pale as he asked this question, and his lips
twitched with nervous anxiety.

"I hope so. I've written to him to try and persuade him to do so. He's
a clever fellow, airy and specious, with what they call a good 'gift
of the gab;' and I want him to try his fortune at the bar."

Streightley rose from his chair, took a few paces round the room, then
settled himself again with his face shaded by his hand, looking at his
friend.

"You were very intimate with this man Frere, Charley?" he asked in a
hard dry voice, after a minute's pause.

"Intimate? Didn't he live here, I tell you?--though you knew it long
since, if you'll only give yourself the trouble to recollect."

"And you were thoroughly in his confidence?"

Charles Yeldham answered, "Entirely." But the word had scarcely
escaped him when he saw the drift of the question, and wished he had
pondered ere replying.

"Then you know, I suppose, that he--that he was--was in love with Miss
Guyon--with my wife?"

"My dear Robert, what on earth are you talking about, what on
earth----"

"Do you know it, or don't you?"

"I have heard it, of course, and----"

"You have heard it, of course; and now he's coming back! Coming back,
curse him!"

"My dear Streightley, have you taken leave of your senses? What on
earth has the young man's return--although in past times he might have
had sufficient good taste to admire Miss Guyon and hope to win her,
for which I honour him--yes! I say I honour him--what on earth has his
return to do with such an outbreak as this?"

"Never mind, Charles Yeldham! He shan't see her! Look here--mark
this--he may be a friend of yours or not, but he shan't see her. I'll
have no renewal of old friendships and all that! He shan't see her!
Mr. Guyon shall take care of that. I'll appeal to him, and he'll back
me up, I know."

"My dear Robert, if you're weak enough to have to appeal to your
father-in-law in any matter in which your wife is concerned, I think
you're to be pitied! However, don't fear! Any feeling which Frere may
have had for Miss Guyon is quite past and gone, and now that she is
Mrs. Streightley----"

"Ah! that's all very well; but he shan't see her. Mr. Guyon will back
me up in that, I'm sure. I know he will. Good-bye, Charley;" and Mr.
Streightley turned the handle of the door and left the chambers.

The attorneys whose cases Mr. Yeldham had in hand that day found the
celebrated conveyancer a little dilatory. Their clerks attending the
next morning were bidden to call again later in the day. You see you
don't get through much work when, your feet on the fender, and a pipe
in your mouth, you sit for the whole afternoon staring at the grate
and chewing the cud of mental reflection. "'He shan't see her!' Why
not? Streightley cannot be idiot enough to suppose that there is such
fascination in Frere as to--O no! That's not it. 'He shan't see
her'--that means they shan't meet, shan't speak, shan't--'Mr. Guyon
shall take care of that--he'll back me up'--Mr. Guyon!--they shan't
meet! Mr. Guyon back me up!--they shan't meet! No answer to Gordon's
proposal, no meeting with him at that ball--old Guyon's reply as to
the pre-engagement and--Now, by the Lord, Robert Streightley, I only
hope my thoughts are wrong; for if I'm right, you've been led by
weakness or worse into a base conspiracy, and henceforth are no friend
of mine!"




CHAPTER VII.
HESTER'S DEBUT.


The judgment passed by Robert Streightley on Hester Gould, when he had
critically examined her bearing under the novel and trying
circumstances of her heiress-ship, was amply borne out by her
subsequent conduct. She was a decided success; and though totally
unknown to the members of the great world in which she had now taken
her place, so that they had no opportunity of comparing her as she was
in the present with what she had been in the past, her simplicity of
manners, her unassuming tranquillity, as free from deprecation as from
assertion, received a tribute of genuine admiration. Miss Gould was as
much alive to the little touch of impertinence in this general
sentiment as she was to its usefulness and agreeability; but she
enjoyed the latter, and did not resent the former.

"They are wonderfully kind and polite, and all that," she said one day
to Lady Henmarsh, while she was entering a long list of new names and
addresses in her visiting-book; "but it amuses me a little to observe
that not one of them can quite conceal her surprise at discovering
that I look and behave like a lady. How I delight in such _navet!_
They let me see, without the least disguise, that they expect me to be
vulgar and underbred, but visit me because I am rich and certified by
you."

"It's the way of the world, my dear Hester," said her friend; "and
neither you nor I will change it, be assured."

"I don't want to change it, for my part," said Hester; "it suits me
very well as it is."

This gay colloquy took place shortly after Miss Gould had taken
possession of her handsome and perfectly-appointed house at Palace
Gardens. The programme agreed upon at Middlemeads had been faithfully
carried out, and the intercourse between Portland Place and Palace
Gardens was frequent and affectionate. Miss Gould demeaned herself
towards Robert and his wife with exemplary tact and propriety. Not the
keenest and closest observer could have divined that she possessed a
knowledge of the affairs of the one wholly unshared by the other, and
that she had succeeded, by minute investigation and the art of
inductive reasoning, at an understanding of the means by which the
marriage which had thwarted her plans, and given her the first shock
she had ever experienced of the humiliation of defeat, had been
brought about, almost as clear as that possessed by the principals in
the transaction. The firmness, the indifference, and the decision of
Hester Gould's character had much attraction for Katharine, who found
pleasure and amusement in watching that young lady's method of dealing
with her novel position, and to whose proud nature the coolness and
self-possession of Hester were peculiarly congenial. They were not
confidential with each other; but then, how could they have been so?
Katharine had a secret in her life whose concealment had been of such
immense importance to her that she had taken the one step which
determines a woman's whole existence in order to secure that
concealment. Outside that she had no confidences to bestow. On
Hester's side there was still less frankness in their intercourse; but
she would not have been confidential with Katharine, had there been no
hidden link between them; she had never trusted any one fully. The
nearest approach she had ever made or permitted to a confidential
intimacy had been in Mr. Thacker's case; and she had begun to repent
of even that limited _dmarche_ lately, since that gentleman had
hinted at the hopes to which it had given rise.

"I might have found out all he has told me for myself, if I had only
waited," she said in vexed soliloquy; "if I had only had patience, I
need not have wanted him at all, and now there's no saying how
troublesome he may think fit to be."

In this misgiving Hester Gould was entirely mistaken, and her
entertaining it showed that she had not read Mr. Thacker with her
accustomed thoroughness and infallibility. Daniel knew when Miss Gould
refused him, in the matter-of-fact and reasonable fashion she had
done, that she was perfectly in earnest, clearly in the right, and
immutable in her resolution. He had no more notion of annoying her
with a renewal of his addresses than he had of resenting their
rejection. He must have liked her very much, and have seen many
advantages in addition to its pecuniary attractions in the scheme
of such a marriage; for Mr. Daniel Thacker was as little of a
marrying-man as any individual in London, but he was quite incapable
of such a _btise_ as persisting in an unwelcome suit, or exhibiting,
indeed of feeling, the slightest offence. Hester Gould was the sort of
woman, being an heiress, whom it would have been pleasant and
advisable to marry; but as such an arrangement was not practicable, he
fell back upon the other and less hazardous alternative--that of
fostering and preserving confidential relations with her. If she was
not to be his wife--and he knew the moment she said "no" that that was
not to be--she should remain his very good friend, in the real meaning
of the term. He believed he had found out what her game had been in
the past (that game she had lost, as it seemed to him, by waiting too
confidently); he acknowledged that he did not know the nature of that
which she meant to play in the future; but if any one was ever to know
it, he would be that person, with her consent or without it. He had
felt at once the change that had come over her after his luckless
proposal; he had discerned her imperfect appreciation of his _savoir
faire_; but he was neither offended nor afraid. He knew he could
safely trust his own manner and time to convince her that he had
accepted her decision as final, that she had no importunity to fear on
his part.

The result had fully justified Mr. Thacker's anticipations, and his
relations with Hester were permanently established on a footing of as
much mutual reliance as was possible to the nature of either, and the
frank interchange of mutual good services. Mr. Thacker was unfeignedly
pleased when he learned from the voice of rumour that the shipowner's
heiress was becoming quite the fashion, and when he perceived by her
brightened expression, her fresher colour, and the added vivacity of
her manner and bearing, that Miss Gould entered with sincere enjoyment
into the pleasures within her reach. A youth of well-concealed
ambition, of self-repression, of toil, had not hardened and deadened
and narrowed her, as it might have done a weaker nature; there was no
active poison of cynicism in her knowledge of the world; and her
coolheadedness, while it secured her from deception, did not err on
the joyless side of utter disbelief. She enjoyed life as a
connoisseur, not as an enthusiast--as an epicure, not as a gourmand;
but she did enjoy it both well and wisely.

Circumstances favoured Miss Gould very decidedly. She was sufficiently
attractive to be admired by men, and not so aggressively beautiful as
to be hated by women. She did not in the least overrate her own
personal charms, or the powers of her mind; but she knew that she was
good-looking and clever enough to be admired in society, independently
of the wealth which had been her passport into it; while other women
would console themselves for her success, and explain it on the
grounds of that wealth solely. She had found herself admitted at once
into the best of the society in which Katharine Guyon had moved before
her marriage, and the circle was constantly expanding. Lady Henmarsh
was more popular as the chaperone of a well-looking and richly-dowered
heiress than as the chaperone of a well-connected beauty with no
money, and a detrimental though pleasant papa. Miss Guyon's remarkably
sensible and commendable marriage had also shed reflected glory upon
Lady Henmarsh; and as the dangerous beauty was dangerous no longer,
but, on the contrary, a decided acquisition, being excessively rich,
and possessing a praiseworthy taste for expensive hospitalities, all
the petty jealousies and envies excited by Miss Guyon were forgiven to
"that dear creature Mrs. Streightley."

Thus the world was to all seeming very fair and bright before the two
young women whom a chance had brought together, to be thenceforth
inextricably intermingled in each other's lives.

It belonged to the well-regulated completeness of Hester Gould's
character, to the firmness of a woman in whom there was nothing
little, however much there might be that was bad, that she never
neglected a friend, never forgot a kindness, never overlooked a former
claim on her consideration or gratitude. She was incapable of the
meanness of disregarding those who had aided her when her lot was one
of poverty and obscurity, and equally incapable of the impertinence of
patronage. She felt gratitude, and she displayed it simply, genuinely,
appropriately, with the true and delicate tact which was one of the
finer features of her character. She had provided for the comfort of
Aunt Lavinia as carefully as for her own in the arrangements of the
handsome house, which the good old lady regarded with mingled
admiration and misgiving. She had explained to her aunt that all the
requirements of the world would be fulfilled by the arrangements into
which she had entered with Lady Henmarsh; that she would never be
expected to do violence to her principles by partaking of the
dangerous and delusive delights to which her niece's novel position
afforded her access; and she gave her _carte-blanche_ for as many
entertainments of the substantial-tea description, which they
particularly affected, as her favourite "ministers" could be prevailed
on to accept. Nor was her attention to her aunt limited to such formal
provisions for her comfort. No pleasure, no hurry, no press of
engagements, none of the flutter of popularity and general request
into which Miss Gould soon fell, ever induced her to neglect the
commonplace but worthy woman who had befriended her youth and shared
her evil days. A portion of every morning was spent with Aunt Lavinia;
and a visit to the quiet spinster preceded invariably the fulfilment
of her evening engagements, over which her aunt would sigh furtively,
and concerning which she reposed many mournful confidences and
misgivings in sundry clerical breasts, without, however, feeling any
distressingly deep conviction of the enormity of her niece's
behaviour. Hester's old school-mistress had not been forgotten. The
modest sum which the labour of half a lifetime had painfully
accumulated, but which had yet some years to gather ere it could
suffice for even such a humble maintenance as the well-nigh worn-out
teacher longed for, was supplemented by the old pupil, to whom Miss
Nickson never "could take;" and Laburnum Lodge, with the inky and
lacerated desks, the dreary fly-blown maps, and the dreadful jangling
rattletrap pianos, was disposed of by private contract. Once every
week Hester Gould's brougham might be seen before the little gate of a
pretty little cottage at Fulham; and Hester's figure, grown graceful
now, and clad in elegant attire, might be recognised seated in the
little parlour-window, as she gave an hour of the time on which
society made insatiable demands to the woman who had done her duty to
the orphan girl for conscience' sake.

She was no less considerate of those to whom her former obligations
were of another kind, and must be redeemed in a different way. Among
their number were the Hampstead Hebrews, Rachel and Rebecca Thacker,
and Ellen Streightley. To the dark-browed sisters of her confidential
friend Miss Gould extended every social advantage within her power to
compass for them. They found their lives wonderfully brightened, and
their ideas much expanded under Hester's influence; and they became
more enthusiastically fond of her than ever.

Ellen Streightley had become less enthusiastic about Katharine since
she had been in town. The constant stir, the fashionable jargon, the
incessant familiar mention of places, and persons, and circumstances,
all foreign to her knowledge, her tastes, and her ideas, troubled and
confused her. The same sort of thing had existed at Middlemeads
indeed, but on a lesser scale; and then Ellen had had Hester to
support her, and she had not felt so insignificant, so lost, as she
felt now, in the ever-shifting, ever-thronging crowd in Portland
Place. Katharine was as kind to her as ever, but she had no time to
occupy herself with her; and the romantic vision of sisterly
confidence, which had made her sojourn at Middlemeads delightful to
Ellen, vanished away before the realism of the tumultuous frivolity of
London life. Ellen had been enchanted with Middlemeads, but the house
in Portland Place alarmed more than it pleased her. She remembered
penitently the warnings of Decimus, who was soon coming back now--a
circumstance which rendered them all the more terrible; she was
chilled by the cool undemonstrative disapproval of her mother, who had
but once entered her son's splendid house; she felt out of her place
there; she was no longer at home with Katharine as she had been at
Middlemeads; here she was only one of her sister-in-law's innumerable
guests. But when Ellen was with Hester Gould she had no such feeling.
Hester was quite unaltered, enjoyed as much leisure, and was as well
disposed to share it with her friend as in the old days. Hester's
house was very handsome, and her establishment was very imposing, and
in all things different from the Brixton villa; but Ellen was not
dazzled and bewildered and put at a disadvantage by this difference,
as she was by that of Katharine's house and manner of living; she did
not feel like a stranger at Palace Gardens. Hester would receive her
as calmly and pleasantly as though no afternoon engagements were in
contemplation; would listen to all her simple, eager, unimpressive
confidences with unwavering patience; would listen even to the
outpourings of the honest missionary, who had a habit of digressing
into sermons in his love-letters; in short, Hester took a sound and
serious interest in Ellen's fate. Miss Gould excessively disliked the
deportation of her friend to foreign, and probably cannibal, parts,
and had given much consideration to the question whether it might not
be possible to restrain the ardour of the Rev. Decimus by the mundane
process of purchasing him a living at home. She had very little doubt
of being able to procure him the advantages of heathen society,
provided he did not insist on black pagans. Down in Staffordshire now,
or in outlying London districts, or among the truly rural population
of Devonshire, he might surely find hideous ignorance, crime, and
brutish unconsciousness of any thing but the lowest instincts of
nature, flourishing as luxuriantly as in the Feejee or the Andaman
Islands. If the police reports spoke truth, there was room for the
evolutions of a whole noble army of martyrs in picturesque and
prosperous England; and Decimus might be quite as useful, while Ellen
would be infinitely more safe. So Hester thought about the matter, and
came to the conclusion--excusable to her ignorance, and deducible from
her experience of the ease with which every thing one wants can be had
for money--that a living in British heathendom might be purchased. She
did not impart her ideas to Robert Streightley, for she had her own
reasons for knowing that he was not in a condition to receive any
proposition involving the expenditure of ready-money with much favour
just then; but she took Mr. Thacker into her confidence; and as that
gentleman's religious persuasion prevented his feeling any scruples
concerning a transaction of the kind, he undertook to buy a living
for Hester's unconscious _protg_ with as much alacrity and unconcern
as he would have undertaken to hire an opera-box or to match a
carriage-horse. "Remember, if you want a presentation likely to fall
in soon, you can't get one cheap," was his sole demurrer when Miss
Gould explained, with the utmost _nivet_, the object of her wishes.

"I don't want to get it cheap, Mr. Thacker," replied Miss Gould.
"Provided it's comfortable, and there's enough to do to keep the
pocket-Apostle busy, and it's a wholesome place for Ellen, and not
dangerous in the way of strikes and mill-burnings,--I am content. I
don't think I should like it _too_ rural and picturesque, please,
because the murders in places of that sort are always so very
horrible."

"By Jove! she gives me her directions as if it were a semi-detached
villa with a good croquet-lawn she wanted," said Mr. Thacker, as he
left Hester's presence, having cheerfully undertaken the somewhat
difficult task she had imposed upon him. "There's nothing on earth to
equal the unreasonableness of even the most reasonable woman, and she
certainly is that. Not bad for an unconscious bit of satire either on
Christian notions in general,--would be nuts to some of our people, I
daresay."


The season was at its height, and all London seemed abandoned to the
pursuit of pleasure, almost as completely as the gay capital of France
in its normal condition;--all London, that is to say, except the few
hundreds of thousands who were suffering, dying, bearing all the ills
and miseries of life, unseen and unheard by their more fortunate
brethren, for whom the hour of calamity had not yet sounded. Among the
most fashionable of the fashionable _runions_ fixed for one brilliant
night in June,--a night on which the fields and trees, the rivers and
the gardens, were bathed in moonlight, and fanned by warm perfumed
air; a night on which all nature was wrapped in a trance of
delight,--was Mrs. Pendarvis's ball. Her ball _par excellence_, be it
observed; for she "opened her rooms" for dancing and music, for
charades and kettledrums, for every conceivable purpose for which
people could be gathered together, a most satisfactory number of times
during the season. But this was a grand, an exceptional occasion,--a
yearly event, which found record in the chronicles of the doings of
the magnates of society, and formed an epoch in the history of each
successive year.

Katharine Streightley and her husband were going to this ball. Miss
Guyon had never missed the grand occasion since she had been "out,"
and its last recurrence had been memorable to her. She remembered it
well as she sat under her maid's hands, and suffered herself to be
attired far more splendidly than usual. She took a secret pleasure
in forcing upon her own attention the contrast between the past and
the present on this night. When her toilet was an accomplished fact,
she stood before her glass and gazed upon her radiant figure, clothed
in the richest white satin, and decorated with the valuable and
quaintly-set diamonds which had been her mother's sole legacy to her,
and a thrill of irrepressible triumph ran through her whole frame. She
felt her own beauty as she had never felt it before; and she
acknowledged that it was very pleasant to have the means of adorning
it so lavishly, of adding so much to its power. Her toilet-table was
covered with cases in which gems of great value and beauty were
nestled away in green-velvet niches, or displayed boastfully upon
backgrounds of satin; but she had left them all undisturbed; her
mother's diamonds should be her only ornaments that night. She desired
her maid to bring more lights, and set them about the room, so as to
show her her own figure in every point of view. The woman obeyed, with
some surprise: this was not like Mrs. Streightley, who, though
inordinately extravagant, was not practically vain, with the kind of
vanity which impresses itself upon the attention of a waiting-woman.

She was looking over her white shoulder at the reflection in the long
glass behind her, and her maid was standing by with a heap of soft
white wrapping drapery on her arm, when Robert knocked at the door of
her dressing-room. She bade him "come in," in a pleasant voice, and he
did so.

"The carriage is waiting. Are you nearly ready?" he said. And then
stopped short, and looked at her, literally dazzled with her exceeding
beauty. Thus he had seen her, a year ago, the first time he had dined
at her father's house, dressed for a ball,--a ball at Mrs. Pendarvis's
too,--a ball he had heard mentioned with a kind of hopeless envy. And
she had gone downstairs to the carriage with him then. How well he
remembered it, how distinctly he saw it all!--the head-dress she had
added to her dinner-array, the white cloak--was this which he took
from the maid and tenderly placed around her the same? he wondered. It
looked like it; but it was another, ten times more costly than Miss
Guyon had ever worn. Again he saw the smile, the bow, from the corner
of the carriage; again he heard Mr. Guyon's, "Don't stand there,
Streightley; come in." And he felt like a man who has formerly seen in
a dream things now passing before his eyes.

He could not speak before her servant; so he trusted to a glance to
tell his wife how beautiful he thought her. He saw immediately that
among the jewels she wore were none of his gifts, and he said, with
some hesitation, "You do not honour my selection much, Katharine.
Would not your bracelet go with your other ornaments, dear?"

A splendid serpent, a glittering mass of brilliants, with emerald eyes
and protruded ruby tongue, lay on the table. He took it up as he
spoke. Katharine looked half-disposed to refuse; then she said gaily:

"Never mind if it does contradict the quaint old roses and crescents;
I'll wear it, Robert. Put it on, please,--there." And she held out her
round white arm.

It was a trifling incident, but it meant a great deal to Robert
Streightley; so much, that when they were seated in the carriage he
thanked her with all the ardour of a lover. He told her he had never
seen her half so beautiful; he reminded her--he who rarely dared to
refer to the past--of the first time he had seen her dressed for a
ball; and told her what a vision of beauty, what an enchantress she
had appeared to him then,--what an unending spell she had cast upon
him. There was no wrath, no bitterness in Katharine's heart that
night, though the remembrances evoked were all of the kind calculated
to provoke them. Time, and the unfailing, persevering love of this
man,--love which she wondered at, and which had begun to touch her
heart,--were working on her proud nature. She listened to him with a
smile, with a faint, beautiful blush. She was glad that she had
pleased him; it was not hard to do so: to wear a gorgeous ornament
like that, and be thanked for it, was not a great sacrifice. To be so
passionately admired by one's own husband was not unpleasant.
Katharine was quite aware that it was not a very common case. Their
carriage fell into the line; the light of many lamps was flitting
about. She threw her cloak off the arm that bore the bracelet, and
admired the splendid jewel, rippling with many-coloured light:

"It is extremely beautiful, Robert," she said. "I like it better than
any of your presents. It was your first, you know:"

He did know; and he also knew that this was the first, the very first
word he had ever heard from his wife's lips which implied any
sentiment concerning the past connected with him. A fresh tide of hope
and joy welled up in his heart; and as she laid her hand lightly in
his, and let it rest there until their turn had come, and the carriage
drew up under the striped awning, surrounded with a gaping crowd of
idlers collected to see the ball-goers, Robert Streightley was happier
than he had ever been in his life before.

Mrs. Pendarvis's house was large, but the fashion and success of a
ball appear to depend on the disregard of proportion between the room
and company; and when it is said that this ball was brilliantly
successful, it becomes unnecessary to state that it was excessively
crowded. Robert and Katharine were detained for some time on the
staircase, but the delay was not tedious; for they encountered a few
scores of their acquaintances, and Robert had the satisfaction, which
in his present happy mood was unmixed, of observing the universal
admiration excited by his lovely wife. At the top of the first flight
of stairs there was a large recess, or rather room, beautifully hung
with muslin and lace, and profusely decorated with flowers and odorous
plants. A few route-seats were placed in this apartment, which was
only a little less crowded than the dancing-rooms and the staircase.
When Robert and Katharine reached this temporary harbour they found
Lady Henmarsh in possession of one of the seats, and were immediately
greeted by her with her accustomed warmth.

"Miss Gould is here, of course?" asked Katharine.

"Yes, she is dancing. How well you are looking, Katharine! I see you
are wearing your diamonds to-night; very becoming indeed; that serpent
is beautiful. You have such taste, Mrs. Streightley."

"Come, Robert, we must really try to make our bow to Mrs. Pendarvis,"
said Katharine rather impatiently; and they proceeded on their journey
to the second floor. There they found Mrs. Pendarvis, and several of
Katharine's habitual partners. In a minute she had joined the throng
in the dancing-room, and Robert was engaged in the double task of
squeezing himself into as small a space as possible along the
doorjamb, and trying to follow his wife's graceful figure through the
distracting evolutions of a valse. When he had succeeded in seeing her
through two or three rounds, he thought he would go down and find Lady
Henmarsh; and he was just moving for the purpose, when a lady and
gentleman came past him from the dancing-room, and the lady stopped
and held out her hand. It was Hester Gould, beautifully dressed, in
the highest spirits, and looking unusually well, even handsome, as
Robert felt instinctively in the moment during which his eyes rested
on her. It was only a moment, however, for they turned to her
companion. The gentleman with whom Miss Gould had been dancing, with
whom she was now going in search of Lady Henmarsh, was Gordon Frere.


Katharine had seen him also. In a whirl of the valse her eyes had met
his, as she and her partner passed him and his. She saw his fair hair,
his blue eyes, the smile she remembered so well; she heard his low
pleasant laugh, and at the same instant he looked at her and she
at him, and they were apart again. Then he led Hester from the
dancing-room, and down to the canopied recess where Lady Henmarsh sat,
and where he remained for some time, laughing and chatting with his
animated and attractive partner. He had seen Katharine; and the result
had been just what he had told Yeldham he knew it would be. He was
ready to acknowledge her as beautiful and fascinating as ever, but he
did not mind seeing her a bit now. He would have been an ass to have
married at all in his circumstances, and she did quite right to make a
good match when she got the chance. She shouldn't have flirted with
him and jilted him as she had done, to be sure; but then women were
all alike, and it hadn't hurt him much after all. He was delighted to
see her looking so well, and to believe that she was very happy; and,
by Jove, he was going to enjoy himself, and not think about love and
marriage until he could afford such luxuries.

Lady Henmarsh had felt an acute pang of fear when she recognised
Gordon Frere; but she soon quieted it by the timely reflection that no
one could prove her share in the transactions of the past, and no one
could unmarry Katharine, or take the money he had made by the marriage
out of cousin Ned's pocket.

"I hope Katharine won't make a fool of herself," she thought, as she
watched her ascend the stairs with her husband, and thought of the
inevitable meeting before her; "but if she is inclined to do it,
nobody can prevent her, and it's no business of mine. What can have
brought the idle young fool back, I wonder? I thought he was safe for
five years at least, and then promotion to Russia, or some equally
desirable place." And when Hester Gould brought Gordon Frere down to
the recess, Lady Henmarsh read in her face that she was pleased with
the young man, and desirous that she should be gracious to him; so, as
Lady Henmarsh found it convenient to further Miss Gould's pleasure
just then to the utmost of her power, she was gracious to Gordon
Frere, congratulated him on his return to London, and gave him to
understand that Sir Timothy would be charmed to see him at Cavendish
Square.

The ball terminated as brilliantly as it had begun; and Katharine was
the gayest of the gay, the brightest of the bright. She stayed very
late, and she danced incessantly. Again and again she found herself
close to Gordon Frere, and once she was so placed that she had to
choose between speaking to him and "cutting him dead." She took
counsel of her pride; she remembered that if, as seemed likely, he was
remaining in London, she must necessarily meet him often, and she
decided on speaking to him. They were on the staircase, she going
down, he coming up, with Hester on his arm,--he had danced several
times with her that night, as Katharine had remarked,--when she bowed
to him, and said,

"How do you do, Mr. Frere? Have you been long in town?"

"A few days only, Mrs. Streightley. I hope Mr. Guyon is well?"

"Quite well, thank you."

Again she bowed, and passed him; and thus they met and parted, who,
when last they met, had parted with the brightest and most blessed
hope which ever gilds life for youth and love.

Robert and Katharine drove home in silence, which each hoped might be
imputed by the other to fatigue. With her remembrance was busy, with
him remorse and shame.




CHAPTER VIII.
MARRIED FOR LOVE.


Mrs. Streightley met Gordon Frere frequently during the remainder of
the month of June. She met him at balls and dinner-parties, at ftes
and promenades, and riding in the Park. She was distantly civil on
these occasions; and he carefully, but reluctantly, modelled his
demeanour on hers. "She is so awfully stiff and standoffish," he would
say to himself, when Katharine had bowed to him coldly or spoken in a
tone of icy indifference; "it seems almost as if she couldn't forgive
herself. I'm sure I forgive her; more than that,--by Jove! I'm very
much obliged to her. We should both have been up a tree by this time
if we had been married, Treasury appointment notwithstanding. What a
beauty she is, though! and Streightley's not half a bad fellow either,
though we used to make such fun of him. 'The City man' she called him,
like a deceitful minx as she was, and she going to marry him all the
time! However, I must not think of that, or I shall be getting angry
again." And from this soliloquy, and from others like it, in which he
indulged, it would appear that Mr. Gordon Frere's sentiments were not
of the deep and lasting order, and that his friend Yeldham had formed
a tolerably correct estimate of his character. He was of that
constitution, and at that time of life, when a few months seem like an
eternity; and he had come back to London fancy-free, and if a little
wiser, a little more capable of acting from interested motives, not
materially corrupted. He would not, probably, allow himself to fall in
love with any woman for the future whom it would be imprudent to
marry; but neither would he marry any woman, no matter how rich, whom
he could not love.

Katharine's demeanour towards Gordon Frere was an unspeakable relief
to Robert Streightley, whose first impulsive feeling on seeing Frere
was dread of an explanation, which might lead to a discovery. His
brief vision of happiness was dispelled by the sight of the young
man's face, and he shrunk with a painful reluctance from the
interchange of the ordinary civilities of society with one whom he had
so deeply injured. In vain did he try to find relief in the
remembrance of all that Katharine had gained by her marriage with him;
in vain did he watch the happy _insouciance_, the heart-whole gaiety
of Frere, and argue from them the lightness and instability of the
sentiment with which he had regarded Katharine. His conscience was
awake, and not any sophistry could lull it to sleep again.

Mr. Guyon had been among the earliest of Gordon Frere's former
acquaintances to hear of his abandonment of diplomatic life, and his
return to London. He was aware of these circumstances before he
received one of cousin Hetty's confidential little notes, in which she
mentioned, in a tone of alarm and judicious warning, having seen Mr.
Frere at Mrs. Pendarvis's ball. Mr. Guyon had met his young friend a
day before that festivity; had joked with him pleasantly about his
"butterfly" qualities; had congratulated him upon his return to the
centre of civilisation; and had asked him whether he had met the
Streightleys,--all with a pleasant impudence which Gordon Frere was
fairly forced to admire, and found it impossible to resent. Mr. Guyon
was not for a moment visited by the misgivings which had disturbed his
more sensitive son-in-law; but he divined that Robert, for whom he
entertained, in certain respects, a good-natured contempt, would be
uncomfortable about Frere's return; and he resolved to console him, at
the risk of offending his pride by the momentary revival of a subject
never mentioned between them. Accordingly he dropped in to breakfast
at Portland Place two days after the ball and the meeting, and found,
as he expected, his son-in-law alone.

"Katharine not down? Nothing wrong, I hope?" asked the affectionate
parent.

"O no; she is a little tired after the Opera and a couple of parties,
and she is going to Richmond to-day; so she is resting this morning."

"Indeed! very sensible of her. She stayed late at Mrs. Pendarvis's,
didn't she?"

"Yes," replied Robert, shortly and uneasily.

Mr. Guyon looked at him, and their eyes met.

"So Frere was there?" said the indomitable Mr. Guyon, as airily and
pleasantly as if he were mentioning the most agreeable trifle. "Rather
awkward, on the whole; and yet, I don't know--all for the best
perhaps. He will probably marry well, and the sooner the better for
him and for us."

"For us?" asked Robert timidly. And there was a shade of pain, and
something like shame on his face, which would have hurt a sensitive
observer, but which merely annoyed Mr. Guyon, who found it difficult
to repress a sneer, as he replied:

"And us, of course--that is, if we need care about the matter one way
or the other, which I don't see that we need."

"But if Katharine should have any conversation, any confidence with
him?" faltered Robert.

"There is not the faintest possibility of any such danger," said Mr.
Guyon, with equal composure and decision. "I understand Katharine
much better than you do, Robert, and I know that our invulnerable
safety"--the younger man flushed and winced a little at the
words--"consists in her indomitable pride. The one individual of all
her acquaintance who will never exchange a confidential sentence with
Katharine is Mr. Gordon Frere." And then Mr. Guyon promptly dropped
the subject, and talked of money, racing, betting, and other serious
pursuits of life; and after a short time took his leave of Robert,
leaving him reassured, but with a fresh and bitter sense of
humiliation.

The time which had wrought so rapid a change in Gordon Frere, which
had taught him to regard with forgiveness, which almost bordered on
approbation, the fickleness and treachery of the woman against whom he
had delivered the valedictory philippic,--which Charles Yeldham
remembered with wonder and bewilderment,--had worked considerable
alteration in Katharine's mood as well. Her fine nature had been
hardened, her generous temper had been warped; a crust of worldliness
and selfishness had formed over the hot heart, and the trustful
impulses of youth were dead within her; but the maddening anger, the
intolerable mortification, had subsided. A momentary thrill of these
former emotions, mingled with the yearning of the heart towards the
object of a passion, or even a fancy, had passed over her, when, in
the crush and whirl of the ball-room, she had recognised Frere. But
her strength of will and self-command had effectually put it down
before the moment came when she found herself obliged to speak to him.

Something like the tumult of the past renewed itself in her mind when
she found herself alone that night, and at liberty to think of the
occurrences of that evening; but it did not last. Mr. Guyon was right.
Any calculation founded on Katharine's pride could not fail; and that
pride helped her in the very first hour of the resuscitation of the
past. Believing as she did that there never had been any sincerity in
the sentiment which Gordon Frere had affected towards her, she did not
recognise change in the gay and unembarrassed manner which she had
immediately observed; she imputed it to the discarding of the mask,
the abandonment of the comedy; and so thinking, she wondered that she
felt so little anger, so little disdain, so little emotion of any
kind, all things considered. She recalled to memory every circumstance
of that terrible day which had undeceived her; she recollected it,
hour by hour, in its anguish of suspense, in its paroxysms of grief
and anger; she remembered the faint deadly sickness which had come
over her, and the dreadful despairing hours of the night. But she only
remembered these things; she did not feel them again; and Katharine
knew that with the last throbs of anger had passed away the last
lingerings of her love for Gordon Frere. It had been real, very true,
and fervent; and no doubt, had he returned it, as he had taught her to
believe he did, it would have lasted through all the chances and
changes of this mortal life; but it was dead and gone now, and the
sight of him taught her that it was so. Before Katharine's eyes closed
that night, after her long vigil of remembrances and reflections, she
knew that she should, in all the future, meet Gordon Frere without any
painful emotion, beyond a little irrepressible contempt.

She was soon put to the test; for the acquaintance between Frere and
Lady Henmarsh progressed rapidly; and Katharine was not spared the
sight or the mention of him. Lady Henmarsh would not have put herself
out of her way to annoy Katharine, but she was not unwilling to do so
when it happened to come in her way; and she took an early opportunity
of confiding to her her impression that Hester Gould was decidedly
smitten with the good-looking young fellow, who really had no harm in
him, and whose only fault was want of money.

"He is really charming, Kate," Lady Henmarsh observed, with an air of
candidly admitting a former error in judgment. "I was quite too hard
on him in old times--an age ago--and I am ready to admit it. Of course
_that_ would never have done; but every thing is all right now, and I
am sure you are the happiest girl in the world; and as for that dear
Mr. Streightley, he is a perfect prince."

Katharine had to bear this sort of thing, and she bore it well,
wondering sometimes that it did not pain her more keenly. She gave
little heed to Lady Henmarsh's hints about Hester Gould, which she
imputed to a general impulse of spite; and simply contented herself
with smiling rather bitterly as she thought how accurately they would
once have hit their mark. When she met Gordon Frere now, there was no
glamour between her eyes and him. He was not invested with the golden
halo of a girl's fancy. The time which had gone over Katharine's head,
though brief in duration, had been long in meaning, and she was no
longer the slave of her imagination. She saw him as he really was--a
pleasant, kindly, genial, well-bred, well-looking, shallow young man,
with brains enough and heart enough for the exigencies of society, and
admirably fitted to be rich and idle, with distinction and popularity.
She knew now that he was not a man who would ever accomplish any great
or noble purpose in life; not a man on whom a woman's heart could stay
itself in trouble. Somehow she felt that she had outgrown and outlived
Gordon Frere.

While one woman, to whom he had been the incarnation of the fondest
and fairest visions of youth, was thus thinking of Mr. Frere, he
had assumed a position of immense importance in the estimation of
another--a woman widely different from Katharine in every thing. When
Hester Gould met him at Mrs. Pendarvis's ball, she had been attracted
towards him chiefly by curiosity. She remembered him well as the
fair-haired young man whom she had seen at the memorable promenade, and
whom she had immediately discerned to be Katharine Guyon's lover. She
strongly suspected that he and the girl had both been victims of some
foul play, the full details of which her subsequent acquaintance with
the affairs of Mr. Guyon and his son-in-law had not enabled her to
ascertain; but that he, at least, had suffered at Mr. Guyon's
unscrupulous hands she did not doubt. Gordon had heard that the "old
cat," as he had irreverently called Lady Henmarsh on a former
occasion, was "taking a new heiress about with her;" for such was the
simple phrase in which the ingenuous youth of his set described
Hester's relations with her friend; and when, on his paying his
respects to Lady Henmarsh at Mrs. Pendarvis's ball, she had presented
him to Miss Gould, he concluded, as he led his partner to the
dancing-room, that she was the "new heiress" in question. Thus he too
felt some curiosity about the girl, whose tranquil easy manner, keen
dark eyes, elegant and tasteful dress, and conversation utterly free
from the missishness and the vapidity common to young ladies just
"out," made her an interesting person, apart from the very large
fortune which she undoubtedly possessed, and which was multiplied by
rumour with its accustomed liberality. Gordon would have been
considerably astonished, had he known that Miss Gould saw the glance
in which his eyes and Katharine's met, and perfectly understood and
appreciated the position; had he known that she marked the short
dialogue which passed between them on the staircase, and noted the
coldness and distance of its tone with distinct satisfaction. He and
she talked with more animation, and of subjects of more worth and
interest, than those usually discussed at a ball; for even a shallow
man like Gordon Frere was forced to think a little when he found
himself talking to a woman like Hester Gould; and they got on together
very well indeed; but the unconscious accord of their thoughts was
greater and closer still.

Curiosity, interest, and the spontaneous admiration which he was
certain to excite in every woman whom he addressed, had been the first
feelings with which Hester Gould had regarded Gordon Frere on that
evening. Before she entered the carriage to which he escorted her and
Lady Henmarsh, her admiration had increased, her interest had
deepened. The calm, well-governed heart, which held itself aloof from
passion, and had never loved any living being entirely without
calculation and caution, had been surprised, like the weakest, like
the least-guarded. Hester Gould had fallen in love--ay, like the
veriest sentimental school-girl--at first sight, with Gordon Frere.

She did not deny the fact to herself; she did not deceive herself. It
was characteristic of her to be perfectly conscious that she was weak,
but not to disguise from herself the weakness. Hester Gould had never
been visited by even the most transient feeling to which she could
assign the name of love before; and now, when it came, she knew it,
she recognised it, she acknowledged it--not with misgiving, not with
despair, not with self-contempt. When she was alone that night, or
rather in the early summer morning, her ball-dress laid aside, her
maid dismissed, she threw open the window of her dressing-room, and
sat down where the cool morning air came in and fanned her dark but
radiant face. The time wore on, and the sun came out strongly, and the
stir of life began, but still Hester sat, gazing out towards the
stately leafy trees in Kensington Gardens, and thinking. For the first
time in her life she suffered the tide of strong emotion to sweep over
her unchecked; for the first time in her life she felt its fulness.
Secretly but desperately she had rebelled against poverty and
obscurity; secretly, thirstingly, she had longed for wealth. Poverty
and obscurity were things of the past; wealth had come to her, and she
had taken it calmly. No human being could ever have guessed at the
exultation with which Hester Gould had entered upon the possession of
her fortune; no human being could ever have divined the intense secret
pleasure which every day's enjoyment of it gave her. But what was it
all to this? What was it all to the strange new delight, the sweet
subtle hope that stole upon her now? Not until she had thought long,
deeply, delightfully, over every little incident of the evening, did
Hester's mind revert to Katharine Streightley; and then, so potent was
the influence of the spell under which the calm self-possessed woman
had fallen, that there was only an acknowledgment of the strangeness
of the coincidence; there was not a single thrill of vindictive
exultation in the remembrance that they, the rivals, had changed
places; that the man whom Hester told herself she loved, told herself
she hoped to win, was the man whom Katharine had loved and lost. All
such thoughts seemed infinitely beneath her now, quite lost in the
immensity of this new interest in her life; and they could never more
have any power over her. But though passion had suddenly invaded the
well-guarded territory of Hester Gould's heart, romance had no place
in her nature; and she did not for a moment forget or undervalue the
advantages of her wealth. "_If_ he only comes to love me," she said,
"there will be no obstacle. I am rich enough to make it a wise thing
for him to marry me." And with this, the last waking thought in her
mind, Hester Gould slept, with a smile upon her face which had never
before irradiated it.

It was not until they had met several times that Gordon Frere began
to think seriously about Hester Gould. He had been asked to two
dinner-parties at Lady Henmarsh's, and had been especially
distinguished by the gracious attentions of the hostess. On neither
occasion had he met Katharine; but on both Mr. Guyon had been present,
and they had got on capitally. The convenient memory and the _savoir
vivre_ of cousin Ned were displayed to perfection in circumstances of
the kind, and Gordon Frere felt quite at his ease. They talked of the
Streightleys. Mr. Guyon described Middlemeads; hoped that his young
friend would have an opportunity of judging of its beauties for
himself; jocularly counselled his young friend to marry, provided he
could do it _well_, as soon as possible. "Never too soon, my dear
fellow,--never too soon. I was a mere boy myself," said Mr. Guyon,
with a comic sort of confidential sentiment; and discovered that he
was keeping his young friend away from the ladies.

When Mr. Gordon Frere had been seen a few times riding with Miss Gould
in the Row, and had been observed dancing with her an abnormal number
of dances, his friends began to make remarks of the kind elegantly
called "chaff" on the occurrences. It is not to be supposed, because
they have not appeared in these pages, that there were not many
aspirants to the hand and fortune of the shipowner's heiress. Their
name, indeed, was legion; but they had all fared equally ill, and not
one of the number had any reason to feel himself personally aggrieved
by the evident progress of Frere in Miss Gould's good graces. So the
chorus was rather congratulatory, the aspirants were good-natured in
the main; and though each would have been delighted to secure Miss
Gould's fortune for himself, they all agreed that Frere was a good
fellow, though an idle dog, who would never make any hand of himself,
and it would be a doosid good thing for him. As for Hester, though she
made no unfeminine or unladylike advances, she was far too sensible to
risk her happiness on punctilio. "I am not the first woman he will
have loved, if he ever comes to love me," she thought; "but he is the
only man I ever have loved, I ever can love, and that makes all the
difference." So she treated him from the first with undisguised though
unostentatious preference; and, fully acknowledging to herself that
her heart's desire and prayer was to become his wife, never endangered
her chance by the slightest coquetry or insincerity.

The light and facile nature of Gordon Frere was exactly calculated to
insure the success of such a policy, which, however, was rather the
instinct of Hester Gould's good sense. He liked her, he thought her
handsome and clever. "Not a star of beauty, not a queen of grace and
loveliness, like her, you know," said Mr. Frere to a friend of his
with whom, in times which seemed very long past now, he had been wont
to take counsel, and who listened to him with a gravely-amused
expression of countenance and much internal satisfaction--"nothing of
that kind, but a real nice girl. As sensible as a judge, sir!--a long
way more so than some of them, I believe--and really fond of me. Don't
think me a coxcomb, Charley, or an ass, as I was before. This is quite
another case; and, by Jove, I am as sure as that I am sitting here in
this everlasting old glory-hole, where I don't believe the very dust
ever changes or blows away, that if I asked Miss Gould to-morrow to
marry me, she would say yes."

"Very good, Gordon," returned his friend. "Then, if you want her to
marry you, and you are positively sure you would marry her if she
hadn't sixpence--which is the extreme proposition you have stated here
three times over, and which is one of those things of which no man can
be more than comparatively sure--ask her to-morrow, or on the first
opportunity, and come and tell me the result. And now I must turn you
out. I have an appointment with Claypole in five minutes, and some
papers to look over before he comes."

Mr. Frere went gaily away, and Charles Yeldham did not turn
immediately to the papers which lay upon his desk. He walked up and
down the room, his hands deep in his pockets, and his head bent. At
length he sat down with an impatient sigh and a muttered sentence:

"To think that fourteen months ago he considered himself madly in love
with Katharine Guyon! What a blessing it must be to a man to be
endowed with the nature of a butterfly!"

Gordon Frere's modest statement of his hopes and expectations was
justified by the result; and the flagging spirits of society at the
end of the season were raised by learning that a marriage was
"arranged" between Miss Gould, who was of course beautiful and
accomplished for the occasion, and Mr. Gordon-Frere, whose ancestral
glories and diplomatic connections were also duly paraded.

Katharine had left town some little time before this announcement had
supplied a fresh topic for discussion to the few scores of people who
knew or felt any curiosity about the respective parties. Her premature
abandonment of the delights of London arose from the condition of her
husband's health. Robert had been constantly looking, and occasionally
complaining of feeling, ill, for several weeks; and at length had
acknowledged to his sister that he exceedingly desired the rest and
tranquillity of the country.

"I don't think he is so much ill as worried," Ellen had said
to her sister-in-law. And the simple girl was right. Robert was
worried--worried about money-matters, worried about Mr. Guyon's
affairs, and his insatiable, irrepressible scheming. But, worse than
all, he was worried by self-reproach.

It was no sacrifice to Katharine to leave town; but if it had been
one, she would not have hesitated to make it. It was therefore at
Middlemeads, in the tranquil enjoyment of her beautiful home, invested
with all the first golden glory of the autumn, that Katharine learned
the news, the great news, which lent eloquence to Ellen Streightley's
pen, and caused her to "gush" on paper as she was wont to do in
speech. It was not, however, to her ingenuous sister-in-law that
Katharine owed her knowledge of the brilliancy of the marriage, the
number and importance of the guests, the details of the bride's dress,
the high spirits of the bridegroom, the _itinraire_ of the bridal
tour, and the winter plans of Mr. and Mrs. Gordon Frere. When the
event had taken place, and Lady Henmarsh's occupation as a chaperone
was for the second time gone; when she had inspected and sufficiently
admired the costly set of rubies which she had received as a parting
gift from the heiress, and had declared that she detested weddings,
and was tired to death, she could think of no more agreeable way of
passing an idle evening than in writing to Mrs. Streightley. Her
letter was very smart, clever, and skilful, as all her letters were;
and if it did not wound Katharine's feelings so much as the writer
intended, its failure was to be imputed to a change in her mind and
feelings, of which Lady Henmarsh was entirely ignorant.

The engagement had not been a long one; neither party had had any
motive for delay; but it was by quite an accidental coincidence that
Gordon Frere and Hester Gould were married on the anniversary of
Katharine Guyon's wedding-day.




CHAPTER IX.
MARRIED TO MONEY.


The time, so often deferred, at which Mr. Guyon was to pay his first
visit to his daughter in her country-house had at length arrived; and
the old gentleman made his appearance at Middlemeads with all the
advantages of a very juvenile toilet and a new stock of those adjuncts
to his personal beauty which he was in the habit of carrying about
with him. It was not without reluctance that Mr. Guyon bade adieu to
London, which he was accustomed to speak of as "the little village,"
and its delights; but he felt it absolutely necessary to make himself
personally acquainted with that country-house which he had so often
depicted to his boon companions in the most glowing terms, and with
those country families whom, to the same confidants, he had
represented as revelling in the elegant and unostentatious hospitality
of the British merchant. He had been a little chaffed by these
friends about the calm manner in which his daughter had borne his
long-continued separation from her. Some of them compared him to King
Lear, some to Captain Costigan; and Mr. Guyon, who knew very little
about either of the historical personages between whom and himself a
comparison was instituted, thought it was "dam' low," and that the
sooner all chance of a repetition of such joking was put a stop to the
better.

So the old gentleman came down to Middlemeads, and took up his
quarters in one of the best spare-rooms, and strove to make himself
agreeable to other people and to enjoy himself simultaneously. This
was not very difficult, for he had a grand capacity for living; and
his small-talk and geniality, and stories of grand people, made quite
an impression amongst the neighbouring families, who thought Mrs.
Streightley rather conceited, and Mr. Streightley very dull. Mr. Guyon
in a very short time had made himself thoroughly at home, and had
taken upon himself--not without Katharine's tacit consent; indeed the
whole affair rather amused her than otherwise--the direction of
affairs at Middlemeads, and the regulation of the manner in which the
day should be spent. He it was who organised the tableaux to which the
whole county was invited, which were such a grand success, and which
were commemorated in the _Morning Post_. He it was who arranged for
the first meet of the season of the stag-hounds on the Middlemeads
lawn, and for the hunt-breakfast at his son-in-law's expense. Robert
Streightley was unfortunately compelled to be away in London on
business on that interesting occasion; but in his absence Mr. Guyon
took the chair, in which he comported himself with the greatest
dignity and hospitality; and when the deer was uncarted, waved his hat
to the ladies, and rode away after it on one of his son-in-law's
horses, to his own intense satisfaction.

Robert Streightley was very frequently compelled to be away in London
on business just at that time; and when he was at home, he seemed to
have left his mind behind him among the ledgers and the invoices and
the share-lists, and to have left his spirits--God knows where! He was
thoroughly preoccupied and gloomy, never speaking except when spoken
to, and then replying with an obvious effort at the collection of his
wandering thoughts. Mr. Guyon noticed this immediately after his
arrival, and tried to rally his son-in-law, commencing with much
pleasant badinage about the accumulation of wealth by the sale of
oneself to the Evil One; an oft-used joke, which he had never known to
miss fire hitherto, but which on this occasion was received with
perfect silence. Over the quiet dinner, which, as it once or twice
happened, Mr. Guyon ate with Katharine and her husband, or in the
midst of a large party, it was all the same,--Robert never entered
into any thing that was going on, but always remained in the same
gloomy, silent, preoccupied state.

Mr. Guyon could never, even in his most amiable moods, have been
called a patient man, long-suffering was not one of his virtues; and
under his son-in-law's long face and absent manner he suffered
acutely. His little _mots_ passed unsmiled at, his anecdotes of the
aristocracy evidently had not been listened to; he felt that he was
throwing the pearls of his West-end refinement before City swine; and
he was highly indignant. But not with Streightley--or at least he
dared not openly declare his indignation to his son-in-law--it was on
Katharine that he turned the heavy-guns of his wrath, and rebuked his
daughter with an acrimony which might have had serious effect on a
less self-possessed young lady.

"I come here," said Mr. Guyon one morning in the library, where he had
gone to write a letter, and where he found Katharine similarly
employed,--"I come here to your house, and I find your husband an
altered man. He has lost that cheerfulness, that energy, that buoyancy
which distinguished him, and, in fact, he's become a doosid unpleasant
dreary bird. How's this? Cheerful before marriage, and miserable
after; looks as if marriage was the cause, doesn't it, Kate? And to
think that my daughter has not--not striven to--to what d'ye
call--bless the lot of the man who--doubles his joys and halves his
sorrows, and all that kind of thing? Am I to think that you--but no,
that could not be! I must remember----"

"You must remember, papa, if you please," said Kate, looking him full
in the face, and speaking in a low stern voice,--"you must remember
the manner in which and the conditions under which I married my
husband! And, remembering them, you must be good enough never to
dare--it is a strong word to use to one's father, but I repeat
it--never to dare to address me in this way again. I know my duty to
my husband, and--according to my lights, and under the peculiar
circumstances of our union--I do it!"

It was not to be supposed that Katharine, however devoid of that
instinctive perception of love which will make the dullest of women
quick to see when trouble is hanging over one dear to her, was either
blind or indifferent to the depression of Robert's spirits and the
change in his appearance. Towards her, individually, he was always the
same,--studious and eager to forward her wishes, and bounding his to
making her happy; but he was preoccupied and gloomy. He was beginning
to look old, too; the vigorous upright look which had been the first
thing in his appearance to strike an observer, was less conspicuous
than it had been, and his step was slower and heavier. His wife was
not blind to the alteration, and she put it all down to the account of
"business." In this general conclusion she was quite right; but
Katharine had not the remotest glimmering of a suspicion that
misfortune and loss were constituents of this "business." She believed
her husband to be a very rich man, whose ambition it was to become
very much richer, and whose life was devoted to the realisation of
that ambition. She had never ceased to regard him as the "City man" of
their first acquaintance; and though her ideas respecting the
transactions carried on by City men had undergone considerable
alteration since that time, she was as far as ever from a real
comprehension of the risks and the anxieties which her husband's life
included. The making of money in larger or smaller sums Katharine
understood to be his calling; and so far as the variation was between
larger and smaller, she comprehended anxiety being involved; but as to
serious loss, as to ruin, she had not the faintest notion of such a
possibility. Of Mr. Guyon's transactions with her husband Mrs.
Streightley was also profoundly ignorant. Robert had taken care she
should be so, for his sake as well as for her own. He knew Katharine's
delicacy of feeling and her pride perfectly, and he also appreciated
her acuteness and keenness as they deserved. From hurt and indignant
mortification at discovering that her father had taken such means to
"_exploiter_" her marriage, to questioning why a clever and shrewd man
of business, such as Katharine well knew Robert to be, should admit
such unscrupulous demands on her father's part, would be an easy and
natural transition; and Robert shrunk with terror from the idea that
any such clue should ever find its way to his wife's hands. No symptom
of such danger had shown itself; the feelings with which Katharine
regarded her father had ceased to be of a kind to prompt her to much
personal interest in his affairs, and by nature she was not
inquisitive. That Mr. Guyon's pursuits were frivolous in the extreme;
that he presented that most contemptible of spectacles--an old man
aping the dissolute manners of an objectionable order of youth,
Katharine was becoming more and more painfully aware; but she looked
no deeper into his life than the surface, from which she turned away
with a feeling which, had she investigated it, she must have
acknowledged to be contempt.

The nobility of Katharine's nature asserted itself in the manner in
which she regarded the marriage of Gordon Frere and Hester Gould. That
the intelligence should not cost her a pang of exceeding keenness was
impossible; but she did battle with herself against the temptations to
bitterness and enmity against Hester which beset her, and she came
nobly out of the strife. Little did she dream how closely her
demeanour was scrutinised; little did she imagine that the bright dark
eyes of the obsequious Mr. Daniel Thacker, perhaps the humblest of
Mrs. Streightley's servants and the most respectful of her admirers,
were steadily directed to her face for many days during his stay at
Middlemeads, with the purpose of reading what might appear on that
fair dial indicative of storm and turmoil in her heart. She had no
suspicion that she was watched; but, as she also had nothing whatever
to hide, there was no danger in her unconsciousness. The brief sharp
pain she endured had come and passed when she was alone. She
remembered how she had envied Hester Gould her wealth, only because it
left her free to marry as she liked: she remembered her own bitter
saying, "she may buy instead of being bought," and she thought it had
been strangely realised. But she would not be unjust either to Hester
Gould or to her own false lover. She would acknowledge that Hester had
many attractions other than her wealth; she would acknowledge her fair
share of beauty, her talents, her good manners, the numerous charms
which might easily secure a genuine attachment. She was ready to
believe that Gordon Frere might really love Hester; and the more
ready, as she had reason to know the shallowness and fickleness of his
nature. "I daresay he cares for her as much as he cared for me,"
Katharine thought; "and in this case he can afford to indulge his
fancy,--in mine he could not. She is fortunate that he can love her
and marry her, otherwise she too would find that he would love her and
leave her, as he left me, to the ridicule of her friends, and a broken
heart, were she fool enough to break her heart for him. And he--he has
only done exactly what I did, even supposing he does not love her. He
has only married for money. With this difference, to be sure,--that I
would have shared poverty with him, and he would not face it for me:
with this other difference too, that I was in earnest, and he was only
amusing himself. Our positions are pretty much the same in the end; we
are both rich, we are parted from each other, and satisfied to be so,
and another has the first claim on each. I have no right to despise
him for the marriage he has made, nor dares he to despise _me_."

So Katharine wrote to Ellen Streightley, and expressed interest in the
marriage, and hope of its happiness, which were perfectly sincere, and
were most welcome to the recipient of her letter. She treated the
subject with polite indifference in her reply to Lady Henmarsh. She
understood cousin Hetty tolerably well, and disdained the spitefulness
which she perceived too thoroughly to stoop to retaliation. It was a
fortunate circumstance for Robert that his sister had remained with
her mother at the Brixton villa after Miss Gould's marriage, and thus
no occasion arose for the lengthened and frequent discussion of the
event. Had Ellen been at Middlemeads, she would have talked about the
wedding to an embarrassing extent. As it was, his reluctance to
mention Gordon Frere's name--a reluctance which Katharine did not
suspect--was seconded by her own, which Robert's state of mind
prevented him from surmising; and after a mere formal comment, whose
insufficiency, considering the intimacy subsisting between the
Streightleys and Miss Gould, did not fail to strike Mr. Thacker, the
subject was dropped. He tried to talk about the wedding, at which he
had been present, and at which his sisters had officiated as
bridesmaids; but he had not courage to persevere in the face of
Robert's silence and the well-bred coldness of Katharine's manner,
which plainly implied that the matter was one wholly devoid of
interest to her; but, of course, if Mr. Thacker chose to pursue that
topic of conversation, she was bound to listen and to reply.

Life at Middlemeads proceeded much as usual, except that the
amusements of autumn were substituted for those of spring. There was
no other change in the aspect of affairs at the stately and luxurious
country-house, over which Katharine presided with grace and dignity
which seemed to grow more and more remarkable. Her beauty was at its
zenith now; and no doubt the subsidence of all angry and impetuous
feeling, the "settling down" which had taken place within the past
year, had told upon her physically as well as morally. She had not,
indeed, acted upon Mrs. Stanbourne's advice in its spirit. She had not
faced the fact that the greatest of all her obligations towards her
husband was the obligation to love him. She had not tried to realise
that; and in so far the change in her was maimed and incomplete. But
she had kept the letter of her promise to her friend, and ruled her
life with more consideration for her husband than in the earlier days
of their marriage. Had there been no obstacle, as unfortunately there
was, in the secret bound in Robert's conscience, to a perfect
understanding between the husband and wife, it might have come about
at this period, when Gordon Frere's marriage had completed the
severance of the past from Katharine's present life.

Mrs. Stanbourne was at Middlemeads shortly after the marriage of
Gordon and Hester, and had been even more anxious than before to find
Katharine on good terms with Robert. She was about to leave England
for an indefinite time; and she would fain have gone away leaving her
young kinswoman more intent on happiness, and less intent on pleasure,
than she had found her on her first visit to Middlemeads. Observation
had but increased her respect and regard for Robert Streightley; and
she now noticed his depressed and careworn manner with sincere regret.
She was at a loss to what origin to ascribe it; for things were far
better, in a domestic point of view, than they had been in the spring.
Had Mrs. Stanbourne met Mr. Guyon at Middlemeads, she might have
discerned at least a portion of the truth, bringing, as she would have
done, clearer notions of "business" than those of Katharine to aid her
observations; but that gentleman avoided her with a persistent
caution, for which, while far from divining its motives, she was
unfeignedly grateful. Mrs. Stanbourne could not have thoroughly
understood Mr. Guyon, had she had ever so favourable an opportunity of
detecting him; but she despised him intuitively, and had often taken
herself to task for the unreasoning dislike with which he inspired
her.

"My dear Kate, what quantities of money you spend on furniture!" said
Mrs. Stanbourne to Katharine, a day or two before she left
Middlemeads. She had entered the morning-room, and found Mrs.
Streightley looking over an upholsterer's pattern-book; while a "young
man" stood by, awaiting her decision and her orders. She had given
them, and the young man had taken his departure, charged by Katharine
to have certain articles ready for her inspection by a certain day of
the ensuing week.

"Do I?" asked Katharine absently. "Well, perhaps I do; but I did not
choose the things here myself, you know; and then, I like change."

"May I ask what you are changing now, Kate?"

"O dear, yes, of course. It's my dressing-room furniture. I hate that
walnut-wood, it looks so brittle; and I was quite delighted with Lady
Kilmantan's rooms; so I am going to have just the same. They will be
charming, with a conservatory and an aviary thrown out on the western
side--just the aspect, you know."

"But your present conservatory is a splendid one, Kate, to say nothing
of your acre of glass at the gardens."

"But I don't care for that great show thing; I want one of my own,
that no one can go into except I specially invite them, and where I
can choose the flowers myself, and put common flowers in if I please,
and not be dictated to by the gardeners. See, here are the plans;
charming, are they not? Here's to be a delicious little fountain, and
the floor is to be white marble."

"Very pretty, Kate; but also very expensive. Don't think me intrusive,
dear, or impertinent, if I say again I think you spend a very great
deal of money. Mr. Streightley is very rich, I believe; do you know
how rich?"

"N-not exactly," said Kate hesitatingly. "I know nothing about his
income, except that he tells me to do just as I like. People talk of
him to me as a 'City magnate,' and as if there were no end to his
money."

"Have you any idea how much you spend yourself, Kate, in a year?"

"No, I have not. Every thing of this kind"--and she waved her hand, to
indicate the room in which they were sitting, with its luxurious
appointments--"Mr. Streightley arranges for. I have nothing to do with
money except for my private expenses, dress, and that; and I have not
had any bills yet."

"I fancy they will surprise you when they arrive, Kate. But if Mr.
Streightley has said nothing, I am perhaps taking fright
unnecessarily." And then Mrs. Stanbourne rather abruptly turned the
conversation to her approaching departure from England. She was to
winter at Rome with her daughter and her son-in-law; and she and
Katharine indulged in talking about a proposed plan for the
Streightleys joining the party there. It did very well to talk about,
if nothing more came of it; and the vague prospect softened the pain
with which Katharine bade her friend adieu a few days later.

The alterations at Middlemeads went on briskly, and, like all
alterations, exhibited a tendency to extend their scope and increase
their variety. The dull wintry weather had come now, and the comfort
of the luxurious house was somewhat interfered with by the presence of
workmen and the disarrangement of some of the rooms. Under a momentary
impression created by what Mrs. Stanbourne had said, Katharine had
spoken to her husband about the cost of her intended improvements,
which had now extended far beyond the narrow sphere of her own
apartments. It was the first time the subject of money had been mooted
between them; and Katharine's manner was slightly constrained, her
pride slightly touched. She shrank from the least possibility of a
rebuke, from the shade of an imputation that she had interpreted the
_carte-blanche_ which her husband had given her too liberally. A
different and more painful kind of embarrassment possessed Robert; and
his over-eagerness to hide it from his wife, his stern resolution to
carry out to the letter the tacit contract between them, induced him
to reassure her with so much vehemence, that Katharine never gave the
subject another thought, but plunged into her plans with fresh vigour
and heedless extravagance.

Mrs. Streightley found the distance from London inconvenient, when
each day required her to pronounce a judgment upon some new pattern in
furniture or hangings, or to decide for or against some piece of
_virt_ or ornament of a rare and costly description. The season was
dull down in Buckinghamshire; and though London was in a certain
sense, the fashionable one, dull also, it would at least offer that
dear delight to all who lead such lives as hers--a change. So she
assented very gladly to a proposition which Robert made to her at the
beginning of November, that they should remove to the house in
Portland Place for a month. The reason he assigned for this
arrangement, on his own part, was the plea of "business," which
Katharine never inquired into; and in a few days, with the ease and
celerity with which rich people make even the most out-of-the-way
arrangements, Katharine found herself settled in her town-house, if
not with all the luxury and completeness of "the season," in very
perfect comfort. She had not thought it necessary to apprise Mr. Guyon
of her intention of coming up to town; nor did she let him know
immediately that she had done so. On the second afternoon after her
arrival in London she called at his house, but without any expectation
of finding him at home. She was, however, shown into the dingy
dining-room--more dingy than ever; and there her father joined her
after a few minutes. He expressed all the fit and appropriate
sentiments on beholding her, with his usual fluency; but he did not
express surprise quite successfully. This did not strike Katharine at
the time; but as she drove back to Portland Place, having invited her
father to dinner on the following day, she thought of it, and felt
sure that he had not been surprised,--in fact, that he knew she was in
town.

"How very odd!" she thought; "has Robert been to see him? And if he
has, why should papa not have mentioned it, and said at once he had
been expecting to see me?"

"I called on papa this afternoon," she said to her husband that day at
dinner, at which meal she could not help observing Robert's unusual
gloom and thoughtfulness. "He is coming to dine with us to-morrow.
Have you seen him yet?"

"Yes," said Robert; "he came to the office yesterday."

Some feeling like anger, but which she could not precisely define,
caused Katharine to turn red and hot for a moment. Her husband said no
more, and seemed lost in thought. Had their mistress chanced to look
towards them, she would have seen a very expressive glance exchanged
between the servants in attendance. The "situation" was not quite a
mystery for the servants' hall, and the opinion there for some time
had been that "the old 'un was a-comin' of it a deal too strong, and
he'd find Streightley wouldn't stand it much longer."

Katharine felt uncomfortable, she did not know why; and she
watched her father on the following day with a degree of attention she
had seldom bestowed upon him of late. His manner was as jaunty, his
conversation was as fluent, his juvenility was as marked, as
well-preserved, as ever. He was delightfully facetious; and when he
told Katharine that he had all sorts of messages in charge for her
from Cousin Hetty, and that--gad! he had nearly forgotten the chief
news of all--sentence of death against Sir Timothy; couldn't live a
month, the doctors said; and as they had the power of proving the
soundness of their own judgment, of course he wouldn't live a
month,--he made the little joke quite fascinating. Still there was
something about him, and about Robert, who was a poor dissembler,
which Katharine did not like, did not understand, and which made her
uncomfortable. There was a fourth person present; a circumstance which
each felt to be a relief. This was Ellen Streightley. Katharine had
gone that afternoon to the Brixton villa, and had paid Robert's mother
a visit, during which she had been as charming and agreeable as she
could be when she chose. She had brought Ellen home with her; and an
instinct now made her doubly glad she had done so. Robert had thanked
her warmly and gratefully for her prompt attention to his mother and
to Ellen, and had looked as happy as ever for a little. Somehow
Katharine liked his thanks, liked his kind words; and when she
wondered what was amiss, found herself hoping it was nothing involving
any distress of mind to Robert.

Mr. Guyon went away early, having told his daughter he should come to
breakfast on the morrow. "But I daresay I shall not see you, my dear,"
he added; "for Robert and I have business to talk over, and we mean to
shut you out,--don't we, Robert?" And the affectionate father-in-law
nodded in his most airy and jovial way to Mr. Streightley. But Robert
only bowed. He was immovably grave, and Katharine almost made up her
mind that she would ask him what was the cause of his restraint and
gloom. She never did ask the question, however; for the following day
found her full of all the delightful occupations which she had planned
for herself in town--found her bent on enjoying all that London had to
offer during its partial eclipse, and also found her father and Robert
apparently on as good terms as ever. Robert had noticed his wife's
transient uneasiness, and, determined to adhere to his fatal
resolution of concealment, he had applied himself to the task of
hiding the truth, this time with success.




CHAPTER X.
STAKED.


The pallid footman, who still remained in attendance on Mr. Guyon in
Queen Anne Street, had been of late leading such an easy life--had had
so much time for the enjoyment of social carouses at his club, for the
cultivation of female society, for the promotion of the growth of his
whiskers, and other large-souled pursuits--had, above all, been
enabled to indulge in his favourite luxury of lying in bed late o'
mornings to such an extent since his young mistress's marriage, that
he received his master's announcement that breakfast for two must be
ready at nine o'clock the next morning with disgust which he felt it
difficult to restrain. As, however, he knew from experience that Mr.
Guyon possessed a temper which he never gave himself the trouble of
placing under much restraint, and which had hitherto vented itself in
strange but particularly strong oaths, and which, as the pallid
domestic feared, had a strong leaning towards the use of sticks and
horsewhips, he thought it better to say nothing, and took care that
the meal was ready at the appointed time.

At the appointed time Mr. Guyon entered the dining-room, seized the
newspaper, and turned hurriedly to a particular spot in its columns,
laid the sheet down again with a reassured air, glanced through his
letters, and then, leaning his elbows on the mantelshelf, carelessly
glanced at himself in the glass. The careless glance became more
attentive, more strained, and more fixed, as he noticed a curious odd
expression of puffiness round his eyes, a tightness across his
forehead, a full, heavy, bloodshot look in the eyeballs, and a sallow
bloated look generally. He had had a strange singing in his head the
last few days, a sense of fullness and dizziness, a disagreeable
notion of black specks flashing before his eyes; and as he regarded
his altered appearance in the glass, he remembered these various
ailments, and shook his head gravely. "This won't do, Ned!" he
soliloquised, leaning his chin on his hand, and looking at his
reflected image; "this won't do! You've gone to grief most infernally
within the last few months, and you're showing signs of shutting up.
You can't carry on at the pace, Ned! It's all very well for the young
fellows with whom you've been living; they're fresh and strong, and
can stand any thing; but you're a doosid old bird, Ned, and you're
getting stiff and cranky, and all this night-work plays the devil with
you! You must cut it," continued Mr. Guyon, tweaking a gray hair out
of his whiskers; "you must cut it, and lie fallow for a bit. If this
thing only pulls through to-day," he said after a pause, "I'll drop
the whole lot, and go off quietly to some German baths, and simmer and
stew and drink the waters, and come back a new man. If it comes off!
phew!" and here Mr. Guyon ran his hand through his hair. "Well, if it
does not, I shall go abroad all the same, and try the sea-breezes of
Boulogne."

Whether the mention of such an excursion had a singular effect on him,
or whether he was really in a bad state of health, it is certain that
Mr. Guyon felt so flushed and strangled at this moment that he reeled
to a chair, and undid his very elaborate blue bird's-eye cravat, and
loosened his shirt-collar, and sat puffing and panting for a few
minutes, when he rang the bell, and ordered the pallid footman to
bring him some brandy and soda-water. He had taken a few sips of this
beverage, and was beginning to feel a little more himself, when a
phaeton drawn by a splendid pair of chestnuts came dashing up the
street, and stopped at Mr. Guyon's door. The natty groom sprung to the
horses' heads; the gentleman who had been driving descended, and gave
a tremendous rap; and presently the pallid footman announced "Mr.
Stallbrass!"

Mr. Stallbrass, of Wood Street, Cheapside, and the Willows, Tulse
Hill, was, at the former address, a Manchester warehouseman in a very
large way of business; at the latter, a fine old English gentleman of
large means and decidedly sporting tendencies. Cramped in early youth
by the objectionable attentions of a father of commercial habits and
evangelical tendencies; married when very young to the daughter of his
objectionable father's senior partner, a pale little woman with drab
hair and a weak spine; condemned thus to lead his City life amidst
long flat pasteboard boxes, and his home life amidst short round
Claphamite divines, Mr. Stallbrass--thanks to his glorious
constitution--had had the good fortune to outlive both his father and
his wife, to inherit both their fortunes, and to be able to indulge
his peculiar tastes in the freest and the easiest manner. Although he
still was "the firm" in Wood Street, he attended to business but
rarely. How could he, indeed, when he never was absent from any of the
great race-meetings in the summer, from any steeplechase or
"pugilistic revival" in the winter? To know sporting-men of all kinds,
from the highest to the lowest; to call them by their Christian or
nick-names; to get the office on all sporting events; have his name
mentioned in _Bell_ as "that real Corinthian," or as "amongst the
_lite_ present we observed--;" to have the red-jacketed touts touch
their hats to him,--these were the delights of life which Mr.
Stallbrass coveted, and which he now enjoyed. He had made Mr. Guyon's
acquaintance in some fast society, and had been greatly impressed by
the old gentleman's manners and tone, which he afterwards affirmed to
be "the real thing, and no flies;" and he determined to cultivate his
acquaintance, though he saw at a glance all the flaws of his
character. For Mr. Stallbrass was, as he himself expressed it, "a long
way off a fool," and saw in an instant that any intimacy between him
and Guyon could only be carried on by his opening his purse-strings,
and consenting to pay, as Telemachus usually pays, for Mentor's
countenance and counsel. But in this case Telemachus, though not a
youth, was decidedly an aspiring man, aspiring to be one of a good
set, and hitherto he had soared no higher than the outside ring of the
fast stockbrokers. Old Guyon undoubtedly went into good society of its
kind, and could, if he chose, pull Stallbrass up with him. So
Stallbrass's house, horses, traps, and hospitality, were very much at
Mr. Guyon's service; and there was only one thing appertaining to Mr.
Stallbrass which the old campaigner was warned off, and that was Mr.
Stallbrass's purse. Of course old Guyon had made the assault in that
quarter at a very early period of their acquaintance, but had been met
with such a straightforward rebuff, delivered without the slightest
possibility of being misunderstood, that he had from, that time
contented himself with his right of "free warren" over the appanages
above mentioned, and never renewed the attempt.

But in every other way Mr. Stallbrass surrendered to the superior
abilities, and bowed down before the more exalted position, of his
friend. See him now as he comes into the room--a tall, big, burly man,
with a heavy grizzled beard and moustache, light-drab overcoat,
cutaway undercoat, blue bird's-eye cravat with a big dog's-tooth set
in gold for a pin, long waistcoat, horsey tight trousers, and
gaiter-boots. Mr. Stallbrass has a big white hand, on the little
finger of which he wears a big horseshoe ring; a keen sunken eye, a
pair of bushy brows, a swaggering gait, and a loud strident voice.
In Mr. Guyon's house, in Mr. Guyon's company, the swagger is
left out of the gait, and the tones of the voice are modulated.
"Chesterfield"--that is the playful name by which Mr. Stallbrass
passes amongst his friends on the Stock Exchange--"Chesterfield," they
say, "tears and ramps awfully this side Temple Bar; but old Guyon
could drive him in a basket fourwheeler!"

Mr. Stallbrass, following close upon the announcement of the pallid
footman, found Mr. Guyon finishing the soda-water and brandy, and
stopped in the doorway, shaking his uplifted forefinger.

"Hallo, my noble Captain! Comed and cotched you in the werry act, as
the man says, did I? That won't do, Major--that tells all sorts of
stories of last night's hanky-panky, that does!"

"Ah, Stallbrass, my good fellow!" said Mr. Guyon, wiping his lips and
rising much refreshed, but still rather tottery; "glad to see you,
doosid glad. You're punctual as to--as to--you know!"

"I know! Lord bless you, I _always_ know, as the man says. We're goln'
to have a fine day after all."

"I hope so; it looks like it. Make all the difference to us, eh?"

"Well, yes. If there was to be much more mud, it would tell against
Devilskin, it would! He's a light 'oss, you know, though a rare
plucked 'un; but mud's the devil. Get into one of those sticky
quagmires, and where are you? as the man says."

"Did you hear any thing after I left last night?"

"Yes. The Marquis came up to Jack Green's--you know old Jack
Green?--and an out-and-out tout the Marquis is! He'd seen Devilskin
that morning, and says he's first-rate, head and tail up, fit to jump
a town! The Marquis--you know why he's called the Marquis--no? Why,
because he was cab-boy to Lord Waterford in the old days--the Marquis
saw Griffin, who's going to ride Devilskin to-day, and he's put the
pot on so far as he can go, and says there's nothing to touch him in
the lot."

"I see Devilskin holds his place in the betting."

"Yes. Vixen came with a rush yesterday afternoon, I understand; but
her temper's so awful, her people never know what she's going to do.
That's good for our side, as the man says; and besides, she can't hold
a candle to the black horse--if he's meant."

"_If_ he's meant! Why, good Lord! there can't be a doubt about that."

"There's _always_ a doubt about any turf event, my noble Captain; and
these Davidsons, who own Devilskin, are reg'lar legs, you know--legs,
as the man says! But Griffin swears he means to ride on the square,
and--what's the matter with you now?"

"Nothing, my dear boy, nothing. I've been a little queer these last
few days, that's all. I--I suppose you've not hedged?"

"Not a penny! My book ain't so heavy as yours; at least so I gathered
from what they said at Pommeroy's last night. You must have done a
heavy lot, you must; but you West-end swells can stand it,--that's one
thing, as the man says."

"If the man said that," said Mr. Guyon with a very ghastly smile, "he
talked about what he knew nothing of. However, let's have breakfast
now, and then get down to Croydon."

The breakfast, an elaborate one of the heavy sporting order--many
kidneys, large chops, ham and eggs--was done ample justice to by Mr.
Stallbrass, whose digestive powers were never out of order; while Mr.
Guyon merely picked at a sardine with a shaking hand, and drank tea
feverishly. In the course of the meal Mr. Stallbrass said----

"Saw Bob Streightley going to the Great Western as I drove through.
Going down to his place in Bucks, I suppose; and going early, as if it
was to his business. He is a rum 'un--as Jack Green says, 'The early
bird's worth two worms in the bush.' He don't look well, don't Bob
Streightley, though; pale in the gills, and seems to me to have aged a
good deal."

"The anxieties of a gigantic business, my dear Stallbrass----"

"Yes, a little too gigantic if he doesn't look out; and likely to be a
good deal less before he's done with it!"

"What do you mean by that? you're so infernally enigmatical, my good
fellow," said old Guy on with great irritability, "that, damme, one
might as well talk to the--the riddle Egyptian thing."

"O, I'm sorry I spoke--never holler! as old Jack Green says," replied
Mr. Stallbrass, who was easily offended. "I'll be as mum as the dumb
cove at Manchester for the rest of the day."

"What a doosid provokin' fellow you are!" screamed Mr. Guyon in a
fresh access of petulance. "Didn't you understand that I asked you to
speak, and not be silent? What was that you were saying about
Streightley?"

"It's not what I say, but what every body--old Jack Green and the
rest of 'em, are saying--that he's going too much a-head; that he was
hard hit by that bank smash; that instead of pulling up, he went
a-head after that; and that he must look out!"

Whether the information thus conveyed was new to Mr. Guyon or not,
could not have been guessed by the expression of his features. A
twitch passed across his face; but when he spoke his looks expressed
scorn rather than astonishment, and he said, "Parcel of dam' cackling
fellows; let 'em leave Streightley alone. He'll be a merchant-prince
when they've returned to their native gutters, by Jove!" The old
gentleman braved it out nobly; but it was only by a strong effort, for
his heart sunk within him, and he felt a presentiment of impending
evil.

After breakfast Mr. Stallbrass lighted a very big cigar, and, as a
thin soft rain was beginning to fall, put on a very big driving-coat,
with double-sewn seams, which asserted themselves in a very prominent
manner, with innumerable pockets, which either gaped wide-open or hid
themselves under pent-house ledges, and with a large collar, which,
when raised, took in all Mr. Stallbrass's beard and a huge portion of
his face. Mr. Guyon having also muffled himself up to the best of his
ability, they climbed into the mail phaeton, and started; Mr.
Stallbrass driving his splendid pair in excellent style, cutting in
and out in the most workmanlike manner, and eliciting great admiration
from the cabmen and boys. Before they had gone very far the rain
ceased, and Mr. Guyon began to feel the reviving influence of the
fresh air, which, with some new information about Devilskin which he
received from a mysterious and shabby man, who stopped their phaeton
at the foot of Westminster Bridge, made the old gentleman perk up
again, and talk in his usual frivolous rattle to his companion, though
that strange, puffed, bloated look had not faded out of his face.

Mr. Stallbrass was not given to conversation when he was driving, his
attention being almost entirely occupied with his horses, which he had
brought to a great state of perfection and simultaneous stepping; so
that, with the exception of pointing with his whip to one or two
houses where "old Jack Green" had either lived, or had known some one
who had lived there, which gave the place quite an interest in Mr.
Stallbrass's eyes, he was silent during the drive, and his companion
was left to his own reflections. And these were not of a particularly
pleasant kind. Mr. Guyon had hacked the favourite for the steeplechase
now about to be decided, to a far greater extent than any one, even
his sporting friend beside him, knew of; and until that present moment
had never seriously attempted to realise his position in case his
horse should be beaten. Floating through life in his usual airy
manner, with good clothes on his back and a few pounds in his pocket,
which prevented him feeling the pressure of any immediate necessity,
"handsome Ned Guyon" closed his eyes to disagreeable objects in his
old age as readily as he had done in his youth, and sturdily refused
to look at the shadows of any coming events. Should his horse win--and
he must, damme, he must--Mr. Guyon would, on the settling-day, come
into possession of what he termed "a hatful" of money; enough to pay
off all his most pressing creditors, without the necessity of seeking
aid from Streightley, whose stern face was like a very baleful vision
before his father-in-law's imagination. And if the horse were
beaten--the old gentleman took off his hat and wiped his brow,
on which great beads of sweat had burst out at the mere
supposition--well, if the horse were beaten, he should quietly drop
across to Boulogne, and stay there until matters were blown over.
Katharine would send him pocket-money, and that sort of thing; and
there was life in the old dog yet, and, damme, they should see he
wasn't beaten.

Such was the tenor of Mr. Guyon's concluding reflections as Mr.
Stallbrass turned the spanking chestnuts, who had spanked so much all
the way from town as to be covered with foam and lather, into the
muddy lane leading to the raceground, which was already lined on
either side with crowds of countrymen and village loafers, gathered
together to gape and chaff in that blunderheaded manner so pleasant to
the English rustic. There were plenty of drags both before and behind
them, and Mr. Stallbrass--who affected the coachman whenever he had
the reins in his hand--was perpetually jerking his little finger into
the air, or waving his whip in answer to recognitions, feeling all the
time thoroughly happy at being seen in the company of such an
unmistakable and well-known "West-end nob" as Mr. Guyon. Paying the
entrance-fee, they turned up through a gate on to the turf; no sooner
had they reached which than Mr. Stallbrass had a new excitement, and a
new triumph, for the Hon. William Trafford, known as "Tit Trafford"
from his love of horse-flesh, ranging up alongside in his drag, and
knowing both Guyon and Stallbrass, proposed to the latter to "have a
spurt;" and away went Tit Trafford's four bays and Stallbrass's
chestnut pair careering off in a race in which the latter had by no
means the worst of it. Mr. Guyon disapproved of this proceeding, which
caused him to clutch wildly at different portions of the phaeton, and
shook and bumped him woefully,--disapproved of it so much that he
pronounced it "infernally stoopid," and only fit to have been the act
of a "dam schoolboy." It was not until they had secured a good place
in the rank, horses had been removed, and a capital lunch spread, that
the old gentleman recovered his equanimity.

But long before luncheon, in fact within a minute of the phaeton's
stopping, Mr. Guyon had descended into the ring and learned the latest
odds about Devilskin. There, in the bawling, fighting, seething,
jostling crowd, he made his way, listening to scraps of information
given to him now and then by men who muttered mysteriously behind
their betting-books, or took off their hats to whisper behind them
into Mr. Guyon's ear. It was all right,--nothing to touch him; fit to
run for a man's life, Sir Harvey had said that very morning. O, here
was Sir Harvey. "Ah, my dear Sir Harvey, one word--only one!" and Mr.
Guyon laid his trembling hand on the arm of a big stalwart Yorkshire
squire, Sir Harvey Boyce, one of the keenest patrons of the turf, and
owner of Devilskin. The two men stood aside for a moment, and Guyon
said--

"About the horse? He's right?"

"Right as the mail."

"And--and--he's meant?"

"Meant? d--n it, Guyon----"

"O, don't blaze out at me, Sir Harvey; don't be in a rage. If you knew
how heavily I stand on this race! Ever since you put me on in the
autumn I've been backing the horse, long odds and short odds; I've not
got off a penny, and--" he stopped for breath, and the big burly
Yorkshireman, looking at him and noticing how ill he appeared to be,
and how the wrinkled hand clasping his arm shook and trembled, said
kindly----

"Keep your pecker up, Guyon! I've stood all my money on the horse, and
I know there's nothing to beat him in the field."

So, comforted and pleased with this interview, Mr. Guyon made his way
back to the phaeton, where Mr. Stallbrass's grooms had already
unfastened the hampers and spread the lunch, and where Mr. Stallbrass
had now gathered round him two or three men "of the right sort," who
were drinking sparkling Moselle, and wondering "what had become of old
Guyon."

The luncheon and the wine had a still further revivifying effect on
that gentleman's spirits; and feeling justly that he was regarded by
Mr. Stallbrass and his friends in the "cock-of-the-walk" capacity, he
sought to be particularly agreeable, and, having quite a new audience,
told some of his best stories--accommodating the principal characters
therein with titles freely distributed--with very great success. There
were two races before the great event of the day, but they attracted
little attention; the first came off while the gentlemen were at
luncheon, and they walked down to look at the jumps, while the course
was being cleared for the second.

They turned down from the starting-place, and looked first at a low
gap, then at two or three flights of turf-covered hurdles, at all of
which Sir Harvey Boyce laughed contemptuously, and declared that any
donkey could clear them; then they struck across a corner of the
field, and came upon a clean ditch with a high bank on its further
side, separating a ploughed field from a bit of turnips. The ditch was
rather broad, and the bank was high and slippery; then came grass with
more hurdles, then grass again, and then just before turning into the
straight run home, a stiff post and rail, old, worn, and mended here
and there in places with rough stakes and railings, with a drop of six
or seven feet into the course below. All the gentlemen regarded this
with great curiosity, and Sir Harvey Boyce said, "This is what'll try
'em! There are seven of 'em to start, and except Vixen and Devilskin,
all the rest know nothing but flat racin', and have just been taught
jumpin' enough to clear those hurdles. But they'll be bumped before
they come to this, and nothing's over here but the chestnut mare and
my horse, I'll take my oath!" Then they returned to the stand on their
carriages, and shortly afterwards the second bell rang and the great
race commenced.

There were seven starters, and the race was twice round the course.
They got away all together, through the gap and over the first flight
of hurdles all in line; a little scattering of them in the ploughed
field, where the first symptoms of tailing-off began to be manifested;
then came the ditch and bank, where there were three dead refusals,
the four safely on the other side being Devilskin, Vixen, a mare
called Gray Duchess--whose performances were all unknown, and
who belonged to a sporting saddler--and Billy Button, an old
steeple-chaser, entered to make running for Vixen. Through the grass
they came, Vixen and Devilskin leaving the others about a couple of
lengths behind, over the light hurdles, then straight heading up for
the drop fence. A crowd had gathered at this point to see the jump
taken; and as the horses came up, each thundered out the name of his
favourite. With his face dead set, his teeth clinched, and with every
muscle of his limbs like steel, Griffin brought his horse straight at
the jump, and Devilskin scarcely needing the slightest lifting,
cleared it in one great rushing bound, blundered a little on touching
the ground, but was up and away ere any of the others were over.
Vixen came next, fretting and fuming, her foam-flecked chestnut coat
heat-stained and mud-dabbled; her jock, who evidently knew her temper,
riding her with a light yet firm hand, and never touching her until
she was just preparing to take her spring, when he rammed the spurs
home, and brought her over cleverly and safely. Close upon her
followed the saddler's gray mare, heavily built and somewhat clumsy in
her gallop as she came thundering along, but rising at the jump and
skimming it like a bird. It was the prettiest thing that had been seen
that day; the people cheered till they were hoarse; and Sir Harvey
Boyce turned a trifle pale as he whispered to Tit Trafford that "that
was an Irish mare, he'd take his oath, and that he was d--d if he
liked her looks." Now past the stand all, Devilskin leading, but Vixen
close upon him, and away into the open, Gray Duchess following three
lengths behind. Now all excitement, hoarse roar, and wild clamour, for
Vixen and Devilskin were neck and neck, over the light hurdles,
through the ploughed field, and nearing the high bank. Griffin seems
to feel that Devilskin wants a lift here, gathers his horse well up in
hand, and comes down heavily on his quarters as he rises to the leap.
Cleverly done, Griffin, for Devilskin clears it better than he did the
first round. Not so Vixen, also whipped, who rears, boggles, tumbles,
and rolls. Devilskin wins! Devilskin! Devilskin! Up goes the clamour
from a thousand hoarse throats. What is that cry? The Gray! the Gray!
Gray Duchess slips over the high bank like a mist, like a dream,
collars Devilskin in the grass, and side by side with him clears the
last set of light hurdles, and rounds the corner facing the drop
fence. Now, Griffin, for your life! bring all the knowledge, all the
pluck learned and nurtured in far-away Yorkshire spinneys to this one
test--you have a foeman worthy of your steel-spurs; show that you know
yet a better thing than he, and win the race! Up came the horse,
blown, panting, with red eyeballs, drooping crest: in the hollow it
looked as if it were all over, but Griffin steadied him quietly, and
then brought him at the leap with a rush. One tremendous welt he gave
him, one home-dig with the spurs, and Devilskin rose at the post and
rails,--rose to fall helplessly into the midst of them staked and
dying; while, so close as almost to brush his writhing carcass Gray
Duchess slips by, and gallops in the winner and sole survivor of the
fray.

Mr. Stallbrass closed his race-glass, muttered a strong word, and
turned to speak to his friend; but as he turned he felt a heavy weight
on his shoulder, and heard the words "Ruined--ruined, by God!"
muttered in his ear. The next moment Mr. Guyon was lying on his back
at the bottom of the phaeton, livid in the face, and breathing
stertorously. An alarm was raised, and a mounted gentleman, announcing
himself to be a doctor, rode up to the phaeton, threw himself from his
horse, and after a hasty examination, pronounced Mr. Guyon to be in an
apoplectic fit, and shook his head very dubiously as to the result.




CHAPTER XI.
"IN THE DEAD UNHAPPY NIGHT."


The first confusion and alarm which had ensued on Mr. Guyon's sudden
illness had subsided, and had been succeeded by the orderly hush of a
house in which mortal sickness had assumed its irresistible sway. Mr.
Guyon had been carried upstairs to the large bedroom formerly occupied
by Katharine, and which he had used since his daughter's marriage. The
doctor who had been found and brought to his assistance upon the
race-course, and his own physician, for whom the housekeeper had sent
at once, before she had despatched the footman to carry the evil
tidings to Mrs. Streightley, were busily but silently occupied with
the insensible form. The servants, frightened and helpless as servants
generally are, were standing about on the stairs and landing-place,
ready to obey such orders as were transmitted to them from time to
time from the grave gentleman in that awful room, through the medium
of the housekeeper. They whispered together solemnly at intervals, and
started when the door on which all their attention was fixed opened a
little, and Mrs. Clarke beckoned one of the two women towards her. Mr.
Stallbrass was in the dingy dining-room, awaiting the award of the
solemn tribunal upstairs. He was a kind-hearted fellow enough; and
having done so much, "having picked up the poor old boy," he thought,
"I may as well see it out." Mrs. Clarke had entreated him to
remain--her master's daughter, she said, would be here immediately,
and she would want to hear how it happened. So this modern type of
Good Samaritan, useful but not officious, and rather sheepish about
his good nature, stayed. The rain, which had begun to fall just as
they were getting Mr. Guyon away from the race-course, was now falling
in cold, pitiless, ceaseless streams, and the early darkness of a
winter's evening had added its gloom to the scene. The gas had
been lighted in the dining-room of Mr. Guyon's house, but the
window-shutters were unclosed, and Stallbrass walked disconsolately up
and down from the door to the window, stopping each time as he reached
the latter boundary to look out into the damp dreariness of the
street. His spirits were beginning to flag under the monotony of
this occupation, and he was seeking relief by furtive snatches of
reading--odd paragraphs in the _Field_ for last week, and little bits
of the current _Punch_--when Mrs. Clarke came in, looking very pale
and scared.

"Well," said Stallbrass abruptly, but kindly, "what news is there? Has
the lady come? She can't have come, though, or I should have seen
her."

"No, sir, she has not come; and I dread she won't while the breath is
in her father, which it's all it is, as far as I can understand the
doctors."

"Really! I'm very sorry--poor old gentleman! Has he not recovered
consciousness at all, then?"

"No, sir, not a bit--he has groaned a few times, and then they
thought he were coming to, but he didn't--but there, sir, there's a
carriage--there's Mrs. Streightley----" And the housekeeper ran
excitedly out, followed by Mr. Stallbrass, and threw open the door,
through which a gust of wind and a cold dash of rain drove into the
hall.

Stallbrass saw a tall young lady, whose face, pale and agitated,
struck him even then as being one of the most beautiful he had ever
seen,---who passed into the room he had just left, followed by the
housekeeper. He stood in the hall, the noise of wind and rain outside
mingling with the stamping of the horses, the jingling of their
harness, and the sound of the women's voices.

"What is all this, Clarke? is it true?" asked Katharine, as she
hurriedly untied her bonnet and flung it down, and threw off her
pelisse of velvet and fur.

"Yes, ma'am, it's all true. But O, why did you not come sooner? James
has been more than an hour gone to fetch you."

"I was out--they had to find me," she said, in the same hurried tone.
"What do they say it is? Let me see the doctor. Let me go up stairs."

"Yes, ma'am, directly," said Mrs. Clarke, down whose rosy and
unrefined cheeks tears were beginning to flow. "But first you must see
the gentleman that brought him home; he knows all about it; he
breakfasted with master this morning. If you please, sir,--Lord ha'
mercy, if he hasn't been left out in the hall!"

Katharine stepped hastily towards the door, as Mrs. Clarke, with many
voluble apologies, brought Mr. Stallbrass in. She thanked him briefly,
and entreated him to tell her all that had happened. She listened to
his story with painful eagerness, turning paler and paler as he went
on; and when she had heard it all, she thanked him again.

"And now I must go to him," she said, and held out her hand to the
stranger.

"I will wait a little longer, if you will allow me, for the chance of
a more favourable report," he said.

"Do so," she returned. "My carriage is at your disposal. Tell them to
come back here, Clarke, when they have taken this gentleman home."
Then she again bade him farewell and left him.

He walked up and down the room for half an hour, at the end of which
time the housekeeper came downstairs again;--this time crying
unrestrainedly.

"There's not a bit of hope, sir; but they think he will live for some
hours; and they hope he will get his senses back, and speak to his
daughter, or at least look at her before he dies."

"I hope so, I am sure," said Mr. Stallbrass solemnly.

"I was to ask your name, if you please, sir," said Mrs. Clarke with
some hesitation.

"Certainly; there is my card," and he laid one on the table. "I shall
call in the morning." Then he took up his hat and went away, having
declined the offer of the carriage. Mrs. Clarke ordered the coachman
to return to Portland Place, adding that his mistress would remain
with her father. "I wonder your master hasn't been here afore this,"
said the housekeeper in conclusion.

"Master's out of town; worse luck!" was the sympathetic answer of the
footman, as he jumped up beside the coachman, and they drove off.

Mrs. Clarke went slowly up the long staircase to the room about which
such awful suspense and interest gathered, unmindful of the card which
lay upon the table in the dining-room, and was swept away with other
rubbish afterwards and forgotten; and when she stood beside Katharine
by the dying man's bedside, all remembrance of the stranger had faded
out of the minds of both.

The dying man! Yes, the fiat had gone forth--he was dying. Ned Guyon,
the _ci-devant jeune homme par excellence_, the trifler by vocation
and profession, the man of all others with whom it was impossible to
associate an idea of solemnity, the dandy in dress, the _rou_ in
morals, the _persifleur_ in religion, the man in consideration of whom
it would have been particularly pleasant to disembarrass the mind of
belief in present and future accountability,--this man was dying. Not
slowly, with time and opportunity for reflection, for repentance, for
"setting his house in order;" but quickly, dumbly, as a stricken
animal might die--as men die in whom the brain is killed first, and
the machine has but a little while to labour on afterwards. His
daughter saw it all, realised it all in a minute, even as she crossed
the threshold of the room she had never entered since her wedding-day;
and there mingled with the horror and anguish of the moment a sudden
sense of recognition, and yet of strangeness, as she saw, without
looking at them, in the inexplicable vividness of perception which
comes in moments of strong emotion, the "soulless things" she had
lived amongst for so long in the old life gone for ever. And here was
another life going away for ever. She did not doubt it for one
instant; and when the physician, who had known her from her girlhood,
gravely took her hand, and whispered to her that there was no hope,
the dying man lying insensible to any sight or sound, she shuddered
strongly from head to foot, but she did not weep, or shrink from the
touch or the voice.

From the senseless figure upon the bed, over which the strange doctor
was stooping, his fingers busy with hopeless investigations at the
heart and the wrist--from the ghastly distorted face, so much more
terrible, with its rouge and cosmetics, its wig and its pearl powder
all removed, than any face of reverend old age, however worn and
wasted, can ever be--from the limp, bluish hand lying upon the
coverlet, with the heavy seal-ring and its pretentious blazon, with
the showy golden buttons hanging from the loosened sleeve--Katharine's
haggard gaze roamed over the room almost unconsciously. It was in most
respects the same as when she had inhabited it; but several of her
father's special belongings had been brought from the den, and
occupied the place of the feminine properties dispossessed. Her
dressing-table, none too large for Mr. Guyon's requirements, was in
its accustomed place, and the long glass had not been moved. But the
writing-table she had been accustomed to use was there no longer, and
in its place, in the recess beside the fireplace, stood a large
cabinet, whose heavy doors closed over a range of wide, shallow
shelves, and also shut in a desk. A basket, half full of scraps of
torn paper, stood between the burly carved legs of this old-fashioned
piece of furniture; and in front of it was the well-worn red-leather
arm-chair which Katharine remembered from her babyhood. The clothes
which had been taken off the insensible man were lying in a heap over
the back of this chair--bright in colour, juvenile in cut, and painful
to see, when one glanced from them to their wearer of a few hours ago.
A bunch of keys had fallen from the gaping coat-pocket upon the
ground, where it lay with a few crumpled papers, a card of the races
being conspicuous among them.

"I believe I can do no more," said the strange doctor, as at length he
relinquished his hopeless task. Then the two left the room together,
and after a little Katharine's old friend returned. By this time she
had drawn a chair to the bedside, and was seated there, gazing fixedly
on the rigid face, which looked as though death itself, when it should
come, would not seal it more utterly up from all impressions of the
outer world. She was lost in thought, and was quite passive while the
doctor gave his final directions to the housekeeper, who was to remain
all night with the dying man. She understood him to say that he must
go home now (he lived close by), but was to be summoned if any change
took place. He gave a few simple directions, which the two women could
carry out, and which were of a merely perfunctory character, and
designed to relieve them by giving them occupation, rather than the
patient, for whom there was nothing more to be done until the
undertaker's turn should have arrived; and he went away, whispering to
Katharine that if he were not sent for sooner, he would be with her at
seven on the following morning.

The night wore on, and Katharine and Mrs. Clarke kept their terrible
watch. They were for the most part quite silent; the one in the chair
beside the bed, the other seated at the fireside, and coming from time
to time to gaze disconsolately upon the dying man. No weariness came
upon Katharine as the hours crept on. The strong excitement kept her
up; and as she administered the few cares of which her father's
condition allowed, the enforced composure of her manner did not break
down. The silence of the room was awful, as silence under such
circumstances always is; the clock upon the chimneypiece ticked
loudly, the showy gold watch, with its trumpery bunch of trinkets,
which had been deposited upon the dressing-table, also ticked on,
till late in the small hours, when it stopped. The fire burned low and
dim, and flickered upon the housekeeper's weary figure in the deep
arm-chair, and upon the ribbons of her cap, as her head nodded
abruptly forward, in the uneasy snatches of broken slumber. Sometimes
a little flame sprung out and glimmered upon the silken folds of
Katharine's rich dress, upon the gold bracelet of the arm laid upon
the bed, upon the pale stern face keeping its wakeful watch.

There were times during those dread hours when the dying man groaned
heavily; and then the two women would bend eagerly over him, using the
prescribed restoratives, and trying to discern some symptom of
consciousness, even of pain; but it never came. Ned Guyon had spoken
his last words--had experienced his last emotion in this world; and
what they were has already been told.

It was about four in the morning; and the cold dismal chill peculiar
to that ghastly hour had stolen over the room; and Katharine had begun
to shiver and yawn under its influence. Mrs. Clarke woke with a guilty
start, softly raked the fire together and replenished it, and, in
answer to Katharine's beckoning finger, approached the bed.

"There's no change--no, no change," said Mrs. Clarke; and she shook
her head gravely.

"Are you sure?" said Katharine; "I thought his face looked colder and
grayer. Don't you think the eyelids are heavier and more nearly shut?"

Mrs. Clarke took a candle, and held it close to the wan face. There
was no change perceptible to her; and the "muffled-drum" beat of the
heart told of life still lingering.

"No, my dear," said the old woman compassionately; "he is not gone
yet, nor going; but Lor' ha' mercy, how cold you are! why, you're
shivering. I'll go and fetch a teapot and a kettle, and make some tea.
No; the kitchen-fire is alight. If you don't mind being alone, I'll
make it downstairs; it's quicker done; and I am sure you want it."

"I do want it, Clarke," said Katharine, shuddering. "The dawn is
coming, I suppose; and the cold strikes into my blood. I shall be glad
of the tea."

Mrs. Clarke went away on her errand. Katharine, all her senses
quickened, heard her step upon each stair until she reached the hall.
A strange, lonely, nervous feeling came over her, and she rose from
her seat by the bedside, and went over to the fireplace. As she stood
idly by the chimneypiece, an unusually strong nicker of the flame
shone upon something bright which lay upon the ground. Katharine
stooped, and picked up a bunch of keys and a handful of crumpled
papers. She laid the keys upon the mantelshelf, and mechanically
turned over the papers. The card of the races she threw into the fire,
the others she smoothed out; and finding some memoranda apparently
containing calculations among them, she thought it would be well to
put them away safely. With the intention of doing so, she took up the
keys again, and opened the heavy door of the oak cabinet.

Mr. Guyon, like many men devoted to the business of pleasure, was very
orderly in his arrangements, and kept all his papers with an enviable
degree of precision. The long shallow drawers of the cabinet had each
its neat parchment label, indicating the contents; and the lowest of
the range bore the superscription, "miscellaneous letters." Katharine
pulled the pendent brass ring attached to this drawer with a little
more force than was necessary to open it. The drawer slid out easily,
and the whole of its contents were exposed to her view. At the back,
in the right-hand corner, lay a small packet, slipped into an elastic
band, on which her quick eye caught her own name, written in a hand
she knew well--her own name, as it had been--"Miss Guyon"--and a date
scrawled in the corner. The blood rushed hotly into Katharine's face
as she took the packet out of the drawer and carried it to the
fireplace, where she examined it by the light of a [xxx ?] lamp. It
consisted of four letters: the uppermost that on which her name was
written: the undermost was placed in the bands so that the address did
not show; but a line was written on xxxx Mr. Guyon's hand--"shown to
R.S."

Katharine sat down in the chair vacated by the housekeeper and
deliberated. In her hand she held a packet of papers, which she felt
concerned her deeply. Here was a letter in Gordon Frere's hand--a
letter whose date was that of the very date which had begun her
hopeless watching and waiting, in the time which, until this moment,
had seemed so far, so illimitably past, but now in an instant was
brought near again, and revived in all its pain and anger. Here was a
letter which must have been written that day when he had sent her the
music and his card, as she had believed without a word. A vague sense
of treachery, something which led her intuitively to an approximate
suspicion of the truth, came into Katharine's mind. She glanced at the
bed, and turned away trembling. What was she about to learn?
Something, she felt instinctively, which must change all her life.
Then she drew out the note directed to "Miss Guyon," and read it. It
was that which Gordon Frere had written to Katharine, from Cramer's,
after he had left Charles Yeldham, with the intention of starting by
the next train, on his pilgrimage of hope, to his father's rectory. It
was a bright gay note, with a pleasant allusion to their talk about
the music; a strong expression of disappointment about Katharine's not
being at the ball; an intimation that his absence would be as short as
he could make it; and that he hoped to see her immediately on his
return. Katharine dropped the hand that held the note heavily into her
lap; had she received it, what might she have been now? An undefined
fear stole over her; this was foul play; this letter had been
intercepted. What did it mean? She drew out the second in order, and
opened it. Again, a letter from Gordon Frere; again, a letter to
her--a passionate, tender, pleading, frank, hopeful letter--such a
letter as a girl might well be glad and proud to receive from the man
she loved; such a letter as Katharine had dreamed of, had hoped for,
had longed for, in the days that were gone. It was that which Gordon
had written from his father's house in the full flush of his delight,
and the perfect but not presumptuous assurance of her love. Deadly
cold and sickness crept over Katharine as she read this letter; her
limbs grew heavy, her sight grew dim, her head grew dizzy. "I must be
near fainting," she thought; "and they are not all read." She forced
herself to rise from her chair, and went to the dressing-table, where
she found water and _eau-de-cologne_. She drank a glassful of the
mixture, and then returned to her task. All this time--it was in
reality only a few minutes--the insensible form upon the bed lay
motionless and silent.

The third letter was a short one, also written by Gordon Frere, and
addressed to Mr. Guyon. It was a straightforward, manly letter, in
which the writer acknowledged his unworthiness of the blessing he
asked with more sincerity than such matter-of-course acknowledgments
usually convey, and set forth his modest confidence in Miss Guyon's
consent to become his wife. Gordon stated the prospects then opening
upon him; and finally, in accordance with his father's wish, formally
requested Mr. Guyon's permission to address his daughter. (The
old-fashioned punctilio of the good rector had helped the unscrupulous
schemer considerably, as the virtues of good men are not seldom found
to aid the devices of knaves.)

The fourth letter, which was endorsed with the words "shown to R S.,"
and was the last contained in the packet, was in Mr. Guyon's
handwriting. As his daughter read it, all the truth revealed itself to
her; all the baseness of which she had been the victim stood in its
revolting nakedness before her eyes. As she read the flowery sentences
in which Mr. Guyon condoled with his "dear young friend," and pitied
himself for being the medium of so painful a communication, a grasp
seemed to tighten upon her throat and to press down her heart: still
she read on,--read that her father had written, on her behalf, to the
effect that, feeling she had been so unfortunate as to have conveyed a
totally unfounded impression to Mr. Frere, she had shrunk from a
personal explanation, and felt sure that, when Mr. Frere should know
that she was engaged to Mr. Streightley, and their marriage was to
take place very shortly, he would excuse her making a written
one;--read that, though Mr. Guyon hoped their future friendship would
be quite unaltered, he trusted Mr. Frere would abstain from any
communication, either personal or by letter, for the present, as such
would agitate Miss Guyon, and cause much unpleasantness; and that she
and her father united in every good wish for Mr. Frere's future
welfare.

Katharine read this terrible letter over many times--not before she
understood and believed the revelation it made, but before she got the
reality of it into her mind, before it connected itself with her own
self, and showed her the past and present laid utterly waste. It was
her father who had done this,--her father! who had been kind to her,
too, after a fashion--her father! Ay, _and her husband!_

_Shown to R.S_. Shown to Robert Streightley--shown to the rich man who
had bought her. Well, she had often told herself, bitterly enough,
that it was a bargain, a purchase; but now it was more--it was a
theft! Stolen from the man who loved her! made to believe him false,
duped--wretchedly, ignominiously duped! Good God! how was she to bear
this knowledge? _Shown to R.S_. There were the words, the fatal,
damning proofs which convicted the two men who were her nearest
friends, her only protectors, of the foulest conspiracy that ever two
rascals concocted against an unhappy woman. She crushed the letters in
her clenched hand, and rose to her feet. She had taken a step forward,
her eyes flaming, her face white and fixed,--far more changed than by
the earlier, weaker shock of this dreadful night,--when the door was
softly opened, and the housekeeper came in, carrying a trayful of
tea-things. At the sight of Katharine's face she set the tray down,
and said, in a hurried whisper:

"Were you coming to call me? Is he worse?"

"I--I don't know," stammered Katharine; "I think so."

"Poor dear!" said the woman compassionately; "no wonder you are
frightened. I shouldn't have left you alone."

Then she bent down to look closely at the patient. Closer and closer
still: she felt the hand, the heart; she touched the chill forehead.
Katharine stood still and watched her, quite silent, the papers in her
clenched hand covered by the folds of her dress. The woman's touch
suddenly became more reverent as she raised the chin and made the
passive blue lips meet, as she pressed her fingers on the half-shut
eyelids, and closed them over the sightless eyes. When she had drawn
the sheet over the still, stiffening face, she turned to the dead
man's daughter, and said,

"Come away, my dear. It's all over. I must send for the doctor, as he
told me."

          *           *           *           *           *

The wintry sun had been up for many hours when Mrs. Streightley
returned to her own house from that in which her father lay dead. She
had sent for Mr. Guyon's solicitor, and had a long interview with him
in the dingy dining-room. She had been wonderfully calm and collected,
the servants said; but she had not reentered her father's room, though
"the corpse is laid out beautiful, to be sure," said James to the
coachman from Portland Place, while that functionary awaited his
mistress, or her orders. She came out, looking pale and absent; and
she took no notice of the sympathising looks of her maid when she
reached home. She went at once to her room, declined all attendance,
and directed that she was not to be disturbed.

The servants wondered whether their master had been sent for; had
James been sent to the telegraph office, did coachman know? Coachman
knew nothing about it; but the lawyer was there,--perhaps he had sent
for master. And then they discussed the death, and the dead man, with
much freedom and candour.

At about two o'clock in the afternoon the footman, doing his turn of
duty by looking out of window in the hall of Mr. Streightley's house,
was surprised by seeing his mistress come downstairs in her bonnet and
cloak, with her veil down, and carrying a square parcel in her hand,
"which it looked like a box done up in paper," the man said
afterwards, when questioned concerning the circumstance.

"Open the door, William, if you please," said Mrs. Streightley.

The man obeyed, wondering.

"I am going to Queen Anne Street. I don't require the carriage," said
Katharine. And she passed out of the door, and out of the footman's
sight.




CHAPTER XII.
RETRIBUTION.


While the events recorded in the last chapter had been taking place,
Robert Streightley had been down to Middlemeads to give the necessary
orders for the immediate reduction of the establishment there. It was
an act over which a great many people would have been sillily
sentimental, but one which affected Robert Streightley very little
indeed. The stately old mansion had never been his home, though it had
contained his wife and his household gods; he had never had the same
regard for it as for the dingy Brixton villa, where every thing was so
old and mean and common. Even when he first bought the place, and
inhabited it in the early days of his wedded life, long before the
falseness of his position and the chance of some day being compelled
to return to his old and quiet mode of life had dawned on him, he had
felt uncomfortable and out of place at Middlemeads. But latterly, as
speculation after speculation "went wrong" in the City, and as
scarcely a week passed without the addition of some new improvement,
the importation of some fresh luxury by Katharine's orders, the
negative feelings with which he had regarded that estate, for the
possession of which he was so much envied and hated, grew into
positive dislike; he remembered that the first time he had seen the
place was the day before he had had that fatal conference with Mr.
Guyon, and he began to associate most of his troubles with the name of
Middlemeads.

He would have sold the place at once but for two reasons; the first
and chiefest of which was, that Katharine took great pleasure and
interest in it--more pleasure and interest than she had taken in any
thing else during her married life; the other, that the sale of his
country estate, which, with the county people who visited there and
the swells whom he entertained, had been so much talked of among his
friends in the City, would be a confession of weakness which Robert
Streightley shrunk from meeting. Besides, all would probably come
right very soon; the house of Streightley and Son was too firmly
established not to be able to stand a shock or two; and by reducing
the establishment at Middlemeads he should effect a considerable
saving, while the sale of a portion of the valuable timber on the
estate would bring in a sum of ready money, of which he was greatly in
need. This done, he drove off to the railway, caught the up-train, and
was on his way to London.

He was alone in the railway carriage; there was no old gentleman
rustling a newspaper, no young gentleman playing with his watch-chain,
no humorous children to trample on his feet,--nothing to disturb the
train of thought into which he fell. By no means a pleasant train of
thought, for a dead weight was at his heart, and he felt a horrible
sense of something--he knew not what--but some calamity hanging over
him. Something, some trifle had reminded him of the day on which Mr.
Guyon had told him of Frere's proposal for Katharine's hand, and now
he could not get the subject out of his head: the words seemed to ring
in his ears; and when he closed his eyes, that peculiar look with
which Mr. Guyon had suggested the suppression of Frere's letter seemed
to rise before him. What had his life been since then? He had married
Katharine! O yes, she was his wife; but had he ever obtained from her
one grain of confidence, one look of love? Had not his business
transactions gone wrong ever since? Had he not suffered under
perpetual qualms of conscience ever since he became a silent
confederate in that monstrous fraud of which Katharine, his wife, was
one of the victims? In his case, at least, retribution had not been
long delayed; the first mutterings of the avenging storm had been long
since heard, and now something told him that the storm itself was
close at hand. He would welcome it in all its fury, though it stripped
him of all his wealth and left him to begin life anew, if it only
could bear away on its wings the barrier existing between Katharine
and himself; if it only enabled him to prove to her his worship of
her; if it only raised in her for him one tithe of the love with which
he regarded her.

It was a dark, dull, damp evening when Robert Streightley alighted
from the cab in which he had driven from the railway, and knocked at
his own door in Portland Place. The enormously stout middle-aged man,
who for a by no means poor wage consented to pass his life in
alternately sitting in and getting out of a porter's chair, like a
leathern bee-hive, was usually sufficiently on the alert to recognise
his master's rap, and give him speedy admission; but on this occasion
Mr. Streightley had to knock three times, and when the porter opened
the door there was a strange odd look on his face, which made his
master think he had been drinking. Robert passed by him quickly and
went into the library, where he rang the bell. It was answered by
William, the footman who had opened the door for Katharine when she
left the house.

"Is your mistress in the Cedar-room? is there any one with her?"

"Missus is not in the Cedar-room, sir, and there is no pusson with
her, as I knows of. Missus ain't at home, sir."

"O, very well. What time did she order the carriage to fetch her?"

"The carriage isn't ordered at all, sir. Missus said she wouldn't want
the carriage."

"Do you know where your mistress is?"

"She said she was goin' to Queen Anne Street, sir."

"Very good. I'll go across myself and bring her home."

"Begging your pardon, sir, I don't think you'll find missus at Queen
Anne Street, sir."

"No! what do you mean?"

"Why, sir, Mamzell Augustus went across about six o'clock, sir, to
know whether missus was comin' home to dress, sir, and they said at
Queen Anne Street that she'd never been there since she left in the
morning."

"Never been there? and--O, she's probably gone out with Mr. Guyon."

"Good Lord, sir!" said the footman, startled out of all propriety; "I
forgot, sir, you didn't know--the hold gent's dead!"

"Dead? Mr. Guyon dead?"

"Yes, sir; had a fit at Croydon races last evening, sir, and died
hearly this morning. Beg pardon, sir, shall I tell Anderson to bring
you a glass of brandy, sir?"

"Eh? No, thank you, William--yes--you may, if you please. I
feel--" and Robert Streightley clutched at a chair near him, and sunk
into it, with trembling limbs and beating heart.

Mr. Anderson, the staid butler, brought a small decanter of brandy,
filled a liqueur-glass, and handed it to his master, whose hand shook
so that the glass rattled against his teeth. After the discreet
domestic had withdrawn, Robert Streightley sat in his chair, glaring
straight before him, revolving in his mind a hundred subjects, all
equally dismal. Katharine's absence, first of all, what could that
mean? what could have induced it? was it in any way connected with Mr.
Guyon's death? Mr. Guyon's death, poor man! not one with whom he had
any thing in common except--that horrible conspiracy always cropping
up! Mr. Guyon dead? well, then, there was an end to the chance of any
betrayal of that mystery; he might rest secure that--Good God! where
could his wife have gone to? Could she have learned--no; that was
impossible. Still, why had she left his house, without leaving any
trace of her whereabouts? Lady Henmarsh was not in town; but she might
have gone to some other friend's house, where she could receive that
womanly kindness and consolation which, in the first shock of her
grief, her heart sought for. It was absurd in him to have imagined
that, under such circumstances, she would remain in her own house
alone, without a soul to speak to in confidence. She would return
soon; he would wait up to receive her.

So through the long hours of that night, having dismissed the
household to rest, Robert Streightley sat in his library, the door of
which opened on the hall, in eager anticipation of his wife's return.
The sharp ticking of the clock on the mantelpiece seemed running a
race with the solemn ticking of the clock in the hall; the rumble of
the cabs outside, the footfalls of the passers-by, fell with
monotonous solemnity on his ear; the dead silence at the back of the
house, broken only by the wailing of dissipated cats, oppressed him;
and the keen anguish of his own thoughts made him occasionally clasp
his forehead and utter some ejaculation; but still he sat there,
looking out into the dimly-lighted hall, and waiting for his wife's
return. That Mr. Guyon was dead, had died suddenly and in a ghastly
manner, he yet scarcely realised: he had heard the fact, and that was
all; he had not thought over it; his thoughts were entirely occupied
with the fact of his wife's absence. To account for this he had now no
possible satisfactory theory. Had she been persuaded to remain at the
house of any friend to whom she might have gone, a message to that
effect would surely have been sent to Portland Place. The shock of her
father's death might have been too much for her; and in walking to the
house of some friend she might have been seized with illness; at that
moment she might be lying unknown in some hospital, or--and as the
thought came across him Robert Streightley started to his feet, his
mind half made up to sally forth at once, and set the detective force
at work to discover Katharine's whereabouts. But before he had
advanced a few steps his cautious common-sense came to his aid. He was
a weak, hot-headed fool, and his usual powers of reasoning had been,
he argued to himself, a little impaired by the mental strain to which
during the last few weeks he had been subjected. Nothing was known yet
of his wife's disappearance. Even to the household their mistress's
absence was a mere subject for discussion over the supper-beer, where
no one had a substantial theory to broach, but all arrived at a
general conclusion, originally propounded by the cook, that "master
not being at home, she'd gone away, poor soul, to some other friend's
nigh by; and not expectin' him, they'd kep her, as was only right and
jest when she was in trouble." If he were to raise a hue and cry, it
would become at once a public scandal; and from a public scandal, from
the mere thought of the knowledge that his friends were discussing his
domestic affairs, Robert Streightley shrunk in horror and dismay. No;
he would take no step, at least for the next few hours; morning must
bring the solution of the mystery, and for that solution he would
wait. Arrived at this determination, he turned out his lamp, and crept
up stairs to bed.

To bed, but not to sleep. For hours he lay tossing on his hot pillow,
racked with dismal doubt. Where was his wife? To whom had she gone in
her time of trouble? That she had not remained to share her grief with
him would have been, under other circumstances, a sufficient cause of
dissatisfaction for her husband; but Robert, calmly reviewing--as
calmly as he could, poor fellow--his real position in the dull dead
watches of the night, was forced to acknowledge to himself that there
had never been any confidence between him and Katharine, which would
warrant him in looking for such a display of affection. On the other
hand, a doubt of her having infringed the strictest rules of propriety
never crossed his mind. Never, during the whole course of her married
life, had she given him occasion for the slightest suspicion of
jealousy. With all her undeniable beauty, with all the attention she
perforce commanded, she had not shown the smallest symptom of
coquetry. If she had not come heart-whole to him, if hers had not been
a love-match, if he had not been the _beau ideal_ of her girlish
fancy, by no act of hers could that have become patent to the
ever-watchful, always censorious world. Where, then, was she gone? Her
position was so peculiar, even to Robert's unworldly view; she had
lived so self-contained a life since her marriage, that she could
scarcely be said to have any special friends. Acquaintances she had by
the score; but one does not go to acquaintances in the time of
trouble; while her quondam chaperone, Lady Henmarsh, her only
intimate, was away, and Mrs. Stanbourne, from whom she might justly
have sought consolation, was far from England. Where could she have
gone? Still revolving this question in his mind, Robert, just as day
was dawning, fell into a fitful feverish sleep, haunted by horrible
dreams, in which he and Katharine, the dead man and Gordon Frere, all
played conspicuous parts, being mixed up in that dreadfully grotesque
manner only possible under dream-influence.

He seemed only to have closed his eyes--in reality he had been asleep
but a couple of hours--when he was aroused by a knocking at the door,
and the voice of his servant, who, according to usual custom, had
brought the post-letters to his bedroom door. In an instant
Streightley sprang up, all the events of the previous day--Guyon's
death, Katharine's absence, his own misery--all flashing upon him at
once, opened the door, and there, on the top of the little heap, saw a
letter in Katharine's well-known hand. He seized it instantly, was
about to tear it open, and stopped--stopped, for his heart was beating
loudly, and there was a choking sensation in his throat, and a film
over his eyes. He sat down on a chair, placed the letter on the table
beside him, and passed his hand over his brow. The whole room reeled
before him; he felt that he must, and yet that he dared not break that
seal. The answer to the question that had been tormenting him all
night, the key to the enigma of his wife's departure, lay before him,
and yet he hesitated to avail himself of it. He remained irresolute
for some minutes; then he took up the letter quietly, opened it, and
read as follows:

"This is the last time I shall ever hold communication with you, and
therefore it is well that I should be explicit. By the merest accident
I have become acquainted with the plot by which the whole of my life
was maimed and perverted, my happiness blighted, my feelings trampled
on, and my girlish pride mortified and humbled. In that plot were
two conspirators; one who basely sold an honest, trusting, loving
girl--his daughter; the other, who, by the mere accidental advantage
of his wealth, was enabled to buy that girl for his wife. By neither,
save as a mere matter of barter, something to be bought and sold, was
I, that girl, considered. One of the plotters has been removed beyond
the reach of my vengeance, and I shall take care to prevent the other
from any opportunity of further villainy, so far as I am concerned. I
have turned my back upon my father's corpse, and I turn my back on
your house. I leave behind me all the price at which you purchased me;
I take nothing with me but my mother's jewels, to which I suppose I
have a right, and the unalterable determination which I have formed;
and that is, in this world or the next, living or dying, never to
forgive you, Robert Streightley, for your share in my degradation, and
never to look upon your face again.--K.S."




END OF VOL. II.
KISSING THE ROD.




CHAPTER I.
"IN BATTALIONS."


It was perhaps fortunate for Robert Streightley that the pressure of
an immediate necessity for exertion was put upon him at the same time
that he received his wife's letter. The blow was so frightful that it
might have completely crushed him, had he not been forced to rouse
himself from its first effect, to put the meaning of the terrible
communication aside for a time, while he attended to the stern duties
which were his, as the only representative of the dead man. The
subdued bustle, the ceaseless coming and going, the people to be seen,
the letters to be written, the innumerable demands upon his attention
in reference to his deceased father-in-law, to say nothing of the
exigencies of his own affairs, from which he had not an hour's
respite, controlled him in spite of himself, and by suspending
softened the intensity of the knowledge of the punishment that had
overtaken him.

The suspense and perplexity into which Katharine's unexplained absence
from home had thrown the household on the preceding day had prepared
them to expect that some important intelligence was contained in the
letter which had reached their master that morning; and the unhappy
man comprehended the necessity of making some communication on the
subject. He briefly informed Katharine's maid that she had left town
for the present; and on being asked whether the woman was to join her
mistress at Middlemeads, he said Mrs. Streightley was not there; that
she had better wait for orders, and in the mean time ask no more
questions. An injudicious answer; but Robert neither knew nor cared
what would have been the judicious course to pursue. He knew only that
his sin had found him out; that the chastisement had come; and that
the woman whom he had so loved and so wronged had left him for
ever--left him hating and despising him.

The hours of that dreadful day wore through somehow. Robert had been
engaged during many of them in making arrangements consequent upon Mr.
Guyon's death; he had been at Queen Anne Street, and at his office in
the City, transacting business of different but invariably unpleasant
kinds. He had seen several persons, but not any by whom the domestic
calamity which had fallen upon him was suspected. He had written to
his mother, informing her of Mr. Guyon's death, and requesting that
Ellen would not come to Portland Place for the present; but giving no
explanation of this request. All the day he had carried about with him
the dreadful knowledge of what had befallen him--had been oppressed by
its weight, darkened by its shadow; but he had not examined his
burden--he had gone his appointed way, and done his relentless task,
and the day had been got through somehow. Now he was going to look the
truth in the face; he was going to force his mind to understand it, to
take it in fully, and to suffer the torture at his leisure.

He shut himself up in his "study," and gave orders that no one was to
be admitted. Then, with the door locked and sure of solitude, he read
Katharine's letter again,--not that he needed to do so; every one of
its few remorseless words seemed to have burned themselves into his
brain,--and then he read the letter which hers had enclosed--the
letter endorsed "Shown to R. S." He had not looked at it in the
morning; it had sufficed him to know that the letter which Mr. Guyon
had shown him on the day which had witnessed their disgraceful
compact--the letter which they had tacitly agreed to suppress, still
existed, for his conviction, for his condemnation, and had reached the
hands to which it had been addressed at last: he had put it away with
a shudder. But now he read it--steadily, and with utter amazement.
There it was; and on the blank side of the sheet, in Mr. Guyon's hand,
were the words, "Shown to R.S." But this letter was sill in Mr.
Guyon's hand, and Robert had never seen it--had never heard of it;
this was not the letter from Gordon Frere to Katharine which her
father had shown to him; there was a dreadful mistake somewhere. As
Robert read the heartless words in which Mr. Guyon rejected Gordon
Frere on his daughter's behalf, he understood for the first time how
the conspiracy which had resulted in so sad a success had been carried
out. This, then, was the method Mr. Guyon had adopted, and into which
Robert had never inquired. He saw it all--he understood it all now;
and he honestly recoiled at the baseness by which his triumph had been
secured. He even thought he would not have consented, had he known how
the thing was to be done; but his conscience was not so deadened as to
accept that sophistry, and another moment's thought taught him that he
was as guilty as ever.

But how came the letter to be endorsed with words, intended by their
writer only as a private memorandum, which were not true? This puzzled
Robert, until he guessed, what really was the case, that Mr. Guyon
had put Frere's letter and his reply away together, and had mistaken
the one for the other. Why had he kept them at all? thought Robert;
why had he put such dangerous and useless documents aside, thus
running the risk of detection now realised? "He never could have
intended to use them as a weapon against me," thought Robert, who had
arrived at a tolerably correct appreciation of the character of his
deceased father-in-law. "They convict him directly; me, though
conclusively _to her_, only indirectly to others. Why on earth did he
keep them?"

Ah, why? Why is half the mischief that is done in the world done by
the instrumentality of letters, which ought to have been read and
destroyed, being treasured up instead by foolish women, or read and
left about by men whom experience has not availed to teach? If Robert
Streightley had quite understood Mr. Guyon's character, he would have
known, in the first place, that that gentleman had never been in the
habit of contemplating the contingency of his own death, or of making
any preparation, temporal or spiritual, for that event; in the second,
that his vanity was of so ominous a kind that he liked to indulge in
the recollection of successful enterprises, no matter what their
nature, and treasured up the trophies of his fortunate _coups_, as
other people might keep love-tokens or relics of departed friends,--a
ghastly perversion, it is true, but a characteristic trait of Mr.
Guyon, as Robert came to learn, when he had to examine all the dead
man's papers and personal effects.

After all, it did not matter very much that this mistake had been
made. Any one of the papers concerning this transaction, so endorsed,
would have equally convicted her husband in Katharine's eyes. For a
moment, when Robert perceived the error and recognised how it had
occurred, a faint hope had sprung up in his heart that all might be
explained, in explaining that he had never seen the draft of Mr.
Guyon's letter to Gordon Frere; but it lasted only for a moment, and
then left Robert more shame-stricken, more despairing than before.

The bitter remembrance of his resolutions of the day before came to
torment him now. How futile they were! made all too late, and useless;
how ridiculous they seemed, too! Would he ever have had the courage to
tell the woman he had wronged the truth concerning himself and her?
Cowering as he was now under the blast of her scorn and anger, he
could not believe that he would; he heaped upon himself all the
reprobation which the sternest judge could have measured out to him.
His sin had found him out indeed, and nothing could save him now from
the fullest retribution. It had come in its worst form, complicated
with the death of his accomplice, as a double horror. Robert
Streightley was not a man who could coldly contemplate such an event
as Mr. Guyon's death. He had indeed retained but little personal
regard for him; but that fact, the growing knowledge of the man which
rendered such regard impossible, invested his death with additional
horror to Robert. That such should have been the manner of the
detection and the punishment, impressed him with awe. Standing, as he
had done that day, by the dead man's bed, he had bowed his head
submissively to the tremendous lesson which the scene conveyed. Where
was their fine scheme now? Where was the wealth for which the father
had sold the daughter? Gone--almost all gone; and if it had remained a
million times told, what could it avail to the form of clay which lay
there waiting for the coffin and the grave? Where was the beautiful
wife whom the father's accomplice had purchased at the price of his
honour? Who was to tell that to the wretched husband, who knew nothing
but that she had detected them both, and fled from them both,--from
the living and the dead?

As he thought these thoughts, and a thousand others which could find
no utterance in words, no expression by the pen, the long hours of the
night were wearing by. Up and down the room, long after the fire had
died out, unnoticed, Robert Streightley walked, buried in his
tormenting thoughts, full of horror, remorse, shame, the sense of
righteous retribution and torturing grief. She was gone,--his darling,
the one treasure of his life, the beautiful idol of his worship: the
desolation of that knowledge had not come to him yet; he had had no
time to think of the meaning of life without her; the fear, the
excitement, the strangeness of the fact were all that he had as yet
realised. The awful sorrow, the hopeless bereavement were for the
future. The strokes of the rod were beginning to fall upon him;
strokes which were to continue, ceaseless and stinging, until the end.
Any one who has ever battled, quite alone, with a tremendous sorrow in
its first hours of strife, knows how vain is the effort to collect his
thoughts at the time, and to recall their order afterwards; knows how
the merest trifles will intrude themselves on the attention at times,
and at others how the faculties will seem to be suspended, and a kind
of dull vacuity will succeed the access of raging pain. The story of
Robert's suffering in no way differed from that of any other supreme
agony. It had all the caprices, all the fantasies of pain; it had the
dreadful vitality, and the intervals of numbness and wandering. Many
times in the course of that night Robert sat down in a chair and fell
asleep, to wake again--with a start, and an impression that some voice
had uttered his name--to the renewed consciousness of his misery.

It was very long before he began to think about the circumstances of
Katharine's flight from her home, before he began to speculate upon
how she had gone, and whither. From the moment he had read her
assurance that in this world he should never see her face again, he
had been seized with a horrible conviction that this was literally
true: he would seek her, of course; he would find out where she had
gone to,--he did not even stop to think whether there would be much,
or any difficulty about that--but he should see her face no more. No
such wild notion as that Katharine would relent and forgive him ever
crossed Robert's mind. He knew how cold and proud she was--how cold
and proud when she was ignorant of his sin against her, and when he
had lived only in the hope of winning her love some happy day before
he died;--he knew how insensate any hope would now be, and he never
cherished such a delusion for a moment. She was dead to him, and all
the gorgeous fabric of the life he had built up for himself had
crumbled away.

The new day was dawning, when Robert Streightley went wearily
upstairs, and stopped at the door of his wife's dressing-room. He had
hardly courage to enter the deserted chamber,--it was as though she
lay dead inside. There had been so strong a likeness to her face in
that of the dead man he had stood beside that day, that it had had a
double awe for him. When at length he opened the door and went in, the
cold dim dawn was there before him, and the orderly emptiness of the
splendid chamber struck him to the heart.

No picturesque disarray was there, but the trimness of a swept and
garnished apartment. He had not entered this room on the preceding
night--he had not thought of looking for any explanation of
Katharine's absence there. But now that she had furnished the
explanation herself, he remembered the servants had told him she had
been some time in her dressing-room after her return from Queen Anne
Street. He drew back the curtains and admitted the misty light; he sat
down on a sofa and leaned his head wearily upon his hands. Gradually
fatigue overcame him, and he fell into a deep sleep, which gave him
merciful forgetfulness until late in the morning.

Robert was roused from his slumber by Katharine's maid, who told him
that Lady Henmarsh had arrived and was waiting to see him. "There's
another lady with her, sir," said the maid,--"Mrs. Frere."

Robert started perceptibly. "I cannot see any one yet," he said. "Say
I am not dressed, but will call on Lady Henmarsh as soon as possible."

The woman hesitated. "Lady Henmarsh wants to know what day is fixed
for the funeral, sir; and she has been asking about my mistress."

"Just tell her what I have said," returned Robert impatiently, "and
say no more."

The maid left him, and Robert went to his own room. His injunction was
useless. Lady Henmarsh, who had felt more discomposure when the news
of Mr. Guyon's death had reached her than any other intelligence
respecting her fellow-creatures could have caused her to experience,
had hurried up to town, had gone to Queen Anne Street, and learned
from the housekeeper the strange disappearance of Katharine.
While her message was being conveyed to Robert, she was engaged in
cross-examining the footman; and she had elicited all that any one,
save Robert himself, could tell her before she went away, obliged to
be contented with the promise of a speedy visit from Mr. Streightley.


The news of Mr. Guyon's death had been received by Mrs. Streightley
and her daughter as such news would naturally be received by such
persons. They were shocked and sorry; shocked, because they knew Mr.
Guyon to be a "worldly" man, and they could not but regard his
unprepared death with awe; sorry, because he was Katharine's father,
and Ellen at least loved Katharine, and grieved for her grief. Ellen
would indeed have gone to her sister-in-law, and sought to soothe her
in her simple fashion, had not Robert's note forbade her doing so.
This note had excited no fresh alarm; the ladies agreed that Katharine
was not able to see any one, not even Ellen, just yet, and were quite
content to wait for the subsidence of a feeling so natural. Thus, when
Robert made his appearance a little before noon on the day following
the receipt of his note, they were wholly unprepared for the
intelligence he had to communicate, and they received it with mingled
horror and incredulity.

"My wife had grave cause of complaint against me," Robert had said,
"and she has left me."

To this plain but not explanatory statement he limited his disclosure,
and he left his mother and sister in much perplexity and distress. It
did not occur to them that Robert was ignorant of his wife's plans;
they accepted the situation as a simple separation; and Mrs.
Streightley's comment upon it to her daughter, made after Robert had
left them, was:

"I don't care what her cause of complaint may be, nothing can justify
her leaving Robert. Don't let us speak of her, my dear; time will
bring things right, and at all events will console him."

Thus Ellen had not any information to afford Mrs. Gordon Frere, when
she surprised her by a visit that same afternoon. It was Hester who
repeated to Ellen the particulars which Lady Henmarsh had extracted
from the footman that morning, and Hester who suggested that Robert
might find it more difficult than he imagined to open any
communication with his wife.

"Lady Henmarsh went to Mr. Guyon's solicitor," said Hester; "and he
evidently can tell nothing. Mrs. Streightley had a long interview with
him after her father's death, but he declares she never gave him a
hint of her intention, and was singularly quiet and composed. He
wondered, indeed, at the composure with which she bore her father's
death. I believe Mr. Streightley expects her to communicate with him,
or you, or some one, by letter?"

"I suppose so. O, of course," said Ellen; "but the whole thing
bewilders me. What fault can she have to find with Robert? Surely no
woman ever had a better husband."

Mrs. Frere assented to this proposition, and the two talked over the
mysterious occurrence. With none the less _got_ that no amount of
talking could render it less mysterious. Hester had a certain degree
of knowledge, and a greater degree of suspicion; but she did not
confide either to her guileless companion, who was distracted between
her admiring affection for Katharine and her absolute belief in
Robert's faultlessness.


The interview between Robert and Lady Henmarsh was not more
communicative on his part than that which had taken place at the
Brixton villa, in so far as the motive of Katharine's flight was
concerned. "Cousin Hetty" had so much to say about Mr. Guyon's death,
and was so much agitated by it, that Robert's kindness of heart would,
under any circumstances, have prevented his telling her any thing
derogatory to the memory of the dead man. He therefore confined
himself to a general statement of the circumstances. Lady Henmarsh was
genuinely astonished, and honestly concerned. She thought in her heart
that Katharine was the "greatest fool" in existence. "The other man is
married," said she to herself, "and therefore out of her reach. She
has not run off with any one else; and unless she was really too well
off, and bored to death by having every thing she wished for, I cannot
understand her conduct." Her manner was perfect in its sympathy with
Mr. Streightley, and in her condemnation of his wife, whose flight
she, however, took care to represent as merely a caprice, a little bit
of temper,--"she always had an ungovernable temper," said Lady
Henmarsh, in a parenthesis,--but of the worst possible taste under the
circumstances.

"Did I understand you rightly, that Katharine was with her poor dear
father when he died?" she asked.

"Yes, she was with him," said Robert; "she was with him all night, and
until near eleven o'clock next day."

"How very extraordinary and how very shocking!" exclaimed Lady
Henmarsh. "Well, Mr. Streightley, I am sure, no matter what you and
she have quarrelled about, the fault is not yours; and her friend will
speedily send her back to you."

"Her friend?" said Robert, interrogatively.

"Yes; Mrs. Stanbourne I mean. Of course she is gone to her. Do not you
think so? She does not say so, I suppose, just to keep you in
suspense, and make a sensation; but no doubt she is gone to her: she
did so in all her troubles formerly; poor Ned and I were not good
enough for her," and Lady Henmarsh sniffed spitefully. "My advice to
you is to take no notice; she must come off her high horse when she
wants money."

Robert started. He had not thought of that; he had not thought of his
wife being reduced to any material distress. The mere idea gave him
acute pain; and yet what better chance for her communicating with him,
and some faint hope arising out of such communication? The divided
pain and relief of the thought struggled in his expressive face.

"I have no idea," he replied; "there is no clue, no indication in her
letter--nothing but the terrible, bare truth; and I don't know whether
she has money with her or not."

"She had a private banking account, I know, among the other luxuries
of her _vie de princesse,_" said Lady Henmarsh with a spiteful
emphasis; "you had better see to its condition. I have no doubt she
has gone to Mrs. Stanbourne. It is unfortunate; and she is foolish to
have made such a scandal as, let us all keep the matter as close as we
may, it must make, for it will not be easily lived down by her, or
forgotten by the world. However, it cannot be helped; she must only
come back, and propitiate society more than ever."

Robert hardly heard her; his thoughts were far distant, in pursuit of
the beloved fugitive. The trivial talk of the woman of the world
passed him by unheeded. He roused himself to tell Lady Henmarsh what
were the arrangements for the funeral of Mr. Guyon, and to utter a few
sentences of kindness towards the dead man, and concern for her grief.
Then he was going away, when he remembered something he had to say,
and turned again to speak to her.

"No papers can be removed until after the funeral," he said; "but I
have looked over the greater part of poor Mr. Guyon's, and I have set
aside a large packet which I consider you are the proper person to
dispose of. I will send them to you carefully."

Lady Henmarsh thanked him; but her manner was confused to a degree
which did her habitual _sang froid_ a great wrong, and a genuine blush
dyed her face from the chin to the forehead. "To think of his being
such an idiot as to keep those letters," she said, when Robert had
left her. "Who could have believed it? I should not be surprised if he
had kept some letter, some memorandum, which has opened Kate's eyes;
and if so, knowing what a devil she is when she's roused, I'm not
surprised at any thing."

Robert found that Katharine had not drawn on her private banking
account for more than a fortnight. More than ever puzzled by this
discovery, he questioned her maid, inquiring if she could tell what
money her mistress had had in her possession. She had only a few
sovereigns in her purse, the maid knew, when she went out that fatal
day in the carriage. Katharine had forgotten her purse, and sent her
upstairs for it just as she reached the hall-door; so she had seen the
purse, and taken particular notice of it, as it lay open on the
dressing-table. Robert went with the woman to examine the drawers and
wardrobes in Katharine's room. He was intensely anxious now to be
assured that she had the equivalent of money with her; for he was far
from really sharing Lady Henmarsh's confident anticipations, though he
tried to persuade himself that he did so. All Katharine's possessions
were in perfect order--not a trinket, not a jewel was missing,--not
one, at least, that Robert had given her, or that she had bought since
their marriage; nothing but the old-fashioned case containing her dead
mother's diamonds, her sole dowry, was gone from its place. Then
Robert despaired; then he seemed to understand the terrible and final
meaning of this event.

He was standing before the open doors of a cabinet in which
Katharine's jewels were symmetrically arranged, and had just satisfied
himself that only the case of jewels had been removed, when a servant
came to seek him.

"What is it?" said Robert. "I am busy: I cannot see any one."

"It is one of the clerks from the City, sir," returned the man; "and
he wants to see you on important business."

Robert went down to the study, and saw the clerk from the City. His
business was important, and his news serious. New and heavy loss had
fallen on Streightley and Son. Troubles had indeed come to Robert,
"not by single spies, but in battalions."




CHAPTER II.
DELIBERATION.


It was eleven o'clock in the morning, and Mr. Charles Yeldham was hard
at work, his oak rigidly closed, the sleeves of his dressing-gown
turned up, his hair in a grand state of "towzle," caused by the
frequent passage of his hands through it; a shower of fresh
ink-splotches dotting the carpet close by his desk, and other
indubitable signs of a hard case of "treadmill." It had occurred to
Mr. Yeldham, in the midst of applying a wise saw to a modern instance,
that somebody was tapping at his outer door; but entirely engrossed by
the vastness of the application, he had given himself to rubbing his
hands together under his desk, and had wholly ignored the knocker. In
the act of taking a fresh dip of ink, preparatory to the elaboration
of a sentence which should utterly confound his adversary the
opposition chamber-counsel, Mr. Yeldham paused, and, recognising the
peculiar taps at the door as those only known to the affiliated,
Charley, with some faint idea that it might be Gordon Frere coming in
for a chat and a smoke, laid down his pen, and unbolting the door,
admitted Robert Streightley.

Very pale, with a bright hectic flush under the eyes, and with an
unnatural brightness in the eyes themselves; with his hat drawn over
his brow, and his shoulders far more rounded than when Yeldham had
last seen him, Robert Streightley wrung his friend's hand, entered the
room, and without invitation flung himself into a chair by the desk.
The appearance of the man was so changed, the action was so contrary
to his usual custom, that Charles Yeldham looked hard at him, and
looking, noticed the restless quivering of his lips, the odd manner in
which he plucked at his chin with his hand, the way in which from time
to time he pressed his side, as though to check the beating of his
heart. Yeldham noticed all these points; but his voice never betrayed
him, and he said perfectly calmly,

"Well, Robert, old man, it's not often you venture into my
quarters--afraid of the law, eh, old fellow?--think that I shall
entangle you into a dispute with Rothschild, or show how easily you
could promote a claim against the Barings? However, I'm glad to see
you now you are come."

"I'm sure you are, Charley; and I know you'll be more glad to see
me--I mean more ready with your sympathy and advice--when you learn
that I have come to you--in trouble."

"In trouble? O yes, I recollect; I saw in the papers. Dreadful thing
about Mr. Guyon; so sudden, and at such a place! Dreadful for your
wife too; I suppose she feels it acutely?"

"I suppose she does. I can't say--I don't know!"

"You can't say--you don't know! Why, Hubert, old fellow, Mr. Guyon's
death must--"

"I didn't come here to talk to you about Mr. Guyon's death, Yeldham; I
came to speak of my own affairs."


"Why, Robert, how you--what on earth's the matter with you, man?"

"What on earth's the matter with a man whose wife--whom he adores and
worships--has left him for ever?"

"Has left him for ever? Good God, Streightley, what's the matter with
you; you've not been----"

"No, I'm not drunk, Charley, if you mean that; and grief has not
turned my brain yet; at all events I know what I said, and I mean
it--read that!" and he handed him Katharine's note.

Yeldham read it through with contracting brows and pursing lips. He
read it twice; then Streightley said, "That note was posted to me, and
reached me the morning after my wife left her home. You see that it
does not give the slightest clue to her whereabouts."

"It does not--it----"

"Why do you hesitate?"

"Well--there was no occasion for you to show me that letter; and you
would not have shown it to me, I presume, if you intended your
confidence to end there."

"I have come here to ask your advice and help, and with the full
intention of concealing nothing from you."

"That is the only condition under which advice, to be worth any thing,
can be given. Mrs. Streightley in that letter speaks of some plot or
conspiracy of which you were cognisant, by which her whole life was
warped and spoiled. I'm not quoting exact words, but that remains upon
my mind as the sense of the passage. What does she mean by that?"

"She means that I, whom you have always known as an honourable man,
acted on one occasion like a sneak and a scoundrel!--she means that I
was so mad in my pursuit of her before we were married, that I
descended to the use of foul means to carry my point; that I was base
enough to be party to an arrangement which, as she says, warped and
spoiled her life, for the sake of getting her for myself."

"This is strong language, Robert! Knowing you as I do, I should think
your conduct even in this matter can hardly have been such as to
justify this self-condemnation."

"Wait and hear the story before you judge. You know how I loved
Katharine Guyon. I told you all about it that first day we went down
to Middlemeads; I told you how, the first time in my life, I was
passionately, madly in love with her. We spoke, if you recollect,
of your friend Gordon Frere; but I did not tell you what I then
knew--that he had paid great attention to Miss Guyon; that these
attentions had been very well received by her, and that there was a
very strong flirtation--if not an understood engagement--between
them."

"You did not tell me, but I knew it. I had been told of it by Gordon
himself."

"You knew of it, and yet listened to my love-ravings? However, the
flirtation, engagement--whatever it was--was gall and wormwood to me.
I had seen them together on several occasions, and the recollection of
the pleasure which she always showed in his society used to madden me.
I made all kinds of excuses to go to her house; I lent her father
money whenever he asked for it; each time I saw her I was more madly
in love, but she was no nearer to me than before. One morning her
father wrote to me to come to him on urgent business. I thought he
wanted more money, but he explained that it was to consult me--I who
was so calm and clever and far-seeing, God help me!--as to the future
of his child. He had that morning had a letter from Mr. Gordon Frere
making a formal proposal for Miss Guyon's hand, and enclosing another
letter to Miss Guyon herself."

Here Charles Yeldham shifted his position, leaning forward in his
chair, and fixing his eyes on Streightley's face.

"I did not read either of these letters," continued Robert; "but Mr.
Guyon explained to me their purport, and I knew at once my doom. Mr.
Guyon expressed his dislike to the proposed connection, stating that
Mr. Frere was too young, too frivolous, and too poor to be intrusted
with Miss Guyon's future. In an instant, and almost without knowing
what I did, I proposed to Mr. Guyon for his daughter. He accepted me
instantly, declared himself delighted, and assured me that he would
smooth matters for me with Miss Guyon. But there was Frere's letter.
We both knew that she was fond of the young man; we both knew that she
would accept his offer; we--yes, we both agreed that the letter should
be kept back from her, and that she should never be informed of
Frere's proposal."

"Good God!" exclaimed Yeldham, "and that intention was carried out?"

"At once. Frere was answered by Mr. Guyon that his daughter was
engaged to me, and--there! I cannot go through the sickening details
of that time again, nor describe the manner in which that girl was
cheated of her lover and made over to me. Since then the knowledge of
my treachery has never left me, I may fairly say I haven't had one
happy hour, and--could I only get my wife back, and prove to her how
sincere is my desire to atone for my part in this plot, I should not
repine at its having come to light. You don't speak, Yeldham; you
despise me--you----"

"I don't despise you, Robert; I pity you from the bottom of my soul,"
said Yeldham in a hard dry voice. "I don't think, much as I have heard
it talked of, that I ever believed in what men call the power of
passion before. That it made whole idiots of the half-brained people
who chose to let it get the mastery of them, I understood; but that
under its influence you should have permitted yourself to have your
sense of right and wrong warped and degraded--that you should have
suffered yourself to become a conspirator with, if not the tool of,
such a thorough-paced scoundrel as old Guyon, is to me most
marvellous. I confess I thought there was something queer in the case;
but I never dreamed of this."

Yeldham stopped speaking for a minute; but as Robert Streightley
remained silent, his head buried in his hands, Charley rose to his
feet and began striding up and down the room, as was his fashion when
very much excited.

"I should be no true friend to you, Streightley, if I did not tell you
all I feel in this matter," he said, "though I cannot express in
strong enough terms my horror at what has been done. When I recollect
how that poor fellow Gordon Frere went away almost heart-broken, and
soured in temper, at the way in which he thought he had been treated
by Miss Guyon--his visits unacknowledged, his letters unreplied to,
his proposal rejected,--when I think how he stormed about her conduct
and cursed her--yes, cursed her, poor girl, as a heartless coquette;
cursed her for what it now appears she not merely had nothing to do
with, but was a fellow-victim in,--when I think of all this, I feel I
must be drunk or dreaming when connecting my old friend Robert
Streightley with such a deliberate piece of villainy! Don't start,
Robert; it was a hard word, but it was the right one. I'm not a friend
of yesterday; we've been like brothers since we were boys, and you
know I'd give my life for you if it were wanted; but I claim the right
to speak out plainly in this matter. Why, it was but the other day
that Frere, who, thank God, came home quite cured of all that early
romance, was here talking of you and your wife, and saying how lucky
she was to have chosen for her helpmate in life such an honest,
genuine, sterling good fellow."

"Charley," pleaded Streightley, crossing his hands behind his head,
"for heaven's sake spare me this! To know what I was, what I seem to
be, and what I am, is too much!"

"There then," said Yeldham, pausing by his friend and laying his hand
on Robert's shoulder--"I've done. No talk will mend the matter, and
besides, immediate action is needed. You say Mrs. Streightley had left
your house?"

"She had; that letter came by the post the day after her father's
death--the day on which she went away."

"And at present you have no clue to her whereabouts?"

"Not the slightest."

Charles Yeldham sat down at his desk, and leaning his head on his
hands, remained for a minute or two in deep thought. Then he turned to
his friend and said:

"Mrs. Streightley was, I should imagine from the little I saw of her,
a woman of great force of character, and not likely to do a thing on
the spur of the moment without calculating results. You see this
letter, by its postmark, must have been written some hours after she
left home. During those hours she was deliberating and forming her
plan; and whatever that was, she'll hold to it, I'm sure. She has
determined that you sha'n't trace her; and it's my opinion you'll have
the greatest difficulty in doing it."

"We might employ the detectives, don't you think?" asked Robert.

"Detectives! There's been no detection done by the detectives since
they were made the heroes of sensation novels; and, besides, we don't
quite want to place your domestic history among the archives of
Scotland Yard. No; whatever is to be done--and, as I said before, I
fear the chance is small enough--must be done amongst ourselves. Who
were her female friends? intimates, I mean; dear and dearest, and all
those things that women say and write to each other?"

"I--I scarcely know," said Robert, looking blank. "She never appeared
to me to have what one could call an intimate friend. There was Lady
Henmarsh, who used to take her about before we were married; but
there's not been over much cordiality between them lately, I should
say; and Mrs. Stanbourne, who is a relative of Katharine's, and a very
charming woman, the kindest and best--so particularly nice to me, made
me feel quite at home--but she's not in England, or I would have sent
to her at once; and there's my sister Ellen, and Hester Gould--Mrs.
Frere, I mean--but of course, under the circumstances, she would not
go to either of them."

"Of course not," said Yeldham, rubbing his head. "It's a tremendous
knot--a most tremendous knot. I don't see my way in it the least.
Motive for leaving plain enough--discovery of this plot. Inducement
for her to go any where in particular? none. 'Never will forgive
you--never will look on your face again'--that means concealment, or I
don't know but she's just the woman whose spirit would induce her
to--no, not that either. Too much pride; hates the world's talk and
pity--no, no. What does she say about having taken nothing of yours?
Hadn't she any money?"

"She had a private banking account of her own, but I find she has not
drawn a cheque for weeks. She has only taken with her some jewels
which belonged to her mother, and which--ah, my darling! my darling!"
and the strong man, who had borne up with such fortitude hitherto,
broke down and wept like a child.

"Robert--old fellow--for God's sake, any thing but that! Have some
brandy; have some----"

"If she should be in want--she, who never yet knew an ungratified
wish--if she--O Charley, I know I'm making a fool of myself, old
friend, but I love her so! O Heaven, I love her so!"

There were tears in honest Charley Yeldham's eyes as he sat himself
down by his friend, and took his hand and said, "Come, Robert--be a
man. I know it's hard to bear, horribly hard, and no preaching, and no
attempt at consolation will make it any better. It must be faced and
battled with. She's gone, and we must find her. It's one consolation
to know that wherever she may be, she'll be certain, by that wonderful
something which I have often felt, but which I can't explain, and
which is innate in her, to command the respect of those she is thrown
among. But the money-test is decidedly an awkward one. She has some
jewels, you say; but she'll know nothing of the way to convert them
into cash, and she's sure to be awfully done; and I suppose she was
like most women, had not the least knowledge of the value of money?"

"Well, no, poor child--not much, I think; you see, she has never had
to----"

"Of course not; I know. Look here, Robert; you must take a blunt
question from a blunt man, and give a blunt answer if you choose. Is
what is beginning to be murmured about you in the City true?"

The colour flushed up into Robert Streightley's pale face at the
question. The pride in his wife, in his position, had been things of
later days; the pride in his City stability had been born in him, and
nurtured in his youth.

"I will answer you, Charley, in all truth," he said, with quivering
lips; "but you must tell me first what the report is."

"The report is, that, hit heavily by the failure of Hicks' bank, you
have been trying to recover leeway by--well, what they call wild
speculation; that you've got some tremendous bills in hand, and
that----"

"There; quite enough. Public rumour is, as usual, considerably in
advance of the truth. We were hit by Hicks' failure, but you'll find
that Streightley and Son will weather the gale yet. Pshaw!"
Streightley exclaimed, suddenly changing his tone--"I got relief from
one confession, why should not I from another? I won't disguise from
you, my dear Charley, that we have been very heavily hit, and that our
present situation is--well, what may be called precarious; but I hope,
and think, we shall pull through."

"Has this state of things been for long?"

"Well--for some months."

"And Mrs. Streightley knew nothing of it?"

"God forbid! Knowing how she had been purchased, was I to yield up the
sole influence I possessed over her by telling her that the gold for
which she had been sacrificed was only dross and dead leaves, and that
the 'merchant prince' was on the brink of ruin? Not I. And what has it
come to now? She is gone, and I am left alone in my misery and
desolation." His head fell on his breast as he said this, and the big
tears rolled down his cheeks.

"Look here, Robert," said Yeldham, laying his hand heavily on his
friend's shoulder; "this won't do at all. You're all unstrung and
out of health. Get you home--if you're not absolutely wanted in the
City--and rest a bit; you need it, heaven knows. Leave this business
to me--you know I'm a capital ferret--and I'll take it in hand at
once, and you shall see me to-morrow with my report."

Robert Streightley wrung his friend's hand, and very shortly left the
chambers; but Charley Yeldham remained for more than an hour with his
chin buried in his hands, and his mind full of all he had heard. At
length he put on his hat, and walked into Fleet Street, where, close
by the top of Middle Temple Lane, he encountered Mr. Daniel Thacker.

It is scarcely necessary to say that, though they were acquainted,
there was very little friendship between Mr. Yeldham and Mr. Thacker.
The Hebrew gentleman regarded the lawyer as a plodding snob; the
conveyancing barrister regarded the West-end money-lender as an
unscrupulous scoundrel; but they had met and been introduced, and were
in the habit of stopping to exchange verbal civilities; and they did
so on this occasion. After the first compliments had passed, Mr.
Thacker expressed his regret at not seeing more of Mr. Yeldham in
society, but added that he perfectly well understood how it was; there
must be bees as well as drones--and Mr. Yeldham had the credit of
being one of the most hardworking as well as one of the most
deservedly successful bees in the legal hive. Mr. Yeldham--in his
coldly formal politeness one could scarcely have recognised the
warm-hearted Charley, Robert Streightley's friend--Mr. Yeldham was
compelled to leave society to those who adorned it, like Mr. Thacker;
and, "talking of society," said Mr. Yeldham, "this is very sad news
about our poor friend Mr. Guyon."

"Sad enough for me," said Mr. Thacker with charming frankness. "Mr.
Guyon was a client of mine; a client for whom I--like a soft fool as I
was--however, that's neither here nor there--I shall have to stand the
racket in that quarter, and be a considerable loser, I can tell you."

Mr. Yeldham expressed his concern, and attempted to terminate the
interview; but Mr. Thacker caught him by the lapel of his coat. "And
talking of that," said he, "this is a pretty business in Portland
Place!"

In Portland Place? You would have gathered from the expression of Mr.
Yeldham's face that it was the first time he had ever heard of that
locality.

"Yes, yes; you know what I mean," said Mr. Thacker impatiently;
"Guyon's son-in-law--Streightley, the City man."

"Streightley, the City man?" repeated Yeldham; "ah, of course,
dreadfully cut up at the sudden death."

"Dreadfully cut up at the sudden death! I hope that's the only way in
which he'll be cut up dreadfully. Haven't you heard the news?"

By a shoulder-shrug which would have done credit to Frederic Lemaitre,
Mr. Yeldham intimated his ignorance.

"Well, then, Mrs. Streightley has gone away from her home--left her
husband, sir; and no one knows where she's gone to."

"That's a very awkward statement to make, Mr. Thacker," said Yeldham;
"Mrs. Streightley, too, of all persons in the world! I suppose you
have--you must have--excellent authority for such a story, or you
would scarcely venture, a man of your perspicacity, to repeat it."

"All I know is, that a--well, in point of fact, a client of mine, Mrs.
Frere, was with Lady Henmarsh, Mr. Streightley's great friend, and
heard it when they called in Portland Place."

"Mrs. Frere--a client of yours? ay, ay! ay, ay! a strange story
indeed, but one which we lawyers must take _cum grano_, as we say.
Good morning, Mr. Thacker." And Yeldham bowed to his acquaintance, and
passed on.

"A dry stick that," said Thacker, looking after him; "a very dry
stick. How much of that story did he know? Every bit; more than any of
us are acquainted with, for he was an old friend of Streightley's, and
has doubtless been consulted about the business. I've underrated that
chap hitherto, I imagine; he did that very neatly, very neatly indeed.
Shook me off at the right instant too, at the very moment when I
intended to pump him about Streightley's liabilities; a deuced cool,
clever hand. I'll remember you, my friend, when I want clear-headed
advice."

"'In point of fact, a client of mine,'" said Yeldham to himself as he
went his way. "That's it, is it? Mrs. Frere a client of Thacker's!
Fishy that--deuced fishy, considering her relations with the
Guyon-cum-Streightley case. Something to be made out of that, I fancy.
I'll just take a turn round the Regent's Park before going back to
head-work, and think that out."




CHAPTER III.
HUSBAND AND WIFE.


The return of Mr. and Mrs. Gordon Frere to England had been almost
simultaneous with the double catastrophe of Mr. Guyon's death and
Katharine's flight. They had returned to Hester's house in Palace
Gardens, and had no intention of leaving London during the winter.
Gordon was excessively tired of Continental life, and had conceded to
fashion rather than consulted his own inclination by spending his
honeymoon out of England. Hester, who had never seen any foreign
country until after her marriage, had been enchanted with every
thing, and would have prolonged her stay with much pleasure, but that
she had perceived her husband's weariness, and desire to find himself
in England again. Gordon was too essentially sweet-tempered and
good-humoured to thwart any one, or to press his own wishes unduly;
but his wife was as keen of perception as she was devotedly attached
to him, and she read him like a book. A glance at the page, on which
incipient boredom was written, was enough for her. With admirable tact
and grace she discovered a score of good and sufficient reasons for
returning to England; and no one would have guessed, who saw her step
gaily into the railway-train at the Embarcadre du Nord, that she was
experiencing a keen disappointment, and renouncing a pleasure to which
she had ardently aspired. Quiet and persistent self-will, which never
failed in its object, but rarely hurt other people in attaining it,
was a strong characteristic of Hester; but the stronger had come
in--Love, the conqueror, the invincible--and self-will had promptly
surrendered. There was a good deal of unconscious selfishness in
Gordon Frere's nature--the light, airy, pleasant selfishness which is
frequently combined with a large capacity for enjoyment and
constitutional indolence, but which in his case would have been easily
dispelled on any given occasion by a remonstrance, and never made
itself offensive. To this quality his wife's excessive love was
particularly calculated to minister, detrimentally to his general
character; for her devotion knew no bounds. It was not unnatural that,
having departed from the rule and practice of her previous life, by
allowing a passion to gain possession of her, Hester should have
departed from it by the widest possible divergence. It would have been
touching as well as curious to watch the subjugation of the proud,
calculating, intellectual woman to the love that filled her whole soul
and ruled her whole life. From her wedding-day to that which saw her
return to London, and her acquisition of the knowledge of Mr. Guyon's
death, by a note despatched from Lady Henmarsh's half-dismantled house
in Cavendish Square, on the chance of her arrival, she had never
bestowed a thought on Middlemeads, on the embarrassments of Robert
Streightley, or the equivocal confidence which existed between herself
and Daniel Thacker. She had indeed thought much and often of
Katharine--thought of her with exultation; occasionally with a touch
of pity, when she satisfied her jealous, passionate soul that no
remembrance of her, except in the most ordinary casual way, ever
cropped up in Gordon Frere's mind. Hester was destined to learn the
truth of a certain proverb about "the letting in of water;" for having
opened the floodgates for the admittance of love, she had no power to
stop the tide, and the tumbling waves of jealousy thundered in the
distance. But, as Hester was, above all things, a reasonable woman,
the danger was still far off; indeed, its foretaste was sweet. She
liked to assure herself that she had no rival with her husband, whose
character, in all but one or two points, she really did understand as
thoroughly as she believed she understood it on all. She liked to
remember that his was a light, gay--if it must be so called, shallow
nature; that all traces of a former rule had passed away, and the
sceptre of this kingdom was securely in her hand. How safely she would
hold it! how tender and watchful her rule should be! She felt, when
this great love laid its grasp upon her, as though she grew ever so
many years older in its hold. She mentally compared herself with her
husband, and smiled at the difference which existed between them,
though her years were fewer by many than his. She utterly laid aside,
she completely forgot, her hatred of Robert and Katharine--that hatred
which had grown on her unperceived, which she had never deliberately
fostered, but had acknowledged, nevertheless, with the strange candour
in self-judgment which characterised her. She made no mistake in her
estimate of her husband's feelings towards her. She did not look for
more than he could give; but she knew exactly how much was comprised
in that _all_, and she joyfully and rightly believed that she
possessed it. She knew that Gordon could no more give her the same
amount and intensity of love that she gave him than he could read the
same books which she read, or be moved by the same impulses, the same
associations of thought and feeling. She never repined at the
knowledge, she never wished him other than he was; his handsome,
refined face was a constant delight to her; she sunned herself in the
light and warmth of his joyous, kind, careless, life-enjoying
disposition; she watched him with an intense secret pride; in short,
she loved him in all the depth and strength of that word of
inexhaustible meaning. He loved her, in return, honestly, heartily,
and after his careless, joyous fashion. He thought her very handsome
and "deuced clever," and was fond of mentioning the latter article of
his creed. "Knows every thing, my dear old fellow, and reads every
thing, and can talk of every thing; not a bit blue, you know--not in
the least; can't bear that sort of thing. Not a bit of show-off in
her, I assure you, but a first-rate head, and a splendid woman of
business."

As Gordon Frere had, in acquiring wealth and its responsibilities, by
no means acquired a taste for business of any kind, and had developed
no practical talents whatever, except for getting out of life all the
enjoyment attainable by large means, youth, high spirits, and a
splendid constitution, it was fortunate for the prosperity and good
management of the Frere _mnage_ that its mistress merited the
commendation he delighted to bestow. They were both singularly free
from littleness of character; and there was not the least danger of
jarring susceptibilities being disturbed by the fact that Hester owned
all the wealth, and kept the management of affairs in her own hands.
Gordon Frere was not a man who could understand the petty pride and
that kind of egotism which make a man married to a rich woman
perpetually uneasy because she is rich, and perpetually desirous of
reminding her and the world that he is the legal proprietor of herself
and her money. Hester Frere was not the sort of person to understand
that, having given him herself, a woman could estimate her money more
highly in the transaction, and aim at keeping her husband mindful of
the secondary and comparatively insignificant concession. In the case
of these two persons, therefore, wealth had fewer snares than it
ordinarily spreads to insure the troubling of peace, and the
destruction of self-respect, in marriages of this kind.

It was Gordon's happy, pleasant way to like every body, instinctively,
and to be difficult to persuade into disliking them, even when he had
discovered for himself, or been convinced by others, that certain
persons were not estimable or admirable. Thus, he liked Mr. Thacker,
and never thought whether he was not just a little vulgar and
presumptuous; whether there was not something about him suggestive of
a pronounced talent for scheming, and a remarkably low estimate of his
fellow-creatures. He liked Ellen Streightley, and never asked himself
whether she was not rather silly, and did not border on the tiresome
as a companion. The nearest approach he had ever made to such an idea
was when he proudly thought of the advantages which Ellen must derive
from Hester's society, and concluded that it was "a splendid thing for
her, by Jove!" It did not occur to him to remember that his wife's
intimate friend was Mrs. Streightley's sister-in-law, and that it was
presumable that his once-adored Katharine's influence was also
available for her benefit. He did not feel so cordially towards Lady
Henmarsh as might have been desired, it is true; but then he had known
her in the old times; he had habitually spoken of her as "the old
cat;" he had prided himself immensely on detecting under the veneer of
fashion the ingrained vulgarity of her mind, and, like all persons
when exercising a talent which they possess in an infinitesimal
degree, he was very proud of his perspicacity in this instance, and
felt that he was bound, in consistency, never to like Lady Henmarsh.
"It isn't as if she really cared about Hester," he would say to
himself, or to the friend with whom he was almost as confidential;
"but she doesn't, you know; she only cares to make Hester give parties
for her purposes--parties by which the old cat pays off all her own
obligations; and to have the use of Hester's carriage, and the
advantage of Hester's popularity--for every one likes my wife.--I
understand her. I'm a sharp fellow in some things, dear old boy,
though I never could take to pens and parchment, and look wise and
bilious, like you." And Charley Yeldham thought what an enviable
nature was this young man's, and what a pity it would be to disturb
his serenity by any revelations, supposing it ever came within his
power to make them. Perhaps it may appear that Yeldham's cogitations
were needless, and that Frere's was not the kind of serenity to be
disturbed by any discovery which only touched the past; but this was
not so. The one or two points on which Hester did not know her
husband's character were precisely those on which his old chum and
faithful friend understood him best.

No unmanly laziness, no idle abandonment to the mere surface follies
of existence, dictated Gordon Frere's ignorance of the details of the
management of his wife's fortune. He knew she was, as he said, "a
deuced clever woman, and a first-rate hand at business," and he simply
acted, having no meanness in him, on his belief. He never thought at
all about the nature of the investments in which his wife's money was
placed, neither did he ever think about her former relations with the
Streightleys; and had he known that Robert was Hester's debtor to the
large amount, which she had advanced to him through Thacker, he would
not have seen in the transaction any thing beyond the merest ordinary
matter of business.

Gordon Frere was excessively shocked by the intelligence of Mr.
Guyon's death. Not that he had any regard for him; indeed, rather
because he had not, and because he knew him better (though far from
thoroughly) than most of Mr. Guyon's friends, who had not had
"business" transactions with the departed gentleman, knew him; and
such a death, come to after such a fashion, had a grim and painful
effect on a mind which was not callous or irreverent, only frivolous
and untrained.

Hester had only waited to impart the intelligence conveyed by Lady
Henmarsh's note to her husband before she went to offer her
condolences to her _ci-devant_ chaperone, who had urgently requested
to see her. But in her manner of telling him there was something that
jarred upon Gordon's sensibility. Coldness and curiosity were in her
tone, and he did not like it. The event was terrible in itself, and
had terrible meaning to Lady Henmarsh and to Katharine Streightley.
Gordon thought honestly of the latter as his wife's friend, not as the
woman he had loved; and he winced at the little touch of unwomanliness
which Hester betrayed. He understood her very incompletely; and though
he knew she loved him, he did not know that she loved no one in the
world but himself--and herself. The good-natured fellow did not get
over the novel sense of annoyance with his wife easily; and to divert
the pain of it, he thought he would go and look in on Yeldham, and
talk over things with him. But he did not succeed in this. When he
reached the Temple, he found Yeldham hopelessly immersed in a
consultation with an inexorable solicitor; and the fiat went forth, in
a whisper at the door, "heavy case, my dear fellow, and quite
impossible to spare five minutes; see you to-morrow, any time." So
Gordon went away, in sufficient discontent, and less in love with law
and hard work than ever; and so it fell out that not from him, but
from Robert, did Yeldham hear the news of Mr. Guyon's death, and that
the next interview between the friends was destined to be of a painful
and memorable nature.

Hester did not see Gordon Frere, after her visit to Lady Henmarsh,
until late in the afternoon; and then they were not alone, so that
there was no conversation between them on the additional circumstances
which had transpired. In the mean time Hester had seen Thacker, and
made communications to him of which the result has been shown in the
preceding chapter. Of all these circumstances Gordon Frere was
profoundly ignorant. He had left a card for Mrs. Streightley during
the afternoon, and made the customary inquiry, to which the
well-taught servant had made the invariable answer; and Gordon had
turned away from the door without learning that a second calamity,
infinitely outweighing the first, had fallen upon the household. When
he saw his wife again, she was engaged with visitors; and though he
remarked that her face was somewhat flushed, and that she was less
gracefully easy in her manner than usual, he imputed these uncommon
appearances to the agitating nature of her visit to Lady Henmarsh, and
he was rather pleased to think she had not taken the dreadful
occurrence, which had affected him powerfully, quite so easily as he
had at first supposed. They were not alone at dinner, and Aunt
Lavinia, in the pleasure of seeing her niece again after her absence,
had affectionately accompanied her to her dressing-room; so that she
had had many hours in which to think over the events of the day before
she had an opportunity of discussing them with Gordon. During these
hours Hester's bad angel had surely been in the ascendant; and
Hester's good sense had failed her for once, in the temptation of
success, in the consciousness of power where she had been powerless
and of superiority where she had been dominated. For once she lost
sight of that which was generally the first, the greatest object of
her attention, her husband's approbation, and made the first false
step in a career which had hitherto been marked by circumspection.

Gordon ran lightly up the stairs, after he had carefully consigned
Aunt Lavinia to the carriage and the special care of the servants, and
found his wife standing by the fire, whose light was shining on the
folds of her velvet dress, and on the few well-chosen jewels she wore.
There was a flush of excitement in her face, which added to its
beauty, but which made Gordon look at her with surprise. Before he
could ask her if any thing had happened, she said, in an eager voice:

"Have you heard the news?"

"No; what news? Any thing more about Mr. Guyon?"

"No; there's only one more event possible for him, and it is to take
place on Thursday. Have you heard nothing of the Streightleys?"

"No; I called there to-day. What's the matter, Hester? is any thing
wrong with Katharine?" His face was pale, and his voice hurried.
Hester started at the word. Why did she not remember; why did she not
take warning? Who can tell? It was but another illustration of "the
letting in of water." In a harsh voice, through her set teeth, she
answered him:

"Yes, there is something wrong with 'Katharine,' as you call
her--something very wrong. The bubble has burst--she has run away from
her husband!"

"Good God!" was Gordon's only answer; but the tone in which he uttered
the exclamation angered Hester, and hardened her.

"Yes," she went on, "there is no doubt about it; I have it on the best
authority--Mr. Streightley's own. She has left her husband at a nice
time, too--on a proper filial occasion--when her father's dead body is
unburied."

Gordon looked at her; and had she been wise she would have taken
warning, she would have seen the dawning of a suspicion that she was
different to that he had believed her, in that look, and paused before
she flung into the gulf of a new and cruel passion the gem of all her
treasures, whose pricelessness she knew well. But she was not wise,
and she mistook the meaning of that look; she did not know that its
sorrow and its misgiving were for her; she gave them to another, in
her excited fancy, and she rushed upon her ruin.

"You are deeply concerned, Gordon, are you not, and very anxious to
learn all the particulars? You shall hear all I know." He was standing
close to her as she spoke, and they were looking steadily at one
another.

"I am indeed, Hester," he replied mildly. "I trust there is some
terrible mistake; tell me what you have heard."

"There is no mistake; Mrs. Streightley has run away from her husband,
leaving a letter for him, like the young ladies in the plays, who
elope with a lover when 'Gardy' wants to marry them; only in this case
there is no lover, I believe, or he is so very well hidden that nobody
knows who he is."

Still Gordon looked at her, but now there was relief in his face.
"Thank God there is no infamy in this," he said; "though I deserve to
be shot for having believed for a moment there could be infamy in any
act of Katharine Guyon's."

"Katharine _Streightley's_, you mean," said Hester with a sneer; "it
strikes me there is some little infamy in her conduct as it is, though
there may be no lover in the case."

"No," said Gordon Frere, in a tone of manly decision, "there is no
such thing. Misery and misunderstanding, possibly mischief, there may,
there must be, but no infamy, no disgrace. I will never hear it said
or hinted. This will be set right, I am convinced."

"You are as sanguine as you are chivalrous, Gordon," said Hester; "but
there is a little difficulty in setting such matters right, either in
the private or the public sense. Mr. Streightley is very generous, we
all know, and he gave his wife the love she did _not_ marry him for,
as well as the money she _did_; but he may have his wrongs as well as
his faults, and----"

"Why are you so hard and bitter, Hester?" said Gordon, in a quick,
unsteady voice. "How have these people offended you? They have always
been your friends, have they not? I thought you had known them
intimately for years, and always received kindness from them--I am
sure you have told me so--and now you speak of their trouble in this
sneering way. When you told me of poor old Guyon's death, I was
shocked at your want of feeling; and now, God forgive me, but I am not
able to resist the suspicion there is something horribly like gladness
in your heart. How can this be? What is it all? What has Robert
Streightley, what has Katharine done, that you should regard their
misery as you do?" He took her hand gently; he looked at her with pity
in his clear blue eyes. She saw the "pity," and it maddened her; she
did not see that he was thinking of her as much as of that other whom
she hated. What! _he_ had reproved her, and on Katharine's account;
the first cloud that had obscured the glorious light of her wedded
happiness, the first ripple on the ocean of her unimaginable bliss,
had come through _her!_ In an instant, in one pang of exceeding agony,
her fancy transported her to the gay garden where she had first seen
this man, who was now _hers_; this man whom she loved with all the
intensity of a nature whose power and passion she herself was only
beginning to understand. In one of those terrible spasms of feeling,
which, when we think of them afterwards, make us understand the
mystery of eternity, she lived through one memorable day again. She
saw the sunshine and the flowers; she felt the perfumed air; she heard
the strains of music; she saw the flitting crowd, the gay groups, the
fluttering dresses, the rich colours, the young faces; she heard the
sounds of talking and laughter, and the soft rustling and flapping of
the flower-tents; she saw Katharine and her party, Mr. Guyon and
Streightley, and Yeldham, and she saw Gordon Frere; he was walking
beside Katharine, and looking at her as lovers look: had he ever so
looked at _her_, his wife,--she who loved him with a love in which she
now knew there were untold possibilities of suffering, she who lived
only to love him? In the instant during which this vision filled her
brain, and wrung her heart, Hester Frere lived through hours of
anguish; and yet there was not a perceptible pause between her
husband's question and her reply. She spoke it with her hand in his,
with her eyes on his, with her face growing paler and harder with
every word:

"You do well to ask me such questions," she said; "you do well to
suspect me of such feelings. This is as it should be; this is what I
should have expected. Perhaps _you_ can answer for Mrs. Streightley's
purpose in this flight; perhaps _you_ know why she found her home
intolerable, and the bondage into which she sold herself for money
unendurable. You answer glibly for her, there is no infamy in her
flight--indeed, are you sure there was no infamy in her marriage? Are
you sure this is the first time she has deceived Robert Streightley?"
She loosed her hand from his hold, and sat down, panting for breath.
Gordon still stood, and looked at her; but his face had darkened, and
an angry look had come into his eyes. He spoke very slowly, and cold
fear came upon Hester, as he said,

"Explain yourself, if you please. Such unwomanly, such base
insinuations shall have no reply from me. Say what you think,--ask
what you wish to know, plainly; but first, let me say this--that I
have been utterly mistaken in you; that I believed you a woman
incapable of a meanness, and honoured you as such----"

"Yes," said Hester, in a voice so low that it was hardly audible,
"_honoured me!_--I believe you; but you loved _her_. Yes; don't start
and stammer, and seek to deny it," for Gordon, in sheer astonishment,
had started, and tried to speak. "It is useless; I know all. I know
how she played with you, and jilted you, and threw you over for the
rich man, whom she despised. Do you think because I was only a
music-teacher, and not 'in society,' I never heard what society talked
about, and had no eyes to see? I tell you, I read your secret and hers
the first time I ever saw your face; and I read it again, when I, the
new heiress, and the 'great prize of the season,' went up the
staircase at Mrs. Pendarvis's ball with you, and _she_ came down with
the _millionnaire_ for whom she had discarded you. I don't know why
this woman has left her husband, but I can guess; perhaps you _do_
know. I don't care."

"Hush, Hester!" said Frere, and his tone forced her into silence.
"Beware lest you reveal to me more of your nature than I can endure.
Never venture to speak such words to me again. I am ignorant of
Katharine's movements, as you know as well as I do; but I would stake
my life on her honour, and I trust her motives, as I trust her
actions. If there be, as there must be, a serious misunderstanding
between her and Streightley, I pity him with all my heart. I know
little of him; but as I have come to know that little, I have learned
to respect and esteem him. I will help him to the utmost of my power."

"Will you?" said Hester, with a sneer. "Your will and your power are
both likely to be taxed. Mrs. Streightley timed her departure well;
she had got all there was to be had out of her great marriage. Robert
Streightley is a ruined man!"

Gordon Frere turned a shade paler as he said, quietly,

"Is this true, Hester? are you sure?"

"It is perfectly true, and I am perfectly sure," she replied.

"Then how do _you_ know it?"

She laughed a low quiet laugh.

"Ah, that is _my_ secret," she said.

"So be it," he replied. "And now, understand me. You have taunted me
with my love for Katharine Guyon, and her rejection of me. I avow
both. I loved her dearly, and I believed she loved me. I asked her to
be my wife, and she rejected me. I don't question her motives; I only
know that I suffered the keenest misery in consequence. But I say to
you, as I would say to any other, who dared to accuse me of sullying
the purity of Katharine Streightley by an unauthorised word or look or
wish, that it is a base and dastardly lie. She has been to me, since
her marriage, as distant as a star,--an object of admiration and
reverence indeed, but no more, as she never can be less. Now--I
would do any thing in the world to prove to her, and to her husband,
that I am the warmest of her friends and the most devoted of her
servants.--And now, Hester, one word of ourselves. You are not a
foolish woman, speaking random words and swayed by every gust of
temper. I presume you have not so spoken to-night; and I give all you
have said its weight of sober seriousness. I think you would have done
better to have left these words unsaid; but remember this, they can
never be unsaid now, and the fruit they are likely to bear will be no
sweeter to your taste than to mine. I am going to see Yeldham in the
morning, and will breakfast with him. Good-night."

So he left her, and she let him go without a word. The time crept on,
and still she sat beside the fire, with the flickering light upon her
jewels and her velvet dress, with her dark eyes stern and fixed, and
her hands clasped and motionless. It was not until a servant came to
ask if the lights might be put out, that she roused herself, and went
upstairs to her room. There she found her maid, shivering and yawning
in the protracted weariness of waiting.

She dismissed the woman at once, who went out of the room, not without
having looked sharply at her mistress. Hester caught the look, and
when she was alone, went to her dressing-table, and gazed fixedly at
the reflection of her face in the glass.

"Yes," she said; "I am to lose that too, I suppose--power over my
feelings first, then over my words, lastly over my features,--and
become the weak thing I have always despised. Fool! fool!"




CHAPTER IV.
WINGED IN FLIGHT.


For many weeks after Mr. Guyon's death the inexorable pressure of
business, increased by a commercial crisis long impending and now
arrived in full severity, obliged Robert Streightley to put his sorrow
as far as possible from his thoughts during business hours, and bring
all his intellect to grapple with the conduct of his affairs. That the
old house of Streightley and Son was in any thing but a prosperous
condition; that its cool, calculating manager had rushed wildly into
almost impossibly beneficial speculations,--was now pretty generally
talked of, and various reasons were assigned for Robert's conduct.
Some people, of course, roundly stated that they had never believed in
him at all; that all his previous success had been the result of luck,
or "flukes;" and that he was merely finding his proper level. Others
lamented that spirit of flunkeydom which had led a sharp fellow like
Streightley to marry the daughter of an insolvent West-end swell, who
had spent all his money in reckless extravagance, and, it was said,
had bolted from him now the money was gone. Few--very few--had a word
of pity for him; he had been too successful for that; and though
during the long years of his triumph he had always been generous and
kindhearted to a degree, in the hour of his fall this was not
remembered; and it was not even allowed, by those who knew nothing of
his private history, that he "took his punishment" well, or that he
exhibited a proper pluck under his defeat and downfall.

It mattered little to Robert Streightley what was thought of him even
in the City now. The mainspring of his life was broken; she, for whom
up to the very last he had plotted and schemed and speculated, had
left him. All his efforts now--and he struggled hard--were made to
save the reputation of the house. Hour after hour did he and Mr.
Fowler spend in going over the books, looking at lists of outstanding
debts, the recovery of which was hopeless, and liabilities which it
was impossible to evade. Hour after hour did the result of their work
show them the hopelessness of their position, and the fact that the
final crash was every day drawing nearer. Poor old Mr. Fowler was a
pitiable spectacle; to him the fact that "the house" was in
difficulties was infinitely more distressing than the thought that
with it would go all the savings of years, from time to time invested
with it, and all chance of that comfortable pension on retirement on
which he could fairly have reckoned.

After Katharine's departure, Robert Streightley seemed to have struck
his flag and given up the battle, so far as his business was
concerned; endeavouring only to steer his wrecked fortune safely into
port. This, notwithstanding all his losses and the bad position of his
affairs, he might have been able to do, but that, within three months
of the catastrophe, he was obliged to make a payment of five thousand
pounds to Mr. Daniel Thacker, as Robert imagined, but in reality to
Mrs. Gordon Frere. Streightley had found Thacker hitherto very kindly
disposed towards him, and after some consideration he wrote, stating
that the security was as good as at the time of the loan; that he
would pay the interest, but that it would be a great convenience to
him if the repayment of the capital could be postponed for a few
months. To this application he had had a reply from Thacker, stating
that he would turn it over in his mind, and write again in a few days.

"Turning it over in his mind" meant, of course, consulting his
principal. So, as soon as he had sent his answer to Robert's note, Mr.
Thacker drove to Palace Gardens, and had the honour of a private
interview with the lady of the mansion, in her boudoir. Hester was
looking very handsome, as Mr. Thacker thought, though there was a
little too much set intensity about her lips for that gentleman's
rather full-flavoured taste. After some ordinary conversation, Hester
said:

"And now, Mr. Thacker, state the special business of which you wrote
to me, and which has brought you here to-day."

"It is one of Streightley's matters, Mrs. Frere. He had, if you
recollect, some five thousand and odd pounds from us some months ago,
for which we hold as security the assignment of the house in Portland
Place, and one or two other minor deeds. That money is, I see, due on
the third of next month--a fortnight hence, that is to say; and I have
received a letter from Mr. Streightley--who, of course, only knows me
in the matter--asking for a renewal of the loan on payment of the
interest, and on the continuance of the same security."

"Have you that letter with you?"

"I have."

"Be good enough to let me see it."

As he handed it to her, Thacker said,

"I know that I have no right even to make a suggestion in this matter;
but I think, Mrs. Frere, that unless you have any special objection,
you might comply with his prayer. The security is undeniable; and
Streightley has been so much knocked about lately, poor fellow, in
several ways, you know, that----"

"It is impossible for me to read the letter while you talk, Mr.
Thacker," said Hester firmly.

Thacker bowed, and turned very red; and Mrs. Frere, leaning back in
her chair, opened the note and applied herself to its perusal. She
remembered the bold firm handwriting, which she had first seen,--ah,
how long since it seemed!--in little formal notes addressed to
herself, or enclosing young-ladyish scraps from Ellen. She recollected
how she had lingered over those notes in the old days, weaving little
romances of the future, in which their writer played a very different
part from the one now filled by him. There was not an atom of
tenderness in these recollections; on the contrary, as Mrs. Frere
thought of the difference between her day-dreams and what had actually
occurred, a bitter smile flitted across her face; and as she read the
letter her lips were set tighter than ever.

She read it through twice carefully, then folded it up and handed it
to Mr. Thacker, saying very calmly,

"I cannot agree to that proposition." It was Mr. Thacker's rule in
life never to betray astonishment at any thing. He did not depart from
his rule in the present instance; but he must have involuntarily
raised his bushy eyebrows a little higher than usual, for Mrs. Frere
said to him,

"Did you expect any other answer?"

This was a home question, and Mr. Thacker objected to being called
upon to answer home questions. He had not been exactly sure of the
state of Mrs. Frere's feelings towards Streightley (of the feeling
with which Miss Hester Gould had regarded the same individual, it will
be recollected, he had arrived at a perfect knowledge), and he knew
that her reply would be entirely governed by them. So he contented
himself with saying:

"It is a mere business question with me. You do not require the money
elsewhere,--at least so far as I know,--and the security is
undeniable. As to the sentimental view of the matter, I know from the
experience of that morning at Middlemeads that you are not likely to
be biassed by any silliness of that kind. Only, you see, things have
changed since then, and poor Streightley is in a very different
position now."

"I don't think we need discuss Mr. Streightley's altered position,
except so far as this proposition is concerned; and on that you have
my decision, Mr. Thacker," said Mrs. Frere coldly.

"And that decision is final? I shall probably be asked to reverse it,
and therefore may as well have my cue," said Thacker.

"Quite final. I prefer not to discuss Mr. Streightley or his affairs
for the future."

"As you please," returned Mr. Thacker; and then he excused himself for
his abrupt departure on the plea of business, and took his leave.

Mr. Thacker had not felt comfortable in Mrs. Frere's society of late;
there was an alteration in her manner towards him--a gradual
withdrawal of confidence, as he took it; but which was, in reality,
only preoccupation of mind, and which Mr. Thacker could very ill
brook. Nor were his relations with Gordon Frere at all of a
satisfactory kind; that gentleman being accustomed to speak to his
wife of Mr. Thacker as "your Hebraic agent, my dear," and to his
friends of the same gentleman as "a Jew fellow, who's my wife's
trustee, or something."

As Mr. Thacker lay back in his brougham on his way to the City, he
fell into a fit of musing over all that had occurred. He drew poor
Robert's letter from his pocket-book and read it through; then laid it
down on his lap, and recalled the scene that had taken place--recalled
Mrs. Frere's words and looks at certain parts of the interview; and
said to himself:

"She's a wonder; she certainly is a wonder. Sticks to what she has
made up her mind to like a leech; and as to moving her to pity, you
might as well clap a blister on the Monument. I'm certain I'm right in
my old opinion that she played for Streightley, and that she was as
wild as possible when he did not see it, but married that pretty Miss
Guyon instead. She'll never forgive him. And the next thing will be,
that he won't be able to pay up the first instalment either; and then
she'll have Middlemeads. Yes; and I shall have helped her to it too.
Well, it must have come, I suppose, in the long-run, even if he had
pulled through for a little; but I fancy this will smash him up at
once. He must sell the house; that will get wind, and then--by Jove,
poor fellow! I'm afraid it's all u-p!" And Mr. Thacker looked and felt
much more sorry than might have been supposed. The next day he found
it a very difficult and unpleasant task to write to Messrs.
Streightley and Son, telling them that, "owing to circumstances over
which he had no control," it would be impossible for him to comply
with their request, but that he trusted, &c. However, there was no
help for it; so, on the receipt of this note, Robert had an interview
with Thacker; and within a week the house in Portland Place was stuck
all over with bills, announcing the sale of the furniture and of the
lease at an early date.

Perhaps during the whole of his trouble this period immediately
antecedent to the sale in Portland Place was the most distressing to
Robert Streightley. With the exception of an old woman and her
daughter--mysterious people who lived in the kitchens, and were
supposed to "do for the good gentleman"--every body had left the house
but himself; and he used to roam through the various rooms, thinking
of Katharine and of her associations with each. Not merely


     "In hanging robe and vacant ornament"


did she present herself to his thoughts, but each article of furniture
spoke of her taste; wherever his eye fell he was reminded of her. For
many weeks after her departure, he had kept her dressing-room locked,
and retained the key in his own possession. This room opened into her
boudoir, and there, on her writing-table, long after dust had gathered
thick upon its leaves, lay her blotting-book open, as she had left it;
on it a note just commenced. He had been requested by Katharine's maid
to compare the jewels which she had left behind with the list in his
own possession, and he had done so. Then he replaced them all, as they
had been when she turned away from all the luxury with which he had
surrounded her. Often in the evenings, his dreary task of battling
with the rising tide of ruin done, he would visit the forsaken shrine
of his idol, and feel the pang of her absence all the more keenly for
these mute evidences that it was all real, that she had once been
there, where silence and emptiness now dwelt. When the blow fell, and
he knew the house and furniture must be sold, his wife's rooms were
the last to be dismantled. With his own hands, and alone, he packed up
every article of her personal property for safe keeping, wherever he
should be. When he entered her dressing-room to commence his task, he
caught sight of his own reflection in the looking-glass doors of a
large wardrobe, and started to see how worn and pale he looked. Some
of her dresses were hanging up in the first wardrobe which he opened,
and, obedient to an impulse, he caught hold of one of them and kissed
it, and went staggering blindly from the room.

A few days before the time announced for the sale in Portland Place
the commercial crisis so long dreaded swooped down upon London.
Continental politics, unsettled since '48, had been seething and
simmering, and daily the aspect of affairs had become more bellicose.
Big German States looked at little German States with longing eyes and
watering mouths, and consoled themselves by the reflection that if
awkward and powerful neighbours snapped at them and went off with a
mouthful, they could revenge themselves on smaller fry. Italy moaned
in her sleep, tormented by the old but unfulfilled dream of freedom
from the Alps to the Adriatic; and France and Russia were looking on
expectant. Things in the City had for some time had what is called "a
downward tendency." Consols were at 82, and French Rentes lower than
they had been known for years. People shook their heads at Spanish
Passives, and Egyptian Scrip was at a discount. One of the great
discount houses, the Brotherly Bound--formed out of the old firm of
Ready, Rowdy, and Dibbs--had recently failed (partly on account of the
old partners having taken all their capital out, partly on account of
all the new capital which was brought in having been spent by the
managing directors in giving banquets to the aristocracy), and the
shareholders in similar concerns were beginning to be seriously
alarmed. Under the alarm of shareholders, managers drew in their
horns, and talked of limiting their business, refused all questionable
paper--in which they had been dealing wholesale--and looked not too
well pleased at good bills, such as they had never had before. There
was gloom on the Stock Exchange, and Clapham dinner-parties were, if
possible, duller than usual. No actual outbreak yet though, and chance
of peace, so the papers said. If war could only be averted, the crisis
would pass. The crisis! it was on them as they spoke. At that moment
the clerks in Lothbury were reading off a telegraphic message,
containing the few words spoken by the Emperor to a provincial mayor;
and when those words appeared in print, it was known that war was
meant, and three of the largest establishments in the City suspended
payment that afternoon. Up went the Bank rate of discount, and the
panic commenced.

These events happened late in the afternoon of a bright spring day, so
immediately before the cessation of business, that they were only
known to those actually concerned in the City; and it was not until
the next morning that the general public was apprised of all that had
happened. The news sprawled over the placards of the newspapers in the
biggest typo; the news-boys at the suburban omnibuses and railway
stations were "sold out" at once; people rushed to tell their friends
what had happened; the panic spread to all stock- and shareholders,
and even to the depositors in banks. Then towards noon the City began
to be filled with a set of people to whom its ways were strange, and
who were unfamiliar with its customs. Elderly maiden ladies and rich
widows from prim Peckham paradises; old boys, club bucks and fogies,
from Bury Street or St. Alban's Place lodgings, who had little
annuities on which they lived; artists and actors hurrying down to see
the special stockbrokers in whom they implicitly believed; newspaper
reporters on the look-out for matter from which to concoct a sensation
article; mooners and loungers of every kind, were blocking up Lombard
Street and pouring into Cornhill. The old-established banks never
quivered for an instant; wild customers brandishing cheques rushed up
to the counter, and felt abashed as they were met by the calmest
clerks, who, without a hair of their parting or a fold of their cravat
displaced, asked them in the most mellifluous voices "how they would
have it?" the copper shovels plunged into the drawers, and came out,
as usual, full of sovereigns; the forefinger of the clerks duly
moistened counted off rolls of notes with the accustomed precision.
"Panic?" they seemed to say; "pooh! it must be something more than
panic that can affect us."

But three or four of the smaller houses, which had been battling for
months with the exigencies of the times, found it impossible to hold
on any longer, and succumbed--amongst them the house of Streightley
and Son. No stone had been left unturned, no effort untried; but the
state of the money-market was such that it was found impossible to
realise the securities which they held; and at length, bowed down with
despair, old Mr. Fowler wrote with his own hand the notice, that,
"owing to the crisis in the money-market having caused a run on the
house, and having failed to procure advances on the securities, or
obtain the slightest temporary assistance, we find it necessary to
suspend our payments." The notice went on to say that the step had
been taken with the view to protect as far as possible the interest of
the friends of the firm, whose forbearance was confidently relied on,
and added, that the books had been placed in the hands of Messrs.
Addison and Tottle, and that the early realisation of a satisfactory
dividend was anticipated.

It was not to be expected that such an old-established firm could fail
without plenty of comment. They talked over "Streightley's smash" that
day at City conferences, on the flags of 'Change, and the Gresham
Club; and many and various were the opinions expressed.

"'Protect as far as possible the interest of their friends!'" said an
indignant merchant, who, when first starting in commerce, had received
the greatest assistance from Robert Streightley's father. "Like their
d--d impudence! What do they mean by that?"

"Better have protected their friends' principal, and not minded the
interest, eh, Jenkinson?" said the wag of Capel Court.

"I'm afraid that the realisation of the satisfactory dividend is all
bunkum," said a third. "Lucky if we get fourpence in seven years, I
should say."

"It's a good thing old Streightley can't come out of his grave and see
this," said a white-bearded patriarch; "he was of the old school--slow
and sure."

"Deuced slow and not very sure," said Ralph Elgood, the Rupert of the
Stock Exchange. "Bob Streightley's a thundering good fellow, but has
been hitting out wildly of late, and now he feels it."

"Nonsense; hitting out wildly!" said young Porunglow, junior partner
(of three weeks' standing) of Shaddock, Porunglow, Quaver, and
Porunglow, great West-Indian merchants, who had been three months in
business, and who frequented the vortex of West-end society.
"Streightley might have gone on all right if he had not married old
Guyon's daughter; a splendid gal, who made the tin fly like--like old
boots! Thundering fine parties they had, sir. None of the Belgravian
nobs did it up browner in the way of foreign singers, and Edgington,
and Coote and Tinney, and real flowers, and all that kind of thing. I
s'pects it's that that's settled Streightley's hash."

"I shall take deuced good care to attend the meeting of creditors,"
said the first speaker; "and unless the personal expenses are
decidedly moderate, I shall take the opportunity of saying a few words
on that subject."

This was the tone in which the matter was talked over in the City, and
then the talkers turned to the discussion of other things. Of the firm
of Streightley and Son nothing soon remained, save the name on the
door-posts in Bullion Lane: the winding-up and the meeting of the
creditors were duly reported in the City Intelligence; and shortly
afterwards a new firm took the old house, and the erasure of the name
from the doors and of the memory of the firm from their friends were
almost simultaneous.

So there was a smash in Bullion Lane and a sale at Portland Place, and
Robert Streightley, the quondam "City magnate," the merchant-prince,
had lost his place among rich men, of consequence to mankind and human
affairs; and had returned to his former quiet life in his mother's
suburban house (for her income had happily been secured against the
vicissitudes of business), and had not even begun to "look about him;"
but was stunned and silent under the reiterated shocks of calamity.

His mother and sister had taken the intelligence of his ruin as most
women do take the tidings of a calamity in which the affections are
not concerned--that is to say, quietly and resignedly. If so many
other persons had not also been ruined, it would have been much harder
to bear, because then inconsiderate, hasty people might have blamed
Robert; but as it was, he was only one of many; and they thought about
the matter much as they would have thought about a war in Russia, or a
revolution in Venetia, the rinderpest, or a railway accident.

As for Robert, he had little personal feeling in the affair. Poverty
or wealth made little difference to him. He could have faced the one
with courage and confidence, had Katharine remained with him, and bid
him grow rich again for her sake; he had valued the other only because
it had won her. And now the money which had enabled him to do the evil
he had done was gone, and the wife it had purchased was gone; and days
had melted into weeks, and weeks into months, and brought no word or
sign of her. No language can tell how Robert suffered during all the
time that his attention was externally claimed by his business; with
what agony of hope deferred he would ask Yeldham, day after day, if
there was any chance of discovering her place of retreat. Foremost in
Robert Streightley's memory was the mind-picture of his desolate home;
keenest of all his torturing thoughts was the idea of his cherished
one, so daintily reared, now perhaps exposed to privation or absolute
want. Compared with the horror of this feeling, the disgrace of his
failure, the loss of his City position, which at another time would in
themselves have been sufficient to crush him, now fell upon him with
lightness--the world thought with extraordinary lightness--for such a
sensitive man. But Yeldham, who alone was in his confidence, knew what
were the secret yearnings of his heart. "O God! if we could only find
her, Charley; if I could only see her once again, only hear her say
she forgave me, I think I'd be content to die, and slip out of it
all."

The inquiries which Yeldham had instituted in every possible quarter
had all been without result, and already many weeks had elapsed, when
one morning Robert received a letter from Mrs. Stanbourne, to whom he
had written immediately on Katharine's departure, but from whom, up to
that time, he had received no reply. He had had no exact knowledge of
her address, and his inquiries had elicited no more precise indication
than "Rome;" so he had no resource but waiting--with little patience
indeed, and but poorly rewarded, for the letter ran thus:


"Florence.

"My Dear Mr. Streightley,--Your letter has been following me about for
several weeks,--I believe for months, indeed,--and has only just
reached me. I cannot--I need not tell you how greatly the news which
it conveys has pained and distressed me. I am sure you will understand
this without my dwelling upon the point, and that you personally will
be assured of my sympathy in this your hour of grief. I am old enough
to be allowed to speak plainly in these matters, even to one with whom
I have not been very long acquainted, and I may tell you therefore
that not merely did I see in you many qualities which any girl might
be proud of in a husband, but I took the opportunity of showing to
Katharine that I had observed them. I am sure furthermore, not merely
from the manner in which those remarks were received, but from the
general tenour of her conduct, that she had not one thought which she
would have been ashamed of sharing with you, and I therefore am
disposed to hope that her departure may have been caused by childish
petulance, provoked by some little 'tiff,' which you have not
explained to me--that it has been merely temporary, and that now, ere
this note reaches you, she has returned to you and her duty. If this
be so, you will throw this letter into the fire and think no more of
it. But if it be not so; if she is still holding aloof from you
through self-will, and which I suppose, as her relative, I may venture
to call obstinacy, I think it best to give you all the aid and
information in my power. I need scarcely tell you that she is not,
that she has not been, with me. I do not know that she would have
sought me; but, at any rate, my frequent changes of address would have
prevented her finding me. Had I seen her, I should have put aside my
own ill-health (which is, I suspect, a great deal laziness, and hatred
of England in the dull season), and, starting off at once, never
left her until I had restored her to you. But I remember that two or
three years ago a great friend and old schoolfellow of hers, Annie
Burton--of whom I know Katharine had a very high opinion--went to live
at the Convent de St. Etienne, in Paris, and, as I believe, ended in
taking the veil there. If all the other inquiries which you have
doubtless set on foot have failed, would it not be well to make a
search for our poor lost girl at this convent? Such a place would be
likely to attract her in her then frame of mind. She would have the
solace of the companionship of her old friend; and as boarders are
received at the convent, she could command perfect privacy and peace,
and, so far as she knows, avoid every chance of discovery. This is
rather a vague idea, but it is a foundation upon which pursuit may
improve. I sincerely trust it may not be needed, but yet I think it
advisable to send it. In any case I shall be most anxious to hear from
you again, and to assist you in any way in my power.

"Yours very sincerely,

     "Margaret Stanbourne."


The perusal of this letter brought light into Robert Streightley's
eyes and comfort to his heart. For the first time since Katharine's
departure he felt that there was a chance of recovering her for
himself, of seeing her once again, and telling her all he had
suffered--all he hoped. His heart beat violently as these thoughts
came across him, and he trembled from the intensity of his feelings.
He would have gone at once to Yeldham's chambers and shown him the
letter; but he felt unable to move, and remained for a few minutes
panting and palpitating in his chair. He was weak and dizzy, and had a
strange oppressive feeling that he should die before he could get upon
the clue just given him. But after a short time these feelings passed
away, and he managed to rouse himself and drive to the Temple, where
he found Charley, as usual, hard at his 'treadmill.'

As his friend entered the room, Yeldham looked up from his writing,
uttered a short cry of alarm, and came hurriedly towards him.

"What's the matter with you, Robert?" he said,--"white as a ghost,
dark circles round your eyes--what the deuce is it? No bad news?"

"No, Charley, I'm all right--or shall be in a minute; a little knocked
down by what's in this letter. I think there's something in it--some
clue at last. Read it, and tell me how it strikes you."

Charles Yeldham took the letter and read it through carefully; then
put it down, and looked across at his friend.

"Well?" said Streightley, anxiously.

"Well, Robert, of course it's a new light, and--and there may
be something in it; but I'm not very much impressed. I scarcely
think--but then I know so little, that I'm not a fair judge--that a
convent's exactly the place to which a lady of Mrs. Streightley's
temperament would retire. However, of course one can send over and
ascertain."

"Send over!" cried Robert; "nothing of the kind. I think far more
highly than you seem to do, Yeldham, of this information. I think so
highly of it, that I shall start at once for Paris, and pursue the
track."

"You? No, Robert, I would not do that. You're not well, my good
fellow; you're not strong; any excitement of this kind might knock you
up, and that would never do, you know."

"I know that I shall start by the tidal train to-morrow morning,
Charley. Now don't argue with me, for my mind is made up."


But Robert Streightley did not start to Paris by the next morning's
tidal train. As he sat that night talking over his intended journey
with his friend, Yeldham saw the colour fade out of his face, the
light out of his eyes,--finally saw him go off in a dead swoon.
Yeldham carried him to his own bed, and sent for a doctor, who
peremptorily forbade any notion of his being moved for days. "It might
cost him his life," he said. And Robert, made acquainted with the
veto, after some murmuring, acquiesced in it, and fell back, weak and
wavering, to sleep.

"I don't like your friend's symptoms, Mr. Yeldham," said Dr. Mannering
to Charley. "Has he had any great mental strain or worry lately? Ah, I
thought so. I'm afraid there's very little doubt that his heart's
affected."




CHAPTER V.
FAILURE.


Robert could not leave Yeldham's chambers for several days after the
astute doctor for whom Charley had sent had hazarded his guess about
the "mental" sources of his patient's illness; and as the strictest
quiet was enjoined, reference to the agitating subject of Katharine
and Mrs. Stanbourne's letter had to be strictly avoided. Such
avoidance was much less difficult than Yeldham had apprehended it
would be; for Robert's exhaustion was extreme, and he readily accepted
his friend's assurance that he knew what he wished to have done, and
that it should be done without any delay.

"I've sent a line to your mother, Robert, and told her not to frighten
herself; and I've had a bed put ready for me in the comer; so you've
nothing to do and nothing to think about except getting well."

"And Katharine?" said Robert, with a vague, wan, painful smile.

"Well, and Katharine; but there's nothing to be done until you get
well--think of that, my dear fellow, and try--except what I have done,
what I did last night when you were asleep."

Robert's hollow eyes questioned him eagerly.

"I wrote to Miss Annie Burton," said Yeldham, sitting down by the bed,
"telling her the circumstances briefly, and entreating her to give us
any information in her power. I assured her, in case her friend should
have reposed any confidence in her, either as to her residence or
otherwise, which she might hesitate to violate, that no attempt would
be made to control Mrs. Streightley's movements in any way; that the
object of the inquiry was to rectify a misapprehension on her part,
and to procure some relief of mind for her husband, whom her
departure, and his ignorance of what had become of her, had nearly
killed. I said that, Bob; I made it strong; and indeed I believe it,
old fellow."

Robert covered his face with his hands, and groaned. Yeldham jumped up
immediately, at once remembering the doctor's injunctions.

"This will never do," he said; "I must leave you, Robert. The 'demd
horrid grind,' you know!"

"We have only to wait, then?" said Robert wearily.

"Yes, to 'wait and hope,' as Monte Christo told his young friends,"
said Yeldham, with a very poor attempt at gaiety. "I'm off now, to
engage in an interesting question about Farmer Shepperton's ten-acre
meadow."

During the few following days the grind which Mr. Charles Yeldham had
instituted for himself, and had without interruption or question kept
up for several years, received many irruptions and incursions at this
period of his life, was broken in upon here, and suddenly put a
stop to there, in a manner that would have annoyed any but the
best-tempered and largest-hearted man in the whole world. While Robert
Streightley lay ill in his bed, it was not to be expected that Charley
Yeldham could remain quiet, poring over his law-papers, without
running in now and then to see how his friend was getting on; whether
he wanted any thing; whether the perpetual scratching of the pen
disturbed him; whether the preternatural silence did not drive him
mad; and other queries, such as men in rude health propose to those
whom, being ill, they take to be fanciful. Then there was the doctor's
visit, the consultation afterwards, the getting the sick man to
acquiesce in all the necessary arrangements, the despatch of Charley's
lad for the medicines, and a hundred other little performances, all of
which Charley had to take part in; thus giving up his work and
withdrawing himself from his desk. He did not mind so very much; for
Charles Yeldham's position was now secured, and he knew that the
attorneys must await his pleasure. His was no bumptious self-conceit;
he had won his spurs in fairest fight and by hardest exertion, by
sheer determination and indomitable energy; and he was as incapable of
affecting a deprecation of his legitimate success as he would have
been of swaggering before that success had been legitimately obtained.
So, notwithstanding his innate love of work, he had no hesitation in
tearing himself from "treadmill" to attend to his friend, whom he
pitied with all his large heart, with a profound pity which had long
ago buried blame out of sight.

One morning, when Robert Streightley was sitting in the easy-chair at
the open window looking on to the Thames, gazing, with that calm
uninterested feeling which comes to us in illness, on the life
below--the nursemaids and valetudinarians in the Temple Gardens; the
squad of Inns-of-Court volunteers in private clothes, but carrying
their rifles, being put through the mysteries of company-drill by the
attendant sergeant; the steam-boats on the river, cutting in and out
among the heavy barges; the distant bridges crowded with traffic, and
the shore immediately in front resonant with the work of the
Embankment,--as he sat, very weak in body, very anxious in mind--for
no answer had as yet come to Yeldham's letter to Miss Burton--Charley
Yeldham opened the door, and coming up to him, laid his hand gently on
his shoulder, and asked him how he was.

Robert answered that he was better; "progressing--quietly, he thought
he might say."

"That's good hearing, old boy! that's glorious hearing! You certainly
have more colour to-day, and your eyes are brighter, and you look more
yourself. How do you feel about your nerves?"

"What a wonder you are, Charley! No other man in the world would ask
such a question, knowing perfectly that if my nerves were in a queer
state, there is nothing so likely to knock them over as being asked
after them. However, they're tolerably right, thank God!--Why?"

"Well, I suppose it was a very stupid question; and I'm not about to
mend it by what I'm going to say now. I was going to say, if your
nerves are tolerably right, and you feel decently strong and able to
bear it, there's somebody in the sitting-room--Good God, Robert!"

He might well exclaim, for Robert Streightley had fallen forward on
the table, his face ghastly pale, his hand shaking and trembling, his
voice, sunk to a whisper, muttering, "Has she come at last? has she
come?"

"No, no, my dear fellow; a thousand times no. Compose yourself,
for heaven's sake. What a tremendous ass I am in any matter like
this--sure to make a mess of it! No, no; there's no 'she' there at
all; only an old friend of mine and an acquaintance of yours; and I
thought if you were well enough, you might like to see him. I may as
well tell you at once it's Gordon Frere."

Streightley started as though he had been cut by a whip, seemed about
to speak; hesitated for a moment; and finally said, "I'll come in and
see him at once."

"You will?" said Charley Yeldham, overjoyed beyond measure; "you will?
That's first-rate. I'm delighted, Robert."

"Why should I not?" said Streightley. "If he were to refuse to see me,
I could understand that well enough; but now when I, who--and I'm
determined that I won't let slip this opportunity of telling him--"

"Robert, Robert, what nonsense you're talking! Frere, of course, like
all the rest of the world, has heard of Mrs. Streightley's departure;
and as he has a tolerably clear head, he might be of use in our
difficulties; but as for going back into bygones, I forbid it utterly.
Now, will you see him or not?"

"Give me your arm, Charley, old fellow, and help me into the other
room at once."

The few days' illness, with all the suffering and suspense which had
preceded it, had had a grievous effect on Robert Streightley's
appearance; so that Gordon Frere--usually impassive, as society
required him--gave a great start when he saw him entering the room
leaning on Yeldham's arm; and, hastily advancing, took him by the hand
and murmured a few words of kindness and sympathy. Robert Streightley
was in a very weak state still; his eyes filled with tears, and the
pressure with which he endeavoured to return Frere's manual greeting
was a very feeble one.

"Now sit down, Gordon, here, close by Streightley--for we mustn't let
him exert himself too soon after his illness--and let us have a quiet
talk," said Charley Yeldham. "Our friend Frere is an old friend of
mine, as you know--and--well--what the world talks of, you know--in
fact, he's heard the story of Mrs. Streightley, and--having known her
and taken some interest in her--he has come, hearing you were here, to
inquire for you, and ask what news we have of her. I've told him what
I know--what we all know; but as for particulars, Lord help us, who
could give them?"

"Our dear old Charley here," said Gordon Frere, "puts in his own
peculiar way--which of course you know, Mr. Streightley, as well as or
better than I--the state of affairs. I heard at the time of what had
happened; but I, like every one else, I suppose, expected it would all
blow over in a few days. I should have liked to have seen you then,
and tried to cheer you up, but I thought it better not. However, as my
wife sees a good deal of your sister, we have heard that things are
not as we hoped they would have been; and yesterday I heard of your
illness, so I have come, having long had the pleasure of Mrs.
Streightley's acquaintance, and having--if you will permit me to say
so--a great esteem for you, to ask Yeldham if I could be of any
assistance in the matter."

The old courtly manner; how well Robert remembered it! As Gordon Frere
spoke to him, he saw him taking leave of Katharine on horseback in the
Park, bending over her in the opera-box, whispering to her at the
Botanical Gardens, in that happy time now so far away. He remained
perfectly quiet, thinking over this for a minute or two; then he said
in a deep voice, and with his eyes cast down:

"No one has a stronger claim to confidence in this matter than Mr.
Frere."

Gordon looked astonished, both at the words and the solemn tone in
which Streightley spoke; but Charles Yeldham interposed nervously:

"Yes, yes, of course. Gordon is an old friend of the Guyon
family--known Miss Guyon--Mrs. Streightley, that is to
say--since--ever so long."

"Not merely on that account, but on another----"

"For God's sake, Streightley! You're weak and ill, and not
yourself----"

"My dear Charley Yeldham, I'm weak--and ill--and--well, not my former
self, at all events; but I cannot see that you are justified in
stopping me in what I was about to say."

"But did not you promise me?"

"Certainly not. I came into this room with the full intention of
saying what I am now going to say. When Mr. Frere knows that the
saying it will have given me relief--and I need relief--I think he
will comprehend my anxiety on the point."

Frere glanced from one to the other in mute amazement. He was not what
is generally called "quick at taking things," and this dialogue was
unintelligible to him. Robert continued:

"You are aware, Mr. Frere, that Mrs. Streightley has long left her
home, and that as yet we are unhappily in ignorance where she may be?"

"I had heard so, to my very great regret."

"But you cannot be aware of what is really the fact--that you are to a
great extent implicated in her departure."

"I? Mr. Streightley----"

"Hear me out. Our good friend here thinks I am in the wrong in
entering into this story to you."

"I don't see the necessity for it," growled Charley Yeldham.

"Very likely not; but then you have not carried the weight about in
your bosom for months, or you would hail such a chance of relief with
delight. A chance indeed; but I have often contemplated seeking you,
and telling you what you are now about to learn. I am fortunate indeed
in an opportunity offered by your kindness." He was speaking clearly
and steadily now; so he spoke until the end. "Mr. Frere, I owe you an
explanation of my last remark to you, and I'm proceeding to give it;
but you will have to pardon my feebleness and give me time. You were
acquainted with Miss Guyon long before I was introduced to her?"

"I was."

"And--I am speaking to you frankly of yourself; you will see how
frankly I shall speak of myself presently--and you admired her very
much?"

"I thought--I think," said Frere, after an instant's hesitation, "that
there never was a more beautiful woman."

"Nor a more heartless one, I suppose you would add. That woman, as you
imagine, fooled you to the top of your heart, gave you every
encouragement to seek her hand; and when you did so, frankly and
honourably, deliberately threw you over for the richer prize which
came in her way."

"Mr. Streightley," said Frere, in an earnest voice, "I'm sure you must
have some very strong motive, or you would never touch upon a subject
which must be so painful to both of us."

"I have a strong motive, sir, as you will speedily find. Your calls
were unnoticed, your letters disregarded, your honourable and manly
offer rejected, almost with contempt. Shortly afterwards Miss Guyon
was married to me. Now, Mr. Frere, I am coming to my point. Katharine
Guyon's rejection of you and her acceptance of me were alike the
result of a base conspiracy against you and her. In matters concerning
you she was hoodwinked and deceived; your visits were not mentioned to
her; your letters were kept back from her. The very offer of your hand
she never received, and until the day of her father's death she was in
ignorance of its having been made."

Gordon Frere had started back at the beginning of this disclosure, and
now sat staring wildly, scarcely able to comprehend what he had heard.
After a pause, he said, "Good God, how awful! And by whom was this
treachery perpetrated?"

"By two men, one of whom has gone to his account, with all his
imperfections on his head; while the other, mercifully spared so far
to repent and make such atonement as lies in his power, is before
you."

At these words Gordon Frere started from his chair; for an instant
remained erect, taking no heed of Yeldham's hands outstretched in
warning; then, as his eyes fell on Streightley's worn and haggard
face, he sank quietly back into his seat.

"I can fully understand what you must feel, Mr. Frere," said Robert;
"and I shall shrink from nothing you may say to me. But there is a
little more to be told yet, and I may as well finish it. I said that
you were somehow concerned in my wife's flight; and what I meant was
this. Her discovery of this plot, the rage and humiliation which she
felt at having been made one of its victims, led her to leave her
home. I am confident she had no other motive. She----" Robert stopped
for a moment, and then continued, "I can't say much more. I'm not
strong yet, and--I only wanted you to know that my crime has not been
unpunished. God knows my share in that miserable compact has never
been absent from my thoughts, and now retribution has overtaken me."

He ceased speaking, and leaned back in his chair, faint and pale. Nor
was Gordon Frere much less pallid as he rose and said:

"I'm taken so aback by all this, that I can say nothing at this
instant. I want ten minutes by myself to collect my thoughts. Charley,
give me your key; I'll go into the Gardens for a few minutes, and then
I'll come back to you."

Although the Temple Gardens were Mr. Yeldham's favourite and only
exercising ground; and although Gordon Frere, in the old days lazily
lounging out of the window with his pipe in his mouth, had often seen
his friend tearing round and round them, doing his constitutional in
the intervals of "treadmill," it is probable that the young man
himself had not been in them more than half-a-dozen times in his life,
and knew nothing of their various beauties. Certain it is that he saw
nothing of them on the present occasion. He walked among the
nursemaids and the town-made children, and the misanthropes and the
valetudinarians; but he saw none of them. He saw the staircase at Mrs.
Pendarvis's house, and the conservatory and the landing, and Katharine
with her head bent down, listening to his soft familiar phrases--which
are not, indeed, the language of love, but which form such a pleasant
prelude to it. He saw the saucy toss of the head with which she would
greet his late arrival in society where they had arranged to meet, and
that half-bashful, half-earnest look in her eyes when they were about
to part. Gordon Frere's heart beat very rapidly as he thought of these
things, and he bit his lip impatiently; but he was a thorough
nineteenth-century man, with a horror of giving expression to or even
indulging in any strong feelings, and he had long outlived the boyish
passion for Katharine which had glorified that past time. His pride
was sharply hurt, and the gentlemanly sense of honour, which alone
among a man's feelings the nineteenth-century code does not require
him to repress, revolted against the story he had just heard from the
shattered invalid within there. How right he had been, when he first
heard from Hester of Katharine's flight, and had instinctively
justified her, even though he then believed she had treated him so
badly! So, while he was regarding her as a jilt, she was thinking that
he had basely trifled with her. Poor Katharine! he pitied her. Did he
pity himself? Well, not much; it was over--the glamour was gone, and
he was none the worse; but she, sold to this man--a poor man
now--homeless, self-exiled, with burning anger in her proud heart. He
never for a moment thought of the possibility that Katharine might
love him, Gordon Frere; still something he did not pause to analyse
told him she did not--that the dream was over for her as for him. The
waking was very different though. Father and husband lost; home and
position forfeited; a wanderer, and poor. Katharine Guyon was all
this. How bright was his own fate in comparison! Mr. Guyon's part in
the transaction galled him. He had so heartily despised the dressy,
boasting, foppish, frivolous, false old man, and had so often laughed
at his little tricks and cheateries, that to have been so thoroughly,
so completely _done_ by him, was, even in such distant retrospect,
decidedly humiliating and unpleasant. He had that letter somewhere,
with its infernal hypocritical condolence, and its coolly impudent
messages from Katharine. All a lie, was it--infernal old scoundrel!
Dead though, that must be remembered, even in the utmost scorn and
anger. And Streightley--how he pitied him! The man knew so little of
the world, and Guyon had made him so completely his tool. He liked
Robert, and all the more since Hester had behaved so ill about it all.
He wished now he had seen him at once, when this happened; had not
been kept back by any fear of Hester's "queerness," as he called it.
Things had never been quite comfortable between them since, and he had
avoided the subject. But now why should he be angry with this poor
broken fellow, who had lost Katharine too, if it came to that? No; he
pitied him, and he would help him to the best of his ability; and now
he would go and tell him so.

Such is a rapid _rsum_ of Mr. Gordon Frere's thoughts as he walked
round the Temple Gardens; and such was the conclusion at which he
arrived before he again entered his friend's rooms.

He walked straight up to the chair in which Robert Streightley sat,
and taking his thin wan hand, said, "I've thought carefully over all
that you have told me, Mr. Streightley, and the result is, that, so
far as I am concerned, the matter is put away and buried for ever. It
shall never be mentioned by me again, and I think I may say it shall
never rise in my mind to your prejudice. The only thing that I will
say about it is, that I am glad I have heard this explanation,
because by it Miss--Mrs. Streightley is freed from the suspicion of
double-dealing and--well, I must say it--heartlessness, which at one
time I attached to her. And now," said Gordon, changing the tone of
his voice, and laying his hand kindly on Streightley's shoulder--"now
we must devote all our energies to finding her and bringing her back.
I'm sure, when she hears that I have--I mean when she knows that
you've told me all--and--yourself so ill--and--that she'll give in at
once--eh, Charley?"

"My dear fellow, I agree with you entirely; I have very little doubt
that if we could communicate with Mrs. Streightley, who is a
particularly sensible woman, all might be arranged happily at once.
But the difficulty is to find her."

"Have you no clue?"

"We had not until quite recently; and even what we now have is very
slight indeed." Then Yeldham repeated to Frere all that has been
already told respecting Mrs. Stanbourne's letter, and that which he
had written to Miss Burton.

"She has not yet answered my letter," he went on to say, with a glance
of significant anxiety at Robert, which Gordon understood. "But she
may be away from Paris."

"Certainly," said Frere; "nothing more likely. She may have gone home,
you know; and the people at the convent may have sent on the letter.
We must not be discouraged by a little delay, must we, eh, Charley?"

"O dear, no," said Yeldham; "there is nothing to be discouraged about.
We must have patience, and Robert must gain strength. Suppose we got a
letter now, and knew where she is, he wouldn't be fit to go to her."

"O yes, I would!" cried Robert. "I should get strength for that. Be
sure of me, so far as that goes."

"Well, well; we will discuss that when the time comes," said Yeldham,
who was impatient for the termination of this agitating interview.
"And now, Gordon, I'm going to turn you out."

"All right, old fellow," said Gordon cheerfully. "I'll soon come and
see you again, Mr. Streightley; meantime, if you have any good news,
you'll let me have the pleasure of sharing it. I understand now why
Yeldham has never spoken much of you to me; but that's all over, is it
not?" And the handsome, happy young man held out his hand, with all
the irresistible grace of his peculiar manner, to Robert, who clasped
it fervently in his poor thin fingers. Yeldham left the room with
Gordon, and the two held a brief colloquy on the landing.

"Will he find her, do you think?"

"I fear not. If ever a determined woman lived, she is that woman. And
he has no hold on her--no knowledge of her past, no intimacy with her
intimates."

"She hadn't any, I believe," said Gordon. "I don't think she had a
friend in the world. She was dangerous, you see, being so handsome,
and so poor; and her father was so deuced disreputable. Did she make
many friends since her marriage?"

"I fancy not; I never heard--except Mrs. Frere."

"O, she knows nothing about her," said Gordon hurriedly. "Good-bye,
Charley. Go back to the poor fellow; he wants you."

Gordon Frere had taken a step down the stairs, and Yeldham's hand was
on the door, when the former turned and came back.

"By Jove, Charley," he said, "I was just going away without telling
you one of the principal things I came to say. That fellow Thacker,
you know, he manages all Hester's business--as far as she allows any
one but herself to manage it, that is to say--and very well he does
it, I fancy. However, that's not the news, and this is. She gave him a
lot of money to invest on one occasion, and he invested it, it
appears, in a thingummy--a loan--you know what I mean--where you get
the place if you are not paid up to time."

"Yes; a mortgage. Go on, Gordon."

"Well, then, a mortgage on Middlemeads; and of course, then, you know
Streightley smashed; and the end of it is, Middlemeads belongs to
us--to her, I mean--and she wants to go and live there when the
season's over. Deuced unpleasant, isn't it, Yeldham? especially after
the story that poor fellow has just told us; looks as if I did it out
of spite to Katharine. I can't explain to Hester; and there's no
reasonable reason why she shouldn't have the place, is there, Charley?
'Pon my life, I don't know what to do."

"It's a strange coincidence, Gordon, and that's all that can be said
about it. And, after all, it is only strange to us three, because only
we know that it is a coincidence at all. To other people Mrs. Frere is
much more strictly allied with the Streightleys than you are. As for
Robert, he won't mind it in the least; he never thinks about the
place. He was eager enough about it, poor fellow, when he and I saw it
first; but I don't think it ever costs him a thought or a regret now.
You may go and live there without a scruple, take my word for that."

"Do you really think so, Charley? That's very nice indeed, and a great
relief; for I would not hurt Streightley for the world. Good-bye
again."

He ran downstairs gaily, and his friend stood for a minute looking
after him, thinking of the story that had been told to him, thinking
of his own confidences about Katharine in the very same room, and
wondering at, a little envying, perhaps a little despising, his
invincible light-heartedness.

There was something odd, he thought, about the Middlemeads
transaction. He had never heard Robert mention the mortgagee's being
Mrs. Frere: but he would say nothing about it; it might agitate him.
So he dismissed the matter from his mind, and went cheerfully back to
Robert, whom he found pale and depressed, and willing to talk only of
the one engrossing topic--_when_ an answer must surely come from Miss
Burton.

"What a fine fellow he is!" Robert thought sadly, in Yeldham's
absence, as he reviewed Frere's conduct in their interview. "How nobly
generous and forgiving! What a contrast to me! And yet he cannot have
loved her as I love her, or no generosity could avail to make him
pardon the man who robbed him of her. Ah, no; who could ever love her
as it is my torment, my punishment, and yet my life, my pride to love
her?"


A few hours more, and suspense, so far as the clue with which Mrs.
Stanbourne had furnished Robert was concerned, was ended. The
following morning brought a letter to Mr. Yeldham from Miss Burton,
written, not from Paris, but from an obscure village in the Pyrenees,
where a religious house of the order to which she belonged had lately
been established. Its contents were conclusive. She had never heard
from or of Katharine from the time she had received the intimation of
her marriage; she had it not in her power to afford the slightest
information or assistance, beyond writing to the superior of her
former convent in Paris, and entreating her, should Mrs. Streightley
make inquiry there for her, to detain her if possible, but in any case
to communicate with her friends. She expressed the liveliest concern
and inquietude concerning Katharine, and the deepest regret for her
own inability to help in this sore strait.

Profound discouragement fell upon the friends when they had read this
letter; nevertheless Robert bore the disappointment better than
Yeldham expected. He had a settled sense of the sin he had committed
upon him, and a resigned conviction that the punishment was not to be
escaped or lessened. The uttermost farthing was to be the sum of the
payment to be exacted from him; he did not rebel against the
conviction he suffered. "I will never give up seeking her, though I
don't believe I shall ever see her face again," he would say to
Yeldham, when his friend strove to encourage him, to exhort him to a
hope he himself was far from feeling.

Yeldham answered Miss Burton's letter, thanking her warmly for her
good wishes, and the precaution she had taken in their behalf; and
then he had nothing more to do--the weary waiting had to be resumed.

Many were the councils held by the three friends, as the days, which
resembled each other only too closely to him, to whom not one of them
brought hope or relief, passed by. Robert had returned to Brixton
shortly after the arrival of Miss Burton's letter, and had improved
since then in health. The demands of society on Gordon Frere were not
quite so insatiable as in his bachelor days; and many a long summer
evening found the friends together, sometimes on the river, sometimes
in some quiet country nook, a little railway-run from town, and
secluded as a desert; but oftener still in Yeldham's chambers.

Robert was a busy man again, to a certain extent; though now he worked
for others, in a subordinate position, which seemed to hurt his pride
but little, if at all. "I can't live in idleness on my mother,
Charley," he said; "and--and if I never see her face again"--that
sentence in her letter haunted him--"I should like to leave her
something."

Charles Yeldham encouraged Robert in these resolves, and had the
satisfaction of seeing him become more tranquil and cheerful, when
with him. He had always the gratification of knowing that to others he
never afforded an indication of the suffering of his mind.

"You are clear, then, Charley," said Gordon Frere on one occasion,
when he had "run up to town" from Middlemeads--they were living there
now, and it was late in the autumn--"you are clear, then, that there
is nothing, positively nothing, to be done? She is certainly not
within the limits of the United Kingdom; for I am confident we have
fished out every mortal creature she ever knew, intimately or
slightly, and no one has heard of her directly or indirectly."

"I am perfectly clear on that point, Gordon. The case stands thus: we
have exhausted all private sources of information known to us, and
must now wait until some others discover themselves. Mrs. Stanbourne
is keenly interested in our success, and she has access to such
foreign information as we could not command. The only other likely
clue is that secured to us, in case of its usefulness, by Miss Burton.
I have always maintained that this was not a case for detective work;
because, in the first place, it would not avail; and in the second,
Katharine never would pardon the employment of such means. The fatal
loss of time at first--the only time in which detective work is ever
good for any thing--disposes of that resource, if no other objection
existed. Robert, Lady Henmarsh, and myself having concluded, most
naturally, that she had gone to Mrs. Stanbourne, the trail was
effectually lost before we knew that we were mistaken. She had more
than time to hide herself, long before it ever occurred to us that she
intended concealment; for you must remember, Gordon, the desperate
defiance of her letter to Robert by no means necessarily implied
that."

"You are sure she had no other friends abroad but Mrs. Stanbourne and
Miss Burton--no friends among foreigners, I mean?"

"Quite certain. Lady Henmarsh knows; and indeed Katharine had told
Robert herself that she had never been abroad for more than a
fortnight, or farther than Paris, till their marriage, and she knew no
foreigners."

"Where did they go to after the marriage?" asked Gordon.

"To Switzerland. But they returned very soon, and did very little
tourist business, I fancy; for Katharine had a severe illness at
Martigny, which upset all their plans. No, no; there's not a chance in
that direction. Robert and I have not left an incident undiscussed,
not a speculation untried."

And they believed so. But one individual connected with their stay at
Martigny had entirely escaped Robert's memory and mention. Had he
remembered Dr. Hudson, however, it would never have occurred to him
that in that direction any help could lie. He knew nothing of the
profession and the promise with which the doctor and his beautiful
patient had parted.

So, like the children in their games of hide and-seek, Gordon had
unconsciously strayed near to the concealed treasure of knowledge when
he asked his careless question, but had wandered away again--no hint
given, no warning cry, "You burn! you burn!"




CHAPTER VI.
HESTER IN POSSESSION.


Time went on, and Robert Streightley received no fresh intelligence to
guide him to the one object for which he now cared to live. The
terrible disappointment of the hopes inspired by the only suggestion
he had received had utterly prostrated him; and now, even the revived
conviction that news of her _must_ come in some way, that though he
might never see her again, this cloud of absolute ignorance of her
fate must drift away--had yielded to the slow influence of the passing
days. Charles Yeldham had succeeded in inducing him to be calm and
quiet; in convincing him that no means of discovering what he wanted
to find out should be neglected; and that the best way to insure
success was to allow some time to elapse, after which Katharine's
precautions would probably relax of themselves. Robert knew his
friend's zeal and fidelity; and in his depressed state of mind, and
weakened condition of bodily health, he was obliged, and thankful, to
rest in that knowledge, and security, not indeed from his sorrow, but
from exertion on his own part. He had once more begun to tax his
intellectual energies by application to business; and the former
habits of his life were regaining their dominion over him. He had
resumed his residence in his mother's house at Brixton, without the
smallest regret for the luxurious abode he had quitted. He had
regarded all the surroundings of the brief period of display and
luxury which had succeeded to his marriage with perfect indifference
on his own account, and now he forgot them. He was to all outward
appearance, in habits and tastes, the same man who had gone City-wards
from the same house, year after year, before the brilliant
interruption; the difference was unseen, undiscernible by any eyes but
those of the Father of Spirits.

It is probable that at this time Mrs. Streightley was as happy as she
had ever been in all her blameless but uninteresting life. She did not
care much about public repute, except in the sense of the impugnment
of commercial honesty; and as Robert's character stood as high as
ever, in spite of his pecuniary disasters, she cared not at all that
the world should talk about his domestic affairs. The world which did
so talk was not her world. Brixton and Clapham, the Pratts and the
Perkinses, the "connection," and the ministers thereof, said little
about the separation between her son and his beautiful "high-flying"
wife, and that little had a consolatory tendency; for these good
people seemed to think Robert's eternal prospects improved by the
occurrence, and it was no part of their creed to trouble themselves
about those of Katharine. The old lady had her son with her again; the
former routine was resumed: if Robert was unhappy, he did not show it;
and she could not understand how he could fret after a woman who had
never been a wife to him,--"not what I call a wife, at least," she
would say, on the very rare occasions when she mentioned the matter.
She was a good woman in her way; but she essentially belonged to the
narrow-minded order of human beings, and was quite incapable of
realising the fact that though she had seen nothing to like, and
little even to admire, in Katharine, her son had seen in her all the
value and the glory of life to him, and was living, under her kind,
motherly, but unobservant eyes, a broken-hearted man.

Ellen, whose weakness of character rendered her amiability and her
enthusiasm almost valueless, had begun to forget Katharine. She had
been charmed by her beauty and kindness, but she had always felt a
little restrained, a little puzzled by her; and as she had never
thought of applying such intellect as she possessed to the solution of
the puzzle, it had remained, to make her uncomfortable. From the first
Katharine's flight had been a silent subject between her brother and
her; and by degrees Ellen had ceased to think of it much, and the
image of her sister-in-law had become faint in her memory. Besides,
the Rev. Decimus had always decidedly disapproved of her; and he had
improved the occasion, entirely to his own satisfaction, and very
nearly to Ellen's conviction, by his eloquent exposition of the
dangers of riches, the snares of fashion, the undesirableness of
beauty, and the enormity of self-will. The reverend gentleman, who was
a good creature in his small way, had one or two defects of character,
not altogether unknown in his class. He was uncharitable in his
judgments, and implacable--piously so, of course, and with the utmost
deprecation of such a sentiment--in his resentments. Robert's marriage
had been distasteful to his brother-in-law elect from every point of
view, personal and professional; and he had never been able to
perceive the slightest concession to his influence on the part of
Katharine; indeed he felt perfectly certain that on the few occasions
of their meeting she had never remembered his existence, after giving
him the prescribed bow or word of recognition. If he could have
believed that Mrs. Streightley had disliked or feared him or his
doctrines, he would have been far less bitter against her than he
really, though secretly, was;--for he mourned over her in the true
unctuous style of self-exaltation, and depreciation of the sinner,
familiar to "professors" of his sort;--he would then have been enabled
to _poser en martyre_, a sufferer of contumely for conscience' sake;
and great would have been his reward in Brixton and Clapham circles,
where Katharine was utterly unknown, except as an object of holy
detraction and affected pity, in the days of her pride and prosperity.
But no such resource was open to Mr. Dutton; he knew perfectly well
that Mrs. Streightley had never thought of him, had never formed any
opinion about him at all; that he had simply been completely
indifferent to her. Strange are the complications of human nature, the
self-delusions of the best among us. Here was a really good man,
disinterested, zealous, perfectly sincere; a man indifferent to wealth
(except for missionary purposes), and with whom Ellen Streightley
outweighed in attraction the whole of womankind; a man to whom the
smallest, the most transient infidelity, either as lover or husband,
would have been as impossible as picking a pocket or forging a
bill--filled with resentment because a woman, a rich and beautiful
woman, had shown herself politely oblivious of him. And he a clergyman
too! Ah, there was the rub--the egotism of the good creature was a
divided egotism, after all; he could not understand feminine
indifference to the cloth! His experiences were partly Polynesian, and
partly Claphamite, and he judged, as he lived, according to his
lights.

When the Rev. Decimus, then, spoke of Katharine with solemn horror, as
an utterly lost sheep, and without the slightest suggestion that it
was any body's business to follow her into the wilderness and bring
her back, Ellen listened to him with her usual adoring respect, and
made no protest. As her future husband, and a clergyman _in esse_,
Decimus was doubly a law to her; and obedience was as deep-seated in
Ellen's nature as revolt is in that of some women. Her curiosity
respecting the cause of Katharine's flight, the "cause of complaint"
against her brother which Robert had assigned, without explaining,
remained in her mind long after her sorrow and her affection for the
lost sheep had subsided. There was not the least probability that it
would ever be gratified; and she began to take the view of the matter
insinuated by Mr. Dutton, though he had not the smallest grounds for
such a conjecture, and was innocent of intentional slander in the
suggestion. "Rely upon it, Ellen," he had said, "Robert's generosity
leads him to shelter his unhappy wife from additional disgrace, by
assuming the blame of this wretched business himself. I daresay he
made some discovery concerning her former life--the life of a
worldling and an unbeliever, my dearest, has no doubt always
disgraceful secrets in it--and this is the result. Your brother is
very generous, and I am sure capable of such a sacrifice."

This was quite a new idea to Ellen, and it took some time to absorb;
but at length she said, with a little air of wisdom:

"Well, but, Decimus, in that case he would know where she is, and all
about her."

"And how do you know that he does not know? He never says a word on
the subject, does he? I think I understood from you that he never
mentioned her since he came back to live here."

"O no, never; not to mamma even, or to old Alice. He has never once
pronounced her name. My reason for thinking he does not know any thing
about her is because Hester says she feels sure he does not, and that
he and his friends--friends we know nothing about--are making every
effort to find out where she is."

"Mrs. Frere is always right, to be sure; but in this case, I think,
she would be certain to know it positively, if such were the case.
Frere would know it--he is so great a friend and ally of Robert--and
he would tell her. No, no, Ellen; on this point I stick to my own
opinion." Which was, indeed, the reverend gentleman's habit in all
matters wherein he differed from his fellow-creatures.

Mr. Dutton's dislike of Katharine Streightley was only exceeded by his
regard for Hester Frere. This sentiment, like all his sentiments, was
entirely disinterested, and had sprung into existence long before
Hester had taken any active interest in his affairs. According to her
usual wise custom, Miss Gould had made herself agreeable to her
friend's lover before she was in a position which enabled her to
patronise him; and he had conceived a genuine liking for her, into
which the element of gratitude was now introduced. Hester had brought
her common-sense, her unfailing tact, and her powers of deferential
persuasion to bear upon Ellen's betrothed respecting the missionary
question; and as she understood the good little man's weaknesses as
well as she understood his narrow sincerity and stupid zeal, she came
out of the discussion with entire success. Mr. Dutton was brought to
recognise the force of the reasoning which maintained that English
savages are as well worth saving as Polynesian savages, and that the
labour implied in the task is at least as arduous, and considerably
more repulsive. Hester had her own notions as to his fitness for
either task; but she kept them to herself, being supremely indifferent
to the spiritual welfare of the world on either side of the Equator.
"I daresay his parishioners won't swallow his doctrines," she said to
herself contentedly; "but then neither will they swallow his wife."
And she derived very great satisfaction from the promptitude and skill
with which Mr. Thacker had executed the commission intrusted to him,
before the great absorbing interest of this woman's life had arisen,
to overpower every other. A living had been found in a situation which
almost realised the conditions prescribed by Hester, and the marriage
of Ellen and Decimus was to take place immediately.

To this, as to most other external circumstances, Robert was
indifferent; he had lost his interest in such things now: his only
feeling about it was regret that he could not give his sister a large
dowry, as he had once hoped to do. He had been consulted in a formal
way by both Decimus and Ellen, and he had agreed to all their plans;
then, his duty being done, he turned away again, and fed upon his
sorrow in silence,--in a silence growing submissive, full of
repentance and humility. His sin had found him out, and the
chastisement was heavy upon him; but Robert was discerning more and
more clearly that the hand which was dealing it was God's hand, and he
was learning to kiss the rod. Very, very slowly were these lessons
learned: the progress of the human soul in the school of the wisdom
which is not of this world, is never rapid; but neither is it ever
arrested, turned aside, or ineffectual.


The long winter, the bright spring, the gay summer had twice come and
gone, since that November day which had witnessed Katharine's flight,
and the rich tints of autumn were upon the beautiful beechwoods of
Middlemeads. The place that was to know her no more, never again to be
adorned by her graceful presence or enlivened by her beauty, was, to
all outward appearance, not a whit the worse for the privation. It was
still splendid, still luxurious, still gay; still the home of youth
and beauty, of fashion and frivolity. It was Hester Frere's home now;
and Gordon was master of the house from which the woman whom he had
loved and lost had turned resolutely away, to be lost in utter
obscurity. He thought of this at times with keen pain; for a change
had passed upon him too, and he was more serious than he had been;
which seriousness his wife marked, and, assigning to it as a primary
cause one which was but secondary, bitterly resented. Gordon had
learned with displeasure as well as astonishment that his wife was the
possessor of Middlemeads; the "profitable investment" had no charms
for him to counterbalance the unpleasantness and what he felt to be
the difficulty of such a position. But what could he do? His wife's
friendship with the Streightleys was no reason why she should not live
at Middlemeads, since it was evident that not one of those concerned
had any notion that her living there was any offence to that
friendship. The real reason against it was confined to his knowledge,
and must not be imparted to his wife. Had he arbitrarily crossed her
wishes, he would have been gratuitously unkind, and that it was not in
Gordon's nature to be; and so he went to Middlemeads against his will,
and remained there, deriving very moderate pleasure from the abode,
and feeling that the coldness and restraint which had sprung up
between him and Hester since the occasion of their conversation about
Katharine were inexplicably increased by the possession of the place.

Since that memorable night Katharine's name had never been spoken
between them. Hester knew that her husband and Robert Streightley were
much more intimate than they had previously been; and this knowledge
fed the jealous passion which devoured her. "They meet to talk of her,
these two men whom she took from me," she would think; and her
once-powerful and well-trained common-sense failed to come to her aid
here, when her need was at its utmost. She would have been desperately
angry had she known that Gordon had told Robert his objection to
living at Middlemeads, and that it was Robert who had quieted his
scruples.

"Don't mind about me, Frere," Robert had said. "What does it matter to
me? I could never see the place again, you know; and it makes no
difference to me who lives there. Hester always liked it, I remember;
and I am glad to think she has it now. I am indeed, Frere; I am, upon
my honour."

And he was. All this was only a trifle, a secondary point of delicacy,
a nothing; it had no influence upon his fate, it did not wound his
feelings; the calamity that had come upon him left him no
sensitiveness to spare for minor suffering. He never saw Hester now;
but that was accident, not design: he had not the remotest notion that
she had any meaning in his life beyond the trifling meaning she had
always had; he never thought of her at all, indeed. When she was in
town Ellen was much with her, he knew; and he also knew that she had
procured the living whose charms had diverted Decimus from those of
black heathendom; he knew that Ellen was to pass some time with her at
Middlemeads in the autumn; but that was all. It had occurred to him to
wonder a little how Ellen would feel at Middlemeads without Katharine.
But Robert knew his sister; and he smiled at the passing thought, and
at himself.

So Hester was in possession. The dream she had dreamed had become a
reality. She was mistress of Middlemeads, owner of the home of her
unconscious enemy, and of the possessions which had belonged to the
man who had preferred another before her. More than this, she was the
wife of the man her enemy had loved--still loved, perhaps: she had no
clue to Katharine's thoughts, no power to read the change which time
had wrought in her. Was ever revenge so safe, so sure as hers? was
ever revenge so complete? And it had not compromised her in the least:
she was all the richer in money, and none the poorer in friends; she
could talk of Mrs. Streightley with polite pity, and if by any
extraordinary chance the fugitive should ever again come to the
surface of society, she could even meet her, unsuspected, unrebuked.
Truly her success had been marvellous, her good fortune and her good
management unsurpassed; and her secret was so entirely her own. A
little impetuousness, the least loss of self-control, and she might
have betrayed herself to Thacker. (Hester was quite unconscious of the
tone in which she had spoken in the church-porch on the occasion of
Robert's marriage.) But she had never lost her self-control; and he
knew nothing. Supposing him to suspect, what matter? she dreaded not
suspicion, but knowledge.

Hester was happy, then. Happy in her wealth, her popularity, her
authority, in her success and prosperity. Happy, as she sat with Lady
Henmarsh, who was clad in the deepest and glossiest of widow's weeds,
having been disembarrassed of Sir Timothy by the kind hand of death
early in the preceding spring, and was now enjoying Hester's
hospitality, which she proposed to enjoy as fully and for as long a
period as possible. The scene suggested happiness. The two ladies were
seated at the large French window of the room which the former
mistress of Middlemeads had occupied as a dressing-room, and which was
furnished in a style at once sumptuous and tasteful; yet it was not
furnished as in Katharine's time. The conservatory, with the fountain
and the marble floor, the aviary, and the flight of marble steps by
which the Italian garden was to be reached, were there, but the
"Lady-Kilmantan" hangings and furniture, the subject of Mrs.
Stanbourne's remonstrance with Katharine, had disappeared. Hester,
consistent even in the novel defects she was acquiring, had sent all
these things to Ellen's future home. She would dissociate herself as
far as possible from Katharine,--her private rooms should bear no
trace of her; but she would make a judicious use of articles of
property, notwithstanding Gordon noticed the alteration, and gave his
wife offence by doing so.

"Didn't you like the blue-and-silver things in your dressing-room,
Hester? I thought them very pretty."

"No," she answered shortly; "blue is horribly unbecoming to me. I have
not a faultless fair complexion, you know."

"I didn't know complexion had any influence on the choice of
furniture," said Gordon, smiling, and quite unconscious of the
feelings his careless remark had excited.

"Didn't you? No, I don't suppose men understand those things. Read the
Duchesse d'Abrantes, and you'll be wiser."

The obnoxious blue-and-silver had been replaced by the freshest and
prettiest of chintzes; and the apartment, if less splendid, was even
more elegant and inviting. Traces of Hester's intellectual tastes were
to be seen about it; and Hester herself was no insignificant ornament.
The development of her beauty had been steadily going on, and now the
new mistress of Middlemeads need not have greatly feared competition
with the former. With all the accessories of wealth and refinement
around her, Hester Frere was a beautiful woman to the most critical
eye--more beautiful indeed to the critical than to the careless; for
hers was the beauty of form and expression, the accuracy of feature
and symmetry of form, the correct loveliness which is less sympathetic
but more satisfying than the lighter, more brilliant, and more
striking kinds of beauty.

"And you actually had Mr. Thacker's sisters down here for a month,
Hester? How very good of you! Were they very dreadful?"

Hester smiled. "You forget," she said, "that I lived all my life among
similar people, and am of them. You can't expect me to admit that they
are dreadful."

"O, I know all that; you need not talk like that to me, Hester, or
pretend that you ever were like the Thacker girls. They are like human
peonies. I shall never forget Rebecca's parasol, with a pink-coral
handle, and her opera-cloak with amber buttons."

"They are very fond of bright colours and jewelry, certainly. I don't
dispute that, or hope to correct it; but they are old friends, and I
am very constant to them."

"So you are to all friends, Hester, and in that wonderfully unlike
most women of the world; and you know the world as well as any one, I
think. But talking of old friends and constancy, what about that silly
girl Streightley's sister, that Katharine, and you too, Hester, bored
one to death with last year?"

"She is coming to me shortly, to stay with me while Gordon goes to the
Scotch moors; and I shall keep her until we go to town. Then she is to
be married early in the winter."

"Indeed!" said Lady Henmarsh in a dissatisfied tone, which referred to
the earlier portion of the reply. "I wonder her brother likes her
coming here; it must be rather awkward for her, and for him too."

"O no, I think not," replied Hester quickly, and with a slight change
of colour. "She does not mind, I am sure."

"That's well," said Lady Henmarsh. "Do you see much of poor
Streightley? I have not heard of him for an age. I never can get over
his unfeeling conduct to poor Ned Guyon. I know all about it, you
know; for Ned wrote me every thing--refusing him money when he was on
the brink of ruin; horrid, wasn't it? So I really know nothing of him.
I suppose, nothing has been heard of that unfortunate mad woman?"

"Mad woman! Why do you call Mrs. Streightley a mad woman, Lady
Henmarsh?" asked Hester with surprise.

Lady Henmarsh was rather confused. She felt she must make some reply,
and she did not know exactly how to make a judicious one, for she had
forgotten for a moment the strange complication in the position of the
woman she was speaking of, and that of the woman she was speaking to.

"Well, really," she answered awkwardly, "you have only to look round
you and out of window for an answer. No sane woman would run away from
such a home as this, I presume."

"But she could not have remained here," said Hester; "Mr.
Streightley's affairs were embarrassed before she went away."

"Yes; but then she did not know it," said Lady Henmarsh. "I suspected
always that she knew nothing about her husband's affairs; and
Streightley admitted that she did not. No, no, worse luck for him; he
declares that it was his own fault that she left him; and I know
Katharine well. She has, as her poor father used to say, 'a devil of a
temper;' and she is as proud as Lucifer, and gave me an immense deal
of trouble; but I am perfectly sure, if she had known the truth, and
the trouble Streightley was in, she would have forgiven him."

"Forgiven him what, Lady Henmarsh? Do you know?--did he ever tell
you?"

"No, never. He only said he was to blame--that she had a cause of
complaint against him;--you know exactly what he said. However, she is
the chief sufferer by her folly, and it is no concern of ours."

Hester was a remarkably keen observer, even where she was much less
interested than, since her fatal revelation of her jealousy to Gordon
Frere, she had been about every thing which concerned Katharine; and
her quick observation now revealed to her that Lady Henmarsh knew more
than she was willing to tell, and was very anxious to conceal her
knowledge. She did not allow her discovery to appear; and soon after
the two ladies separated to dress for dinner.

An hour later Mrs. Frere stood at one of the windows of the long
drawing-room, gazing thoughtfully out with eyes that took no heed of
the objects they saw. She was beautifully dressed in sheeny satin and
soft rich lace; she looked proud, composed, and beautiful; and the
thoughts she was thinking were these:

"She will know sooner or later that misfortunes have come on him, and
she will return. Then Gordon will see her again, when the little love
he ever gave me is dead; when he has become her husband's friend; when
there is no confidence between him and me--and _she_ has been the
means of its withdrawal. Yes, it was she, not myself, not my betrayal
of my feelings--how could I help that? how could any wretched creature
like me avoid that?--it was _she!_ he is always thinking of her. What
is his friendship for Robert but love of her? I know he works for him;
he goes to him whenever he goes to town; and ah, how often he goes! He
does not like this place--I can see it--because it ought to be
hers--forsooth, ought to be hers! and bought with my money. But he
does not care for my money, and he does not care for me. _I
wish--I wish I was dead!_"

You see Hester's success had been complete; and the mistress of
Middlemeads, reigning in her rival's stead, must needs be perfectly
happy.




CHAPTER VII.
A SPLIT IN THE CAMP.


Town was getting empty, and business of every kind was getting slack,
so that it chanced one day that Mr. Yeldham found himself writing
letters at abnormal hours, and with no very pressing engagements on
hand. He was just thinking what a pleasant thing a little leisure, not
too pronounced, was, when his clerk rushed in, and announced "Mr.
Thacker."

"You're surprised to see me, Mr. Yeldham," said Thacker, as, after a
quick survey of the apartment, he sat himself calmly down in a chair
by Yeldham's desk.

"Well--if you ask the question--yes," said Charley with perfect
coolness.

"And not too well pleased, perhaps?"

"I should have left you to say that, in any case, Mr. Thacker. I
presume you come to me on business. Have the goodness to explain its
nature."

Charley Yeldham had not been gifted by nature with great powers of
making himself disagreeable, but on this occasion he exerted all he
possessed.

"I always heard you were a cool hand, Mr. Yeldham," said Thacker, in
admiration, "and I find they did not say a bit too much. You don't
mind my smoking a cigar, do you, while I stop?"

"Not in the least," replied Mr. Yeldham, with immovable gravity, "if
you find smoking conducive to the despatch of business."

Mr. Thacker looked at him with an unmoved expression of countenance,
and Yeldham began to experience a strong inclination to kick him. He
restrained it, however, and kept his seat and his countenance, while
Mr. Thacker lighted a peculiarly fine cigar by the aid of a peculiarly
fine light-box which hung from his prodigious watch-chain.

"I allow all that," said Mr. Yeldham; "so, Mr. Thacker, fire away."


"You wonder what brings me here," said Thacker, settling himself into
his chair; "but you'll wonder a great deal more when I tell you. I
suppose you think I'm not particularly friendly to your friend
Streightley, eh?"

"I didn't think about it one way or the other," said the imperturbable
Yeldham.

"But you knew that I held the mortgages on most part of his
property--that place down in the country where the Freres are living,
and his town-house--you knew I held those, and that it was I who
mainly helped to sell him up?"

"Yes, I knew that; but as I also knew that gentlemen in your
profession were men of business, and not usually swayed by sentiment,
I did not see much to wonder at in the proceeding. I imagine any one
else would have done the same."

"You're complimentary to what you call my profession--you are, by
George! but that's neither here nor there. Suppose--I only say
suppose--that I've had little or nothing to do with any of
Streightley's money transactions; that though I've conducted them and
carried them out; though he has had my cheques for the cash, and I've
had his signature to the deeds--suppose all the time that I've not
been acting for myself, but merely as agent to a third party, who
wanted to lay their claws on R.S. What do you think of that? Ah! I
thought I'd make you look interested at last."

"This is true, Mr. Thacker? you're not romancing, or trying to trot me
out in any way, are you?"

"As true as that I'm sitting before you at this present moment."

"Then I must ask why, having kept up the delusion so long, you come
here now to disclose it? The motive requires a little elucidation, Mr.
Thacker. It's not spontaneous penitence, I suppose?"

"Of course I know you'll want to know the motive," replied Mr.
Thacker, daintily removing the cigar from his full red lips, and as
daintily replacing it, wholly unmoved by Yeldham's observation; "and
I'll tell you. Because I've been badly treated by my principal--ah,
you smile and shrug your shoulders! the usual 'discharged servant's'
tactics, you think. Only understand, I discharged myself."

"I must ask you to be more explicit, Mr. Thacker. I have no time for
circumlocution. In the first place, who is your principal?"

"That's coming home at once," said Mr. Thacker; "but I don't mind.
Miss Hester Gould that was--Mrs. Gordon Frere that is."

Even Charles Yeldham's placid equanimity--placid by nature, more
placid by training--gave way under his astonishment at this
revelation, and Thacker's quick ears heard him mutter "The devil!"
under his breath.

"Ah! I thought that would astonish you," he said triumphantly. "You're
not one of those that have much to learn, Mr. Yeldham; but there are
very few people of my acquaintance that I couldn't wake up one way or
another, I fancy. Yes, sir, that lady is my principal. Her husband
don't know or care much about business, I daresay, and so much the
better--a good fellow, I daresay; but soft, sir--soft."

"And so Mrs. Frere is your principal, Mr. Thacker," said Yeldham,
after a moment's pause, to recover his equanimity, "and was her
friend's principal creditor, eh? Well, well, that's strange enough.
And you and she don't put your horses together now? What can have made
you agree to differ?"

"You've a very insinuating manner, Mr. Yeldham. It's a pity you're not
in the courts instead of in chamber practice. You'd get it out of them
wonderfully there. But it's only due to myself to tell you that I see
your every move, and that I should not tumble to it in the least if I
had not previously made up my mind to have it all out."

Charles Yeldham smiled and bowed, and Mr. Thacker proceeded.

"You know these women don't understand business; and because it had
suited my book, for other than mere monetary reasons"--and here he
settled his cravat and looked conscious--"to do work for Miss Gould,
she began to look upon me as a mere clerk. She forgot, tins young
woman, that while she was a poor governess, glad enough to come up to
Hampstead and have tea with my sisters, I was one of the leading
financiers of the West-end. She forgot that in my bureau I had the
names of half the peerage on stamped paper; that I dined here, and
lunched there; and was hand-and-glove with some of the best men in
London. She forgot that--I see you grinning, Yeldham; and all this
time that I'm swaggering you're waiting to get at the story. Well,
I'll tell it you as shortly as I can. You're too well posted up in
these matters not to know that a tremendous smash like that in the
City two years ago could not have passed over without touching most of
us at the West-end. We've been all of us under the harrow, more or
less, ever since; and I found it hard work to pull up the losses of
that time. I just did that, however, and no more. But there are two or
three affairs in which I'm largely interested, which have been
excellent, and which will be better still, only just at this
particular moment they want a little bolstering. All I could do for
them I have done; but a lot of my money was still locked up, and I
knew that these things only wanted backing to be splendid investments.
So, a short time ago, I went to our friend Mrs. F., and told her all
about it; took her a sheet of paper full of figures--women always like
that; most of 'em can't understand 'em, but she can--and went
thoroughly into it with her; proved that it would be a good thing for
her, and urged it as a personal favour to myself. Damme, sir, she
refused to have any thing to do with it!"

Mr. Thacker brought down his fist upon the table with a bang. Then,
seeing Mr. Yeldham was not particularly moved, he went on. "I was not
to be beaten at the first go off; so, after she had spoken, I asked
her, if she would not go into the matter herself, whether she would
let me have the money--of course on unexceptionable security. She
refused point-blank; and when pressed to give her reasons, said
she did not want to go into any more speculations. I never saw a
woman so altered in my life. I don't know what the devil has come
over her--gone mad on her money, I suppose. I don't know what induced
me to say it,--I can generally manage to take these things quietly
enough,--but I was a little bit annoyed, I suppose; but, at all
events, I did say, 'This is not quite the manner in which you answered
me when I proposed to you to take that mortgage on Middlemeads, Mrs.
Frere.' The words were hardly out of my mouth when she turned round on
me as quick as lightning, and said, 'You think of nothing but the
interest on your money. I had another motive in that investment.'
'And that was--?' I asked. 'To serve my--my own purposes,' she
replied. 'I had a long-standing account to settle with Robert
Streightley, and that was the method I chose of doing it.' You would
not have liked the expression of my lady's face when she said this.
For the first time in her life she seemed to drop the mask. I saw her
eyes glowing, her lips livid; and then I felt certain of what I had
always suspected."

"And that was--?"

"That when she was down on her luck, and intimate with his people, she
had really intended to make Robert Streightley marry her; and that
when she found he did not care for her, and eventually married Miss
Guyon, she determined to be revenged on them both."

"Certainly, Mr. Thacker, your boast of being able to tell strange
things is fulfilled in the present instance. I had no idea of this."

"How should you have? But it's fact, nevertheless; take my word for
it. I suppose I let on by the expression of my face--for she is as
downy as a cat--that I had spotted her game; for she tried in every
possible way to wriggle out of what she had said. 'Middlemeads was
such a good investment.' 'Money wasn't so scarce then.' 'In these
times one ought to be particularly careful,' &c. &c. But I wasn't to
be put off with any such humbug as that; I just asked her plainly once
more, whether she would make the advances I suggested, on the security
I offered; and when she again decidedly refused, I took up my hat
and wished her good morning. And I took my oath, as I crossed her
hall-mat, that I'd go out of my way to do her a bad turn; and, as luck
would have it, now I'm able to do it without going out of my way."

"That is splendid! we're really coming to it!"

"You're still chaffing me, Mr. Yeldham. I might have told you that
interest in Streightley was the sole motive for my coming here to tell
you what I am going to tell you presently, whereas I don't disguise
for a minute that the hope of doing Mrs. Frere a bad turn entirely
governs me in the matter. I thought at first that what would annoy her
most would be to see Streightley's business doing well again. And,
mind you, that could be very easily managed. He came out of his
troubles with a high character, and money is getting plenty. There are
heaps of fellows who, from old respect and friendship, would come
forward to help to put Robert Streightley on his legs again. I'd do my
little share--from another motive. I thought of that plan; I've got it
all down in detail at home; it may be of use some day; but in the mean
time something else has turned up which looks infinitely more
promising, in the way of sticking a dagger into my lady's breast."

"Don't soar into metaphor again, Mr. Thacker, please. It delays your
point most confoundedly."

"That Streightley is ruined--partly by her act--is nuts to her, but
nothing like such nuts as that his wife has left him. She and that old
cat Lady What-do-you-call her--Marsh something--have talked that poor
girl over ever since,--regular old Tabby that Lady Thingammy,--and so
I changed my mind, and thought to myself, 'No; nothing would make Mrs.
Frere so wild as to see Mrs. Streightley restored to, and happy with,
her husband;' and I determined I'd do my best to carry that idea into
effect."

"My good fellow, you only determined what all of us have determined
and tried, but without the smallest possible result."

Mr. Thacker settled his elbows comfortably on the table, and replied
in a tone of easy confidence:

"Ye-es; that's exactly the difference between me and 'all of us.' But
listen to me, and I will show you I have come here on no fool's
errand. You know that, pending the great gathering together of all of
us at Jerusalem, our people are spread over the whole face of the
earth. Thus those among us who are well known, or who take a leading
part, have ramifications and correspondents in every large city in the
world. I myself am in this position; and it was my intention to have
set the whole of the machinery in motion, with the view of discovering
where Mrs. Streightley lay hidden, when, by a most fortunate accident,
I believe I have been spared the trouble, and have at once
accomplished my end."

"God grant it!" said Yeldham earnestly. "But how? how?"

"You must let me tell my story in my own way, and this part of it
involves rather a lengthened explanation. When I was a lad, my
bosom-friend was a boy of my own age named Hartmann. He was of German
origin; but his family had been for a long time settled in this
country, and he and I were sworn chums. I do not know why; I never
could make out why, except perhaps"--and here Mr. Thacker set his
teeth, while the colour mounted into his cheeks--"except perhaps that
we were both Jews; and the other boys stood aloof from us, and used to
chaff and call us names. D--n 'em! I've made some of 'em pay for that
fun since. There was nothing else in common between young Hartmann and
me. I was always pushing and energetic, looking to the main chance,
and doing all I could to make something out of every body; while he
was a dreamy, quiet kind of fellow, with no interest for any thing in
the world but music. He was a wonderful musician. By George! sometimes
even now, when I'm in a quiet mood, and get thinking of him, I fancy I
hear the sounds that he used to draw out of his violin. There he would
sit, scraping away hour after hour in play-time; so that when we left
school, which we did about the same time, he'd had great practice for
such a young chap, and was quite a proficient. His friends talked
about getting him into a house of business; but I knew how much that
would do. When you've got what your friends call artistic, and your
enemies Bohemian tendencies, you had better give way to 'em at once,
for they'll prevent your settling down to any thing else, and they're
sure to claim you in the end. Poor Nat Hartmann prayed so hard to be
allowed to follow his bent, that his friends never attempted to
struggle with him; and he went off, very soon after leaving school, to
some connections of his family at Vienna, where he was to finish his
musical education. He was not long absent before we had news of him.
He was in the highest spirits, making excellent progress. Then he
wrote that he had been noticed by the Emperor, and taken into the
Imperial private band, of which, in about three years, he became
leader. His name began to be known in musical circles, and his arrival
in England was announced for the approaching season. Then suddenly
there came a rumour that he was under a cloud--how or why we could
never ascertain. I wrote to him twice or thrice; but my letters were
unanswered, and I gave it up in despair.

"It must have been ten years after this, that, one night as I was
coming out of the Opera, I felt a gentle pull at my coat, and, turning
round, I saw Nat Hartmann. I knew him in an instant, though he was
utterly changed from my friend of years before. All his colour was
gone; his face was thin and pinched and haggard; his eyes sunk deep in
his head; his lips, which had been so full and ruddy, were now thin
and pallid. I stepped aside to satisfy myself that it was he; then I
made him get into my brougham, and drove him to my rooms. To my dying
day I shall never forget that man's appearance as he stood in his
thin, wretched clothes, under the lamplight; I shall never forget the
manner in which he rushed to the fireplace, knelt down on the rug, and
spread out his transparent hands to the blaze; I shall never forget
the manner in which he gulped down the wine which I handed to him, or
the ravenous way in which he tore at the food. When he had eaten and
drank, had warmed himself, and nature seemed revived within him, I
talked to him, and bit by bit managed to drag from him his story. He
was a long time telling it, and it was disconnected and jerky to a
degree, interspersed with loud railing at fortune, with sighs and
tears, and dolorous ejaculations, and I had a hard task to follow him;
but I gleaned from him this: His first downward step had been caused
by his having married a Christian girl, a singer at the Grand Opera in
Vienna, with whom he fell desperately in love. This had so exasperated
his relatives, that after trying, by every means in their power, to
prevent the marriage, when they found it had actually taken place,
they repudiated him, and did every thing possible to ruin him and his
wife. One of the principal Jewish bankers, who had originally
introduced Hartmann to the Imperial notice, now became his bitterest
enemy, used the influence which had formerly been exerted in the young
man's favour to debase him, and finally, under some pretext, got him
removed from his position as leader of the Emperor's private band.
From that time onward misfortune seemed to have seized him; his wife,
after a long illness, died in childbirth, leaving him with one little
girl. In his misery he took to drinking, and sunk from bad to worse.
One night, while drunk, he struck an officer who had mocked his
playing, and, to save his life, fled with his little child to England.
He had been in London a week, and had haunted the streets in the hope
of meeting me; and the meeting was only just in time, by George! for
he and his little child were nearly starved.

"This is a long story, but it's pretty nearly over now. Of course I
did what was possible to be done for this poor fellow; I gave him
money and clothes, and sent him to the doctor, and all that; but he
was very proud in all his misery, and would not accept what he called
'charity,' but insisted upon working for his living. Poor Nat, poor
fellow! the drink had ruined him, mind and body--all his crisp touch,
all his wonderful execution, gone, sir, gone never to return; but he
could still play the fiddle very decently, better than most, at any
rate; so I spoke to Wuff and some operatic people I knew, and got him
playing at concerts and theatres, and that sort of thing. But it
didn't last long; the drink had done its work, and he could not get on
without stimulants; when he got ill again, and broke up suddenly,
sending for me when he was on his death-bed, and imploring me to take
care of his little girl--his little Louise. I promised readily enough,
for she was a sweet little child, and I had always been fond of her;
and as soon as we had buried the poor fellow, I sent the girl over to
a school in Paris, intending to have her brought up as a governess;
but with a splendid violinist for her father, and a first-rate
opera-singer for her mother, it wasn't to be expected that she'd go in
for steady respectability, though she's as good a girl as ever
breathed; moreover she inherits her mother's voice, and I
believe--from what I hear from friends of mine over there, who know
all about this kind of thing--that she'll some day be a splendid
singer, and astonish the world. So, when all these representations
were made to me, I could not hold out any longer; and when Louise left
school, eighteen months ago, I got her admitted as a pupil at the
Conservatoire; and there she is working away, and I'm told is getting
on gloriously. Was getting on gloriously, I should say, up to within
the last month; but she has been very ill, poor child, and that has
pulled her down, and put her back; and--that's exactly what I'm coming
to. I daresay you've been horribly bored up to this point, Mr.
Yeldham; but I think when I've finished, you'll say it was worth your
listening to."

"Only you carry out the hopes you've raised, Mr. Thacker, and you may
depend upon it I won't complain," said Yeldham.

"Well, I had been wondering that I had not heard from this girl. She
must be sixteen or seventeen now, and she writes most capital letters.
I assure you, when I'm regularly dry and stoney with business, feel as
if I was stuccoed all over like, one of this girl's letters refreshes
me and cheers me up, and makes me remember there is something else in
the world to live for besides money-getting. I had been wondering I
had not heard from Louise, when this morning a letter came. In it she
told me that she had been very ill with a fever, which had completely
prostrated her, and that--but I may as well read this part out to
you."

Mr. Thacker then produced a letter from his pocket-book, and read the
following passage:

"You know, my dear guardian, notwithstanding my foreign extraction and
half-foreign bringing-up, the horror I have always had of French
doctors; and it is certain I should have been left to the mercy of
some of these dreadful creatures, if it had not been for Lucy Elliott,
who is a fellow-pupil of mine at the Conservatoire, and who knew Dr.
Hudson, who is our great English physician over here. She came and saw
me when I was first taken ill, and promised to send Dr. Hudson to me.
Within an hour he was by my bedside; and I can never express to any
one his kindness and attention. He asked me, without the smallest
impertinent curiosity, about myself; and when I told him that I was
all alone in Paris, and had no relations on whom I could depend, he
shook his head, and said it was absolutely necessary that I should
have some one to nurse me. I suggested Sister Agatha, who used to come
and see us so often at the _pension_, and who, I know, is a skilled
and practised nurse; but Dr. Hudson said he thought he could do better
than Sister Agatha for me, and that he would try to get an English
widow lady of his acquaintance to come and nurse me."--("Ah, ha! you
start, Yeldham, my friend! Hold on a bit, my boy; the scent's only
just warming yet; hold on a bit longer.")--"I went to sleep after Dr.
Hudson left me; and when I woke that evening I found a stranger
sitting by my side. A tall elegant young woman, very young still, but
looking as though she had seen a great deal of sorrow; for her
beautiful face--I can't explain to you how wonderfully beautiful it
is, so calm and classical and statuesque--is marked here and there
with deep lines, and there is a gravity about her which I am sure has
been brought on by mental suffering. She motioned me to keep silent,
and then told me, in O such a sweet voice, that I was to be quite
quiet, and that she had come to nurse me and attend upon me, and under
God's help get me well again. From that night until now--she has only
just gone away, and she will be back this evening, though I scarcely
require any assistance now--she has been my best and dearest friend,
my nurse, my consoler, my sister. In all that dreadful fever I had the
sense of her constant presence, knew the touch of her cool hands to my
hot head, recognised the cheering tone of her voice, when, in my pain
and misery, I could scarcely see her. To her and my kind Dr. Hudson I
owe my life; and as I know, my dear guardian, that you are good enough
to prize that life, I am sure you will be grateful to these good
friends. And here I come to a point where I require your advice and
assistance. I told Dr. Hudson that though I was only a struggling
pupil at the Conservatoire, I had connections in England who, I was
sure, would take care that his kindness to me was not forgotten. I
presumed so much, my dear guardian; for I felt certain that your
goodness of heart"--("That's nothing," said Mr. Thacker abruptly;
"hem! hem! here it is")--"but now I don't know what to say about
Madame Sidney. She is evidently not rich, though a thorough lady born
and bred; and I'm sure you will think with me that some recompense
should be made her, though what it is to be, and how it is to be
managed, I must leave to your better sense and knowledge of the world
to suggest. One thing I have discovered, and that is, that this is one
of the most trying, if not _the_ most trying, occasions on which
Madame Sidney has acted in the capacity of sick nurse; and that
discovery I made in this way. When I was first coming into
convalescence, when I first had a glimmering of what was passing round
me, I heard the doctor say to her, 'Well, I knew I was not mistaken;
the child owes her recovery, under Providence, to your care and
ceaseless attention. It's your greatest experience; it's the
opportunity which you have so much wished for, of showing that you
possessed the patience, the energy, and the long-suffering for which
you have so long fervently prayed; but all of which _I_ knew were your
attributes, when, under different circumstances, neither you nor I
thought you would ever be called upon to employ them, for they were
not wanted then for others, but they were wanted for yourself,--I mean
during that week's illness at Martigny.'"

"Stop!" cried Charley Yeldham, bringing his hand down heavily on the
table, and then rising and pacing hurriedly up and down the room;
"stop! that seems to me to be conclusive."

"Ah, ha!" cried Thacker, in exultation; "we're hot at last; we're
burning now, ain't we? When I came to that passage in Louise's letter,
the whole thing flashed across me. I recollected having heard
Streightley talk of his wife's illness at Martigny. I said to myself,
'Here's a go; the lost bird's found!' And in an instant I saw my
way--I confess it; I don't go in for any high moral dodges--I saw my
way to being revenged on Mrs. Gordon Frere, and to shooting a bolt
between the joints of her armour, and hitting her in the very place
where she was most vulnerable, and would least like to be hit." And
Mr. Thacker looked up in Yeldham's face, and rubbed his hands with the
greatest glee.

"By Jove, Thacker, I think there's very little doubt about the
co-identity of Mrs. Streightley and Madame Sidney," said Yeldham,
after a few minutes' deliberation. "It will be a wonderful thing if it
turns out so. I never thought that--" and Yeldham stopped.

"Never thought that I should be the means of furnishing you with such
pleasant information? Never thought that the Jew-discounter could ever
do a man a good turn without an ulterior view to his own advantage?
That's it, eh? Don't be bashful; speak out."

"Not exactly that," said Charley Yeldham. "I am in the habit of
speaking out, and so I'll say that I never thought--how could I?--that
the man whom we have all regarded as the active agent in Robert
Streightley's financial ruin would probably turn out to be the means
of securing his domestic happiness."

"I hope to God I may!" said Thacker earnestly. "Look here. I don't
pretend to be a particularly moral or a strait-laced kind of person;
and I acknowledge, as I have done from the first, that my promptings
in this matter have been to be revenged on Hester Gould--Mrs. Frere, I
mean. But if by any act of mine I could do a good turn to Streightley,
whom I believe to be an honourable man and a devilish clever fellow,
and to his wife, who is certainly the handsomest woman I know,
I--well, it would be a deuced pleasant thing to think over by and by,
and I wouldn't let money be any obstacle to my carrying it out."


"You said I didn't like you, and wasn't pleased to see you, when you
came in," said Yeldham, taking Thacker's hand and wringing it. "Put
that opinion to the test some day--you'll find yourself mistaken."

"That's the ticket," said Mr. Thacker. "And now good-bye, and God
speed you! I swear all the notions of revenge on Mrs. F. with which I
came here seem to have disappeared, and I can think of nothing now but
the chance of having done a good turn to Streightley. Ah, old
Shakespeare knew all about it: 'Hath not a Jew what's-his-names'--you
remember the quotation."

And Mr. Thacker waved his hand jauntily in adieu and left the
chambers.

As may be readily supposed, Yeldham lost no time in communicating to
Robert the main points of Mr. Thacker's valuable information. He kept
that gentleman's revelation of the virtuous motives which had animated
him strictly to himself; they did not bear upon Robert's interests,
and a knowledge of them could only tend to distress him.

Robert's agitation was extreme when he learned the unmistakably
reliable nature of the clue now placed so unexpectedly in their hands.
He remembered the English doctor who had attended Katharine in her
illness at Martigny perfectly, and he was desperately vexed and
impatient with himself that he had not remembered him sooner. Yeldham
did not try to stem the tide of his self-reproach, but he did not set
himself very seriously in opposition to Robert's determination, that
the evening of the day then passing should see him _en route_ for
Paris.

"Suppose you find her--and you must remember, Robert, that though most
probable, it is not certain--and she positively refuses to see you?
What are you to do? You cannot force yourself into her presence.
Suppose she learns your intention, and she is resolved to carry out
her purpose, she will fly away again, and then we shall be worse off
than before. Be guided by me, Robert; let me go in your stead. If I am
to succeed, the pleasure will not be lessened; if I am to fail, better
I than you. You can trust me, I know; and you know, in the best case,
I only precede you by a few hours; in the worst--well--we won't talk
of that beyond saying that you'll bear it better coming through me."

These arguments and his own secret despondency induced Robert to
consent. He was immeasurably grateful to Yeldham for undertaking the
task for him; but he said little. He was "not strong," as he was
accustomed to say, and easily upset; so Yeldham got up a great deal of
unnecessary bustle and discussion to cover his emotion; and, indeed,
on this and some other late occasions the lawyer displayed great
womanish tact and affectionate cunning. Yeldham could not go that same
evening, and the little delay tried Robert; but he strove to hide his
impatience; and his friend seconded the effort, and arranged to leave
London on the morrow.

A short note from Yeldham to Gordon Frere had informed the latter that
Charley was about to start for Paris. He had not time to enter into
written explanations, and he greatly desired to secure for Robert
during his absence the comfort of Gordon's cheerful companionship and
invariably hopeful counsel. So he had merely said, "We have got a
clue, a safe one this time, so far as finding the person we want goes,
and I am off to follow it up. Can you come up for a day or two? I want
to see you before I start."

Gordon Frere announced his intention of going to town for a few days,
immediately after he received this note; but gave no explanation of
its motive. He had dropped into habits of the sort of late; and he and
his wife were quite a fashionable couple, independent of each other in
all their arrangements, and models of courtesy.

Having reached the Temple, he found Yeldham in the midst of a vast
confusion of books and papers, and, to his great satisfaction, alone.
He had rather expected that Robert would be there to the last moment,
clinging to his emissary, and urging upon him superfluous entreaties
concerning speed and earnestness.

Yeldham explained to Gordon briefly and clearly what had happened,
merely suppressing Hester's share in Thacker's revelation. He had no
inclination to make mischief between Mrs. Frere and her husband,
though he could not avoid thinking what a sufficient kind of
punishment for her lay ready to his hand, had he chosen to use it. But
Yeldham disdained to do so; the woman would be punished by the
restoration of her innocent rival to her husband, if such a blessed
event were indeed to be; and if it were not--he could not waste a
thought on her meanness and her malice. He knew Gordon would not ask
for more information than he was disposed to give, and would not take
the trouble of looking beneath the surface of any thing. So he told
him as much as he thought proper; and Gordon, his first surprise and
curiosity abated, questioned him concerning his anticipations of
success.

"What are the chances, Charley?" he asked, earnestly,--"what do you
really think they are?"

"That they are terribly small. Small enough as to the finding of the
lady, and smaller still as to getting her to return. However, I do
think that in all respects it is better that Robert Streightley should
not go himself. His wife would be much more likely to hear of his
presence there than of mine."

"And do you think if she did hear of it she would avoid him?"

"She would go off somewhere else like a shot. She is just a
temperament difficult to deal with. Smarting under the sense of a
great wrong, she is capable of any thing.'"

"She was always strong-minded--I mean self-reliant, and that sort of
thing," said Frere; "but she had plenty of common-sense."

"So I should imagine from what I saw of her. Of course I would not
have dreamed of hinting such a thing before our poor friend; but the
difficulty of arranging the matter will arise not so much from Mrs.
Streightley's want of sense as from her want of heart. A woman who
could see her husband suffering from the anxieties which beset Robert
long before the crash came, and yet persist in a course of thoroughly
reckless extravagance, is not very impressionable, you may depend upon
it."

"Do you imagine that--"

"My dear Gordon, it's not a nice thing to say, but I imagine that,
though she did not know the terms of the bargain, she felt that she
had been purchased by her husband, and she was determined to have the
entire price. Now, you know, dealing with such a woman as that, where
questions of feeling are concerned, is difficult."

"It's but a poor look-out, I'm afraid," said Frere, rising from his
chair; "and I don't envy you your mission, Charley, though I don't
know any one who would do it so well; and if honesty and warm feeling
are to win the day, you'll be successful. So, God bless you! Mind you
let me know how you prosper. Better write to me at the club, I think,"
added Mr. Frere, with a sudden recollection that news of Katharine
Streightley was ever too welcome to the lady who was now his wife.

Yeldham shook hands warmly with him, grinning the while. None of these
little evidences of character were thrown away on the old bachelor,
who may have derived solace and instruction from them.

Robert was to accompany him to the station, and the hour of his
arrival drew near. Yeldham's packing was quickly done, and he had a
few minutes' leisure to think of the strangeness of the freak of
fortune which was sending _him_ in search of the only woman towards
whom his heart had ever been attracted, with the object of winning her
back to another. Perhaps he had censured her too harshly in talking to
Gordon Frere--to that other man, who had also loved her, after his
fashion. Then he heard Robert's step ascending the stairs, and sighed
as he thought that it was hard indeed to look at his suffering face,
and acquit Katharine of heartlessness and cruelty.




CHAPTER VIII.
THE PLEDGE REDEEMED.


In one of the old-fashioned hotels of the Rue de l'Universit, in that
quarter of Paris around which cling some of the saddest and noblest
memoirs of a history which is but a succession of acts in a great
pompous tragedy, Dr. Hudson had occupied a suite of apartments for
many years. There were other and younger English physicians in Paris
than he; but he had made, and kept, a solid reputation, and his
friends comprised a large number of the native denizens of Paris, and
all his own compatriots "of standing," as the Yankees say. His
_clientle_ was of wider range; for the English doctor was as well
known to the poor of Paris as to the rich, and he laboured among them
as assiduously.

On the self-same day which had witnessed Mr. Thacker's visit to
Middlemeads, and the failure of his application to Mrs. Gordon
Frere--on which he had expressed himself with so much resentment to
Charles Yeldham--and at the self-same hour at which the project of his
vengeance began to take shape in the brain of the angry Hebrew,--Dr.
Hudson was seated in his study, conversing earnestly with a lady, who
wore the mournful garb of widowhood in the English form. The frank,
thoughtful face of the physician was clouded, and his voice was low
and troubled, as he spoke to the lady.

"I don't like to let you go, Katharine. You have been doing too much.
This long attendance upon poor Louise has been too much for you
already; and now the care of an old blind woman--no, no; it ought not
to be."

"The care of your mother, my best friend!" returned the lady in a tone
of remonstrance; "does _that_ not make all the difference? Besides,
what does it matter? here, or in Brittany? The work has to be done,
and place does not make the smallest difference. You cannot bring the
old lady to Paris; and since Marion's death you have had no peace of
mind, no confidence about your mother. Let us look at this rationally.
Is there any one in whom you have such confidence as in me?"

"Certainly not, Katharine, though----"

"Though I do not return it. Well, in one sense I do not; but let us
not discuss that for the present. If you do not let me go to Morlaix,
to your mother, you must send some one in whom you have less
confidence. That's a 'logical sequence,' as you learned people say,
isn't it?--and I should also call it a very silly proceeding. Next,
you must provide me with work here; and I can assure you, you can give
me none I should like half so well. I am free too, and I don't know
that any other of your helpers are:--let me see the list."

She took a manuscript volume from the table, turned to a certain page,
and ran over a list of names.

"No; I thought not. All busy, and with serious cases,--'long jobs,' as
the 'regulars' call them. You see Fate and my self-will are against
you--and I must go; so that's settled. And now, Mr. Doctor, let me
make my report."

"This was your last visit to Louise, I think?" he asked absently.

"My last regular visit. She is quite well now; but I shall never lose
sight of her, I hope. She is a good girl and a grateful; and so long
as she has this illness, and I have Martigny to talk about and the
same rescuer to praise--though she little knows how small an item in
the account between him and me Martigny is--we are not likely to tire
of each other's company. Where are your wits wandering to? you are not
listening to a word I am saying to you."

He turned his face fully towards her, and the serious expression it
bore increased. He took an ivory paper-knife from off his desk, and
beat it softly upon his open palm as he spoke.

"My wits are wandering to speculations about you, my dear. How long
are you going to lead this life? and when am I to know the meaning of
it all? It is not fit for you, Katharine; you must rest."

"No, no," she said nervously; "you know the only thing I cannot do
when you bid me, is rest. Besides, I am going to be very quiet, you
know, down in Brittany----"

"That will not be for long, if even I let you go. My poor old mother's
life is nearly ended; and then----"

"And then--for I mean to go; it is quite settled---are there no more
duties for me? are the poor and the sick to cease out of the land?"

"No, it is not that; I am thinking of you seriously, Katharine, and
wondering whether I am doing right by you. I had no doubt, when you
came to me, and claimed the fulfilment of the promise I made to you at
Martigny--there was such desperation, such utter self-abandonment
about you--that I, who knew the symptoms of despair, and their
deadliness, could not hesitate about what was to be done. But now,
Katharine, now, has not time made any difference?--it has made a great
alteration in you, my dear--a very great and blessed change; not time
alone, I know, but life and suffering and self-knowledge, and a higher
wisdom still--has it not changed circumstances too? You told me your
return to your husband's home was an impossibility then; and I knew, I
felt it was so. You never told me why; you never placed the secret
of his sin, whatever it may have been, in my possession. Now I ask
you--the matter has been pressing long upon my mind, and is daily
growing heavier--is the same impossibility in force still?"

Katharine did not make any answer, but she looked at him, pale and
tearful. Then he continued:

"Think of your youth, Katharine. Your life is almost all before you;
and you have no friend but me. Supposing I were to die, my dear, how
would it be with you then? For though you are not so helpless and so
ignorant of the world's ways as when you came to me that winter's
night, and told me I must hide you, and that without a question, and I
did it--you are as little fitted as any woman I know for the
loneliness of a friendless life. Is this offence quite past
forgiveness? is there no way of reconciliation?"

"None, none," she murmured. "O, do not talk to me of the past."

"Katharine," he said, with deeper solemnity still, "think, be very
sure, before you answer. Remember that nothing but the extremest
injury can justify the course you are pursuing. Your name is false,
your position is false, your very dress"--he stretched out his hand
and touched it--"is a lie!"

"My widowhood at least is real," she said in an abrupt and bitter
tone.

"My poor child, I don't doubt that. I know it is; but the evils dealt
by man's hand are often of God's sending. Are you resisting God, and
not man only? I am talking to you in the dark about many things, but
there are some broad truths applicable to all circumstances. One of
them is, that no self-imposed duties can stand in the place of those
which God has appointed. When I watch--and I watch it closely--your
exemplary life of usefulness, your self-denial, your promptitude in
doing good--and see that you are not at peace in it, I cannot but
think that you are doing this--that you are trying to do your own
will, and not God's will; and that you are reaping the inevitable
consequences."

Her head was bowed now, and she was crying.

"I don't know why I have felt forced to say all this to you to-day,
Katharine. Something has forced me to say it, certainly. Think of it,
my dear; and if there be any possible way to reconciliation with your
home and your former life, turn your steps towards it."

"Are you weary of the charge of me? are you tired of the thankless
task?"

He smiled, very slowly and tenderly; then rose; and, arranging some
papers on his desk, said:

"Do you think to turn away my meaning by such a silly subterfuge? I am
going out now: think of what I have said, Katharine; and, remember, if
I have hurt you, it is because of my ignorance. I don't reproach you
that you have kept me in it; but you must not wonder if it sometimes
tells against yourself. Be sure of this, Katharine, there is no life
so acceptable as that in which we carry _our own_ burdens, without
selecting them; and no spirit so safe as that which takes trials as
they are sent, not sought for--kissing the rod."

He was leaving the room, when she rose impetuously and went up to him.
She caught his arm, and pressed it to her closely, as she said:

"Don't say more to me now; I can't bear it. I wonder why you have
spoken like this again--it is so long since you did so before. Let me
go to your mother, and think it all out there--all you know and all
you don't know; and when I come back I will tell you every thing."

"My dear, you mistake me. I don't want to know; it is from no feeling
of that kind I speak;--it is for your own sake, and because of the
treacheries and changes of life----"

"Yes, yes; I know. When had you any but good motives, or did any but
good deeds? Just give me this little time, and keep your vow to me,
that you will never answer a question about me, or give any human
being a clue to finding me; and when I come back you shall know all,
and judge for me."

"Agreed," said Dr. Hudson; "I will keep my promise, and you will keep
yours."

A day or two later Katharine Streightley left Paris.


"I give you my word of honour--I will take the most solemn and sacred
oath you can dictate to me, that nothing you can tell me, of what I
ask you, can harm the lady. I am here on behalf of her husband."

"Her husband!" said Louise Hartmann, with a disdainful smile; "now I
know you are deceiving me. She is a widow--her husband is dead."

"Indeed--indeed he is not, my dear young lady; for God's sake listen
to me! Her husband is alive, and he loves her better than his life.
Indeed he is dying, I truly believe, because he cannot find or hear of
her. A quarrel--a misunderstanding parted them, and he has sought her
vainly ever since. Just think of the dreadful weary time, and have
pity on this poor man."

Charley Yeldham's friends would have been only less astonished than
himself had they heard him thus eloquently pleading the cause of
Robert to the inflexible little German girl, who stood before him, the
very image of immovable fidelity.

"See! look at her portrait again; you have acknowledged that you know
it, and that it is Madame Sidney's likeness. Well, I tell you her
husband has worn it on his breast night and day for nearly three
years, and would not have parted with it for a moment for any less
object than enabling me to trace her by it. He asks nothing but to
know where she is--nothing but the means of communicating with her.
Surely you will tell him that much?"

"Have you asked Dr. Hudson? he knows her better than I," was the
cautious questioning reply of the German girl.

"Yes," said Yeldham incautiously; "I went to his house at once, and I
waited a long time to see him, but all in vain. He knew Madame Sidney,
but he would tell me nothing about her--not even whether she was now
in Paris, or ever in the habit of residing in Paris."

"And yet Dr. Hudson is her best friend, and knows more about her than
any one in the world."

"Yes, yes; we heard that: then so much was right at least."

Louise Hartmann deliberately sat down, tucked her feet comfortably
under her chair, and folded her hands in her lap. Yeldham waited,
breathlessly anxious for her to speak. She kept him waiting for some
time; but at length she said, slowly and emphatically:

"Soh! you fine English gentleman, who give your word of honour and
your sacred and solemn oath, you come to a poor girl like me, and you
try to make me tell you about Madame Sidney--who nursed me, and was
more good to me than ever any one in the world was before--what the
good doctor, her own friend, refuses to tell you. You may go away,
sir, back to England; I will tell you nothing--no, not one single
word. If this lady's husband is alive, he has done something that
makes her think of him as dead, and she knows best. He has made her
miserable; for she is not happy, I know that--I often saw that; and he
shall never render her miserable again through help of mine."

Yeldham was utterly confounded by the girl's calm speech, and the
resolution which showed itself in her face and sounded in her voice.
He stood bewildered and silent for several minutes. At length Louise
spoke again:

"Please to go away, sir; you have nothing to hear from me, and nothing
to say to me more."

He caught joyfully at the anxiety she expressed to get rid of him. Was
it not a proof that Katharine was in Paris still--was near; that she
was then expecting or fearing her coming? He made another appeal.

"Listen to me, my dear young lady," he said. "No one can honour your
fidelity to your friend, or respect you for keeping your word so
firmly, more than I do; but I swear to you you are acting under a
mistake,--a most fatal and lamentable mistake. At all events, I, who
am not this lady's husband, cannot injure her--cannot force her to do
any thing against her will. Let me see her. I swear to you, if you
will, that if she bids me be silent, I will not utter a word; and I
will neither follow her nor have her followed. I ask you this, because
if you will only do it, you shall see for yourself the error there is
in all this, and you will probably be the means of richly rewarding
your friend for all she has done for you, by restoring her confidence
in her husband."

Louise had looked at Charles Yeldham with earnest intentness all the
time he was speaking, and the incredulous scorn which had possessed
her wholly during the earlier part of their interview began to give
way. She dropped her eyes, put her hand to her brow, and thought
intently.

"I dare not believe you," said she at last; "I dare not listen
longer to you, lest I might be persuaded to do Madame Sidney a wrong.
So now you must go away. You had better; if you stay here a month, I
will tell you no more than this--and it cannot harm her, if her
husband, and you too--and perhaps you are her husband--bah, how can I
tell?--were ever so wicked and cruel. She is not in Paris. Now go; you
shall not got another answer out of me."

She rose, and stepped towards the door, as though about to open it for
his departure.

"Thanks," he exclaimed, "a thousand thanks, even for that information;
and, as you say, it could not harm her, if we, who are her devoted
servants, desired to do so. Yes," for she had her hand on the latch of
the door, "I will leave you immediately; only let me say a few words
more."

Louise frowned. "I will give you no answer," she said sullenly.

"O yes, I think you will, when I have spoken them. If Madame Sidney
ever comes back to Paris--I don't ask whether you expect her-- (here
he stole a quick glance at her, but she was prepared to meet and
conquer it--there was not the smallest change in her face, from its
expression of sullen waiting)--but if she comes back, and comes to see
you, tell her about my visit; tell her I came from her husband--here
is my card. There can be no harm in telling her, you know, and then
it will depend on herself--not on you, or on me, but on herself
only--whether she will let any one who loves her see her again in this
world. You understand me in this, do you not, mademoiselle? You see
that I am speaking now what must be the truth, and cannot by
possibility deceive any one."

Louise appeared to be moved by this direct appeal to her
understanding. She took up the card, which he had laid on the table,
and read the name aloud.

"Mr. Yeldham! Yes; I understand that if I tell her you have been here,
she will be free to choose whether you shall come again; and unless
she or I tell you, you can never know whether she comes again. So it
will be her own affair, and I cannot be betrayed into injuring her.
Yes,"--she looked up suddenly at him,--"I will tell her if she comes
here ever again."

"Thank God!" exclaimed Yeldham in a tone of infinite relief; "then all
will be right, and it is only waiting a little longer; for I am sure
she will come back at some time. God bless you for that promise! You
do not know all the good you may do, all the ill you may prevent, by
keeping it."

"I always keep my promises," said Louise coldly, rather offended by
his thanks.

"Yes, yes, I know that; but O, if I could but make you understand!
_She_ will make you understand, some day, all I could never explain. A
word more, and I leave you. When you tell her that I was here, and the
story I have told you of my business and my hopes--_she_ will believe
it, though it is quite natural and right that _you_ should hesitate to
do so--tell her this, that I entreated you to write to me and let me
know that she had returned to Paris. You will do this too, will you
not? You see it is only a part of what you have already promised: it
is not a new thing. I cannot know that she has returned, unless she
permits you to tell me, and so only can harm her. You see I take your
own view, with her own consent."

"I see that," said Louise; "it follows from the first. Yes, if she
gives me leave, I will write to you."

He contented himself with a more moderate expression of gratitude than
was natural to him under the circumstances; and then, having written
his address in full, and very distinctly, on the card Louise had
consented to keep, he took his leave.

He had been defeated in the greater purpose, but he had achieved a
less one, whose gain would have seemed to the friends priceless good
fortune a little while ago, but which was robbed of its fail
proportions by the larger hope unfulfilled.

Yeldham communicated to Robert the result of his expedition by letter
the same evening, and the following day he returned to London.

"I am thankful, Charley, for the light I have been granted. It is dawn
after dark, and now I will wait and hope for the day," said Robert;
and Yeldham rejoiced to see his fortitude.

So October passed, and November; and December came, and it was only
twilight still.




CHAPTER IX.
SUCCESS.


The wintry rays of the sun were contending unsuccessfully with the
strong and cheerful blaze of a bright fire in Charles Yeldham's outer
room one morning in December, when that hard-working gentleman emerged
from his bedroom at an unusually late hour, and glanced with an
expression of satisfaction at the fire, the preparations for
breakfast, and the heap of letters and other papers which occupied one
end of the small table. Charles Yeldham was looking troubled on this
particular day, but not as he usually was, full of the care and
preoccupation of his work; his generally concentrated gaze was
abstracted; and any one familiar with his expression would have
recognised that the subject of his thoughts was not present to his
bodily eyes. He seated himself and began to open his letters, having
first poured out his tea. They were numerous and various: one from his
father, one from his sister, a note from Frere, a number of business
letters, and one from Paris. His face changed as he took up this one,
changed still more as he read:


"Rue d'Alger, No. --, 9th Dec. 186-.

"Sir,--I fulfil my promise, relying on yours, and believing all you
told me of your intentions for the dear lady's good. She is dear and
good. She has come back to Paris, and I have seen her.

"I am, sir, your servant,

"Louise Hartmann."


Yeldham's first impulse was to jump up from his untasted breakfast,
take his hat and coat, and rush off to find Robert Streightley; but he
resisted the impulse, and set himself to consider what would be the
best thing to do. Robert had been ailing lately; Yeldham had noticed
his altered looks with pain, and he dreaded telling him news except
such as was undeniably and completely good. This could not be said to
be so. There was no doubt now that the way was opened to communication
with Katharine; but much more than communication was involved. So long
a time had elapsed, so obstinately had her determination been adhered
to, so intense and keen had been her husband's suffering--suffering
which none but Yeldham had divined, under Robert's quiet and reticent
bearing--that the matter had assumed to Yeldham's mind an aspect of
even additional importance. Should he act on the information contained
in this note at once, and only tell Robert when he should have seen
Katharine and ascertained the state of her feelings, or should he
communicate with Robert immediately, and allow him to proceed at once
to Paris in search of his wife? In favour of the latter method of
proceeding there was the consideration that the mutual position of the
estranged pair was one of the utmost pain, and requiring the most
delicate handling; and that undoubtedly the husband and wife could
alone discuss the matters which divided them with propriety and
authority. There was also the consideration of Katharine's excessive
pride, which would lead her instinctively and vehemently to resent the
interference of a third person. Both these were gravely pondered by
Charles Yeldham. In favour of the former method of proceeding were,
the comparative composure and hopelessness with which Robert had begun
to regard his fate since Yeldham's unsuccessful expedition, the
patience with which he acceded to Yeldham's advice that they should
not unnecessarily discuss the matter of their most constant thoughts,
and the consequent risk, in case all overtures should prove
unavailing, of exciting Robert to dangerous agitation and increased
grief. Yeldham understood Streightley better than Streightley
understood himself; and when he would say, as he constantly did, that
he would ask nothing more than to know where his wife was, to be sure
that she was more content than he without her, that he had no hope of
ever seeing her more, Yeldham knew that he entirely believed what he
said, but that he deceived himself; and that with the first
intelligence of Katharine new feelings would arise, whose
disappointment would be terrible. Added to this, he knew that Robert
could not plead his own cause as he, Charles Yeldham, would plead it
for him; if she should refuse to see him, Robert, conscience-stricken,
would not persevere. Thus the subject had two sides, and he had to
regard first the one, and then the other, with great care and
deliberation. He did so, and finally decided, all parts of the
question balanced, that he would tell Robert he had received the
letter for which they had looked so long in vain, and leave it to him
to decide on what should be done. "If I went, and failed, he must know
it sooner or later," was the result of Yeldham's cogitations; "so he
may as well know about this at once."

So Charles Yeldham wrote a note to Robert, requesting him to call on
him late in the afternoon, when he should be comparatively at leisure,
and proposing that they should dine together in the City afterwards.
Then he dismissed the matter from his mind, as far as possible, and
went to his "treadmill."

There was nothing unusual in the tone of Yeldham's note--nothing to
excite Robert's hopes or fears. He had had several such notes from the
writer; and yet he was agitated while he read it, and nervous when he
laid it down. He was always nervous now, he said to himself, as he
rebuked his own tremors. How unmanly, how weak, how foolish he was
becoming--less and less like a man whom she ever could love, he would
think, with a degree of despondency which might have proved to him,
had he considered his own case in a philosophical light, how much hope
had really lurked at the bottom of his abnegation. This nervousness
increased as the hour drew near for his interview with Yeldham; and at
six o'clock, when the streets were bright with gaslight, and the crisp
cold of a clear wintry night had set in, Robert Streightley's hand
trembled as he knocked at the outer door of his friend's chambers, and
his face was pale. Yeldham observed him closely, and decided on
deferring his purposed communication until a later hour. Accordingly
he easily gave a plausible turn to his summons of Streightley; the two
dined together; and Roberts spirits rose, as they invariably did,
under the influence of his old friend's genial temperament.

Yeldham knew that Robert would not deliberately break through the
established rule of silence on the subject of Katharine, but that he
might be easily led into doing so; and he accordingly gave the
conversation a turn which brought it to bear upon the past, and then
seized the opportunity. Robert took the communication which his friend
made to him with more calmness than Yeldham had anticipated, but he
was not in the least sanguine.

"The question now is, Robert, whether you or I shall go to find her
and bring her back," said Yeldham in the most cheerful tone he could
command.

Robert kept silence.

"I expected you to have been quite elated," said his friend in almost
a tone of reproach. "You take it very quietly. At all events you must
be thankful to know that we shall find out where she is, and all about
her circumstances."

"I am thankful, God knows," said Robert, "as well as He, and He only,
knows what I have suffered, in my ignorance, in the innumerable fears
that have beset me, and," he said with a heavy sigh, "that may all be
realised yet. I am thankful; but this intelligence, and my gratitude
for it, do not bring me nearer to _her_. No, no, Charley, I shall
never see her face again--never see her face again!" he repeated
drearily; and leaning his elbows on the table, he laid his face on the
open palms of his hands.

Yeldham looked uneasily at him. He knew that he was quoting
Katharine's own words.

"Robert," he said impressively, "you must not despair, you must not
give way in this fashion. You will see her face again, please God; you
will see it as beautiful as ever, and with no cloud between you and
it. I feel convinced of this, my dear fellow; and you must feel
convinced of it too, if you will listen to your reason and not to your
self-reproach. Just think what time does in all sorts of cases, and
remember how much time has gone over since your wife left you."

"_I_ think of it, Charley? Do you think I have not felt the passage of
every hour of it?"

"I know you have," said Yeldham; "but I want you to think of it in
another sense--its own sense. It effaces every thing--kingdoms and
flies, men's strength and women's beauty, the deepest loves, the
bitterest hatreds, the cruellest injuries, the firmest resolves.
Believe me, Katharine has outlived her anger, and has been held to
her purpose by pride and circumstances. She must always remain your
wife--she must always remember that she is so; and, depend upon it,
she will not be sorry to return to a quiet home with you, to whom she
is still so dear. Three years have had their effect upon her, be sure
of it. Rely upon it, she thinks more of her duty and less of her
resentment now."

"Her duty!" said Robert, looking up from the palms of his hands with
hollow, burning eyes; "her duty! O Charley, how can you or I talk of
her duty _to me?_"

"I certainly can," returned Yeldham. "I don't wish to go back over the
past, but nothing can absolve her from that duty; and I look to the
faults for which each has to forgive the other as the strongest bond
between you for the future."

Robert sighed, but made no reply. Yeldham continued: "And now, Robert,
you will go to her at once, of course?"

"I--I don't know, Charley," returned Robert, in a low and broken
voice; "I don't know. I am--I am almost afraid."

"Afraid, Robert, of what? That she will not see you? Well, that risk
must be run; but I feel so confident that there is no danger of her
refusing to do so, that I can hardly excuse your hesitation. I know I
cannot inspire you with the confidence I feel, but at least act as if
you felt it; and remember that the influence of time has been all in
your favour. She has had leisure to forgive, if not to forget, one
injury, and to remember and miss the innumerable proofs of love you
gave her. You will start to-morrow, will you not?" Yeldham put the
question in a business-like tone, which dismissed discussion, and
obliged Robert to rouse himself from thought to action.

"Yes, yes; since you think I ought, I will go to-morrow. Can you come
with me, Charley?"

"I don't know; if you wish it very much, I will try. Send round in the
morning, and I will let you know."

These were almost the last words spoken between the friends before
they parted, Robert going his way to Brixton, and Yeldham returning to
his chambers, to pass several hours of the night in so arranging his
work as to admit of a brief absence from London.

The morrow brought Robert's messenger, but not the expected question.
On the contrary, Robert sent word to Yeldham that he wished to see
him, feeling too ill to "keep his appointment."

The first glance which Charles Yeldham gave at his friend showed him
that he must revert to the second alternative which had presented
itself to his mind. Old Alice had admitted him, and had told him
"Master Robert" was bad again with "them spazims;" and the state of
prostration in which Robert lay on a large sofa, drawn as near the
dining-room fire as its size would admit, fully bore out her
assertion. Mrs. Streightley was not at home, her daughter requiring
her services just then; and the interview between the friends was
quite uninterrupted.

Robert's complete inability to undertake a journey to Paris being
admitted, his nervous impatience for Yeldham's departure in his stead
became uncontrollable. Yeldham did not attempt to contest it, but
assured him that the following day should see him at Paris, and, if by
any effort or exertion the thing were possible, in Katharine's
presence.

"And I'll bring her back to you, my dear fellow; I'll bring her back
to you--rest assured I will."

"No, no, never; I can't believe it; nevertheless go and tell her all.
See her; let me see a face that has looked on hers, though I am to see
hers no more. Tell her--tell her----"

"Yes, yes," said Yeldham; "I know, Robert, I know; have trust in me;
be assured I will tell her all you wish--every thing--and I will bring
her with me--something tells me so--and you know I am not sentimental,
or presentimental either. Only keep quiet, and get well; it won't do
to frighten her with such a face as that, you know," said Yeldham,
with a dreary attempt at cheerfulness.

"I'll take care," returned Robert; "but, Charley, you won't deceive
me, will you? You'll tell me every word she says, no matter how
severe, no matter how hopeless. You'll tell me every word and, as far
as you can, every look. I shall be able to see them by the aid of
_this_;" and he touched his breast-pocket, in which Yeldham knew he
always carried the miniature by whose aid Katharine had been
identified. "And, Charley, you'll tell her I never, never blamed her:
you'll tell her I suffered; but I know I deserved it all." His eyes
were shining now with a feverish light, and Yeldham hastened to
terminate their interview. He bent over Robert, as he lay upon the
sofa, and took his hand.

"Be content, Robert," he said; "I have never failed you yet, and I
will not fail you now. All that I know, and all that I can guess you
wish to have said to your wife, I will say to her; and as surely as I
am talking to you now I will bring her home to you,--I never felt more
certain of any thing. Good-bye, my dear fellow; you have nothing to do
but trust me, keep quiet, and get well."

"Yes, I will keep very quiet--as quiet as I can. God bless you!
Good-bye."

They wrung each other's hands, and Yeldham went away, speaking gravely
to Alice in the hall, and reflecting with a queer sense of wonder,
when he gained the road, upon the oddity of the fate that made him a
messenger, in this supreme crisis, to Katharine Streightley, the only
woman who had ever made him think regretfully of his loneliness, the
only woman who had ever realised his early dreams of love and beauty.

Robert had kept his face towards the door until the sound told him
Yeldham had shut the little garden-gate, and was gone; then he turned
his head away, buried his face in the sofa-cushion, and closed his
eyes. Thus old Alice found him, when she came to see if he required
any thing, an hour later; and the old woman said downstairs that she
wished Master Robert would let her send for the doctor, for he was
looking "desperate white and weary, to be sure."


When Charles Yeldham reached Paris in the evening after his interview
with Robert, he found the fair city looking beautiful, under the
combined influence of clear starlight, sharp frost, and the glow of
the best-arranged gaslight in Europe. The scene, striking as it
always must be, made but little impression upon him, as he drove from
the railway-station to his hotel, revolving in his mind all the
circumstances of the painful and difficult business which lay before
him, and haunted by the remembrance of Robert's white, grieved face.
He was tired, depressed, and more doubtful of the success of his
undertaking than when he had spoken so confidently to Robert; but he
tried to rouse himself, to shake off the foreboding which beset him,
and to arrange some definite plan for the interview with Katharine,
which he felt sure would be accorded him. It was no part of his
intention to take her by surprise. He knew that she would resent such
a _ruse_ as an unpardonable liberty, and did not doubt that it would
defeat its own purpose, and lead to her immediate departure from
Paris. He made his calculations in this way: "When she receives my
request for an interview, she will conclude that no further effort at
concealment will avail; she will remember that no coercion of her is
possible; and she will consider it more in accordance with her own
dignity to grant me the interview--a concession winch does not commit
her to any thing. After all, too, she is a woman; and she _must_ want
to know something about the world she has turned her back on; she
_must_, after all this time." So Charles Yeldham felt no apprehension
about the first portion of his task, though there was a strange
flutter of various emotions in the feelings with which he anticipated
finding himself in Katharine's presence.

He wrote briefly to Robert, announcing his arrival, and went early to
rest. At noon on the following day he presented himself to the
unrecognising stare of the _concierge_ at No.-- Rue d'Alger, and
having named Mademoiselle Hartmann, passed up the wearisome flight of
stairs leading _au quatrime_. He was admitted by the girl herself,
and gladly perceived that she was looking much improved in health. The
appearance of the neat little apartment also bore witness to
improvement of another kind. Modest as before, it was more
comfortable, and was now a pleasant snug nest for this lonely bird.

The girl had believed in Yeldham from the first, and was unaffectedly
glad to see him. She had expected him, she told him candidly; and she
had told the dear lady all about his previous visit.

"You did well," said Yeldham. "I would not have you deceive your good
friend in any thing."

"I told her I had promised to write to you when she should return to
Paris, but I would not do so if she forbade me; and I asked her what I
should do. Then she asked me many questions about you, and I told her
all she asked; and she told me I might write to you. I said I know you
would come when you should receive my letter; and she said she thought
so too, and if you did come, I was to give you this."

She unlocked a drawer in a little table which stood beneath the
window, and handed a folded slip of paper to Mr. Yeldham. It contained
an address in the Rue du Bac, and these words:

"_Mrs. Streightley will see Mr. Yeldham. He must inquire for Madame
Sidney_."

"When did she give you this?" he asked.

"I have told monsieur," replied the girl, smiling; "on the day I wrote
to you--two days ago."

"And you have not seen her since?"

No, she had not seen the dear lady since; and she trusted monsieur
would see her, and give her back all her happiness. She was paler and
sadder now than before she went to Brittany; and she was too good, had
too much heart, too great compassion for all who suffered, to be left
to any sadness. All the world ought to be good to her, who was good to
all the world.


Half an hour later Charles Yeldham had realised a hope, a dream which
had mocked and eluded him for long: he was in Katharine Streightley's
presence. Striving hard and ineffectually when before the eyes of the
woman towards whom he had felt the strongest emotion which life had
ever Drought him for the composure which had seemed so easy at a
distance, filled with yearning pity for the man who would have given
so much to stand where he was standing, and to see what he was looking
upon, Charles Yeldham was quite silent for some minutes. He had been
ushered into a room in which Katharine was sitting, and she had risen
on his entrance, and stood facing him, her hand resting on the back of
her chair--resting there calmly, not grasping the chair, with no
nervous flutter in the fingers, no need for support implied in the
action. With his first glance at her, every impression, every memory
he held of her, flashed freshly through Yeldham's mind,--every
attitude in which he had seen her, every dress she had worn, every
scene in which they had met. The tone of her musical girlish voice
sounded in the air around him, while yet this woman he looked upon had
not spoken; the graceful form flitted about a flower-decked garden and
moved through stately rooms, while yet this woman stood motionless
before him. Changed! Yes, she was changed; in the first glance,
comprehending all the past, perceiving all the present, he saw the
change,--saw that whereas Katharine when he had seen her last looked
younger than her years, the woman he now saw looked older than those
which had been added. The face was pale, more waxen in its delicate
clearness, and there was a sterner line about the beautiful lips. The
radiant eyes were radiant still, but their light was steady and
serious, and the glorious lustre of youth had passed from the face for
ever. What had replaced it, Yeldham thought, that made her so much
more beautiful, that lent her a charm, a majestic influence,
insurmountable and immortal? He knew afterwards that that which had
wrought the change was the purification, the strengthening influence
of suffering, the teaching of life and experience, the education of
the spirit, which first bruises and then heals, which first chastens
even to faintness, almost to despair, and then leads to peace and
shelters from self-deception. After his first glance at her, he did
not fear for Robert; he felt that he should fulfil the promise which
had sounded so rashly confident. Pardon, and the magnanimity of a
large heart, looked out of Katharine's beautiful eyes as she bowed her
head to her visitor, and said in a low tone, as she indicated a seat
to him and resumed her own:

"You are my husband's friend, Mr. Yeldham; and you come to me from
him, I think?"

Yeldham's many and troubled speculations had never strayed into the
direction of such a reception as this; and the delight with which he
heard her words was equalled by his astonishment.

"You are right, Mrs. Streightley," he answered; "I do come from your
husband; from one who, let me assure you, has never for one hour
ceased to repent the sin which drove you away from him as bitterly as
he has mourned your loss."

She became exceedingly pale, and spoke the next words with some
difficulty.

"Is it true, Mr. Yeldham, that my husband has suffered heavy
losses--that he is no longer a rich man?"

"It is quite true," he replied; "and it is part of my business here to
tell you a fact which I have always believed would have pleaded with
you, had you known it. Robert had sinned grievously against you; but I
am sure, had you known that when you left him ruin was hanging over
his head, you would have regarded that as sufficient punishment. In
itself it has been heavy, but to him as much lighter than that which
you have inflicted as his love for you is greater than his care for
his wealth. May I ask when and how you learned this, Mrs.
Streightley?"

"Very lately--only a few days ago. I accidentally met a Mr.
Stallbrass, a person whom I had no recollection of ever having seen,
and whose name I had certainly never heard. This gentleman, it
seems, had seen me--once--" here she hesitated, and turned paler
still,--"and he recognised me. He told Dr. Hudson that he had done so,
but gave his word of honour to my kind friend that he would never
mention the circumstance. He told him all he knew concerning my
husband's affairs, being under the impression that ours was a
separation by mutual consent, and that I was in possession of the
facts."

Katharine paused, and a fresh strong hope sprang up in Yeldham's
heart; a hope in which he saw the realisation of happiness for Robert
far beyond any thing he had dared to dream of for him. With its fresh
impulse in his voice, he said eagerly:

"And tell me, I entreat you, what effect had this disclosure upon
you?"

"Tell me first, Mr. Yeldham, what message do you bring me from my
husband? Yet--no," and she stretched her hand towards him to stay his
eager answer; "not so, I owe him much: I owe him reparation for pride
and passion, for blind resentment, for selfishness and ungovernable
self-will, and I will make it. Before I hear my husband's message, let
me tell you mine to him."

A small ivory box stood near her on a table; she drew it towards her,
and took from it a sealed letter, which she held in her hand while she
spoke. Yeldham listened to her with a painful intensity of attention,
and marked with wonder the varying beauty of her sensitive face.

"It is written here, in this letter, which I should have sent to him
three days ago, but that a few hours after I had written it I learned
how you had sought me out, and that you would come to seek me again.
Then I resolved to wait; for I knew whatever communication my husband
had charged you with would form the answer to my letter, and it would
be better to receive it thus."

"And the letter--what is it?" asked Yeldham, with all the agonising
anxiety and entreaty which he felt in his voice. Katharine laid one
hand heavily upon her breast, and breathed deeply.

"It tells him that I ask his forgiveness, as I have long granted him
mine; it is to ask his permission to return, and do my duty to him in
the future, as I never did it, or understood it, in the past. Mr.
Yeldham, what is my husband's message to me?"

He rose, came towards her, caught her hands in his, and said hoarsely,
while unheeded tears ran down his face:

"His message to you is the message of a dying man to one who holds his
life in her gift--of one who loves you with an immortal love; to whom
life has been sheer unmitigated agony without you; to whom it has no
hope, no ambition, no desire, but your pardon. It is the prayer of the
sick for health, of the famishing for food, of the shipwrecked for a
sail. 'If I should never see her face again,' he said last night, 'let
me look upon a face which has looked upon hers;' and I am here,
Katharine,--I am here!"

He held her hands in a grasp tight even to pain while he spoke; now he
released them. She covered her face with them, and sobbed aloud.

Trembling with delight, he stood by until her emotion had subsided.
Then he said:

"Never was ambassador so happy to find his mission useless and
superseded. God for ever bless you for the words you have spoken. Let
me leave you now; I must write to Robert. Will you send your letter,
or shall I? Perhaps," he went on gravely, "you had better let me
enclose it. He has been ill, and even the best-managed communication
of such unlooked-for happiness will try him; though joy never kills,
they say, it may harm him. Don't be anxious; remember you will bring
him health and happiness and life."

He took up the letter, once more caught her hands in his, and
reverently kissed them; told her he would be with her on the morrow at
an early hour, and left her--feeling like a man who walked in a dream.

His success had been so immeasurably beyond his hopes! _His_ success?
what nonsense was he talking to himself? It had not been his success,
but that of circumstances, of an accident--the success of time, of
experience, of conscience. How happy Robert would be! How "pure
womanly" she was, with her loftiness and her lowliness, her beautiful
compassion, her rapid generous impulse, her ready self-accusation, and
thoroughness of reparation! How beautiful too--how very, very
beautiful, in her sombre dress! deep mourning too! the sort of
mourning widows wear in France, if he did not mistake--of course she
had passed as a widow--a gloomy dress, but she was too beautiful to
heed it. When would she go to England, he wondered; would she return
with him at once? he might ask her to-morrow. That would be very soon;
but he must go,--delay was impossible; and she was likely to do at
once any thing she had made up her mind to do at all.

Yeldham's excitement remained so long upon him, that it was difficult
to him to write the few lines to Robert which were necessary. At
length he scrawled them.

"All has succeeded, as I told you it would. The enclosed letter from
your wife will explain more and better than I could. Be happy, dear
old fellow, but don't agitate yourself; and mind you are quite well
when I keep my word, and bring Katharine home."




CHAPTER X.
COMING HOME.


"Alice," said Robert Streightley to the old nurse, who had kept an
anxious watch upon him from the moment she had heard Yeldham's parting
words, "I want to speak to you. Come upstairs with me to Miss Ellen's
room."

It was about noon, on the second day after Charles Yeldham reached
Paris; and Robert had received his letter, with the enclosure from
Katharine, that morning. It had been delivered at the hour which
usually found Robert at breakfast, and old Alice in attendance upon
him; as in the old time, which had had so brief, so brilliant, and so
melancholy an interruption. But on this occasion Robert was alone, by
his own express desire; and Alice, too much concerned, too seriously
apprehensive to be affronted, had acquiesced without grumbling in his
request that she would leave him for a little. No human eye,
therefore, had seen Robert's perusal of his wife's letter--had
witnessed the effect produced on him by such a reversal of his life
for the past three years. His heart had known its own bitterness, and
neither friend nor stranger was near now to meddle with its joy--a joy
too deep for utterance, too supreme almost for endurance--a joy full
of keen and piercing pain, of repentance, infinitely more terrible
since forgiveness had come, and rich with the divinest blessings of
hope. Hours had gone over since the glorious light of this new life
had dawned--unheeded hours; and now Robert called to Alice, and she
came. As he spoke, the old woman looked at him anxiously, but his face
reassured her. It was very pale, and he looked old--he had been
looking old of late, she had often thought--but peace, serenity, a
calm, which she felt without understanding or questioning, were on the
features, and a smile--a sweet and serious smile--lighted them. She
followed him without a word to the now disused but always orderly,
room which had been Mrs. Dutton's in her maiden days. It was a pretty,
bright, simple apartment, with gay chintz curtains, carefully pinned
up now, and covered with holland wrappings; with a bright carpet,
covered with its linen shroud; and pretty furniture, simple and
inexpensive, but in good taste and in perfect order. The day was
bright and clear, and the tireless room, though cold, was not
cheerless. Robert glanced round the room, placed a chair for Alice,
bade her sit down, and shut the door. Then he set his back against the
door, and said:

"Alice, I want you to get this room made ready for a lady as soon as
possible."

"Lord bless us! Master Robert," said the old woman nervously, "who
ever's coming, and the mistress away, and Miss Ellen not fit to be
left, I'm sure--not for a fortnight yet, if so soon----"

"Alice, dear old woman!" said Robert, and he bent his tall figure, and
laid his hands kindly on her shoulders,--"it is for my wife. My wife
is coming back to me!"

She looked at him with the timid uncertainty of old age, and began to
tremble and cry.

"Yes, she's coming," he said. "You don't know her, Alice,--you saw her
very seldom; you don't know how good she is----"

"Good, Master Robert! and stay from you so long, and you in trouble,
and so fond of her!"

"She did not know I was in trouble, nurse; I never told her anything
of the kind. She thought I was the same rich man I had been when she
left me; and it was all my fault. I cannot explain; but if you love
me,--and I know you do, old nurse, I know you do--who so well?--never
blame my wife in your heart, or let others blame her in your hearing.
But she's coming back to me; think of that."

"When?" was Alice's first practical question; "does my mistress know?"
was her second.

"To-morrow, or the next day, I hope; I am not sure, until I hear
again--no, my mother does not know; no one knows. She will come here
to me, until I can get a quiet home of our own; then she and I will
begin our life again;" and as Robert spoke the words, he could hardly
believe in the meaning they conveyed.

Alice had entertained no favourable opinion of Katharine, and had
never thought at all of her of late, since she had ceased to be
mentioned by Mrs. Streightley. But Robert's joy acted as a revelation
of his sorrow to the faithful friend who watched him more closely, and
knew him better than any one in the world beside. She listened,
therefore, with the utmost attention to his directions, and promised
the closest compliance with his wishes. Every thing should be done to
make the house fit for Mrs. Streightley's reception; little was
needed, indeed, but the fires should be lighted and the rooms swept
and garnished. Robert thought of the suite of apartments at Portland
Place, and of the "Lady-Kilmantan" hangings at Middlemeads, but not
bitterly; he thought of them, indeed, with a smile: such things
mattered little now to him, or to his wife. His wife! He called her by
the sacred name, in his thoughts, a thousand times in an hour, and
life seemed too short and narrow for all his thankfulness and joy.

The news soon spread through the little household, and was received
with much indifference. The three female servants who composed the
modest establishment were new-comers; they had known nothing of
Robert's wife, and cared nothing about her. But they liked him, and
they were rather glad than otherwise that any thing should occur to
give him pleasure, more especially as Nurse Alice informed them the
"young madam's" residence would be but temporary, for they agreed
unanimously that they "couldn't abide two mistresses, and in course it
was only natural as Mr. Robert's wife should like to have her own
way." Thus they set to work with very tolerable activity and
good-will, and the work of preparation went on briskly.

How the hours of that day passed over Robert Streightley he could not
have told, had there been any to question him. Should he write? he had
asked himself, when he was once more shut up in the dining-room and
secure from interruption. What could he say? To Yeldham he might
possibly write a few words of thanks and thankfulness; but what would
they avail? what a poor mockery they would be! But perhaps he had
better write them. Then the strong man, who had seen his fortunes
crumble into dust, and stood upright amid the ruins, took a pen in his
hand, and tried to form a few simple words, and he could not do it;
darkness gathered before his eyes and his senses reeled. So he went
out to the nearest telegraph-office, and he dictated a message to a
clerk in three words,--"Come home quickly;" and he lingered about
until he knew they had been clicked off to Paris, and then he began to
count the time as he walked, he hardly knew where, about the clean,
frosty suburban roads, and to speculate upon the exact moment when his
wife would receive his message. So wandering, while the short hours of
the winter's day were waning, he found himself on the borders of
Clapham Common, and leant for a few minutes idly against an iron post,
watching the omnibuses starting from the Plough, and their conductors
warming themselves by brisk exercise, assisted by strong drink. A
narrow road led away to his right; and a little way down, a tall,
graceful, lancelike church-spire showed solemn and beautiful against
the steel-coloured vault of the sky; the stars were beginning to
twinkle, and the leafless trees rustled sharp and brittle in the
frosty air. Looking upward at the spire, Robert turned down the narrow
road, and found himself in a minute before the low gate and little
paved court in front of a modern Gothic church, small, but of rich and
correct architecture. The gate swung open as he came up to it, and
several children ran gladly out into the road. Through the porch and
the heavy oak-door, iron-clamped, and half-open, Robert saw glimpses
of the interior of the church, saw gleams of rich colour and bits of
quaint Gothic decoration. The grand sonorous tones of an organ swelled
out suddenly, and ceased, as he stood idly looking and listening. The
notes were the last of the "practice," and accompanied a reiterated
"Amen" by children's voices. He passed through the gate into the
porch, and, after a moment's hesitation, entered the church. A great
longing for the peace of God had come over him, and here was God's
house; it mattered not to him that the form of the worship therein
was Catholic, not that to which he was accustomed, and he went in.
There was no light in the church save the red gleam from the
sacramental-lamp, swung by long silver chains before the High Altar;
the gas-jets which had given light to the organist were turned out as
he went into the church, and the children went down the gallery-stairs
and trooped noisily away. A man lingered for a few minutes to arrange
some chairs piled against the wall of a side aisle, and then departed,
having left all in order for the evening service, to commence in an
hour. Robert was quite alone: over the large window, high up in the
wall, behind which the guests of the Community (for the church was
attached to a monastery) were wont to sit and assist unseen at Divine
worship, a crimson curtain hung; there was no human eye to witness the
emotion of his soul.

Robert sat long, absorbed in thought; then he drew near the
altar-rail, and kneeled down upon the marble step. The red light shone
solemnly upon his kneeling figure, and upon the paintings glowing on
the sanctuary-walls. His eyes wandered over these, until they rested
upon one, and then they stayed their wandering. It represented a Man
of infinitely benign and sorrowful aspect, in whose figure there was
great dignity and power. He stood with outstretched arms and piercing
gaze directed out from the canvas, as though he looked into the faces
of a multitude. A scroll ran round the top of the picture, and bore
these words: "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white
as snow."

The light was very dim; he could not have read the written words by
its glimmer had he needed to read them; but he did not. Kneeling
there, on the altar-step, before the face and the words of promise,
Robert took his wife's two letters from his breast, and, like Hezekiah
in his trouble, he, in his repentance and his gratitude, "spread them
before the Lord."

It was late when Robert reached home, and Alice was anxiously
expecting him. He was very cheerful, and listened with pleasure to the
old woman's account of all that had been done during the day in the
way of preparation for Katharine's reception. He had several matters
of business to attend to; and so the hours wore themselves away; and
at length he was the only one waking in the quiet house.

"You'll go to bed soon, Master Robert," old Alice had said to him;
"and you'll sleep well, I hope, for you'll not like to be looking ill
when Mrs. Streightley comes; and you're not strong, you know. Promise
me, now, that you'll not sit up."

So Robert promised, and he fully meant to keep his word; but as the
night wore on restlessness came upon him, and distressing pain in the
head and eyeballs. He wondered that any illness or pain could come
near him, he was so happy so thankful--God had been so good to him,
and Katharine was coming home! He could not sleep; no, the effort
would be useless; so he made up the fire in the sitting-room, and he
walked up and down, trying to tire himself into sleepiness. He had
lost command over his thoughts; and though he might not have tried to
guide them otherwise than they were going, he felt that he had lost
it, and they hurried wildly into the past. All his life seemed to pass
before him in a strange phantasmagoria, of which he was but a
spectator; and innumerable forgotten scenes, and faces which he had
not seen for years, rose up before him,--the first day he had seen
Katharine, the day at the Flower-show, the day Mr. Guyon had shown him
the letter. Good God, how terrible that recollection was! But she had
forgiven him now, and he might fairly try to forgive himself, with
this blessed assurance (and he grasped the letter in his breast with
his hand as he walked up and down) in his possession, and the
certainty of reading a full pardon in her eyes before long. And then
he shuddered, shook through all his limbs with the strong contest of
emotion, with irrepressible passionate delight and pain. Anon he rose
again, and was whirled away upon another storm of thoughts. Mr. Guyon
was present to him--the terrible sudden death. Ah, he had taken that
too lightly; he had condemned the dead man too hastily and too
heavily; the dead man, who had cared for trifles, who had found
pleasure in things he could not comprehend, but was no worse than he;
the dead man, who loved money and enjoyment, and naught beside. Well,
he ought to have pitied him for that--he did pity him, for he was
dead. His daughter could not come to him with soft words of peace, and
heavenly smiles of pardon, as she was coming to the husband who had
wronged her. He did pity the dead old man. He thought how coldly he
had looked on the dead face--the rigid, ashy face; he remembered it
well, how forlorn and ghastly it was! how awfully alone!--more so than
any dead face he had ever seen. And then he remembered how carelessly
he had attended the funeral; he had had no thought, no sorrow for the
dead; his heart had been rent and wrung with anguish for the loss of
Katharine; he had hardly heard the Burial Service at all: he had been
glad when it was over, and had turned away to his business and his
grief. He remembered some of it now: "Man that is born of a woman hath
but a short time to live, and is full of misery." Yes, full of misery;
but not now, not now--that was over. "The sure and certain hope"--this
was troubling him; he would read it all through, and try to steady his
thoughts upon it.

Mrs. Streightley's "church-books" lay upon a shelf near one of the
windows. She rarely used the Common Prayer-book, inclining rather to
dissenting forms of worship; so Robert found the book without
difficulty. He sat down beside the fire, and read the Burial Service
throughout, half aloud; and as he concluded it, heavy sleep fell upon
him suddenly, as it had done a few times lately since he had not been
so strong and well as formerly. He slept on, though the wintry dawn
came and the fire died out; and when the housemaid came into the room
in the morning, "it gave her," as she described it, "quite a turn, to
see the master a-sittin' there asleep, and the gas a-burnin' in the
broad daylight."

Old Alice came bustling in to rouse and scold him; and Robert, feeling
very much ashamed of himself, went off sheepishly to bathe and dress.
He looked and felt much better after those restoratives, and assured
Alice that it had not harmed him to sleep on a chair instead of his
bed; he felt just a little giddy of course, but it was nothing, he
told her. He told himself it was the expectation of the post-hour, and
the news it would bring. He did not venture to ask Alice to leave him
to breakfast alone this morning; so the old woman was in the room when
the expected letter arrived. It was very short; and with his first
glance at it, he said:

"She will be here this evening, Alice; she comes by the day-mail."

"Thank God!" said the old woman fervently. "I am thankful there's to
be no more waiting; for you ain't fit for it, Robert, my boy, and
that's the truth."

"The train comes in at six; she will be here before seven. Mr. Yeldham
is coming with her. Is every thing ready, Alice?"

"Every thing, Master Robert. I will have the fire lighted in her room
immediately, and the things all put straight; and then you can look at
it, and satisfy yourself. And you won't worry yourself--will you
promise me not to worry yourself?"

"I worry myself!--no, indeed, nurse. I think that nothing can ever
harm or grieve or 'worry' me, as you call it, any more."

Then he told her he must go into the City for an hour or two: and he
took a kind leave of her and went. The old woman sat down on the chair
he had vacated, and burst into an unaccountable fit of crying.

"I am an old fool, to be sure, if ever there was one!" she said
irritably, after a few minutes; "but I can't help it--there's
something over me, though I'm glad for my dear boy. Now that _that's_
over, I'll go and look after those girls, and see what's best to have
for her dinner."


It was nearly four o'clock when Robert returned; and he came in a cab
which looked like a small conservatory on wheels, for every available
space in it was filled with flowers. He carried the pots and the
bouquets carefully into the house; and having assured Alice that he
was not hungry--for her anxiety on that point had not slumbered since
his infancy--he asked her if the rooms upstairs were ready.

"I have just come down from looking after them myself, Master Robert;
and nothing could be prettier nor nicer."

"Well, nurse, help me to take these flowers upstairs, and show me all
your beautiful decorations."

Alice was right: nothing nicer or prettier than the room prepared for
Katharine could be seen. A bright fire burned in the polished grate,
and a soft white lambskin rug lay before the fender; the chintz
curtains shaded the windows cosily, and the uncovered carpet looked
fresh and gay; the simple furniture was tastefully disposed; and a low
velvet chair, borrowed from the drawing-room, stood invitingly before
the fire. Ellen had been fond of flowers, and some pretty Parian vases
were among the ornaments of her forsaken chamber. Aided by Alice,
Robert arranged the flowers he had brought--and which, though
numerous, were not various, for even money will not avail to procure
floral variety in December--and disposed the vases as his taste
dictated. Then they set the flower-pots in the balcony, and looked
round approvingly on their completed task. The two faithful friends
stood a while in silence, and then Robert said,

"Is all ready downstairs as well?"

"All ready, my dear; and not long to wait now, God be praised! What
are you going to do--not going to the station to meet them surely, are
you?"

"O no, nurse--I'm going to wait for her here; and I want you to take
care that I'm not disturbed. I have a great deal to think about,
Alice, and I want to be alone now until she comes."

"Very well, Robert; no one shall come near you. What time is it now?"

"Half-past four. Have plenty of light downstairs, that the house may
look cheerful when she comes; and, Alice, I will light the gas here
now, so shut the shutters."

He went with her to one of the windows to aid her, and they looked
out. The red wintry sun was going down in a fiery ball, and red
streaks were lying low upon the sky.

"They have had a pleasant journey, no doubt," said Alice cheerfully;
"and they're on the sea now, I suppose."

Robert made her no answer: he was looking at the sunset, a fold of the
shutter in each hand. He closed them together, fastened the bolt, and
drew the curtains, while Alice lighted the gas-lamps. His face was
very pale, but there was a smile of exultation and delight upon it. He
spoke aloud, forgetting his reticence in his joy:

"The last sun has set that I shall see rise without her. All my
troubles are over, nurse."

The old woman went up to him, gently lifted her arms, and drew his
face down towards her own. She kissed him fondly more than once, and
said in a low broken tone,

"God bless you, my darling boy! Don't forget the Lord, who has granted
you your heart's desire."

Then she left the room quickly, and went downstairs, wiping her eyes
with her apron.

After a few minutes Robert went into the adjoining room, and returned,
carrying a large leather box. He set it upon a small table, near the
toilet, and opened it with a key attached to his watch-chain. Then he
took from it several cases, which he arranged symmetrically on the
dressing-table, opening each, and displaying its contents.

"Yes," he murmured; "I am sure it was in just such order they lay that
night when she put on the bracelet when I asked her, and put her hand
in mine. The amethysts here, and the opal cross beside the pincushion,
and the diamonds there." And he placed them as he spoke. The diamond
serpent came to his hand last, and he held it, turning it to the light
and watching the flashes of rich colour which gleamed from the gems.
Then he replaced it in its satin case, and laid it upon the stand of
the toilet-mirror.

"Yes, my darling," he murmured, "they are beautiful, and worth much
money; and I have wanted money sorely since you adorned them last and
turned from them with disdain; but I would have starved, I think,
before I could have parted with them, for they had touched you."

He sat down in the velvet chair by the fire, took something from his
waistcoat-pocket, and held it towards the light on his open palm. It
was a plain gold ring, and a date was engraved inside it. It was that
of the day then passing into evening, and he had had it done that
morning.

"This is the true symbol," he murmured, "she will wear this
willingly."

He sat for many minutes gazing at the ring upon his outstretched hand;
then he put it back into his pocket, and started up.

A quarter to six.

Later than he had thought, than he had hoped. His thoughts were
confused. Now they were hurrying him away again. This must not be. In
this supreme hour of his life there must be no vagueness; he must rule
his mind. But how? Her letter--he would read her letter--yes, that
would reassure him, would restore his composure. A horrid feeling of
unreality was creeping over him. This was not a dream, surely?
Katharine his wife was really coming--this was her room. The fire and
light were real; the doors of yonder wardrobe were lying open to
receive her dresses, and the jewels upon the table there were
hers--she had worn them. He was really standing in the midst of
objects which assured him all was true. Then why had he felt for a
moment a wide cold barren heath around him, and seen the sky and the
stars? They were shut out, and there was no picture upon the wall
opposite? Of course not. There was no picture there; he was only
remembering the picture he had seen yesterday. He would read her
letter, and he would read it on his knees, and remain kneeling until
he should hear the sound of wheels--and then? How painful the slow
heavy beating of his heart grew! It quite confused him. He would be
much easier kneeling down. He crossed the room to the low white bed,
touching the table with his hand for a moment, and knelt down on the
side of the bed which faced the door. He took Katharine's letter from
his breast, spread it open on the coverlet, stretching his arms out
round it, like a frame. He was steadier now--that strange hurry had
passed away. This was the letter:--


"I wrote to you three years ago, on the day after my father died; and
I then believed, and intended what I said, that that should be the
last communication I would ever hold with you. I left you, full of
anger and revenge, full of self-contempt that I had permitted myself
to be deceived, and with no thought beyond myself, my injuries, and my
vengeance. From that day I never heard your name spoken, or was
recalled by any outward circumstance to the recollection of the life I
had forsaken, until a few days ago; and the letter I am now writing to
you, Robert, is the result of what I then accidentally learned.

"The knowledge I have gained is the knowledge of your loss of
fortune--ruin. The person who mentioned it called it in the strong
phrase natural to those who love wealth best, and value it above all.
I hope it is not so bad as this; but whatever it be, you are what the
world I lived in once, but which has forgotten me, and which I have
forgotten, calls a poor man. Thus the great barrier which did exist
between you and me exists no longer, and I can address you as frankly
and as freely as I will, with my whole heart. You may have ceased to
love me, you may not care for my pardon now; but at least you cannot
say I am tired of obscurity and poverty, and would return to my former
position of wealth and luxury as your wife. Neither you nor the world,
if it should ever know any thing of me again,--nor even my own proud
self-doubting heart, which has so often tortured me with suggestions
of deceitful motives,--can whisper that I have any purpose but the
right to serve in this.

"I have suffered and learned since I left you, Robert. That suffering
has been good for me, and that learning has changed me; so that I have
often wished to do that which I am now doing, but have been held back
by pride. For I am asking you to take me back; I am asking you to give
me once more the place in your home and in your life which I wilfully,
in my blind wrath, abandoned. The wrong you did me I have long ago
forgiven; will you forgive me the wrong I have done you? I never
understood it aright until I knew that your fortunes had fallen, until
I knew that you, too, had lapsed out of your place in the world; and
then, though you never cared for these things as I cared for them, I
came to understand what I had done to you. You hid all your troubles
from me; you kept a cheerful face to me when your heart was sad; and
you allowed me to lavish money when it was melting out of your hands;
you never found a fault with me, or denied a wish of mine its most
ample gratification. Foolish, vain, worthless wishes they were, and I
think of them with shame; but I remember your forbearance, your
generosity, your constant kindness with gratitude, which is no new
feeling, for I have been learning life's lessons for a long time in
silence and loneliness; and if I could have conquered my pride, if I
could have known above all what I know now, I should long ago have
told you this. What am I, that I should be relentless to you? what am
I, that I should not forgive? I never fulfilled a wife's duties; I
never understood them; no one ever tried to teach me but one, and I
set my headstrong will against her. I left you to sorrow and
perplexity, to humiliation, and to ruin; I, who had enjoyed your
wealth, and had married you without love. Your sin was not greater in
reality than mine, Robert. I wonder can any sin be really greater than
a marriage without love? But I was implacable to you, and you never
complained of me. We lived together, the one a mystery for the other,
each a lie to ourselves, and there was no confidence between us, and
in me no forbearance. God help me, I was ignorant indeed; and it was
not until I had become a lonely looker-on at life that I learned the
lessons which earlier might have saved both you and me.

"I soon forgave you, Robert; but I have never been able to forgive
myself. Perhaps when you have forgiven me, as I know you will, peace
will come to me. External quiet I have had, but not peace, though it
took me long to learn that I was seeking a vain shadow, under that
name, and that in doing the right alone can any human being ever find
it. In the day when self-delusion fell away from me, it left me as
lonely as I had left you; and there was no possibility of substituting
self-made duties for those which God's law and my own vow had laid
upon me, and which I had forsaken. If you have been unhappy--and,
little as I know you, in comparison with the comprehension which a
wife's ought to be, I know you well enough to feel only too sure that
you have been unhappy--my life has had no joy in it, no serenity. All
that ever pleased me in the past has utterly lost its charm. God has
had too much compassion on me to suffer me to say, 'Peace, peace, when
there is no peace;' and now the end of the struggle has come. Careless
words spoken by a stranger have been a revelation to me. You have
sought for me in vain, Robert; then you desire to find me? Is it that
you love me still, as you loved me in those evil days when I so ill
requited your love? Or is it because you too would expiate the past
for God's sake and the right? Whatever be your motive, there is but
one course for me--the course I am taking. If you will receive me, I
am ready to return to you whenever you shall summon me.

"Do you remember Dr. Hudson, who attended me at Martigny after our
marriage? He has been a true and untiring friend to me. Nobly has he
redeemed the unasked pledge of fidelity which he gave me when we
parted there. I sought him out when I left you, and he has taken care
of me ever since. Part of the time I lived in a convent, and was
permitted to work among the poor and the sick; but of late I have been
living with Dr. Hudson's mother in Brittany. This is a brief history
of a long time. If you can forgive me, and bid me come home, I will
tell you all the story of my outwardly quiet life, and you shall; tell
me yours. We are husband and wife, Robert; and yet what strangers we
are to each other! I wonder if you are as much changed as I am. Since
I have known that you have had other heavy griefs besides those which
I laid upon you, I dread to think how they may have altered you. Let
me help you to bear them now--I, who never before touched your burdens
with so much as a finger--let me be to you in adversity what in
prosperity I did not care, did not know how to be. Let our dead past
bury its dead. Life must always be sad and serious, I think, to those
who are neither foolish nor wicked; and it will be always sad and
serious to us. There are shadows cast from the time that is gone upon
our paths, which no light can wholly dissipate, until we emerge into
the perfect day; but the shades of anger and resentment are not among
them: they have vanished, and can never come again. I do not know
where your home is, Robert, and I must direct this letter to your
mother's house; but wherever and whatever it may be, I entreat you let
me share it. Let me come to you, late as it is, and keep my vow to
you, so long and so wilfully broken, 'until death do us part.'

"Katharine Streightley."


A quarter-past six.

The hour chimed gaily with a treble ring from the little French clock
on the mantelpiece. The fire was burning steadily, as fires burn in
cheerful frosty weather; the delicate scent of the flowers had come
out under the genial influence of the warmth, and dispersed itself
through the room. The sharp roll of cab and carriage wheels upon the
road came deadened through the closed windows. Robert still knelt
beside the bed, and still framed his wife's letter with his
outstretched arms. The stir of expectation and preparation was audible
downstairs. The dining-room door stood invitingly open, the fights
burned brightly, the table was laid for three, and the snowy
tablecloth and glittering glass looked not the least attractive among
the items of the welcome prepared for the travellers. The little hall
was lighted too, and the very porcelain tiles seemed to have been
brightened for the occasion.

Half-past six.

Alice comes upstairs from the kitchen, opens the hall-door, and
listens. The keen air comes in, but the old woman is not afraid of the
keen air, and there is no wind. Soon she goes to the stair-head and
calls,----

"Susan, your clock is slow. The down-train is just leaving the
junction. They'll be here directly."

Susan answers from the bottom of the short staircase:

"Let 'em come. Dinner is all ready, and I doubt it'll be spoiled, if
they don't come soon, by the time they've got their things off.
Where's master?"

"In Miss Ellen's room; he's not to be disturbed till they come. O,
he'll hear 'em fast enough. There, it's gone the quarter!"

Alice comes back to the door, and holding it a little ajar, continues
to peep out. Many trains from distant places arrive about this hour,
and she is disappointed several times by cabs, luggage-laden, which
pass the gate.

"I've often heard Master Robert say a quarter of an hour should always
be allowed for them foreign trains," the old woman mutters a little
impatiently; "but surely they'll soon be here. He'll be worn out with
waiting."

Seven!

They are here. A cab stops at the gate, and Alice calls excitedly to
the servants, Susan cannot abandon the dinner, but the others come and
concern themselves about the luggage, while she opens wide the door,
and a lady and gentleman enter.

"Well, nurse," says Mr. Yeldham in an excited voice, "you see I have
brought Mrs. Streightley home."

"I see, sir," says Alice, trembling. "God bless you, ma'am; and
welcome home a thousand times!"

Katharine puts out her hand hurriedly, and takes the old woman's; but
she does not speak. She is very pale, and her lips are trembling; but
she is very, very beautiful. Alice is startled at her beauty. She
looks like a queen, she thinks; her deep-mourning dress drapes her
like robes. But she has only time for a glimpse of Katharine, for
Yeldham leads her quickly into the dining-room, whence he comes out in
a moment, and asks Alice, still in the hall, and watching the servants
and the cabman carrying the luggage up the little garden walk,
"Where's Robert?"

Alice explains that he is in the room prepared for Mrs. Streightley,
but wonders he has not heard the cab, and is bustling towards the
stairs to call him, when Yeldham stops her.

"No, nurse; I know the room. I'll take her to him."

So he calls Katharine, and she comes quickly; and they go up the
stairs together, Alice following. There is light on each landing, and
they are soon at the door. Yeldham taps rapidly, and at the same time
turns the door-handle; and Katharine, with a swift steady step, passes
into the room, into the glow of the light and the warmth and the
perfume of the flowers. She sees it all with one quick happy glance;
sees the jewels on the table, and recognises them; sees the light
glancing upon the scales of the diamond serpent; sees the outstretched
arms upon the bed, and the head now laid down upon them. In a moment
she is beside the kneeling figure, her hand upon the shoulder, her
breath upon the thick brown curls.

"Robert! I have come--I am here!"

There is no answer. The breathless listeners on the landing hear no
sound of glad welcome. An instant, and a faint gasping cry reaches
them; for Katharine has knelt beside her husband, and lifted his head
from off his outstretched arms, and it has swayed helplessly, and
fallen heavily against her bosom.

Death has parted them!




THE END.
