RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 



CHAPTER I. 

NEWS. 

Throughout tlie length and breadth of this Lon- 
don of ours there were few legal firms, no matter 
of how old standing, doing a better, larger, ready- 
money business than that of Moss and Moss of 
Cursitor Street, Chancery Lane. Looked down 
upon? Well, one could hardly say that. Old 
Mr. Trivett, of the firm of Trivett, Coverdale, and 
Trivett of Bedford Row, who had the secrets of 
half the first families in England locked up in his 
dusty japanned boxes ; yomig Mr. Markham, who, 
besides being nominally a solicitor, was a high- 
bailiff" somewhere, and had chambers in the Al- 
VOL. I. B 



2 RUNKING THE GAUNTLET. 

bany, and rode a very maney and taily liglit cliest- 
nut cob ill the Kow; and a few others, . might 
shrug their shoulders when the names of Moss and 
Moss were mentioned; but that did no harm to 
Moss and Moss, who, on the whole, were very 
well respected throughout the profession. At Mrs. 
Edward Moss's Smiday-evening parties in the Re- 
gent's Park were to be met many people wliose 
names were pleasantly familiar to the public. 
Mr. Smee, Q.C., known as "Alibi Smee" from 
his great success in pro^'ing that his clients never 
liad been within fifty miles of the spot where tlie 
crime with which they were charged was com- 
mitted; Mr. Sergeant Orson; Mr. Tocsin, who 
bullied a Avitness admirably, but who gave more 
trouble to Edward Moss than any other man at 
the bar, wanting perpetual cramming and sug- 
gestions, and having the face of brass and the 
lungs of steel and the head of wool; Mr. Re- 
plevin, the most rising junior at the O.B. ; and 
others, amongst them Gilks, the marine painter, 
some of wliose choicest bits adorned Mrs. Moss's 
walls; Kreese, the editor of the great sporting, 



NEWS. 6 

literary, and theatrical Sunday print, The Scourge; 
O'Meara of the Stock Exchange ; and actors, 
actresses, and singers too numerous to mention. 
These last were invited through Mr. Marshall 
Moss, Edward's brother and junior partner, who 
was a bachelor, and who, though he gave occasional 
excellent Greenwich and Richmond dinners, yet 
had no liouse of his own to entertain in. Marshall 
Moss attended to the more convivial portion of the 
clients : the actors who had differed from their man- 
agers; the ladies who wanted certain settlements 
arranged; the sporting publicans Avho wanted ''the 
screw put upon certain parties ;" the fast yomig 
gents requiring defence from civil process, . were 
shown up to Marshall's room on the first-floor, a 
comfortable room with several arm-chairs, and a 
cupboard never without sherry and soda-water ; 
a room where some of the best stories in London 
were from time to time told, and which was 
fenced off with thick double doors, to prevent the 
laughter caused by them penetrating to Edward's 
sanctum downstairs. 

For Edward attended to the real clients of the 



4 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

house . those for wliom it was originally estah- 
lished . those by whom its fame had been made. 
And these were . thieves. Yes, there is no blink- 
ing the word. If a burglar were '^ in trouble," 
if a forger had been apprehended, if some very 
hea\y tm'f-robbery had come to light, Edward 
Moss's busy brain was at work, and Edward 
Moss's hom's of sleep were rutlilessly curtailed. 
He did not care about the heaviest kind of busi- 
ness, though two or three murderers miques- 
tionably owed their necks to his skill and fore- 
thought ; and he refused all petty cases of mags- 
men, skittle-sharps, and card-swindlers. They 
would have lono-ed to have him ; but thev knew 
it was impossible. He did not like their style of 
business, and, above all things fatal to a chance 
of their engaging him, he never did any thing 
on spec. When a man was " in trouble" he 
knew that it was no use sending for ]\Ii\ Moss 
without being able to tell him that at such-and- 
such a tavern or lodging-house, he woidd find a 
landlord willing and ready to advance the fee 
for the prisoner's defence. Tlien Mr. Moss woidd 



NEWS. D 

step into the first hansom outside the station, and 
hie away to St. Luke's, Cripplegate, Drury Lane, 
or any other locality indicated, and returning 
with the money in his pocket would hear all that 
the prisoner had to say, and straightway deter- 
mine on the line of defence. A wonderful little 
man, Edward Moss! wonderful to look at I with- 
out the smallest sign of colour in his sln-unken, 
baggy, parchmenty face, witli small gray eyes 
under overhanging bristly brows, with a short 
stubbly liead of gray hair, a restless twitching 
mouth, thin wiry figui'e, and dirty hands with 
close-bitten dubby nails. Li these respects a 
very different man from his brother Marshall, who 
was a by-no-means bad-looking Hebrew, with a 
handsome beard and moustache, fidl scarlet lips, 
prominent brown eyes, and in face and figiu'e 
showing a general liking for the flesh-pots and 
other good things of tliis hfe. Where Edward 
Moss wore dirt, Marshall Moss sported jewelry, 
and each brother was sufficiently vain of his 
display. Each knew his business perfectly, and 
neither interfered with the other. Marshall's 



b RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

clients drove up in broughams or rattled in han- 
soms to the front-door, went up the broad stair- 
case to the first-floor, and either passed straight 
into the presence, or beguiled the necessary in- 
terval in the perusal of the daily papers handed 
to them by obsequious clerks. Edward's clients 
sneaked in through a narrow door up a side-court ; 
had their names and business wrung from them 
by the most precocious and most truculent of Jew 
boys ; were left to rub their greasy shoulders up 
and down the white-washed walls of a o-hastlv 
waiting-room until " Mithter Edward" chose to 
listen to the recital of their distress and wishes. 

Occasionally, hoAvever, visitors to Mr. Ed- 
ward Moss came in at the large front-door, and 
afterA^'ards made the best of their way to his 
sanctum. They were generally people who would 
not have been regarded with much favour by the 
greasy-shouldered clients in the com't. This was 
one of them who entered Cursitor Street on a 
warm June afternoon, and made straight for the 
front-door blazing with the door-plate of " Moss 
and Moss." A middle-sized ftittish man, ill- 



NEWS. 7 

dressed in an ill-fitting blue frock-coat and gray 
trousersj and a very innocent-looking small hat 
with a black mourning-band; a sodden-faced 
sleepy -looking man vrith mild llne eyes and an 
undecided mouth ; a man like a not very pro- 
sperous publican ; a man who, with a fresher 
complexion, and at another time of year, might 
have been taken for a visitor to the Cattle Show ; 
who looked, in fact, any thing but what he was 
. chief officer of the City detectives and the 
terror of all the evil-doers of the East-end. He 
walked through the hall, and, leaving the staircase 
leading to Mr. Marshall Moss's rooms on his 
right, passed to the end of the passage and tapped 
at a door on which was inscribed the word 
'^ Private" in large letters. It must have been 
a peculiar knock which he gave, for the door was 
immediately opened merely wide enough to ad- 
mit him, and closed as he passed thi'ough. 

" All, ah I" said a little man in an enormous 
pair of spectacles ; " ah, ah I itli you, inthpector ! 
The governor'th been athkin' after you to-day. 
Let'th have a look," he continued, lifting a corner 



8 RUNmNG THE GAUNTLET. 

of a green-baize curtain ; ^^ all ! he'tli jutlit 
sliakin' off that tronblethome perjury. Now I'll 
give him vour name." 

This was Mr. Amedroz, Edward Moss's right- 
hand man, who knew all his master's secrets, and 
who was so reticent that he never opened liis 
mouth where he could convey as much by writing. 
So Mr. Amedi'oz inscribed " Stellfox" in large 
round-text on a slip of paper, laid it before 
his principal, and, receiving an affirmative nod, 
ushered the inspector into the presence. 

" Morning, Stellfox," said Mr. Edward, glanc- 
ing up from a mass of papers in front of him : 
<^ report?" 

Inspector SteUfox, mibuttoning his blue frock- 
coat, produced from his breast-pocket a thick 
note-book, and commenced : 

^^ Sorry to say, nothing new about Captain 
Congreve, sir. We've tried . " 

" Now look here, Stellfox," interrupted Mr. 
Moss; '' you've had that business in hand a fort- 
night. If you don't report by Wednesday, I'll 
give that to Scotland Yard. Yom* men are 



NEWS. 9 

getting lazy, and I'll try what Sir Richard 
Mayne's people can do. What next ?" 

Crestfallen, Inspector SteUfox continued, . 
'' Slimy William, sir." 

''Well," said Mr. Moss keenly, "what of 
him?" 

'' I think that's all right, sir. We've found 
out where his mother lives, . Shad's Eow, Wap- 
ping, No. 3 ; bill up in the window, ' a room to 
let.' If you've no objection, one of my men shall 
take that room, sir, and try and Avork it that 
way." 

" Xo," said Mr. Moss ; " must put a woman 
in there. Don't you know a woman up to that 
sort of thing ?" 

" There's Hodder's wife, sir, as helped us in 
Charlton's case ; she'd do." 

'' I recollect ; she'll do well. Furnished or 
unfurnished ?" 

" Unfurnished room, sir." 

" All right ; hire some furnitm'e of the broker. 
Tell IMrs. Hodder to get in at once. Widow ; or 
husband emuloyed on railway in the comitry. 



10 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Must keep a gin-bottle always open, and be gen- 
erous with it. Old lady will tallv over her drink ; 
and Mrs. Hodder must find out where Slimy 
William is, what name he's going under, and 
must notice what letters old lady receives. Tell 
her to take a child with her. Has she got a 
child?" 

" Xot of her own, sir." 

^^ Xever mind ; must get one of some one 
else's. Must see you, or one of your men, every 
morning. Child will want air . excuse for her 
taking him out. If Slimy William is coming 
home on the sudden, child must be taken ill in 
the middle of the night; she can take it to the 
doctor, and come down to you." 

'^ Right, sir. Now about Coping Crossman." 

^^Well?" 

" Markham will have him to-night, sir. That 
girl 'Liza Burden blew his gaff for him last night. 
He's a comic singer, he is. Goes by the name 
of Munmorency, and sings at the Cambridge 
Music-hall." 

" Good ! What of Mitford ?" 



XEWS. 11 

" Well, nothing yet, sir. You're hard upon me, 
Mr. Moss; and that you are. We"ve only had 
that case three days, and you're expecting infor- 
mation ah'eady." 

" Stellfox," said Mr. Moss, rising, and taking 
a sonorous pinch of snuff, "you detectives are 
mere shams. You've been spoilt ])y the penny 
press, and the sliilhng books, and aU that. You 
think you're wonderful fellows, and you know 
nothino; . literallv nothino-. If I didn't do vour 
v.'ork as well as my own, where should we be ? 
Don't ansvv^er ; listen ! Mitford has been three 
times within the last week to the Crown coffee- 
house in Doctors' Commons. There's very httle 
doubt that he'll go there again ; for it's a quiet 
house, and he seems to like it. You've got his 
description ; be off at once." 

Inspector SteUfox had transacted too much 
business with Mr. Edward Moss to expect any 
fmther converse, so he took up the cliild's hat and 
quietly bowed and departed. 

To say that of all the intensely-quiet and re- 



12 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

spectable houses in that strange portion of the 
City of London known as Doctors' Commons the 
Crown coffee-house is the most quiet and re- 
spectable, is making a strong assertion, but one 
which could yet be borne out by focts. It is a 
sleepy, dreamy neighbourhood still, although its 
original intense duhiess has been somewhat en- 
livened by the pedestrians who make Paul's Chain 
a passage to the steamboats caUing at Paul's 
Wliarf ; and the hansom cabs which find a short- 
cut down Great St. Andrew's Hill to the South- 
western Railway. But it is still the resort of 
abnormal individuals, . ticket-porters, to wit ; 2^1e- 
thoric indi\4duals in half-dirty white aj^rons and 
big badges like gigantic opera-checks, men whose 
only use seems to be to warn approaching veliicles 
of the blocking-up of the narrow streets ; and 
sable-clad mottled-faced proctors and their clerks. 
There are real green trees in Doctors' Commons ; 
and flies and butterflies . by no means bad imi- 
tations of the real country insect . are seen 
there on the wing in the sultry summer days, 
buzzing I'omid the heads of the ticket-porters, 



NEWS. 13 

and of the strong men who load the Bottle Com- 
pany's hea\y carts, and who are always flinging 
huge fragments of rusty iron into the capacious 
hold of the Mary Anne of Goole, stuck high and 
dry in the mud off Paul's Wharf before men- 
tioned. Life is rampant in the immediate vi- 
cinity, . in enormous Manchester warehouses, 
perpetually inhaling the contents of enormous 
Pickford's vans ; in huge blocks of offices where 
the representatives of vast provincial firms take 
orders and transact business ; in corn-stores and 
iron-companies ; in mansions filled from basement 
to roof with Dresden china and Bohemian glass ; 
in insurance-offices and banks ; and in the office 
of the great journal, where the engines, for six 
days out of the seven, are unceasingly tlu'obbing. 
But in the Commons life gives way to mere ex- 
istence and vegetation. The organ-man plays 
unmolested on Addle Hill, and the chikfren's 
shuttlecocks flutter in Wardrobe Place ; no Pick- 
fords' vans disturb the calm serenity of Great 
Knio-htrider Street ; and instead of warehouses 
and offices, there are quaint old dumpy congrega- 



14 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

tionless cliurches, big rambling old halls of City- 
Companies, the forgotten old Heralds' College 
with its piu'poseless traditions, a few apparently 
nothing-doing shops, a number of proctors' offices 
into which man is never seen to enter, and two 
or three refreshment-rooms. Of these the Crown 
is the oldest and the dirtiest. It was established 
. if YOU may trust the half-effaced legend over its 
door . in 1790, and it has ever since been doing 
the same quiet sleepy trade. It cannot under- 
stand what Kammerer's means by it. Kam- 
merer's is the refreshment-house at the corner, 
which has long since escaped from the chrysalis 
state of coffee-shop, and now, resplendent w^ith 
plate-glass and mahogany bar, cooks joints, and 
draws the celebrated " Crm Grw" Llangollen ale, 
and is filled with a perpetual stream of clattering 
junior clerks from the adjacent warehouses. Tlie 
Ci'own . according to its proprietor, in whose 
family its lease has been vested since its establish- 
ment . don't do nothin' of this sort, and don't 
want to. It still regards chops and steaks as the 
most delicious of human food, and tea and coffee 



NEWS. 15 

as the only beverages by which their consumption 
should be accompanied. Across its window still 
stretches an illuminated blind representing an 
Italian gentleman putting ofFm a boat with ap- 
parently nothing more serviceable for navigation 
purposes than a blue banjo ; and it still makes a 
gorgeous display of two large coffee cups and 
saucers, with one egg in a blue egg-cup between 
tliem. Its interior is still cut up into brown boxes 
with hard narrow seats, on wliich you must either 
sit bolt upright, or fall off at once ; its narroAv old 
tables are scarred and notched and worm-eaten ; 
and it holds yet by its sawdusted floor. 

About seven o'clock in the evening of the same 
day on which Inspector Stellfox had consulted ]\Ir. 
Moss, the green-baize door of the Crown was gently 
swung open, and a man slinking in dived into the 
nearest box then vacant. Ho was a vouno: fellow 
of not more than three-and-twenty, with well-cut 
regular features, and who would have been hand- 
some had not his complexion been so sallow and 
his cheeks so pinched. His gaunt attenuated frame, 
tliin hands, and eyes of unnatural brightness and 



16 RUNNING THE GAXJNTLET. 

restlessness, all told of recent illness ; and though 
it was summer time his threadbare coat was tightly 
buttoned round liis tln'oat, and he shivered as he 
seated himself, and looked hungrily at the cook- 
in:-fire burnino; in the kitchen at the other end 
of the shop. After fui-tively glancing romid him 
he beckoned the proprietor, gave him an order for 
some small refreshment, and then taking down an 
old volume of the Gentleman'' s Magazine from a 
neighbouring shelf, began to turn over its pages 
in a listless pm'poseless manner. "While he was 
thus engaged, the green-baize door swmig open 
again, admitting a portly man with a child's hat 
perched on the top of his round head, wdio, walk- 
ing into the middle of the shop, ordered from that 
post of vantage " a large of coffee and a rasher," 
then looked round the different boxes, and finally 
settled himself with his back to the light in that 
box where the last arrival was seated. The j^ortly 
man made the other visitor a very polite bow, 
which was scarcely returned, and the iirst-comer 
bent more earnestly over his book and shrouded 
his face with his hand. But the portly man, who 



KEWS. 17 

was no other than Inspector Stellfox, had been 
too long in his profession not to know his busi- 
ness thoroughly, and so he hung up the child's 
hat on a peg immediately over his friend's head, 
and he took hold of a newspaper which lay 
directly under his friend's elbow ; and taking 
advantage of each opportunity to look his friend 
over and over, saw that he was on the right 
track, and thoroughly made up his mind what 
to do when the chance arrived. The chance 
arrived simultaneously with the refreshment or- 
dered by the haggard man : he had to put 
down his hand to reach the tray, and in 
so doing his eyes met those of the inspector, 
who at once winked and laid his fino^er on his 

lip. 

'' Mr. Mitford ?" said he in a fat voice ; " ah ! 
I thought so. No, you don't, sir," he continued, 
pushing back the man, who had attempted to start 
up; "it's all right; that little matter at Canter- 
bury's been squared up long since. I wanted to 
see you about something else. Look here, sir ;" 
and the inspector took from his pocket-book a 

VOL. I. c 



18 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

printed slip of paper, and handed it across the 
table to his companion^ who read as follows : 

" Fatal and Appalling Accident. 
We (^Bridgeiuatei' Mercury) deeply regret to 
hear that a telegram has been received from 
Malta stating that Sir Percy Mitford of Redmoor 
near this town, and his two sons ao:ed twelve and 
nine, were drowned by the upsetting of a little 
boat in which they were proceeding to Sir Percy's 
weU-kno^\ii yacht Enchantress, then anchored off 
A^aletta. By this dreadful accident the title and 
estates pass into another branch of the family ; the 
heir being Sir Percy's nephew, Mr. Charles Went- 
worth Mitford, now studpng abroad." 

" There, sir ! there's news for you !" said In- 
spector Stellfox; "we know what studying abroad 
means, don't we? We knows . " but Inspector 
Stellfox stopped suddenly ; for his companion, after 
glaring at him vacantly for an instant with the 
paper outstretched in his rigid hand, fell forward 
in a fit. 



CHAPTER 11. 

MORE NEWS. 

Twenty years ago tlie Maecenas Club, which is 
now so immensely popular, and admission to 
whicli is so difficult, was a very quiet unpre- 
tending little place, rather looked down upon and 
despised l^y the denizens of the marble palaces in 
Pall Mall and the old foo;ies in St. James's Street. 
The o;reat o;aunt stuccoed mansion, with the l^ust of 
Maecenas in the big hall, then was not ; the Ckd) 
was held at a modest little house only differing 
from a private residence in the size of its fan- 
lio-ht, in the fact of its haviufr a double flio-ht of 
steps (delicious steeple-chase ground for the youth 
of the neighbourhood), and from its liall-door 
being always open, typical of the hospitality and 
good-fellowship which reigned witliin. Ah, a glo- 
rious place in those days, the Maecenas ! whicli, as 



20 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

it stated in its prospectus, was established " for 
the patronage of literature and the cbama, and 
the bringino^ too^ether of 2:entlemen eminent in 
their respective circles;" but which wisely left 
literature, the drama, and the eminent gentlemen 
to take care of themselves, and simply brought 
together the best and most clubbable fellows it 
could 2^et hold of. There was something: in 
the little M., as the members fondly abbreviated 
its name, which was indescribably comfortable 
and unlike any other club. The Avaiters were 
small men, which perhaps had something to 
do with it; there Avas no billiard-room, with 
noisy raffish frequenters ; no card-room, with 
solemn one-idea'd fogies ; no drawing-room for 
great hulking men to lounge about, and put up 
their dirty boots on yellow-satin sofas. There 
was a capital coffee-room, strangers' -room, writ- 
ing-room, reading-room, and the best smoking- 
room in London ; a smoking-room whence came 
three-fourths of the best stories which ]:)ermeated 
society, and whither was brought every bit of news 
and scandal so soon as it was hatched. Tliere 



MORE NEWS. 21 

was a capital clief^ who was too true an artist 
to confine liimself to made-disliesj but who looked 
after the joints and the toothsome steaks, for which 
the M. had such a reputation ; and there was a 
capital cellar. Fui'thermore, the members believed 
in all this, and believed intensely in one another. 

That a dislike to clubs is strongly rooted in 
the female breast is not a mere aphorism of 
the comic writer, but is a serious fact. This 
feeHng Avould be much mitigated, if not entirely 
eradicated, one would think, if women could only 
know the real arcana of those much-loathed esta- 
blishments. Life wants somethino; more than 
good entrees and wine, easy-chairs, big waiters, 
and a place to smoke in : it wants companion- 
ship and geniality . two qualities which are very 
rare in the club-world. You scowl at the man 
at the next table, and he scowls at you in retui'n ; 
the man who wants the magazine retained by your 
elbow growls out something, and you, raising your 
arm, growl in reply. Li the smoking-room there 
is indeed an attempt at conversation, which is 
confined to maligning human natm*e in general, 



22 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

and the acquaintance of the talkers in particular ; 
and as each man leaves the room his character 
is wrested from him at the door, and torn to shreds 
by those who remain. 

It was its very difference from all these that 
made the Maecenas so pleasant. Every body 
liked every body else, and nobody objected to 
any body. It was not too pleasant to hear little 
Mr. Tocsin, Q.C., shrieking some legal question 
across the coffee-room to a brother barrister; to 
have yom- mackerel breathed over by Tom O'Bla- 
ther, as he narrated to you a Foreign-Office scan- 
dal, in which you had not the smallest interest ; 
to have to listen to Dr. M^GoUop's French jokes 
told in a broad-Scotch accent, or to Tim Dwyer's 
hmiting-exploits with his ^^ slash'n meer;" but 
one bore these things at the M., and bore them 
patiently. How proud they were of their dis- 
tinguished members in those days ; not swells, 
but men who had distinguished themselves by 
something more than length of whisker and 
shortness of head . the very " gentlemen eminent 
in tlieir respective circles*' of the prospectus ! 



MOEE XEWS. 23 

Thev were proud, and justly proud, of J\Ir. Jus- 
tice Ion, whose kindly beaming face, bright eye, 
and short-cropped gray hair would often be seen 
amongst them ; of Smielding and Follett, the t^vo 
great novelists of the day, each of whom had his 
band of sworn retainers and worshippers ; of Tat- 
terer, the great tragedian, who would leave King 
Lear's robes and be the delight of the Maecenas 
smoke-room; of Gilks the marine -painter, of 
Clobber, who was so great in cathedral interiors, 
and Markham, afterwards the great social cari- 
caturist, then just commencing his career as a 
wood-draughtsman. The very reciprocity of re- 
gard was charming for the few swells who at 
that time cared for membership ; they were im- 
mensely popular; and amongst them none so 
popular as Colonel Laurence Alsager, late of 
the Coldstream Guards. 

By the time that Laui'ence Alsao;er was o;a- 
zetted as ca^otain and lieutenant-colonel, he had 
had quite enough of regimental duty, quite enough 
of transition from Portman Barracks to Welling- 
ton Barracks, from Winchester to Windsor ; quite 



24 EUNNIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

enough of trooping the guard at St. James's, 
and watching over the treasui'es hidden away 
in the Bank - cellars ; of leaning out of the 
little window in the old Guards Club in St. 
James's Street ; quite enough of Derby drags and 
hallet balls, and Ryde pier and Cowes regatta, and 
Scotch moor and Norway fishery, and Leamington 
steeplechase and Limmer's, and all those things 
which make up the life of a properly-regulated 
guardsman. The younger men in the House- 
hold Brio^ade could not understand this '' ha vino; 
had quite enough." They thought him tlie most 
enviable fellow in the world. They dressed at 
him, they walked like him, they grew their 
whiskers as nearly like his as they could (mutton- 
chop whiskers were then the fashion, and beards 
and moustaches were only worn by foreign fid- 
dlers and cavahy regiments), they bragged of liim 
in every possible way, and one of them having 
heard him spoken of, fi'om the variet}- of his ac- 
complishments, as the Admirable Crichton, de- 
clared that he was infinitely better than Crichton, 
or anv other admiral that had ever been in the 



MORE NEWS. 25 

sister service. The deux-temps valse had just been 
imported in those days, and Alsager danced it 
with a long quick swinging step which no one 
else could accomphsh; he played the cornet al- 
most as well as Koenig ; while at Windsor he 
went into training and beat the Hammersmith 
Flyer, a professional brought down by the envious 
on purpose to degrade him, in a half-mile race 
with twelve flights of hurdles ; he was a splendid 
amateur actor ; and had covered the rough walls 
of the barrack-room at Windsor with capital cari- 
catm-es of all his brother officers. He knew all 
the mysteries of " battalion drill" too, and had 
been adjutant of the regiment. When, therefore, 
he threw up his commission and sold out, every 
body was utterly astonished, and all sorts of ru- 
mom's were at once put into circulation. He had 
had a quarrel with his governor, old Sir Egre- 
mont Alsager, some said, and left the army to 
spite him. He was bitten with a theatrical mania, 
and going to turn actor (" Was he, by G . ?" said 
Ledger, the light comedian, hitherto his warmest 
admirer ; '' w^e want none of your imitation mock- 



26 EUKKING THE GAUNTLET. 

turtle on the boards !") ; he had got a rehgioiis 
craze, and was gomg to become a Trappist monk ; 
he had taken to drinking; he had lost his head, 
and was witli a keeper in a villa in St. John's 
Wood. All these things were said about him by 
his Idnd friends ; but it is probable that none of 
them were so near the mark as honest Jock 
McLaren of the Scots Fusiliers, a great gaunt 
Scotchman, but the very best ferret in the world 
in certain matters : who said, " Ye may depeend 
upon it there's a wummun in it. Awlsager's a 
deevil among the sax ; and there's a wummun in 
it, I'll bet a croon." Tliis was a liea^y stake for 
Jock, and showed that he was in earnest. 

Be tliis as it may, how that Laurence Alsager 
sold out from her Majestv^'s regiment of Cold- 
stream Guards, and that he was succeeded by 
Peregrine Wilks (whose grandfather, par faren- 
these, kept a ham-and-beef shop in St. Martin's 
Com't), is it not written in the clu'onicles of the 
London Gazette? Immediately after the business 
had been settled. Colonel Alsager left England for 
the Continent. He was heard of at Munich, at 



MORE NEWS. 27 

Berlin, at Vienna (^\'liere he remained for some 
considerable time), and at Trieste, wliere all 
absolute trace of liim was lost, though it was 
believed he had gone off in an Austrian Lloyds' 
steamer to the Piraeus, and that he intended 
travelling through Greece, the Holy Land, and 
Eg}"pt, before he retm-ned home. These were ru- 
mours in which only a very few people interested 
themselves ; society has too much to do to take 
account of the proceedings of its absent mem- 
bers ; and after two years had elapsed Laurence 
Alsager's name was almost forgotten, when, on 
a dull January morning, two letters from him 
arrived in London, . one addressed to the steward 
of the Ma3cenas orderinor a (j-ood dinner for two 
for the next Satm'day night at six ; the other to 
the Honom'able George Bertram of the Foreign 
Office, requesting that distinguished public ser- 
vant to meet his old friend L. A. at the Maecenas, 
dine with him, and go with him afterwards to the 
Parthenium Theatre, wliere a ncAV piece was an 
nounced. 

Honest Mr. Turquand, the club-steward, by 



28 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

natiu'e a reticent man, and one immersed in per- 
j)etual calculation as to ways and means, gave his 
orders to the cook, but said never a word to any 
one else as to the contents of his letter. George 
Bertram, known among his colleagues at the For- 
eign Office as " Blab Bertram," from the fact that 
he never spoke to any body unless spoken to, and 
even then seldom answered, was equally silent ; so 
that Colonel Alsager's arrival at the Maecenas was 
thoroughly unexpected by the members. The 
trimly-shaved old gentlemen at the various tables 
stared with wonder, not unmixed with horror, at the 
long black beard wdiich Alsao-er had ptowu durino; 
his absence. They thought he was some stranger 
who had entered the sacred precincts by mistake ; 
some even had a horrible suspicion that it might 
be a newly-elected man, whose beard had never 
been mentioned to the committee ; and it was not 
until they heard Laurence's clear ringing voice, 
and saw liis eye light up with the old fire, that 
they recognised their long-absent friend. Tlien 
they crowded round him, and wanted to hear aU 
liis two-years' adventm^es and wanderings told in 

 



3I0RE NEWS. 29 

a breath ; but be laughingly shook them off, pro- 
mising full particulars at a later period ; and went 
over to a small corner-table which he had been 
accustomed to select before he went away, and 
which Mr. Turquand had retained for him, where 
he was shortly joined by George Bertram. 

It is probable that no man on earth had a 
greater love for another than had George Bertram 
for Laurence Alsager. When he saw his old 
friend seated at the table, his heart leapt Avithin 
him, and a great knot rose in his tlu'oat ; but he 
w^as a thorouo'h Eno;lishman, so he mastered his 
feelings, and, as he gripped Laurence's out- 
stretched hand, merely said, ^' How do?" 

'' My dear old George," said Laurence heart- 
ily, " what an age since we met ! How splen- 
didly well you seem to be ! A little stouter, per- 
haps, but not aged a day. Well, I've a thousand 
questions to ask, and a thousand things to tell you. 
What the deuce are you staring at?" 

" Beard I" said Mr. Bertram, who had never 
taken his eyes oif Laurence's chin since he sat 
down opposite to him. 



30 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

" Oh, ah, yes !" said Laurence. " That's a 
relic of savage life, which I shall get rid of in a 
few days ; but I didn't like to ha^'e him oflF sud- 
denly, on account of the change of climate. I 
suppose it shocks the old gentlemen here ; but I 
can't help it. Well, now you'ye got oceans of 
news to tell me. It's ftdl a twelvemonth since 
I had letters from England; not a line since I 
left Jerusalem ; and . ah, by Jove ! I've never told 
you how I happened to come home in such a 
hurry. It's horribly absurd and ridiculous, you 
know; I hadn't the least idea of returning for 
at least another year. But one sultry evening, 
far up the Nile, as I was lying back in my 
kandjia, . boat, you know, . being towed up by 
tln-ee naked chaps, pulling away like grim death, 
we met another kandjia coming down. In it 
were two unmistakable Englishmen; fellows in 
all-round collars and stiff wide-awakes, w^ith pug- 
gerees put on all the TVTong way. Tliey were 
chattering to each other; and I thought, mider 
that burning sky and solemn stilhiess, and sur- 
rounded by all the memorials of the past, they 



MORE NEWS. 31 

would probably be quoting Herodotus, or Gard- 
ner Wilkinson, or, better than all, Eothen ; but, 
just as they passed me, what do you think I 
heard one of them say to the other ? ' No, no, 
Jack,' said he ; ' you're ^^Tong there : it was 
Buckstone that played Box !' He did, by Jove ! 
Under the shadow of the Pyramids, and close by 
the Sphinx, and the vocal Memnon, and Cheops 
and Cephi'enes, and all the rest of it, to hear of 
Buckstone and Box and Cox! You can't tell 
the singular eifect it had on me. I began to 
feel an awful longing for home ; what the Ger- 
mans call Heimweli came upon me at once. I 
longed to get back once more, and see the clubs 
and the theatres, and all the old life, which I had 
fled from so willino;ly ; and I ordered the Ai-abs 
to turn the boat round, and get me back to Cairo 
as quickly as possible. When we got to Cairo, I 
went to Shepherd's, and found the house fidl of 
a lot of cadets and fellows going out ; and one of 
them had a Times, and in it I saw the announce- 
ment of the new piece at the Parthenium ; and, 
I don't know why, . I fixed upon that as a sort 



32 EUKNING THE GAUNTLET. 

of date-mark, and I said, ' I'll be back in Eng- 
land to see that first niglit;' and the next day 
I started for Alexandi'ia. And on board the P.- 
and-0. boat I made the acquaintance of the post- 
office courier in charge of the Indian mail, a very 
good feUow, who, when he found my anxiety to 
get on, took me with him in hmfourgon; brought 
me throucrh from Marseilles to Calais without 
an instant's delay; let me come on board the 
special boat waiting for him; and landed me at 
London Bridge last night, having got through 
my journey Avonderfully. And I'm in time for 
the first night at the Parthenium ; and . and now 
tell me aU your news." 

" Blab" Bertram had been di'eading tlie com- 
mand, which he knew involved his talking more 
in twenty minutes than he was in the habit of 
doincr in a month. He had been delifrhted to 
hear Laurence rattling on about his own adven- 
tures, and fondly hoped that he should avoid 
any revelations for that night at least. But the 
dread edict had been issued, and George knew 
his friend too well not to obey. So he said with 



MOKE NEWS. 33 

a sigh, di-awing out a small note-book, " Yes, I 
knew you'd be naturally anxious to hear about 
people, and what had happened since you've been 
away ; and so, as I'm not much good at telling 
things, I got Alick Geddes of our office . you 
know him; Lord M'MulFs brother . to put down 
some notes, and I'll read them to you." 

" That'll do, George," said Lam-ence laugh- 
ing ; " hke the police, ^ from information you have 
received,' eh? Xever mind, so long as I hear it. 
. Mr. Turquand, they've not finished that bin of 
Thomson and Crofts' '20 dm'ing my absence ? Xo. 
Then bring us a bottle, please. . And now, George, 
fire away !" 

For the purposes of this story it would be 
needless to recount all the bits of scandal and 
chit-chat, interesting and amusing to those ac- 
quainted with the various actors in the di-ama, but 
utterly vapid to every one else, which the com- 
bined memories of Messrs. Alexander Geddes and 
George Bertram, clerks in the Foreign Office, 
and gentlemen gomg a great deal into all kinds of 
society, had furbished up and put together for the 

YOL. I. D 



34 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

delectation of Colonel Alsager. It was the old, 
old story of London life, Ivno^vn to eveiy one, and, 
mutatis nominihus, narrated of so many people. 
Tom's marriage, Dick's divorce, and Harry's 
going to the bad. Jack Considine left the ser- 
vice, and become sheep -farmer in Australia. 
Little Tim Stratum of the Treasury, son of old 
Dr. Stratum the geologist, marrying that big 
Indian widow -woman, and becoming a heavy 
swell, with a house in Grosvenor Square. Ned 
Walters dead, . fit of heart-disease, or some in- 
fernal thing, . dead, by Jo^'e ! and that pretty 
wife of his, and all those nice little children, 
gone . God knows where ! Lady Cecilia mar- 
ried? oh, yes; and she and Townshend get on 
very well, they say; but that Italian chap, Di 
Varese, with the black beard and the tenor voice, 
always hanging about the house. Gertrude Ne- 
therby rapidly becoming an old woman, thin as 
a whipping-post, by George ! and general notion 
of nose - and - cliinniness. Florence Sackville, as 
lovely and as jolly as ever, was asldng after you 
only last night. Tliese, and a hundred other little 



MORE NE^ys. 35 

bits of gossip about men in liis old regiment, 
and women reputable and disreputable, formerly 
of his acquaintance, of tiu'f-matters and club-scan- 
dals, interspersed witli such anecdotes, seasoned 
with gros sel, as circulate when the ladies have 
left the dinner-table, did Laurence Alsager listen 
to; and when George Beiiram stopped speaking 
and shut up his note-book, ' he found himself 
warmlj complimented on his capital budget of 
news by his recently- arrived friend. 

"You've done admirably, old fellow," said 
Laurence. " 'Pon my oatli I don't think there's 
any body we know that you haven't had some- 
thing pleasantly unpleasant to say about. Xow," 
taking out his watch, '' we must be off to the 
theatre, and we've just time to smoke a cigarette 
as we walk down there. You took the two 
stalls?" 

" Well . no," replied George Bertram, hesi- 
tating rather suspiciously ; " I only took one for 
you; I . I'm going . that is . I've got a seat in 
a box." 

" George, you old vagabond, you don't mean 



36 



RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 



to say you're going to desert me the first niglit I 
come back?" 

" Well. I couldn't help it. You see I was 
engaged to go with these people before you \^Tote ; 
and." 

" All right ; what people are they ?" 

" The Mitfords." 

" Mitfords ? Coniiais j^asr 

" Oh, yes ; you know them fast enough ; oh, 
I forgot . all since you left ; only just happened." 

" Look here, George : I've had quite enough 
of the Sphinx during the last six months, and I 
don't want any of the enigma business. What 
has only just happened ?" 

^' Mitford . and all that. You'll give me no 
peace till I tell you. You recollect Mitford ? 
with us at Oxford . Brasenose man, not Clu'ist 
Church." 

"Mitford, Mitford I Oh, I recollect ; big, fair 
man, goodish - looking. His father failed and 
smashed up ; didn't he ? and our man went into 
a line regiment. Oh, by Jove, yes ! and came to 
grief about mistaking somebody else's name for 



MOKE NEWS. 37 

Ms o^\'n, and backing a bill with it ; didn't he ? 
at Canterbuiy, or somewhere where he was quar- 
tered ?" 

" Same man. Had to leave service, and came 
to awful grief. Ran away, and nothing heard of 
him. His uncle, Sir Percy, and two little boys 
drowned off Malta, and title came to om' man. 
Couldn't find him any where; at last some Jew 
lawyer was employed, put detectives on, and 
hunted up Mitford, nearly starved, in some public 
in Wapping, or somewhere in the East-end. When 
he heard what a swell he'd become, he had a fit, 
and they thought he'd die. But he's been all square 
ever since ; acted like a gentleman ; went down to 
the place in Devonshire Avhere Ms people lived 
before the smash ; married the clergyman's daugh- 
ter to whom he had been engaged in the old days ; 
and they've just come up to town for the winter." 

" Married the clergyman's daughter to whom 
he had been engaged in the old days, eh? George 
Bertram, I saw a blush mantle on your ingenuous 
cheek, sir, when you alluded to the lady. What 
is she like ?" 



38 EUlsNrN'G THE GAUNTLET. 

" Stuff, Laurence ! you did notliing of the 
kind. Lady Mitford is a xery delightful wo- 
man." 

" Carambaj Master George ! If I were Sir 
Mitford, and heard you speak of my lady in that 
eai-nest manner, I should keep a sharp eye upon 
you. So you've not improved in that respect." 

George Bei'tram, whose amourettes were of the 
most innocent description, but to accuse whom of 
the wildest profligacy was a favom'ite joke with 
his friends, bluslied deeper than ever, and only 
nttered an indignant ^' Too bad, too bad I" 

^' Come along, sir," said Laurence; "I'll sit 
in the silent solitude of the stalls while you are 
basking in beauty in a box." 

^' Eut you'll come up and be introduced, Lau- 
rence ?" 

"Not I, thank you; I'll leave tlie field cleai' 
for you." 

" But Sir Charles Mtford would be so glad 
to renew his old acquaintance with you." 

" Would he ? Then Sir Charles Mitford must 
reserve that dehght for another occasion. I shall 



MORE XEWS. 



39 



be here after the play, and we can liave a further 
talk if YOU can descend to mundane matters after 
your felicity. Now come along." And they 



strolled out together. 



CHAPTER III. 

AT THE PARTHENIUM. 

The Partlienium Theatre at the time I write of 
was a thino[ by itself. Since then there have been 
a score of imitations of it, none of them coming np 
to the o-reat oriOTnal, but sufficiently like to have 
dimmed the halo surrounding the first attempt, 
and to have left the British public undecided as 
to whom belono^ed the laurels due to those who 
first attempted to transform a wretched, dirty, hot 
building into an elegant, well-ventilated, comfort- 
able salon. It was at the Parthenium that stalls 
w^ere first introduced. Up to that time they had 
been only kno^vn at the Opera ; and it was the 
triumph of the true British playgoer, . the man 
who had seen Jack Bannister, sir, and Mimden 
and Dowton, and all those true performers who 
have never had any successors, sir, . that he al- 



AT THE PARTHENKJM. 41 

ways sat in the fi'ont row of the pit, the only place 
in the house whence the performance could be pro- 
perly seen. "When Mr. Frank Likely undertook 
the lesseeship of the Parthenium, he thought he saw 
his way to a yery excellent improyement founded 
on this basis. He hated the true British playgoer 
with all his heart. In the style of entertainment 
about to be produced at the Parthenium, he had not 
the smallest intention of pandering to, or eyen pro- 
pitiating, that great historic character ; but he had 
perfect readiness to see that the space imme- 
diately behind the orchestra was the most yaluable 
in the theatre ; and so he set carpenters at once 
to work, and uprooted the hard black deal pit- 
benches, and erected in their stead rows of de- 
licious fauteidh in crimson yelyet, broad soft 
padded-backed lounges with seats which turned 
upon hinges, and left a space underneath for your 
hat and coat ; charming nests where you could loll 
at your ease, and see and hear to perfection. The 
true British playgoer was thus relegated to a dark 
and dismal space underneath the dress-circle, 
where he coidd see little saye the parting of the 



42 KTINNIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

back-liair of the swells in the stalls, and the leofs, 
from the knee downward, and feet of the people 
on the stao-e ; Avhere the ceilino^ seemed momen- 
tarily descendincr on him, as on the prisoner in 
the story of the "Iron Sln-ond ;" and where the 
knees of the orange-sellers dug him in the back, 
while their baskets banged him in front. It is 
needless to say that on the Saturday after the 
opening of the Parthenium under the new regime, 
the columns of the Curtain, the Thesinan Wag- 
goner, and the Scourge were found brimming over 
with stinging letters from the true British play- 
goer, all complaining of his treatment, and all 
commencing, " By what right, sir, I should like 
to know." But Mr. Frank Likely cared little 
enough for this, or for any thing else indeed, so 
long as he could keep up liis villa at Roehampton, 
have his Sunday parties, let his wife di'ess like a 
duchess, have two or three carriages, and never 
be compelled to pay any body any thing. Not to 
pay was a perfect mania with him. Not that he 
had not the money. Mr. Humphreys, the treasurer, 
used to come round about half-past ten with bags 



AT THE PARTHEXIOI. 43 

of gold and silver, wliicli were duly deposited in 
Mr. Likely's dressing-room, and thence transferred 
to liis carriage by his di*esser, a man whose pound- 
a-week wao-es had been due for a month; but if ever 
he were to ask for a settlement Mr. Likely would 
look at him with a comic surprise, give a short 
laugh, say, " He, he I you don't mean it, Evans ; 
I haven't a fourpenny-piece ;" and step into the 
brougham to be bowled away through the summer 
night to lamb-cutlets and peas and Sillery Mous- 
seux at the Roehampton ^^lla, with a prime cigar 
on the lawn or under the conservatory afterwards. 
He took the money, though he never paid any one, 
and no one knew what became of it ; but when he 
went tlu-ough the Court the Commissioner com- 
plimented him pubhcly, as he gave him his cer- 
tificate, and told him in his private room that he, 
the Commissioner, had experienced such pleasure 
from Mr. and Mrs. Likely's charming talent, that 
he, the Commissioner, was really glad it lay in 
his power to make him, Mr. Likely, some little 
retm-n. 

It is, however, only in his position as lessee of 



44 RUNKIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

tlie Parthenium Theatre that we have to do \vith 
Mr. Frank Likely, and therein he certainly was 
admirable. A man of common-sense and educa- 
tion, he saw plainly enough that if he wished to 
amuse the joublic, he must show them something 
with which they were perfectly familiar. They 
yawned over the rage of Lear, and slept through 
Belvidera's recital of her woes ; the mere fact of 
Captain Absolute's wearing powder and breeches 
precluded their taking any interest in liis love- 
affairs; but as soon as they were shown people 
such as they were accustomed to see, doing things 
which they themselves were accustomed to do, 
ordinarily dressed, and moving amongst ordinary 
surroundings, they were delighted, and flocked in 
crowds to the Parthenium. Mr. Likelv p-ave such 
an entertainment as suited the taste of his special 
visitors. The performances commenced at eight 
with some trifle, during the acting of which 
the box-doors were perpetually banging, and 
early visitors to the stalls were carefully stamped 
upon and ground against by the club -diners stead- 
ily pushing their way to their seats. Tlie piece 



AT THE PARTHENIUjM. 45 

of the evenlno; commenced about nine and lasted 
till half-past ten ; and then there came forty min- 
utes of a brilliant bm-lesque, with crowds of pretty 
coryphees, volleys of rattling pmis and parodies, 
crackling allusions to popular topics, and resplen- 
dent scenery by Mr. Coverflats, the great scenic 
artist of the day. When it is recollected that though 
only two or three of the actors were really first- 
rate, yet that all were far above the average, 
being dressed mider Mr. Likely's eye, and taught 
every atom of their ^^ business;" that the theatre 
was thoroughly elegant, and unlike any other 
London house in its lio-ht-blue-and-gold decora- 
tions and airy muslin curtains, and that ii?> foyer 
and lobbies were happy meeting-gromids for wits 
and men of fashion, . no Avonder that "first- 
nights" at the Parthenium were looked forward to 
with special dehght. 

On the occasion on which Colonel Alsager 
and Mr. Bertram were about to be j^resent, a 
more than ordinary amount of cm'iosity pre- 
vailed. For some wrecks it had been vaguely 
rumoured that the new comedy Tned in the 



46 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Furnace^ about to be produced, was written 
by SpofForth, that marvellous fellow who com- 
bined the author with the man of fashion, who 
was seen every where, at the Premieress's recep- 
tions, at the fast clubs, always associating with 
the best people, and who flavoured his novels and 
his plays in the most piquante manner with re- 
productions of characters and stories well known 
in the London world. It was rmnom^ed that 
in Tried in the Furnace the plot strongly re- 
sembled the details of a great scandal in high 
life, which had formed the ijlat cle resistance of 
the gossips of the pre\'ious season ; and it was 
also said that the hero, an officer in the Guards, 
would be played by Dacre Pontifex, who at that 
time had turned all women's heads, who went 
regularly into society, and who, to a handsome 
face and figure and a thorouglily gentlemanly 
bearing, seemed to add great natural histrionic 
genius. 

All these reports, duly set afloat in the various 
theatrical journals, and amongst the particular 
people who think and talk of nothing else but 



AT THE PAKTHENIUM. 47 

the drama and its professors, . a set permeating 
everj class of society, . had whetted the pubhc 
appetite to an miparalleled amomit of keenness ; 
and long before its representation, all the retain- 
able stalls, boxes, and seats generally, for the first 
night of Tried in the Furnace had been secured. 
The gallerv^-people were certain to come in, because 
Mugger, the low comedian, had an exceedingly 
humorous part, and the gallery worshipped 
Mugger; and the diminished area of the j^it 
would probably be thronged, as it had been 
whispered in the columns of the Scourge that 
the new play was reported to contain several 
hits at the aristocracy, invariably a sure " draw" 
with the pittites. It was only of the upper boxes 
that the manager felt doubtful; and for this re- 
gion he accordingly sent out several sheaves of 
orders, which were duly presented on the night 
by wild weird-looking women, with singular head- 
dresses of scraps of lace and shells, dresses neither 
high nor low, grimy gloves too long in the fin- 
gers, and bonnets to be left with the custodian. 
It was a great night ; there could be no doubt 



48 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

of that ; Humj^hreys had said so, and Avhen Hum- 
plu'eys so far committed himself, he was gene- 
rally right. Humphreys was Mr. Likely's trea- 
surer, confidential man, factotum. He stood at 
the front of the theatre to receive the important 
people, . notably the press, . to settle discord, to 
hint what was the real strength of the forth- 
coming piece, to beg a little indulgence for Miss 
Satterthwaite's hoarseness, or for the last scene of 
the second act, which poor Coverflats, worn off 
his legs, had scarcely had time to finish. He 
knew exactly to whom to bow, with whom to 
shake hands. He knew exactly where to plant 
the different representatives of the press, keeping 
up a proper graduation, yet never permitting any 
critic to think that he was not sufficiently hon- 
oured. He knew when to start the applause, 
when to hush the house into silence. Better than 
all, he knew where to take Mr. Likely's accept- 
ances to get them discomited; kept an accomit 
of the dates, and paid the renewal fees out of 
the previous night's receipts. An invaluable man 
Humphreys ; a really wonderful fellow ! 



AT THE PARTHEXIU3I. 49 

When Laurence Alsager flung away the end 
of his cigarette under the Pai-thenium portico, 
and strolled leisurely into the house, he found 
Humphreys standing in exactly the same position 
in which he had last seen him two years since ; and 
he almost quailed as, delivering up his ticket, he 
returned the treasurer's bow, and thanked him for 
his welcome. '^ Glad to see you back. Colonel. 
Something worth showing to you to-night I" and 
then Laurence lauo;hed outrio;ht. He had been 
away for two years ; he had seen the Sphinx and 
the Pyramids, and all the wonders of the East, 
to say nothing of the European continent ; and 
here was a man congratulating himself that in 
a three -act tinpot play they had something 
worthy of his observation. So he nodded and 
laughed, and passed on into the theatre. AYell, 
if there were no change in Humplu'eys, there was 
little enough in any one else. Tliere they were, 
all the old set: half-a-dozen newspaper critics 
dotted over the front rows of the stalls ; two or 
three attached to the more important journals 
in private boxes; celebrated author surrounded 

VOL. I. E 



50 EUXNING THE GAUNTLET. 

bj his family in private box; other celebrated 
author scowhng by himself in orchestra-stall ; two 
celebrated artists who always came to first-nights 
amusing themselves by talking about art before 
the curtain goes up ; fat man with vulgar wife, 
with wreath of roses in her head, . alderman, 
wholesale stationer, said to be Mr. Frank Likely' s 
backer, in best stage - box ; opposite stage - box 
being reserved by Jewish old party, landlord of 
the theatre, and now occupied by the same, asleep 
and choking. Lady Ospringe of com'se, with 
(equally of com'se) the latest lion of the day by 
her side . on this occasion a very little man, with 
long fair hair, who, as Laurence afterwards 
learned, had written a poem all about blood and 
slaughter. The Duke and Duchess of Tantallan, 
who are mad about private theatricals, who have 
turned the old noiihern feudal castle into an 
uncomfortable theatre, and whose most constant 
guests are little Hyams (the costumier) and Jubber 
(^ heavy old man') of the Cracksideum Theatre, 
who ' gets up' the duke's plays. Sir Gerald Spoon- 
bill and Lord Otho Faulconbridge, jolly old boys, 



AT THE PARTHEXinr. 51 

flushed with hastilj-eaten dinner at Foodie's, but 
delighting in the drama; the latter especially ha^dng 
inherited taste for it, his mother having been . 
well, you know all about that. That white w^aist- 
coat which o-listens in the stalls coidd belono; to 
no one but Mr. Marshall Moss, next to whom sit 
on either side Mr. Gompertz, the stock-jobber, 
and Mr. Sergeant Orson, the last-named having 
entertained the other gentlemen at a very snug 
little dinner at the Haresfoot Club. Nor was 
pipe-clay wanting. The story of the plot, the 
intended character to be assumed by Mr. Ponti- 
fex, had been talked over at Woolwich, at Bromp- 
ton, . where the sucking Indian heroes, men 
whose names long afterwards w^ere household 
words during the Mutiny campaigns, were learn- 
ing soldiering, . at the Senior and the Junior, 
and at the Eag, the members of which, awaiting 
the completion of their present palatial resid- 
ence, then occupied a modest tenement in St. 
James's Square. There was a boxful of Plun- 
gers, big, solemn, heavy men, with huge cm-ling 
moustaches, conspicuous among whom were Algy 



UNIVERSITY OF 



52 EUKNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Forrester and Cis Hetheriiigton of the Blues ; 
Markliam Bowers of the Life Guards, who shot 
the militia-sur2:eon behind the windmill at Wim- 
bledon; and Dick Edie of the 4th Dragoon 
Guards . Dick Edie, the solicitor's son, who after- 
wards ran away with Lady Florence 'Ormolu, 
third daughter of the house of Porphyry ; and 
on beino^ reconciled and introduced to whom on 
a future occasion, the Dowager Countess of Por- 
phyry was good enough to make the remark that 
she " had no idea the lower orders were so clean." 
Where are ye now, lustrous counts, envied 
dandies of that bygone time? Algy Forrester, 
thirty-four inches round the girth, has a son at 
Oxford, breeds fat sheep, and is only seen in Lon- 
don at cattle-show time. Cis Hetherington, duly 
heralded at every outlawry proclamation, lies 
'perdu in some one of the barren islands forming 
the Hebrides cluster. Markham Bowers fell in 
the Balaklava charge, joierced through and through 
by Cossack spearmen; and Major-general Richard 
Edie, M.P., is the chief adviser and the trusted 
agent of his mother-in-law, the Dowager Countess 



AT THE PARTHEXIUM. DO 

of Porphyry. In the next box, hiding behind the 
muslin curtains, and endeavoiu'ing to hide her 
convulsions of laughter behind her fan, sat little 
Pauline Desiree, pi^emitre danseuse at the Opera 
Comique, with Harry Lindon of the Coldstreams, 
and Prothero of the Foreign Office, and Tom 
Hodgson the comic writer; none of them one atom 
changed, all of them wonder-struck at the man in 
the big beard, all of them delighted at suddenly 
recognising in him an old friend, not much 
thought of perhaps dm-ing his absence, as is the 
Avay of tlie world, but certainly to be welcomed 
now that he was once more among them. 

Xot one atom changed ; all of them just tlie 
same. What were his two years of absence, his 
wanderino;s in burnino; solitudes, or amono-st 
nomadic tribes? His sudden rushing away had 
been undertaken with a purpose ; and whether that 
purpose had been fulfilled was known to him- 
self alone. He rather thought it had, as, without 
an extra heart-beat, he looked into a box on the 
pit-tier, and his grave face flashed into a sar- 
donic grin as his eyes lit on the bald foreliead 



54 Rm?NING THE GAUNTLET. 

and plaited shirt-frill of an elderly gentleman, in- 
stead of the light-chestnut bands and brilliant bust 
which once reigned dominant there on every "first 
night." But all the others were just the same; 
even the people he did not know were exactly like 
those whom he had left, and precisely answered 
to those whom he should have expected to find 
there. Xo, not all. The door of a box on the 
grand tier next the dress-circle opened with a 
clang, and a lady whom he had never seen before, 
coming to the front, settled herself in the corner 
opposite the stage. Tlie noise of the door at- 
tracted the attention of the house ; and Ventus, 
then plaj'ing his celebrated cornet-solo in the 
overtm^e, cursed the interruption ; a whisper ran 
romid the stalls ; the ari'ival was telegraphed to 
the Guards' box : this must be some star that had 
risen on the horizon since Lam^nce's absence. 
All, there is Blab Bertram at the back of the box ! 
This, then, must be Lady Mitford ! 

She was apparently about twenty, and, so far as 
could be judged from her sitting position, tall and 
shght. Her complexion was red and white, beauti- 



AT THE PARTHENIUM. 55 

fully clear, . tlie white transparent, the red scarlet, 
. and her features regular ; small forehead, straight 
Grecian nose, very short upper-lip, and mouth 
small, with lips rather thin than pouting. Her 
dark-brown hair (fortunately at that time it was 
not considered necessary for beauty to have a 
red head), taken off beliind the ears in two tight 
bands, showed the exquisite shape of her head, 
wliich was very small, and admirably fitted on 
the neck, the only fault of which was its excess 
in length. She was dressed entirely in white, 
Avith a green necklace, and a tiny wreath of green 
i\y -leaves was mtertwined among the braids into 
which her hair was fastened at the back of her 
head. She took her seat gracefully, but looked 
round, as Laui-ence noticed, with a certain air 
of strangeness, as though miaccustomed to such 
scenes ; then immediately turned her eyes, not on 
the other occupants of the theatre, not on the stage, 
nor on George Bertram, w^ho, after some apparent 
demur, took the front seat opposite to her, but to- 
wards a tall man, who relieved her of her cloak, 
and handed her a fan, and in whom Alsager recog- 



56 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

nised the Charles Mitford of his Oxford days. A 
good reahsation of Tennyson's Sir "Walter Vivian, . 

" Ko little lily-handed baronet he ; 
A stout broad-shouldered genial Englishman," . 

was Sir Charles Mitford, with strongly-marked 
well-cut features, bright blue eyes, curling red- 
dish-broAvn hair, large light breezy whiskers, and 
a large mouth gleaming with sound white teeth. 
The sort of man ^^ho, you could tell at a glance, 
would have a ^ery loud hearty laugh, would grip 
yom* hand until your fingers ached, would be 
rather awkward in a room, but who would never 
flinch across comitry, and never grow tired among 
the turnips or over the stubble. An mimistakable 
gentleman, but one to whom a shooting-coat and 
gaiters would be more becoming than the even- 
ing-dress he then wore, and who evidently felt 
the moral and physical restraint of his white 
choker, from the way in which he occasionally 
tugged at that evidence of civihsation. Shortly 
after they had settled themselves, the curtain went 
up, and all eyes were turned to the stage ; but 
Laurence noticed that Lady Mitford was seated 



AT THE PAETHEXIUM. 57 

SO as to partly lean against her husband, wliile 
his left handj resting on her chair-back, occasion- 
allj' touched the braids of her hair. George Ber- 
tram seemed to be entirely overlooked by his com- 
panions, and was able to enjoy his negative plea- 
sure of holding his tongue to the fullest extent. 

They were right who had said that Spoiforth 
had put forth all his power in the new piece, and 
had been even more than usually personal. The 
characters rej^resented were, an old peer, wigged, 
rouged, and snuff-box bearing, one of thoe won- 
derful creations which have never been seen on 
the English stage since Farren left it; his young 
wife, a dashing comitess, more frequently in a 
riding-habit than any thing else, with a light 
jewel-handled whip, with which she cut her male 
friends over the shoulders or poked them in the 
ribs, . as is, we know, the way of countesses in 
real life; a dashing young cavahy-officer very 
much smitten with the countess, excellently played 
by Dacre Pontifex, who admirably contrived to do 
two things at the same time . to satisfy the swells 
by his representation of one of their class, . 



58 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

'' Doosid good tiling ; not like usual dam cawick- 
acliaw," they said, . and simultaneously to use cer- 
tain -words, plirases, and tones, to fall into certain 
attitudes and use certain gestures, all of wliich 
were considered by the pittites as a mockery of 
the aristocracy, and were delighted in accord- 
ingly. It being an established fact that no play at 
the Parthenium could go down without Mugger 
the low comedian, and there being in the '^ scan- 
dal in high life," which Spofforth had taken for his 
plot, no possible character which Mugger could have 
portrayed, j)eople were wondering what would 
be done for him. The distribution of the other 
characters had been apparent to all ever since it 
was known that Spofforth had the story in hand : 
of com'se Farren would be the marquis, and Miss 
Amabel the marchioness (Spofforth had lowered 
liis characters one step in rank, and removed the 
captain from the Guards to the cavalry . a great 
stroke of genius), and Pontifex the mihtary lover. 
But what could be done for Mugger? Tlie only 
other character in the real story, the man by 
whom the intrigue was found out, and all the 



AT THE PARTHEXIUM. 59 

mischief accidentally caused, was a simple old 
clergyman, vicar of the parish close by my lord's 
comitry estate, and of course they could not have 
introduced a clergyman on to the stage, even if 
Mugger could have played the part. This was a 
poser. At first Mugger proposed that the clergy- 
man should be turned into a Quaker^, when he 
could appear in broad-brim and drab, call every 
body " thee," and snuffle through his nose ; but 
this was overruled. At last Spofforth hit upon 
a happy idea : the simple old clergyman should be 
tru-ned into a garrulous mischief-making physi- 
cian ; and when Mugger appeared at the back of 
the stage, wonderfidly " made-up" in a fluffy 
white hat, and a large shirt-frill protruding from 
his waistcoat, exactly like a celebrated London 
doctor of the day, whose appearance was familiar 
to all, the shouts of delight rose from every part 
of the house. This, with one exception, was the 
hit of the evening ; the exception was when the 
captain, in a letter to his beloved, writes, '' Fly, 
fly with me ! These arms once locked round you, 
no blacksmith shall break them asmider." Now 



60 RUisXING THE GAUNTLET. 

this was an expression wliicli had actually been 
used by the lover in the '' scandal in high life/' 
and had been made immense fun of by the comi- 
sel in the trial which ensued, and by the Sunday 
newspapers in commenting on that trial. "When, 
therefore, the phrase was spoken by Pontifex in 
his most telling manner, it created first a thrill 
of astonishment at the author's daring, then a tit- 
ter, tlien a tremendous roar of laughter and ap- 
plause. Mr. Frank Likely, who was standing at 
the wino* when he heard this, nodded comfortably 
at Spofforth, who was in the opposite stage-box 
anxiously watching the eifect of every line ; and 
the latter shut up his glass, like the Duke of 
Wellington at Waterloo, and felt that the battle 
was won. "It was touch-and-go, my boy," 
Likely said to the author afterwards ; " one single 
liitch in that speech, and the whole thing would 
have been 2;oosed off the stao-e." 

Tliere were, however, a few j^eople in the 
theatre who were not so intensely delighted with 
Mr. Spofforth's ingenuitv' and boldness. Lau- 
rence Alsager, whose absence from England had 



AT THE PARTHENIUM. 61 

prevented liis hearing the original story, tliouglit 
tlie whole play dreary enough, though he appre- 
ciated the art of Pontifex and the buffoonery of 
Mucrrrer ; but the j^i'eat roar of delio-ht cauMit him 
in the middle of a yawn, and he looked romid 
with astonishment to see how a very silly phrase 
coidd occasion such an amomit of laughter. Glanc- 
ing round the house, his eyes fell upon Lady Mit- 
ford, and he saw that her cheeks were flushed, her 
looks downcast, and her lips compressed. She had 
been in the greatest wonderment, poor child, dur- 
ing the whole of the piece: the manners of the peo- 
ple represented were to her as strange as those of 
the Ashantees; she heard her own language and 
did not understand it; she saw men and women, 
apparently intended to be of her own nation and 
station, conducting themselves towards each other 
in a manner she had never heard of, much less 
seen ; she fancied there had been a laxity of speech 
and morals pervading the play, but she only knew 
it when the roar of welcome to Mr. Pontifex's 
hint about the blacksmith fell upon her ear. She 
had never heard the origin of the phrase, but her 



62 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

natural instinct told lier it was coarse and gross ; 
slie laiew it from the manner in Avliicli lier hus- 
band, miable to restrain a loud guffaw, ended with 
" Too bad, too bad, by Jove !" She knew it by 
the manner in which Mr. Bertram studiously 
turned his face away from her to the stage ; from 
the manner in which the ladies all romid endea- 
vom'ed to hide their laughter behind their fans, 
oblivious of the betrayal afforded by their shaking 
shoulders ; she knew it from the look of intense 
disgust in the face of that curious-looking bearded 
man in the stalls, whose glances her eyes hap- 
pened to meet as she looked down. 

Yes, Laurence Alsager was as thoroughly 
disgusted as he looked, and that was saying 
much ; for he had the power of tin-owing great 
savageness of expression into his bright eyes and 
thin lips. Here had a sudden home-sickness, an 
indescribable longing, come upon him, and he had 
hurried back after two-years' absence ; and now 
within half-a-dozen hours of his arrival he had 
sickened at the change. He hated the theatre, 
and the grinning fools who laughed at tlie im- 



AT THE PARTHENIUM, 63 

modest rubbish, and the grinning fools who ut- 
tered it; he hated the conventionahty of dress 
and liAdng; he could not stand going in with a 
regular ruck of people again, and having to con- 
form to all their ways. He would cut it at once ; 
go down to Knockholt to-morrow, and stay a 
couple of days with Sir Peregrine just to see the 
old governor, and then be off again to South 
America, to do prairies and bisons and that sort 
of thing. 

As he made this resolution, the cm'tain fell 
amidst a storm of applause, and rose again to 
show the actors in a row, bowing delightedly 
with their hands on their waistcoats ; Spofforth 
'^ bowed his acknowledgments from a private 
box," and kissed his hand to Alsager, who re- 
turned the salute with a very curt nod, then rose 
and left the theatre. In the lobby he met the 
Mitford party, and was quietly slipping by when 
Sir Charles, after whispering to Bertram, touched 
his shoulder, saying, " Colonel Alsager, let me 
renew our old acquaintance." There was no 
escape from this big man's cheery manner and 



64 EmWING THE GAUNTLET. 

outstretched hand; so Laurence, after an in- 
stant's adimrablj-feigned forgetfiilness, returned 
the grasp, saymg, '^ Ah, Mitford I thmk? of 
Brasenose in the old days ?" 

" Yes, yes, to be sure ! All sorts of things 
happened since then, you know." 

" Oh yes, of course ; though I've only been 
in Encrland six hours I've heard of vour luck 
and the baronetcy. George Bertram here is 
such a terrific talker, he couldn't rest until he 
had told me aU the news." 

This set Sir Charles Mitford off into one of 
his great roars again, at the finish of which he 
said, "Let me introduce you to my wife; she's 
just here with Bertram. . Here, Greorgie darling, 
this is Colonel Alsager, an old acquaintance of 
mine." 

Of any one else Mitford would have said " an 
old friend;" but as he spoke he glanced at Lau- 
rence's stem grave expression, and changed the 
word. Perhaps the same feeling influenced Lady 
Mitford, as her bow was constrained; and her 
spirits, already depressed by the performance, 



AT THE PARTHENIUM. 65 

were by no means raised by the introduction to 
tliis sombre stranger. 

Sir Charles tried to rally. " Hope we shall 
see something of you, Alsager, now you're back. 
You'll find us in Eaton Place, and . " 

^'You're very good; but I shall leave town 
to-morrow, and probably England next week." 

Probably no man had ever been more aston- 
ished than was George Bertram as he stood by 
and heard this ; but, true to his creed, he said 
never a word. 

" Leave England !" said Sir Charles. " Why, 
you've only just come back. You're only just . 
All right; we're coming!" This last in answer 
to roars of " Lady Mitford's carriage !" surging 
up the stairs. " Thank you if you'll give my 
wife your arm." 

Lady Mitford accepted this courtesy very fri- 
gidly, just touching Laurence's arm with the 
tips of her fingers. After she had entered the 
brougham, Alsager stood back for Sir Charles 
to follow; but the latter shut the door, saying, 
" Good-night, Georgie dear; I sha'n't be late." 

VOL. I. F 



6Q RLTS^^NG THE GAUNTLET. 

" Oil, Charley, are you not coming with me?" 
she said. 

" No, clear, not just yet. Don't put on such 
a frightened face, Georgie, or Colonel Alsager 
will think I'm a perfect Bluebeard. I'm going 
to sup with Bligh and Winton ; to be introduced 
to that fellow who acted so well, . Pontifex, you 
know. Sha'n't be late, dear. . Home, Daniells." 

And as the carriage drove off, Sh' Charles 
Mitford, forgetting to finish his civil speeches to 
Laurence, shook hands with him and Bertram, 
and wishing them good-night, walked off with 
his companions. 

" Chaff or earnest," said Mr. Bertram when 
they were left alone, " going away again ?" 

" I don't know yet ; I can't tell ; I've half a 
mind to . How horribly disappointed that little 
woman looked when that lout said he was go- 
ing out to supper! He is a lout, your friend, 
George." 

^^ Cubbish; don't know tilings yet; wants 
training," jerked out Mr. Bertram. 

" Wants training, does he? He'll get it soon 



AT THE PARTHEXIOI. 67 

enowh if he consorts much with Bho;h and Win- 
ton, and that set. They'll sharpen him." 

" Like Lady Mitford ?" said Bertram inter- 
rogatively. 

"J think not; I don't know. She seems a 
httle rustic and missish at present. Let's come 
to the Club ; I want a smoke." 

But as they walked along, Laurence '^Tung 
some further particulars about Lady Mitford from 
his friend; and as they ascended the club-steps, 
he said, " I don't think if I had a pretty wife 
like that, I should leave her for the sake of pass- 
ing my evening with Winton and Bligh, or even 
of being introduced to Mr. Pontifex. Would you, 
George ?" 

" Can't say. Never had one," was Mr. Ber- 
tram's succinct reply. 



CHAPTER IV. 

IN THE SMOKIXG-ROOM. 

Among tlie advantages upon wliicli I have not suf- 
ficiently clilateci, the Maecenas Club had a smok- 
ing-room, of which the members were justly proud. 
Great improvements have been lately made ; but 
in those days the smoking-room was a novel in- 
gredient in club-comfort, and its necessity was 
not sufficiently recognised. Old gentlemen, gene- 
rally predominant in clubs, were violently opposed 
to tobacco, save in the shape of the club-snufF; 
regarded smoking as a sure sign of dissipa- 
tion, if not of entirely perverted morality, and 
combined together in committee and out of com- 
mittee to worry, harass, and annoy the devotees 
of the cigar. Consequently these last were in most 
clubs relegated to a big gaunt room at the top 
of the house, which had palpably been formed by 



IX THE S3I0KIXG-E00M. 69 

the removal of the partition between two servants' - 
attics, a room with bare walls, an oil-cloth-covered 
floor like a hair-dresser's cutting-room, a few imi- 
tation-marble-topped tables, some windsor chairs, 
and a slippery black-leather ottoman stuck against 
the wall. Thither, to that tremendous height, the 
waiter, humorously supposed to be devoted to tlie 
room, seldom penetrated ; and you sat and smoked 
your cigar, and sipped yom- gin-and-seltzer when 
you were lucky enough to get it, and watched 
yom' neighbour looming tln-ough a fog of his 
own manufactm'e in solemn silence. It required 
a bold man to penetrate to such howling wilder- 
nesses as the smoking-rooms of the Retrench- 
ment, the True Blue, and the Xo Sm-render in 
those days ; nor were they much better off at the 
Rag, save in the smnmer, when they rigged up a 
tent in the back-yard, and held their tahagie under 
canvas. At the Minerva, they had no smoking-room 
at all ; the bishops, and other old women in power 
there, distinctly refusing to sanction a place for 
any such orgies. But at the Maecenas the smok- 
ing-room was the room in the house. Xone of 



70 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

your attics or cocldofts, none of your stair-climb- 
ing to get into a bare garret at the end of your 
toil. At the Maecenas you went straight through 
the hall, past all the busts of the eminent gentle- 
men, tlu'ough a well-Ht stone passage, where, if 
you were lucky, you might see, in a httle room 
on the right, honest Mr. Turquand the steward 
brewing a jorum of that gin-pmich for which the 
Club was so renowned; past the housekeeper's- 
room, where ]\Irs. Norris always sat breast-high 
in clean table-linen, and surrounded by garlands 
of lemons and groves of spices ; past the big re- 
frigerator, into which Tom Custance tlu'eatened 
to dip little Captain Eodney one night when that 
peppery light-weight had had too much of the 
club-claret ; and then, built over what should have 
been the garden, you fomid the pride of the little 
M. A big square room, lit by a skylight in sum- 
mer, or sun-bm'ner in winter, with so much wall- 
paper as could be seen of a light-green colour, 
but with the walls nearly covered with sketches 
of all kinds in oil, crayon, and water-colour, con- 
tributed by members of the Club. From mantel- 



IN THE SMOKIXG-ROOil. 71 

shelf to ceiling liad been covered by Gilks, in 
distemper, with " Against Wind and Tide" . a 
lovely bit of seascape, to look at which kept you 
cool on the hottest night ; opposite, hung Sandy 
Clobbier's hot staring "Sphinx and Pyramids;" 
Jack Long's crayon caricatm^e of " King Jamie 
inditing the Counterblast" faced a charming 
sketch of a charming actress by Acton, R. A. ; and 
there were a score of other gems of art. Such 
cosy chairs and luxurious lounges ; such ventila- 
tion, watched over specially by Fairfax, the oldest 
and perhaps the joUiest member of the Club ; such 
prime cigars and glorious drinks, and pmigent 
anecdote and cheerftd conversation, were to be 
had nowhere else. 

The room was full when Laurence and Ber- 
tram entered, and the former was immediately 
received with what dramatic critics call " an ova- 
tion ;" that is, the men generally shook hands with 
him, and expressed themselves glad to see liim 
back. 

" And I see by your dress that you've no 
sooner arrived than you've plunged into the vor- 



(Ji EUKN'IKG THE GAUNTLET. 

tex of society, Colonel," said old Fairfax from 
his post of lionoiu' in the chimney-corner. 

" Not I, Mr. Fairfax," replied Laurence, 
laughing ; '^ I've only been to the play." 

" What ! not to Spofforth's,. not to the Par- 
thenium ?" 

'' Why not ? is there any harm ? is it a riddle ? 
what is it ? Let me know at once, because what- 
ever it is, I've been there." 

" No, no ; only there's been a difference of 
opinion about the new piece. Billy Gomon thinks 
it capital, and gave us a flaming account of it ; 
but since then Captain Hetherington has come 
in and spoken very strongly against it. Now, 
Colonel, you can act as umpire between these 
two referees." 

'^ Not at all, not at all," said Mr. Gomon, a 
mild bald-headed little gentleman who did Bos- 
well to Spoffoi-th, and was rewarded for perpe- 
tually blowing his idol's trumpet by opera-ivories 
and first-night private-boxes, and occasional din- 
ners with pleasant theatrical people. '' I merely 
said that there was . ah, an originality, . a . cle- 



IX THE S3I0KIXG-R00M. 73 

vemess, . and . a . above all a gentlemanly tone 
in tlie piece sucli as you never find in any one's 
writings but SpofFortli's." 

Most of the men sitting round lauglied heartily 
as Billy Gomon uttered liis sentiments in the 
mildest, most deprecatory manner, and "svith tlie 
pleasantest smile. 

'^ "Well, that's not bad to l^egin vritli ; and 
now, Cis, Avhat have you got to say ?" 

A big man, half-sitting, half-loUing on an otto- 
man the other side of the room, Avholly occupied in 
smoking a very large cigar, staring at the ceiling 
and pulling his long tawny moustaches, looked up 
at the mention of his name, and said : 

" Well, look here, Alsager : I'm not clever, 
and all that sort of thing, you know ; I'm not 
particularly sweet on my own opinion ; of course, 
being a Plunger I can't speU or write, or j)ro- 
nounce my t^'s, 'cordin' to Punch and the other 
ftmny dogs, and so I've no doubt BiUy Gomon's 
right; and it's doosid clever of Mr. Spofforth, a 
gentleman whose acquaintance I've not the plea- 
sure of possessing . and don't want, by Jove, 



74 EUXIs'DsG THE GAUNTLET. 

that's more ! . doosicl clever of Mr. Si^ofForth to 
rake up a climgliill story out of the newspapers 
when it had been forgotten, and to put the un- 
fortunate devils who were concerned in it on to 
the stage, and bring back all the old scandal. 
I've no doubt it's doosid clever ; and I'm sm'e it's 
a very gentlemanly thing of Mr. Spofforth to do ; 
so gentlemanly that, if any of my people had been 
mixed up in it, I'd have tried the strength of my 
hunting-loop over ]VIi\ Spofforth' s shoulders !" 
And havino; concluded, Cis Hetherinirton leant 
back lazily, and resumed his contemplation of the 
ceiling. 

There was a pause for a moment, and then 
Bertram said : 

" Quite right, Hetherington ; hon-ible piece, 
di'eary and dirty. D . d unpleasant to think that 
one can't go to the theatre with a modest woman 
without ha\^ng innuendoes and doubles entendres 
thrown at you." 

" By Jove, a second edition of the miraculous 
gift of tongues !" said a man seated on Lam-ence's 
right. " I never heard the Blab so chai'mingly 



IN THE SMOKIKG-PvOOM. 75 

eloquent. You Avere witli liiin at tlie theatre, 
Alsager ; who was the lady whom he so deliciously 
described as a ^ modest woman' that he escorted ?" 
The speaker was Lord DollamorCj a man of good 
abihties and position, but a confirmed Sybarite 
and a renoAvned roue. 

" Bertram escorted no one ; he merely had 
a seat in a box with Lady Mitford and her hus- 
band," said Laurence coldly. He hated Lord 
Dollamore. As he himself said, he " didn't go in 
to be straight-laced; but Dollamore was a cold- 
blooded ruffian about women, and, worse still, a 
boaster." 

" Ah, with Lady Mitford !" said Lord Doha- 
more, slowly expelling a mouthful of smoke ; " I 
have the pleasure of her acquaintance. She's 
very nice, Alsager I" 

There was a succulence in the tone in wliich 
these last words were spoken that sounded unplea- 
santly on Laurence's ear ; so he said shortly, " I 
saw Lady Mitford for the first time to-night." 

" Oh, she's very nice ; a little too classical and 
statuesque and Clitc-like for my taste, which leans 



76 KUK^'DsG THE GAUXTLET. 

more to the heaute-du-diaUe order ; but still Lady 
Mitford's charming. Poor little Avoman I she's 
like the yomig bears, with all her troubles before 
her." 

" Her troubles won't be many, one w^ould 
think," said Laurence, who was growing irri- 
tated under his companion's half-patronising, 
half-famihar tone in speaking of Ladj Mitford. 

"" Won't they?" said Lord Dollamore, with an- 
other slow expulsion of smoke ; this time in the 
shape of rings which lie dextrously shot one 
through the other. 

" I can't see how they should. She has 
beauty, wealth, and position; a young husband 
who doats on her, . oh, you needn't grin ; I saw 
him with her in the box." 

" Yes, and I saw him without her, but with 
Bligh and Winton, the two Clarks, who are 
coryphees at Drury Lane, and Mdlle. Carambola 
from the cu'que at Leicester Square, tm-ning in 
to supper at Dubourg's. Kow, then, what do you 
say to that?" 

^^ Nothing. Mitford told his wife he was 



IN THE SMOKnsG-ROOM. 77 

going to supper Vvath Bligli and Winton. I heard 
him." 

^^ Yery hkely ; but you didn't hear him men- 
tion the female element. No, of course not." 

" Sir Charles Mitford being, I presume, a 
gentleman, that suggestion is simply absurd." 

" Pardon me, my dear Colonel Alsager, I 
never make any suggestion that can be called 
^simply absmxl.' The fact is, Alsager, that 
though I'm only, I suppose, five or six years 
older than you, I've seen a deal more of life." 

^^Ofwhichsideofit?" 

" Well, the most interesting, . the worst, of 
course. While you've been momiting guard and 
saluting colours, and teaching buUet-headed re- 
cruits to form square, and all that kind of thing, 
I've been studying human nature." 

" How delio;htful for human nature !" 

" Tliat may or may not be," said Lord Dolla- 
more calmly, and without the smallest sign of 
irritation ; " but this I know, that all boy-and- 
girl marriages iuA'ariably come to grief. A man 
must have his fling some time or other ; if he does 



78 EUXNING THE GAUNTLET. 

not have it before liis marriage, lie will after. 
And between ourselves, Alsager, this Mitford is 
a devihsh bad egg. Vxe known of him all his 
life. He had a fast turn when he was a mere 
boy, and didn't stick at trifles to raise money, as 
you may have heard." 

'' I know all about that ; but . " 

"And do you think that, now that he has 
plenty of money and health and position, he won't 
go in for that style of pleasure which he formerly 
risked every thing to obtain? Nonsense, my 
dear Alsager ; cela va sans dire. Lady Mitford 
will have to rmi the gauntlet of society, as do 
most married women with loose husbands ; and 
will certainly be more successfid than most of her 
competitors." 

Laurence put down his cigar, and, looking 
steadily at his companion, said, " I don't envy the 
man who could be blackguard enough to attempt 
to throw a shadow on such a woman's life." 

"Don't you?" said Lord Dollamore, as 
steadily retm^iiing the glance; "of course not." 
Then, in a somewhat lighter tone, he added, 



IN THE SMOKIXG-ROOM. 79 

'' By the way, have you seen the Hammonds 
lately ?" 

A flush, noticeable even through the red 
bronze, rose on Laurence's cheeks ; but before he 
could speak, a man who was sitting on the other 
side of Lord Dollamore cut into the conversation 
by saying, " Oh, by the way, there was a brother 
of Percy Hammond's dining here last week ; 
Prothero asked me to meet him. He's a sporting 
parson, and a tremendous character^ He told us 
he always knew when woodcock came in by the 
lesson for the day." 

^' I know him," said Cis Hetherington, who 
had lomiged up and joined the party ; " Tom 
Hammond, a thundering big fellow. His vicar- 
age or rectory, or whatever it is, is close by 
Dursley ; and at the last election Tom seconded 
my brother . Westonhanger, you know . for the 
county. The Rads brought over a lot of roughs, 
navvies, and fellows working at the railway close 
by ; and whenever Tom spoke, these fellows kept 
yelling out all sorts of blackguard language. 
Tom roared to them to stop it ; and when they 



80 EUXNIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

wouldn't, lie quietly let liimself drop over the front 
of the hustings, right into the middle of 'em. 
He's a splendid bruiser, you know; and he let 
out . one two, one two . right and left, and sent 
half-a-dozen of 'em flying like skittles. Tlien he 
asked if any more was wanted, carefully settled 
his clerical white-choker, and went back to the 
hustings again." 

" He owed your brother a good turn after the 
way in which he astonished your governor a year 
or two ago, Cis," said Lord Dollamore. 

'' What was that ? Did he pull the Duke up 
for coming late to chm'ch, or for not hunt- 
ing the county? Tlie last most likely, I should 
think." 

'^ Not at all. You all know what a tremen- 
dous swell Cis's brother the Duke is, . you know 
it, Cis, as well as any body, . wants all the 
pavement to himself in St. James's Street, and 
finds the arch on Constitution Hill not quite liigh 
enough for his head. Well, a year or two ago 
Tom Hammond had a splendid roan horse which 
he used to di'ive in a light Whitechapel to cover. 



IN THE SMOKIXG-ROOM. 81 

Tlie Duke sray this animal, and tliouglit it would 
make a splendid match for a roan of his ; so he 
sent his coachman over to Tom's little place to ask 
if he'd sell. Tom saw the coachman, heard what 
he had to say, and then told him he never spoke 
to grooms, except to give them orders ; if the 
Duke wanted the horse, he must come himself. I 
can't think what messao^e the man can ha\'e i^^iven 
to his master; but two days afler, the Duke's phae- 
ton pulled up at the parsonage-door, and the Duke 
himself bowed to Tom, who ran to the window 
with his mouth full of lunch. Tom's account of 
the interview was delicious. He imitates the 
Duke's haw-haw manner to perfection, . you don't 
mind, Cis ? He asked him in, and told him that 
the Stilton was in prime cut ; but the Duke de- 
clined, and said, ' I understand you wish to sell 
your roan, Mr. Hammond.' ^ Then your grace 
understands a good deal more than I gave you 
credit for,' said Tom. ' Then you don't want to 
sell the horse ? I want him particularly for a 
match-horse.' ^ Xo,' said Tom ; ' I won't sell 
him. I'm a poor parson, and I wouldn't take 
VOL. I. G 



82 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

three limiclrecl for him ; but I'll tell yon what I'll 
do, your grace. I'm always open to a bit of 
sporting ; and Fll toss your grace for the ixiir ; 
or, if that's not exciting enough, I'll get my 
cm'ate to come in . he's only next door . and we'll 
go the odd man, the best of three. Tliat's Avhat 
I'n do.' Tom says he thought the Duke would 
have had a fit. He never spoke a word, but 
drove straight away, and has never looked at 
Tom since." 

After the laugh which this story raised had 
ceased. Lord DoUamore said, " Did Tom say any 
thing about his brother Percy the day he dined 
here?" 

" Oh, yes," said the man who had first 
spoken; "they're coming back at once. Mrs. 
Hammond finds Florence disagrees with her." 

" Perhaps she'd find Lam-ence agree with her 
better," said Dollamore sotto voce; then aloud, 
" Ah ! and so of course poor Percy is to be 
trotted back again. By Jove, how that woman 
rules him ! She has only to whistle, and he 
comes to her at once. I should like to see a 



IX THE SMOKIXG-EOOM. 83 

woman try that on me, . a woman that I was 
married to, I mean. . By the way, you haven't 
seen Mrs. Hammond since her marriage, have 
you, Alsager?" 

" No ; I left England just previously." 

'^ All ! she's as pretty as ever, and infinitely 
more wicked . I beg your pardon, though ; I 
forgot we had tm-ned purist since om' Oriental 
experience." 

^^ At all events we have learned one thing in 
our Oriental experience, Lord Dollamore." 

"And that is . ?" 

" To keep our temjoer and . ^hold our tongue. 
Good-night." 

As he said these words, Laurence Alsager rose 
from liis seat and left the room ; Bei^ram had 
pre\aously taken his departm'e ; so that Lam-ence 
walked off" alone to his hotel, pondering on all he 
had seen and heard. 

" So she's coming back," he said to himself as 
he strolled along ; " coming back to brmg back to 
me, whenever I may happen to meet her, all the 
sickening recollection of the old times, the heart- 



84 RTINl!TrNG THE GAUNTLET. 

burnings, tlie lieart-breaking, to escape from wlilcli 
I rushed away two years ago. Slie won the day 
then, and she'll be as insolent as she can be on the 
strength of her victory now, though she knows 
well enough that I did not shoot my best bolt then, 
but keep it in my quiver yet. It's impossible to 
fight with a woman ; they can descend to so many 
dodges and meannesses where no man worthy of 
the name could follow them. No ; I'll seek safety 
in flight. I'll be off again as soon as I've seen 
the governor ; and then . And yet what a strange 
interest I seem to take in that girl I saw to-night ! 
Poor little child ! I wonder if DoUamore's right 
about her husband. Well, I'll wait a few days, 
and see what turns up." 

While these thoughts were passing through 
Lam-ence Alsager's mind. Sir Charles Mitford was 
leaning against the jambs of the door leading fi'oni 
his dressing-room into liis Avife's bedi'oom. He 
had one boot off, and was vainly endeavouring to 
discover the hole in the bootjack in which to in- 
sert the other foot. The noise which he made in 



IX THE SMOKING-KOOM. 85 

this operation awoke Lady Mitford, wlio called 
out, " Oh, Charley, is that yoii?" 

" Course, my dear," said Sir Charles in a 
thick voice; "who should it be this time o' night? 
not that it's late, though," he said, correcting him- 
self after a moment's reflection ; then looking 
vacantly at her, added in a high-falsetto key, 
" quite early." 

" You are not ill, Charley ?" she asked, look- 
ing anxiously at him. 

" iSTot I, my darling ; never berrer. . Off at 
last, are you?" this last observation addressed 
to the conquered boot. " But you, what's mar- 
rer with you ? Look all flushed and frightened 
like." 

" I've had a horrid confused dream about the 
theatre, and people we saw there, and snakes, oh ! 
so dreadftd ; and that grave man. Colonel Some- 
body, that you introduced me to, was just going 
to rescue me. Oh, Charley, I feel so low and de- 
pressed, and as though something were going to 
happen. I'm sm'c we sha'n't be happy in London, 
Let's go away again." 



S6 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

"Nonsense, Georgie; . nonsense, my love! 
Very jolly place for . good supper, . Colonel 
Snakes ;" and with these intelligible murmurings 
Sir Charles Mitford slipped into the land of 
dreams. 



CHAPTER Y. 

GEORGIE. 

If, twelve months before the production of Mr. 
SpofForth's play (which necessarily forms a kind 
of Hegira in this story), you had told Georgia 
Stanfield that she was destined to be the wife 
of a baronet, the mistress of a house in one of 
the best parts of London, the possessor of horses 
and carriages, and all the happiness which a very 
large yearly income can command, your asser- 
tions would have been met, not with ridicule, 
for Georgie was too gentle and too well-bred for 
that, but with utter disbelief. Her whole life 
had been passed in the little Devonshire village 
of which her father was vicar, and it seemed to 
her impossible that she coidd ever live any where 
else. To potter about in the garden during the 
summer in a large flapping sti'aw hat and a cot- 



88 KUNNTNG THE GALTs'TLET. 

ton go^^^l, to tie up cli'ooping flowers and snip off 
dead leaves ; to stand on tlie little terrace di'eamily 
gazing oA^er the outs]3read sea, Avatcliing the red 
sails of the fishing-smacks skimming away to the 
horizon, or the trim yachts lying off the little port . 
the yachts whose fine lady-passengers and gallant 
swells, all blue broad-cloth and club-button, seen 
at a distance, . were Georgie's sole links with the 
fashionable Avorld ; to visit and read to the bed- 
ridden old women and the snufflino^, cou^hincr old 
men ; to superintend the preparation of charitably- 
dispensed gruel and soup ; to traverse Mavor's 
Spelling-book up and down, up and down, over 
and over again, in the company of the stupid 
girls of the village-school ; to read the Cidlompton 
Chronicle to her father on Thursdays, and to copy 
out Ms sermon on the Satm'day evenings, . these 
had been the occupations of Georgie Stanfield's 
mieventful life. 

She had not had even the excitement of flirta- 
tions, a few of which fall to the lot of nearlj^ every 
girl, Ije she pretty or plain, rich or poor, iovm- 
or countiy-bred. The military depots are now 



GEORGIE. 89 

SO numerous tliat it is hard, indeed^ if at least a 
couple of subalterns cannot be found to come over 
any distance in tlie rumbling dog-cart liired from 
the inn in the provincial tov>m Avhere they are 
quartered; and though in Georgie's days there 
was no croquet, . that best of excuses for social 
gathering and mild flirtation, . yet there were 
archery-meetings, horticultui-al shows, and pic- 
nics. Faihng the absence of the military, even 
the most -out -of- the -way country village can 
j)roduce a curate ; and an intending flirt has 
merely to tone-down certain notions and expand 
others, to modify her scarlets and work-up her 
grays, and she will have, if not a very exciting, 
at all events a ^'ery interesting, time in playing 
her fish. But there were no barracks within 
miles of Fishbom-ne, nor any temptations there 
to have attracted officers from them, if there had 
been. There were no resident gentry in the place, 
and the nearest house of any importance . Weston 
Tower, the seat of old Lady Majoribanks . was 
twenty miles oif, and old Lady Majoribanks kept 
no company. As for the curates, there was one, 



90 KUKN^ING THE GAUXTLET. 

certainly ; but Mr. Lucas had '^ assisted" Georgie's 
father for the last eio:hteen years, was fifU" years 
old, and had a little wife as slow and as gray 
as the old pony which he used to ride to outlying 
parts of the parish. 

Besides, if there had been eligible men in 
scores, what had they to do with Georgie Stan- 
field, or she with them ? Was she not engaged to 
Charles Mitford ? . at least, had she not been so 
affianced until that dreadful business about some- 
thing A\Tong that brought poor Charley into dis- 
grace ? and was that sufficient to permit her to 
break her plighted word ? Mr. Mitford, Charles's 
father, had been a banker and brewer at Cullomp- 
ton, and had had a comitry cottage at Fishbourne, 
a charming little place for his family to come to in 
the summer; and Mr. Stanfield had been Char- 
ley's tutor; and when the family were away at 
Cullompton in the winter, Charley had remained 
at the yicarage ; and what so likely as that Charley 
should fall in loye with Georgie, then a tall slip 
of a girl in short petticoats and frilled trousers 
and yery thin legs, with her hair in a net ; or 



GEORGTE. 91 

that Georgie sliould liave reciprocated tlie attach- 
ment ? Both the fathers were delighted at the ar- 
rangement ; and there was no mother on either side 
to talk of extreme youth, the chance of change, 
or to interpose other womanly objections. There 
came a time when Charley, then a tall handsome 
fellow, was to go up to Oxford ; and then Georgie, 
to whom the outu^ard and visible frill period was 
long past, and who was a lovely budding girl of 
sweet seventeen, laid her head on his breast on the 
night before he went away, and promised never 
to forget him, but to be his and his alone. 

All, those promises never to forget, those 
whispered words of love, breathed by lips trem- 
bling under the thick cigar-scented moustache 
into delicate little ears trellised by braids fresh 
from the fingers of the lady's-maid ! Tliey are 
not much to the Corydons of St. James's Street, 
or the Phyllises of Belgravia. By how many dif- 
ferent lips, and into how many different ears, are 
the words whispered and the vows breathed in 
the com'se of one London season ! I declare I 
never pass through any of the great squares and 



92 EUms^IKG THE GAUXTLET. 

streets, and see the men enclosing the balconies 
with striped calico, that I do not wonder to myself 
whether, amongst all the nonsense that has been 
talked beneath that well-worn a^^ming-stufF, there 
has been any that has laid the foundation for, or 
given the crowning touch to, an honest simple love- 
match, a marriage undertaken by two people out 
of sheer regard for each other, and permitted by 
re"!atives and friends, without a sino;le thouo;ht of 
money or position to be gained on either side. If 
there be any, they must be very few in nmnber ; 
and this, be it observed, not on accomit of that 
supposed favourite pastime of parents . the dispo- 
sal of their daughters' hands and happiness to the 
highest bidder, the outcry against which has been 
so general, and is really, I believe, so undeserved. 
The circumstance is, I take it, entirely ascribable 
to the lax morality of the age, under which a girl 
engages herself to a man without the slightest 
forethought, often without the least intention of 
holding to her word, not unfrequently from the 
increased opportmiities such a state of things af- 
fords her for flirting with some other man, and 



GEORGIE. 93 

under wliicli slie can break lier engagement and 
jilt lier lover witliout compromising herself in tlie 
least in the eyes of society. Besides, in tlie course 
of a London life these vows and pledges are ten- 
dered so often as to be worn almost tlrreadbare 
from the number of times they have been pledged ; 
and as excess of familiarity always breeds con- 
tempt, the repetition of solemn phrases gradually 
takes from us the due appreciation of their mean- 
ing, and we repeat them parrot-wise, without the 
smallest care for what we are saying. 

But that promise of love and truth and re- 
membrance uttered by Georgie Stanfield on the 
sands at Fishl^ourne, under the yellow harvest- 
moon, with her head pillowed on Charles Mit- 
ford's breast and her arms clasjied round his 
neck, came from a young heart which had known 
no guile, and was kept as religiously as was Sir 
Galahad's vow of chastity. Within a year after 
Charley's departm^e for Oxford, his father's affairs, 
which, as it afterwards appeared, had long been in 
hopeless confusion, became irretrievably involvec 
The bank stopped payment, and the old i> 



94 EUKNIXG THE GAm^TLET. 

unable to face the storm of ignominy by which 
he imagined he shonld be assailed, committed 
suicide. Tlie smash was complete ; Charles had 
to leave the University, and became entirely 
dependent on his uncle, Sir Percy Mitford, 
who declined to see him, but offered to pm^- 
chase for liini a commission in a marching 
regiment, and to allow him fifty pomids a year. 
The yomig man accepted the oflPer ; and by the 
same post ^\Tote to Georgie, telling her all, 
and giving her the option of freeing herself 
from the engagement. It was a gentlemanly 
act ; but a cheap bit of generosity, after all. He 
might have staked the fifty pounds a year his 
uncle had promised him, on the fidelity of such a 
girl as Georgie Stanfield, more especially in the 
time of trouble. Her father too, with his old 
disregard of the future, entirely approved of his 
daughter's standing by her lover mider the cir- 
cumstances of his altered fortune ; and two let- 
ters . one breatliing a renewal of love and trust, 
the other full of encouragement and hope . went 
away fi^om Fishbourne parsonage, and brought 



GEORGIE. 95 

tears into the eyes of their recipient, as he sat on 
the edge of a truckle-bed in a whitewashed room 
in Canterbury Barracks. 

The vow of constancy and its renewal were 
two little epochs in Georgie's quiet hfe. Then, 
not very long after the occurrence of the last, . 
some six months, . there came a third, destined ne- 
ver to be forgotten. Tliere had been no letter from 
Charley for some days, and Georgie had been in 
the habit of walking across the lawn to meet the 
postman and question him over the garden-wall. 

One hea\"^^ dun Auo-ust morning^, when the 
clouds were solemnly gathering up together, the air 
dead and still, the trees hushed and motionless, 
Georgie had seen the old mail with a letter in his 
hand, and had hastened, even more eagerly than 
usual, across the lawn, to be proportionately 
disappointed when the postman shook his head, 
and pointing to the letter, said, " For the master, 
miss." The next minute she heard the sharp 
clang of the gate-bell, and saw her father take the 
letter from the postman's hand at his little study- 
window. Some inward prompting . she knew 



96 EUKNING THE GAUNTLET. 

not wliat . kept Georgie's eyes on lier father. She 
saw liim take out liis spectacles, wipe tliem, and 
carefully adjust tliem ; then take the letter, and 
holding it at nearly arm's length, examine its 
address ; then comfortably settling himself in his 
arm-chair at the window, prepare to read it. 
Then Georgie saw the old man fall backward in 
his chair, his hand dropping powerless by his side, 
and the letter fluttering from it to the ground. 
Without uttering a cry, Georgie ran quickly to 
the house ; but when she reached the study, Mr. 
Stanfield was sitting upright in his chair, and had 
picked the letter from the floor. 

^' Papa dearest," said Georgie, ^' you gave 
me such a fi'ight. I was watching you from the 
garden, and I thought I saw you faint. Oh, 
papa, you are ill ! How white and scared you 
look ! What is it, papa darling? . tell me." 

But to all this Mr. Stanfield only mui'mured, 
gazing up into his daughter's face, . " My poor 
child ! my poor darling child I" 

'' What is it, papa ? Oh, I know . it's about 
Charley! He's not . " and then she blanched 



GEORGIE. 97 

dead- white, and said in a scarcely audible voice : 
" He's not dead, papa?" 

^^ Xo, Georgie, no. It might be better if lie 
were, . be better if he were." 

^^He's very ill, then?" 

'^ 'No, darling, . at least . there ! perhaps you'd 
better read it for yourself ; here, read it for your- 
self;" and the old man, after giving her the letter, 
covered his face with his hands and sobbed aloud. 

Then Georgie read in Sir Percy Mitford's 
roundest hand and stiffest style, how his nephew 
Charles, utterly ungrateful for the kindnesses wliich 
he. Sir Percy, had showered upon him, and re- 
gardless of the fact that he had no resources of 
his own, nor expectations of any, had plunged into 
" every kind of vice and debauchery, notably 
gambling" . (Sir Percy was chairman of Quarter- 
Sessions, and you might trace the effect of act- 
of-parli anient reading in his style) . how he had 
lost large sums at cards ; and how, with the 
double object of paying his debts and retriev- 
ing his losses, he had at length forged Sir Percy's 
signature to a bill for 200^. ; and when the docu- 

YOL. I. H 



98 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

ment became due, had absconded, no one knew 
where. Sir Percy need scarcely say that all com- 
munication between him and this unworthy mem- 
ber of . he grieved to say . his family was at an 
end for ever ; and he took that opportunity, while 
informing Mr. Stanfield of the circumstance, of 
congratulating him on having been lucky enough 
to escape any matrimonial connection with such 
a roo^ue and a vao^abond. 

Mr. Stanfield watched his daughter's perusal 
of the letter, and when she finished it and re- 
turned it to him calmly, he said : 

" Well, my dear ! it's a severe blow, is it 
not?" 

'^ Yes, papa, it is indeed a severe blow. Poor 
Charley, poor Charley !" 

" Poor Charley, my dear! l^ou surely don't 
feel the least compassion for Charles Mitford ; a 
man who has . who has outraged the laws of his 
country !" 

^' Not feel compassion for him, papa? Who 
could help it? Poor Charley, what a bitter de- 
gradation for him !" 



GEORGIE. 99 

" For liim ! degradation for him ! Bless my 
soul, I can't understand; for us, Georgina, . de- 
gradation for us, you mean I However, there's 
an end of it. We've washed our hands of him 
from this time forth, and never . " 

" Papa, do you know what you're saying ? 
Washed our hands of Charles Mitford ! "Do 
you recollect that I have promised to be his 
wife?" 

'^ Promised to be his wife ! Why, the girl's 
going mad ! Promised to be his wife ! Do you 
know the man has committed forgery ?" 

'' Well, papa." 

" Well, papa ! Good God ! I shall go mad 
myself I You know he's committed forgery, and 
you still hold to your engagement to him ?" 

" Unquestionably. Is it for me, his betrothed 
wife, to desert him now that he is in misery and 
disgrace? Is it for you, a Christian clergyman, 
to tm*n yom* back on an old friend who has fallen, 
and who needs your sympathy and counsel now 
really for the first time in his life ? Would you 
wish me to give up this engagement, which, pre- 



100 RUXXIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

liajDs, may be the very means of bringing Charles 
back to the right?" 

'^ Yes, my dear, yes ; that's all yerj well," 
said the old gentleman, . ^' all yery well from a 
woman's point of yiew. But you see, for our- 
selyes . " 

." Well, papa, what then ?" 

" Well, mj dear, of course we ought not to 
think so much for om'selyes ; but still, as your 
father, I'ye a right to say that I should not wish 
to see you married to a . a felon." 

"And as a clergyman, papa? . what haye you 
a right to say as a clergyman?" 

" I . I decline to pursue the subject, Geor- 
gina ; so I'll only say this . that you're my daugh- 
ter, and you're not of age yet ; and I command 
you to break off this engagement with this . this 
criminal! That's all" 

Georgie simply said, " You know my deter- 
mination, papa." And there the matter ended. 

This was the first quarrel that there had eyer 
been between father and daughter, and both felt 
it yery much indeed. Mr. Stanfield, who had 



GEORGIE. 101 

about as mncli acquaintance with human nature, 
and as much power of reading character, as if he 
had been bhnd and deaf, thought Georgie Avould 
certainly give way, and laid all sorts of palpable 
traps, and gave all sorts of available opportmiities 
for her to tlu'ow herself into his arms, confess hoAV 
wrong she had been, and promise never to think 
of Charles Mitford ao;ain. But Georo;ie fell in 
with none of these ways ; she kissed her father's 
forehead on coming down in the morning, and 
repeated the process on retiring at night ; but she 
never spoke to him at meal-times, and kept away 
from home as ^much as possible during the day, 
roaming over the country on her chestnut mare 
PoUy, a tremendous favourite, which had been 
bought and broken for her by Charley in the old 
days. 

Durino; the whole of this time Mr. Stanfield 
was eminently uncomfortable. He had acted 
upon the ridiculous principle \Tdgarly rendered by 
the phrase, cutting off' his nose to revenge his face. 
He had deprived himself of a great many personal 
comforts without doino; one bit of o-ood. For a 



102 ELTNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

fortnight the Cullompton Chronicle had remained 
imcut and unread, though he knew there was an 
account of a bishop's visitation to the neighbour- 
ing diocese which would have interested him 
higlily. For two consecutive Smidays the parish- 
ioners of Fishbourne had been regaled with old 
sermons in consequence of there being no one to 
transcribe the vicar's notes, which, save to Geor- 
gie, were unintelligible to the world in general 
and to their writer in particular. He missed 
Georgie's graceful form in the garden as he was 
accustomed to see it when looking up from his 
books or his writing ; he missed her sweet voice 
carolling birdlike through the house, and always 
reminding him of that dead wife whose memory he 
so tenderly loved ; and notwithstanding the constant 
horse-exercise, he thought, from sly glances which 
he had stolen across the table at her during 
dinner, that she was looking pale and careworn. 
Worst of all, he was not at all sure that the posi- 
tion he had taken m]) was entirely defensible on 
moral grounds. He was differently placed fi'om 
that celebrated character in the Critic^ who ^^ as a 



GEOEGIE. 103 

father softened, but as a governor was fixed." 
As a father he might object to the continuance of 
an engagement between his child and a man who 
had j^roved himself a sinner, not merely against 
religious ordinances, but agamst the laws of his 
country ; but he was very doubtful whether, as a 
Christian and a clergyman, he was not bound to 
stretch out the hand of forgiveness, and endea- 
vour to reclaim the penitent. If Mr. Stanfield had 
lived in these days, and been sufficiently before the 
world, he woidd probably have had " ten thou- 
sand college councils" to " thunder anathema" at 
him for daring to promulgate the doctrine that 
" God is love ;" but in the little retired parish 
where he lived, he taught it because he believed it; 
and he felt that he had rather fallen away from 
his standard in endeavouring to coerce his daugh- 
ter into giving up Charles Mitford. 

So one morning, when Georgie came do^\ai 
to breakfast looking flushed and worried, and very 
little refreshed by her night's sleep, instead of 
calmly receiving the frontal kiss, as had been 
his wont during the preceding fortnight, the old 



104 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

man's arms were Avomid aromid her, his lips were 
pressed to hers, while he murmm-ed, ^' Oh, 
Georgie ! ah, my darling ! ah, my child !" and 
there was a display oi grandes ecmx on both sides, 
and the reconciliation was complete. At a later 
period of that day Mr. Stanfield entered fully 
upon the subject of Charles Mitford, told Georgie 
that if the scapegrace could be found, he should 
be willingly received at the parsonage ; and then 
the old gentleman concocted a mysterious adver- 
tisement, to the effect that if C. M., formerly of 
Fishbourne, Devon, would call on Mr. Stevens 
of Furnival's Inn, Holborn, London, he would 
hear something to his advantage, and be received 
with hearty welcome by friends who had forgiven, 
but not forgotten, him. 

This advertisement, duly inserted through the 
medium of Mr. Stevens, the lawyer therein named, 
in the mystic second column of the Times Supple- 
ment, appeared regularly every other day dm'ing 
the space of a month ; and good old Mr. Stanfield 
wrote twice a week to Mr. Stevens, inquiring 
whether " nothing had come of it ;" and Mr. Ste- 



GEORGIE. 105 

Yens diily replied (at three shillings and sixpence 
a letter) that nothing had. It must have been 
two months after the concoction of the advertise- 
ment, and one after its last appearance in the 
columns of the Times, that there came a letter 
for Georgie, written in the well-kno^\Ti hand, and 
signed with the well-kno^A^i initials. It was very 
short, merely saying that for the second time the 
writer felt it due to her to leave her unfettered 
]3y any past engagement existing betAveen them ; 
that he knew how he had disgraced and placed 
himself beyond the pale of society ; but that he 
would always cherish her memory, and think 
of her as some pure and bright star which he 
might look up to, but to the possession of which 
he could never aspire. 

Poor little Georgie was dreadfully touched by 
this epistle, and so was Mr. Stanfield, regarding 
it as a work of art ; but as a practical man he 
thou:ht he saw a chance for ao^ain workino; the 
disruption of the engagement-question . this time 
as suggested by Charles himself; and there was 
little doubt that he would have enunciated these 



106 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

sentiments at length, had he not been abniptly 
stopped by Georgie on his first giving a hint about 
it. Despairing of this mode of attack, the old 
gentleman became chplomatic and macchiavellian ; 
and I am inclined to think that it was owing to 
some secret conspiracy on his part, that yomig 
Frank Majoribanks, staying on a desperately- 
dreary tln-ee-weeks' visit Avith his amit and pa- 
troness Lady Majoribanks, took occasion to drive 
one of the old lady's old carriage-horses over to 
Fishbourne in a ramshackle springless cart be- 
longing to the gardener, and to accept the vicar's 
offer of Imicheon. He had not been five minutes 
in the house before Georgie found he had been 
at Oxford with Charley Mitford; and as he had 
nothing but laudatory remarks to make of his old 
chum (he had heard notliing of him since he left 
college), Georgie was very polite to him. But 
when, after liis second or third visit, he completely 
threw aside Charley as his stalking-horse, and 
began to make ruiuiing on his own accomit, 
Georgie saw tln^ough the whole thing in an in- 
stant, and treated liim with such marked coldness 



GEORGIE. 



107 



that, being a man of tlie world, lie took the hint 
readily, and never came near the place again. 
And Mr. Stanfield saw with dismay that his 
diplomacy succeeded no better than his threats, 
and that his daughter was as much devoted to 
Charles Mitford as ever. 

So the two dwellers in the parsonage fell back 
into their ordinary course of life, and time went 
on, and Mr. Stanfield's hair grew gradually more 
gray, and his shoulders gradually more rounded, 
and the sweet girl of seventeen became the bud- 
ding woman of twenty. Then one Tliursday even- 
ing, in the discharge of her weekly task of read- 
ing to her father the Cullom]?ton CliroJiiclej Geor- 
gie suddenly stopped, and, although not in the 
least given to fainting or ^'nerves," was obliged 
to put her hand to her side and wait for breath. 
Then when a little recovered she read out to the 
wondering old gentleman the paragraph announc- 
ing the fatal accident to Sir Percy Mitford and 
his sons, and the accession of Charles to the title 
and estates. Like Paolo and Francesca, . though 
from a very different reason, . " that night they 



108 RUNXIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

read no more," the newspaper was laid by, and 
each sat immersed in thought. Tlie old man's 
simple foith led him to believe that at length the 
long-wished-for result had arrived, and that all 
his daughter's patience, long-suffering, and cour- 
age would be rewarded. But Georgie, though she 
smiled at her father's babble, knew that through- 
out her acquaintance with Charley he had gone 
through no such trial as that to which the acquisi- 
tion of wealth and position would now subject him ; 
and she prayed earnestly with all her soul and 
strength that in this time of temptation her lover 
might not fall away. 

A fortnight passed, and Mr. Stanfield, finding 
not merely that he had not heard from the new 
baronet, but that no intelligence of him had been 
received at Redmoor, at the town-house, or by 
the family law;y^ers, determined upon renewing 
his advertisement in the Times. By its side pre- 
sently appeared another far less reticent, boldly 
calling on " Charles Mitford, formerly of Cul- 
lompton, Devon ; then of Brasenose College, Ox- 
ford; then of the 26th regiment of the line;'' to 



GEORGIE. 109 

communicate ^Yith Messrs. Moss and Moss, Soli- 
citors, Cursitor Street, Chancery Lane, and hear 
something to his advantage. To this advertise- 
ment a hne was added, which sent a thrill 
through the little household at the parsonage : 
^' As the said Charles Mitford has not been heard 
of for some months, any one capable of legally 
proving his death should communicate with Messrs. 
M. and M. above named." Capable of legally prov- 
ing his death ! Could that be the end of all poor 
Georgie's life-dream ? Could he have died with- 
out ever learning all her love for him, her truth 
to him ? No ! it was not so bad as that ; though, 
but for the shrewdness of Edward Moss and the 
promptitude of Inspector Stellfox, it might have 
been. A very few hours more would have done 
it. As it was, little Dr. Prater, who happened to 
be dining with Marshall Moss at the Hummums 
when Mitford was brought there by the inspector, 
and Avho immediately undertook the case, scarcely 
thought he should pull his patient through. When 
the fierce stage of the disorder was past, tliere 
remained a horrible weakness and lano-uor, which 



110 ruinxing the gauntlet. 

the clever little physician attacked in vain. " Na- 
tui'e, my clear sir, . nattu'e and your native air 
they must do the rest for you ; the virtues of the 
pharmacopoeia are exhausted." 

So one autumn evening, as Mr. Stanfield sat 
poring over his book, and Georgie, her hope day 
by day dying away within her, was looking out 
over the darkening landscape, the noise of wheels 
was heard at the gate ; a grave man in black 
descended from the box of a postchaise, a worn, 
thin, haggard face peered out of the window; 
and the next instant, before Mr. Stanfield at all 
comprehended what had happened, the carriage- 
door was thrown open, and Georgie was hanging 
romid the neck of the carriage-occupant; and 
kiss, kiss, and bless, bless ! and thank God ! and 
safe once more ! was all the explanation audible. 

Dr. Prater was quite right; nature and the 
patient's native air efPected a complete cure. By 
the end of a month . such a happy month for 
Georgie ! . Sir Charles was able to drive to Eed- 
moor to see the men of business from London ; 
by the end of two months he stood at the altar 



GEORGIE. Ill 

of the little Fishbourne cliurcli, and received liis 
darling from the hands of her father; the cere- 
mony being performed by the old curate, who had 
learned to love Geors^ie as his own child, and who 
wept plentifudly as he bestowed on her his blessing. 



CHAPTER YL 

THE GRAYS. 

When Laurence Alsager awoke the next morn- 
ing, lie did not regard life with such weari- 
ness, nor London with such detestation, as when 
he went to hed. He had slept splendidly, as 
would naturally fall to the lot of a man who for 
two years had been deprived of that greatest of 
earthly comforts . an English bed. Laurence 
had bounded on French spring-mattresses ; had 
sweltered beneath German feather-lined coverlets ; 
had cramped himself up in berths ; had swung 
restlessly in hammocks ; had stifled behind mos- 
quito-ciu'tains ; and had passed many nights with 
his cloak for his bed, and his saddle-bags for his 
pillow, with the half-naked forms of dirty Arabs 
dimly visible in the flickering firelight, and the 
howls of distant jackals ringing in his ears. He 



THE GRAYS. 113 

had undergone every description of bed-discom- 
fort ; and it is not to be wondered at that be lin- 
gered long in that glorious nest of cleanliness 
and rest provided for him at liis hotel. As he lay 
there at his ease, thoroughly awake, but utterly 
averse to getting up, he began to think over all 
that had happened during the previous evening ; 
and first he thought what a charming -looking 
woman Lady Mitford was. 

Tlie Scotch gentleman who had remarked that 
Colonel Alsager was ^' a deevil among the sax" 
had some foundation for his observation ; for it 
was a fact that, from the days "v^'hen Laurence 
left Eton and was gazetted to the Coldstreams, 
until he sold his commission and left England 
in disgust, his name had always been coupled 
by the gossips with that of some lady well known 
either in or out of society. He was a mere 
boy, slim and Avhiskerless, when the intense ad- 
miration which he excited in the breast of Mdlle. 
Valentine, combined with Avhat she afterwards 
termed the " coldly insidar" manner in which he 
treated her, gave that charming danseuse such 

VOL. I. I 



114 KUXXIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

a migQ^aine as rendered her unable to appear in 
public for a week, and very nearly caused Mr. 
Lumlej to be favoiu'ed with a row equal to the 
celebrated Tamburini riot in the days of M. 
Laporte. He was not more than twenty when 
'' Punter" Blair told him that his o;oino;s-on with 
Lady Mary Blair, the Punter's sister-in-law, 
were the talk of the iovm. ; and that if her hus- 
band, the Admiral, was blind, he, the Punter, 
wasn't, as he'd let Alsager pretty soon know. 
Laurence rephed that the Pmiter had better mind 
his own business, . which was " legging" young 
boys at ecarte and blind-hookey, . and leave his 
brother's wife alone; upon which Punter Blair 
sent O'Dwyer of the 18th witli a message ; and 
there must inevitably have been a meeting, had 
not Blair's Colonel got a hint of it, and caused 
it to be intimated to Mr. Blair that unless this 
matter with Mr. Alsager were arranged, he, the 
colonel, should have to take such notice of '^ other 
matters" aflPecting Mr. Blair as woidd compel 
that gentleman to send in his papers. 

So in a score of cases differing very shghtly 



THE GRAYS. 115 

from each other. It was the old story Avhich 
was Ip'icallj rendered by Dr. Watts, of Satan 
being always ready to provide congenial occu- 
pation for gentlemen with nothing to do. There 
is notj I believe, very much martial ardom' in 
the Household Brigade just now. That born of 
the Crimean war has died out and faded away, 
and the officers lia^e taken to drive off eimiii, 
some by becoming district- visitors, and others by 
enjoying the honest beer and improving conver- 
sation of the firemen in AYatling Street. But 
even now there is infinitely more enthusiasm, 
more belief in the profession as a profession, more 
study of strategy as a thing vrhich a military man 
should know something of, than there was before 
the Crimean expedition. The metropolitan in- 
habitants had little care for their gaUant defenders 
in those days. Their acquaintance w^ith them 
was limited to the knowledge that large red men 
were perpetually discovered in the kitchens, and 
on discovery were presented as relatives of the 
servants ; or that serious, and in some cases fatal, 
brawls occurred in the streets, when the pleasant 



116 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

fellows laid about them with their belts, or ran 
a -muck amongst a crowd with their bayonets. 
An occasional review took place in the Park, 
or a field - day at Woolwich ; but no cordial 
relations existed between the majority" of the 
Londoners and the household troops until the 
news came of the battle of the Alma. Tlien the 
public learned that the Guards officers were to 
be heard of in other places than balh'ooms and 
divorce-courts, and that guardsmen could fight 
with as much untiring energy as they had ah'eady 
displayed in feeding on householders and flirting 
with cooks. 

Not much worse, certainly not much better, 
than his compeers was Laurence Alsager in those 
days, always having " something on" in the w^ay 
of feminine worship, until the great " something" 
happened which, according to Jock M'Laren 
and one or two others, had occasioned the great 
change in his life, and caused his prolonged ab- 
sence from England. But in all his experience 
he had only kno\^-n women of a certain kind ; 
women of the world, ready to give and take ; 



THE GRAYS. 117 

womeiij ill liis relations with whom there had 
been no spice of romance save that spm'ious 
romance of the French-novel school, so attractive 
at first, so hoUow, and bad, and disgusting, when 
proceeded with. It is not too much to say that, 
varied as his '" affaires" had been, he had not 
known one quiet, pm-e-minded, virtuous woman ; 
and that during his long foreign sojourn he had 
thought over this, and often wondered whether 
he should ever have a wife of his own, or, fail- 
ing this, whether he should ever have a female 
friend wdiom at the same time he could love and 
respect. 

Yes, that was the sort of woman, he thought 
to himself as he lay calmly reflecting. What a 
good face she had! so quiet and calm and self- 
possessed. Naturally self-possessed ; not that firm 
disgusting impei-turbability which your hardened 
London coquette has, he thought ; like that hor- 
rible Mrs. M^Alister, who puts her double-eyeglass 
up to her eyes and coolly surveys women and 
men alike, as though they were slaves in the 
Constantinople market, and she the buyer for the 



118 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Sultan. Tliere certainly was a AvonderftJ charm 
about Lady Mitford, and, good heavens ! think 
of a man having such a wife as that, and going 
off to sup with Bligh and Winton, who were 
simply two empty-headed roue jackasses, and 
Pontifex, who . Well, it was very lucky that peo- 
ple didn't think alike. Yes, that man Mitford 
was a lout, a great overgi'own-schoolboy sort 
of fellow, who might be led into any sort of 
scrapes by . By Jove ! that's what Dollamore 
had said, Avith that horribly-cynical grin. And 
Lady Mitford would have to rmi the gauntlet of 
society, as did most women whose husbands w^ent 
to the bad. 

Laurence Alsager was a very different man 
from the Laurence Alsager of two years ago. He 
wanted something to fill up his leism'e time, and 
he thouo^ht he saw his wav to it. Dollamore never 
spoke at random. From his quietly succulent 
manner Alsager knew that his lordship meant 
mischief, probably in his o^vn person, at all events 
hinted plainly enough that . Ah ! he would stop 
all that. He would pit himself against Dollamore, 



THE GRAYS. 119 

or any of them, and it would 1)8 at least a novelty 
to have a virtuous, instead of a vicious, end in 
view. Mitford might be a fool, his wife weak 
and silly; but there should be no disastrous con- 
sequences. DoUamore's prophecy should be un- 
fulfilled, and he, Lam'ence Alsager, should be the 
active agent in the matter. 

Simultaneously with this determination he 
decided upon deferring his visit to liis father, 
and settling himself in London for a time. He 
would be on the spot ; he would cultivate the ac- 
quaintance which Mitford so readily held out to 
him ; he woidd have the garrison well under sur- 
veillance in order carefully to observe the enemy's 
approach; and . The shower-bath cut short liis 
reflections at this point. 

He dressed and breakfasted; despatched liis 
servant to see if his old rooms in Jermjm Street 
were vacant; lit a cigar, and strolled out. He 
had at first determined to brave pubhc opinion 
in every shape and form, to retain his beard, 
to wear the cm-ious hght coats and elaborately 
puckered trousers which a Vienna Schneider 



120 ruistn^ing the gauntlet. 

had a year before turned out as prime specimens 
of tlie sartorial art. But even to this determi- 
nation the night's reflection brought a change; 
and he found himself turning into Poole's, and 
suifering himself to be suited to the very latest 
cut and colour. Tlien he must get a hack 
or two from Saunderson in Piccadilly; and as 
the nearest way from Poole's in Saville Kow 
to Saunderson's in Piccadilly is, as every one 
knows, down Grosvenor Place and through Eaton 
Place, that was the way that Laurence Alsager 
walked. 

Eaton Place is not a very cheerfril thorough- 
fare at the best of times. Even in the season, when 
all the houses are full of the domesticity of par- 
liament-members, furnished at the hebdomad at 
twenty guineas, there is a stuccoy and leading- 
to-not-much-thoroughfare depression about it ; but 
on a January morn, as Laurence saw it, it was 
specially dull. Sir Charles Mitford had men- 
tioned no number, so that Laurence took a cri- 
tical survey of each house as he passed, consider- 
ing whether the lady in whom he had suddenly 



THE GRAYS. 121 

taken so paternal an interest resided there. He 
had, however, j^assed a very few doors when at 
the other end of tlie street he saw a low pony- 
carriage with a pair of iron-gray ponies stand- 
ing at a door ; and just as he noted them, a 
slight figui'e, which he recognised in an instant, 
came down the steps and took up its position in 
the phaeton. It was Lady Mitford, dressed in 
velvet edged with sable, with a very little black- 
velvet bonnet just covering the back of her head 
(it was before the days of hats), and pretty dog- 
skin drivino:-crloves. She cast a timid glance at 
the ponies before she got in (she had always had 
horsy tastes down at Fishbourne, though without 
much opportunity of gratifying them), and was 
so occupied in gathering up the reins and speak- 
ing to the groom at the ponies' heads, as scarcely 
to notice Laurence's bow. Tlien with a view to 
retrieve her rudeness, she put out her hand, and 
said cordially : 

^' How do vou do, Colonel Alsao;er? I be^; 
your pardon ; I was taking such interest in the 
ponies that I never saw you coming up. Tliey're 



122 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

a new toy, a present from my husband ; and that 
must be my excuse." 

" Tliere is no excuse needed, Lady Mitford. 
Tlie ponies are charming. Ai'e you going to 
drive them ?" 

" Oh yes ; why not ? Saunderson's people say 
they're perfectly quiet ; and, indeed, we are going 
to take them out to the farm at Acton, just to show 
Mr. Grieve the stud-groom how nicely they look 
in oiu' new phaeton." 

"You're sm-e of your own powers? They 
look a little fresh." 

" Oh, I have not the least fear. Besides, my 
husband will be with me; I'm only waiting for 
him to come down, and he drives splendidly, you 
know." 

" I've a recollection of his prowess as a tan- 
dem-whip at Oxford, when the Dean once sent 
to him with a request that he'd ' take the leader 
off.' "Well, auplaisir, Lady Mitford. I wish you 
and the two ponies aU possible enjoyment." And 
he took off his hat and went on his way. Oh, 
he was perfectly right ; she Avas charming. He 



THE GRAYS. 123 

wasn't sure whether she liadii't looked better 
even this morning than last night, so fresh and 
wholesome. And her manner , without the slight- 
est suspicion of an arriere pensee, free, fr'ank, and 
ingenuous; how nicely she spoke about her hus- 
band and his drivino: ! Tliere could be no mis- 
take about a woman like that. No warping or 
twisting could torture her conduct into any thing 
assailable. He'd been slightly Quixotic when he 
thought to give himself work by watching over 
and defending her ; he . ^' Good-morning, Mr. 
Spm^rier. Eecollect me? Mr. Saunderson in?" 
Eevolving all these things in his mind, he had 
walked so quickly that he fomid himself in Pic- 
cadilly, and in Mr. Samiderson's yard, before he 
knew where he was. 

^^ Delighted to see you back, Colonel. Tliought 
I caught a glimpse of you at the theatre last night, 
but was doubtftil, because of your beard. No ; 
Mr. Saunderson's gone up to the farm to meet 
a lady on business ; but any thing I can do I shall 
be dehghted." Mr. Spurrier was Mr. Samider- 
son's partner, a very handsome, fi-esh-coloured, 



124 RUis^nNG THE GAUNTLET. 

cheery man, ayIio liad been in a liglit-cavaliy 
regiment, and coming into money on the death 
of a relation, had tm^ned his bequest and his 
horsy talents to account. There were few such 
judges of horseflesh ; no better rider across coun- 
try than he. " Thought you'd be giving us a 
call, Colonel, unless you'd imported a few Ai'abs ; 
and gave you credit for better judgment than 
that. Your Ai'ab's a weedy beast, and utterly 
imfit for hacking." 

" No, Spurrier, I didn't carry my orientalism 
to that extent. I might have brought back a 
clever camel or two, or a dromedary, ^ well suited 
for an elderly or nervous rider,' as they say in 
the advertisements ; but I didn't. I suppose you 
can suit me with a hack." 

Mr. Spurrier duly laughed at the first part 
of this speech, and replied in the affirmative, of 
course, to the second. " You haven't lost much 
flesh in the East, Colonel," said he, running 
him over with his eye, . " I should say you pull 
off* twelve stone still." Tlien Mr. SpmTier, as 
was his wont, made a great show of tln'owing 



THE GRAYS. 125 

himself into a fit of abstraction, dm-ing the oc- 
currence of which he was supposed by customers 
to be mentally going through the resources of 
his establishment ; and roused himself by calling 
the head-groom, and bidding him tell them to 
bring out the Baby. 

The Baby was a bright Ijay with black points, 
small clean head, short well-cut ears, and a bright 
eye, arching neck, and, as she showed when trotted 
up the yard with the groom at her head, splendid 
action. When she was pulled up and stood in the 
usual position after the " show" had been given, 
Laiu'ence stepped up, eyed her critically all over, 
and passed his hand down her legs. SpmTier laughed. 

" All right there. Colonel. Fine as silk ; not 
a sign of a puff, I'll guarantee, and strong as 
steel. Perfect animal, I call her, for a park- 
hack." A horse was never a "horse," but always 
an " animal" with Mr. Spurrier, as with the rest 
of his fraternity. " Will you get on her. Colonel? 
Just give her a turn in tlie Park. . Here, take 
this mare in, and put a saddle and bridle on 
her for Colonel Alsager." 



126 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

It was a bright smmy winter's day, and the 
few people who were in town were taking their 
constitutional in the Eow. As Alsager rode 
round by the Achilles statue he heard ringing 
laughter and saw fluttering habits, which, as- 
sociated with the place in his mind with his last 
London experiences, brought up some apparently 
unpleasant recollection as he touched the mare 
with his heel, and she, after two or tlu'ee ca- 
pricious bomids, settled down into that long 
swinging gallop which is such perfect luxmy. 
He brought her back as quietly as she would 
come, though a little excited and restless at the 
imaccustomed exercise, and growled a good deal 
to himself as he rode. ^^Just the same; a little 
more sun, and some leaves on the trees then, and 
a few more people about ; that's all. Grad ! I 
can see her now, sitting square, as she always 
used, and as easy on that chestnut brute that 
pulled so infernally, as though she were in an 
arm-chair. Ah ! enough has happened since I 
was last in this place." And then he rode the 
Baby into the yard, asked Mr. Spurrier her price, 



THE GRAYS. 127 

agreed to take her, told Spurrier lie wanted a 
groom and a groom's horse, and was saunter- 
ing away, when Mr. Spurrier said, ^' You'll want 
something to carrv you to hounds. Colonel ?" 

" I think not ; at all events not this season." 

" Sorry for that, as I've got something up at 
the farm that would suit you exactly." 

" ^NTo, thank you ; . where did you say?" 

^^ At our farm at Acton. You've been there, 
you know." 

The farm at Acton ! . that was where Lady 
Mitford said she was o-oino- to drive. She must 
be the lady whom ]\Ir. Saunderson had gone to 
meet. Spurrier saw the irresolution in his cus- 
tomer's face and acted promptly. 

" Let me take you out there ; we sha'n't be 
twenty minutes going; and this is really some- 
thing you ought not to miss. He's so good, that 
I give you my word I wouldn't sell him to any 
but a workman. You will ? All right I . Put the 
horses to." 

Within tlu'ee minutes Laurence Alsaaer was 
seated by Mr. Spurrier's side in a mail-phae- 



128 KUXNING THE GAUNTLET. 

ton, spinning along to Mr. Saunderson's farm and 
his o^^Tii fate. 

Tliere were few wliips in London who drove 
so well or so fast as Mr. Spurrier, and there ^yeve 
none w^ho had better horses, as may be imagined ; 
but Laurence did not find the pace a whit too 
fast. He had asked ]\Ii\ Spurrier on the road, 
and ascertained from him that it was Lady Mit- 
ford who was expected. " And a charming lady 
too, sir; so gentle and kind with every one. 
Speaks to the men here as polite as possible, and 
they're not over-used to that ; for, you see, in 
business one's obliged to speak sharp, or you'd 
never ^et attended to. Don't think she knows 
much of our line, though she's dreadfully anxious 
to learn all about it ; for Sir Charles is partial to 
horseflesh, and is a good judge of an animal. 
He's been a good customer to us, and will be 
better, I expect, though he hasn't hunted this sea- 
son, being just married, you see. Tliat's the regular 
thing, I find. ^ You'll give up hunting, dear. I 
should be so terrified when you were out.' ^ Yery 



THE GRAYS. 129 

well, clear ; any thing for you ;' and away go the 
animals to Tattersall's ; and within six months 
my gentleman will come to me and say, ' Got 
any thing that will carry me next season. Spur- 
rier?' and at it he goes again as hard as ever." 

'^ I saw the ponies at the door this morning," 
said Laurence for the sake of something to say ; 
"they're a handsome pair." 

" Ye-es," replied Mr. Spurrier; " I don't 
know very much of them ; they're Mr. Sami- 
derson's buying. I ch'ove 'em once, and thought 
they wanted making ; but Sir Charles is a good 
whip, and he'll do that. . Ga-a-te !" And at this 
prolonged shout the lodge-gates flew open, and 
they di'ove into the stable-yard. 

Mr. Samiderson was there, but ]io Lady 
Mitford. Mr. Samiderson had his watch in his 
hand, and even the look of gratification which he 
tlirew into his face when he greeted Colonel 
Alsager on his return was very fleeting. There 
was scarcely a man in London whose time was 
more valuable, and he shook his head as he said, 
" I'll give her five minutes more, and then I'm 

VOL. I. K 



130 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

off. . What are joii going to show the Colonel, 
Spurrier ?" 

" I told them to bring out Launcelot first." 

Mr. Saunderson shook his head : '^ Too bad, 
Spurrier, too bad! I told you how the Duke 
fancied that animal, and how I'd given his Grace 
the refiisal of him." 

^^ Well, we can't keep our business at a stand- 
still for dukes, or any one else. Besides, we've 
kno^vn the Colonel much longer than the Dul^e." 

" That's true," said Mr. Saunderson with a 
com^teous bow to Laurence ; " well, if Colonel 
Alsager fancies the animal, I must get out of it 
with his Grace in the best way I can." 

It was a curious thing, but no one ever 
bought a horse of Mr. Saunderson that had not 
been immensely admired by, and generally pro- 
mised to, some anonymous member of the peerage. 

" Easy with him, Martin, easy ! Bring him 
over here. . So, Lamicelot; so, boy." 

Launcelot was a big chestnut horse, over six- 
teen hands high, high crest, long lean head, 
enormous quarters, powerful legs, and large 



THE GRAYS. 131 

broad feet. He looked every incli a weight- 
carrying himter, and a scar or two here and 
there about him by no means detracted from his 
beauty in the eyes of the knoA\ang ones. Martin 
was the rough rider to the estabhshment, bul- 
let-headed, high-cheek-boned, sunken-eyed, with 
limbs of steel, and pluck which would have made 
him ram a horse at the Victoria Tower if he had 
had instructions. As Mr. Spurrier patted the 
horse's neck, Martin leant over and whispered, 
'^ I've told one o' them to come out on Black 
Jack, sir. This is a 'oss that wants a lead, this 
'oss does. Give 'im a lead, and he'U face any 
think." 

^^ All right," said Spurrier, as another man and 
horse came out ; '' here they are. Go do"wn to 
the gate in the tan-gallop, will you? put up the 
hurdles first. . Now, Colonel, this way, please : the 
grass is rather wet, even now." 

They walked across a large meadow, along one 
side of which from end to end a tan-gallop had 
been made. Midway across this some hurdles 
with frirze on the top had been stuck up between 



132 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

two gate-posts, and at these the boy on Black Jack 
rode his horse. A steady-goer, Black Jack; up to 
his work, and knowing exactly w^hat was expected 
of him ; comes easily up to the hurdles, rises, and is 
over like a bird. Not so Launcelot, who frets at 
starting ; but moves under Martin's knees and 
Martin's spurs, gives two or tlu-ee bounds, throws 
up his head, and is off like a flash of lightning. 
Martin steadies him a bit as they approach the 
leap, and Jack's rider brings his horse romid, 
meets Martin half-way, and at it they go together. 
Jack jumps again, exactly in his old easy way, 
but Launcelot tears away with a snort and a 
rush, and jumps, as Mr. Spurrier says, " as 
though he would jump into the next comity." 

" Now the gate !" says Mr. Spurrier ; and the 
hm-dles were removed, and a massive five-bari'ed 
gate put up between the posts. 

" You go first, boy," said Spurrier ; and Black 
Jack's rider, who was but a boy, looked very white 
in the gills, and very tight in the mouth, and gal- 
lopped off. But Jack was not meant for a coun- 
trv which grew such gates as that, and when he 



THE GRAYS. 133 

reached it, turned short round, palpably refusing. 
Knowing he should get slanged by his master, the 
boy was bringing him up again, when he heard a 
warning shout, and looking romid, cleared out of 
the way to let Launcelot pass. Launcelot's mettle 
was up ; he wanted no lead this time. Martin, with 
his face impassibly set, brought his whip down 
heavily on him as he lifted him ; but Lamicelot 
did not need the blow : he sprang tlu"ee or four 
inches clear of the leap in splendid style. 

" By George, that's a fine creature !" said 
Laurence, who had all a sportsman's admiration 
for the feat. ^^ I think I must have him. Spur- 
rier, if his figure's not very awful. But I should 
first like to take him over that gate myself." 

" All right. Colonel ; I thought he'd take your 
fancy. . Get down, Martin, and let down those 
stirrups a couple of holes for the Colonel, will you? 
. And you, boy, tumble off there. I'll see whe- 
ther that old vagabond will refuse with me. . Ah, 
you're a sly old scoundrel. Jack ; but I think we'll 
clear the gate, old boy !" 

Alsager was already in the saddle, and Spur- 



134 EUXXIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

rier was tightening the girths, when the former 
heard a long low rumbling sound gradually grow- 
ing more distinct. 

" What's that?'' he asked his companion. 

"What?" asked Spurrier, with his head still 
under the saddle-flap ; but when he stood upright 
and listened, he said, " Tliat's a mnaway ! I know 
the somid too well ; and . and a pair ! By tlie Lord, 
the grays !'* 

They were standing close by the hedge which 
separated the meadow from the road. It was a 
high quickset-hedge, Avith thick post-and-rail fence 
running through it, and it grew on the top of 
a high bank with a six-foot drop into the road. 
Standing in his stirrups and craning over the 
hedge, Lam-ence saw a sight which made his 
blood rmi cold. Just ha\dng breasted the railway- 
bridge, and tearing doA^Ti the inchne at their 
maddest pace, came the grays, and in the phaeton, 
which SAAomg fr^ightfully from side to side, sat 
Lady Mitford . alone ! A dust-stained form ga- 
thering itself up out of the road in the distance 
looked hke a groom; but Sir Charles was not 



THE GRAYS. 135 

to be seen. Lady Mitforcl still lield tlie reins, and 
appeared to be endeavouring to regain command 
over the ponies; but lier efforts were evidently 
utterly useless. 

Mr. Spurrier, wlio had momited, comprehended 
the whole scene in a second, and roared out, " Run, 
Martin ! run, you boy ! get out into the lane, and 
stop these devils ! Hoi !" this to the grooms in the 
distance, to whom he telegraphed with his whip. 
" They don't miderstand, the brutes ! and she'll be 
killed. Here, Colonel, to the right-about! Five 
hundred yards off there's a gate, and we can get 
through and head them. What are you at ? you're 
never going at the hedge. By G . , you'll break 
your neck, man I" 

All too late to have any effect were his last 
words ; before they were uttered, Laurence had 
turned Sir Launcelot's head, taken a short sharp 
circling gallop to get him into pace, and then 
crammed him straight at the hedge. Spurrier says 
that to his dying day he shall never forget that 
jump ; and he often talks about it now when he is 
giving a gentleman a glass of sherry, after a "show" 



136 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

just previous to the hunting-season. Pale as death, 
with his hat over his brows, and his hands down 
on the horse's withers, sat Laurence ; and just as 
Sir Launcelot rose at the leap, he dealt him a cut 
with the heavy whip which he had snatched out of 
Spurrier's hand. The gallant animal rose splen- 
didly, cleared posts and rails, crashed through the 
quickset, and came thundering into the lane 
below. Neither rider nor horse were prepared for 
the deep drop ; the latter on grounding bungled 
awkwardly on to his knees ; but Laurence had 
him up in an instant, and left him blown and 
panting, when at the moment the gravs came in 
sight. Lady Mitford was still in the carriage, but 
had apparently fainted, for she lay back motion- 
less, while the reins were dragging in the road. 

Lam'ence thought there was yet a chance of 
stopping the ponies, upon whom the pace was 
evidently beginning to tell severely, but, as they 
neared a gate leading to a portion of the outbuild- 
ings, where on their first purchase by Mr. Sami- 
derson they had been stabled, the grays, recollecting 
the landmarks, wheeled suddenly to the left and 



THE GRAYS. 137 

made for tlie gate. Tlie carriage ran up an em- 
bankment and instantly overtm'ned ; one of the 
ponies fell and commenced lashing out in all di- 
rections; the other, pulled across the pole, was 
plmiging and struggling in wild attempts to free 
itself Tlie men who had been signalled to by 
Spurrier were by this time issuing from the lodge- 
gates, and making towards the spot ; but long 
before they reached it, a tall man with a flowing 
black beard had sprung in among the cUhris^ re- 
gardless of hoofs flying in all directions, and had 
dragged therefrom the senseless form of Lady Mit- 
ford. 

" "What is the matter ? Where am I ?" 
^' You're at my farm. Lady Mitford," said 
Mr. Samiderson, advancing with that old-fashioned 
courtesy which he always assumed when dealing 
with ladies ; " and there's nothing the matter, 
thank God ! though you've had a bad accident 
with the ponies, which seem to have rmi away ; 
and I may say you owe your life to Colonel Al- 
sager, who rescued you at the peril of his own." 



138 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

She looked round with a faint smile at Lau- 
rence, who was standing at the foot of the sofa 
on which she lay, and was about to speak, when 
Laui'ence lifted his hand deprecatingly : 

"Isot a word, please, Lady Mitford; not a 
single word. What I did was simply nothing, 
and our friend Mr. Saunderson exao^o;erates hor- 
ribly. Yes, one word . wdiat of Sir Charles ?" 

'^ He has not heard of it? He must not be 
told." 

" 1^0 J of com'se not. What we want to 
know is whether he started for the drive with 
you." 

'^ Oh no ; he could not come, . he was pre- 
vented, thank God ! And the groom?" 

" Oh, he's all right; a Httle shaken, that's all." 

Lam-ence did not say that the groom had been 
not a little shaken by Mr. Spurrier, who caught 
the Avretched lad by the collar, and holding his 
wliip over him told him mildly that he had a 
great mind to " cut liis life out" for his cow- 
ardice in tin-owing himself out of the trap, and 
leaving his mistress to her fate. 



THE GRAYS. 139 

Tlien it was arranged tliat Mr. Samiclerson 
sliould take Lady Mitford home, and explain all 
that had happened to Sir Charles. She took 
Laurence's arm to the carriage, and when she 
was seated, gave him her hand, saying frankly 
and earnestly, " I shall never forget that, mider 
Providence, I owe my life to you. Colonel Alsa- 
ger." 

As they drove back to town together, Mr. 
Spurrier said to his companion: "I shall have 
to book Sir Launcelot to you, Colonel. I've looked 
at his knees, and though they're all right, only the 
slightest skin-w^ound, still . " 

" Don't say another word. Spurrier," inter- 
rupted Laurence ; "I wouldn't let any one else 
have him, after to-day's work, for all the money 
in the world." 

Laurence spoke innocently enough; but he 
noticed that during the rest of the drive back 
to town, Mr. SpuiTier was eyeing him with great 
curiosity. 



CHAPTER VIl. 

WHAT HAD DETAINED SIR CHARLES. 

The arrangement for tlie trial of the ponies had. 
been one of some standing between Sir Charles 
and his wife, and one to which he fully intended 
to adhere. .It is true that on waking after the 
supper with Messrs. Bligh, Winton, Pontifex, and 
tlieir companions, he did not feel quite so fresh 
as he might have wished, and would very much 
have liked a couple of homes' additional sleep ; yet 
so soon as he remembered the appointment, he 
determined that Georgie should not be disap- 
pointed; and by not having the '^ chill" taken oif 
his shower-bath as usual, he was soon braced 
up to his ordinary good condition. Neverthe- 
less, witli all his good intentions, he was nearly 
an hour later than usual ; and Georgie had 
gone up to dress for the drive when Sir Charles 



WHAT HAD DETAINED SIR CHARLES. 141 

descended to the breakfast-room to discuss the 
second relay of broiled bone and devilled kid- 
ney which had been serv^ed up to tempt his 
sluggish appetite. He was making a not very 
successful attempt to eat, and between each 
mouthfid was reading in the newspaper Mr. 
Kose's laudatory notice of Mr. Spofforth's play, 
when his servant, entering, told him that a "per- 
son" wanted to speak to him. There is no 
sharper appreciator of worldly position than your 
well-trained London servant, and Banks was a 
treasure. 

"What is it, Banks?" asked Sir Charles, 
looking up. 

" A person wishing to see you. Sir Charles," 
replied Banks. 

" A person I Is it a man or a woman ?" 

" Tlie party," said Banks, varying his word, 
but not altering the generic appellation, . "the 
party is a man, sir." 

"Do I know him?" 

" I should say certainly not. Sir Charles," 
replied Banks in a tone vrhich intimated that if 



142 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

his master did know the stranger, he ought to be 
ashamed of himself. 

" Did he give no name ?" 

" I ast him for his name, Sir Charles, and 
he only says, ' Tell your master,' he says, ' that 
a gentleman,' he says, Svants to see him.' " 

" Oh, tell him that he must call some other 
time and send in his business. I can't see him 
now ; I'm just going out for a drive with Lady 
Mitford. Tell him to call again." 

" Tliere was a time, and not verv lono; ao;o 
either," said Sir Charles, taking up the paper as 
Banks retired, " that if I'd been told that a man 
who wouldn't give his name wanted to speak to 
me, I should have slipped out the back-way and 
run for my life. But, thank God, that's aU over 
now. . WeU, Banks, what now ?" 

" Tlie party is very arbitrary. Sir Charles ; 
he won't take ' no' for an answer ; and when I 
told him you must know his business, he bust out 
larfin' and told me to say he was an old mess- 
mate of yours, and had sailed with you on board 
the Albatross." 



WHAT HAD DETAINED SIR CHARLES. 143 

A red spot bunied on Sir Charles Mitford's 
cheek as he laid the newspaper aside and said, 
" Show this person into the library, and deny me 
to every one while he remains. Let yom- mis- 
tress be told I am prevented by business from 
driving with her to-day. Look sharp T' 

Mr. Banks was not accustomed to be told to 
'' look sharp !" and during his three-months' ex- 
perience of his master he had never heard him 
speak in so petulant a tone. " I'd no idea he'd 
been a seafarin' gent," he said downstairs, '^ or 
I'd a never midertook the place. Tlie tempers of 
those ship-captains is awfid." 

When Banks had left the room Sir Charles 
walked to the sideboard, and leant heavily against 
it while he poured out and di-ank a liqueur-glass 
of brandy. 

" The Albatross !" he muttered with white 
lips; "which of them can it be? I thought I 
had heard the last of that cursed name. Banks 
said a man ; it's not the worst of them, then. 
That's lucky." 

He went into the library and seated himself 



144 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

in an arm-chair facing the door. He had scarcely 
done so when Banks gloomily ushered in the 
stranger. 

He was a middle-sized dark man, dressed in 
what seemed to be a seedy caricatui'e of the then 
prevailing fashion. His coat had once been a 
bright-claret colour, but was now dull, tln-ead- 
bare, and frayed round the edges of the breast- 
pocket, out of which peeped the end of a flashy 
silk handkerchief. He had no shirt-collar appa- 
rent ; but wore round his neck a dirty blue-satin 
scarf with two pins, one large and one small, fas- 
tened together by a little chain. His trousers were 
of a staring green shawl-pattern, cut so as to hide 
nearly all the boot and tightly strapped down, 
as was the fashion of those days; and the little 
of his boots visible was broken and shabby. 
Sir Charles looked at him hard and steadily, then 
2:ave a sio-h of relief He had never seen the 
man before. He pointed to a chair, into which 
his visitor dropped with an easy swagger; then 
crossed his legs, and looking at Sir Charles said 
familiarly, " And how are you V 



WHAT HAD DETAINED SIR CHARLES. 145 

^' You have the advantage of me," said Sir 
Charles. 

''1 think I have," said the man, grinning; 
" and what's more, I mean to keep it too. Lord, 
what a precious dance you have led me, to be 
sure !" 

" Look here, sir," said Mitford : " be good 
enough to tell me your business, and go. I'm 
engaged." 

" Go ! Oh, you're on the high jefF, are you? 
And engaged too I Groing to di'ive your missis 
out in that pretty little trap I saw at the door ? 
Well, I'm sorry to stop you ; but you must." 

" Must !" 

^^ Yes, must. 'Tain't a nice word ; but it's the 
one I want. Must ; and I'll tell you why. You 
recollect Tony Butler?" 

Sir Charles Mitford's colour, which had re- 
turned when he saw that his visitor was a stranger 
to him, and which had even increased under the 
insolence of the man's manner, fled at the men- 
tion of this name. His face and lips were quite 
white as he said, ^^ I do indeed." 

YOL. I. L 



146 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

" Yes, I knew you would. Well, he's dead, 
Tony is." 

"Thank God!" said Sir Charles; "he was 
a horrible villain." 

" Yes," said the man pleasantly ; "I think 
I'm with you in both those remarks. It's a good 
job he's dead ; and he was a bad 'un, was Tony, 
though he was my brother." 

" Yom- brother !" 

" Ah ! that's just it. We never met before, 
because I was in America when you and Tony 
were so thick together. You see I'm not such 
a sweU as Tony was ; and they . him and father, 
I mean . were glad to get me out of the country 
for fear I should spoil any of their little games. 
When I came back, you had given Tony a licking, 
so far as I could make out, though he'd never 
teU exactly, and yom- friendship was all bust 
up, and he was dreadluUy mad with you. And 
that's how we never came to meet before." 

"And wdiy have we met now, pray?" said 
Sir Charles. " What is yom- business with me ?" 

" I'm coming to that in good time. Tony's 



WHAT HAD DETAINED SIR CHARLES. 147 

last words to me were, ^ If you want to do a good 
tiling for yourself, Dick,' lie says, ' find out a 
fellow named Charles Mitford. He's safe to turn 
up trumps some day,' says Tony, ' he's so un- 
commonly sharp ; and whenever you get to speak 
to him, before you say who you are, tell him you 
sailed in the Albatross.' Lord bless you ! I knew 
the lot of 'em . Crockett, and Dunks, and Lizzie 
Ponsford ; they said you and she used to be very 
sweet on each other, and . " 

The door opened suddenly, and Lady Mitford 
hurried into the room ; but seeing a stranger, she 
drew back. Sir Charles went to the door. 

"What do you want, Georgie?" said he 
sharply. 

" I had no idea you had any one here, 
Charles, or I wouldn't have disturbed you. Oh, 
Charley, send that horrid man away, and come 
and drive me out." 

She looked so pretty and spoke so winiiingly 
that he patted her cheek with his hand, and said 
in a much softer voice, " I can't come now, child. 
This man is here on special business, and I must 



148 RUNNrN'G THE GAUNTLET. 

go tliroiigli it with him. So good-bye, pet, and 
enjoy youi'self." 

She made a little moue of entreaty, and put 
her hands before his face in a comic appeal ; but 
he shook his head, kissed her cheek, and shut the 
door. 

" Pretty creechur, that !" said his companion ; 
'' looks as well in her bonnet as out of it ; and 
there's few of 'em does, I think." 

'' When did you ever see Lady Mitford before, 
sir ?" asked Sir Charles haughtily. 

^^Ali! that's just it," replied Mr. Butler with 
a sniggering laugh. " I told you you'd led me 
a precious dance to find you, and so you had. 
Tony told me that you had regularly come to grief 
since you parted with him, and I had a regular 
hmit after you in all sorts of lodging-houses and 
places. Tliere are lots of my pals on the look-out 
for you now." 

" Upon my soul, you're devilish kind to take 
all this trouble about me, Mr. . Butler. What 
your motive was, 1 can't imagine." 

" You'll know all in good time ; I'm coming 



WHAT HAD DETAINED SIR CHAELES. 149 

to that ; and not ' Butler/ please : Mr. Effingham 
is my name just now ; I'll tell you why, by and 
by. Well, I couldn't get hold of you any how, 
and I thought jou'd gone dead or somethmg, 
when last night, as I was standing waiting to come 
out of the Parthenium, I heard the linkmen out- 
side hollaring 'Lady Mitford's carriage!' like mad. 
The name strikes on my ears, and I thought I'd 
wait and see her ladyship. Presently down came 
the lady we've just seen, leaning on the arm of 
a cove in a big black beard like a foreigner. ' No 
go,' says I ; ' that's not my man ;' and I says to 
a flunkey who was standing next to me, ' He's a 
rum 'mi to look at, is her husband.' ' That's 
not her husband,' he says ; ' this is Sir Charles 
coming now.' The name Charles and the figure 
being like struck me at once ; so I took the 
flunkey into the public next door, and we had a 
glass, and he told me all about the old gent and 
his kids being dro^^^led, and your coming in for 
the title. ' Tliat's my man,' says I to myself; 
and I found out where you lived, and came 
straight on here this morning." 



150 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

" And now tliat your prying and sneaking lias 
been successful and you have found me, Avliat do 
you want ?" 

" All ! I tliouglit you'd lose your temper ; 
Tony always said you was hotheaded. What do 
I w^ant ! AYellj to be very short and come to the 
point at once . money." 

" I guessed as much." 

"Yes, there's no denying it; I'm regularly 
stumped. I suppose you were surprised now to 
hear I wasn't flush, after seeing me so well got- 
up ? But it's a deal of it dummy. Tliese pins 
now, . Lowther Ai'cade ! No ticker at the end 
of this o-uard ; nothino; but a key . look!" And 
he twitched a key out of his waistcoat - pocket. 
" My boots too are infernaUy leaky ; and my hat 
has become quite limp from being perpetually 
damped and ironed. Yes, I want money badly." 

" Look here, Mr. " 

" Effingham." 

" Mr. Effingham, you have taken, as you 
yourself admit, an immense deal of trouble to 
hmit me up, and having fomid me you ask me 



WHAT HAD DETAINED SIR CHAELES. 151 

for money, on tlie ground of your being the bro- 
ther of an infernal scomicbel whom I had once 
the ill-hick to be associated with . don't interrupt 
me, please. It wasn't Tony Butler's fault that I 
didn't die on a dmighill, or that I am not 
now." 

'. In Korfolk Island," said Mr. Effingham, 
getting in his words this time. 

Sir Charles glared fiercely at him for an in- 
stant, and then continued : " Xow I expected I 
should have to encounter this soii; of thing from 
the people who pillaged me when I was poor, and 
would make that an excuse for farther extortion, 
and I determined not to accede to any application. 
But as you're the first who has applied, and as 
you've neither bullied nor whined, I'll tell you 
what I'll do. I'll give you, on condition I never 
see or hear of you again, this five-pomid note." 

Mr. Effingham laughed, a real hearty laugh, 
as he shook his head, and said : " Won't do ; no- 
thing Hke enough." 

Sir Charles lost his temper, and said : " Stop 
this infernal tomfoolery, sir ! Not enough ! Why, 



152 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

d . n it, one would think jou had a claim upon 
me !" 

'^ And supjoose I have, Sir Charles Mitford, 
what then?" said Mr. Effingham, leaning for- 
ward in his chair and confronting his companion. 

"^Aliat then? Why . pooh, stuff! this is 
a poor attempt at extortion. You don't think to 
get any money out of me by threatening to tell 
of my connection with the Albatross crew ? You 
don't think I should mind the people to whom 
you could tell it knowing it, do you?" 

" I don't know ; perhaps not ; and yet I think 
I shall be able before I've done to prove to you 
I've a claim on you." 

^^ What is it?" 

" All tiled here, ch? Nobody within earshot? 
Tliat sleek cove in black that wouldn't let me see 
you, not listening at the door, is he ?" 

" There is no one to hear," said Sir Charles, 
who was getting more and more uncomfortable 
at all this mystery. 

'^ All right, then. Sorry to rake up disagree- 
ables ; but I must. You recollect making a slight 



WHAT HAD DETAINED SIR CHARLES. 153 

mistake about your Christian name once, fancy- 
ing it was Percy instead of Charles ; writing it as 
Percy across a stamped bit of paper good for 
two hmidred quid, and putting Hedmoor as your 
address after it?" 

'' Well, what if I do ?" His lips were so 
parched he could hardly frame the words. 

^' It would be awkward to have any thing of 
that sort brought up just now, wouldn't it ?" 

Sir Charles hesitated for an instant, then gave 
a p;reat sio;h of relief as he said : " You infernal 
scoundrel ! you think to frighten me with that, 
do you? To make that the ground for your 
extortion? Why, you miserable ^\Tetch, I 
myself burnt that . that . document In Moss's 
office !" 

" How you do run on. Sir Charles ! I just 
mentioned something about a little bill, and you're 
down upon me in a moment. I guessed that was 
destroyed; at all events I knew It was all safe; and 
Sir Percy's dead, so it don't much matter. But, 
Lord! with your memory you must surely re- 
collect another little dockyment, . quite a little 



154 RUNNING THE GAI-TNTLET. 

one, only five-ancl-twenty pound, . where you mis- 
took botli your names tliat time, and accepted it 
as Walter Burgess : . recollect?" 

Tlie pallor liad spread over Mitford's face 
again, and his lips quivered as he said : ^^ Tliat 
was destroyed . destroyed by Tony Butler long 
since . before the other one was done." 

" Yes, yes, I know this was the first, . a little 
one just to get 3^our hand in. But it ain't de- 
stroyed. It's all right, bless you ! I can see 
it now with a big black ' forged' stamped across 
it by the bank-j^eople." 

^' Where is it?" 

" Oh, it's in very safe keeping with a friend 
of mine who scarcely knows its value. Because, 
though he knows it's a forgery, he don't know who 
done it. Now, you see, through my brother Tony 
I do know who done it ; and I do know that Wal- 
ter Bui'gess is alive, and is a large hop-factor doT\'n 
Maidstone way, and owing you a grudge for that 
thrashing you gave him in the billiard-rooms at 
Canterbur}^, which he's never forgotten, would 
come forward and prosecute at once." 



WHAT HAD DETAINED SIR CHARLES. 155 

'' You . you might prove the forgery ; but 
how could you connect me with it?" 

" Not badj that. But I'm ready for you. 
People at the bank will prove you had the money ; 
and taken in connection with the other little busi- 
ness, which is well known, and which there are 
lots of people to prove, a jury would convict at 
once." 

Sir Charles Mitford shuddered, and bm-Ied his 
face in his hands. Then, looking up, said : " How 
much do you want for that bill ?" 

" Well, you see, that's scarcely the question. 
It's in the hands of a man who don't know its 
value, and if he did he'd open his mouth pretty 
wide, and stick it on pretty stiff, I can tell you. 
So we can let him bide a bit. Meantime / know 
about it, and, as Tony told me, I intend to make 
it serve me. Now you want to get rid of me, and 
don't want to see me for some little time? I 
thought so. I'm not an extravagant cove ; give 
me fifty pounds." 

^' Until that bill is destroyed, you will wring 
money from me when you choose." 



156 EUNNING THE GAUKTLET. 

" If jou refused me money and I cut up rough, 
the bill should be produced, and you'd be m quod 
and Queer Street in a jiffy ! Better do as I say . 
give me the fifty, and you sha'n't see me for a 
blue moon !" 

Whether Sir Charles was stimulated by the 
period named or not, it is certain he sat down at 
his desk, and producing his cheque-book began to 
write. Mr. Effingham looked over his shoulder. 

" Make it payable to some number . 295, or 
any thing . not a name, please. And you needn't 
cross it. Lord ! you didn't take much trouble to 
disguise your fist when you put Walter Bur . , 
beg pardon ! quite forgot what I was saying. 
Thank you, Sir Charles. I'U keep my word all 
right, you shall see. I'm not an idle beggar ; 
I'm always at something ; so that I sha'n't depend 
entirely on this bit of gray paper ; but it'll ease 
my springs and grease my wheels a bit. Good- 
day to you. Sir Charles. Never mind ringing for 
that solemn cove to let me out ; I ain't proud. 
Good-day." 

Mr. Effingham gave a very elaborate bow, and 



WHAT HAD DETAINED SHI CHARLES. 157 

departed. As the door shut upon him. Sir Charles 
Mitford pulled his chair to the fire, and fell into 
a deep reverie, out of which he did not rouse liim- 
self mitil liis wife's return. 



CHAPTER YIIL 

KISMET. 

It was not because Laurence Alsager had been for 
a twelvemonth in the East that he believed in the 
Mohammedan doctrine of fatalism. That had been 
an unacknowledged part of his creed long before 
the disappointment which sent him flying from 
the ordinary routine of life had fallen upon him. 
Even mider that disappointment he allowed the 
power of the wondrous ^' to be," and, bowing to 
its influence, accepted his exile with far greater 
equanimity than many others would have done 
under similar circumstances. He had suffered 
his plans . midecided when he left England 
. to be entirely guided by chance ; had fol- 
lowed suggestions for his route made by hotel- 
landlords or conveyance - advertisements ; had 
dallied over one part of his journey and hm'ried 



KISMET. 159 

over another, simply in obedience to tlie prompt- 
ings of the feehng of the moment; and had 
finally decided on returning to be j)resent at the 
first night of Spofibrth's play at the Parthenium 
in the haphazard spirit which had prompted all 
his movements. 

His behef in Kismet had been enormously 
strengthened since his return. It was "ar- 
ranged" that Lady Mitford should l^e present on 
the occasion in question ; that he should be pre- 
sented to her after trying to avoid her and her 
party ; that Lord Dollamore should be at the 
Club, and should give utterance to those senti- 
ments which had aroused so deep a disgust in 
Laurence's breast. As to the events of the next 
day, . the visit to Saunderson's, the drive to 
Acton, the trial of Sir Launcelot and its con- 
sequences, . therein was the most marvellous il- 
lustration of the doctrine of Kismet that ever he 
had yet seen. 

He thought of all this as he woke the next 
morning ; and clearly saw in an instant that it 
would be rmming directly contrary to his fate 



160 KmfNING THE GAUNTLET. 

to go down to see his father just then. He felt 
impelled to remain in London, and in London he 
should stay. He felt . Ah, how beautiful she 
looked as he dragged her out from amidst the 
dehis of the carriage and the plmiging hoofs of 
the ponies, though her face was as pale as 
marble, and the light of her eyes was quenched 
beneath the drooping lids! It was Kismet that 
had kept that handsome oaf, her husband, at 
home, and prevented his interfering with the 
little romance. Not that Sir Charles Mitford 
was by any means an oaf ; he was a man of less 
worldly experience, of less polish, of social standing, 
higher in rank, but decidedly lower in reputation, 
than Laurence ; and so Laurence regarded him 
as an oaf, and, since the pony-carriage adventure, 
began to find a little hatred mingling with the 
contempt with which he had previously regarded 
the latest addition to the baronetage. 

Tliis last feeling may have been in accordance 
with the rules of Kismet, but it certainly was 
not in accordance with the practice of the world. 
There were many men in his old regiment, and 



KISMET. 161 

generally tbrougliont the brigade of Guards, . men 
who, as professedly coureurs des dames, held that, 
for the correct carrying out of a flirtation with 
a man^ied woman, an intimacy of a certain kind 
with the lady's hnsband was almost indispensable. 
And, though not good at argument, had they 
been put to it, they could have indorsed their 
dicta with plenty of examples. They could have 
told of picnics improvised solely for the pleasure 
of madame's society, when monsieur was of the 
greatest assistance, the life and soul of the party, 
opening champagne, finding salt, cracking jokes ; 
the only man who could induce the gathered leaves 
to bm'st into a fire for kettle-boiling purposes ; the 
first to volunteer to sit in the rumble with the cap- 
tain's valet on the jom^ney homewards. They could 
have told of visits paid in opera-boxes at a time 
when it was certain that monsieur was just 
smacking his lips over something peculiar in 
claret at a dinner at the Junior, specially given 
by the captain's brother-officer, the major. They 
could have told of capital fishing and excellent 
shooting obtained by them for monsieur with a 
VOL. I. M 



162 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

tendency in that direction ; stream or lake, moor 
or stubble always happening to be at a very 
remote distance from monsieur's family abode. 
There were even some of them who for the time 
being would thorouglily interest themselves in 
monsieur and his aiFairs, would bear with his chil- 
dren, would listen to his stories, would, on rare 
occasions, be seen about with him, and would, 
when very hard hit, invite him to the Windsor 
mess, or give him a seat in the Derby drag. 

But that sort of thing did not do for Lam-ence 
Alsager. Such a line of conduct might have 
suited ]iim once ; but it would have been years 
ago, and with a very different style of wife and 
husband from Lady Mitford and Sir Charles. He 
could not think of her with any feeling that w^as 
not deeply tinged with respect, and that in itself 
was sufficient to remove this new passion from 
the category of his past loves. His new pas- 
sion ? Yes ; he could not deny it to himself; 
he felt a singular interest in this woman ; there 
was an attraction in her such as he had never 
experienced in any one else. He smiled as he 



KISMET. 163 

recollected how, in the bygone timeSj he would 
have called her '^ cold" and '^ statuesque ;" how 
he would have despised her slight figure, and 
thought her manners rustic, if not gauche. How 
he had sneered at love, as distinguished from 
intrigue, when he was a , mere boy ; and now, at 
thirty, after thirteen years of hard life of all 
kinds . ^traces of which might be seen in a few 
lines round the eyes and on the forehead . he was 
lapsing into the calf-love which boys at school 
feel for the master's daughter. He laughed ; but 
he knew it was all true, nevertheless. 

He must see her that day, of coui'se ; at least, 
he must caU . mere politeness required so much 
after the events of the previous day. Meanwhile he 
would go down to the club, to read the papers, 
and get some luncheon, and kill time. 

There were several men in the mornino^-room 
at the club, some of whom he had seen on the 
first night of his arrival, others whom he met now 
for the first time since his return. Lord DoUamore 
was there, his legs up on a sofa, reading a news- 
paper, with a very peculiar grin upon his face. 



164 KUNNIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

'^ Here he is !" lie said, looking towards the 
door as Lam-ence entered the room ; " here's the 
man himself! Why don't we have a band to 
play ' See the conquering' ? " 

" So we ought J by Jove I" said Cis Hether- 
ington. " Hallo, Laui'ence, old boy ! no sling or 
any thing?" 

'^ Looks well after it, don't he ?" said another; 
while several old gentlemen looked up from their 
newspapers, partly in admiration, partly in awe. 

" Fire away, gentlemen !" said Laurence. 
^^ Be as funny as you please ; it's all lost upon 
me. What the deuce do you mean by ' sling,' 
Cis?" 

" He's been so long away, that he's forgotten 
the English language," sneered Dollamore. 

" Oh no, he hasn't. Lord Dollamore, as he'd 
quickly show you, were there the least occasion," 
said Laurence. " But," added he more quietly, 
^^what is the joke? I give you my honour I 
don't laiow what you're taUs:ing about." 

"A lovely lady and a gallant knight ! Bring- 
forth the steed ! Tlie accident ; the leap ; the 



KISMET. 165 

rescue ! Ha, ha ! she's saved ! Slow music and 
curtain ! Stunnin' draymer it would make. I 
can introduce you to several enterprising mana- 
gers if you'd like to torn* in tlie provinces," said 
jolly Mr. Wisconsin, who spent nearly all his 
time and two-thirds of his income amongst thea- 
trical people. 

" Why, how on earth did that story get 
here ?" asked Lam'ence, on whom the truth was 
beginning slowly to dawn. 

" Here ! why, it's all over to^^'n . all over 
England by this time. It's in the papers." 

" In the papers ! Ah, you're selling me." 

'^ Take it, and read for yourself," said Wis- 
consin. " Open the paper, and knock it back 
with your hand . that's the legitimate busi- 
ness." 

^^ Doosid well Alsager pretends to be aston- 
ished, don't he, considering he put that in the 
paper himself?" 

" No, he didn't do it himself; he got Cis He- 
therington to do it." 

'' Cis couldn't have spelt it," said Lord Dolla- 



166 EUXNrS^G THE GAUNTLET. 

more. " There are some devilisli long words, over 
whicli Cis would liave come a cropper," 

While his friends were thus pleasantly dis- 
cussing him, Laui'ence was reading a remarkably 
full-flavoured and eloquent description of a " Se- 
rious Accident and Gallant Conduct," as the para- 
graph was headed, in which Lady Mitford's name 
and his own figm-ed amongst the longest adjec- 
tives and most difficult adverbs. How the wildly- 
excited steeds dashed away at a terrific pace ; 
how the grasp of the lovely charioteer gradually 
relaxed, and how her control over the fiery ani- 
mals was finally lost; how the attendant groom 
did every thing that strength and science in 
equine matters could suggest, mitil he was flmig, 
stunned and breatliless, into the mire ; and how, 
finally, the gallant son of Mars, mounted on a 
matchless barb, came bounding over the hedge, 
and exti'icated the prostrate and palpitating form 
of the lovely member of the aristocracy from 
utter demolition at the hoofs of the infririated 
animals. All this was to be fomid in tlie news- 
paper paragraph which Laurence was reading. 



KISMET. 167 

This paragraph originated in a short story told 
bj the groom in the bar of a pubKc-house close 
to the mews, whither he had gone to solace him- 
self with beer after the indignities he had suf- 
fered at Mr. Spurrier's hands, and where he 
had the satisfaction of repeating it to a broken- 
down seedy man, who '^ stood" a pint, and who 
took short notes of the groom's conversation in 
a very greasy pocket-book. 

Laurence was horribly disgusted, as could be 
seen by the expression of his face, and the ner- 
vous manner in which he kept twisting the ends 
of his moustache. Tlie amusement of the other 
men was rather increased than diminished at his 
annoyance, and was at its height when Cis He- 
therington asked : 

" What the doose is a ^ matchless barb,' Al- 
sager ? I've seen all sorts of hacks in my time, 
but never met with one of that kind." 

" What do you mean by hacks ?" said an- 
other. " A barb is a fellow that writes plays, ain't 
it? They call Shakespeare the immortal barb." 

" Ah, but they call him a Swan, and all kinds 



168 EUXKING THE GAUKTLET. 

of tliino's. There's no maldno; out what a thiiioj 
is by Avhat they call him." 

Meanwhile Lord Dollamore had risen from 
the couch, and strolled over to the rug in front 
of the fire, where Laurence was standing. 

" You've begun your duties quickly, my dear 
Alsager. There are few fellows who get the 
chance of falling into their position so rapidly." 

" What position ?" 

" That of champion of beauty in distress." 

" Position ! I declare I don't follow you, my 
lord." 

" My dear Alsager, surely the East has not 
had the effect of rendering obtuse one of the 
keenest of men. Don't you recollect our talk 
the other night?" 

" Perfectly." 

'^ When I then expressed my opinion that 
Lady Mitford would have to go through the usual 
amount of danger, of course I meant moral, not 
actual, peril. However, the actual seems to have 
come first." 

'' Ye-es. A smashed carriage and plunging 



KISMET. 169 

horses may, I suppose, be looked upon as actual 
danger." 

" All, slie'll have worse things than those to 
contend against and encounter. You were lucky 
enough to save her from a fractured skull ; I sup- 
pose we shall see you doing the ' sweet-httle- 
cherub' business, and watching over her gene- 
rally, henceforth." 

" You seem to forget that Lady Mitford has 
a husband. Lord DoUamore." 

'^Not for an instant, my good fellow. But 
so has . well, ]\Ii\s. Hammond . and so have lots 
of women ; but then the husbands are generally 
engaged in taking care of somebody else. Well, 
well, to think that you should become a sheep- 
dog, . you whose whole early life was spent in 
worrying the lambs I" 

'^ Whose whole early life . that's it ! Quand 
le diahle est vieiuv il se fait ermiteP'' 

" Y''e-es ; but if I were the husband of a ver}- 
pretty yomig wife, I doubt whether I should 
particularly like you being her father con- 
fessor.'' 



170 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

"You need not alarm yourself, my lord; I'm 
not going in for the position." 

" Qui a hu^ hoira, my dear Alsager. I dis- 
trust sudden conversions, and liave no great re- 
liance on slieep-dogs whose fangs are scarcely 
cleared of wool." 

Laurence might have replied somewhat sharply 
to this, had he heard it ; but he was off on his way 
to the coffee-room to his luncheon, which had 
been announced by the waiter ; that finished, 
he started off for Eaton Place. 

He had sufficient matter for reflection on his 
walk. Tliis preposterous story which had crept 
into the papers woidd of course form a splendid 
subject of gossip for all those who had nothing 
better to do than to talk about such things. Tliere 
was already a certain amount of interest attaching 
to the Mitfords from the fact of Sir Charles having 
inherited the baronetcy in a singular and milook- 
ed-for manner, and from his wife's having had 
the audacity . although sprmig from an unknown 
family . to have a beautiful face and agreeable 
manners. For tliis presumption Alsager felt that 



KISMET. 171 

a temble retribution was in store for lier, poor 
child, wlien the regular season came on, and the 
dowagers brought up their saleable daughters 
to the market. Then the notion that a common 
countiy parson's daughter had been beforehand 
with them, and had carried off an miexceptionable 
jparti before he had been regularly advertised as 
ready for stalldng, would drive these old ladies 
to a pitch of rankling and venomous despair which 
would find vent in such tamits, hints, insinua- 
tions, and open lies as are only learnt in the 
great finishing-school of London society. Lady 
Mitford's beauty, style, and position were in them- 
selves quite sufficient to render her an object of 
dislike to nine-tenths of the other Avomen in so- 
ciety', who would eagerly search for something 
against her, however slight it might be. Had 
not that unfortunate accident and its result given 
them this " something" ? Laurence had been 
too long amongst the ranks of nous cadres not to 
recognise the meaning of the grins and winks 
which went round the assembled circle of club- 
men when the newspaper paragraph was read, 



172 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

not fully to understand every sneering inflexion 
of Lord Dollamore's voice. Thus was the sin of 
his youth visited on him in later life, with a 
vengeance. Hundreds of other men might 
have done exactly as he had . an act simply of 
manly impulse . without any thing having been 
said about it save praise ; but with him, that 
infernal reputation for gallantry, of which he 
was once so proud, and which he now so intensely 
loathed, would set shoulders shrugging and eye- 
brows lifting at once. Tlie old story ! Laurence 
Alsager again! What else could be expected? 
For an instant, as all these thoughts came rushing 
tln-ough his mind, he stopped short, wondering 
whether it would not be better to retrace his steps 
to the hotel, and to fulfil his first-formed resolu- 
tion of paying a hurried visit to his father, and 
then quitting England at once. Yes; it would 
be much better ; it would save any chance of 
scandal or talk, and . And yet he did not Hke 
to miss the chance of being thanked by those 
sweet eyes and that soft voice. He had thought 
so much of how she would look, not as he had 



KISMET. 173 

hitherto seen her in full evening-dress, or in her 
bonnet, but in that simple morning - costume 
in which all charming wom.en look most charm- 
ing. Besides, it was his duty as a gentleman 
to call, after the events of the previous day, and 
see whether she was suffering from any result 
of her accident, or from any fright which might 
have arisen from it. Yes ; he would first call 
and see her, and then go away; . at least, he 
was not quite certain whether he would go away 
or not. He was not sure that it would not be 
far more advisable that he should stay in Eng- 
land, and be on the spot to put a stop at once 
to any preposterous talk that might arise ; and 
especially to watch over her in case of any at- 
tempts which might be made by men of the Dolla- 
more class. Lord DoUamore was a most dan- 
gerous fellow, a man who would stick at nothing 
to gain his ends ; and what those ends were, it 
was, to a man of Alsager's experience, by no 
means difficult to imagine. Besides, he was 
merely the t^-pe of a class; and if all he had 
stated about Sir Charles Mitford were really true, 



174 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

if the baronet were a man of dissolute tastes and 
habits, and utterly unable to withstand the tempta- 
tion which his wealth and position would at once 
open up to him, it was absolutely necessary that 
some one should be there to prevent his wife's 
falling a prey to the numerous libertines who 
would immediately attempt to take advantage 
of her husband's escapades^ and ingratiate them- 
selves into her favour. 

When the wish is father not merely to the 
thought, but to the subsequent argument, it is 
by no means difficult to beat down and utterly 
vanquish the subtlest and most logical self-reason- 
ing. Tlu'ee minutes' reflection and balancing 
served to show Laurence how wrong he had been 
in thinking of absenting himself at such a critical 
time ; and though for a moment the " still small 
voice" ventured to insinuate a doubt of the 
soundness of his argmnent, yet he felt that . leav- 
ing futm'e events to take such course as they 
might ultimately fall into . it Avas at least liis 
bomiden duty to go then and inquire after Lady 
Mitford ; and onwards he proceeded. 



KISMET. 175 

Lady Mitford was at home. In a charming 
drawing-room, . every thing in it bearing evi- 
dence of exquisite womanly taste, . he found her, 
dressed, as he expected, in the most lovely 
of morning - costumes . a high violet -silk dress 
with a simple linen collar and cuffs; her hair 
perfectly plain, showing the small classic head in 
all its beauty : she looked to liim the lovehest 
creature he had ever seen. She rose at the an- 
nouncement of his name, and came forward with 
a pleasant smile on her face and with out- 
stretched hand. Laurence noticed . not, per- 
haps, without a little disappointment . that there 
was not the smallest sign of a blush on her cheek, 
not the slightest tremor in her voice. 

" I'm so glad to see you. Colonel Alsager," 
she said frankly; "I'm sm^e I've thought a 
hundred times since we parted of my gaiiclierie 
in not thanking you sufficiently for the real ser- 
vice you did me yesterday." 

" Pray don't say another word about it, Lady 
Mitford; it was a simple duty which merits no 
further mention." 



176 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

" Indeed, I don't think so. It was a very 
gallant act in itself, and one which, so far as I 
am concerned, renders me jour debtor for life." 

'' The acknowledgment cancels the obligation. 
I only trust yon are none the worse for the mis- 
hap." 

" Thank yon, not in the least. I was a little 
shaken and unstrmig by the fall, and rather 
stupid yesterday evening, I'm inclined to think; 
but the night's rest has set me perfectly right. 
You know I'm country-bred, and therefore what 
my husband would call in good condition ; and 
I've had so many tumbles off ponies, and been 
upset so many times in our Devonshire lanes by 
papa, . w^ho, I'm afi'aid, is not a very good whip, 
bless him ! . that I'm not entirely unused to such 
accidents." 

" That accounts for yom' pluck, then. I never 
saw any one go tln'ough what . now it's over . 
I may say was a very ugly rmiaway with more 
perfect calmness." 

^^Ah, that's what I wanted to ask you. I 
lost my head just as we started down that de- 



KISMET. 177 

scent, and knew nothing afterwards. I do so 
hope I didn't scream." 

"You may make youi'self thoroughly easy on 
that score. You were perfectly mute." 

" I am delighted at that !" she laughed out 
with childish glee. " Charley asked me the very 
first thing whether I hadn't ' yelled out,' as he 
called it ; and I told him I thought not. It was 
very weak of me to faint, and I fought against 
it as long as I could; but I felt it must come, 
and it did." 

" You would have been more than woman 
if you could have deprived yourself of that 
treat," said Laurence smiling. " How is Sir 
Charles?" 

" Well, not very well. I fancy that this ac- 
cident has upset him very much, poor fellow. I 
think he blames himself for having allowed me 
to go without him ; and yet he couldn't come, as 
he had some horrid man here on business. But 
he's been very dull and preoccupied ever since. 
He'll be annoyed at having missed you, as he 
went out specially to call and thank you for 

VOL. I. N 



178 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

your great kindness. We did not know your 
address, and he went down to ]\Ir. Bertram's 
office to get it from liim." 

"Oil, Bertram is a very okl friend of mine. 
It was from liim I first heard of you." 

" Yes, he knew Charley at Oxford. He is 
a kind gentle creature, I should think ; a man 
that it must be impossible for any one to dislike. 
And really his silence is sometimes any thing 
but disagreeable . at a theatre, you know, and 
that sort of thing." 

" Silence ! I can assm-e you. Lady Mitford, 
that when you are the theme of his discom'se, 
he is a perfect Demosthenes. ' The common 
mouth, so gross to express delight, in praise 
of her grew oratory,' as Tennyson says. He 
is one of yom' stan chest admirers." 

Lady Mitford looked uncomfortable and a 
little vexed, as she said, " Lideed !" then smiled 
again as she added, "You also have the effect 
of loosening the dumb man's tongue. Li Mr. 
Bertram you have the loudest of trumpeters. 
In fact, ever since he heard from you of your 



KISSIET. 179 

intended return, we have gro-^vn almost tired of 
hearing of your good quahties." 

''. I hope you won't banish nie, as the Athe- 
nians did Ai'istides for the same reason. Old 
George is one of the best fellows living. Do you 
know many people now in to^^^l, Lady Mitford?" 

" No, indeed. Om' Devonshire neighbours 
have not come up yet, and will not, I suppose, 
until Parliament meets. And then Sir Charles 
ha^dng been . been away for some time, and I 
not having lived in society, we scarcely know 
any body yet ; at least, I mean . I . some of 
Charley's old friends have found us out. Mr. 
Bertram, Captain Bligh and Major Winton, and 
Lord Dollamore." 

^^Ah, Lord Dollamore! yes, to be sure. And 
what, if it's a fair question, do you think of 
Lord Dollamore ?" 

Georgie laughed. " It certainly is not a fair 
question, and if Charley were here, I should not 
be allowed to answer it ; but I don't mind telling 
you. Colonel Alsager, that I have a great horror 
of Lord Dollamore." 



180 RUt^^ING THE GAUNTLET. 

Laurence smiled grimly, but with the greatest 
inward satisfaction, as he said, " Poor DoUamore ! 
And will YOU tell me why you have a horror 
of him. Lady Mitford?" 

'' I can scarcely say. I'm sm'e I ought not 
to have it, as he is always studiously polite to 
me : but there is somethino; stranoje to me in his 
manner and in his conversation, sometliing such 
as I have never met with before, and which, 
though I don't comprehend it, rouses my anti- 
pathy and makes me shudder. I never know 
what to say to liini either, and he always seems 
to be watcliing every word that you speak. Now 
you're laughing at me. Colonel Alsager ; and I 
can't explain what I mean." 

Her cheeks flushed as she said this, and 
the heightened coloiu- added to her beauty. 
Lam'ence found himself staring mutely at her, 
in sheer wonderment at her loveliness ; then 
roused himself and said, '' Lideed, I was not 
laughing, and I can fully comprehend you. 
Now tell me ; the ponies are none the worse 
for their race ?" 



KISMET. 181 

"Not much. One lias a cut fetlock, and 
both have had a good deal of hair rubbed off ; 
but nothing to signify. I was round in the 
stables the first thing this morning, and came 
in great glee to tell Charley how little harm 
had been done to them. But he's dreadfidly 
angry about it, and declares they shall both be 
sent away. And all because I was too weak 
to hold them !" 

" Well, I should like to be on your side ; 
but I don't think your husband is very far wrong 
in the present instance. They are plainly mifit 
for any lady's driving, miless she is what no 
lady would like to be, . mideniably horsey, and 
masculine, so far at least as her wrists are 
concerned." 

" Ah, and your horse ! that splendid fellow 
that took the tremendous leap, . ]\Ir. Samiderson 
told me this ; I laiew nothing of it at the time, 
.what of him?" 

'' Oh, he's wonderfully well. He landed splen- 
didly ; but just heeled over for a second and 
touched his knees, . the merest graze, and that 



182 EUKXIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

all tlirougli my clumsiness ; but I was too much 
excited at tlie time to attend to liim. But it's 
a mere liair-scratcli, and he'll be as right as ever 
in a week or two." 

" Well, the whole thing seems to me like 
a dream ; but a dream from which I should 
never have woke, had it not been for your 
promptitude and presence of mind. Those I 
have said I shaU never forget; and . Now here 
comes Chai'ley to indorse my gratitude." 

As she spoke, a hea^y tread was heard on 
the staircase ; the door opened, and Sir Charles 
Mitford entered, full of hfe and radiant with 
happiness. Any preoccupation or anxiety, for 
which his wife had prepared her visitor, seemed 
entirely to have disappeared. He advanced with 
open hand, and in his cheeriest manner said, 
" My dear Alsager, dehghted to see you ! A 
thousand thanks, my dear fellow, . much more 
than I can express, . for your conduct yesterday ! 
I've heard all about it, and know how much 
I owe to you. Tremendous pluck! Oh yes, I 
know; you needn't pretend to be modest about 



KISMET. 183 

it. I've been round to Saunderson's, and seen 
Spurrier ; and he tells me that it was just one 
of the pluckiest things ever done. You staked 
the horse, or did something damaging to him, 
didn't you ? so of course I told Spm-rier to 
enter him in my account." 

^' You're very good ; but you're a little late, 
Sir Charles. I bought him on the spot, and 
would not part with him for treble his price." 

Laurence could not resist stealing a glance 
at Lady Mitford as he said tliis. Her eyes were 
downcast ; but a bright - red spot burned on her 
cheeks, and her brows were contracted. 

'' Well, you've the right of refusal ; and you 
know a good fencer when you see one, Alsager, 
I know. I only wished to have the horse as a 
memento of the day." 

Laurence muttered something inaudible. 

" I went down to call upon you, to thank 
you for all yoiu' kindness to my wife," con- 
tinued Sir Charles ; ^^ and then finding I didn't 
know your address, I looked up Bertram at the 
Foreign Office ; and after being handed about 



184 BUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

from one room to another , I found liim, and 
lie took me to vour liotel. Don't seem to have 
mucli to do, those fellows at the Foreign Office. 
Bertram had only just arrived ; but he left im- 
mediately when I told him I Avanted him to 
come with me." 

" I'm very sorry I was not at home." 
" WeU, so was I partly, and partly not. 
Of com-se I should have wished to have given 
you my thanks for your kindness the very 
first thing ; but then of course you miderstand 
that I meant all that. When a man rescues 
another man's wife from tremendous danger, 
of course he understands that her husband is 
tremendously thankful to him, miless it's in a 
book or play, or that kind of thing, where hus- 
bands wish their wives were dead. And then 
ao^ain, if vou had been in, I shoidd have missed 
being introduced to sucli a charming woman." 

" To such a what, Charley ?" asked Lady 
Mitford. 

^^ Oh, don't you be frightened, dear ; it's all 
square and above-board. She asked me if she 



KISMET. 185 

might call upon you ; and she'll be here to- 
morrow or the next day ; so mind you're at 
home to receive her." 

"Her? who?" 

"Oh yes, I forgot. I'll tell you all about it. 
When we found Alsager was not at his hotel, 
Bertram evidently didn't Avant to go back to his 
office, so he 2:>roposed a stretch romid the Park. 
I said I was quite agreeable ; and off we started ; 
right round the Oxford-Street side, back by the 
Powder-magazine, and so into the Drive. When 
we got there, there was not a single trap to be 
seen . not one, I give you my honour ; but as we 
stumped along, and Bertram . most delightfid 
companion ! . never opened his mouth, I saw a 
pair of bright chestnuts in black harness come 
whirling a low pony-phaeton along; and as it 
passed, Bertram took off his hat to the lady driv- 
ing. She pulled up, and we Avent to the trap, 
and Bertram introduced me. She was a very 
pretty little woman, and had a sable cloak ; . you 
must have a sable cloak, Georgie ; I'll find out 
where she got hers; . and there was another 



186 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

woman whom I could not see . kept her veil down, 
and looked like companion, or something of that 
sort . sitting by her. She certainly drove splen- 
didly. I couldn't help thinking if she'd had those 
grays of yom-s yesterday, Georgie, she'd have 
mastered them." 

^' I sincerely wish she had," said Lady Mit- 
ford with a little petulance ; " I can't say I en- 
tirely relished the adventure, even though it 
called forth Colonel Alsager's assistance." [" Tliat's 
a thorough woman's blow," thought Lam^ence, 
listening.] " But you haven't told us the name 
of this charming Amazon." 

" I don't know any thing about Amazon or 
not," said Sir Charles, avIio began to be a little 
nettled ; " the lady's name is Hammond . IMrs. 
Hammond, wife of a man who was something 
in the government service. Ah, you know her, 
Alsager. Yes, by the way, I recollect her ask- 
ing Bertram whether you had come back." 

Tlie mention of Mrs. Hammond's name seemed 
to throw rather a damp upon the conversation. 
Lady Mitford did not appear m the least to share 



KISMET. 187 

her husband's rhapsodies, . as how should she, 
being ignorant of theii' object ? . and Colonel Al- 
sager's expression was moody and liis voice silent. 
But when he rose to take his leave the expressions 
of gi-atitude were renewed both by husband and 
wife, each in their peculiar manner . Sir Charles 
was boisterously hearty-; Lady Mitford quietly 
impressive. 

" We shall see a good deal of you now, I hope, 
Alsager ; you won't stand on any ridiculous cere- 
mony, or any thing of that sort, but come in and 
out just as you like. Tliere's no one who will be 
more welcome here, and no one who's earned the 
right so much, for the matter of that. It rests 
with you now entirely how far you pursue the 
acquaintance." 

'' Good-bye, Colonel Alsager," said Lady Mit- 
ford with a sweet smile ; " and I'll promise, when 
you do come to see us, not to give you so much 
trouble as I did yesterday." 

Laurence was equally averse to commonplaces 
and to committing himself, so he bowed and 
smiled, and went away. 



188 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

'' Kismet," he muttered to himself as he 
strode down the street, . " Kismet in full force. 
Lam*a Hammond back in England, and an ac- 
quaintance formed between her and Mitford al- 
ready. Taken with her, he seemed too. She's 
just the woman that would fetch such a man as 
he. Well, let Kismet do its worst ; I shall stand 
by and see the play." 



CHAPTER IX. 

ME. effixgham's proceedings. 

Whex Mr. Effingham found himself with fifty 
pomicis in his pocket outside the bank where 
he had changed Sir Charles Mitford's cheque, he 
could scarcely contain his exidtation. His dealings 
with bankers had been few, and not always satis- 
factory. He had had cheques in his possession 
which he had been too bashftd to present in his 
own proper person, but had employed a little boy 
to take to the counter while he Avaited round the 
corner of an adjacent street ; he had had cheques 
which he had presented himself, but the proceeds 
of which, when asked "how he would have," he 
had always taken in gold, as a more convenient 
and untraceable medium. On the present oc- 
casion, however, he had walked boldly in ; had 
rapped on the counter, to the horror and dismay 



190 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

of the old gentlemen behind it ; had handed over 
his cheque with a swagger, and taken half the 
change in clean crisp notes of the Bank of Eng- 
land. All right now; all straight and above- 
board. Old Mr. Coverdale, solicitor to the bank- 
ing-firm, passing tln'ongh the public office on 
his way to the private parlour, peered at IMr. 
Effingham under his bushy gray eyebrows curi- 
ously; but Mr. Effingham did not mind that. 
The porter sitting on a veiy hard stool just inside 
the swing-doors rubbed his nose and winked 
significantly at the policeman in plain clothes 
stationed just outside the swing-doors, whose 
duty was to help rich old-lady customers in and 
out of their carriages. Both porter and policeman 
stared very hard at Mr. Effingham, and Mr. 
Effingham returned the stare with all the eye- 
power at his command. What did he care ? 
They might call him back and inspect the cheque 
if they liked, and then they would see what they 
would get for attempting to molest a gentleman. 

In his character of gentleman, Mr. Effingham 
felt that his costume w^as scarcely so correct as it 



ME. Effingham's proceedings. 191 

might have been ; in fact, that in the mere quality 
of being weather-tight it was lamentably deficient. 
So his first proceeding was to \asit an outfitter's, 
and then and there to procure what he termed 
^^ a rig-out" of the peculiar kind most in accord- 
ance with his resonant taste. Tlie trousers were 
of such an enormous-check pattern that, as the 
Jew tailor hmnorously remarked, " it would take 
two men to show it ;" the hat shone like a bad 
looking-glass ; the coat, though somewhat baggy 
in the back, was glossy, and had a cotton-velvet 
collar ; and the Lowther- Arcade jewelry glistened 
in the midst of a bird's-eye scarf of portentous 
height and stifiiiess. 

His outer man satisfied, Mr. Effingham 
thought it time to attend to his inner ; and ac- 
cordingly turned into a City chop-house of re- 
nown, where his elegant appearance made an 
immense impression on the yomig stockbroking 
gents and the junior clerks from the banks and 
Mincing-Lane houses, who commented, in no 
measm^ed tones, and with a great deal of biting 
sarcasm, on the various portions of his costume. 



192 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Either not liearing or not heeding this banter, 
Mr. Effingham ordered a point steak and potatoes 
and a pint of stont ; all of which he devoured with 
an appearance of intense relish. An old gentle- 
man sitting in the same box opposite to him had 
a steaming glass of fragrant pmich, the aroma 
of which ascended gratefully into Mr. Effing- 
ham's nostrils and almost impelled him to order 
a similar jorum ; but prudence stepped in, and 
he paid his bill and departed. Not that he did 
not intend to indulo^e in that after-dinner gros^, 
which was customary with him whenever he had 
the money to pay for it himself, or the luck to get 
any body to pay for it for him ; but he wished 
to combine business w^ith pleasm'e ; and so started 
off for another tavern nearer the West End, 
where he knew the combination could be accom- 
plished. 

The chosen place of Mr. Effingham's resort, 
though properly designated the Brown Bear, was 
known to all its frequenters as " Johnson's," from 
its proprietor's name. It was a commonplace 
public-house enough, in a street leading out of 



193 

the Strand, and sufficiently near the large theatres 
and newspaper-offices for its parlour to be the re- 
sort of actors and press-men of an inferior grade. 
The more eminent in both professions " used" the 
Rougepot in Salad Yard, a famous old place that 
had been a house of call for actors, wits, and men- 
of-letters for generations, and where strangers 
seldom penetrated. Tlie Jiahitu/s of " Johnson's" 
were mostly young men just affiliated to their 
professions, and not particularly careful as to 
their associates ; so that you frequently fomid in 
Jolmson's parlour a sprinkhng of questionable 
characters, men who hung on to the selvage of 
theatrical life, betting-book keepers, and card- 
shai'pers. The regular frequenters did not actually 
favour these men, but they tacitly allowed their 
presence, and occasionally would join in and listen 
to their conversation, from which they gleaned 
new notions of life. 

When Mr. Effingham pushed open the parlour- 
door and looked into the room, on the afternoon 
in which he had conducted his banking-operation 
with such signal success, the place was almost 

VOL. I. o 



194 EUKNIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

deserted. The large corner -boxes by the fire, 
where the ^professional gentlemen usually congre- 
gated, were empty ; but at a table in the far end 
of the room were seated tsvo men, at sight of 
whom Mr. Effingham's face brightened. They 
were flasliily-dressed, raffish-looking men, smok- 
ing rank cigars, and busily engaged in comparing 
betting-books. 

" Hollo !" said one of them, looking up at 
the noise made by the opening of the door; '^ I'm 
blessed if here am't D'Ossay Butler ! And the re- 
gular D'Ossay cut too . sprucer than ever ; might 
pass for the Count himself, blowed if you mightn't, 
D'Ossay !" 

'^ What's happened to the little cove now, I 
wonder?" said the other, a thin man with a 
shaved face and a tall hat, wliich he had great 
difficulty in keeping on his head; "what's hap- 
pened to him now ? Has he stood-in on a steeple- 
chase, or robbed a bank ? Look at liis togs ! What 
a slap-up swell he is !" 

Mr. Effingham received these compliments 
with great equanimity, sat do^^'::! b}- his friends, 



MR. EFFIXGHAm'S PROCEEDINGS. 195 

and seeing their glasses empty, said : " Any lap ? 
I'm game to stand any thing you like to put a name 
to ;" rang the bell for the waiter, and ordered three 
nines of brandy hot. 

"What an out-and-out little cove it is!" 
repeated the first man with great admiration. 
" Well, tell us, D'Ossay, all about it. How did 
it come off? What was it?" 

" Come off!" said Mr. Effingham; "what do 
you mean? Nothing's come off that I know of; at 
least nothing particular. You know that gentle- 
man in the City that I told you of, Griffiths?" 
he asked, with a private wink at the man in the 
high hat. 

" I know him fast enough," replied that 
worthy w^ith a nod, partly confirmatory, partly 
to keep the tall hat on his head. " Did he pull 
thi'ough in that matter ?" 

"Pull through!" said Mr. Effingham; "he 
won a lot of money ; and as I'd given him the 
office, and put him on a good thing, he said he'd 
behave handsome ; and he didn't do amiss, con- 
siderin'." 



196 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

, " What did he part with ?" asked the first 



man. 

"A tenner." 



Tlie first man's ejes glistened, and he in- 
stantly made up his mind to bori'ow half-a-sover- 
eign if he could get it . five shillings if he could 
not . of Effingham before they parted. 

"Ah, and so you went and rigged yom'self 
out in these swell togs, D'Ossay, did you, at 
once ? You always had the notions of a gentle- 
man, and the sperrit of a gentleman, that's more. 
I wish you'd put me on to something of that 
kind ; but, there, it wants the way to carry it out ; 
and I haven't got that, I know well enough." 

While this speech was in progress, Mr. Effing- 
ham had caught the eye of the tall man, and wink- 
ing towards their friend, pointed over his shoulder 
at the door. Tlie tail man repeated the nod tliat 
did the double duty, and after looking up at the 
clock, said, " You'd better be oft*, Jim ; you'll 
be just in time to catch that party down at Peter 
Crawley's, if you look sharp." 

Jim, thus admonished, finished his grog and 



MR. Effingham's proceedings. 197 

took liis leave, asking Mr. Effingliam if lie could 
have " lialf a word" with him outside ; which 
half-word resulted in the extraction of a half- 
sovereign, as Jim had predetermined. 

"Now for it," said Griffiths, as soon as Effing- 
ham returned, " I'm death to hear all that's hap- 
pened, only that fool wouldn't go. Wanted 
something, of course, outside, eh? Ah, thought 
so. What did you square him for ?" 

"Half-a-couter." 

" You appear to be making the shiners spin. 
Master D'Ossay ; that swell at the West End 
must have bled pretty handsome. Tell us all 
about it. What did he stand?" 

" Well, I won't try and gammon you. He 
stood fi%." 

"What, on the mere gab? Avithout your 
showing liim the stiff, and only telling him you 
knew about it ? Fifty quid I that's a cow that'll 
give milk for many a long year. Master D'Ossay, 
if only properly handled. Come, hand us over 
what you promised for putting you on. By 
George!" he added, as Effingham drew a bundle 



198 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

of notes from liis pocket, ^^low nice and crisp 
tliey sound !" 

"There's your tenner," said Effingliam, se- 
lecting a note from the roll and handing it to his 
fi'iend ; " I'm always as good as my word. That 
squares us up so far." 

" No fakement about it, is there ?" said Mr. 
Griffiths, first holding the note up to the light, 
then spreading it flat on the table, and going care- 
fully over it, back and fi'ont. " I've been dropped 
in the hole too often by flimsies not to be precious 
carefril about 'em. No. Matthew Marshall . aU 
them coily things in the water-mark and that ; all 
right. I think you ought to make it a little more ; 
I do indeed." 

"Make if a little more! I like that. Why, 
what the devil could you have done without me? 
It's true you first heard of the coppered stiff" from 
Tony ; but you didn't trouble a bit about it. 
Who set all the boys to hunt up this cove ? who 
found liim at last ? and who walked in as bold as 
brass this morning, and cheeked him out of fifty 
quid without a stitch of evidence? Why, you 



daredii't have gone to liis crib, to start with ; and 
if you had, he'd never have seen you ; the flunkey 
would have kicked you out for an area-sneak or 
a gonoph. Why, even /had some bother to get 
in ; so what would have become of you ?" 

Mr. Effingham was only a little man, but he 
swelled so with self-importance as, in the eyes 
of liis companion, to look very big indeed. He 
bounced and swaggered and spoke so loud as to 
quite queU the unfortunate Griffiths, who began, 
with due submission, to apologise for his oa\ti 
shortcomings and deprecate liis friend's wrath. 

'' Well, I know all that fast enough, and I 
only just liinted ; but you're do^^Ti upon a cove so. 
However, it's a fine thing for us l^oth, ain't it ? 
He'll be as good as a bank to us for years to 
come, wiU this swell." 

"I'm not so sure of that," said Mr. Effing- 
ham thoughtfully. 

"How do you mean, not so sure of that?" 
asked Griffiths. 

" Well, you see, he's a long way off being 
a fool ; he's not half so soft as Tony led us to 



200 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

believe. He doAvned on to me once or twice 
as quick as lightning; and I tliink it was only 
my way of putting it, and liis being taken 
sudden on the hop, that made him shell out." 

" You think that after he's thought the matter 
over, he'll fancy he's been a flat ?" 

" Well, not exactly that. You see the higher 
a fellow climbs, the worse it is when he falls. 
Tliis Mitford wouldn't have cared a cuss for 
this thing in the old daj's ; he'd have stood the 
racket of it easy. But it's different now; he's 
a big swell ; it's ' Sir Charles' and ' my Lady,' 
pony-phe-aton and 'orses and grooms, nice wife, 
and all that. He'd come an awftd smasher if 
any thing was to trip him up just now, and 
he knows it. Tliat's om- hold upon liim." 

"And that's what wiU make it easy for us 
to squeeze him." 

"No, not entirely. That very fear of being 
blown upon, of having to bolt or stand a trial 
. my eye ! how blue he turned w^hen I mentioned 
Norfolk Island to him ! . that very fear will make 
him most anxious to get rid of every chance of 



MR. effixgham's proceedings. 201 

coming to grief, to prevent any one being able 
to lay hold of him." 

" There's only one way for him to do that, 
and that's to burn the bill." 

"Yes; but he must get it first, and that's 
what he'll want, you may take your oath. The 
next time I go to him, it'll be, ^ Where is it? 
let me see it ! name your outside price, and let 
me have it I' That's what he'll say." 

" Likely enough ; and what'll you say then ?" 

" Cussed if I know !" said Mr. Effingham 
ruefully. " If I say I haven't got it, he'll stop 
the suppKes imtil I bring it; if I say I can't 
get it, not another mag from him." 

" You must fall back on the bounce, like 
you did to-day, and tell him you know of there 
bein' such a thing, and that you won't keep 
yom* mouth shut unless you're paid for it." 

" Oh, you're a leery cove, Griffiths, you 
are !" said Mr. Effino-ham with irreat diso;ust. 
" You never heard of attemptin' to extort money, 
did you? You don't think he'd ring the bell 
and send for a bobby, do you?" 



202 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

" No, I don't. He wouldn't liave the 
pluck." 

^^ Oh, but I do though; and as you see it's 
me that the bobby would lay hold of, I'm rather 
partiekler about it. Besides, it's not such a 
pleasant thing finding yourself at Bow Street; 
for even if one could square tliis Mitford and 
get him not to prosecute, there'd be heaps of 
bobbies there to prove previous convictions. 
Clark of the G's getting up ; ' Known as D'Ossay 
Butler, your worship. I had him for passing 
base coin in '43 ;' and all that kind of game. 
No, no, Griffiths I bounce won't do, my boy; 
won't do a bit." 

" What will do, then ? what shall we try ? 
Shall we shy up the sponge and think om-selves 
lucky to have got this fifty, and never try liim 
any more? That seems hard lines with such a 
chance." 

^'It would be ; and we won't do it. No ; there's 
only one thing to be done . we must go the whole 
hog; we must have the bill." 

" All ! and we must 'ave lamb and screen- 



MR. Effingham's peoceedixgs. 203 

peas in Febooaiy; and a patent shofle cab to 
ride in, so as not to tire ourselves ; and pockets 
full of 'alf-bulls to toss with ! We must ; but you 
see we 'aven't, D'Ossay, my boy ! And as for 
gettin' that bill, we're done at the very first 
step : we don't know who's got it." 

" You fool ! if we did know who'd got it, 
we'd have it, fast enough. There ain't many of 
'em that could keep it away from me !" 

" You are a plucked 'mi !" said Griffiths, re- 
garding him with admiration; "I can't help say- 
in' so, thougli you do lose yoiu' temper and call 
your friends ugly names. No ; I don't think there 
is many as could keep you off it, if you knew 
where it was. But how we're ever to find that, I 
can't tell." 

" Let's go over the lousiness all again," said 
Effingham. " It was Tony that always had a 
fancy for that bit of stiff. He stuck to it when it 
wasn't worth more than the stamp and the paper 
it was "vvrote on ; but he always thought some- 
thing would come of this Mitford, and then it 
would be a first-class screw to put on him, and 



CHAPTER X. 

SOUVENT FEJIME VARIE. 

No; Laui'ence Alsager was certainly not best 
pleased at all lie heard about Mrs. Hammond. 
Mrs. Hammond, a pretty little woman, coming 
to call upon you . great Heaven! Is that the 
way that that oaf Mitford talked of her who two 
years ago was Laura Molyneux, the mere men- 
tion of whose name caused Alsager to tlmll to 
his finger-tips; and whose low trainante voice, 
long steady passionate glances, and rippling shoul- 
ders could have led him to destruction? Drove 
her chestnuts well, eh ? Yes, by Jove ! there 
were few women could touch her either in riding 
or driving, and . Laurence laughed grimly to 
himself as he strode along. Wliat was it Dolla- 
more had said about Mitford's readiness to 2:0 to 
the bad, to shake a loose leg, to enjoy those ad- 



SOUVENT FElilME VAEIE. 207 

vantages of health, wealth, and position which 
had before been denied to him ? Why, here was 
the very woman to ensnare him, to act as his 
evil genius, the veiy counter-charm of Lady Mit- 
ford's quietude and girlish grace ; a woman of 
the world, bright, sharp, active, and alert ; with 
plenty of savoir /aire, an enormous talent for flir- 
tation, and not the smallest scrap of heart to 
throw into the balance against any of her whims. 
No, by George, not a scrap. Lam'ence l^e- 
thoup-ht him of a certain December morning: in 
Kensington Gardens, and the whole scene rose 
vividly before him. The trees all stripped and 
bare, and stridently clanging in the bitter wind ; 
the thick dun clouds hanging over the horizon ; 
the greatcoated park-keeper stamping vigorously 
over the gravel, and banging himself with his 
arms with vague notions of generating caloric; 
and he himself pacing up and do^vn by Laura 
Molyneux's side. The argmnents he had used, 
the very phrases which he had employed to in- 
duce her to reconsider the determination then 
aimounced to him, were ringing in his ears. Ho 



208 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

recollected how he had humbled himself, how 
he had implored her to reconsider her decision, 
how even he had begged for time, and how he 
had been met with one stern pitiless refusal ; and 
how he had gone away to weep bitter tears of 
mortified pride, and rejected love, and savage 
disappointment; and how she had stepped into 
the neat httle brouo^ham waitino- for her at the 
gate, and been whirled off to accept the hand 
and heart of Mr. Percy Hammond, a retired civil- 
servant from India, a widower with one daughter, 
who had shaken the pagoda-tree to some purpose, 
and returned to England with a colossal fortune. 

That was the then finale of the intimacy 
between Laura Molyneux and Laurence Alsager. 
Li the course of the next week he started on 
his tour ; in the course of the next month St. 
George's, Hanover Square, was the scene of her 
marriage, . a bishop welding the chains. And 
now two years had elapsed, and he was back in 
London, pretty much the same as if he had never 
lefl it ; and she was asking whether he had re- 
turned, and he had begmi to feel a gi-eat interest 



SOUVENT FEMME VARIE. 209 

in Lady Mitford ; and Sir Charles Mitford evi- 
dently thought Mrs. Hammond a most delightful 
person, and every thing was a tort et a traversy 
as it has been, is, and always shall be, in the great 
world of London. 

iWZ admirari is the motto on which your 
precocious youth j)iques himself; but which is 
adopted in all due seriousness and sobriety by 
the calm student of life. Who wonders at any 
thing ? . at the peevishness of your wife ; at the 
ingratitude of the child for whom you have 
pinched and slaved ; at the treachery of the one 
familiar friend; at the enormous legacy left you 
by the uncle whose last words to you were that 
you were a jackanapes, and, so far as he was 
concerned, should be a beggar ? The man of 
the world is surprised at nothing ; he is not 
Vhomme blase of the caricaturist ; he is not an 
atom astonished at finding nothing in any thing ; 
on the contrary, he finds plenty of novelty in 
every variety of life ; but nothing which may 
happen to him excites the smallest wonderment 
on his part. So that when Colonel Alsager 

VOL. I. p 



210 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

walked into the Guards Club to dinner, and 
received from the hall-porter a small note, with 
an addi'ess in a handwriting perfectly familiar 
to him, he was not in the least surprised. 

But he looked at the note, and twisted it 
between his fingers, and even put it into his 
waistcoat-pocket, as he walked up to the table 
whereon stood tlie framed menu, and left it 
there while he walked round and spoke to two 
or three men who were already at dinner; and 
it was not mitil he was comfortably seated at 
his little table, and had eaten a few mouthfiils 
of soup, that he took it from Ms pocket, lei- 
surely opened it, and bringing the candle within 
range, began to read it. Even then he paused 
for a moment, recollecting with what heart- 
throbs of anxiety and sensations of acute delight 
he used to read the previous epistles fr'om the 
same source ; then, as with an effort, he set 
himself to its perusal. 

It was very short. 

^^I shall be at home to-morrow at three, 



SOUVEXT FEMME VARIE. 211 

and hope to see you. I hear all sorts of rumours, 
which you alone can solve. Clii non sa niente 
non duhita di niente ! It will be for you to read 
the riddle. L." 

He smiled outright as, after reading it and 
restoring it to his pocket, he said to himself, 
'^ The old story ; she always made a mystery 
when there was no other excitement ; but I'll 
go, for all that." 

During his wildest times, Laurence had 
always been a pmietual man : and even the 
irre2:ular manner of his life dui'incr the two 
last years had not altered him in this respect. 
On the next afternoon, as the clock was strikino; 
three, he presented himself at Mrs. Hammond's 
door, and was immediately admitted and shoA^ai 
into her presence. 

He was apparently a little too punctual ; for 
a tall young woman, looking half lady, half 
nursery - governess, was standing by her and 
listening respectfully. Mrs. Hammond rose at 
the amiouncement of the Colonel's name, and 



212 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

coming forward, pressed his cold motionless 
hand with a tight grasp. 

" Pray excuse me for one instant, Colonel 
Alsager," said she ; " the doctors have said 
that w^e were all wTong in leaving Florence ; 
that it's impossible Mr. Hammond can remain 
in London dm-ing this awful weather, and that 
he must go at once to Torquay. So I'm send- 
ing Miss Gillespie down there to get a house 
for us, and arrange matters before we go down. 
Now, Ruth," turning to her, " I don't think 
there's any more to say. Not facing the sea, 
recollect, and a six-staU stable and double coach- 
house. You know all about the rest, . bedrooms, 
and those sort of things, . and so good-bye." 
Miss Gillespie touched lightly the outstretched 
tips of Mrs. Hammond's fingers, bowed grace- 
fully to Lam'ence, and departed. 

Mrs. Hammond watched the door close again, 
and, obviously ill at ease, turned to Laiu'ence, 
and said : " Miss Gillespie is the most invaluable 
person. She came at first as governess to Miss 
Hammond ; but she has reaUy made herself so 



SOLl^NT FEMME VARIE. 213 

useful to me, that I don't know what I should do 
without her. Housekeepers and all regular ser- 
vants are so stupid ; and I hate trouble so." 

She stopped, and there was a dead silence. 
Mrs. JBammond coloured, and said: "Have you 
nothing to say. Colonel Alsager ?" 

^^ On the subject of Miss Gillespie, nothing. 
If you sent for me to expatiate to me on Miss 
Gillespie's virtues, I am sorry ; for my time could 
have been better employed." 

" Tlian in coming: to see me ? You did not 
think so once." 

" Then we didn't talk about Miss Gillespie. 
Your note said that you had heard rumours, or 
riddles, which you wanted me to explain. What 
have you heard?" 

'^ In a word, nothing. I wrote the first thing 
that came into my mind because I wanted to see 
you, Laurence Alsager. Because I have lum- 
bered to see vou for two vears; to hear vour 
voice, to . You were at Vienna? at Isclil? and 
at Trieste?" 

" I was at all three . some little time at each." 



212 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

coming forward, pressed his cold motionless 
hand with a tight grasp. 

" Pray excuse me for one instant, Colonel 
Alsager," said she ; " the doctors have said 
that we were all wTong in leaving Florence ; 
that it's impossible Mr. Hammond can remain 
in London dm-ing this awful weather, and that 
he must go at once to Torquay. So I'm send- 
ing Miss Gillespie down there to get a house 
for us, and arrange matters before we go doT^^l. 
Now, Euth," turning to her, ^^ I don't think 
there's any more to say. Not facing the sea, 
recollect, and a six-stall stable and double coach- 
house. You know all about the rest, . bedrooms, 
and those sort of things, . and so good-bye." 
Miss Gillespie touched lightly the outstretched 
tips of Mrs. Hammond's fingers, bowed grace- 
fully to Laurence, and departed. 

Mrs. Hammond watched the door close again, 
and, obviously ill at ease, tiu'ned to Lam-ence, 
and said : " Miss Gillespie is the most invaluable 
person. She came at first as governess to Miss 
Hammond ; but she has really made herself so 



SOUVENT FEMME VARIE. 213 

useful to me, that I don't know what I should do 
without her. Housekeepers and all regular ser- 
vants are so stupid ; and I hate trouble so." 

She stopped, and there was a dead silence. 
Mrs. Hammond coloured, and said : " Have you 
nothing to say. Colonel Alsager ?" 

" On the subject of Miss Gillespie, nothing. 
If you sent for me to expatiate to me on Miss 
Gillespie's virtues, I am sorry ; for my time could 
have been better employed." 

" Than in coming to see me ? You did not 
think so once." 

" Then we didn't talk about Miss Gillespie. 
Your note said that you had heard rumours, or 
riddles, wliicli you wanted me to explain. What 
have you heard?" 

^^ In a word, notliing. I wrote the first thing 
that came into my mind because I wanted to see 
you, Lam-ence Alsager. Because I have limi- 
gered to see you for two years ; to hear your 
voice, to . You were at Vienna? at Isclil? and 
at Trieste?" 

" I was at all three . some little time at each." 



214 EUKNING THE GAUNTLET. 

" You saw tlie Times occasionally on your 
travels?" 

" While I remained in Eui'ope, frequently. 
Oh yes, Laura, I received all yoiu' letters at the 
places you mention ; and I saw the advertisement 
in the Times, under the signature and with the 
ciphers by which Ave used to correspond in the 
old days." 

" And why did you take no notice ?" 

" Because my Ioa'c for you was gone and 
dead ; because I was tired of being dragged about 
and shown-ofF, and made to display the abject 
state of docility to which you had reduced me. I 
told you all tliis that January morning in Ken- 
sington Gardens ; I said to you, ^ Let us finish 
this schemino: and hidino; ; let our eno^ao-ement be 
announced, and let us be married in the spring.' 
And you apparently assented, and went home and 
wrote me that letter wliicli I have now, and shall 
keep to my dying day, declaring that you had been 
compelled to accept an offer from Mr. Hammond." 

" You knew, Laurence, that my mother in- 
sisted on it." 



SOUVEXT FEMME YARIE. 215 

'^ I kiievf you said so, Mrs. Hammond. . 
When I was acquainted with Mrs. Molyneux she 
was not much accustomed to having any influence 
with her daughter. Tlien I went away; but at 
first not out of the reach of that London jargon 
which permeates wherever EngHshmen congre- 
gate. I heard of your marriage, of your first 
season, of the Richmond fete given for you by 
the Russian prince, Tchernigow. I heard of you 
that autumn as being the reigning belle of Baden, 
where Tchernigow must have been at the same 
time, as I recollect reading in Galignani of his 
breaking the bank. Before I Avent to the East I 
heard of you in a score of other places ; your name 
always connected with somel^ody else's name . 
always ' la belle Hammond ^ et puis . ' I never 
.choose to be one in a regiment; besides . " 

"Besides what?" 

" Well, my time for that soi*t of thing was 
past and gone ; I was too old for it ; I had gone 
through the phase of existence which Tchernigow 
and the others were then enjoying. I had offered 
you a steadfast honest love, and you hud rejected 



216 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

it. When I heard of the Tchernigow alhance, 
-and the various other passe-temps, I must say I 
dfelt enormously grateful for the mipleasantness 
you had spared me." 

^' I cannot say your torn' has improved you, 
Colonel Alsager," said Mrs. Hammond cahnly, 
though with a red spot biu'ning on either cheek. 
^' In the old days you were considered the pink 
of chivahy, and would have had your tongue cut 
,out before you woidd have hinted a sneer at a 
- woman. You refuse to believe my story of com- 
pulsion in my marriage ; but it is true . as true as 
is the fact that I rebelled then and there, and, 
having sold myself, determined to have as much en- 
joyment of life as was compatible with the sale." 

^^ I never denied it, Mi's. Hammond ; I sim- 
ply told you what I had heard." 

^^ Tlien tell me something more, Laurence 
Alsager," said Mrs. Hammond, flushing bril- 
liantly, and looking him, for the fii'st time dming 
their inter\-iew, straight in the face; "is it to 
be war between us two, or what?" 

She looked splendidly beautiful just at that 



sou VENT FEMME VARIE. 217 

moment. She was a bright-looking Uttle woman, 
with deep-gray eyes and long dark lashes, shining 
phestnut hair, a retrousse nose, a wanton mouth, 
and a perfect, trim, tight, romided small figm-e. 
As she threw out this verbal challenge, her eyes 
flashed, she sat erect, and every fibre within her 
seemed quivering with emotion. 

Laurence marked her expression, and for an 
instant softened, as the recollection of the old days, 
when he had seen her thus wilfully petulant only 
to make more marked the subsidence into pla- 
cidity and devotion, rose before him ; but it faded 
rapidly away, had utterly vanished before, no less 
in reply to her peering gaze than to her words, 
he said, "No, not war; neighbours who have been 
so nearly allied should never quarrel. Let us take 
another strategic phrase, and say that we will 
preserve an armed neutrality." 

" And that means. ?" 

" Well, in our case that means that neitlier 
shall interfere with the other's plans, of whatever 
kind, without due warning. That once given 
and disregarded, there will be war to the laiife ; 



218 RUNXIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

for I think under present circumstances neither 
will be inclined to spare the other." 

*^Your anticipations are of a singularly sombre 
character, Colonel Alsager. I think that . ah !" 
she exclaimed, suddenly clapping her hands, "I 
see it all ! my eyes are opened, and the whole map 
lies patent before me." 

"What has caused this happy restoration of 
sight?" 

" Eemembering a story which was told me 
a day or two ago by a little bird. The story of 
a preiLv chevalier and a lady in distress ; of a 
romantic adventure and a terrific leap ; of plung- 
ing hoofs and fainting-fits, and all the necessary 
ingredients of such a scene. Je voiis en feiiciU^ 
Monsieur le ColoneV 

Laurence's brow grew very dark as he said, 
"You are too clever a woman to give a leg-up 
to a manifestly limping story, however much it 
might temporarily serve your pm-pose. Of that 
story as it stands, turned, twisted, perverted as 
it may be, nothing can be made. The scandal- 
mongers don't know what they have taken in 



souat:xt femme yarie. 219 

hand. They might as well try to shake the Rock 
of Gibraltar as that lady's good name." 

Mrs. Hammond laughed a short bitter laugh 
and said, " You have even lost that grand virtue 
which you possessed . the power of concealing your 
emotions. With the gravity, you have attained 
the simplicity of the Oriental; and you now . " 

She was interrupted by the servant's tin-owing 
open the door and announcing, " Sir Charles 
Mitford." 

Tliat gentleman entered immediately on the 
announcement of his name, with a certain air of 
empressement which vanished so soon as he saw 
Colonel Alsager's broad back. Laura Hammond 
prided herself on never ha\dng been taken una- 
wares. When spealdng to Alsager her face had been 
curling with sneers, her voice harsh and strident ; 
hut before Sir Charles Mitford had crossed the 
threshold, she had Avreathed her mouth in smiles, 
and as she shook hands with him, though aloud 
she only uttered the ordinary commonplaces, in a 
lower tone she said, " I thought you would come 
to-day." 



220 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Alsager heard her say it. Tliat was a smgular 
property of his . ^that gift of hearing any thing 
that might be said, no matter in how large a party, 
or how earnestly he might be supposed to be talk- 
ing. It had saved his life once ; and he had as- 
siduously cultivated it ever since. Mitford heard 
it too, but thickly. He had not had as much 
experience in the cadences of the demi-voiv as 
Laui'ence. 

" How are you, Alsager? We seem to be al- 
ways tumbling over each other noAV, don't we? 
and the oftener the better, I say. . How d'ye 
do, IVIrs. Hammond? I say, what's all this that 
you've been saying to my wife ?" 

Laurence started, and then reverted to the 
album which lay on his knees. ' Mrs. Hammond 
saw the start, and the means adopted for hiding 
it, and smiled quietly. 

"" I don't know wdiat I said in particular to 
Lady Mitford; notliing to frighten her, I hope," 
said Mrs. Hammond; *^ I was congratulating 
myself that she and I had got on so very well 
together." 



SOUVENT FEMME VARIE. 221 

" Oh, yes, so you did, of course," said Sir 
Charles, . " sisters, and all that kind of thing. 
But I mean what you said to her about lea\dng 
toT\'n." 

'^ Oh, that's perfectly correct. Mr. Hammond 
has seen Sir Charles Dumfunk and Dr. Wadd, 
and they both concur in saying that he ought 
not to have left Florence until the spring ; and 
that he must leave London forthwith." 

" And they have recommended Torquay as the 
best j^lace for him ; at least so my wife tells me." 

" Quite right ; and in obedience to their com- 
mands I have sent Miss Gillespie off this very 
day to take a house, and make all necessary ar- 
rangements." 

"Who's Miss GiUespie?" 

" My . well, I don't know what. I beHeve 
factotum is the Latin word for it. She's Miss 
Hammond's governess (my step-daughter, you 
know), and my general adviser and manager. 
I don't know Avhat I should do without her, 
as I told Colonel Alsager, who, by the way, 
did not pay much attention." 



222 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Laui'ence grinned a polite grin, but said never 
a word. 

" She was with me in the pony - carriage 
the first day Mr. Bertram introduced you to 
me, Sir Charles. Ah, but she had her veil 
do^\ai, I recollect ; and she asked all about you 
afterwards." 

''' Very civil of her to take an}^ interest 
in me," said Sir Charles. " I recollect a veiled 
person in the pony -carriage ; but not a bit 
of interest did I take in her. All that concen- 
trated elsewhere, and that sort of thing ;" and 
he smiled at Mrs. Hammond in a manner that 
made Lam-ence's stern face grow sterner than 
ever. 

"Well, but about Torquay," continued Sir 
Charles. " I thought at first it was a tremen- 
dous nuisance your having to go out of town; 
but now I've got an idea which does not seem 
so bad. Town's horribly slow, you know, ut- 
terly empty; one does not know what to do 
with oneself; and so I've been suggesting to 
Georgie v>diy not go down to Redmoor . our 



SOUVENT FEMME VAKIE. 223 

country 2:>lace in Devon, you know . close to 
Torquay, . and one could fill the house with 
pleasant ipeojAe, and you could come over from 
Torquay, and it would be very jolly indeed." 

He said it in an ofF-hand manner, but he 
nevertheless looked earnestly up into Mrs. Ham- 
mond's face, and Laurence Alsager's expression 
grew sterner than ever. 

Mrs. Hammond returned Sir Charles's glance, 
and said, " Tliat would be thorouglily delightful ! 
I was looking forward with horror, I confess, 
to a sojourn at Torquay. Those dreadful people 
in respirators always creeping about, and the 
stupid dinner-parties, where the talk is always 
about the doctor, and the quarter in which the 
wind is. But with you and Lady Mitford in the 
neighbom'hood it would be quite another thing." 

'' Oh yes, and we'd get some jolly people^ 
doA\ni there. . ^Alsager, you'd come?" 

" I don't think I'd come, and I'm any thing 
but a jolly person. I must go to my father's. 
at once." 

^' Gad, Alsager, you seem to keep your 



224 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

father always ready to bring forward whenever 
you want to be misantlrropical. You were to 
liave gone to him a week ago." 

" Circumstances alter cases," said Mrs. Ham- 
mond with a short laugh ; " and Colonel Alsager 
finds London more tolerable than he expected. 
Is it not so, Colonel?" 

" ' Very tolerable, and not to be endured,' 
as Dogberry says, since I am about to leave 
it," said Laurence. (" She would Hke to draw 
me into a semi-confidence on that subject ; but 
she sha'n't," thought he.) 

^^ No; but really, Alsager, do try and come, 
there's a good fellow ; you can hold over your 
father mitil you want an excuse for not going 
to some place where you'll be bored. Now we 
won't bore you ; we'll take do^^al a rattling good 
team : Tom Charteris and his wife . she plays 
and sings, and all tliat kind of thing, capitally; 
and Mrs. Masters, w^ho's quiet to ride or 
drive . I don't mean that exactly, but she's 
available in two ways, . as a widow she can 
chaperon, and she's quite young and pretty 



SOUA^EXT FEMME VARIE. 225 

enough to flirt on lier own hook ; and the 
Tyrrells . nice girls those ; and Bligh and 
Winton, . oh, and Dollamore ! I'll ask Dol- 
lamore ; he'd be just the man for such a 
party." 

'' Oh yes, you must have Lord Dollamore," 
said Mrs. Hammond ; "he has such a delightfully 
dry way of saying unpleasant things about every 
body ; and as he never shoots or hunts, he is a 
perfect treasure in a country house, and devotes 
himself to the ladies." She shot one hasty 
glance at Laurence as she said this, which he 
duly perceived. 

"Oh yes," said Sir Charles, " DoUamore's 
sure to come. And you, Alsager, . come, you've 
changed your mind?" 

" Upon my w^ord, the temptation you offer 
me is so great, that I'm unable to resist it. Yes, 
I'll come." 

" I thought you would," said Sir Charles 
carelessly. 

" I knew you would," said Mrs. Hammond 
in an undertone ; then aloud, " What going, 

VOL. I. Q 



226 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Colonel Alsager ? Good-bye ; I'm so pleased to 
have seen you; and looking so well too, after 
the climate, and all the things you've gone 
through." 

Laurence shook hands with Mitford and de- 
parted. 

Yes, there was not much doubt about it : Sir 
Charles was tolerably w^ell " on" in that quarter. 
An old poacher makes the best gamekeeper be- 
cause he knows the tricks and dodges of his old 
profession; and there was net one single move 
of Sir Charles Mitford's during the entire con- 
versation, which Laurence Alsager did not re- 
cognise as ha\ang been used by himself in bygone 
days. He knew the value of every look, knew 
the meaning of each mflexion of the voice; and 
appreciated to its full the motive-power which 
had induced the baronet suddenly to long for 
the comitry house at Kedmoor, and to become 
disgusted w^ith the dreariness of London. De- 
termined to sit Mm out too, wasn't he? Lord! 
how often he, Laurence, had determinedly sat 
out bores for the sake of getting ten w^ords, one 



SOUVENT FEMME YARIE. 227 

hand-clasp from Laura after they were gone! 
Yes, Mitford was getting on, certainly; making 
the running more quickly even than DoUamore 
had prophesied. Dollamore ! ah, that reminded 
him : DoUamore was to be asked down to Red- 
moor. That, and the manner in which Mrs. 
Hammond had spoken of him and his visit, had 
decided Laurence in accepting Mitford's invita- 
tion. There could not be any thing between 
them which . no ; Dollamore could never have 
made a confidante of Laura and imparted to her 
. oh, no ! Laura had not too much conscience 
in any case where her ovni passion or even her 
own whim was concerned ; but she would shi'ink 
from meddling in an affair of that kind. And 
as for Lord Dollamore, he was essentially a 
man of petits soins, the exercise of which 
always laid those who practised them open 
to mismiderstanding. He had a habit of hint- 
ing and insinuating also, which was unplea- 
sant, but not very noxious. As people said, 
his bark was probably worse than his bite, 
and . 



228 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

AiicI at all events Laurence was very glad 
tliat lie had accepted the invitation, and that he 
would be there to watch in person over any thing 
that might happen. 



CHAPTER XL 



DOWN AT KEDMOOR. 



Just on tlie liighest ridge of tlie gi'eat waste of 
Eedmoor, whicli is interspersed with dangerou-s 
peat-bogs and morasses, and extends about ten 
miles every way, with scarcely a fence or a tree, 
stands Redmoor House, from time immemorial . 
whicli means from the reign of Edward III. . 
the home of the Mitford family. Stands high 
and dry, and lookino; warm and snuo; and com- 
fortable, with its red-brick face and its quaint 
gables and queer little muUioned windows. It is 
a house the sight of which would put spirit 
into a man chilled and numbed with looking over 
the great morass, and would give some vestige 
of credibility to the fact, that the sluggish little 
stream bom in the middle of the moor, and wind- 
ing romid through the gardens of the house, 



230 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

from its desolate birthplace flows down . as can 
be traced from the windows . tlurough a land of 
plenty, of park and meadow, of orchard and corn- 
field, by the old cathedral-city, to the southern 
shore. 

A grand old house, with a big dining-hall like 
St. George's Chapel at Windsor on a small scale, 
without the stalls, but with the knightly banners, 
and the old oak, and the stained glass, and the 
solemn air of antiquity; with a picture-gallery 
full of ancestors, begimiing with Sir Gerard, 
temp. Henry VIII., painted by Holbein, a jolly 
red-bearded swashbuckler, not unlike his royal 
master, and ending with the late lamented Sir 
Percy, painted by Lawrence, with a curly head 
of hair, a fiir-collar to his coat, a smile of sur- 
prising sweetness, and altogether not unlike his 
royal master. There were drawing-rooms in blue 
and amber; a charming bow- windowed room 
hung with tapestry, and commanding a splendid 
view over the cultivated landscape, which, in the 
housekeeper's tradition, had been a boudoir for 
Sir Percy's lady, who died within thi-ee years of 



DOWN AT EED3I00R. 231 

her marriage ; a grand old library, tlie bookcases 
in black oak, and nearly all the books in russia 
leather, save those bought under the auspices of 
the late baronet, . Hansard's Debates, and a legal 
and magisterial set of volumes all bound in calf 
and red-lettered at the back. There is a grand 
terrace in front of the house, and all kinds of 
gardens stretch round it : Dutch gardens, formal, 
quaint, and solemn, with a touch of old-world 
stiffness like the Mynheers ; Italian gardens, 
bright and sunny and gaudy, very glittering 
and eifective, but not very satisfactory after all, 
like the Signori ; English gardens, with ample 
space of glorious close-shaved la^vn, and such 
wealth of roses as to keep the whole air hea^7' 
with their fragrance. Great prolific kitchen-gar- 
dens at the back, and stables and coach-houses 
wliich might be better ; but the late baronet 
cared for nothing but his quarter-sessions and his 
yacht; and so long as he had a pair of horses 
to jolt with liim to join the judge's procession at 
assize-times, troubled himself not one jot how the 
internal economy of the stables was ordered. 



232 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Tliis is all to be altered now. It was not 
very briglit in Sir Percy's time, and it has been 
deadly-lively indeed since liis deatli ; but the 
Sleeping Beauty herself was never more aston- 
ished by the arrival of the prince than was 
Mrs. Austin, the old housekeeper at Kedmoor, by 
the advent of a tall hook-nosed gentleman, who 
announced himself as Captain Bligh, and who 
brought a letter from Sir Charles Mitford, duly 
signed and sealed with the family arms, which 
Mrs. Austin knew so well, ordering implicit 
obedience to whatever orders the bearer might 
choose to give. "With him came a sleek-looking 
man with close-cut hair and a white cravat, whom 
Mrs. Austin at first took for a clergjnnan, mitil 
she discovered he was the stud-groom. This 
person inspected the stables, and the remnant 
of the late Sir Percy's stud, and reported to 
Captain Bligh that the stables was pigsties, and 
as for the hanimals, he should think they must 
be the 'osses as Noah put into the hark. 

A fresh regime and fresh work to be done 
by every body under it. No more chance for 



DOWN AT REDMOOR. 233 

Tummus coachman and Willum helper to just 
ride harses to ex'cise and dryaive 'em out in 
trap Avhenever wanted to go crass to races or 
market, or give missus and young 'uns a Httle 
change. ISTo more chance for Dawniel Todd the 
vScotch gardener to make his market of all the 
fruits, flowers, and vegetables, selling them to 
Mrs. Dean or Miss Archdeacon, or to the ofiicers 
up in barracks. ]tvrot much chance for the head- 
keeper and his two mider-trappers, who really 
had all their work to do to keep the game 
down after Sir Percy's death, so strictly had 
that terror of poachers preserv^ed ; though they 
thought they saw their way to l^alancing any 
loss which they might sustain from being un- 
able any longer to supply the poulterers of the 
county toTvm, in a house full of ardent sports- 
men, with innumerable hea\y tips after battue- 
days, and an occasional dog to break or to 
sell. Tlie old lodge -gates had begmi to grow 
rusty from disuse ; but they are constantly on 
the stretch now, for carts with ladders and 
scaffolding-poles, and men in light linen blouses 



234 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

daubed with paint, were streaming in and out 
from morning till night. Tliere is a new roof 
being put on the stables, and the outhouses are 
being painted and whitewashed throughout ; and 
the mastiff, who has been bred up on the true 
Enghsh principle of " keeping himself to him- 
self," has been driven quite mad at the influx 
of new faces, and has showai such a convincing 
set of teeth to the painter's men, that they have 
decHned proceeding with their work until he 
has been removed. So Tummus coachman and 
"Willum helper have removed his big kennel to 
the back of the stables ; and here Tui'k lies, with 
nothino; but his black nose visible in the clean 
straw, until he catches sight of a painter or a 
tiler pursuing his occupation high up in mid-air, 
and then with one balefiil spring Turk bounds 
out of his kennel, and unmistakably expresses 
his fervent wish to have that skilled labourer's 
life's-blood. 

Captain Bligh too sits heavy on the lodge- 
keeper's soul. For the Captain, after a cursory 
inspection of the vehicles at Redmoor House, has 



DOWN AT REDMOOR. 235 

sent do^^ra to Exeter for a dog-cart, and has duly 
received thence the nearest approach which the 
Exeterian coachbuilder had on hand. It is not 
a bad tax-cart, of the kind known as '' Wliite- 
chapel," has a very big pair of wheels, and be- 
hind a long chestnut mare . wliich the Captain 
found in a loose box in the corner of the yard, 
and which it seemed Tummus coachman used 
to reserve for his special driving . rmis remark- 
ably light and well. In this tax-cart Captain 
Bligh drives to and from the station, where he 
is occupied watcliing the disembarkation of fm-- 
niture coming direct from Gillow's, . ottomans 
for the smoking-rooms, and looking-glasses for 
my lady's boudoir ; to and from the market- 
tow^i, where the painters and other workpeople 
are to be hunted up ; to and fr'om the barracks, 
where he has found that hospitaHtv' and good- 
fellowship which are invariable characteristics 
of the service. From the barracks the Captain 
is not unfrequently very late in returning, yelling 
out, " Ga . a . ate !" in the early hours of the 
morning, and frightening the lodge-keeper from 



236 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

peaceful dreams ; and as the painter's men arrive 
at six, and the railway -van did not leave till 
eleven, the lodge -keeper begins to feel, on the 
-whole, that life is not all beer and skittles, and 
rather wishes that the late baronet had never 
been dro^wnded. , 

Now things begin to look a little straighter, 
and rumours are rife that it won't be long be- 
fore the new baronet brings his wife down, and 
regularly takes possession. Tlie old stables have 
been re-tiled and touched up, four new loose 
boxes, " wi' sla-ate mangers and brass foxes' 
heads a-holdin' the pillar-reins," have been erected, 
the coach-houses have been cleaned and enlarged. 
Tlie stud-sroom, mider whose directions all these 
alterations have been made, has watched their 
completion, and has then started for London, 
returning with a whole string of splendid crea- 
tm-es, all in the most perfect-fitting hoods and 
cloths embroidered w^ith Sir C. M.'s initials and 
bloody hand, railed down to the nearest station, 
and brought over thence in charge of three un- 
derlings, also sleek-headed, tight-trousered, and 



DOWN AT EEDMOOR. 237 

wliite-cravatted. Kot in incomej but in status 
do Tummus coaclnnan and Willuin helper feel 
the change. Tliey are to be retained on the 
establishment with the same rate of wages ; but 
they are simply to make themselves generally 
useful in the stables, and to have no particular 
duties whatsoever. 

Very busy indeed has been Captain Bligh ; 
but his labours are drawing to an end now, 
and he begins to tliink that he has been very 
successfLil. He has been good in generalisation, 
he thinks ; there's nothing that any one could find 
particular fault with, looking at the materials 
he had to work upon, and the time he had to 
do it in. But there are two things about which 
he knows in managing for other peojjle you 
should be particular. Take care that both the 
men and the women have a stumiing good room 
of their otn^i. You know the library is generally 
considered the men's room ; but Charley am't 
much of a bookworm ; the Times of a day, and 
Bell of a Sunday, and that kind of thing ; and 
the library's an infernal big room, with all sorts 



238 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

of plaster-casts of philosophic classic parties, 
grinning at you off the tops of the shelves. 
Charley won't like that ; so Bligh has fitted him 
up this little crib, next to his dressing-room, 
cosey and comfortable, good drawing stove, little 
let-down flap for his grog, whip-rack, pipe-rack, 
and all snug . don't you think so? Bollindar 
and Smyth, of the 26th Cameronians, to whom 
the question is put, think so . rather ! and look 
all round the room and nod their heads saga- 
ciously, and clap Bligh on the back and tell him 
what a knowing hand he is, and then go ofi* to 
try the new biUiard-table which Thurston has just 
sent from London. That Lady Mitford's special 
room should also be something to be proud of, 
is also a desideratum with the Captain ; but 
there he mistrusts his own taste. The late Mrs. 
Bligh had been a barrack-master's daughter, and 
havino- lived in barracks both before and after 
her marriage, had been accustomed, as her hus- 
band recollected, to think highly of any place 
where the doors would shut and the windows 
would not rattle. But the old campaigner re- 



DOWN AT KEDMOOR. 239 

collected that Mrs. Ban-ington the widow, daugh- 
ter of the Dean and Deaness, and then living at 
home with her parents in the Close, had, during 
the two happy years of her marriage to George 
Barrington, private secretary to Lord Muffington 
when keeper of the Gold Fish to her Majesty, 
lived in very decent society in London; and it 
was after Mrs. Barrington's idea that the bow- 
windowed boudou' had its bow-window filled 
with plate-glass, and a light chintz paper and 
maple furniture. Sipping a glass of '20 port 
with her lunch-biscuit (the cellars at Eedmoor 
were splendidly stocked, and wanted no renova- 
tion), Mrs. Dean declared that the room Avas 
perfect ; and poor pale peaky little Mrs. Bar- 
rington, looking romid at the elegance and com- 
fort, was reminded of the days when she was 
something more than a dependent on her parents' 
bounty, and when she had a husband whose 
chiefest delight was the fidfilment of her every 
wish. 

So the Captain wrote up to his principal, and 
reported all in readiness; and the day for Sir 



240 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Charles and Lady Mitford to come down was 
agreed upon. There was some talk of having 
a public reception; but the Captain did not 
think Sir Charles v/ould care particularly about 
that, and so the scheme was given up. However, 
when the carriage Avliich fetched them from the 
station dashed tln'ough the lodge-gates, the ten- 
antry, some mounted on their rough little E,ed- 
moor jionies, some on foot, but all in their best 
clothes, were drawn up on either side of the 
avenue, and greeted their new landlord wdtli 
reiterated cheers. They are an impressible peo- 
ple, these Devonians ; and they were much gra- 
tified by the frank, hearty, sporting appearance 
of Sir Charles, ^^ so different fi'om Sir Percy, 
as were all di'ied-up like ;" they liked the jolly 
way in which he stood up and waved his hat to 
them ; while as for Lady Mitford, the impression 
she created was something extraordinary. Tlie 
men raved about her, and the w^omen seemed 
to feel the greatest gratification in repeating that 
she was " a pm^e Devon lass, as any one could 
tell by her skin." 



DOWN AT REDMOOR. 241 

Sir Charles had wished to bring all their 
friends down to Redmoor at the same time as 
they themselves came ; but Georgie, who, ever 
since the visit to the ancestral home had been 
determined upon, had found her mistress-of-the- 
house position weighing on her mind, begged that 
they might be there for at least a day or two 
by themselves, that she might settle with Mrs. 
Austin the disposal of the various rooms, and 
the general arrangement of the household. To 
this Sir Charles agreed, and they came alone. 

The " day or t^vo" spent by themselves were 
very happily passed by Georgie. The whole 
of the first day was consumed in going from 
room to room with Mrs. Austin, listening to 
the family history, and thoroughly examining 
all the pictures, tapestry, and curios. The old 
lady was enchanted with her new mistress, who 
took so much interest in every thing, and who, 
above all, was such an excellent listener. Then 
Georgie, whose housekeeping tastes had not had 
much opportunity for display in the parsonage 
at Fishbourne, under Mrs. Austin's guidance 

VOL. I. R 



242 RUKNTING THE GAUNTLET. 

went " thi'ougli tlie things," absolutely revelling 
in snowy linen and spotless damask, in glorious 
old china and quaint antique glass, in great stores 
of jams and preserves, and all Mrs. Austin's 
household treasures. She did not take so much 
interest in the display of plate, though it was 
really veiy handsome and very valuable ; not the 
least effective among the trophies being several 
splendid regatta-prizes won by the late baronet's 
celebrated yacht. With the boudoir Georgie 
was deHghted ; and when she heard from Captain 
Bhgh that, feeling his utter ignorance in the 
matter, he had consulted Mrs. Barrington, after 
whose taste the room had been prepared, Georgie 
declared that Mrs. Barrington must be a very 
nice woman to have such excellent taste, would 
probably prove a delightful neighbom-, and cer- 
tainly should be called upon as soon as possible. 

You see, if Georgie " gushed" a little at tliis 
period of her life, it was not mmatural, and was 
certainly excusable. She had been brought up 
very quietly, and had had, as we have seen, her 
little trouble and had borne it with great pldck 



DOWN AT REDMOOR. 243 

and determination ; and now, as she imagined, 
she was thoroughly happy. Husband's love, 
kind friends, wealth and position, were all hers ; 
and as she was young and impulsive, and tho- 
roughly appreciative of all these blessings, she 
could not help showing her appreciation. In 
those days, even more than in the present, it 
was considered in the worst taste to be in the 
smallest degree natural ; a dull uncaring accept- 
ance of events as they occurred, without betraying 
the least astonishment or concern, was considered 
the acme of good breeding ; so that unless Georgie 
altered a great deal before the London season, 
she would be voted very bad ton by Lady Clan- 
ronald and the Marchioness of Tappington, those 
sovereigns of society. But there is some little 
time yet before the commencement of the season, 
and Georgie may then have become as unapprecia- 
tive and as undemonstrative as the other women 
in her position. Just now she is thoroughly 
happy with Mrs. Austin and the contents of the 
linen- and china-rooms. 

Whether, as the woman is the lesser man, 



244 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

the feminine mind is much more easily amused than 
the masculine, or whether there was much more 
absolute novelty to Lady Mitford in her position 
than to Sir Charles in his (he had seen something 
of the external life of fashionable people, and, 
like most military men, had acquired a veneer 
of swelldom while in the army), it is difficult to 
determine ; but it is certain that the " day or 
two" to be spent before the arrival of their 
friends, seemed like a day or twenty-two to 
Sir Charles Mitford. He had gone over every 
room of the house, thoroughly examined the 
new stables and loose boxes, had out all the 
horses and critically examined them, had tried 
two new pairs and spent an horn' or two in break- 
ing them, had pulled the old mastiff's ears mitil 
the dog growled, had tlien kicked him for growl- 
ing, had put all his whips and all liis pipes into 
their respective racks, had smoked more than 
was good for him, had whistled every time he 
could remember, and was utterly and horribly 
bored. 

He was like the little boy in the child's story- 



DOAVN AT REDMOOR. 245 

book : he wanted somebody to come and play with 
him. Captain Bhgh had been obhged to leave 
for London directly his friends arrived, and was 
coming do^vn again with the first batch of visitors. 
And Sir Charles hated being alone; he wanted 
somebody to smoke with him, and to play bil- 
liards with him. He used to put a cigar in his 
mouth and go and knock the balls about, trying 
various new hazards ; but it did not amuse liim. 
He could not ask the officers of the neighbouring 
garrison to come over, as his plea to liis friends 
had been the necessity for preparation in the 
house. He grew very cross towards the close of 
the second day ; and after dinner, as he was 
going off to smoke a sulky pipe in his own room, 
Georgie came up to him, and put her arm tln'ough 
his, and looked at and spoke to him so affection- 
ately, that liis conscience gave him a little twinge 
as he thought how lately he had let his fancy 
run on eyes and hair of a different colour from 
his wife's. 

"What is it, Charley? You're all wrong, I 
see; not ill, are you, dai'ling?" 



246 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

^^ No, Georgie, not ill; only confoundedly 
bored." 

"Bored?" 

" Yes, bored ! Oli, I know it's all very well 
for you, who have your house to look after and 
Mrs. Austin to attend to, and all that kind of thing 
. that passes the time. But I've had nothing to 
do, and nobody to speak to, and I'm regularly sick 
of it. If this is the kind of thing one's to expect 
in country life, I shall go back to town to-morrow." 

" Oh, you won't feel it when your friends 
come down, Charley ; they'll be here the day after 
to-morrow. It's only because you're alone with 
me, . and I'm not much of a companion for you, 
I know, . that you're moped. Now let us see, 
what can you do to-morrow ? Oh, I have it, . 
why not drive over and see your friends the 
Hammonds at Torquay ?" 

He had thought of that several times, but had 
not mentioned it because . well, he did not know 
why. But now his wife had started the subject; 
so of com'se it was all right. Still he hesitated. 

" Well, I don't know." 



DOWN AT REDMOOR. 247 

" Now I tliink it a capital idea. You can 
drive over tliere, and they'll most probably ask 
jou to stop to dinner, and you'll have a fine 
moonlight drive back. And then the next day 
all the rest of the people will come down." 

After this Sir Charles did not attempt, how- 
ever faintly, to interpose an objection, and was 
in a very good temper for the remainder of the 
evening. 



CHAPTER XIL 

DRAWING COVER. 

It was part of the crafty policy of the tall-hatted 
Mr. Griffiths to keep his employer Mi'. Effingham 
in good-humour, and to show that he was worth 
feeing occasionally; and it was with this end in 
view tliat Mr. Griffiths had spoken so confidently 
of Mr. Lyons's undoubted knowledge of the where- 
abouts of the forged bill and of his (Griffiths's) 
intention of seeking an immediate interview with 
Lyons. But, in sober truth, Mr. Griffiths merely 
had a faint notion that Lyons, from liis previous 
connection with Tony Butler and his general ac- 
quaintance with the shady transactions of the de- 
ceased, might possibly give a guess as to the 
hands in which the bill then was, wliile he had 
not the remotest idea where to find the redoubt- 



DRAWING COVER. 249 

able Mr. Lyons himself, with a view to obtain 
from him the necessary information. 

For Mr. Lyons, as is the case with many 
gentlemen of his persuasion, did not confine his 
energies to the exercise of one calling, but dabbled 
in a great many. To some men he was known 
as a jeweller and diamond-merchant ; to others 
as an importer of French clocks, whistlmg bull- 
finches, and German mustard; to some he was 
known in connection with the discounting of 
stamped paper; to others as a picture-dealer, a 
cigar-merchant, a vendor of ohjets d'art of a very 
peculiar kind. He had no residence . that is to 
say, he had a great many, but none particularly 
tangible or satisfactory. He would write to you 
dating from a nmnber in Clement's Lm ; and 
when you called there, you would find the name 
of Mr. Glubb over the door, with a painted 
square of tin by the letter-slit annomicing that 
Mr. Glubb had removed to Great Decorum 
Street, and that letters for liim were to be lefii 
with the porter; and lower still you would find 
a dirty scrap of paper, with " M. Lyons" faintly 



250 EIHOING THE GAUNTLET. 

traced upon it; and on the door being opened, 
you would find M. Lyons in a room with one 
chair, one table, a blotting-pad, pen and ink, and 
a cheque-book. He was in the habit of mak- 
ing appointments at coiFee-houses and taverns; 
and when he sent the clocks or the bullfinches, 
the cigars or the ohjets d^art^ to their purchasers, 
they arrived at night, being left at the door by 
mysterious boys, to w^hom they had been given, 
with the address and twopence, by a man whom 
they had never seen before, but who was just 
round the corner. There was, it was said, one 
permanent address which Mr. Lyons had kept up 
for a great number of years ; but this was known 
only to those with whom in their relation with 
Mr. Lyons a melting-pot was associated, and these 
were very few in number. 

Mr. Griffiths was getting desperate, for the 
last half-crown out of the ten pounds lay in his 
pocket, and his principal Mr. Effingham had al- 
ready spoken to him rather sharply on the matter. 
He had been to all Mr. Lyons's known haunts; 
he had spoken to a dozen people who were known 



DRAWING COVER. 251 

to be of liis intimates; but he could obtain no 
tidings of him. Some thought he might be at 
Amsterdam, where the diamond-sale was going 
on; others had heard him mention liis intention 
of visiting Frankfort about that period; some 
laughed, and wondered whether old Malachi had 
heard of the plate -robbery, " thalvers ath big 
romid ath a cart-veel, and thpoonth, all new, 
not a bit rubbed !" which had lately taken 
place. But no one could give any precise 
information. And time was going on, and 
Mr. Effingham's patience and Mr. Griffiths's 
stock of ready-money were rapidly becoming ex- 
hausted. 

One night, going into " Johnson's" as usual, 
Mr. Griffiths saw his principal seated at one of 
the tables, aixl not caring to confront him just 
then, was about quietly withdrawing as much of 
his tall hat as he had already protruded through 
the swing-door, when he was espied and called 
to by Mr. Effingham. 

*.' Come in there ; don't think I didn't see you, 
because I did. What a slimy cove you are, 



252 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Griffitlis !. that's what I complain of; notliing 
fair and aboveboard in you." 

"Who's to be fair and aboveboard," growled 
Mr. Griffiths, "if they're to be everlastingly 
growled at and badgered? What I come here 
for is to be quiet and 'ave a little peace, not 
to be worritted and downed upon. D'rectly I 
see you sittin' here, I knowed it'd be, ^ Well, 
and wot's up ?' and ' Ain't you got no news ?' 
and ^Wot a feller you are, not to 'ave learned 
sometliink!' so, as I didn't seem to care about 
that, I was goin' away agen." 

" Poor feller," said Mr. Effingham with great 
contempt, " don't hke being worried or having 
to work for yom- livin', don't you ? I wonder 
you didn't get yourself a government berth, where 
pokin' the fire and whisthn' tunes is what they 
do when they're there, which is only the tln-ee 
winter months of the year. So you've brought 
no news?" 

" Not a stiver, not a ha'porth, not a blessed 
word. Tliere, you may as well take it all at 
once !" said Griffiths in desperation. 



DRAWING COVER. 253 

"And you've been every where likely?" 

" Every where, . in every gaff and crib where 
there was the least chance of hearin' of the old 
boy ; but not a word." 

"E^ow you see what a thing luck is," said 
Mr. Effingham sententiously ; "I believe that 
old City cove who said he couldn't afford to know 
an unlucky man was right after all ; and I'm 
not at aU sure I'm right. Master Griffiths, in 
not dropping your acquaintance, for certingly 
you're an unlucky buffer, if ever there was 
one." 

" WeU, p'raps I am, D'Ossay," said Griffiths, 
who began to see how the land lay; "perhaps 
I am in some things ; but it ain't only luck, . I'm 
as lucky as most of 'em ; but it's the talent as does 
it . the talent ; and there's none of us has got 
that like you, D'Ossay, my boy." 

" WeU, luck or talent, or whatever it is," said 
Effingham, pulling the bell, " it helps me on. . 
Bring some brandy and hot water here. . I come 
in here to have a mouthful o' bread and cheese 
and a glass o' ale about two this afternoon, and 



254 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Pollock was in here; Jack Pollock they call 
him, . the feller that writes the plays, you 
know." 

Mr. Griffiths, over his first gulp of brandy- 
and- water, nodded his head in acquiescence. 

'-^ Things is going on rather bad at the Gar- 
den," continued Mr. Effingham; "I don't know 
whether you've heard. Tlieir pantomime's been 
a reg'lar failure this year, and Wuff's paper's 
beginning to fly again. I suppose old Lyons is 
in that swim, for Pollock says to me, ' Didn't 
I hear you askin' after Mr. Lyons?' he says. 
^ I did,' I says. ' I thought so,' he says ; ' and 
I told him so when I saw him just now in WuiFs 
room at the Garden. And he says, " I've just 
come back fi^om abroad, and I don't reckleckt 
Mr. Effingham's name," he says ; " but if he's 
one of the right sort, he'll find me among the 
lemons on Sunday morning." ' So I thanked 
Pollock, and winked my eye, and nodded my 
head, and made believe as though I knew all 
about it ; but I don't." 

^^ You don't?" 



DRAWIXG COYER. 255 

" Xot a bit of it ; I'm as far off as ever, save 
for knowing that the old man's in England." 

" You ain't fly to what's meant by ' among 
the lemons,' eh?" 

"Not a bit of it, I tell you. What are you 
grimiing and chuckling away at there, Griffiths ? 
That's one of your disgustin' ways, . crowin' 
over me because you know something which I 
don't." 

" Don't be riled, D'Ossay ; don't be riled, 
old feller. It's so seldom that I get a chance 
of findin' any thing that you don't know, yomig 
though you are, that I make the most it, I 
confess." 

" Well, there, all right. !N'ow do you know 
what he meant by ^ among the lemons' ?" 

"Ofcourseldo." 

" And what does it mean ?" 

" ' Among the lemons' is magsman's patter for 
' Homidsditch.' There's a reg'lar gatherin' of 
sheenies there every Sunday mornin', where they 
have a kind of fair, and sellin' all sorts of things, 
. clothes, and books, and pictures, and so on." 



256 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

^^ Well, but old Lyons is a cut above all that 
sort of tiling." 

" I should think he was." 

'' He AYouldn't be found there." 

" Well, not sellin' any thing ; but he might 
be on the look-out for some magsmen as work 
for him, and who may have had the office to be 
about there. But if he's not there, Pd know 
where to lay hands on liim, I'd take my oath." 

"Where's that?" 

" At the Net of Lemons, a public where shee- 
nies of all kinds . diamond-merchants, fences, all 
sorts . meet on the Sunday." 

" Do you know the place ?" 

" Know it ! I should tliink so, and Mr. Eha- 
son as keeps it; as respectable an old gent as 
walks." 

" They'd let you in ?" 

" All, and you too, if I squared it for you." 

" Yery well, then ; we'll hunt up old Lyons 
on Sunday morning." 

Mr. Effingham was so pleased with liis chance 
of success, that Mr. Griffiths thought he might 



DRAWING COVER. 257 

borrow half-a-sovereign ; and wliat is more, lie 
got it. 

On the folloy>'ing Sunday morning Mr. Ef- 
fingham found himself by appointment opposite 
Bishopsgate Church as the clock struck ten, and 
Mr. Griffiths there waiting for him. As he ap- 
proached, Mr. Effingham took stock of his friend's 
personal appearance, and mentally congratulated 
himself that it was at the East and not at the West 
end of London that they w^ere to be seen in com- 
pany together ; for those mysterious means by 
which Mr. Griffiths went through '' the fever 
called living" had not been very productive of 
late, and his wardrobe was decidedly seedy. The 
tall hat shone so as to give one the idea that its 
owner had forgotten to remove it when he ap- 
plied the morning macassar to his hair, and the 
suit of once-black clothes looked as if they had 
been bees-waxed. Mr. Effingham must have al- 
lowed his thoughts to be mirrored in his expres- 
sive countenance, for Mr. Griffiths said as he 
joined him : 

VOL. I. S 



258 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

"Looking at my togs, D'Ossay? Well, they 
ain't as nobby as yours ; but you see, I don't go 
in to be a 'ea\y swell. They'll do well enough 
for the caper we're on to-day, though ; better 
perhaps than your gridironed kickseys." 

At another time Mr. Effingham might have 
shown annoyance at thus having his check trou- 
sers sneeringly spoken of; but something which 
Griffiths had said had rather dashed him, and 
it was with a little hesitation that he asked : 

" Tliey . they ain't a very rough lot that we're 
going amongst, are they ?" 

" Well, there's more rough nor smooth hair 
among 'em ; but they won't do you no harm ; I'll 
look after you, D'Ossay. Shovin' you won't 
mind, nor elbers in every part of your liody at 
once. Oh, and I say, don't leave any think in 
your 'ind-pockets, and put your fogle in your 
'at. Like this, look. I carry most things in my 
'at." 

And Mr. Griffiths whipped off the tall hat, and 
showed in it a handkerchief, a greasy parcel sus- 
piciously like a ham-sandwich, a pocket-comb, 



DRAWING COVER. 259 

and a paper book with the title " Tlie Oho of 
Oddities, or the "VVarbhiig Wagoner's WaUet of 
Wit and Wisdom." 

Mr. Effingham took his friend's ad^dce, and 
transferred all his portable property from the tail- 
pockets of his coat to other less patent recesses, 
and then the pair started on their excursion. 

Crossing Bishopsgate, and turning short romid 
to the right up a street called Sandy's Row, 
past a huge black block of buildings belongmg 
to the East India Company, and used as a store- 
house for costly silks, round which seethed and 
bubbled a dirty, pushing, striving, fighting, hig- 
gling, chaffering, vociferating, laughing mob, 
filling up the narrow street, the small strips of 
pavement on cither side, and what ought to have 
been the carriage-way between them. It was 
Sunday, and may have been obsen^ed '^ as such" 
elsewhere, but certainly not in Sandy's Row or 
Cutler's Row. Tliere were shops of all kinds, 
and all at work : tool-shops, . files, saws, adzes, 
knives, chisels, hammers, and tool-baskets dis- 
played in the open windows, whence the sashes 



260 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

liad been removed for the better furtlierance of 
trade ; batters', hosiers', tailors', bootmakers' shops, 
the proprietors of which had left the calm asylum 
of their comiters and stood at the doors, impor- 
tmiing the passers-by with familiar blandishments : 
for in the carriage-way through which Effingham 
and Griffiths slowly forced a passage were peripa- 
tetic vendors of hats, hosiery, clothes, and boots, 
. ^hook-nosed oleaginous gentry with ten pairs of 
trousers over one arm, and five coats over the 
other, with enormous boots, a few hats, and a 
number of cloth caps. Mr. Effingham soon 
learned the value of his friend's advice, for there 
were thieves of all kinds in the motley crowd; 
big bm'ly roughs with sunlven eyes and massive 
jaws sulkily elbowing their way through the mass, 
and ^' gonophs" or pickpockets of fourteen or 
fifteen, with their collarless tightly-tied necker- 
chiefs, their greasy caps, and " aggerawater" 
curls. Delicate attention Avas paid to Mr. Effing- 
ham before he had been five minutes amongst 
them. The hind-pockets of his coat were tm-ned 
inside out, and he was " somided" all over by a 



DRAWING COYER. 261 

pair of lightlj-touching liancls. Whether Mr. 
GriiSths was known, or whether his personal ap- 
pearance was unattractive and promised no hope 
of adequate reward, is uncertain ; but no attempt 
was made on him. 

Wliile Mr. Effingham was vaguely gaping 
about him, staring at every thing and thoroughly 
impressed with the novelty of his situation, Grif- 
fiths had been taking stock of the crowd, and 
keeping a strict look-out for i\Ii\ Lyons. Jews 
were there in shoals, and of all kinds : the grand 
old Jewish type, dignified and bearded, than 
which, when good, there is nothing better ; hand- 
some sensual-looking men, with bright eyes, and 
hook-noses, and scarlet lips ; red frizzy-headed 
Jews, with red eyelids, and shambling gait, and 
nasal intonation ; big flat-headed, stupid-looking 
men, with thick lips, and tongues too large for their 
mouths, and visibly protruding therefrom ; . all 
kinds of Jews, but Mr. Lyons not among them. 

So they pushed on, uncaring for the chaff 
of the mob, wliich was very facetious on the sub- 
ject of Mr. Effingham's attire, saluting him as a 



2C)2 rvUXNING THE GAU^'TLET. 

^' collared bloke," in delicate compliment to his 
wearing a clean shirt; asking whether he was a 
" Rooshan ;" whether he were not " Prince Hal- 
but's brother/' and other delicate compliments, . 
l^ushed on until they arrived at the Clothes-Ex- 
change, a roofed building filled round every side 
and in the centre with old-clothes stalls. Here, 
piled up in wondrous confusion, lay hats, coats, 
boots, hob-nailed shoes, satin ball-shoes, driving- 
coats, satin dresses, hoops, brocaded go^^ms, flan- 
nel jackets, fans, shirts, stockings with clocks, 
stockings with torn and darned feet, feathers, 
parasols, black-silk mantles, blue-kid boots, bel- 
cher neckerchiefs, and lace ruffles. More Jews 
here ; salesmen shrieking out laudations of their 
wares, and frantically imploring passers-by to 
come in and be fitted. " Here'th a coat ! plue 
Vitney ; trai this plue Yitney, ma tear." " Here'th 
a vetlikit for you, thirl" shouted one man to 
Effingham ; " thuch a vethkit ! a thplendid vethkit, 
covered all over with blue-and-thilver thprigth." 
Mr. Effingham cast a longing eye at this gorgeous 
garment, but passed on. 



DRAWING COVER. 263 

No Lyons here, either among sharp-eyed 
vendors or leering buyers. Mr. Griffiths was 
getting nonplussed, and Mr. Effingham growing 
anxious. " We must find him, Griffiths," he 
said; " we must not tlu'ow away this chance 
that he's given us ; he may be off to the Con- 
tinent, Lord knows where, to - morrow. Why 
the devil don't you find him ?" 

Mr. Griffiths intimated that so far as e}'e- 
straining could be gone through, he had done 
his best ; and suggested that if the man they 
sought were not there, all the energy in the 
world would not discover him. " But there's 
the Net of Lemons yet," he said; "that's, after 
all, the safest draw, and we're more likely to hit 
upon him there than any where else." 

So they pushed their way through the steam- 
ing, seething, struggling crowd, and fomid them- 
selves in a quiet dull little square. Across this, 
and merely glancing at several groups of men 
dotted here and there in its midst, loudly talking 
and gesticulating with energy which smacked 
more of the Hambom-g Borsenhalle or the Frank- 



264 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

fort Zeil than the stolid reticence of England, 
Mr. Griffiths led his companion until they stopped 
before the closed door of a public-house, aloft 
from which swung the sign of " The Net of 
Lemons." At the door Mr. Griffiths gave tln-ee 
mystic raps, at the third of which the door 
opened for about a couple of inches, and a thick 
voice said, " Who is it?" 

" All right, Mr. Eliason. Griffiths, whom you 
know. Take a squint, and judge for yoiu'self." 

Mr. EHason probably followed this advice, 
and finding the inspection satisfactory, opened 
the door to its extent, and admitted the pair ; 
but raising his bushy brows in doubt as to Mr. 
Effingham, Griffiths said, "A friend of mine . 
come on partickler business, and by appointment 
with Mr. Lyons. Is he here ?" 

The reference w^as apj)arently satisfactory, for 
Mr. Eliason, a fat good-looking big man in a 
soft wide-awake hat, said, ^^ You'll find him in- 
side ;" and shut the door behind them. 

Mr. Effingham walking through, and follow- 
ing his conductor, found himself in a low-roofed 



DRAWING COYER. 265 

square-built comfortable room, romid tliree sides 
of which were ranged tables, and on these tables 
were placed large open travs of jewelry. There 
they lay in clusters, thick gold chains curled 
round and round like snakes ; long limp silver 
chains such as are worn by respectable mechanics 
over black-satin waistcoats on Sundays ; great 
carbuncle pins glowing out of green-velvet cases ; 
diamond rings and pins and brooches and neck- 
laces. The best emeralds in quaint old-fashioned 
gold settings nestled by the side of lovely pale 
opals ; big finger-rings made up after the an- 
tique with cut cornelian centre-pieces ; long old- 
fashioned earrings ; little heaps of rubies, emeralds, 
and tm^quoises set aside in the corners of the 
trays ; big gold and silver cups and goblets and 
trays and tazzas ; here and there a clumsy old 
epergne ; finger-rings by the bushel, pins by the 
gross ; watches of all kinds, from delicate gold 
Genevas to the thick turnipy silver " ticker" of 
the schoolboy ; and shoals of watchworks with- 
out cases. On this Tom Tiddler's PTOund Avere 
crowds of customers, smoking strong cigars, 



266 EUisNIKG THE GAUKTLET. 

walking about without let or hindrance, and 
examining . ay, and handling . the jewels with- 
out creating the least consternation in the- breasts 
of then' vendors. 

There was a slight movement among the 
company at the entrance of the new - comers ; 
but Griffiths seemed to be known to a few, with 
whom he exchanged salutations, and the appear- 
ance of Mr. Eliason with them settled any wan- 
derino; doubts which might have arisen in the 
minds of the others. As for Mr. Effingham, he 
began to think he was in the cave into which 
Aladdin descended to get the lamp at the bidding 
of the magician ; and he went moving round, 
gazing first on one side, then on the other, 
lost in wonder. But Mr. Griffiths, to whom the 
scene was tolerably familiar, went at once to 
business, scrutinising with keen glance the buyers 
and sellers, poking his nose into the groups of 
domino -players in the corners, hunting about 
with admirable patience and forbearance, but 
for a long time with no result. 

At last he stopped before a group of three. 



DRAWING COVER. 267 

One of these was an old Jewish gentleman, with 
strongly-marked featui'es, overhanging bushy eye- 
brows, hooked nose, and long white beard. He 
held in his hand a blue paper, such as generally 
contains seidlitz -powders, but its contents were 
diamonds. These were being carefully inspected 
by the other two men, each of whom had a bright 
steel pair of pincers, with which he selected 
a specimen from the glittering heap, breathed 
upon it, watched it carefully, and in most in- 
stances finally laid it on one side for purchase. 
When this transaction had been gone through 
and was at an end, the old gentleman folded up 
his paper with such diamonds as remained in 
it, placed it in his waistcoat - pocket, and was 
calmly walking away, when Griffiths touched 
him on the arm, saying interrogatively, " Mr. 
Lyons?" 

The old man tm'ned in an instant, and threw 
a sharp look of inquiry over his interlocutor, as 
he said : " Yes, ma tear sir, that's mai name ; not 
ashamed to own it any veres. Yot might you 
vant vith me ?" As he spoke he had covered his 



2G8 HUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

waistcoat-pocket with liis hand, and stood prim 
and spry. 

" This gentleman . Mr. Effingham . has been 
looking for you some little time. You told a 
friend of his . Mr. Pollock . that you would be 
here to-day, and we've come on purpose to meet 
you." 

"Effingham! Pollock!" said the old man, 
musing. " Oh yes. Pollock, who writes those 
funny burlesques for my friend WufF; oh yes . 
Effingham," he said. " How do you do, ma tear? 
Now vot is it? A leetle adwance, or something 
you've got that you don't know how to get rid 
of, and think I might fancy it, eh ?" 

"Well, it ain't either, Mr. Lyons," said 
Effingham. " It's a little information you're in 
possession of that you might be inclined to give 
us, and . " 

" You're not traps ?" asked Mr. Lyons, trnm- 
ing pale. 

" Not a bit of it, Mr. Lyons," said Griffiths, 
striking into the conversation. " Quite different 
from that. You and I have done business before. 



DEAWIXG COYER. 269 

I was with . " and here he wliisperecl into Lyons's 
ear. 

" Ah, I reckleckt," said the old gentleman. 
'' That vos a very good plant, and bothers them 
all in Scotland Yard to this dav. Ha, ha ! I reck- 
leekt. Now vot did your friend say? Lifor- 
mation? Yell, you know, I never give infor- 
mation." 

" No, no, of course not," said Griffiths, wink- 
in o; at Effincrham. 

'' Oh no, sir," said that worthy. ^' I'm pre- 
pared to pay, of course, any thing reasonable 
for what I require." 

'' Yell, veil, ma tear, let's know vot it is." 

" You were great pals with my brother, I 
beheve ?" 

" No. Effingham ? Xo ; . never heard the 
name." 

" No, no ; not Effingham. Tliat's merely . 
you understand ?" 

'^ Oh, ah I Oh yes I I qvite understand ; but 
vot is the name ?" 

'' Butler ! You knew Tonv Butler well ?" 



270 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

" Knew him veil ; I should rather think I 
did. A good fellow ; a clever fellow ; oh, a very 
clever fellow, ma tear." 

'' Yes ; well, I'm his brother." 

" Not like him," said Mr. Lyons. " More 
dressy, and not so business-like. A rare fellow 
for business, Tony." 

" That may or may not be," said Effingham, 
slightly offended. ^' Now, when he died, you 
cleared off his traps." 

" Only a few sticks ; very poor sticks. Ah, 
ma tear, vot I lost by that transaction ! Yy, there 
vosn't enough to clear me in a sixth part of vot 
I'd advanced to Tony." 

" Well, I'm not here to enter into that . that 
was your look-out. But amongst what you took 
away there was a desk." 

" Vos there ? 'Pon my soul I can't reckleckt ; 
not that I'm goin' to gainsay you. Vos there a 
desk, noAv?" 

" And in it," continued Effingham, not seem- 
in o; to heed him, ^' there was an overdue bill for 
twenty-five pounds accepted by Walter Burgess." 



DRAWING COVER. 271 

" Lord now ! Vos there indeed?" 

" Look here, Mr. Lyons. If you don't know 
any thing, all right. We won't waste our time 
or our money, but we'll go to those who can 
help us." 

" Yot a headstrong boy it is I Who said I 
couldn't help you ? Go on now, . a bill accepted 
by Walter Burgess ?" 

" Exactly. Now that bill's no use to any one, 
and we want you to give it to us." 

" Ha, ha ! clever boys, clever boys ! Yot 
large-hearted fellows too, to vant to buy a bill 
that ain't of any use to any vmi ! Oh, vot gene- 
rous boys !" 

" It's no use, Griffiths," said Effingham an- 
grily ; ^Mie either don't know or won't say any 
thing about it." 

" Steady," said Griffiths. " Come, Mr. Lyons, 
say you've got the stiff, and name your price." 

"Accepted by Walter Burgess, eh?" said the 
old gentleman ; " yes, I reckleckt that bill; oh yes, 
I reckleckt him." 

" Well now, bring your recklecktion into 



272 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

something practical, and I'll give you this for that 
bill," said Mr. Effingham, producing a five-pound 
note. 

Tlie old Jew's eyes glistened at the sight of 
the money ; and then his face fell, and he looked 
horribly disappointed. 

'^ You should have it for that," said he ; ^'you 
should have it for that, and velcome ; only there's 
vun little reason vy I can't make it over to 
you." 

^^ What's that?" cried Effingham. 

" Veil, it's a strong reason, as you'll allow 
Yen I tell it to you. I can't let you have the bill 
because . because I haven't got it myself." 

Mr. Effingham swore a sharp oath, and even 
Mr. Griffiths looked disconcerted. 

^^ Come along," said the former, . "we've 
wasted time enough with the pottering old fool, 
who's only selling us, and . " 

" Yait a minute," said Mr. Lyons, laying his 
hand on the other's arm, . " A'ait a minute, ma tear. 
Though I haven't got the leetle bill myself, perhaps 
I know who has." 



DRAWING COYER. 273 

" That's Hkely enough," said Griffiths ; " well, 
who has ?" 

^' Ah, that's tellings, ma tear. I shall van't . 
just a leetle something to sav." 

" I'll give this," said Effingham, producing a 
sovereign. 

" Yell, it ain't enough ; but you're such head- 
strong fellows. Tliere I" said Mr. Lyons, slipping 
it into his pocket; ^^ now do either of you know 
a gal who 'v^'as under Tony Butler's thumb at one 
time, but who hated him mortal, and vos very 
sveet on ^o^m of Tony's friends ?" 

" I do !" cried Griffiths ; " Lizzie Ponsford." 

" That's the same ; a fine gal too, a reg'lar fine 
gal. Yell, I'd no sooner got Tony's traps over at 
my place than that girl comes to me, and she says, 
' You've got a desk that b'longed to Tony Butler,' 
she says. And ven I says ' yes,' she offered me 
a pound for it. It vosn't "VTith five shillings ; so I 
knew there vos something in it she vanted, though 
I'd hunted it through and found nothin' but old 
diaries and memorandums and such -like. ^I 
von't sell it,' I says. ' May I look at it ?' she 

VOL. I. T 



274 EUNXI^'G THE GAUNTLET. 

says. ^ You mar,' I says ; and yith that I fetched 
it down ; and yen she see it, she touched a spring, 
and out flew a secret drawer vith this bill in it. 
^ Hands off,' I says, for she yos going to clutch it 
at ^Tince. ' Let me haye it,' she says ; ' I'll pay 
for it.' So I looked at it, and saw it had been 
overdue eighteen months, and reckleckted hearin' 
it was all wrong; so I says, ' Yot'll you giye?' 
^ A soyereimi,' she says. ' Make it two, and it's 
yours,' I says. So, after a little, she give me two 
skiys, and she took the bill andvalked avay yith it" 

Mr. Effingham looked at Griffiths, and the 
latter returned the glance. 

" It would be almost worth another crown 
to know if these are lies you are telling us, old 
gentleman," said the former ; " but it sounds 
something like truth. Now one question more. 
Where is Lizzie Ponsford ?" 

"Ah, that beats me. A reg'lar cleyer gal; 
nice-looking and reg'lar clever. I'd have given 
something to find out myself; but it vos aU of 
no use. She vent avay from all the old haunts, 
and hasn't been heard of for a long time. I've all 



DRAWING COYER. 275 

sorts of people about, and they'd tell me, bless 
you, if slie'd ever showed up. But she's gone, 
and no one can find her." 

" Very good," said Effingham ; " now you 
take this commission from me. If you hear of 
her^thin the next month, and can let me know 
where she is, find out Griffiths at Johnson's, and 
it'll be a fiver in your pocket. You understand?" 

Mr. Lyons made no verbal reply, but struck 
his forefinger against his nose and looked preter- 
naturally sagacious. 

'' All right ! now good-bye ;" they shook 
hands and parted. 

When they got into the street again Mr. Ef- 
fingham said, " So Lizzie Ponsford has the bill. 
"What the deuce made her want it ? unless some 
day to revenge herself on Mitford. But she's 
not likely to have heard of his having turned up 
such trumps. Now, Mr. Griffiths, our pursuit 
beo-ins aojain. Lizzie Ponsford has that bill. 
Your business and mine is to find out Lizzie 
Ponsford, and by some means or other . no mat- 
ter what . get that bill from her." 



CHAPTER XIII. 



Sir Charles Mitford was up betimes the next 
morningj for he had a twenty-miles' drive be- 
fore him. Tlie weather was bright, clear, and 
frosty; Sir Charles's spirits were high; he was 
radiant and buoyant, and thoroughly in good 
temper with himself and every body else. He 
was specially kind and affectionate to Georgie, 
and after breakfast insisted upon seeing her com- 
mence her day of work before he started on his 
day of pleasm-e ; and he complimented Mrs. Aus- 
tin on the progress her pupil had made under her 
directions, and on the care, cleanliness, and order 
observable throughout the house, and by his few 
words made a complete conquest of the old lady, 
who afterwards told Georgie that though Sir 
Percy had been an upright man and a good 



SIR Charles's visit. 277 

master, it was all in a straitlaced kind of way, 
and no one had ever heard him say a kind 
word to herself, let alone any of the servants. 
And then when the chestnuts had been brought 
romid in the mail-phaeton, and were impatiently 
pawing at the gravel in front of the hall-door, 
and champing at their bits, and flecking with foam 
their plated harness and their sleek sides. Sir 
Charles gave his wife an affectionate kiss and 
drove away in great glee. 

Mrs. Austin's instruction of her mistress was 
shortened by full five minutes that morning . 
five minutes dm-ing which Lady Mitford was 
occupied in leaning out of the window and watch- 
ino' her husband down the di'ive. How hand- 
some he looked ! in his bio^ heavv brown drivinof- 
coat with its huge horn buttons, his well-fitting 
dogskin gloves, and his natty hat . wide-awakes 
had not then been invented, but di'iving-men 
used to wear a hat low in the crown and broad 
in the brim, which, though a trifle slangy, was 
in some cases very becoming. Tlie sun shone 
on his bright complexion, his breezy golden 



278 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

whiskers, and his briUiant teeth, as he smiled 
his adieu ; and as he brought the chestnuts up 
to their bearings after their first mad phmges, 
and standing up got them well in hand and 
settled them down to their work, Georgie was 
lost in admiration of his strong muscular figure, 
liis pluck and grace. It was a subject on which 
she would have been natm'ally particularly reti- 
cent, even had there been any one to " gush" to ; 
but I think the tears of j)leasure welled into her 
eyes, and she had a very happ}- " cry" before she 
rejoined Mrs. Austin in the still-room. 

And Sir Charles, what were his thoughts 
dm'ino^ his drive ? Amono; all the wonderful 
revelations which the publication of the Divorce- 
Court trials has made public, the sad heart-rend- 
ing misery, the brutal rufiianism, the heartless 
villany, the existence of which could scarcely 
have been dreamed of, there is one phase of 
life which, so far as I have seen, . and I have 
looked for it attentively, . has never yet been 
chronicled. The man who leaves his wife and 
family to get on as they best can, while he revels 



SIR CHAELES'S VISIT. 279 

in riot and. debauchery ; the man who is the 
Wind slave of his own brute passions, and who 
goes headlong to destruction without any ap- 
parent thought save for his own gratification; 
the man who would seem in the iteration of liis 
share of the marriage-service to have substituted 
"hate" for "love," and who either detests his 
wife with savage rancom-, or loathes her with 
deep disgust, for better for w^orse, for richer for 
poorer, in sickness and in health, until the Judge- 
Ordinary does them part ; the respectable man, 
so pmictual in the discharge of his domestic 
duties, so imswerving in the matter of family- 
prayers, Avhose conjugal comfort is one day 
wrecked by the arrival of a clamorous and not 
too sober lady w4th heightened colour and black- 
ened eyelids : . with all these types w^e are fami- 
liar enough tlu-ough the newspaper columns ; 
but there is another character, by no means so 
numerously represented, nor so likely to be 
brought publicly under notice, who yet exists, 
and with specimens of which some of us must 
be famihar. I mean the man who, with great af- 



280 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

fection for his wife, and strong desire to do right, 
is yet so feeble in moral purpose, so impotent 
to struggle against inchnation, such a facile prey- 
to temptation, as to be perpetually doing wrong. 
He never grows hardened in his vice, he never 
withdraws his love from its proper object . for 
in that case it would quicldy be supplanted by 
the opposite feeling ; he never even grows indif- 
ferent : after every slip he inwardly upbraids him- 
self bitterly and vows repentance ; in his hour 
of remorse he institutes comparisons between his 
proper and inij^roper attractions, in which the 
virtues of the former are always very bright 
and the vices of the latter always very black; 
and then on the very next occasion his virtuous 
resolutions melt away like snow, and he goes 
wrong again as pleasantly as possible. 

Sir Charles Mitford was of tliis class. He 
would have been horrified if any one had sug- 
gested that he had any intention of wronging 
his wife ; would have said that such an idea had 
never crossed his mind . and truthfully, as when- 
ever it rose he immediately smothered it ; would 



SIR Charles's visit. 281 

have declared, as lie believed, that Georgie vas 
the prettiest, the best, and the dearest girl in the 
world.' But he was a man of strong passions, 
and most susceptible to flattery ; and ever since 
]\Ii's. Hammond had seemed to select him for 
special notice, more especiallj since she had as- 
sumed the habit of occasionally looking pensively 
at him, with a kind of di'eamy languor in her 
large eyes, he had thought more of her, in both 
senses of the phrase, than was right. He was 
thinking of her even then, as he sat square and 
erect in liis phaeton, before he passed out of 
Georgie's gaze ; thinking of her large eyes and 
then' long glances, her fidl rounded figoire, a 
peculiar hand-clasp which she gave, a tlnill with- 
out a grip, a scarcely perceptiljle miforgettable 
pressure. Then his horsey instincts rose within 
him, and he began to take coachman's notice 
of the chestnuts ; saw the merits and demerits 
of each, and almost unconsciously set about the 
work of educating the former, and checking the 
latter; and thus he employed himself until the 
white houses of Torquay came within sight, and 



282 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

glancing at his watch he found he should have 
done his twenty miles in an houi' and forty- 
minutes. 

Mrs. Hammond had told him that he would 
be sm-e of finding their addi'ess at the Eoyal 
Hotel; so to the Royal Hotel he cbove. The 
chestnuts went bomiding through the town, at- 
tracting attention from all the valetudinarians 
then creeping about on their shopping or ante- 
prandial walks. These poor fellows in respirators 
and high shawls, bending feebly on sticks or 
tottering on each other's arms, resented the sight 
of this great strong Phoebus dashing along with 
his spinning chariot-wheels. When he pulled 
up at the door of the Eoyal, a little crowd of 
invalids crept out of smmy nooks and sheltered 
corners, where they had been resting, to look at 
him. Tlie waiter, a fat greasy man, who used 
to let the winter-boarders tear many times at 
the bell before he dreamt of answering it, heard 
the tramp of the horses, and the violent pidl 
given to the door-bell by Sir Charles's groom, and 
in a kind of hazy di'eam thought that it must 



SIR Charles's visit. 283 

be summer asain, and that it must be some of 
the gents from the yachts, as was always so noisy 
and obstreperous. Before he could rouse liim- 
self sufficiently to get to the door, he had been 
anticipated by the landlord, who had scarcely 
madediis bow, before Dr. Bronk, who had noticed 
the phaeton dashing romid the corner, and fancied 
it might be a son or nephew on the look-out 
for quarters . and medical attendance . for some 
invalid relative, came into the portico, and be- 
stowed the oreatest care in rubbino; his shoes on 
the hall-mat. 

Mr. Hammond? No, the landlord had never 
heard the name. Constant change of faces renders 
landlords preternaturally stupid on this point, they 
can never fit names to faces or faces to names. 
Hammond ? no, he thought not. John ! did John 
know the name of Hammond ? But before John 
could sufficiently focus his wits to know whether 
he did or not, Dr. Bronk had heard all, had 
stepped up to the side of the phaeton, had made 
a half-friendly, half-deferential bow, and was in 
full swing. 



284 



EUNNIKG THE GAUNTLET. 



Mr. Hammond? a middle-aged gentleman, . 
.well, who perhaps might be described as rather 
elderly, jes. Bald, . yes. With a young daughter 
and a very charming wife? Yes, oh yes; certainly 
he knew them ; he had the honom' of beino- their 
medical attendant, . Dr. Bronk of the Paragon. 
Lately had come down to Torquay, recommended 
to him by his . he was proud to say . old friend 
and former fellow-pupil Sir Charles Dumfunk, 
now President of the College of Physicians. Where 
were they ? well, they had been really unfortunate. 
Torquay, my dear sir, qxqyj year rising in im- 
portance, every year more sought after, . for which 
perhaps some little credit was due to a little me- 
dical brochure of his, Torquay and its Climate, . 
Torquay was so full that when Mrs. Hammond 
sent down that admirable person Miss Gillespie, 
. whom of course the gentleman knew, . ^there 
was only one house vacant. So the family had 
been forced to content themselves with a mansion 
. No. 2 Cleveland Gardens, . very nice, sheltered, 
and yet with a charming sea-view. Where was it ? 
Did the gentleman see the bow-windowed shop at 



SIR Charles's visit. 285 

the corner? Second turning to tlie right, just 
beyond that . " Se-cond tm-n-ing to the right !" 
This shouted after Sir Charles, who, with a feel- 
ing that the chestnuts were too rapidly coohng 
after their sharp drive, had started them off the 
minute he had obtained the information. 

The second tmiiino; to the rio;ht was dulv 
taken, and Xo. 2 Cleveland Gardens was duly 
reached. It was the usual style of seaside-house, 
with stuccoed front, and green veranda, and the 
never-failing creeper which the Devonians always 
grow to show the mildness of their climate. Tlie 
groom's thundering knock produced a smart wait- 
ing-maid, who acknowledged that Mrs. Hammond 
lived there ; and the sending in of Sir Charles 
Mitford's card produced a London flmikey, on 
whom the countrv air had had a demoralisintr 
influence, so far as his outAvard appearance was 
concerned. But he acknowledged Sir Charles's 
arrival with a deferential bow, and begging him 
to walk in, assm-ed him that his mistress would 
come down directly. So the groom was sent 
round to put-up his horses at the stables of the 



286 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Eojal, and Sir Charles followed the footman into 
the drawing-room. 

It was not an apartment to be left alone in 
for long. 'No doubt the family of the owner, a 
jounger brother of an Irish peer, found it plea- 
sant and airy when they were do^vn there in the 
summer, and the owner himself found the rent 
of it for the spring, autumn, and winter a very 
hopeful soiu'ce of income ; but it bore '^ lodging- 
house" on every scrap of funiiture throughout it. 
Sir Charles stared round at the bad engravings, 
at the bad old-fashioned artists on the walls ; looked 
with concentrated interest on a plaster-model of 
the Leaning Tower of Pisa, and wondered whether 
the mortar shrinking had w^arped it; peeped into 
two or tln'ee books on the table ; looked out of 
the window at the promenading invalids and the 
green twinlding sea; and was relieved beyond 
measure when he heard a woman's step on the 
staircase outside. 

The door opened, and a woman entered . but 
not. Mrs. Hammond. A tall woman, Avith sallow 
cheeks and great eyes, and a tliicldsh nose and 



SIR Charles's visit. 287 

large fall lips, with a low forelieadj over which 
tumbled waves of crisp brown hair, with a mar- 
vellous Hthe figure and a peculiar swimming walk. 
Shifty in her glance, stealthy in her walk, cat- 
like in her motions, her face deadly pale, . a vol- 
cano crumbled into ashes, with no trace of its 
former fire save in her eyes, . a woman at once 
uncomfortable, uncanny, noticeable, and fearsome, 
. Miss Gillespie. 

Tlie family of the younger brother of the 
. L'ish peer owning the house prided themselves 
immensely on certain pink - silk blinds to the 
windows, which happened at that moment to be 
down. Tliere must have been some very peculiar 
effect in the tint thrown by those blinds to have 
caused Sir Charles Mitford to stare so hard at 
tlie new-comer, or to lose all trace of his ordinary 
coloiu' as he gazed at her. 

She spoke first. Her full lips parted over a 
brilliant set of teeth as with a slight inclination 
she said, " I have the pleasm'e of addressing Sir 
Charles Mitford? Mrs. Hammond begrs me to 
say that she is at present in attendance upon 



2S8 RrXN^ING THE GAUNTLET. 

Mr. Hammond, who is forbidden to-day to leave 
liis room ; but slie hopes to be with you in a 
very few minutes." 

A pohte but sufficiently ordinary speech ; cer- 
tainly not in itself calculated to call forth Mit- 
ford's rejoinder . " In God's name, how did you 
come here ?" 

'^ You still keep up that horrid habit of swear- 
ing ! Auti^e temjys, autres mceurs, as I teach my 
young lady from the French proverb-book. "What 
was it you asked?" 

'^ How did you come here ? what are you 
doing here ?" 

'' I came here through the medium of the 
Ladies' Association for Instructors, to whom I 
paid a registration-fee of five shillings. What am 
I doing here? Educating youth, and making 
myself generally useful. I am Miss Grillespie, 
of whom I know you have heard." 

^^ You have seen me before this, since . since 
the old days?" 

" I don't know what is meant by ^ old days.' 
I was born two years ago, just before Mrs. 



289 

Hammond married, and Avas clmstened Eutli 
Gillespie. My mother was the Ladies' Association 
for Instructors, and she at once placed me where 
I am. Except this I have no past." 

'^ And your future ?" 

^^ Can take care of itself : sufficient for the 
day, &c. ; and the present days are very pleasant. 
There is no past for you either, is there ? so far as 
I am concerned, I mean. I first saw Sir Charles 
Mitford when I was sitting in Mrs. Hammond's 
phaeton in the Park with my Shetland veil down, 
I recollect ; and as I had heard the story of the 
romantic manner in which he had succeeded to 
the title and estates, I asked full particulars about 
him from . well . my mistress. I learned that 
he had married, and that his wife was reported 
to be very lovely . oh, very lovely indeed I" she 
almost pm-red as she said this, and undulated 
as though about to spring. 

" Be good enough to leave my wife's name 
alone. You say there is no past for either of 
us. Let om' present be as wide asunder as pos- 
sible." 

VOL. I. u 



290 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

" Tliat all rests with you." 

" I wonder," said Sir Charles, almost below 
his breath, " what infernal chance has sent you 
here !" 

^^ If ^ infernal' were a word to be used by 
a lady . I doubt whether it should be used in 
a lady's presence; but that is a matter of taste 
. I should reiterate your sentiment; because, if 
you remark, you are the interloper and intruder. 
I am going on perfectly quietly, earning my 
living, giving every satisfaction to my employers, 
. living, in fact, like the virtuous peasant on 
the stage or in the penny romances, . ^when chance 
brings you into my line of life, and you at once 
grumble at me for being there." 

"You can miderstand fast enough, I sup- 
pose," said Sir Charles sulkily, " that my as- 
sociations with my former life are not such as 
I take great pleasure in recalhng." 

" If a lady might say such a word, I should 
say, upon my soul I can't understand any such 
thing. Tliough I go quietly enough in harness, 
and take my share of the collar-work too, they 



SIR Charles's visit. 291 

little think how I long sometimes to kick over 
the traces, to substitute Alfred de Musset for 
Fenelon in my pupil's reading, or to let my 
fingers and voice stray off from Adeste Fideles 
into Eh, ioup, ioupj ioup, trcdala, lata ! How 
it would astonish them ! wouldn't it ? . the 
files, I mean; not Mrs. Hammond, who knows 
every thing, and I've no doubt would follow on 
with Mon pere est a Paris as naturally as pos- 
sible." 

Sir Charles was by no means soothed by 
this rattle, but frowningly asked, '^ How long 
do you mean to remain here ?" 

^' How long ? Well, my movements are of 
course controlled by Mrs. Hammond. It is 
betraying no confidence to say that I know she 
is expecting an invitation to Redmoor (you see 
I know the name of your place) ; and as this 
house is not particularly comfortable, and yoiu* 
hospitality is bomidless, I conclude when once 
we get there, we shall not leave much before 
we retiu*n to town for the season." 

" We !" exclaimed Sir Charles ; " w^hv, do 



292 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

you mean to say that you are coming to stay 
at my house?" 

" Of course I am. Mrs. Hammond told me 
that she gave you distinctly to understand that 
she must bring Miss Gillespie with her ^Yhen 
she came to stop at Eedmoor." 

" True ; but then." 

^' Tlien you did not know Miss Gillespie. 
"Well, you'll find she's not a bad fellow, after 
all." 

'' Look here," said Mitford with knitted brows 
and set teeth: ^^ there's a point to which you 
may go, but which you sha'n't pass. If you 
dare to come into my house as my guest, look 
to yom'self; for, by the Lord, it shall be the 
worse for you !" 

^' The privileges of the salt, monseigneur !" 
cried Miss Gillespie, with a crisp laugh ; " the 
salt, 'that sacred pledge, which once partaken 
blunts the sabre's edge.' You would never abiLse 
the glorious rights of hospitality ?" 

" You were always fond of d . d stage-jargon ; 
but you ought to have known me long enough 



SIR Charles's visit. 293 

to know that it would have no effect on me. 
Take the wai'ning I've given you in good part, 
and stay away." 

" And take the warning I give you in good 
part and in good earnest, Charles Mitford," said 
Miss Gillespie, with a sudden change of voice 
and maimer; '^I've been tolerant to you hitherto 
for the sake of the old times Avliich I love and 
you loathe ; but don't you presume upon that. 
I could crush you hke a snail: now tliis is 
no stage-jargon, but simple honest fact. You'll 
recollect that though perhaps a little given to 
rodomontade, in matters of business I was truth- 
ful. I can crush you like a snail; and if you 
cross me in my desh'es, . which are of the hum- 
blest ; merely to be allowed to continue my 
present mode of life in peace, . so help me Hea- 
ven, I'll do it !" 

AU claws out here. 

" You mean war, then ? I'll . " 

" Hush ! not a word ; here's Mrs. Hammond 
eoming do^^^l. I do mean war, under circum- 
stances; but you won't drive me to that. Yes, 



294 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

as you say, Sir Charles, it is the very place for 
an invalid." 

As she spoke Mrs. Hammond entered the 
room, looking very fresh and pretty; her dark- 
blue merino dress with its close-fitting body 
displaying her romid figure, and its sweeping 
skirts, and its tight sleeves, with natty hnen 
cuffs. She advanced with outstretched hand 
and with a j^leasant smile, showing all her fresh 
wholesome teeth. 

" So you've come at last," she said ; '' it's 
no great compHment to say that ^^^e have anx- 
iously expected you . for any thing like the hor- 
ror of this place you camiot imagine. Every 
body you meet looks as if that day were their 
last, and that they had just crawled out to take 
farewell of the sun. And there's not a soul we 
know here, except the doctor who's attending 
Mr. Hammond, and he's an odious little chatter- 
box. And how is dear Lady Mitford ? and how 
did you find the house ? and did Captain Bligh 
make the arrangements as nicely as we thought he 
would?. Come, sit down and tell me aU about it." 



SIR Charles's visit. 295 

It was at tliis period, and before they seated 
themselves, that Miss Gillespie said she thought 
she would go and see what Ahce was doing. 
And Mrs. Hammond asked her to tell Newman 
that Sir Charles Mitford would dine with them ; 
and that as he had a long drive home, thej had 
better say six-o'clock dinner. And charged with 
these messages, IMiss Gillespie retired. 

Then IVIrs. Hammond sunk do^Aii into a plea- 
sant ottoman fitted into a recess close by the 
glomng fire, and Sir Charles Mitford, looking 
round for a seat, obeyed the silent in^-itation 
con^'eyed to him in her eyes and in the move- 
ment of her ch'ess, and seated himself by her side. 

" Well, you must have a gi'eat deal to tell 
me," she commenced. " I saw in the Post that 
you had left to^\Ti, and therefore imagined that 
Captam Bhgh's arrangements were concluded. 
And how do you like Redmoor?" 

" It's a glorious place, really a glorious place, 
though I've been rather bored there for the last 
two or three days . wanted people there, you 
know, and that sort of tiling. But the place 



29Q RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

itself is first-rate. I've chosen your rooms. I 
did that the first day." 

" Did you ?" said she, her eyes sparkling 
with delight ; " and where are they ?" 

"They are in the south wing, lookmg over 
the civihsed side of the country, and are to my 
thinking the very best rooms in the house." 

, " And you chose them for us, and thought 
of us directly you aiTived ! How very, very- 
kind of you ! But suppose we should be unable 
to come ?" 

" What ! unable to come ! Mrs. Hammond, 
you're chaffing me, eh ?" 

"iJ^o, indeed. Mr. Hammond's health is in 
that wretched state, that I doubt whether Dr. 
Bronk would sanction his being moved, even to 
the soft air and all the luxuries of Redmoor." 

" Oh, do him good, I'm sure ; could do him 
no possible harm. He should have every thing 
he wanted, you know ; and the doctor could come 
spinning over there every day, for the matter of 
that. But at any rate you won't disaj^point 
us?" 



SIR Charles's visit. 297 

'' I don't think my not coming would be 
keenly felt by many." 

" It would by me," said Mitford in a low 
voice. 

Slie looked him fiill in tbe face for an instant. 
^' I believe it would," said she ; " frankly I believe 
it would ;" and she stretched out her hand al- 
most involuntarily. Sir Charles took it, pressed 
it, and would have retained it, but she witlidrew 
it gently. " Ko, that would never do. Mrs. 
Grundy would have a great deal to say on the 
subject; and besides, my place is at his side." 
If ^' his side" were her husband's, Mrs. Hammond 
was far more frequently out of place than in it 
^' My place is by his side," she repeated. "Ah, 
Sir Charles, you've no idea what a life I lead !" 

He was looking at her hand as she spoke, 
was admiring its plumpness and whiteness, and 
was idly following with his eye the track of the 
violet veins. Tliere is a something legible in the 
back of a hand, something which chiromancy 
wots not of, and Sir Cliarles Bell has left unex- 
plained. Mitford was wondering whether he read 



298 EUNXIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

tliis problem ariglit when tlie last words fell on 
liis ear ; and feeling it was necessary that he 
should reply, said, '' It must be dull, eh?" 

" Dull I you've no conception how dull. And 
I often tliink I was meant for something dif- 
ferent, . something better than a sick -man's 
nurse, to bear liis wdiims, and be patient mi- 
der his irritability\ I often think . But what 
nonsense I'm talking! . what are my thoughts 
to you?" 

^^ A great deal more than you know of Go 
on, please." 

" I often tliink that if I had been married to 
a man who could understand me, who could ap- 
preciate me, I should have been a very happy 
and a good woman. Good and happy I God 
knows very difierent from what I am now." 

With her right hand she touched her eyes with 
a delicate little handkercliief. In her left hand she 
had held a small feather fan, with vdiich she had 
screened herself from the fire ; but the fan had 
fallen to the floor and lay there imnoticed, while 
the hand hung listlessly by her side close by Sir 



SIR CHARLES'S VISIT. 299 

Charles. Gradually their hands touched, and this 
time she made no effort to withdraw hers fi-om 
his clasp. 

There was silence for a few moments, broken 
by her saying, " There, there is an end of that ! 
It is but seldom that I break down, and show 
myself in my true colours ; but there is some- 
thing in you which . inexphcably to myself . 
won my confidence, and now I've bored you 
with my troubles. There, let me go now, and 
I'll promise never to be so siUy again." She 
struggled to free her hand, but he held it 
firmly. 

"Leave it there," said he; "you have not 
misplaced your confidence, as you know very 
well. Oh, you needn't shake yom- head ; you 
know that I would do any thing to serve you." 

He spoke in a low earnest voice ; and as she 
looked up at liim with one of her long deep 
dreamy looks, she saw a sudden thrill run 
tlu-ough him, and felt his hand which held her.s 
ti'emble. 

"1 do know it," she said ; " and we will be 



300 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

the best, tlie very best of friends. Now, let us 
talk of something else." 

He was with her the whole of that day in 
a state of dreamful happiness, drinking in the 
music of her voice, watching her graceful mo- 
tions, dehghted witli a certain bold recklessness, 
a contempt for the conventional rules of society, 
a horror of obedience to prescribed ordinances, 
which now and then her conversation betrayed. 
Tliey saw nothing more of Miss Gillespie, save 
at dinner, when Mitford noticed tliat Mrs. Ham- 
mond made no alteration in her manner towards 
him, miless indeed it was a little more prononce 
than when they had been alone. Miss Gillespie 
did not appear to remark it, but sat and purred 
from time to time in a very amiable and pleasant 
manner. She retired after dinner, and then Sir 
Charles's phaeton was brought romid, and it was 
time to say adieu. 

He said it in the little hbrary, where the 
brother of the Irish peer kept his boots and his 
di'iving-whips, as he was lighting a cigar for 



301 

which Mrs. Hammond held a cedar-match. As 
he bent over her, he felt her breath upon his face, 
and felt liis whiskers touch her scented hair. 
He had not been inattentive to some Burgmidy, 
which the invalid upstairs had specially com- 
mended to him in a message, and his blood 
coursed like fire tlu'ough his veins. At that 
moment Miss Gillespie appeared at the open door 
with a glove which she had found in the hall, 
and with her dark -green eyes gleaming with 
rage. So Sir Charles only took Mrs. Hammond's 
hand, whispering '^ Friends ?" receiving a long 
pressure and '^ Always !" for answer ; and pass- 
ing with a bow Miss Gillespie, whose eyes still 
gleamed ferociously, sprang into his phaeton and 
drove off. 

That last pressure of Mrs. Hammond's hand 
was on his hand, that last word of hers rung in 
Iiis ear all the way home. All the way home 
liis fevered fancy brought her image alluringly 
before him . more frequently, more alluringly than 
it had been in his morning's drive. But there 
was another figure which he had not thought of 



in the momiug, and which now rose up ; . the 
figure of a woman, green-eyed, pale-faced, cat- 
hke in her motions. And w^hen Sir Charles 
Mitford thought of her, he stamped his foot 
savagely and swore. 



END OF YOL. L 
RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 



CHAPTER I. 

IN THE TOILS. 

Sir Charles Mitford had not been guilty of 
any exao-o-eration when he announced his inten- 
tion of filling his house at Redmoor with a very 
pleasant set of people. If a man have a kindly 
genial temper, a sense of humour, a desire to be 
pleasant to his fellow-creatures, such qualities, 
however they may have hitherto been concealed, 
will make themselves felt during a sojourn at a 
friend's well -filled country-house. There the 
heavy man, who has sat by one at a dozen din- 
ner-parties during the season and never opened 

his mouth except to fill it, is discovered to be 
YOL. IL B 



Z EUNXIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

full of antiquarian erudition about the old castles 
and abbeys in the neighbourhood; and imparts 
his information^ pleasantly studded with quaint 
anecdote and pungent remark. There Lady Ka- 
therine gives up her perpetual simper, and rests 
her aching lips, and occasionally covers her gleam- 
ing teeth. There Mrs. Phillimore mixes for a 
while with people in her own rank in life, and 
temporarily denies herself the pleasure of hunting 
orphans into asylums, and dealing out tea and 
Bibles to superannuated crones. Grinsby would 
have gone through life despised as a cockney 
littdrateur^ . indeed they intended to have im- 
mense fun out of him at the Duke's, . if he had 
not knocked over tliat brace of woodcock, right 
and left barrel ; if, in fact, he had not made better 
shooting than any other man of the party ; and 
Tom Copus would never have given that deli- 
cious imitation of little Mr. Loudswell, the bla- 
tant barrister, had it not been coaxed out of him 
during the private theatricals at Eversholt Park. 
What glorious flirtations, what happy marriages, 
what fun, enjoyable at the time, and lasting somx'e 



XN' THE TOILS. 3 

of retrosjoectlve enjoyment for long aft or , have 
arisen from the gatherings in country-houses ! 
In these days of imitation it is also gratifying 
to know that comitry-house society is essentially 
English. Monseigneur le Due de Hausse et Baisse 
has a gathering at liis terre^ or the Grraf von Hasen- 
braten fills his ancestral castle of Suchverloren 
with intending assistants at a treihjagd : but the 
French people are very unhappy; they long to 
be back in Paris, and they seek consolation in 
dressing and behaving exactly as if they had never 
quitted that city ; while the manner of life among 
Germans alters never : . to shoot a very little, to 
eat and di-ink a great deal, and " the sooner it's 
over the sooner to sleep," . such are the simple 
conditions of Teutonic happiness. 

The party at Redmoor was large and well 
constituted. Captain and Mrs. Charteris, whom 
every body kneu", were there. Tom Cliarteris 
had been in the Enniskillens ; had run tlu'ough 
all Ills money, and was in daily expectation of 
being sold up, when liis uncle, the senior 
partner in a large distillery, died, leaving Tom 



4 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

sucli a sliare in the business as would brin^: 
him an excellent income, on the sole condition 
that he should leave the army, and personally 
attend to the management of the distillery. It 
is probable that Tom would have been sufficiently 
idiotic to refuse compliance with these conditions ; 
but, fortunately, he had taken to himself a wife, 
a young lady who was the daughter of the church- 
organist in a little town where the Enniskillens 
had been quartered, and who gave lessons in 
music and singing to the resident gentry. She 
was a pretty inquante little person ; and Tom, 
lounging out of the barrack - window while he 
smoked his after - breakfast pipe, had seen her 
tripping to and fro, always neat, active, and 
sprightly, and always displaying a remarkably 
pretty foot and ankle. Admiration of pretty 
feet and ankles was among Tom's weaknesses, 
and he watched the little music -mistress with 
great interest, and began to look forward to 
her daily appearance with delight. Then he got 
an introduction to her, . without any definite 
end or aim, for good or for bad, but simply to 



IN THE TOILS. D 

amuse himself; tlien lie became fascinated by 
her, and finally he married her. It was 
Mrs. Tom who insisted upon big jolly old Tom 
giving up the army, and taking to the dis- 
tillery and the mone}'. She was a fimny little 
woman, and would make her intimates shout 
with lauo^hter at her imitation of Tom stridino; 
about the comiting-house among the clerks (he 
never could get rid of his di'agoon- swagger), 
and talking a haw-haw to the publicans who 
came to borrow money or beg for time. Tliey 
had a pretty little house in Clarges Street, 
whence Tom would bowl away every morning 
at 9.30 to the distillery in Barbican, remaining 
there till half-past four, when Mrs. Tom would 
call for him in the brougham, and air him in 
the Park till dinner-time. Every body knew 
them, and hats were bobbing off over the 
iron-railings all down the Drive as they passed. 
Whenever a stoppage occurred Tom had to stand 
a running fire of chafi*, being asked what it 
was a quartern, whether he'd like a drop of 
something short, with other jokes, in Avhich the 



b EUNKING THE GAUNTLET. 

phrases '^ white tape" and " blue ruin" pkved 
conspicuous parts. Tlic little house in Clarges 
Street was a great resort for a select few after 
the Opera, and many well-known men would 
drop in to lia^e the claw of a lobster and a glass 
of champagne, or to smoke a final cigar wliile 
listening to Mrs. Tom's brilliant playing . till two 
A.M., when Tom turned his guests out, declaring 
he was a j^oor tradesman, and had to be up early 
to business. The house was a pheasant one, where 
there was a certain amount of laissez-allcr free- 
dom, but where Tom took care that his wife was 
thorouglily respected. 

Then Mrs. Masters, always spoken of as 
" pretty Mrs. Masters," or " the pretty widow," 
was of the party, . a tall handsome woman with 
large ej-es and masses of floating light-brown hair, 
relict of old Dr. Masters, who had left her a capi- 
tal income, which she seemed determined to keep 
to herself. jSTot more than eight-and-twenty, and 
eminently attractive, she was a source of wonder 
to her friends, who could not miderstand why 
she did not marry again. She had nmnbers of 



IX THE TOILS. 7 

visitors, male and female; she went into society 
constantly, and did lier due share of dancing and 
flirtation ; but the latter vras so mild in kind, and 
so general in its natiu'e, that no man's name had 
ever- been coupled Avitli hers. Her most intimate 
enemies raised a report that she was at one time 
madlv in love with Colonel Alsager ; but if there 
was any truth in the rumour, she managed her 
madness so admirably as never to show a trace of 
it. She was invaluable in a country-house, for 
she was thoroughly good-tempered, entered heart 
and soul into every thing that was proposed, and 
was a great bait for vain bachelors, whose vanity 
was specially piqued at her long resistance to the 
charms of their sex. With Mrs. Masters came 
her cousins, two young ladies named Tyrrell, 
whose father was a judge in India, and who were 
of the ordinary stamp of pretty, pert, self-satisfied 
twenty-year-olds. 

Tlie other ladies in the house do not call for 
description. Chief amongst the men was Captain 
Bligh, who, as he walked about and inspected tlic 
alterations which had been made under liis direc- 



8 RmraiNG THE GAUNTLET. 

tions, wondered whether liis old father would ever 
relent, and whether he should have a chance of 
putting the old hall down in Norfolk in order for 
himself ; or whether he sliould go on betting and 
billiard-playing and steeplechase-riding until he 
'' went a tremendous mucker," and either blew his 
brains out or levanted. And there was Major 
Winton, who, dressed in a pair of enormous thigh 
boots, a dreadnaught, and a sou'-wester, and ac- 
companied by a keeper, went away every morning 
at dawn to lie out in the marshes for snipe and 
wild-fowl, and who did not return till dinner-time ; 
immediately after which meal he was accustomed 
to retire to his bedroom, where a case-bottle of 
brandy, a jar of Cavendish tobacco, a huge meer- 
schaum-pipe, and the adventures of the Chevalier 
Faublas, were awaiting him ; and with these he 
would occupy himself until he went to bed. Lau- 
rence Alsager was at Redmoor also, though his 
visit to his father was yet unpaid; and so was 
Lord DoUamore. The officers of the garrison had 
called, and the officers of the frigate cruising off 
Torquay, and the neighbouring gentry; and the 



Ds' THE TOILS. y 

whole party seemed to enjoy themselves except 
Sir Charles Mitford, . whose happiness was not to 
be long delayed, for the Hammonds were ex- 
pected on a certain day, which noAv dawned upon 
the impatient master of Redmoor. 

He had rctm'ned home after hmcheon, leaving 
the shooting-part}^ nnder the charge of Captain 
Bhgh, and had been in a state of undisguisable 
anxiety all the afternoon, miable to settle himself 
to any thing ; now playmg a stroke or two at 
billiards, and looking on at Tom Charteris, who 
was practising certain hazards preparatory to a 
match with Bligli ; now strolling through the 
drawing - room, where Alsager was talking to 
Lady Mitford and Mrs. Masters; now interrupt- 
ing Lord Dollamore, who was stretched out in 
an easy-chair in the library reading Montaigne. 
Sir Charles's impatience and restlessness were not 
unobserved by any of these. Tom Charteris 
supposed he was ah-eady sick of the quiet of the 
country, and contemplated recommending him a 
turn in the distillery by way of a cure. Lady 
Mitford coidd not understand his restlessness, and 



10 llUXMNTx THE GAUNTLET. ^ 

feared Charley liacl been annoyed about some- 
thing. Mrs. Masters ascribed it to want of savoir 
faire on the Baronet's part. Only Colonel Alsager 
and Lord Dollamore guessed its real cause. Tlie 
former frowned portentously as he watched his 
host ; and the latter was considerably amused. 

^* Tliis is positively a very delicious experience 
of life," thought Dollamore, as he laid aside his 
book; "I could not have had a more charming 
field for study. So many different characters too ! 
There is that remarkably micouth person om- 
host, who is so horribly raw and midisciplined as 
to be unable to behave himself decently when 
expecting the last object of his calf-love. And 
there's that modern Bayard, Alsager, who has 
undoubtedly a tendresse for our hostess, and who 
as undeniably wore Laura Hammond's colom's a 
little time ago, and bolted because of some inexpli- 
cable row with her. And there's Laura Hammond 
herself . dehcious creatm-e . with a newly-caught 
mouse in her mouth ; and yet her eye constantly 
roving over the late captive playing round her, 
lest he should escape beyond possibility of recap- 



IX THE TOILS. 11 

ture. Tliere's that good-looking widow too, wlio 
is as cold as ice, but who is supposed to have 
thawed a little once in Bayard's favoui\ And then 
there's Lady Mitford herself, who is worth all the 
rest of the women put together. What grace, 
what beauty, what thorouglilj^ imsopliisticated 
charms and real naturahiess of manner ! By 
Jove ! compared to her, the widow is a giraffe, and 
the Hammond a dairy-maid. Talk of their birth 
and breeding I why, tliis country parson's daughter 
has the ah' and manner of a duchess. They will 
try and set upon her when she comes to town, . 
that old Clani'onald, who looks hke a cook, and the 
Tappington with her three daughters like grena- 
diers in petticoats ; but if she has any pluck . and 
I tliink she has, under all that quietude . she'll 
ride them down right and left ; and she'll have 
all the men on her side, though I don't know 
that that's any pull. Meantime this oaf is en- 
tertaining an angel unawares, and neglecting her, 
. is standing at the door of his tent oghng the 
daughters of the Cities of the Plain. So much the 
better for Bayard and . and for others. But the 



12 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

imhroglio is deliglitfulj and I couldn't wish for 
better fun tlian to stand by and watch the play ; 
cutting -in of course when I see a chance of 
holdino; winnino; cards." 

And then Lord DoUamore rubbed his hands 
with great gusto, and applied himself with re- 
newed delight to his volume of French philo- 
sophy. 

At length the noise of wheels on the hard di'ive 
was heard, and Sir Charles rang the bell and 
summoned the servants, and had the hall-door 
thrown open, and stood on the steps ready to re- 
ceive his guests in person. Drawn by four horses 
at full gallop, Mr. Hammond's carriage came thtm- 
dering along the drive, and ere it pulled up at the 
door Lady Mitford had joined her husband, pre- 
pared to echo his words of welcome. With her 
came Colonel Alsager, . carrying in his hand 
a light shawl, which he pressed upon her ac- 
ceptance when he saw the door open, and felt 
the rush of the cold air, which sent the flames 
roaring up from the great open fii'eplace, . and 
also Lord Dollamore, who smiled placidly to 



IN THE TOILS. 13 

liimself as he saw this act of attention. " None 
but your regular Bayard would have done that," 
said he to himself; "wonderfully thoughtful 
fellows they are, by Joye !" He suffered under 
a slight lameness, and always carried a Ma- 
lacca cane with an ivory crutch -handle, de- 
clared by the men at the club to be his familiar, 
the recipient of his confidence, and the suggester 
of many of his iniquities. He carried it now, 
and rapped it against his teeth, and laid it to 
his ear, as thouo-h he were listenino; to its 
counsel. 

" Tliere they are," he continued, "in a 
close carriage of course, because of my hus- 
band's health ; but I am at the open window, 
and remarkably well I look. Blue always be- 
came me, and my eyes are bright, and I'ye 
got a high colour. How do you do ? My 
hand out at the window, and a yery palpable 
squeeze to the oaf, who is blushing, by Joye, 
like a great schoolboy, . a yery palpable squeeze. 
Steps down now, and, leaning heayily on his 
arm, out we jump, and . oh yes, dear Lady 



14 RmsTS^IXG THE GAUXTLET. 

Mitford ! Kiss, kiss . jon she- Judas ! . and . hallo ! 
rather astonished at seeino^ Bavard, eh? How 
do yon do, Colonel Alsager ? I scarcely thought 
you would be here. No, of course not ; one 
strino; too manv for her bow. Now for me ! . 
Needn't ask you how you are, Mrs. Hammond ; 
never saw you looking more charming. . And she 
smiles and passes on. Lord help us ! is this 
Pei'cy Hammond, this unfortunate object that 
they're helping out now ? Why, he's only 
a year or two older than I; left Haileybury 
while I was at Eton ; but what an awfld ^\Teck 
he is I What on earth made him marry a 
second time, . especially such a woman as this? 
Hallo ! who have we here ? Tall young woman ; 
severely got up, but a neat figure, and a good 
stepper too. Yery cold bow from Sir Charles; 
little hand-shake from my lady. Must be the 
governess. Oh yes, that's it : and there's the 
child. Now, then, all the characters are assem- 
bled ; ring up the curtain . the play's begun." 

Lord Dollamore was right; it had been a 
palpable hand-squeeze, palpable to him, palpable 



IX THE TOILS. 15 

to Laurence Alsager, palpable to her fi'om wliom 
it should have been specially hidden . Lady Mit- 
ford. She saw it, but could scarcely believe she 
had seen aright ; but then she noticed the manner 
in wliich Mrs. Hammond leaned on Sir Charles's 
arm, and a certain look which passed between 
them as she alighted. The next instant her guest 
had caught hold of both her hands, and was em- 
bracing her with efiusion ; but just before Georgia 
had had time to steal one glance at Lam'ence Al- 
sager's face, and to read in the lowering brow 
and compressed lips that he too had noticed 
the empressement of the meeting. The whole 
thino; was so thorouMilv strauo-e to her, so 
utterly unexpected, that she did not know how 
to act. Her first impulse was to di'ag herself 
out of Mrs. Hammond's embrace, to call her a 
false bad woman, and to go off in a flood of 
tears ; but fortunately she did not attempt this 
experiment. She did the very best thing under 
the circumstances, and that was . nothing. She 
fi'eed herself from her visitor's embracing arms 
when she had unresponsive received her kiss, 



16 RUKN'ING THE GAUNTLET. 

and murmm'ed a few commonplaces about her 
delight at seeing her ; and then she went for- > 
ward to say a passing word of kindness to 
Mr. Hammond as he was helped past her 
by his servants, to exchange salutations with 
Miss Gillespie, and to kiss the child's forehead. 
By this time she was perfectly ready to do 
the honom-s of her house, and to follow her 
husband, on whose arm Mrs. Hammond was al- 
ready leaning, to the suite of rooms prepared 
for the guests. These were, as Sir Charles had 
said, the best in the house ; and as they en- 
tered them, Georgie remembered how he had 
specially reserved them for the Hammonds, and 
she winced as her eye lighted on a splendid^ 
bouquet of hot -house flowers arranged in a 
vase on the writing-table. Tlie fires burned 
brio^htlv, and there was a sufficient air of 
comfort to justify Mrs. Hammond in clasping 
her hands and exclaiming, " How very, very 
charming ! Every thing in such exquisite taste ; 
and oh, what lovely flowers. Lady Mitford I You 
know my passion for flowers, and have indeed 



IN THE TOILS. 17 

taken pains to gratify it." Georgie bowed in 
an icy manner, and Sir Cliarles glowed from 
liis head to his feet. " It's too late to look out 
now, but I've no doubt that the prospect's de- 
lightful." 

'' Looks towards the south. Good for Ham- 
mond, and that kind of thing," said Sir Charles, 
explanatorily. 

^^ We'll leave you now, Mrs. Hammond ; the 
first dinner-bell has just rung," said Georgie^ 
moving towards the door. 

" Any thing you want you've only to ring 
for, you know ; so find out something to ask 
for by dinner-time. Do ! you know you've only 
to ask and have in this house." 

Georgie did not hear this last remark. She 
was hurrying as quickly as she could towards 
her OAvn room ; and on reaching it she flung 
herself on a sofa, and burst into tears. 

It was the custom at Redmoor to assemble 
previous to the announcement of dinner in the 
library, . a lai'ge room, rather solemn with its 
dark oak bookcases, and when lighted only by 

VOL. II. C 



18 RUNKDsG THE GAUNTLET. 

two or three moderator-lamps, placed on small 
tables. Sucli Avas Sir Charles's whim ; he had 
a notion that the removal from darkness to light 
awoke a corresponding cheerfulness ; and though 
it had been often combated by Georgie, on this 
occasion she was grateful for any respite from 
the public gaze, and every opportunity of reco- 
vering her wonted calmness. Clang I goes the 
gong. ^^ Dinner is served." Through the indis- 
tinct gloom Mrs. Hammond is seen sailing away 
on the arm of Sir Charles. Alsager has the 
widow for his companion, and feels a thrill run 
up his coat-sleeve, to which the arm within 
his coat -sleeve does not respond. Tliere are 
officers from the garrison, who file oif with 
the Tyrrell girls and with the yomig ladies, 
members of the neighbouring families ; and the 
procession is closed by Lady Mitford, escorted 
by Lord Dollamore, who takes the opportunity 
of saying, "Charming woman Mrs. Hammond; 
so frank, ingenuous, and oj^en ! So devoted to 
her poor invalid husband . don't you think 
so?" and when Lady Mitford responds, "Yes, 



IX THE TOILS. 19 

oh yes, quite so," Lord Dollamore lifts the 
ivory crutch-handle of liis Malacca cane to his 
mouth, and seems whispering to it mitellable 
jokes. 

The dinner was very good ; but that was more 
due to Bligh than to any one else, even to Lady 
Mitford. The chef\\\\o had been let to the Mtfords 
with the house in Eaton Place had stuck to his bar- 
gain, and refiised to go into the country. He had his 
club, his menus pkiisirs, and he declined to leave 
them. So the jolly Captain looked about, took 
Mrs. Austin the housekeeper into confidence, and 
found out from her that there was a woman who 
had lived as kitchenmaid in the first families, and 
who had always thought of bettering herself, but 
never had the chance, and was then at ^Sir John 
Rumbold's, hard by. This person was fetched over, 
and directed to try her prentice-hand at cooking a 
steak and a potato for Captain Bligh, that achieve- 
ment being, as he opined, the great touchstone 
of the culinaiy art; and having been thoroughly 
successful, she was bon'owed for a few days and 
ftn-thcr tried, and finallv engaged. The dinner was 



20 EUNXING THE GAUNTLET. 

SO good tliat every one enjoyed it, even poor Percy 
Hammond, who had roused himself sufficiently to 
come to table, and whose eyes brightened under 
the influence of a bottle of the celebrated old Ma- 
deira placed at his side. It was not the old 
Madeira which caused Mrs. Hammond's eyes to 
brighten, but they had never shone more bril- 
liantly, and her spirits had never been higher. 
She talked incessantly, addressing her conversa- 
tion chiefly to her host, on whose right hand she 
was seated. 

"I suppose you have some charming old places 
about here. Sir Charles? . abbeys, and ruins, and 
castles," said she after a pause. 

"I daresay there are, but as I have only just 
come here, you know, I can't say. Major Maxse, 
no doubt, can tell you; they've been quartered 
in the neighbourhood for the last twelve months, 
and know every inch of it. Maxse, Mrs. Hammond 
asks whether there are any old ruins, castles, 
abbeys, that sort of thing, in the neighbom'hood. 
I tell her she should inquire of you, as the like- 
liest person to know." 



IX THE TOILS. 21 

Major Maxse, the gentleman addressed, a 
good-looking middle-aged man, replied, '^ Well, I 
really tliink I might earn an honest livehhood 
by setting up as guide to this region. Tliough 
we've been here little more than a twelvemonth, 
I've been so horribly bored that I think I have 
explored every nook and corner of the country 
within a circle of fifty miles ; and I am very 
happy to tell Mrs. Hammond that there are 
all sorts of ruins for her to choose from, 
with all sorts of architecture, and all sorts of 
legends attached. For example, there's Egre- 
mont Priory." 

" That's Boscastle's place, isn't it?" said Lord 
Dollamore, fr'om the other end of the table ; '' who 
made the legend about that ? One of the family 
probably; for there never was a Boscastle yet 
who was known to speak truth, even by accident." 
" First-rate place for wild-ducks," said Major 
Winton : '^ don't send any confounded picnic 
people there, Maxse ; they'll scare the birds." 

" Even at the risk of being considered con- 
fomided picnic people, if it's a pretty place, and 



22 RUNNDs'G THE GAKS'TLET. 

lias a good story attached to it, I propose that 
we make a party and go," said Georgie. 

She was a httle astonished at herself when she 
had said this, but she had said it purj)osely. 
She was wondering what it was that had attracted 
her husband in Mrs. Hammond which she herself 
did not possess ; and she thought perhaps it was 
a certain dash and verve^ to which she had never 
pretended, but which her rival midoubtedly dis- 
played. Poor Georgie felt tliat perhaps she had 
been a little too tame and sedate ; and this speech 
was her first attempt in the opposite direction. 

" Charmingly said. Lady Mitford ; the very 
thing," said ^Irs. Hammond. " And I think vre 
could go, even if there were no story at all . " 

'' There's a romid tower which is occupied by 
an old woman, who'll boil potatoes, and lay the 
cloth, and that kind of thing . all under shelter, 
you know," said Captain Bligh, who was of an 
eminently practical tm-n. 

" Oh, no ; but we must have the legend," said 
Lord Dollamore. '^ Come, Major Maxse, you don't 
get off telling us the Boscastle legend." 



IX THE TOILS. 23 

" Oh, it's tlie old story with the usual ingre- 
dients . love and a ghost," said Major Maxse. 

" Yes, but what love ? whose ghost ?" asked 
Mrs. Hammond. " You promised to tell me, 
Major Maxse, and we're all attention." 

" It is simply this. After the Restoration Roger 
Boscastle, who had been serving with the Royalists 
from the beginning of the war, and who had had 
to fly the country after Naseby, came back to his 
estates and to his wife, who during her husband's 
absence had been living with her own family, 
strict Parliamentarians. Lady Boscastle was a 
very lovely woman ; but a little strict and rigid, 
and scarcely suited to a rollicking swash -buck- 
ler like her husband. One day there arrived at 
Egremont Priory a troop of horse escorting a 
beautifid lady and her father, both foreigners, 
who had done the king much service in time of 
need, and who had known Roger Boscastle when 
abroad. Roger seemed very much surprised to see 
them, and so did Lady Mildred ; the latter more 
especially when first the old nobleman threw 
his arms romid Roofer's neck and exclaimed. 



24 rtUKN'IKG THE GAUis'TLET. 

'' Mon fils I" and then tlie jomig lady did ditto 
and exclaimed, " Mon amour !" but they were 
neither of them so astonished as were the old 
gentleman and the yomig lady when Roger led 
Lady Mildred forward and presented her as his 
wife. They were thorouglily taken aback, and 
the young lady muttered to Roger under her 
breath something which Lady Mildred could not 
catch, but which, by the exj)ression of her eyes, 
must have been very unpleasant. However, 
they took up their abode in the castle, wliither 
they had been commended by the king; and 
they were very polite, especially the lady, to Mil- 
dred, who hated her with such hatred as is only 
felt by a woman who suspects another of carrying 
on with her husband." 

" Bravo, Maxse!" interrupted Lord Dollamore; 
" gad, that's really quite grapliic, . that last sen- 
tence. You've mistaken your profession, Maxse ; 
you ought to have been an author." 

'' I'm afraid the last sentence was cribbed from 
the Guide-hook to the county. However, to cut my 
story short, one night Lady Mildred overheard a 



IX THE TOILS. 25 

converscation behveen her husband and Pepita (that 
was the foreign lady's name), from whicli it was 
pretty clear that Eoger had represented himself 
as a single man when abroad, and had actually 
married Pepita. Then Mildred had a stormy 
interview with Roger, and told him of her in- 
tention to leave him the next day and go to 
her brother. But the next morning she was found 
dead, stabbed to the heart with a dagger, round the 
handle of which was a scrap of paper, inscribed, 
' In a Spaniard's way ;' and Pepita, her father, 
and Roo-er Boscastlc were all crone. The latter 
came back when quite an old man, but was found 
dead in his bed the morning after his arrival ; 
frightened, it is supposed, l)y the ghost of Lady 
Mildred, whicli in stormy weather duly walks the 
castle, wringing its hands and waving the bloody 
dao-crer in the air." 

'' No, I don't like the last bit," said Lord 
Dollamore ; ^Hoo much like Richardson's show. 
All the rest very good and dramatic ; don't you 
think so. Lady Mitford?" 

" Oh, very good indeed . thoroughly interest- 



26 RUlsXIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

ing; and J as usual, the only innocent person in 
the stoiy was punished." 

" That was because she was innocent," said 
Lord Dollamore ; " there must have been ehgible 
persons, even among her Roundhead friends ; how 
very much better to have consoled herself with . " 

" As usual, you miss the point of the story, 
Lord Dollamore," said Alsager, hotly interrupt- 
ing; ^^sm-ely it would have been better to have 
been the mm-dered than the mm'deress in such a 
case." 

" It's very hicky there are not any such cases 
nowadays," said Sir Charles. " No woman would 
put a knife into another now." 

" Lito any one who stood between me and my 
love I would, for one," said Mrs. Hammond under 
her breath ; and she looked for a moment so fierce, 
that Mitford said, " Gad, I beheve you !" in a 
similar tone. 

"When the ladies had left the room Laurence 
Alsa^rer said to Lord Dollamore : " You had heard 
that story before ?" 

" What storv, my dear Alsager?" 



IX THE TOILS. 2{ 

" The legend of Egremont Priory." 

" Had I ? Not unlikely. You know I'm a 
very eccentric reader, and delight in odd stories." 

" It's a pity you did not save Maxse the 
trouble of tellino; it afjain." 

"Do you tliink so? AVell, do you know I 
can't agree with you? It's recital seemed to 
bring out the character of some of our friends 
in the highest degree ; and if there's any thing I 
delight in, it is the study of character." 



CHAPTER 11. 

EGREMONT PRIORY. 

Lady Mitford's proposition of a visit to Egre- 
iiiont Priory, tliougli originally made in a kind of 
bravado, was remembered by most of lier guests . 
notably by Mrs. Hammond, who saw in it a better 
chance for flirtation than she had had since her 
arrival at Redmoor. Ever since Greorgie had 
noticed the warm lingering hand -pressure ex- 
chano^ed between her husband and her visitor 
on that occasion, she had been thoroughly on the 
qui Vive J and, like most young women ignorant 
of the world's ways, had imagined that the best 
way to nip a flirtation in the bud was by being 
perpetually observant of all that took place, and 
by letting the guilty persons know that their con- 
duct was watched. It requires considerable expe- 



EGREMONT PPJORY. 29 

rience before a woman discovers that . so long as 
the affair is confined witliin certain bounds . totally 
to ignore its existence is her very best policy; 
a policy which saves her from infinite domestic 
discomfort, and is besides the only possible method 
of 2:allino; her rival. 

But Georgie was not only young, but coun- 
try-bred,. -which means a great deal, for London 
girls at seventeen know more of the world than 
country girls at five-and-twenty, . and had had 
scarcely any experience. So she went to work 
naturally, and betrayed her anger in the plainest 
manner, . in perpetual super\asion, in lip-bitings 
and hand-clenchings, in occasional tears, which 
luould come welling up into her eyes, how- 
ever far back she might hold her head, and 
were perfectly visible, however hastily brushed 
away. To Mrs. Hammond, who was a practised 
duellist, all this behaviour was delightful ; she 
took it as a tribute to her own powers of fasci- 
nation, and was proportionately pleased. Flirta- 
tion, in its strongest sense, was absolutely ne- 
cessary to her existence ; but she never conde- 



30 ETOsXING THE GAUNTLET. 

sceiicled to boys, and she regarded officers, when 
merely officers and nothing more, as very small 
game. She liked to entangle men of position 
and celebrity, no matter how grave or how old 
(she had perfectly charmed a bachelor bishop ; and 
the enemies of one of om' greatest physicians 
declared that his wife rendered his home unbear- 
able on account of his attentions to Mrs. Ham- 
mond) ; and the latest literary, artistic, or thea- 
trical lion was usually to be fomid hovering about 
her. But far beyond any thing else she liked a 
flirtation with the husband of an acknowledged 
pretty woman ; and the more beautiful the wife, 
the more bent was Laura Hammond on caj^ti- 
vating the husband. That gave her greater eclat 
than any thing else, and she liked Mat. She 
liked being talked about, . up to a certain point ; 
she liked women to express their wonder at 
what men could see in her to rave about; she 
liked to have repeated to her what men said at 
clubs : '' 'Str'ord'nary little woman the Ham- 
mond I Tliere's Cosmo Gordon been every where 
with her, leaving that lovely wife of his all by 



EGREMONT PRIORY. 31 

lierself, by Jove ! What tlie doose can tliere bo 
in lier?" and other speeches of a like nature. 
She also liked to bo on good terms with the 
wives of her admirers . a thing by no means so 
difficult as might be imagined by the inex- 
perienced. There are women so spaniel-like 
in their nature that they will fiiwn on those 
who injm'e them ; and some of these consorted 
with Mrs. Hammond with a vain idea of pro- 
pitiating her by their forbearance, and thus 
inducing her to give up the chase. She had at 
first thoucfht that Georo;ie Mitford mio-ht be of 

o o o 

this order; but she was by no means disap- 
pointed to find her otherwise. She gloried in a 
contest out of which she could come victorious, 
and despised all easy triumphs ; there was plea- 
sure in captivating a man whose position or cele- 
brity reflected lustre on his enslaver; but there 
was tenfold pleasure when he, in his blind in- 
fatuation, set the rules of society at defiance, 
and openly neglected the wife whose beauty had 
hitherto been his greatest pride. 

So Mrs. Hammond reminded Sir Charles that 



32 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

dear Lady Mitford has expressed a wisli that they 
should go over in a party to Egremont Priory, and 
sur2:ested that he had better see about it at once. 
Of course Sir Cliarles saw about it immediately; 
told Bhgh to have some luncheon sent over the 
next day, and to mind that they had a big fire in 
the keep, for it was any thing but picnic weather ; 
wrote a line to Major Maxse and other officers to 
join them ; and proceeded to poll his visitors as to 
how they would go over to the spot. How would 
Mrs. Hammond go ? How ? Oh, wouldn't dear 
Lady Mitford ride over with her on horseback ? 
they could get some gentlemen to escort them ; 
and it would be dellghtfid. Dear Lady Mitford 
was much obliged, but would rather not. Mrs. 
Hammond could ride over on horseback if she 
chose, and doubtless would find plenty of cava- 
liers ; but Lady Mitford would drive in a pony- 
phaeton. Ah, of com\se ! Mrs. Hammond had 
forgotten Lady Mitford's charming experience of 
pony-phaetons ; and as she said this she looked 
round with a hght and pleasant smile at Colonel 
Alsager, who was pidling his black beard, and 



EGREMONT PRIORY. 



33 



glowering horribly close by. Sir Charles Mitford 
had no objection to Georgie's going in the phaeton . 
no objection to her driving, for the matter of that; 
but since that accident, it would be better, he 
thought, to have some one reliable in coachman- 
ship sitting by her : Lord DoUamore, for instance ? 
But Dollamore declared he was the worst whip in 
the world ; his horrible rheumatism had crippled 
his hands ; and why should not that tremendous 
fellow Alsager, who had already earned the medal of 
the Humane Society . why should not he go ? Ay, 
Alsager was the very man. Sir Charles thought ; 
and Laurence, though he saw every atom of the play 
on Dollamore's part, and felt himself completely 
jockeye'd into the position, could discern no way out 
of it, and assented with apparent dehght. He was 
not too pleased to see a certain look of terror which 
had pervaded Lady Mitford's face when Dollamore 
was proposed as charioteer fade away when the 
other arrangement was finally decided upon. 
Many men would have taken the change as a 
compliment; but Lam'ence had had experience, 
and thought otherwise. Lord Dollamore, Tom and 

VOL. II. D 



34 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Mrs. Cliarteris, one of tlie Tyrrell girls, and Cap- 
tain Bligli, might post over in the break ; in which 
also went the luncheon-hampers. Fred Aspen, 
Ellen Tjrrell, and Major Winton, would ride. So 
the stud-groom had his orders, and all was ar- 
ranged. Sir Charles had not said how he intended 
to go to Egremont Priory, and yet no one was 
surprised, when the cavalcade was on the point 
of setting out, to see his big horse Tambour 
Major brought out by the stud-groom, who was 
closely followed by a helper leading Lady Jane 
. a very dark iron-gray mare . with a lady's 
saddle on her. No one doubted for an instant 
for Avhom the lady's horse was intended. A 
bright red spot burned on Lady Mitford's cheek ; 
and as she settled herself in the phaeton by Lau- 
rence's side, she said in a loud and marked tone, 
'^ I hope. Colonel Alsager, I shall not have occa- 
sion to-day to increase the debt of gratitude I 
already owe to you." 

Mrs. Masters raised, her eyebrows as Lord 
Dollamore assisted her into the break, and after- 
wards had two minutes' confidential whispering 



EGREMONT PEIORY. 35 

with Miss TpTell ; and Mrs. Charteris had scarcely 
time to fi.0T^^l down old Tom, who was always 
full of his gaucheries, before he had ejaculated, 
" Making the running early, eh ? ah, haw, haw !" 
Sir Charles Mitford saw nothing of this little 
performance ; but Mrs. Hammond, whose eyes and 
ears were every where at once, lost not one single 
scrap of it. So, just before the word for starting 
was given, while Mrs. Masters was doing her whis- 
pering, and Lady Mitford was burning with anger, 
and Captain Bligh was peering into the various 
hampers to see that nothing had been forgotten ; 
whde Sir Charles himself, intoxicated with her 
wonderful piquancy (she never looked to such ad- 
vantage as in her riding-habit), was coming across 
to mount her, she turned calmly round, and said in 
a voice which could be heard Ijy all round, ^' No, 
. thanks. Sir Charles . I won't trespass on yoiu* 
attention. As host vou have all sorts of things 
to look after and to do. . Major Winton, if that 
chestnut will stand for half a minute . here, boy, 
look to his head ! . I'll get you to mount me, and 
if you'll permit me I'll join your party. I'm the 



36 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

best of chaperons J Major ; and when it's requii'ed, 
my talent for admirmgthe landscape is enormous." 

This last was uttered sotto voce, and with a 
quick side-glance towards Ellen Tyrrell. It 
was a clever move ; and though by no means 
convincing, had some effect on all the party. 
Sir Charles bowed, sprang on Tambom* Major, 
and rode away with disgust plainly visible in every 
featm-e ; Lady Mitford looked disconcerted ; so 
did Alsao^er, thouo-h he understood it all ; Dolla- 
more took his familiar stick into consultation, and 
whispered to it that she was a devilish clever little 
woman ; Tom Charteris Avinked quietly at his 
wife; and Major Winton was delighted. He 
told some friends afterwards, in the freedom of 
barrack-room conversation, that he didn't go in 
for women's society and that sort of thing, you 
know, and he'd no idea he was so d d nice. 

So they went on. The party in the break was 
very humorous; they kept up a running-fire of 
jokes against Bligh about something being forgot- 
ten, and compelled him (naturally a nervous man, 
and very proud of his arrangement of such mat- 



EGREMONT PRIORY. 37 

ters) to dive frequently to the bottom of liampers 
and return witli tlie supposed missing article in liis 
hand, his face purple with stooping and triumph 
combined. Captain Bligh was not a humorist, 
but he retorted with several broad allusions to Tom 
Charteris's distillery ; and, a flash of old sporting 
experience having suddenly revealed to him that 
there was an affinity of meaning between the words 
' gin' and ' snare,' he dilated thereon after a fashion 
that Mr. George Cruikshank might have envied. 
They were very quiet in the pony-phaeton, for 
Georgie was annoyed at having so plainly shown 
her anger; and Lam-ence, finding that his few 
remarks about the weather and the scenery only 
gained monosyllabic answers, soon lapsed into 
silence. Sir Charles was seen going across 
country at a great pace, apparently comforting 
himself by taking it out of Tambom' Major, and 
clearing every thing in first-rate style. The 
mounted party seemed to enjoy themselves most 
of all ; Major Winton was in the seventh heaven, 
for Mrs. Hammond did all the talking, requiring 
him only to throw in an occasional word, and 



38 



RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 



she looked so fascinating that lie devoted himself 
to her dui'ing the ride, entirely neglecting Ellen 
Tyrrell . to that young lady's great gratification, 
be it said, as she regarded the Major as a fogie, 
and was infinitely better pleased vv'ith the atten- 
tions of one of the ofiicers who joined the caval- 
cade just as it emerged on the Redmoor. 

The winter picnic passed off much more plea- 
santly than might have been augm'ed from its 
commencement. Durino; the drive GeorPie had 
had time deliberately to examine herself, and to 
arrive at the conclusion that what she was doing 
was very foohsh, and, more than that, she was 
afraid, very wrong. It might be that her own 
jealousy had jaundiced her ideas ; it might be 
that the pressure of the hand, from which her 
misgiving first dated, Avas entirely imaginary. 
What right had she to suspect Charley of 
fickleness? Had he not proved his truth in the 
noblest way, by coming back to her in the time 
of his prosperity and raising her to her present 
position ? Was it likely, then, that he would so 
suddenly change? Yes, she had been very 



EGREMOXT PRIORY. 6\) 

viTong to permit the growth of such horrible sus- 
picions, and she would make up for it to Charley 
by tenfold warmth and affection. Georgie's al- 
readj-sufiPused face deepened in hue as she re- 
membered whatj in the bitterness of her S2:>irit, 
she had said, to Colonel Alsao-er on takino; her seat 
in the phaeton. What could he have thought of 
her ? Whatever he maj have thought, nothing 
could be gathered from the calm grave expression 
of his face. Yevj likely he guessed what was 
passing through his companion's mind; for from 
the little he had seen of Georgie, he believed 
her to possess more common-sense than is given 
to the average woman, and he was certain she 
could show it in no better way than hy totally 
ignoring this business, at all events in its pre- 
sent stage. Laurence saw plainly enough lili's. 
Hammond's intentions. There was not a point in 
her system of strategy which he did not com- 
prehend ; and he also saw that Mitford was 
morally weak, and obviously flattered by her 
attentions. In the present stage of affairs, liow- 
e^'er, for Lad}' Mitford to show herself annoyed 



40 KUXNING THE GAUNTLET. 

was the very worst policy she could adopt; 
and while she kept silence Laurence guessed she 
was arguing the question within herself, and ear- 
nestly hoped she would come to the right decision. 
He knew she had done so when, just as they were 
nearing their destination, she looked up with a 
bright smile and said, " I have been a very dull 
companion, I am afraid, Colonel Alsager ; but the 
truth is I was full of thought." 

'' A bad thing to bring out to a picnic, 
Lady Mitford. I should advise you to discard 
it as speedily as possible." 

" I fully intend to do so, and hope every 
one else will follow your advice. By the way, I 
may say, ' Physician, heal thyself;' for you've 
been most sedate ever since we started." 

" I was wondering," laughed Laurence, 
^' among other things, what the groom seated 
behind us could think of us. He's yomig, I 
see, and may possibly therefore imagine that 
silence is a sign of good-breeding." 

" Li that case, in his opinion we must be 
perfect aristocrats, for we've not exchanged a 



EGREMONT PRIORY. 41 

word. Ah J here comes the cavalcade ; how well 
Mrs. Hammond looks ! . doesn't she ? and how 
perfectly she sits her horse I" 

'' Yes, she rides admirably, and . ah, I 
thought so ; she has just discovered we were look- 
ing at her, or she would not have done that." 

" Tliat" was to put her horse at a bit of 
bank and hedge bordering the grass-meadow, 
on which she and her party were cantering. 
She cleared it admirably, and drew rein close 
by the phaeton. As her horse jmnped, Mrs. 
Hammond caught Laurence's eye, and her own 
lighted up with a saucy triumph ; the exercise 
had done her good, and she was in great spirits. 

" Well, dear Lady Mitford, I hope you've 
enjoyed your drive ; no accident this time, I 
see. But Colonel Alsager is a good whip. . I've 
heard your praises sung often by men who 
really understand the subject. Colonel Alsager. 
Tliey say you have the very hand for a restive 
animal . light, but firm." 

'' Tliey get away from me sometimes, though, 
Mrs. Hammond," said Laurence, looking up. 



42 EUNXIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

^^Ali, that happens with every one," she 
rephed; ^'but you always conquer at last, don't 

you?" 

"Always; and when I get them in hand 
again, I make them remember their freaks, and 
pay for them." 

'' You're qvdte right," said she carelessly. 
" Ah, here is Major Winton. I assm-e you, 
Lady Mitford, the Major is the most perfect 
escort ; full of talk and fmi, he never suffers you 
to be dull for an instant. And there's the break 
aiTived, and that energetic Captain Bhgh man- 
aging every thing as usual. What very large 
hampers I And I declare there's Sir Charles ar- 
rived before any of us, and superintending the 
laying of the cloth in that romantic-looking old 
tower." 

Lady Mitford caught sight of her husband 
at the same time, and hurried off to him. She 
was fidl of penitence, and wanted to set herself 
right with him at once. 

"Ah, and there's Lady Mitford off at the 
mere sound of his name. Look at that. Colonel 



EGREMONT PRIOR Y. 43 

Alsager, and . will you have the kindness to 
help me to dismount, Colonel Alsager ? . No, 
thank you, Major, I won't trouble you ; the 
Colonel is ah'eady on the ground. There, Lau- 
rence ~ Alsager," she whispered, as she sprang 
from the saddle, " that is what I pine for, . 
domestic love ;" and she heaved a little sigh, 
and tapped the ground with the delicate little 
riding-boot, which the lifting of her habit had 
exposed. 

For an instant Lam'ence was taken off his 
guard, and said bitterly, " When you might have 
had it, you spurned it ;" then recovering him- 
self, he added, " However, we have had that 
out once, and . " 

" And here is Major Winton," said Mrs. 
Hammond in her airiest manner. " Luncheon al- 
ready, eh ? then you shall gi^'e me yom* arm. 
Major, for this turf-liill is awkward to climb, 
especially in a habit." 

Meanwhile Georgie had hurried ix\\',\y to where 
her husband was standing watching the laying 
of the cloth in the one room of the keep, by the 



44 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

old chatelaine and her granddaughter. Georgie 
made her way up to him, and with the tears 
rising in her eyes, said, ^' Oh, Charley, I'm so 
glad I have found you; I wanted to speak to 
you." 

'^ Did you, little woman ?" said he, looking 
down at her in great astonishment ; " what 
about ? ISTothing left behind, is there ?" 

" No ; that is . at least . I don't know ; it 
was not about that I wanted to speak." 

'^ What was it, then ? Nothing the matter 
with the ponies ? . not another accident, eh?" 

" No, oh no ; I only wanted to say that I 
hoped you would not be annoyed at . at any 
thing I did when we started from home to-day 
. about the way in which the party was di- 
vided, I mean." 

" Why, you silly little woman, of course 
not ; you had nothing to do with it. If Winton 
chose to make himself ridiculous, it wasn't your 
fault. There, come, dry your eyes, Georgie, and 
let's go and look after the people." 

80 then, he had not noticed her anger or 



EGREMONT PRIORY. 45 

lier foolish speech at all. Georgie hardly kiiew 
"svhether to be pleased or vexed at the discovery. 

The indefatigable Captain Bhgh had now 
brought his arrangements to a head, and all 
was ready for luncheon. A large hre burned 
in the great open fireplace of the old room, 
lighting up the grim old walls, and flickering 
through the narrow slips and embrasures, whence 
in old days the archers had done good serAnce. 
Lady Mitford headed the table, with Lord Dolla- 
more and Major Maxse, who had ridden over 
with some of his brother officers, on either side. 
Mrs. Masters was delighted to find herself next 
to Colonel Alsager ; Tom Charter is was placed 
opposite the largest piece of cold beef, and told 
to go on carving it until somebody stopped 
him ; Mrs. Charteris was acting as a kind of 
female aide-de-camp to Captain Bligli ; and if 
Mrs. Hammond fomid Major Winton, who was 
on one side of her, unusually talkative, she could 
make no such complaint of Sir Charles Mitford, 
who sat on the other side, and was unusually 
silent. 



46 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

The meal went off with great success. Every 
body was hungry, and nearly every body was 
good-tempered ; there was abundance of cham- 
pagne, and the officers and the young ladies 
had a great deal of laughter ; and then they 
set out to explore the ruins, and there was that 
charming story of the murdered lady, and the 
spot where she appeared was pointed out by the 
old housekeeper, who told the legend in a de- 
liciously-funny manner ; and Tom Charteris hid 
himself behind a buttress, and at its conclusion 
bomiced out among them with a great roar, 
clanking a dog-chain which he had picked up. 
All the ladies screamed, and Ellen TyiTell was 
so frightened, that she nearly fainted, and had 
to be sujiported by Frank Somers, the officer who 
had ridden with her from Redmoor ; and even 
when she recovered she was so weak as to be 
compelled to walk very slowly, so that she and 
her companion were some distance behind the 
rest of the party. 

With this exception they all kept together; 
and Georgie had the satisfaction of engaging 



EGRE3I0yT PRIORY. 47 

her husband's arm during the greater portion 
of their stay. 'When the time came for their 
return, the only change made was, that Mrs. 
Masters had manoeuvred so successfully as to 
induce Lady Mitford to change places with her, 
. Georgie retm'ning in the break, and Lam'ence 
driving the widow in the phaeton. But this time 
the equestrians all started together. Sir Charles 
did not tear away on Tambour ^lajor ; for 
though still annoyed with Mrs. Hammond, he 
had by this time got his temper under control. 
It was a trying time for Tambour Major, who 
hated being held back, and pushed and jumped 
so as to be very disagreeable company at close 
quarters. He was very disagreeable indeed to 
Major Winton, who had eaten a large lunch, and 
wanted to digest it quietly; and equally dis- 
agreeable to Frank Somers and Ellen Tyrrell, 
who were engaged in a conversation which 
compelled them to keep their horses at a walk- 
ing-pace. Tlie only person who was really 
pleased was Mrs. Hammond, wlio in Tambour 
Major's struggles and plunges saw her wav to 



48 KTINNING THE GAUNTLET. 

the end wliicli she had all along intended to 
accomj)hsh. 

" That's more show than bnsiness, I'm think- 
ing, Sir Charles," said she, pointing with her 
whip to the horse as he gave a tremendous 
plunge. 

''. How do you mean 'show,' Mrs. Hammond? 
I only know it's all I can do to hold him 
steady." 

" Let him have his head, then ; he looks as 
if he would rush his fences, and had not the 
least notion of steady jumping." 

" You should have seen him this morning ; 
he." 

" You took good care I should not, by run- 
ning away from us." 

'^ He'd do just the same going home. I 
can take you the way I came, over some of the 
prettiest jumps you have ever seen," said Mit- 
ford, getting nettled about his horse. " Come, 
who'll foUow?" 

" I, for one," said Mrs. Hammond ; but no 
one else spoke. 



EGKEMONT PRIORY. 49 

" Tliey only Avant a lead ; . come, let us 
show them the way;" and as he spoke, Sir 
Charles tm-ned his horse out of the high-road 
up a short sloping embankment on to a broad 
stretch of moorland, and with ]\Irs. Hammond 
close by his side, was away at full gallop. The 
rest of the riding-party looked after them, but 
did not attempt to follow. Major Winton, finding 
himself decidedly de trop^ lit a cigar, and jogged 
lazily along by himself, while the others con- 
tinued their conversation. 

Away go the big black horse and the dark iron- 
gray, side by side, flying over the pm'ple moor- 
land. Lady Jane holding her o\^ti well with her 
companion, let him tear and struggle as he may to 
shake her off. Now far away to the right looms 
dark the first obstacle, which Sir Charles points 
out with his whip, and at sight of which ]\Irs. 
Hammond rings out a merry little laugh. As 
they approach, it develops itself as a double line 
of posts and rails, good stiff oak timber, which 
must either be cleared or dechned, through which 
there is no scrambling. Tambour Major sees it 

VOL. II. E 



50 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

already and rushes at it with a great snort of 
triumph, clearing it at a bound. Xor is the gray- 
to be balked; scarcely has he alighted, foani- 
flecked and trembling, in the field beyond, than 
Lady Jane is by his side. 

" That's number one," said Sir Charles ; " the 
next we shall find just at the end of . " but Mrs. 
Hammond laid her whip upon his arm. She had 
previously looked round and marked that they 
were far out of the range of observation by their 
late companions. 

" Quite enough," she said ; "I am satisfied 
with Tambour Major's performances, and own I 
-did him grievous injustice. From the manner in 
which he went at that, I am certain he could do 
any thing. Besides," she added, bending forward 
and patting Lady Jane's neck with her pretty dog- 
skin gauntlet, '' I wanted to speak to you." 

". To me, Mrs. Hammond?" 

" Yes, to you . to you, alone. You are angry 
with me ?" 

^' I . angry? Ton my word I can assm-e 
you. I." 



EGREMONT PRIORY. 51 

"All, don't deny it." Her voice dropped 
into its most musical and softest key. " Do you 
think I am not quick to read any change in your 
manner ?" 

^^No, but really . I haven't the least right to . " 

" The least right ! I thought you had promised 
to be my friend, . my firm, steadfast, constant 
friend. Ah, if you knew how I have longed for 
such a friend, . one in whom I could confide, and 
who w^ould advise me !" 

She di^opped her head on her breast as she 
said this, and the red rays of the dying sun 
touched the tight braids of her chestnut hair with 
2:old. 

" Such a friend you will find in me," said 
Mitford ; " I meant it when I said it . I mean it 
now." 

" No," said Laura plaintively, " no ; you have 
other ties and other claims upon you, and it must 
not be. The world cannot understand such con- 
fidence as I would give and receive ; it is too 
pure and too earnest for worldly comprehension. 
Already . but I won't speak of that." 



UNIVERSITY OF 
ILLINOIS LIBRARY 



52 RUNNEsXJ THE GAUNTLET. 

" Finisli your sentence, please." 

"No, it was nothing, really nothing." 

" Tlien tell me, or I shall fancy it Avas some- 
thing. Tell me." 

" How you compel me to obey you ! I was 
going to say . it's excessively silly of me ; very 
probably it was only my own foolish notion, 
but I'm so nervous and anxious about any thing 
which concerns . my friends ; I thought that 
Lady Mitford seemed a little annoyed at your 
obvious intention of ridinp; witli me this mornincr." 

She stole a look at him under her hat to see 
how he received this shot. 

"Who? Georgie ! annoyed? Oh, you must 
have been mistaken. I should have noticed it in 
an instant if that had been the case." 

" You think so ! Well, then, very^ likely it 
was my mistake. And I was so frightened, so 
fearful of causing any misunderstanding between 
you, so terrified at the thought of getting you 
into trouble, that I at once called that odious Major 
Winton into my sen^ice, and have suffered him to 
bore me with his niaiseries throughout the day." 



EGREMONT PEIOPwY. 53 

'' Oh, that was tlie reason that you flirted 
with Winton, then ! I thought." 

^'Thought what? All, Ive caught you! you 
were angry, then?" 

" Well, perhaps, . -just a little." 

" I should have been deeply hurt if you had 
not been ; it would have showed that you had no 
real interest in me, and that would be dreadful. 
Just before I knew you, I held my life as utterly 
valueless, the daily repetition of a dull dreary task, 
. nothing to live for, nobody to care for. And this 
morning Avhen I thought that you were really 
angry with me, that feeling came back so hope- 
lessly . oh, so hopelessly ! I think I should die if I 
had no one to take interest in me now." 

She moved her hand towards the little pocket 
in her saddle-flap for her handkerchief, but he 
stopped it in its descent and held it in his own. 

"While I live," said he, ''you will never have 
cause to make that complaint." 

And their eyes met, . hers soft and dreamy, 
his fierce and eager. A delicious interchange of 
glances to the persons concerned, but perhaps not 



54 KUXNING THE GAUNTLET. 

SO j)leasant to a looker-on. Apparently very dis- 
pleasing to the only one then present . a tall slim 
woman, picking her way in a very cattish manner 
across the adjoining meadow ; who stopped on 
catching sight of the equestrians, frowned heavily 
as she watched them, and crouched under the 
shadow of the hedge until they had passed. 



CHAPTER III. 

CHECK. 

The day after the winter picnic Sir Charles Mit- 
ford sat in that httle snuggery next his dressing- 
room, which had been so deftly fitted up for him 
by Captain Bhgh, in the enjoyment of a quiet 
after-breakfast pipe. Breakfast was on the table 
at Redmoor from nine to twelve. Each guest 
chose his own time for putting in an appear- 
ance ; rang for his or her special teapot, special 
relay of devilled kidney, ham, kipper, eggs, or 
bloater ; found liis or her letters placed in close 
proximity to his or her plate ; breakfasted, and 
then went away to do exactly as he or she liked 
until Imicheon, which was the real gathering-hour 
of the day. On the morning in question every 
body had been late, except Major AVinton, who, 
deeply disgusted with the proceedings of the 



56 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

23revioiis day, had routed up one of tlie uiider- 
keepers at daybreak, and trudged away to his usual 
shooting-ground. Sir Charles had turned out at 
ten, but had found no one in the breakfast-room 
save Captain Bligh, deep in the perusal of the 
newly-arrived copy of BeWs Life. So Sir Charles 
read his letters, which were of a prosaic business- 
like character, and ate his breakfast, which he 
rather enjoyed, and then went up to his room, 
taking the Times A^'ith him. Not, however, for 
the purpose of reading it . Charley seldom re- 
sorted to that means of passing time ; he never 
could understand what fellows saw to read in 
the papers ; for beyond the police - intelligence 
and the sporting - news and the advertisements 
of horses to be sold, all that enormous sheet 
of news, gathered with such care and expense, 
was utterly blank to liim. To-day he did not 
even want to read his usual portion of the paper ; 
he took it up with him half-unconsciously ; he 
wanted to smoke and to think . to smoke a little 
and to think a great deal. 

So he sat before the cheerful fire in the cosey 



CHECK. 57 

little room, the fireliijlit o-lancino; on the red- 
flock paper, and illumining the " Racing Cracks" 
and the " Coaching Recollections ;" pictures which 
the Messrs. Fores furnished for the delectation 
of the sporting-men of those days, and -which 
are never seen in these. They were bet- 
ter and healthier in tone than the studies of 
French females now so prevalent, and infinitely 
more manly and national. Tlie smoke from his 
pipe curled round his head, and as he lay back 
in his chair and watched it floatincr in its blue 
vapour, his thoughts filled him with inexpres- 
sible pleasm-e. He was thinking over what had 
happened the day before, and to him the picnic 
was as nothing. He only remembered the ride 
home. Yes ; his thoughts were very, very 
pleasant ; his vanity had been flattered, his fur 
had been stroked the right way. This was his 
first experience of flirtation since his marriage ; 
and he stood higher than usual in his own opi- 
nion when he found that he had attracted the 
notice of . to say the least of it . a very pretty 
woman. Very pretty ; no doubt about that ! By 



58 KUXXIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

Jove ! she looked perfection in that tight-fitting 
robe. What a splendid figure she had, . so round 
and plump, and yet so graceful ! and her general 
turn-out was so good . such natty gloves and jolly 
little white collars and cuffs, and such a neat 
riding -whip ! And that lovely chestnut hair, 
gathered into that gleaming coil of braids mider 
her chimney-pot hat I How beautifully she rode 
too ! went at those posts and rails as calmly as 
though she had been cantering in the Row. He 
watched her as the mare rose at them ; and, 
but for a little tightening of the mouth, not a 
feature of her face was discomposed, while most 
women would have turned blue tlu'ough sheer 
fright, even if they would have had pluck to face 
such a jump at all, which he doubted. 

It was uncommonly pleasant to think that 
such a woman was interested in him ; would look 
forward to his presence, would regret his ab- 
sence, and would associate him with her thoughts 
and actions. AYhat an earnest, impulsive, sensi- 
tive creatm-e she was ! She had seen in an in- 
stant what had annoyed him yesterday ! Not like 



CHECK. 



59 



Georgie . lie felt a slight twinge of conscience as 
he thought of her . not like Georgie, who had 
supposed he was vexed at something she had said, 
poor child ! Xo ; that other woman was really 
w^onderful . so appreciative and intelligent. How 
cleverly she had befooled that hard-headed old 
Winton for the sake of keeping things square ! 
Winton was like a child in her hands ; and 
though he could not bear ladies' society, and was 
supposed to be never happy exce^jt when shooting 
or smoking, had cantered by her side and tried 
to make civil little speeches, and bowed and 
smiled, like a fellow just fresh from Eton. And 
how^ cleverly she had managed that business about 
their getting away when she wanted to speak to 
him ! Poor little thing, how frightened she was 
too at the idea of his being angry, as though one 
could be angry with a creature like that! And 
how pretty she looked when her eyes filled with 
tears and her voice trembled ! Gad I she must feel 
something stronger than interest in him for her to 
show all tliat. Yes, by Jove ! . there was no use 
in denying it to himself any lunger, . this little 



60 EmOsIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

woman was tliorouglily fascinated. He recalled 
the events of tliat homeward ride . the talk, the 
looks, the long, long hand-clasj:), the passionate 
manner in which, just before tliej reached the 
house, she had implored him to remember that 
she counted on him, and on him alone, for ad- 
vice and aid in the troubles of her life. By 
the way, what were the troubles of her life ? 
She had dwelt very much upon them generally, 
but had never thought it necessary to go into 
detail. She spoke frequently of being tied to 
an invalid husband, of having been intend- 
ed originally for something better than a sick 
man's nui'se ; but that could not prey upon her 
mind very much, as she was scarcely ever with 
her husband, or if it did, it was not a case in 
which any advice or any aid of his would be of 
much use to her. No ; the advice and aid, and 
the intimate friendship, were devices by which she 
was endeavom'ing to blind herself and him to the 
real state of the case, to the fact that she was 
deeply, madly in love with him, and that he . 
well, he . What was that ? a rustle of a di'ess 



CHECK. 61 

in the passage outside, a low tap at the door. 
Can it be she ? 

The door opened, and a woman entered . not 
Mrs. Hammond, but Miss Gillespie. Sir Charles 
Mitford's heart had beat high with expectation; 
its palpitation continued when he recognised his 
visitor, though from a different cause. He 
had risen, and remained standing before the fire ; 
but Miss Gillespie made herself comfortable in 
a velvet causeiise on the other side of the snug 
fireplace, and pointing to his chair, said : 

'' You had better sit down again. I shall be 
some time here." 

As though involuntarily, Mitford re -sea ted him- 
self He had scarcely done so when she said : 

" You did not expect me ? You don't seem 
glad to see me?" 

''. Are you surprised at that ?" he sneered. " I 
should be glad never to set eyes on you again." 

" Exactly; as we used to say in the old days, 
^them's my sentiments.' I reciprocate your cor- 
dial feelings entirely. And I can't conceive what 
adverse fate drove vou to come with a pack of 



62 EUKN'ING THE GAUNTLET. 

swaggering, s2:)orting, \Tilgar people, into a part of 
the country Avliere I happened to be quietly and 
comfortably settled ; for, as I pointed out to you 
at our last interview, I was the original settler, 
and it is you who have intruded yourself into my 
territory." 

'^ You did not come here to repeat that, I 
suppose?" 

^^ Of course not; and that's exactly a point I 
want to impress uj)on you . that I never repeat. 
I hint, I suggest, I command, or I warn . once ; 
after that I act." 

" You act now, you're always acting, you per- 
petually fancy yourself on the boards. But it does 
not amuse me, nor suit me either, and I won't 
have it. What did you come here for?" 

^' Not to amuse you, Sir Charles Mitford, you 
may be certain, nor to be amused myself; for a 
heavier specimen of our landed gentry than }'om'- 
S3lf is not, I shoidd hope for the credit of the 
comitry, to be found. You were never much fun ; 
and it was only your good looks, and a certain soft 
manner that you had, that made you gQi on at all 



CHECK. 63 

in our camaraderie. Xo ; I came here on busi- 
ness." 

'^ On business ! Ah, it's not very difficult to 
imagine wliat kind of business. You want money 
of course, like the rest of them." 

" I want money, and come to you for it ! !N^o, 
Charles Mitford; you ought to know me better 
than that. You ought to know that if I were 
starving, I would steal a loaf from a child, or 
rob a church, rather than take, much more ask 
for, a single penny fi'om you. Like the rest or 
tliem, did you say ? So they have found you out 
and begun to bleed you ! . the pitiful curs !" 

" Well, what do you want, then? My time's 
precious." 

'^It is indeed, my friend; if you did but 
know all, you'd find it very precious indeed. 
But never mind that; now for my business. I 
want you to do something," 

" And that is." 

^^ To give up making love to Mrs. Hammond. 
Now, be quiet ; don't put yourself in a rage, and 
don't try those uplifted eyebrows, and that general 



64 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

expression of injured astonishment, on me, be- 
cause it won't do. I was not born last week, 
and my capacity for gauging such matters is by 
no means small. Besides, I happened yesterday to 
be taking my walks abroad in a meadow not far 
from the western lodge of Redmoor Park, the seat 
of Sir Charles Mitford, Bart., and I happened 
to witness an interview of a very tender and 
touching kind, which took place between a lady 
and a gentleman, both on horseback. I imagined 
something of the kind was going on. I saw 
something when you were leaving the house that 
night at Torquay which would have sm'prised 
any one who had not learned as much of Mrs. 
Hammond as I had during the time I had been 
with her. But since Ave have been here my sus- 
picions have been confirmed, and yesterday's pro- 
ceedings left no doubt upon my mind. So I 
determined to speak to you at once, and to tell 
you that tliis must not, and shall not be !" 
Mitford's face grew very dark as he said : 
"And suppose I were to ask you how the 
flirtation which you allege exists between me 



CHECK. 65 

and . and the lady you liave named, . T^diicli I 
utterly and entirely deny, . suppose I were to ask 
how this flirtation affects you, and, in short, what 
the devil business it is of youi's?" 

^'How it affects me? Why. no, but that's 
too preposterous. Isot even you, with all your 
vanity, could possibly imagine that I have in 
my own mind consented to forget the past, that 
I have buried the hatchet, that I have returned to 
my premier amour, and am consequently jealous 
of your attentions to Mrs. Hammond." 

'^ I don't suppose that. But I can't see what 
other motive you can possibly have." 

'' You can't, and you never shall. I don't 
choose to tell you; perhaps I have taken com- 
passion on yom' wife, who is very pretty . of 
her style . and seems very good and all that, 
and very fond of you, poor silly thing ! and I 
don't choose her to be tormented by you. Perhaps 
I want that poor wretched invalid to die in peace, 
and not to have his life suddenly snuffed out by 
the scandal which is sure to arise if this goes 
on. Perhaps . but no matter ! I don't intend 

VOL. II. F 



6Q KXINNING THE GAUNTLET. 

to give my reasons, and I've told you what I 
want." 

" And suppose I tell you . as I do tell you . 
I won't do what you want, and I defy you! 
What then?" 

" Then I will compel you." 

" Will you? Do you think I don't know the 
screw which you would put on me ? You'd pro- 
claim all about my former life, my connection 
with that rascally crew, of whom you were 
one." 

" Who brought me into it?" 

" No matter; . of whom you were one! You'd 
rake up that story of the bill with my micle's 
name to it. Well, suppose you did. What then ? 
It would be news to nobody here . they all know 
of it." 

" No, they don't all know of it. Lord Dolla- 
more does, and so does that good-looking man 
with the beard. Colonel Alsager, and perhaps 
Captain Bligh. But I doubt if one of the others 
ever heard of it : these things blow over, and are 
so soon forgotten. And it would be very awk- 



CHECK. 67 

ward to have the story revived here. Why, the 
coimtj families who have calledj and are inclined 
to be civil . I heard you boasting of it the other 
day . would drop you like a red-hot coal. The 
officers quartered in the barracks would cut you 
dead ; the out-going regiment would teU the story 
to the in-coming regiment ; you would never get 
a soul over here to dinner or to stop with you, 
and you would be bored to death. That's not a 
pleasant look-out, is it ?" 

He sat doggedly silent until she spoke again. 

" But that is not nearly aU. I have it in my 
power to injure your position as well as your re- 
putation ; to compel you to change that pretty 
velvet lomiging-coat for a suit of hodden gray, 
that meerschaum-bowl for a lump of oakum, this 
very cheery room for . But there's no need 
to dilate on the difference : you'll do what I 
ask?" 

"And suppose I were to deny all your 
story." 

"Ah, now you're descending to mere childish- 
ness. How could you deny what all tlie men I 



6S RrXN^r^G THE GAU>s^TLET. 

have mentioned know tlioronglily well ? Tliey are 
content to forget all about it now, and to receive 
you as a reclaimed man ; but if they were asked 
as men of honour whether or not there had been 
such a scandal, of course they would tell the truth. 
Come, you'll do what I ask?" 

She had won the day; there was no doubt 
about that. Any bystander, had one been there, 
could have told it in a moment ; could have read 
it in his sullen dogged look of defeat, in her 
bright airy glance of triumph. 
" You'll do what I ask ?" 

" You have me in your hands^" he said in a 
low voice. 

" I knew you woidd see it in the right light," 
she said, rising. " You see, after ah, it's very little 
to give up ; the flirtation is only just commencing, 
so that even you, with your keen susceptibility, 
cannot be hard hit yet. And you have such a 
very nice wife, and it will be altogether so much 
better for you now you are ra7ige, as they say. 
You'n have to go to the village-church regularly 
when you're down here, and to become a magis- 



CHECK. 69 

trate, and to go through all sorts of other respecta- 
bilities with which this style of thing would not 
fit at all. ISTow, good-bye ;" and she turned to go, 

" Stay !" he called out ; " when may I expect 
a repetition of this threat for some new demand ?" 

'^ Tliat rests entirely with yourself. As I have 
said from the first, I did not seek you ; you in- 
truded yourself into my circle. I like my present 
mode of life . for the present . and don't want to 
change it. Keep clear of me, and we shall never 
clash. Again, good-bye." 

She made a pretty little bow and, undulating 
all over, left the room as quietly as she had en- 
tered it. 

When she had closed the door Mitford rose 
from his chair with a long sigh of relief, loosened 
his cravat, and shook his fist. 

"Yours to-day, my lady . yours to-day; but 
my chance will come, and when it does, look out 
for yourself." 



CHAPTER lY. 

COUNTERCHECK. 

Mr. Effingham began to think that the position 
of affairs was growing serious. A month had 
elapsed since his inter\aew with old Mr. Lyons at 
the Net of Lemons, and he had not gained one 
scrap of information as to the whereabouts of the 
holder of the forged bill, which was to be held in 
terrorem over Sir Charles Mitford for money - 
extracting purposes, and which was finally to be 
given up for an enormous romid sum. Not a 
single scraj); and worse than all, he had so de- 
voted himself to this one scent, that his other 
chances of money-getting were falling into disuse. 
Not that there was much to be done elsewhere ; it 
was the off-racing season, so that his trade of tip- 
ster and tout, with occasional sallies into the arena 



COU^'TEIICHECK. 71 

of welcliuig, could not have been turned to very 
profitable purpose. Tlie Bank authorities had 
lately been terribly wideawake; several packets 
of slippery greasy half-crowns, and many rolls 
of soft sleezy bank-notes, lay hid in their manu- 
facturer's and engraver's workshops, waiting a 
better time for their circulation. There had 
been some notable burglaries both m town and 
country. Gentlemen with blackened faces who 
wore smock-frocks over their ordinary clothes 
had done some very creditable work in out-of-the- 
way mansions and London houses, whose owners 
were entertaining company in the country, and 
the melting-pots of old Mr. Lyons and others 
of his fraternity were rarely off the fire. But this 
branch of trade was entirely out of Mr. Effing- 
ham's line. " He's a good un at passing a half- 
bull or at spinning a flash fiver. There's a 'air 
about him that goes down micommon. He's 
fust-rate for that, is D'Ossay Butler ; but as rank 
a little cur as ever waddled. When he thinks 
traps is on, he's off; and as to my cracksman's 
business, or any thing where pluck's wanted, 



72 RimNIN-G THE GAUNTLET. 

Lor' bless you, you miglit as well have a girl in 
higlistrikes as D'Ossay." Tliat was what his com- 
panions said of him, and it was pretty nearly 
true. Where a little swaggering bantam-cock 
demeanour was of use, D'Ossay succeeded; but 
where any thing like physical courage or 
physical force was required, he was no good 
at all. 

When the lion is on short commons, the jackal 
is generally in a very bad way. If Mr. D'Ossay 
Butler was hard up, the condition of tall-hatted 
Mr. Griffiths was necessarily frightful. That 
worthy member of society was financially at the 
lowest ebb, and had resorted to a trade which he 
reserved for the depths of despair, a mild card- 
sharping . a '^ three, two, and yun" game, in which 
it was an impossibility for the bystander to point 
out the exact position of the king . at low pubHc- 
houses. During all his wanderings, however, he 
kept his eyes open to the necessity of obeying 
his instructions fi^om D'Ossay Butler, to the 
necessity of discovering the whereabouts of Lizzy 
Ponsford, the holder of the bill. Tliere was no 



COUNTERCHECK. 73 

slum that lie visited ; no public-house, where he 
first propitiated the landlord by the purchase of 
half-a-pint of ale, and then proceeded to suggest 
to the notice of the two or three sawney-looking 
men at the bar a " curous little game he had 
there, at which 'atfuls of money had been von, 
and which was the favom'ite recreation of the 
horficers of the Queen's Life -Guards at the 
Windsor Barracks, where he'd 'ad the pleasure 
of introducin' it 'imself ;" no pedestrian ground, 
no penny-gaff, where he did not get into con- 
versation with somebody connected with the pre- 
mises, and try to worm out that all-important 
secret. But all was of no avail. Many of the 
persons he spoke to knew or had heard of Tony 
Butler, and paid many handsome compliments 
to the deceased . '' a vide-avake Yun and no 
mistake," " a feller as vould take your coat 
off your back on to his own," &c. ; but very 
few had kno^vn Lizzie Ponsford, and those had 
not seen or heard of her for a considerable 
time. 

So Mr. Griffiths began to keep clear of Mr. 



74 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Effingham. There was nothing to be got from 
his employer but abuse, and that was an article of 
which Mr. Griffiths perhaps had a surfeit, espe- 
ciallj after he had picked up a few stray eighteen- 
pences from the frequenters of the Pig and Whistle, 
at the noble game of the "three, two, and vun." 
But one night, finding himself in the neighbour- 
hood of the Strand, and having had rather a suc- 
cessful evening, . he had won fifteen shillings from 
a sailor, at a pubhc-house in Thames Street; a 
sailor who paid him rigidly, and then cursed him 
for an adjective swab and kicked him into the 
street, . Mr. Griffiths thought he would take a 
little refi'eslmient at Johnson's. On presenting 
the crown of his hat within the swing-doors, that 
article was immediately recognised by Mr. Ef- 
fingham, seated moodily in the neai'est box, and 
its OTviier hailed in the nearest approach to a 
voice of thunder which that small gentleman could 
accomplish. 

" Come in ; I see you !" called out the little 
man. '^ I've been wondering what had become of 
you all this time. I thought you'd gone to stay 



COUNTERCPIECK. 75 

with some swell in the country for tlie hmitino;- 
season. I was goin' to ask if they'd got your 
address at the Morning-Post office, that I might 
write you a line and see if you could find it con- 
venient to lend me a trifle." 

" You must be in luck to have such spirits, 
D'Ossay, . ^you must/' said Mr. Griffiths senten- 
tiously. " Out of collar and out at elbows . that's 
what I've been out of. Look at my coat," point- 
ing to his arms; "shining like bees-wax. Look at 
my crabshells," pointing to his boots ; " as leaky as 
an old punt, reg'larly wore down to the sewin', 
and all through elberin' and cadgin' my way into 
every crib where I thought there was a chance of 
my comin' at what we wanted to know." 

" And what good have you done with all that 
tremenduous exertion ?" 

" No good, . not a scrap. I suppose you've 
been at the same game? How have you got 
on?" 

" About the same as you have. Just as 
'ealthy my look out is." 

"Well, I'll tell you what I intend to do. 



76 EUNiaNG THE GAUNTLET. 

Pve worked high and low, here and there, Hke a 
blessed black slave, to find out where this gal is, 
and I've had no luck no more than you have. 
And I intend to cut it. I'm sick of aU this 
dodgin' and divin', and askin' every body after 
somebody that nobody knows. I intend to cut it. 
Tliat's what I intend !" 

^^And let it go altogether, after all the 
U'ouble we've had ; after . Not such a flat, 
Griffiths ; don't you fear. Look here, my 
boy," said Mr. Butler, putting liis hand into his 
waistcoat -pocket, and producing therefrom two 
sovereigns; ^'do you see that couple of quid? 
That, with a shilling and a fourpenny-bit, is all that 
remains to your fr'iend D'Ossay of the current 
coin of this realm . the real business, I mean, and 
no fakement But these two simple skivs shall be 
turned into fifty or a hundred before the end of 
the week. And to show you that I'm not boast- 
ing, I'll stand a drink. Here, waiter! . brandy 
hot, two !" 

Mr. Griffiths gazed in double admiration at his 
friend's generosity and pluck ; but low as he was. 



COUNTERCHECK. 77 

he really admired the latter, from which he might 
possibly derive ultimate benefit, more than the 
former, from which he was about to receive im- 
mediate advantage. After the first sip of his grog 
he said . 

"And how's it coming off?" 
" I don't mind telling you," said D'Ossay. 
" There's nothing to hide . why should there 
be ? I'm going to try it on again with our friend 
the Bart." 

" Without the biU ?" 

" Of course, without the bill, considering that 
neitlier you nor I have been able to get hold of it. 
But didn't I raise a fiflier out of him without the 
bill before, and why shouldn't I do that, or double 
that, now?" 

"Ah, why indeed?" said Mr. Griffiths, who 
always coincided when he did not know what 
else to do, and there was nothing to lose by so 
doing. 

" You sec, I thought he might down upon me 
with the extortion dodge, and liand me over to a 
bobby. But there's no bobbies where he is now ; 



78 EUNKING THE GAUNTLET. 

he couldn't ring the bell and send out that sleek- 
looking vally, and have me in Yine Street in a 
brace of shakes. He's down in the country ever 
so far away. I called at Eaton Place to-day, and 
they gave me liis address." 

'' And how do vou mean to oret at him ? Not 
by writin' ? Don't trust your fist on paper." 

" Teach yom- grandmother, Griffiths ! How 
do I mean to get at him ? Why, by paymg one of 
those yellow-boys to a booking-clerk at 6.30 to- 
morrow morning, and going down by the Great- 
Western parliamentary to Torquay, which is close 
by the swell's place." 

"And then?" 

" Tlien I shall put up at some quiet crib, and 
go over the next morning and take him on the 
bounce . -just as I did before." 

"And suppose he shows fight and won't 
part ?" 

" Tlien I must send up a line to you, and you 
must get up a friendly lead, or something of that 
kind, and work me back to town." 

"And you'U chance aU that?" 



COUNTERCHECK. 79 

" I'd chance a mile more than that for such 
stakes, where there's no knockin' about or head- 
pimchin' business, Griffiths. I've not got what 
they call animal courage, which means I don't 
like being hurt. Some people do, I suppose, 
and they have animal courage. Now, let's settle 
where I'm to write to you, and all the rest of the 
business." 

Mr. Effingham spoke thus cheerily, and 
seemed thoroughly determined on his midertaking 
and confident of his success, as he sat, late at 
night, in a warm brilliantly - lit tavern - parlour, 
with the odoui's of tobacco and hot spirituous 
drinks fragrant to him floating pleasantly about. 
He took quite another view of the subject when 
he turned out between five and six the next 
morning into a bald blank street, swept by tor- 
rents of rain, in which no one visible but the 
policeman and the few vagrants huddling round 
the early-breakfast stall at the comer. Mr. Effing- 
ham wrapped himself up as best he might in liis 
fifteen-shilling pea-jacket, and under cover of a 



80 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

big gingham umbrella, borrowed from his land- 
ladjj made the best fight he could against the 
wind and the I'ain, which, however, had so far 
the best of it that he was tolerably damp by the 
time he reached the Paddington station. 

He took his ticket, and seated himself on the 
shelf in one of those wooden boxes which benevo- 
lent railway directors set aside for the conveyance 
of parhamentarians. His companions were two 
navvies, who had not slept off the effects of last 
night's drunkenness, and whose language made 
Mr. Effingham . albeit not miused to listening to 
" tall talk" . slu'ink with disgust ; an old woman 
with steaming black garments, and an umbrella 
which would not stand up in any corner and 
would not lie under the seat, and got itself 
called most opprobrious names for its persistence 
in leaning against the nearest nav^'y ; and a young 
woman with a swollen face tied up in a check 
cotton pocket-handl^erchief Mr. Effingham made 
an effort to let the very small ^vindow on his side 
down, but the young woman with the toothache 
had it up in an instant ; while the aperture on the 



COUNTERCHECK. 81 

other side was constantly stuffed with the body 
of one or other of the drunken na^wies, who 
fought for the privilege of leaning half out of 
the carriage, and running the chance of being 
knocked to pieces against arches and tunnel- 
walls. So the navvies fought and swore, and 
the old woman sniffed and took little snatches 
of sleep, waking with a prolonged snort and start ; 
and the young woman moaned and rubbed her 
face, until Mr. Effingham was nearly mad. Cir- 
cumstances were almost too much for him ; he 
grew first desponding, and then desperate. He 
wished he had never started on his journey; he 
would get out at the next station at which the train 
stopped (and as the parliamentary duly stopped 
at every station, he would not have had to wait 
long) ; he would go back to London. Ko, he 
would not do that; he had boasted about his in- 
tention to Griffiths, and would lose all authority 
over that satellite if he did not show at least the 
semblance of a fulfilment of his purpo.se. He 
would get out at the next station, and wait at a 

public-house in the village until the next day, and 
VOL. II. G 



82 EUNTN'l^s'G THE GAUNTLET. 

then go back and tell Griffiths he had seen Sir 
Charles Mitford, and had found it impossible to 
get any money out of him. And then, just as 
the whistle shrieked out and the engine reduced 
its particularly slow pace to a slower still, pre- 
paratory to pulling up, Mr. Effingham's hands 
strayed into his waistcoat-pocket, where he fomid 
only a half-sovereign and a few shillings remain- 
ing . the extent of his earthly possessions. Tliat 
decided him ; he would go on, come what might ! 
Such a state of imiDecuniosity nerved him to any 
thing ; and . the absence of policemen in rm'al 
districts still pleasantly remembered . he deter- 
mined upon pursumg his original idea and of 
continuing his journey. 

Tlie next day Sir Charles Mitford, who had 
been compelled to devote the morning to diy de- 
tails of business connected with his estate . details 
to which he listened conscientiously, over which 
he shook his head visibly, and which he did 
not in the least understand . had got rid 
of the man of business from the library about 
noon, and was just thinking he would go and 



COUXTERCHECK. 83 

see what Mrs. Hammond was doing, wlien 
Banks entered, and closing the door after him 
in a secret and mysterious manner, announced 
^^ That party, sir." 

"^Vhat^ party,' Banks?" 

'^ Tlie party that called in Heaton Place, Sir 
Charles, and ast to see you, and you wouldn't see 
at first, but did afterwards. Sir Charles." 

" I don't know yet whom you mean. 
Banks." 

" Tlie naval party. Sir Charles ; though look- 
in' more like after the coats and humbrellas in the 
'all. Tlie naval party as serv^ed with you on board 
some ship, Sir Charles." 

" Oh," said Mitford hurriedly, " I recollect 
now ; one of . one of my sailors from my old 
yacht . yes, yes, of course. You can show him 
into my own room. Banks. I'll go up there at 
once." 

'' ' Sailor,' " said Mr. Banks to himself as he 
walked do^vn the passage, " ' from my hold yacht,* 
did he say ? Why, if what they says at the Club is 
right, the lionly naval concern which he knew 



84 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

of before comin' in for the title was tlie Fleet 
Pris'n ! Tliis is a queer start about this feller, 
this is. I wonder why he wants to see Mitford, 
and why Mitford can't refuse hisself to him ? . This 
way J young man." And he beckoned haughtily to 
Mr. Effingham, and preceded him to his master's 
room. Sir Charles had already arrived there, and 
was seated in his large arm-chair when the visitor 
was sho-\vn in. 

Ah, what a different ^-isitor from the Mr. 
Effingham who called in Eaton Place ! Then full 
of -vTilgar confidence and brazen audacity ; now 
flinching, slouching, cowardly. His dress bedrag- 
gled from the previous day's wretched joui'ney, 
his manner downcast from the preconceived 
notion of failure in his mission, and the impossi- 
bility of enforcing his previous demands. A very 
wretched specimen of humanity was Mr. Effingham 
as he stood before Sir Charles Mitford, shifting 
his limp hat from hand to hand, and waiting to 
be asked to sit down. 

When Banks had retired and closed the door, 
Sir Charles looked up quietly and steadily at his 



COIIN'TERCHECK. 85 

visitor, and said, ^' Well, Mr. . I forget your 
name . you've broken your promise, as I ex- 
pected, and come to try and extort money from 
me again I" 

"Extort, Sir Charles! that's not the word, 
sir; I." 

" That is the word, sir ! Sheer barefaced rob- 
bery and extortion . that's what has brought you 
down here ; deny it if you can ! Have you come 
to ask me for money, or have you not?" 

" Well, Sir Charles, I. that is." 

" No shuffling, sir I no prevarication ! Have 
you or not?" 

" Well, suppose I have ?" 

" Suppose you have ! And suppose that I, as a 
justice of the peace and magistrate for the county, 
make out a warrant for your committal to prison 
as a rogue and a vagabond ? We're a long way 
from London, and justice's law is to be had down 
in these parts. Besides, how could you aj^pcal? 
to whom could you refer ? I've made a point of 
having a few inquiries made about you since you 
last did me the honour of a call, and I find tliat 



SQ RUNNIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

if not a regular gaol-birdj you could at all events 
be recognised by the police as a swindler and an 
utterer of base coin. T^^hat do you think of that, 
Mr.. Butler?" 

What did he think of it ? The realisation of his 
worst fearSj the overtlu'ow of his strongest hopes ! 
He ought to have relied on the presentiment which 
had told him that the man would take this course, 
though not so promptly or so strongly. He 
thought he would try one more bit of bomice, 
and he shook himself together and put as much 
impudence as he could command into his look as 
he saidj 

'' How do you Imow I've not got that forged 
bill in my pocket?" 

'' By yom' face, sir ! I can see that as 
plainly as if it were written there in big black 
letters ! Ah, I knew I was right ! Now, what 
have you got to say to tliis, Mr. . Butler?" 

'Mr. Effingham fairly collapsed. '' Nothing, 
Sir Cliarles," he stammered. " I've nothing to 
say . only have mercy, Sir Charles ! I have not 
brought the bill with me, but I know where it 



COUNTERCHECK. 87 

is, and could lay my hand on it at any time, 
Sir Charles. And as to what you said about 
committing me as a rogue and a vagabond, oh. 
Lord ! don't do it. Sir Charles ! pray don't ! I'm 
a poor miserable devil without a rap ; but if 
you'll only let me go, I'll find my way back 
to to^\m, and never intrude on you again. Sir 
Charles; I." 

All this time Mr. Effingham had been backing, 
and with his hand behind him feeling for the 
handle of the door. Having secured it, he was 
about to vanish, when Sir Charles called out to 
him " Stop !" and he stopped at once. 

" You say you're hard-up, Mr. Butler?" 
" I'm positively stumped. Sir Charles." 
" Then you'd be glad to earn a little money ?" 
^' If I could do so . " Mr. Effingham was 
about to say " honestly," but he thought this 
would be a little too glaring, so he finished his 
sentence by substituting, " without incurring any 
danger, I should be delighted." 

" There would not be the slightest dan- 
ger-" 



88 KU>s^NING THE GAUNTLET. 

^' Bj danger I mean, punching of heads and 
that kind of thmg." 

'' Precisely ; there would be nothing of that. 
The only person with whom you would be brought 
into contact would be a woman." 

Mr. Effingham's barometrical mercury rose as 
quickly as it fell. *'A woman!" he said, as he 
settled his limp collar and gave a pull at his dirty 
wrist-bands, . '^ a woman, Sir Charles ! Oh, then, 
I've no fear." 

" Wait and hear what you're required to do, 
sir, before you give an opinion. The person to 
whom I allude is at the present moment in this 
house. She is therefore, although not invited by 
me, to a certain extent my guest, and it would be 
impossible for me to appear in the matter. You 
comprehend me ?" 

"Perfectly." 

"Especially as she is to be got rid of at once 
and for ever. When I say ' got rid of,' I don't mean 
it in the slang phrase of the penny romances . 
I don't mean that the woman is to be killed ; but 
simply that she is to be told that she must remain 



COUNTERCHECK. 89 

here no longer, and the danger of doing so must be 
strongly pointed out to her.'* 

'^ Exactly, je twig ! Xow will you please to 
tell me the name of this good lady, and what reason 
I'm to give for insisting on her leavingsuch a very 
swell and pleasant crib as this appears to be ?" 

" She is called here Miss Gillespie," said Sir 
Charles ; " but you will have heard of her imder a 
very different name . Lizzie Pousford." 

" What !" exclaimed Mr. Effingham, leaping 
from his chair; " Lizzie Ponsford here ! She whom 
Pvc been." 

"Well, sir?" asked Sir Charles in astonish- 
ment. 

''Whom I've been hearing so much about!" 
said Mr. Effingham, recovering himself. " Lizzie 
Ponsford here !" he continued, going off again. 
" WeU, that is a rum start !" 

" Be good enough to attend to me, sir. She 
is here, and she is in my way. Her presence 
worries me, bringing back all sorts of hideous 
associations that I thought I had got rid of, and 
never want to have revived. You must sec her. 



90 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

talk to lier, and get her to go at once ; once gone, 
I could so arrange matters as to leave little cliance 
of her returning." 

"I see!" said Mr. Effingham. "Now the 
question is, how to work her out of tliis. What 
would he the best way to frighten her and get her 
under your thumb ?" 

" What is your notion on that point?" 

" I scarcely know yet ! It will want a little 
thinking over, but I've no doubt I shall be able to 
hit upon something. Is she pretty comfortable 
where she is . likely not to give it up without a 
struggle ?" 

" You may take yom- oath she will not move 
unless compelled . it is for you to find the some- 
thing that wiU compel her." 

" Exactly. Well, I don't tliink that there will 
be much difficulty about that . at least," said he, 
correcting himself, for he feared that comparative 
facility might lessen the reward . " at least, not 
much difficulty for a man whose head's screwed 
on the right way. Now about the payment?" 

Sir Charles opened a drawer in his desk, and 



COUNTERCHECK. 91 

from a little rouleau of gold counted out ten sove- 
reigns. The cMnk of the money sounded deli- 
ciouslj in Mr. Effingham's hungry ears. 

" I will give you these ten sovereigns now/' 
said Sir Charles ; " and if you succeed in carry- 
ing out all I have told you, I will give you fifty 
more." 

" Will you ? Well, I always say what I think, 
and I say that's liberal. Now look here ! Very 
likely I sha'n't see you again ; perhaps I shall have 
to step it with her, in order to be sm-e she's safe 
off and not dodging or likely to walk back again. 
So when you find she's really gone, just you send 
a cheque for the fift}^, made payable to bearer, 
mind, and not crossed, to this address;" and 
bending down over the table he took a pen and 
a scrap of paper and wrote : Mr. Effingham, Mr. 
Johnson's, The Brown Bear, Shakespeare Street, 
Strand, London. " Will you do that?" 

'' I will." 

" Having said so as an honourable gent, I know 
you'll keep your word. Now, how am I to see 
her?" 



92 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

'^ She T^'alks out eveiy day at tliree o'clock 
with her pupil . " 

" Her pupil I Lizzie Ponsford's pupil ! My 
eye!" 

" With her pupil," repeated Sir Charles sternly, 
^^ in the chestnut-avenue leading from the lodp-e- 
gate. A tall woman with very large eyes, and 
crisp wa\y hair over her forehead ; a peculiar- 
looking woman . you couldn't mistake her." 

" All right ! As I go out of the lodge -gate 
now, I'll just say a few words to the old lady that 
keeps it, that she may know me again . don't you 
see ? . and not be siu*prised at my coming in and 
out. And now, as I shall j^robably have to hang 
about here for two or three days, where can I put 
up?" 

'' You mustn't remain here in the house . " 

" Lor' bless you, that would never do ! isn't 
there a pubhc near?" 

" There is the Mitford Arms, within a quarter 
of a mile of the lodge." 

"I saw it; the carrier's-cart which brought 
me over fi'om Torquay stopped there. Tliat'll do. 



COUNTERCHECK. 93 

I'll be a littery gent gettin' up information about 
the old county families, or an artist sketehin' . 
that'll do. ^N'oAv give me a week clear : if nothing's 
done by then, you'll have spent ten pound very 
badly, and I shall have lost my time. But if within 
that time . and it might be to-morrow or any day 
. you find she's clean gone, you've got the ad- 
dress, and you'll send the cheque to it?" 
" You may rely on me." 

^^ I do thoroughly. Xow how am I to get out? 
It wouldn't do for you to be seen with me . my 
togs, though just the sort of thing for the littery 
gent, ain't very swell." 

'^ You can go down this staircase," said Sir 
Charles, leading him to a landing; ''it guides on 
to the garden, take the first to the right, and you'll 
come at last to the avenue." 

Mr. Effingham put his finger to the limp brim 
of his hat and departed. 

But when he arrived in the chestnut-avenue, 
and had looked carefully round, and found tliat lie 
was out of sight of any one in the house, and that 
there was no one near enough to observe his con- 



94 RUNXIKG THE GAOsTLET. 

duct, he rubbed his hands together, and ahnost 
cut a caper in the air with dehght. 

^^To think of it!" he said. "There never, 
never was such duck ! D'Ossay, my boy, you've 
got the trick of it somehow. What will Griffiths 
say now? To think that I've been hmiting for 
this woman all this time, and that she's now placed 
in my hands . and by this very swell too ! Two 
birds with one stone now. Oh, there's a much 
bigger game than the Bart.'s cheque for fifty ! But 
it'U take a deal of thinking over and planning ; and 
if there's any one to do that, it's you, D'Ossay, my 
boy, and no one else !" 



CHAPTER Y. 

m THE DRAWING-ROOM. 

What was Laurence Alsao-er cloino* at Eecl- 
moor ? He was beo-imiino; to ask himself that 
question very frequently. And tliat question led 
to another . why had he come do^^'n there at 
all ? He had " done" country-houses and their 
amusements and had tu'ed of them years before ; 
he had not the slightest liking for any of the 
guests ; he had a vague dislike of the host. 
Why, then, had he come ? He was a man who 
rarely tried to deceive himself; and when he put 
this question point-blank to himself the answer 
was, Why? Why, because you take a certain 
interest in Lady Mitford . no, I allow that per- 
fectly ; nothing dishonourable, nothing wliich at 
present could even be described as a love-passion ; 
but a certain interest. You think from all you 



96 EimiTING THE GAUNTLET. 

have seen that she is not merely very charming in 
her innocence and simplicity, but really good ; 
and you expect from certain signs which you de- 
tect, and with the nature of which you are fami- 
liar, that she will have to pass tlu'ough a very 
perilous ordeal. It is obvious to you that in 
society, as it is now constituted, a woman of Lady 
Mitford's personal attractions and position must 
incur a very great deal of temptation. Tliis, of 
course, would be to a great extent avoided if she 
were secure in the affections and certain of the 
attentions of her husband ; but in the present in- 
stance you are constrained to admit, contrary to 
the opinion which you once publicly expressed, 
that Sir Charles Mitford is a weak, silly, vain per- 
son, who has fallen a victim to the wiles of a 
thoroughly heartless coquette, and who appears 
to be going from bad to worse as rapidly as pos- 
sible. So that your certain interest has brought 
you down here to watch over the lady. Quixotic 
and ultra-romantic, is it not ? You do not mean 
it to be so, I know . I give you full credit for that ; 
but still that is the designation it would probably 



IX THE DKAWIXG-PvOO:M. 97 

receive from any of your friends. The trutli is, 
that this . I was almost going to call it parental, 
but we will say fraternal . this fraternal regard 
for a very handsome woman is a novelty to 
you; and hence your enjoyment of it. I said 
expressly a very handsome woman, because I 
don't believe that the fraternal sentiment could 
possibly blossom for an ugly one. Beware of it, 
my friend, if you please ! it's the trickiest, most 
treacherous elf, this fr'aternal friendship, that ex- 
ists; it goes on for a certain period perfectly 
steadily and properly, and then one morning you 
find it has deserted you, and left in its place a hot 
flaming riotous passion that scorches you into 
tinder, makes you miserable, takes away yoiu* 
appetite, and, in fact, possesses all the qualities 
which, at one time, you knew so well. 

Such was the residt of Laurence Alsager's 
self-examination, and he fully admitted its trutli. 
It was the interest which he took in Lady 
Mitford that had induced him to visit Red- 
moor; it Avas the same feeling which kept him 
lingering there. Then the interest must have 

VOL. u, TT 



98 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

increased ; for the necessity for liis self-imposed 
task of protection and supervision had certainly 
diminished. Tlie actual fact which had decided 
his coming was the announcement that Lord 
Dollamore was to be among the guests. He 
had always had his own opinion of Lord 
Dollamore's morality; and the way in wliich 
that nobleman had spoken of Lady Mitford in 
the smoking-room of the Maecenas had jarred 
horribly on Alsasier's nerves. Tliere was some- 
thing too in Laura Hammond's look and in the 
tone of her voice when she spoke of the proba- 
bihty of Dollamore's being left constantly with 
the ladies, at which Lam^ence had taken alarm. 
But Lord Dollamore seemed to be perfectly inno- 
cuous. Laurence had watched him narrowly 
from the first, and, as in the case of the di'ive 
to Egremont Priory, he seemed rather to avoid 
than to seek opportunities of being in Lady Mit- 
ford' s company en tete-a-tete^ and, judging from 
that and one or two other instances, was appa- 
rently desirous of keeping in the backgromid, 
and of pushing Laurence forward. Coidd he . ? 



IX THE DRAWD7G-E00M. 99 

No; lie was a man utterly without principle 
where women are concerned ; but he would never 
attempt such a game as that, more particularly if 
he, Laurence Alsager, were involved in it. Cer- 
tainly Sir Charles was going to the bad more 
rapidly than Alsager had anticipated ; but then it 
was to be said for him that he clearly had follen 
into able hands. There had been few such 
adepts in the art of flirtation in Europe as Laura 
Molyneux ; and she seemed to have become even 
.more fertile in resom'ces and skilful in their 
development since her marriage. Any tiling 
like the manner in which she had flirted with 
Mitford dm'ing the first few days of her visit to 
Redmoor, Laurence, in all his experience, had 
never seen; and he thought at the time of the 
Egremont-Priory expedition that things were 
coming rapidly to an end. Lady Mitford had 
evidently noticed something that day, some ten- 
dresse between her husband and Mrs. Ham- 
mond, which had annoyed her very much; so 
much that slie had almost called her friends' 
attention to her disgust. But the sweetness of 



100 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

her disposition had come to the rescue. Lau- 
rence knew, as well as if he had been able to read 
her thoughts, all that had passed in her mind 
during that diive in the pony-phaeton ; he saw 
how she had reasoned with herself, and how 
she had finally determined that she had been 
hasty, inconsiderate, and in the wrong. He had 
seen her, immediately on alighting, slip away to 
join her husband; and he could fiilly understand 
that she had made silent atonement for what 
she imac^ined to be an outburst of ojroundless 
jealousy. 

An extraordinary change had come over 
Mitford within the last few days. Before the 
j)icnic, and at the picnic, he had been enthralled, 
entete^ eagerly waiting for Mrs. Hammond's 
every look, every word, and scarcely able to be- 
have with decency to any body else. Since then 
he had acted quite diiferently. Had his con- 
science smitten him for neglecting his wife ? Xo ; 
Laurence did not believe in sudden conscience- 
smites with such men as Sir Charles Mitford; 
and he had further noticed that thouo-li there was 



IN THE DKAWING-KOOM. 101 

110 open flirtation, there was plenty of eye-tele- 
graphy of a very peculiar and significant kind. 
They had come to some understanding evidently, 
for Mrs. Hammond now seldom addressed her 
conversation to her host, but kept her hand in 
by practising on the susceptible heaii; of Major 
Winton, or by coquetting with some of the of- 
ficers who were invariably to be found dining at 
Eedmoor. She had tried to rechauffer a Httle of 
the old story with Lam^ence, but had encountered 
something so much more marked than mere 
disinclination, that she suspended operations at 
once. 

However, be this as it might, the necessity 
for Alsager's stay at Redmoor, even judged by 
his own peculiar notions, was at an end. Tlie 
DoUamore question never had been mooted; the 
Hammond difficulty seemed entirely in abeyance. 
What further need was there for him to keep 
watch and ward over the Redmoor household ? 
He could be back in town as soon as they could, 
go where he might; sometldng would occur during 
the season, he thought, and he might as well 



102 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

be there on guard ; but that was a matter of 
only a few lioiu's from wherever he might hap- 
pen to be. 

Whither should he go, then? Not back to 
London . that was impossible. Tlie week or two 
he had passed there had thoroughly sickened 
him of London for some time to come. Paris? 
No, he thought not ! Tlie hals (V opera would be 
on then, . Frisotte and Rigolette, Celestine and 
Mogador, Brididi and the Reine Pomare . oh, 
yes, he knew it all ; it was a very long time since 
those exercitations of the cancan, rebuked by the 
sergents-de-ville in a low grumble of " Pas si 
fort ! pas si fort ! p)oint du tcUgraphe /" had 
afforded liim. the slightest pleasure. Leicester- 
shire? No, though he had pm'chased Sir Laun- 
celot, and from merely that short experience of 
him at Ealing, felt sure that he would " show 
them the way" . no, not Leicestershire this year, 
he thought, nor any where else, unless he went 
(\.o^w\ to Knockholt to see his father. Yes, by 
Jove ! he ought to have done that long since, 
and now he would do it at once. 



IN THE DRAWING-ROOM. 103 

He settled this in his o^Yn mind as he was 
dressing for dinner about a week after the winter 
picnic. Settled it not without long deliberation 
and a little sleep, for he began to give the matter 
his careful consideration after returning from 
a long day's shooting ; and it was not until he 
had steamed and lathered himself in a warm 
bath, had pulled the little sofa in front of the 
fire, and was contemplating his evening clothes 
neatly arranged on an adjacent chair, that he 
began to consider the question. His delibe- 
ration involved the putting -up of his feet on 
the sofa, and that proceeding caused him at 
once to drop helplessly off to sleep, only to be 
roused by the loud clanging of the second dinner- 
bell. 

An addition accrued to tlie dinner-party 
that day, in the persons of Sir Thomas Ha}ter, 
a comitry neighbour, his wife and daughter. Sir 
Thomas was a hearty old Tory country squire, 
who dm'ing his one season in London had been 
captivated by and had married her ladyship ; at 
the time of her marriage a passt'e beauty, now 



104 EUXS'ING THE GAUNTLET. 

a tliin chip of an old. woman, still affecting girlish 
airs. Miss Hayter Avas a fine, fi:esh, dashing, 
exuberant girl, inclined to flirting, and fulfilling 
her inclination thoroughly. Tliey infiised a little 
new life into the party ; for though Sir Thomas 
did not talk a great deal, he listened to every 
thing that was said, and threw in an occasional 
^^ Ha ! dear me I" with o-reat yio-oui* and effect, 
while Lady Hayter chirped away to Sir Charles 
Mitford, asking him about all sorts of London 
people of whom he had never heard, and quite 
bewildering him with her yolubility. She suc- 
ceeded better with Mr. Hammond, whose health 
was fast improving in the soft Devon air, and. 
who, in spite of the strongly-expressed opinion of 
his wife, had come down to dinner that day. He 
was seated next to Lady Ha}i;er ; and shortly af- 
ter dinner commenced, he found out that he had 
known her before her marriage, when she was 
Miss Fitzgibbon ; " used to have the pleasm'e of 
meeting you at the Silvesters' in South Audley 
Street ;" and then they entered upon a very long 
conversation about the acquaintances of their youth, 



IX THE DRAWING-ROOM. 105 

while all the time each was stealing covert glances 
at the other, and wondering how it was possible . 
she, that that cadaverous, parchment-faced, bent in- 
valid could be the handsome boy who in those days 
had just come up from Haileybury, and was going 
to India with such good prospects ; he, that the old 
woman with the palpably-dyed pui'ple hair, the 
scraggy neck, and the resplendent teeth . the gold 
springs of which were so very visible . could have 
been Emily Fitzgibbon, about whose beauty every 
one was raving in '25. Miss Hayter too was very 
happy; she was immensely taken by Laurence 
Alsager, next to whom she was seated. She had 
heard of him often ; and two years before, when 
she was in London, he had been pointed out to 
her at the Opera ; and she . then a young lady 
of seventeen . had o-one home and written aljout 
him In her diary, and drawn portraits of him in 
her blottlng-book, and thought him the hand- 
somest creatm-e In the world. She told him this, 
not of com'se in so many words, but with that 
charming quiet way of paying a compliment which 
some well-bred women possess ; and she had also 



lOG RtrSNING THE GAUNTLET. 

heard of the catastrophe with the ponies at Ealing, 
and of his gallant conduct. 

" For it was very gallant, you know, Colonel 
Alsager ; any one could see that, even tln'ough 
that ridiculous newspaper report ; and it was a 
splendid jump too. I was talking about it the 
other day to my cousin Fred Rivers, who loiows 
you, I think ; and he said he'd seen the place, 

and Mr. I forget his name ; the head man 

up there . said it was as fine a thing as ever 
was done in Leicestersliire ; and Fred said he 
thought so too ; ^ bar none,' he said, in that 
sporting way, don't you know, which he has 
oftaHdng." 

" You make a great deal too much of it, 
Miss Hayter," said Laurence, smiling ; ^^ I've 
seen Fred Rivers take many such jumps himself, 
for a better horseman never crossed country." 

" Ah, yes, during a run, I daresay ; but this 
was in cold blood, wasn't it ? . not that I wonder 
at your doing any thing for Lady Mitford. 
Isn't she lovely ? I declare I never saw such a 
perfect face in my life." 



IN THE DRAWIXG-ROOM. 107 

Alsager was about to answer, when Major 
Maxse spoke fi'om the other side of the table, 
" Oh, by the way, Colonel Alsager, what Miss 
Hayter was saying reminds me that you ought not 
to have driven that day we went to Egremont ; 
you should have gone on horseback. There's a 
very neat comitry if you do but know it." 

*^ Did you drive over. Colonel Alsager?" 
asked Miss Hayter in astonishment. 

" Yes ; I drove Lady Mitford in her pony- 
phaeton." (" Oh !" in a subdued tone from Miss 
Hayter.) " Sir Charles was the only one who rode." 

^^And Mrs. Hammond, . I beg your pardon, 
and Mrs. Hammond !" said Major Winton, the 
first words he had spoken since he sat down to 
dinner. ^^ I too was on horseback, but I can 
scarcely be said to have ridden. But, coming 
back, they went away splendidly. I never saw 
any thing better than the manner in which the 
first fence was cleared by them both. I daresay 
it was as good all over the com'se; but they 
got away after the first, and we never saw any 
more of them." 



108 RUXNIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

And Major Winton sipped liis first glass of 
post-prandial claret with great gusto. He had 
paid off Mrs. Hammond for using him on the pic- 
nic-day, and tlu'owing him off when she no longer 
required him. It was to be presumed, however, 
that Mrs. Hammond had not heard this remark ; 
at least she gave no signs of having done so, 
being occupied in conversation with Captain 
Bligh. Sir Charles Mitford grew very red ; Miss 
Hayter looked round, enjoying the fun ; and an 
awkward pause ensued, broken by old Sir Tliomas 
Hayter. 

'^ Didn't I hear you say you were over at 
Egremont the other day, Mitford?" 

" Yes, Sir Thomas ; we went over there, and 
had a kind of winter picnic." 

" You didn't see any thing of Tom Boscastle, 
I suppose ?" 

^' Xo ; we only went to the ruins, and lunched 
in the keep. Besides, I don't know him." 

"Ah! you wouldn't have seen him if you 
had known him. He keeps quite to himself 
just now." 



IX THE DRAWIXG-ROOM. 109 

" What's the matter ? is he ill ?" 

" Xo, not ill in body, you know. What's that 
we used to learn in the Latin grammar . ^ magis 
quam coiyore^ cegrotat . his mind, you know." 

" Tliat's bad ; what has brought that about?'* 

" Well, you see, he's got a son, a wild ex- 
travagant fellow, who has run through I can't 
tell you how much money, which poor Tom 
could very ill afford, as we all know ; and the 
last thing the vagabond did was to get hold of 
his father's cheque-book, and forge his name to 
a terrible amount." 

Had Sir Tliomas been a gentleman of quick 
perception . a charge which had never been 
brought against him . he would have been 
very much astonished at the effect of his anec- 
dote. Sir Charles Mitford turned deadly white. 
Colonel Alsager frowned heavily, and glanced to- 
wards Lady Mitford, who, pale as her husband, 
looked as if she were about to faint ; Lord Dol- 
lamore glanced sharply at Sir Tliomas Hayter, 
to see whether he had spoken innocently or 
with malice prepense. Mrs. Hammond was the 



110 RUNNIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

only one who seemed to keep her wits thoroughly 
about her. She glanced at Lady Mitford, and 
then pushing her chair back sharply, as though 
obevino: a simial from her hostess, rose from the 
table, followed of course by all the other ladies. 

After their departm-e, and so soon as the 
door closed behind them, Lord Dollamore ad- 
dressed himself to Sir Tliomas, asking him if he 
had heard the report that the Whig Ministry 
intended to impose a new duty on cider . a 
subject which he knew would engross the old 
gentleman's attention, to the exclusion of Tom 
Boscastle and every one else. And, as Lord 
Dollamore said afterwards, it was an illimitable 
subject, for he himself invented the report as 
a herring across the scent; but under old Hay- 
ter's fostering care it grew into a perfect Frank- 
ensteinian monster. While they were talking. 
Sir Charles Mitford filled a bumper of claret, 
and after swallowing half of it, looked round 
the table to see the extent of the calamity. 
Tlien, for the first time, he acknowledged to 
himself how thorouglily right the girl Lizzie 



IN THE DRAWiyG-ROO:\I. Ill 

Ponsford had been in what she had said. Dol- 
lamore evidently knew the story, and Alsager 
. perhaps Hammond, who was leaning back in 
liis chair, enjoying his Madeira ; but he could 
tell in an instant, by the expression of their 
faces, that none of the others had heard it. 
Another link had been foro-cd this evenino^ in the 
chain of his attachment to that charmino; Mrs. 
Hammond ! how nobly she had l^eliaved ! Poor 
Georgie had lost her head of course, and had very 
nearly made a mess of it by fainting, or screaming, 
or something ; but that other woman did just 
exactly the right thing at the right time. And 
all for him I He was more infatuated with her 
than ever. He wondered whether he should ever 
have the chance of telling her so. He wondered 
how Butler was progressing in his mission. 

By the time the gentlemen arrived in tlie 
drawing-room all trace of the little awkwardness 
at the dessert-table had passed away. Indeed, 
Miss Hayter was the only one of all the ladies 
who had noticed Georgie's mieasiness, and she 



112 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

had not attributed it to its right cause. Now 
Lady Mitford was looking as serenely lovely as 
ever, listening to Mrs. Charteris warbling away at 
the piano ; and she looked at her husband with 
such loving solicitude as he entered the room, 
that he could not refrain fr'om going up to her, 
smihng kindly, and pressing her hand as he whis- 
pered, " All right ! quite blown over." 

Then Sir Charles went in search of Mrs. Ham- 
mond. She was sitting in a low chair near the 
fire, with a little table bearing a shaded lamp close 
by her hand, and was amusing herself by tm'iiing 
over an album of prints. She never gave herself 
the smallest trouble when left alone with women ; 
she did not care what they thought of her, and, 
save mider peculiar circumstances, she made no ef- 
fort to please them. She wished to stand well with 
Lady Mitford, but she considered she had done 
enough to that end for one day by executing 
the masterly retreat from the dinner-table. So she 
sat there idly mider the shade of the lamp, and Sir 
Charles Mitford thought he had never seen her 
to such advantage. Her rounded fio-ure showed 



IN THE DRAWIXG-ROOM. 113 

to perfection in her violet-velvet dress trimmed 
with soft white lace ; her head reclined lazily on 
the back of her chair, and her eyes rested with 
calm indifference on the pages of the album . in- 
difference which was succeeded by bright vivacity 
as she raised them and marked her host's approach. 

He dropped quietly into a chair close by hers 
and said, "You have increased my debt of grati- 
tude to you a thousand-fold." 

"Have I?" she replied; "it has been \ery 
easily increased. So easily that I don't know how 
it has been done." 

" Don't you ? Tlien your natm-al talent is 
wonderful. I shoidd think there were few better 
or more useful stratagems in warfare than the 
diversion of the enemy's attention from your weak 
point." 

" Oh," she said, " that is not worth remem- 
bering ; certainly not worth mentioning again. I 
am so glad," she added, dropping her voice, " to see 
you by my side again. I have gone through all 
kinds of self-examination, imagining I had in some 
way offended you ; going over in my own mind 

YOL. ir. I 



114 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

all diat I had said or done since that delicious ride 
home from Egremont, and I could not tax myself 
with having wittingly given you any cause for 
offence. But you seemed to avoid me, to shrink 
fi'om me, and I cannot tell you how I felt it." 

Voice very low here, looks downcast, and ge- 
neral depression. 

'^ Don't speak in that way," said Sir Charles 
in the same tone ; ^^ you don't understand my 
position. I could explain, and I will some time 
or other when I have the chance ; not now, be- 
cause . Yes, you are quite right, Mrs. Hammond, 
Sir Thomas is a thorough specimen of the good old 
English." 

" Very sorry to interrupt so pleasant a talk, 
specially when on so charming a subject as Sir 
Thomas Hayter," said Lord DoUamore, approach- 
ing ; ^'but I come as a deputation from the general 
company to beg that Mrs. Hammond will sing to 
us." 

'' Mrs. Hammond would be charmed," said 
that lady; "but to-night she is out of voice, and 
really cannot." 



IX THE DRAWIXG-ROOM. 115 

" Do, Mrs. Hammond ; as a matter of mere 
charity, do," said Lord Dollamore. " That delight- 
ftd person Mrs. Charteris, . most dehghtfid, and 
kind, and all that, . has been trilling away every 
evening mitil one is absolutely sick of her thin 
little voice. Do, for pity's sake, change the note, 
and let us have a little of your contralto. Do." 

" You're ver}' polite, Lord Dollamore; and ' as 
a matter of mere charity' I should be delighted 
to help you, but really T am out of voice and can- 
not. Stay; the old rule in convivial societies 
was, or I am mistaken, that one should sing or 
find a substitute. Now I think I can do the lat- 
ter. Miss Hammond's companion, governess, what 
you will, . Miss Gillespie, . sings charmingly. If 
Lady Mitford will permit me, I will send for her." 

Georgie, appealed to, was only too well pleased 
to secm^e such an aid to the evenino-'s entertain- 
ment ; so a message was sent to Miss Gillespie, and 
she was requested to '^ bring some songs ;" Miss 
Hayter filling up the interval by playing, suffi- 
ciently brilliantly, a pot-pourri of dance-music. 

Towards the end of this performance the door 



116 ruknesTt the gauntlet. 

opened and Miss Gillespie entered. All eyes Tvere 
instantly tui'ned towards her, and . in tlie case 
of all the men at least . the casual glance grew 
into a lengthened gaze. She was a very sti'iking- 
looking woman, with her sallow cheeks, her large 
eyes, her brown hair rolling in crisp waves on 
her forehead. She was dressed in a tight-fitting 
brown-silk dress with handsomely-worked collar 
and sleeves, and in her hand she' candied a roll 
of music, of which Lord Dollamore stepped for- 
ward to relieve her ; but she thanked him with 
a slight bow and sat down on the chair close to 
the door, still retaining her roll of music in her 
hand. 

When Miss Hayter had ceased playing. Lady 
Mitford crossed the room and shook hands with 
Miss Gillespie, offered her refreshment, thanked 
her very sweetly for the promptitude with which 
she had acceded to their request, and told her 
that ]\Ii's. Hammond had already raised their ex- 
pectation very high. Tlien Sir Charles Mitford 
came up somewhat stiffly, and offered his arm 
to Miss Gillespie and led her to the piano ; 



rs" THE deawing-roo:m. 117 

and there, just removing her gloves, and without 
the smallest hesitation or affectation, she sat down, 
and with scarcely any prelude plunged at once 
into that most dehghtful of melodies, ^' Che faro 
senza Emydice," from Gliick's Orfeo. Ah, what 
a voice ! clear, bell-like, thrilling, toucliing not 
merely the tympanum of the ear, but acting on 
the nerves and on the spinal vertebr*. What 
melody in it ! what wondi'ous power ! and as she 
poured out the refrain, " Emydice, Eurydice !" 
what deep passionate tenderness ! The company 
sat speU - bound ; Lord DoUamore, an accom- 
plished musician liimself, and one who had heard 
the best music every Avhere, sat nursing his knee 
and drinking-in every note. Laurence Alsager, 
rapt in admiration, had even been guilty of the 
discourtesy of turning his back on Miss Hayter, 
whose chatter began to annoy him, and was 
beating time with his head and hand. Tom 
Cliarteris had crept behind his Avife, who, far too 
good a little woman to feel professional jealousy, 
was completely delighted ; and the big tears were 
rolling down Lady Mitford's face. She was stiU a 



118 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

cliild, YOU see, and had not gone through the Clan- 
ronald furnace, vv^here all tears are dried up for ever. 

When the sono^ was ended, there came a vollev 
of applause such as is seldom heard in di'awing- 
rooms, and far different from the usual languid 
'' Thank you," which crowns the failure of the 
amatem\ Miss Gillespie looked romid elated, as 
though the sound wxre pleasant and not unfami- 
liar to her, and was about to rise from her seat, 
when Lam-ence Alsager, who was nearest the 
piano, advanced, and begged she would remain 
. he was sm'e he spoke in the name of all pre- 
sent. So Miss Gillespie, after looking him hard 
in the face, made him a little bow, and re- 
mained at the piano, this time starting oif into 
one of Louis Puget's charming French ballads, 
'^ Ta main," which she sung with as much fire 
and cJdc as if she had never quitted Paris. 

At the conclusion of the second song. Lady 
Mitford came across to the piano to thank the 
singer, and she was followed by Mrs. Charteris 
and Mrs. Masters. Mrs. Charteris was in the 
highest delio-ht . a feelincr not at all decreased 



IN THE DRAWING-R003I. 119 

when Miss Gillespie assured her that she had 
frequently hstened to her, Mrs. Charteris's, sing- 
ing, and had often envied that lady her correct 
musical education. Mrs. Masters said her little 
complimentary say about the songs, but was 
principally taken up by Miss Gillespie's costume. 
She was one of those women who never see 
any thing nevv^ worn by any other woman with- 
out taking private mental notes of its every 
detail; tlius setting at defiance any attempted 
extension of the Patent laws in regard to fe- 
male apparel. So, with her eyes devouring Miss 
Gillespie's dress, Mrs. Masters said to her : 
" Yes, so charming that Glilck ! so full of depth 
and power! . (Wonderfully good silk; stands by 
itself like a board!) . And the Kttle French cIlcui- 
sonnette^ so sparkling and melodious, and . (Oh yes, 
certainly French I should think ! no English house 
could . ) may I ask you where you got that collar 
and those cuffs. Miss . Miss Asplin? They are 
most peculiar!" 

" My name is Gillespie, madam ;" and the 
collar and cuffs I worked myself." After which 



120 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Mrs. Masters bowed, and went back to lier 
seat. 

During tliis examination Laurence Alsager, 
who had seated himself next to Miss Hayter, in 
the neighbourhood of the piano, was conscious 
that Miss Gillespie's looks constantly strayed to- 
wards him. It was very odd. There was nothing 
coquettish in the regard, he knew every one in 
that category of glances of old ; but these were 
strangely earnest looks, always averted when she 
fomid they were remarked. While they were 
full upon him, Miss Hayter, in reply to sometliing 
he had said about his delight in ferns, expressed 
a hope that they would see him at her father's 
place, the Arme Wood, where there was a 
splendid fernery. Lam^ence, in reply, thanked 
her, and said how happy he would have been 
to go, but that he feared it would be impos- 
sible, as he intended to leave Redmoor in a day 
or two. He must be a dutiful son, and visit his 
father, whom he had not seen since his return 
to England. As he said this Miss Gillespie's 
eyes were full on him. 



IN THE DEAWIXG-ROOM. 121 

They were very singular eyes, lie thought, 
as he undressed himself lazily before the fire in 
his bedroom. Very singular eyes ; so large, and 
dark, and sj>eaking. What on earth made the 
woman look at him so j^jerpetually ! He was grow- 
ing too old to inspire love at first sight, he felt, 
smiling grimly as he inspected himself in the 
looking-glass ; besides, she was not the style of 
woman for any such folly. How magnificently 
she sung I what depth and pathos there was in 
her voice ! " Eurydice, Emydice !" . those notes 
were enouo^h to ojo throuo;h any man's soul ; those 
notes were enough to . hallo, what's this ? 

He had strolled across to the dressing-table, 
and taken up a small sealed note, addressed in a 
thin fine female hand to Colonel Alsafrer. 

He broke the seal and read : 

" I heard you talk of leaving Redmoor. If 
not impossible, I pray you to stay. Your presence 
will be a check upon two people, who, liberated 
from that, will go headlong to ruin, dragging down 
a third in their fall. For the welfare of this third 



122 RUXN^ING THE GAUNTLET. 

person both you and I are solicitous. But it 
seems probable that my sphere of usefuhiess is 
ended ; so all devolves upon you. Remember 
tliis, and for her sake, stay on." 

^^Ahl" said Laiu'ence Alsager when he had 
perused this mysterious note for the second 
time . "there's no doubt that my anonymous 
correspondent is the handsome woman with the 
eyes and voice. What she means I'll find out in 
tlie morning." 



CHAPTER YL 

DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 

On the morning after the day when Miss Gilles- 
pie had made so successful a debut among the 
company assembled at Redmoor, Mr. Effingham, 
lomiging quietly up the road from the Mitford 
Ai'ms, rang at the lodge-gate, and after a few 
minutes' conversation with the old portress, 
passed up the avenue. His conversation v^^as 
purely of a pleasant character ; there was no 
inquuy as to who he Avas, or what he wanted, . 
all that had been settled long ago. He was a 
gentleman from London, who was writing a 
book 'bout all the old fam'ly houses, and was 
going to put our place into it. He knew Sir 
Charles, and had his leave to come and go 
when he liked. A civil - spoken gentleman he 



124 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

AvaSj and talked most wonderful ; never passed the 
lodge without stoj^plng to say something. Per- 
haps of all Mr. Effingham's peculiarities, this 
impressed the old woman the most ; for, like 
all country people of her class who hve a soli- 
tary and quiet life, she was thorouglily reticent, 
and it is questionable whether, beyond the or- 
dinary salutations to those with whom she was 
brought in contact, she uttered more than a dozen 
sentences in a week. But Mr. Effino-ham's licrht 
airy chatter was very Avelcome to the old lady, 
and, combined with the politeness which he al- 
ways exhibited, had rendered him a great fa- 
vourite. 

A considerable alteration had been effected 
in Mr. Effingham's outward man since his fu'st 
visit to Redmoor. As in the former instance, 
his first step on receiving the ten pounds from 
Sir Charles Avas to purchase a new suit of 
clothes. He bought them at the neighbouring 
toAvn, and in pursuance of his intention to 
assume a literary or artistic character, he had 
endeavoured to render his apparel suitable, or 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 125 

as lie called it, ^^to make up for tlie part." So 
he now wore a large slouch felt wideawake hat, 
a dark velveteen jacket, long waistcoat, gray 
trousers, and ankle -jack boots. Had he carried 
out his own views of literary attire, he would 
have adopted a long dressing-gown and Turkish 
trousers, such as he had seen in the portraits 
of celebrated authors ; but he felt that these 
would be out of place in the country, and might 
attract attention. He, however, armed himself 
with a large note-book and a pencil of porten- 
tous thickness, w^ith which he was in the habit 
of jotting down visionary memoranda whenever 
he fomid himself observed. By the initiated and 
the upper classes this last -described act may 
have been recognised as an indisputable hterary 
trait ; but by the lower orders Mr. Effingham 
was regarded as a mystic potentate of the turf, 
whose visit to the Mitford Arms had mysterious 
connection with the proximity of Sir Danesbmy 
Boucher's stables, where Limejuice, the third 
favourite for the Derby, ^Yas in training ; while 
tlie entries of the memoranda were by the same 



126 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

people ascribed to the exercise of a process 
known to them as the booking of bets. 

Tlie March morning was so splendid in 
its freshness and bright glittering sunlight, 
that Mr. Effing^ham, althouo;!! little o-iven to ad- 
miring the beauties of nature, could not resist 
occasionally stopping and looking round him. 
The old elms forming the avenue were just 
putting fortli their first buds ; far away on 
either side stretched broad alternations of tm-f 
in level, hill, and glade, all glistening with the 
morning dew ; while on the horizon fronting 
him, and behind the house, could be seen the 
outhne of the great Eedmoor. The jolly old 
house stood like some red-faced giant, its mul- 
lioned windows winking at the smilight, the 
house itself just waking into life. From the 
stable-yard came a sti'ing of rugged and hooded 
horses for exercise. The gardeners were cross- 
ing from the conservatory bearing choice flowers 
for the decoration of the rooms. At the porch 
was standing the head-keeper, accompanied by 
two splendid dogs; a groom on horseback, with 



DIAMOND CUT DLUIOXD. 127 

the swollen post-bag slung round him, passed 
Mr. Effingham in the avenue ; . every where 
aromid were signs of w^ealth and prosperity. 

" Yes," said Mr. Effingham to himself, as 
he stopped and sm'veyed the scene, " this is 
better than my lodgings in Doory Lane, this is ! 
No end better I And why should this fellow have 
it, and not me . that's what I want to know ? I 
could do it up pretty brown, here, I'm thinkin' ; 
not like him . not in the same wa}', that is, l^ut 
quite as good. There mightn't be so many nobs, 
but there'd be plenty of good fellers ; and as for 
the nobs. Lord bless you, when they found there 
was plenty of good grub and drink, and good 
fun to be had, they'd come fast enough. I shoidd 
just like to try it, that's all ; I'd show him. And 
why shouldn't I try it ? Not in this way, per- 
haps . not to cut it quite so fat as this, but still 
reg'lar comfortable and nice. A nice little box at 
Finchley or Hampstead, with a bit o' lawn, and 
a pony-trap, and chickens, and a spare bed for 
a pal, . that's my notion of comfort I And why 
shouldn't I have it, if I play my cards jn'operly ? 



128 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Damme, I will have it ! I'm sick of cadgin' 
about from hand to mouth, never knowin' what's 
goin' to turn up next. Tliis bit o' stiff ought to 
be worth any thing to me . any thing in reason, 
that is to say. So, when I've once got it from 
our friend here, and that won't be just yet, . I 
must get her aAvay from here, and have her well 
mider my thumb before I try that on, . when I 
once get that dockyment, I'll take it straight to 
Sir Charles, and let him have it for a sum down 
. ^must be a big sum too . and then I'll cut the 
whole lot of 'em, and go and live somewhere in 
the countiy by myself! That's what I'll do !" 

L\qjp^tit vient en mangeant. When Mr. Effing- 
ham was utterly destitute he accommodated him- 
self to his position, and lived on, fr^om hand to 
mouth, in the best way he could. He retired to 
tlie back-ways and slums then, and seeing very 
few people much better off than he was himself, 
Ms envy and jealousy were not excited. Sir 
Chai'les's ten pounds had disturbed the little 
man's mental equilibrium ; the readiness with 
wliich they melted in his grasp showed him 



DIAMOXD CUT DIAMOND. 129 

how easily he could get rid of a hundred, of a 
thousand, of ten thousand. Tlie sight of the 
comfort and luxury of Redmoor contrasted hor- 
ribly with the wretchedness of his o^vii lodging, 
and lashed him into a storm of rage. 

" It's too bad I" said he, striking his stick 
against the tree by which he was standing, . '^ it's 
too bad that there should be all this lot of money 
in the world, and that I should have none of it, 
while this cove here . oh yes, if you please, my 
horses goin' out with the grooms ; my gardeners 
a-bringin' pines and melons and all the rest of 
it ; my keeper a-waitin' to know how many phea- 
sants I'm goin' to kill to-day ! Damme, it's sick- 
ening!" Mr. Effingham struck the tree again, 
pushed his hat over his eyes, and started off 
in his walk. When he had proceeded about half- 
way up the avenue, he climljed the iron fence, 
and started off to the right over the park, until 
he reached a little knoll, on the top of which 
were two magnificent cedars. On the other side 
of these cedars, and completely hidden by them 
from the house, was a carved rustic seat. On 
VOL. II. K 



130 RUisNING THE GAUNTLET. 

reaching the top of the knoll, Mr. Effingham 
looked roundj and seeing nobody, sat down, 
put his feet up, and made liimself most com- 
fortable. 

A lengthened contemplation of the cedars, 
however, instead, as might have been expected, 
of bringing calm to his perturbed soul, served only 
to remind him that they, in common with all 
the surromidings, were the property of somebody 
else, and that on that somebody else he had a 
tremendous hold, provided he went properly to 
work. 

^^ And I'll do it!" said he, taking his feet off 
the bench, and pushing the felt wideawake hat 
into all kinds of shapes in his excitement, . " I'll 
do it too ! Now, let me see ! My friend will 
be here presently . let me just rmi through what's 
to be done. Quiet's the game with her, I think ; 
no bulljTag and bluster . quiet and soft. No 
connection with any one here . never even heard 
the name . sent by the other parties . I'm so 
innocent. Yes, I think that will do ; then, when 
we've once started together, I can make my own 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 131 

terms. . How late she is ! She must be awfully 
down on her luck at being spotted doTvn here, 
and she must suspect something by the quick way 
in which she agreed to meet me here when I 
spoke to her yesterday as she was walkin' with 
the young 'mi, . made no bones about it at all. 
She won't fail me, I suppose." 

Oh no, she would not fail him. There she 
was, crossing the park apparently from the back 
of the stables, and making straight for the cedars. 
Could it be she? A figm-e bent nearly double, 
dressed in an old-fashioned black-silk cloak and 
a poke-bonnet, and leaning on a thick umbrella. 
It was not until she was well under the shadow 
of the cedars, that she straightened herself, pushed 
back her bonnet, and stood revealed as Miss 
Gillespie. 

^^ Good-morning," said she, so crisply and 
blithely that Mr. Effingham, who had expected 
she would adopt a very different tone was quite 
astonished ; '^ I'm afraid I'm a little late, Mr. 

; you did not favour me with your name ; 

but the fact is, as you probably know, I am not 



132 RUNlN'DsG THE GAUNTLET. 

my own mistress, and my services were required 
just as I was about to start." 

" All right, miss," said Mr. Effingham, taking 
off his hat, and making a bow as near as possible 
after the manner of walking-gentlemen on the 
stage . a proceeding with which the limpness 
of the wideawake's brim interfered considerably ; 
'' my name's Effingham." 

" Indeed ! what a pretty name ! so romantic. 
You would not mind my sitting doAAm, would you? 
Xo ; that's all right. And now, Mr. Effingham, 
I suppose you want something of me, don't you, 
after that mysterious communication which you 
made to me yesterday when I was walking with 
my pupil ? Poor child ! she's been in a state of 
Avonderment ever since ; and I've had to invent 
such stories about you. And what is it you want, 
Mr. Effingham?" 

Mr. Effingham scarcely liked the tone ; he 
felt he was being " chaffed ;" so he thought he 
would bring matters to a crisis by saying, " My 
name's not Effingham . at least, not more than 
yom-s is Gillespie." 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 133 

" Oh, I perceive/' said she with a httle nod. 

" My name's Butler as much as youi's is 
Ponsford. Now d'ye see ?" 

"Oh yes; now I see perfectly. Butler, eh? 
Any relation of a man named Tony Butler who is 
now dead ?" 

" Yes . his brother. He may have spoken to 
you of a brother in America." 

"In America! ay, ay. Well, Mr. Butler," 
she continued with a bright smile, " now I know 
that you're the brother of Tony Butler, there's 
scarcely any need of repeating my question whe- 
ther you wanted any thing; for . pardon me . 
you could hardly belong to that interesting family 
"without wanting something. The question is, 
what do you want? Money? and if so, how 
much?" 

" No ; I don't want money . " 

"That's very unlike Tony Butler. I shall 
begin to discredit your statements," said she, still 
with the pleasant smile. 

" At least not yet, nor from you. But I do 
want something." 



134 RIINTs'IXG THE GAU^'TLET. 

" Ye-es, and that is." 

" I want YOU to go away from here with me 
at once." 

"To go away fr'om here ! Oh, no. Connuj 
my dear Mr. Butler ; I see the whole of the play. 
This is not your own business at all, dear sir. 
You dance, and kick yoiu' legs and swing your 
arms very well ; but you are a puppet, and the 
gentleman who pulls the strings lives over yon- 
der ;" and she pointed with her umbrella to Red- 
moor House. 

" I can't make out what you mean." 

" Oh, yes, you can. ' A master I have, and I 
am his man.' You are Sir Charles Mitford's man, 
Mr. Butler ; and he has set you on to tell me that 
I must leave this place and rid him of my in- 
fluence. Now, you may go back to Sir Charles 
Mitford, your master, and tell him that I set him 
utterly at defiance ; that I won't move, and that 
he can't make me. Do you hear that, my dear 
Mr. Butler?" 

She had risen from her seat, and stood erect 
before him, looking very grand and savage. Her 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 135 

companion knew that the success of his scheme 
depended wholly upon the manner in which he 
carried out the next move, and accordingly he 
threw all his power into the acting of it. 

" You're one of those who answer their own 
questions, I see," said he, with perfect calmness. 
" I've met lots o' that sort in my travels, and I 
never found 'em do so much o-ood as those that 
waited. All you've been saying's Greek to me. 
Who's Sir Charles Mitford? I've heard of him, 
of course, as the swell that lives in that house. 
They've never done talking of him at the Mitford 
Arms and all about there. But what's he to do 
with you ? I suppose it don't matter to him who 
his friends' governesses is. He's not sweet on 
you, is he? If so, he wouldn't want you to go 
away. And what's he to do with me ? and how's 
he likely to hear of my having been in the place ? 
I haven't left my card upon him, I promise you," 
said Mr. Effingham with a grim humour. 

Miss Gillespie looked at him hard, very hard. 
But his perfect command of feature had oflen 
stood Mr. Effingham in good stead, and it did not 



136 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

desert him now. Tlie saucy laughter on his lips 
corresponded with the easy bantering tone of his 
voice ; he sat swinging his legs and sucking his 
stick, the incarnation of insolence. So far he 
was triumphant. 

She waited a minute or two, biting her lips, 
and turning her plans in her mind. Then she 
said, " Granting what you say . and it was rather 
a preposterous proposition of mine, I admit . jou 
are still a puppet in somebody's hands. You had 
no knowledge of my previous life, and yet you 
come to me and say I must come away at once 
with you. Why must I come away?" 

" Because you're wanted." 

^^ And by whom?" 

" By the crew of the Albatross. Ah, I 
thought you wouldn't be quite so much amused 
and so full of your grins when I mentioned 
them." 

'' Oh," said she, recovering herself, " I can 
still orrin when there's any thino^ to amuse me. 
But we seem to have changed places ; now yoiCvo 
talkino^ riddles which I cannot understand." 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 137 

" Can't you ? then I must exj^lain them for 
you. If what I'm told is right . but it's very 
little I know . you belonged to that crew yourself 
once. My brother Tony was one of them, I un- 
derstand ; and though he's dead now, there's seve- 
ral of 'em left. Old Lyons, for instance, . ^you 
recollect him ? Crockett, Griffiths . " 

" Suppose, to avoid giving you fm^ther trouble, 
I say I do recollect them, what then ?" 

"You're angry, although you smile ; I can see 
that fast enough. But what's the good of being 
angry with me? You know when a feller gets 
into their hands what chance he has. You know 
that fast enough, or ought to. Well, I'm in their 
hands, and have to do what they order me." 

" And they've ordered you to come do\^ai to 



me r 



" They found out where you were, and sent 
me after you." 

" Ha ! And what on earth can have induced 
them, after a certain lapse of time, to be so sud- 
denly solicitous of my welfare?" said Miss Gil- 
lespie, laughingly. " There was nc\cr any great 



138 RUNNIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

love between any of tliose yon have named and 
myself. I have no money for them to rob me 
of, nor do I see that I can be of any great use to 
them." 

"I don't know that," said ]\Ii\ Effingham, 
laying his forefinger knowingly alongside his nose. 
^' You see, you're a pretty gal, and you've rather 
got over me . " 

" Flattered, I'm sm-e," said Miss Gillespie, 
showing all her teeth. 

" No, it ain't that," said he, with a dim per- 
ception that his compliment was not too graciously 
received; " it ain't that; but I do like a pretty girl 
somehow. "Well, you see, they don't let me much 
into their secrets . don't tell me the reason why 
I'm told to do so and so ; they only tell me to go 
and do it. But I don't mind tellin' you . taking 
an interest in you, as I've just said . that, from 
what they've let di-op accidentally, I thmk you can 
be of great use to them." 

" Indeed ! have you any notion how ?" 

'^ Well, now look here. I'm blowin' their 
gaff to you, and you know what I should get if 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 139 

they knew it; so swear you'll never let on. From 
wliat I can make out, there's certain games which 
you used to do for them that they've neyer been 
able to find any body to come near you in. I 
mean the Mysterious Lady, the fortune-tellin', and 
the electro -biology business." 

Some scenes recalled to her memory by these 
words seemed to amuse Miss Gillespie, and she 
laughed heartily. 

^' But that's ^ general work,' " continued Mr. 
Effingham ; " what they want you particular for 
just now is tliis. Some swell, so far as I can 
make out, came to grief early in life, and made a 
mistake in puttmg somebody else's name to paper; 
what they call forgery, you laiow." 

She nodded. 

" Old Lyons has got hold of this paper, and he 
wants to put the screw on the swell and make liim 
bleed. Now there's none of the lot has half your 
manner, nor, as they say, half your tact ; and 
that's why, as I believe, is the reason they want 
you back in town amongst them." 

" All ! to . what did you say ? . ^ put the screw 



140 EUKN^IXG THE GAUNTLET. 

on a swell and make Mm bleed,' wasn't it? How 
verj nice ! Well, now you've obeyed jour orders, 
and it's for me to speak. And suj^pose . just sup- 
pose for the fun of the thing . I were to hold b j 
mj original decision and declare I would not 
come, what would you do ?" 

" I should go back to town and tell 'em all 
that had j^assed." 

" And they ?. what woidd they do ?" 

'' I can tell you that, because that was part of 
my instructions. Old Lyons put that yery plain. 
' If she rides rusty,' he says, . ' and she's got a 
temper of her o^ti, I can tell you, . just let her 
know from me that I'll ruin her. I'll neyer leave 
her ; she knows me of old ; it won't be merely,' 
he says, ' her being turned away in disgrace out 
of where she is now; but I'll never leave her. 
She may go where she likes, but I've found her 
out once, and I'll find her out again ; I'll foller 
her up, and I'll be the ruin of her,' he says, ' so 
sure's her name's what it is.' " 

He looked up to see the effect of his speech, 
but Miss Gillespie was looking full at him with an 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 141 

expression of great interest and a very 2:)leasant 
smile, as if she were listening to the narration of a 
thrilling story with which she had no connection 
save that of listener. 

'' Did he indeed say all that ?" said she, 
after a pause. '' Oh, he's a most terrible old 
man, and whatever he determines on, he never 
fails of caiTying out. However, I think I won't 
put him to much trouble this time." 

" How do you mean ?" 

" Well, do you know I've a strong mind to 
save you any further worry, and to crown you 
with glory by allowing you to carry me back 
in triumph." 

'^ You don't say so ! but this is sudden, you 
know. I don't put much trust in such sudden 
conversions." 

" Mine is not the least sudden. I generally 
act on the impulse of the moment. That now 
iiTcres me to 0*0 back to mv old life. The 
shackles of this respectability are beginning to 
strain a little. I feel cramped by them occa- 
sionally, and I suppose I have originally some- 



142 EUNNDsG THE GAKN'TLET. 

thing of the Bohemian in my natm'e, for you 
have fired me with an ardent lonorino- for free- 
dom and ii-responsibihty. " 

"Tliat's right!" cried Mr. Effingham, de- 
lighted at the success of his scheme ; " that's 
just as it should be. It's all very well for those 
swells to live on here, and go on their daily 
round. Tliey've got the best of it, so far as 
they know; but they haven't seen as much as 
we have. They don't know the pleasm'e of . 
well, of pitting your wits against somebody else 
who think themselves deuced sharp, and beating 
them, do they?" 

" Xo," said Miss Gillespie, with her crispest 
little laugh ; ^' of course they don't." 

'^ Well, now," said Mr. Effingham, ^^ you 
know what old Lyons is, reg'lar man of busi- 
ness ; wants every thing done at once, right 
off the reel. When will you be ready to start ?" 

" What a practical man you are, Mr. Butler !" 
cried she, still laughing; "it will be quite de- 
lightfid to get back again into the society of 
practical people after all this easy-going laissez- 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 143 

aller time. But you must not be too hard upon 
me at first. I've several tilings to clo." 

" You won't be saying ' good-bye' to any 
body, or any thing of that sort?" 

'' Oh no, nothing of that sort, you may de- 
pend." 

^'That's right; you mean putting your tilings 
together, eh?" 

'' Yes ; packing, and getting ready to start." 

" Well, twenty -four hours will be enough 
for that, I should think. Suppose we say to- 
morrow at noon ?" 

"Ye-es, give me a little longer: say two 
in the afternoon, then I shall be perfectly ready." 

" And where shall we meet?" 

" "We must get across to the rail at once. 
Not to Torquay; there's a small station nearer 
here, where they won't think of looking for us. 
Not that I suppose they'd take any trouble of 
that kind when they find I'm once gone. How- 
ever, it's best to be prepared. Can you drive ?" 

^'I should think so!" said Mr. Effingham 
with a chuckle. '^ I've driven most things, from 



144 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

a shofle-cab in to^^Ti to the mall -sleigh in 
Canada !" 

"How very nice!" said she; "that will do 
beautifully, then. You must get a gig or a dog- 
cart, or something light, from some place in Tor- 
quay. I shall have very little luggage, and have 
it all ready at a little side -gate of the park, which 
you can see . over there," again bringing the 
umbrella into requisition. " That gate is in^d- 
sible from the house; it's perfectly quiet and 
unfrequented, and I have a key of it. That once 
closed behind me I'm thoroughly safe." 

" And there's no chance of om- being met, 
and you being recognised ?" 

" Not the very smallest. Tlie people staying 
in the house will all be at Imicheon; the gar- 
deners and stable-people, should we come across 
any, will all be in that state of comatose repletion 
which succeeds the after-dinner tobacco. Besides, 
very few of them know me by sight; and the 
road which I have pointed out skirts the Eedmoor, 
and is very little frequented." 

" Tliat'll do ! that will be first-rate ! Now, 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 145 

let me see if all's understood. A dog-cart to be 
ready to-morrow at yon gate of tlie park, at two 
o'clock sharp. There you'll be and your luggage 
. eh? By the bye, how's that to get there ?" 

" I told you it would be very little; and there's 
a boy, devoted to my service, who will carry it." 

" All right, . I only wanted to know. Two 
o'clock to-morrow, then." He put out his hand, 
and, as she lightly touched it with the tips of 
her fingers, offered to seize hers and convey it 
to his lips ; but she slid it through his clumsy 
fist, and had pulled the poke-bonnet over her face, 
resumed the bent walk and the clumsy umbrella, 
and was making her way back across the park 
almost before he had missed her. 

^' And if ever a man did a good day's work, 
I've done one this blessed morning," said Mr. 
Effingham, as he strolled quietly back through 
the avenue. " They may talk about great genius, 
if they please. Great genius means getting hold 
of a good idea at the right minute, and strikin' 
while tlie iron's hot. That's great genius ! and 

VOL. IT. L 



146 RUNNIN'G THE GAUNTLET. 

they was two great ideas whicli I've worked just 
now ! Tliat pretendin' to know nothin' of the 
Bart., and gammonin' her that okl Lyons sent 
me after her, was first-rate ! I thought old Lyons's 
name woukl brings her round. Tliey're all afraid 
of him, it seems. Now when we've got some 
distance on the road, I'll tell her the truth, or, 
at least, as much as I choose, and just sound her 
about the bill. D'Ossay, my boy, you've done 
a good day's work, and can afford to go into 
Torquay and dine like a swell to-night !" 



CHAPTER YIL 

CHECKMATE. 

Mr. Effixgham fulfilled his design of going into 
Torquay and dining well. In his singular costume 
he created quite a sensation among the invalids 
on the Parade, who would have severely resented 
the healthy and sporting tone of his ankle-jacks 
if it had not been mitigated by his slouch wide- 
awake hat and black jacket. As it was, they merely 
regarded him as an eccentric person staying at one 
of the countr}' houses in the neighbourhood, and 
they pardoned his not being consumptive on the 
score of his being probably either rich or distin- 
guished. So he " did'' the to^vn and all the lions 
to his great satisfaction, and, as aflPording them 
subject-matter for conversation over their valetu- 
dinarian diniiers, to the satisfaction of those whom 
he encountered. He made an excellent dinner at 



148 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

tlie hotel, and then was driven out to his rural lodo- 
ino;s in a flv, havino; o:i\'en orders for a do2;-cart to 
be in readiness for him at the particular gate of 
Redmoor Park which he described at two o'clock 
the next day. 

It was a brilliant starlight night, and Mr. 
Effingham had the head of the fly opened ; he was 
well wrapped up, and the air being very mild, he 
wished to enjoy the beauties of nature and the 
flavour of his cigar simultaneously. As he lay 
back puffing the smoke out before him his thoughts 
again reverted to his morning's work, and again 
he found every reason for self-gratulation. There 
would be the fifty pounds from Sir Charles . that 
was safe to start with ; he should go up and gi\'e 
him notice in the morning, that that cheque might 
come up by the evening's post. Tliat would help 
him to tide over any delay there might be in get- 
ting this woman to give up the bill. "What a 
funny one she was ! what a regular lively one ! 
how she kept on laughing ! and how sly she looked 
when she said that she was tired of that humdrum 
respectability, and would like to run away to the 



CHECKMATE. 149 

old adventiu'ous life ! Xot one to be trifled with, 
though; none of your larks with her; regular 
stand-offish party. AVell, never mind ; that did not 
matter ; what he was about now was business, and 
she seemed thorouglily up to that. He did not think 
he should have much trouble in makuig her see 
what advantage to them both could be got out of a 
proper use of the forged bill. One point, on which 
he at one time had had some doubt, the interview 
of that morning had satisfactorily set at rest. She 
had been spooney on Mitford . so Griffiths told him 
. and he feared that the old feeling might still re- 
main, and she would refuse to take any steps about 
the bill lest she might injure her old flame. But, 
Lord ! he could see plainly enough she did not care 
a snuff of a candle for Mitford now ; rather more 
t'other might be judged from the flash in her eyes 
and the sneer on her lips when she spoke of him, 
Tliat was all right, so . All ! perhaps her shrewd 
notions of business might lead her to seeing the 
value of the bill and to driving a hard bargain for 
it. He must be prepared for that ; but when he 
got her up to London she would be much more in 



15U EUNNIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

liis power. The bill must be had somehow, by fair 
means or foul; and if she resisted . well, there 
would not be very much trouble in stealing or 
forcing it from her. 

As these reflections passed tlu'ough his mind 
the carriage in which he sat reached the top of a 
height, whence was obtained a view of Redmoor 
House ; its outline standing black and heavy 
against the sky, its lower wdndows blazing with 
light. The sight turned Mr. Effingham's tlioughts 
into a slightly different current. 

" Oh, yes ! go it ; that's your sort," he said to 
himself with a certain amount of bitterness ; " fine 
games goin' on there, I've no doubt ; the best of 
drink, and coves with powdered heads to wait 
on you ; game o' billiards afterwards, or some 
singin' and a dance with the women in the dror- 
ing-room. That's the way to keep it up ; go it 
wliile you're young. But, my friend the Bai't., 
you'd sing another toon and laugh the wrong side 
o' your mouth, and cut a very different kind o' 
caper, if you knew what was so close to you. I've 
heard of a cove smokin' a pipe and not knowing 



CHECKMATE. 151 

that what he was sittin' on was a powder-barrel ; 
and this seems to me very much the same sort o' 
thing. To think that close under his nose is the 
dock^Tiient that would just crop his 'air, put him 
into a gray soot, Cole-Barth Fields, Milbank, and 
Portland, and that cussed stone-quarryin' which, 
from all I've heard, is tlie heart-breakin'est work. 
To think that he's been payin' me to get the bill, 
and I've been employin' Grriffiths and givin' skivs 
to old Lyons and settin' half Doory Lane at work 
to hunt up the gal, and that there she was mider 
his roof the whole time . it's tremenjous !" 

And Mr. Effingham laughed aloud, and lit a 
fresh cigar, and pulled the rug tighter over his 
legs. 

'' She's a rum un, she is. I wonder which of 
them lio-hts is in her room. There's one a lona: 
way off the rest, up high all by itself ; that's it, I 
shouldn't wonder. She's not fit company for the 
swells downstairs, I suppose. Well, perhaps not, 
if they knew every thin' ! But what a blessin' it 
is people don't know every thin' ! Perhaps if they 
did, some of 'em wouldn't be quite so fond of sittin' 



152 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

down witli tlie Bart. I wonder what slie's doin' 
just now. Packin' lier traps ready for our start, I 
shouldn't wonder. What a game it will be ! Yes, 
D'Ossay, my boy, this is the best day's work you 
ever did in your life ; and youi' poor brother Tony 
little thought what a power of good he was doin' 
you when he first let you into the secret of Mr. 
Mitford and his little games." 

And with these reflections, and constantly-re- 
newed cio-ars, Mr. Effino-ham beguiled the tedium 
of his jom-ney to the Mitford Arms. 

He was up betimes the next morning, making 
his preparations for departure. His very small 
wardrobe . its very smallness regarded by the land- 
lady of the inn as a proof of the eccentricity of 
literary genius . was packed in a brown-paper 
parcel. He discharged his modest bill, and began 
to fidget about until it was time to give his 
employer a final and fancy sketch of how he had 
accomplished his mission. Entirely fictional was 
this sketch intended to be, as widely diverging 
from fact as possible. Mr. Effingham knew well 
enough that so long as the removal of Miss Gilles- 



CHECKMATE. 153 

pie, or Lizzie Ponsford, had been effected, Sir 
Charles Mitford would care very little indeed about 
the means by wliich it had been accomplished. 
And as Mr. Effingham was playing a double game, 
it would be necessary for him to be particularly 
cautious in makin'T; any statement which mio-ht 
reveal the real state of the case to Sir Charles. 
These reflections, brinn^ino; clearly ao-ain before 
him the great fact of the entire business, . that he 
was being paid for communicating with a person, 
to communicate with whom he would have gladly 
paid a considerable sum of money had he possessed 
it, . put Mr. Effingham into the most satisfactory 
state of mind, and caused the time, which woidd 
otherwise have hung heavily on his hands, to pass 
pleasantly and quickly. 

He knew that there was little use in attempting 
to see Sir Charles before eleven o'clock ; so about 
that time he made his way up the avenue, on 
this occasion cutting short the old portress, who, 
contrary to the usual custom, was beirinninf*- to 
enter into some little story. It was Mr. Effing- 
ham's plan . and one wliich is pretty generally 



154 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

adopted in tliis world, especially by tlie lower 
order of Mr. Smiles's friends, the " self-made" 
men, . to kick down the ladder after he had 
landed from its top ; and as Mr. Effingham 
thought he should be able to make no more 
use of this old woman, he did not choose to 
be bored by her conversation. So he cut her 
short with a nod, and walked up the avenue 
with a swafTfrerino; o^ait, which she had never 
knoAvn before, and which very much astonished 
her. He met no one on his way ; and when 
he reached the house he went modestly round 
to a side -door leading to the bilhard - room, 
through the window of which he observed no 
less a person than Mr. Banks, Sir Charles's man, 
who was by himself, with his coat off" and a cue 
in his hand trying a few hazards. Mr. Effing- 
ham gave a sharp tap at the glass, which made 
Mr. Banks start guiltily, drop his cue, and re- 
sume his garment ; but when he looked up and 
saw who had caused him this fright, he waxed 
very wroth and said, ''Hallo! is it you? what 
do you want now ?" 



CHECKMATE. 155 

His tone did not at all suit Mr. Effingliam, 
who replied sharply, " Yoiu' master; go and tell 
him I'm here." 

" He ain't up yet/' said Mr. Banks. 

^^ Did you hear what I said ? Go and tell 
him I'm here." 

" Did you hear what 1 said, that Sii' Charles 
ain't stirrin' ?" 

" It'll be as much as yom' place is wortli, 
my man, if you don't do what I tell you. Have 
I been here before, or 'ave I not ? Have I been 
let in to him at once before, or 'ave I not ? Does 
he see me d'rectly you tell him who's waitin', or 
does he not ? Now . go." 

Tliis speech had such an effect upon Mr. 
Banks, who remembered that the little man only 
spoke the truth in his statement of the readi- 
ness with which Sir Charles always saw him, 
that he opened the door, showed Mr. Effingham 
into the biUiard-room (which was decorated with 
empty tumblers, fragments of lemon -peel, to- 
bacco-ash, and other remnants of the preceding 
night, and smelt powerfiUly of stale tobacco). 



156 RUKNIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

suggested that lie should '^ knock the balls about 
a bit," and went up to tell liis master. 

When he returned he said, " He's just finished 
dressin', and I'm to take you up in fi^e minutes. 
You seem quite a favourite of his." 

Mr. Effingham laughed. " Yes," he said ; 
^' he and I miderstand one another." 

]\Ir. Banks looked at him for a moment, and 
then said, " Was you ever in the Pacific?" 

"In the what?" 

" The Pacific." 

Mr. Effinorham chano^ed colour. He did not 
half like this. He thought it was the name of 
some prison, and that the valet had fomid him 
out. But he put a bold face on and said, " What's 
the Pacific?" 

" Ocean," said Mr. Banks. 

" No," said Mr. Effingham, " certainly not . 
nothing of the sort." 

" Xot when you and he," pointing to the 
ceiling, " was together ?" 

" Certainly not." 

"All!" said Mr. Banks, "kept at home, I 



CHECKMATE. 157 

suppose ; it ain't so dangerous or sucli hard work 
at home, is it ? . Portsmouth, and round there ?" 

" It's hard enough at Portsmouth, from what 
I've heard," said Mr. Effingham ; " that diggin' 
away at Southsea's dreadful work." 

" Diggin' aboard ship I" said Banks in as- 
tonishment. 

'' How do you mean ^ aboard ship' ?" said 
the other. 

^' Why, I'm talkin' of when you and liim 
was on board the . wdiat was it ? you know . 
Albatross." 

" Oh !" said Mr. Effingham, greatly relieved, 
and bursting into a fit of laughter ; '' we went 
every where then. And that's where I learned 
something which I don't mind teaching you." 

" What's that ?" 

" Never to keep Sir Charles waiting. Tlio 
five minutes is up." 

Mr. Banks looked half-annoyed, but his com- 
panion had already risen, so he made the best of 
it, pretended to laugh, and showed Mr. Effing- 
ham into Sir Charles Mitford's private snuggery. 



158 RUNNIXG THE GAUXTLET. 

Sir Charles was drinking a cup of coffee. He 
looked eagerly at Mr. Effingham, and when Banks 
had closed the door, said : 

" Bv the expression of your face I should say 
you bring good news. In two words . do you or 
not?" 

" In two words. I do." 

Mitford set down his cup. Tlu'ough his mind 
rushed one thought . the sjn' o^'er his flirtation 
with Mrs. Hammond was removed ! henceforward 
he could sit with her, talk to her, look at her, 
with the consciousness that his words would reach 
her ear alone, that his actions would not be over- 
looked. His face flushed with anticipated plea- 
sure as he said : 

" How was it managed? Did she make much 
resistance ?" 

" Well, it wasn't a very easy job, and that's 
the fact. I've seen many women as could be got 
over with much less trouble. You see the party 
seems to be in very comfortable quarters here, . 
all right to eat and drink, and not too much to 
do, and that sort of thing." 



CHECKMATE. 159 

"Well, what then?*' 

" TVhy, when parties are in that way they 
natm-ally don't like movin'. Besides, there's an- 
other strong reason I've found out why that young 
woman don't want to go." 

" And that is. ?" 

" She's uncommon fond of you. Ah, you 
may shake your head, but I'm siu'e of it." 

^^ If she made you believe that, Mr. . Effing- 
ham," said Sir Charles wdtli a very grim smile, 
" I'm afraid she has got the better of you alto- 
gether." 

" Has she, by Jove ! No, no. The proof of 
the puddin's in the eatin'. Sir Charles ; and whe- 
ther I've done the trick or not ^^ou'll find out 
before I've finished. Any how, I'm satisfied." 

" Well, as you say that, and as the pa}Tnent 
of the fifty pounds depends upon the ^ trick being 
done,' as you call it, I suppose before you've 
finished your story I shall be satisfied too." 

"What was I saying? Oh, al)out her being 
nuts on you still, . oh yes, . and I had to talk 
to her about that, and tell her it wouldn't do now 



160 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

you was married, and, in fact, that that was one 
of the great reasons for her to go, as parties had 
observed her feelin's. Tliat seemed to touch her, 
. for her pride's awful, . and she began to give 
way, and at last, after a long palaver, she said 
she'd go, though not before I . " 

" Beg your pardon. Sir Charles," said Banks, 
opening the door; " Mrs. Hammond, Sir Charles, 
wishes to speak to you. Sir Charles : she's here 
at the door." 

^^ Show her in, by all means," said Mitford, 
turning to Effingham and laying his finger on 
his lips ; then to him, sotto voce, " Keep yom* 
mouth shut!" 

'^ I'm very sorry to trouble you. Sir Charles," 
said Mrs. ' Hammond, entering hm-riedly, with a 
slight bow to the stranger and a glance of aston- 
ishment at his appearance : " but I will detain 
you only an instant. Have you heard am' thing 
of Miss Gillespie?" 

" Of Miss Gillespie? I, Mrs. Hammond? Not 
a word ? What has happened ?" 

"" Of course you haven't, but the most extra- 



CHECKJIATE. 1(31 

ordinary thing ! This morning Miss Gillespie did 
not come into Alice's room as usual ; so the 
child dressed by herself, and went to Miss Gil- 
lespie's room. She tried the door, and found it 
fast ; so, concluding that her governess was ill, . 
she's subject to headaches, I believe, . Ahce went 
down to breakfast. Afterwards she tried Miss 
GiUespie's door again, but with no better suc- 
cess; and then she came to me. I sent for 
Gifford, Mr. Hammond's man, you know ; and 
after calling out once or twice, he bm'st the 
door open : we all rushed in, and found the room 
empty." 

'' Empty!" cried Sir Charles. 

" The devil!" burst out Mr. Effingham. " I 
beg your pardon ! What an odd thing !" 

" Empty," repeated Mrs. Hammond. " Tlie 
bed hadn't been slept in; her boxes were open, 
and some of the things had been taken out ; while 
on the dressing-table was this note addressed 
to me." 

She handed a small slip of paper to Sir 
Charles, who opened it and read aloud : 

VOL. II. M 



162 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

^' You Avill iieA'er see me a:am. Search for 
me will be useless. R. G." 

^'Yes," said Mrs. Hammond, "she's gone. 
' Search for me will be useless.' So provoking 
too ; just the sort of person one liked to have 
about one ; and I had got quite accustomed to her 
and all that. ^ Xever see me again;' . I declare it's 
horribly annoying. Kow, Sir Charles, I want to 
ask your advice ; what would you do ? Would you 
have people sent after her in all directions, eh?" 

" WeU, 'pon my word, I don't see how you 
can do that," said Sir Charles. " She hasn't 
taken any thing of yom^s, I supj^ose, . no, of 
com-se not, . so, you see, she has a right to go 
away when she likes. Needn't give a month's 
warning, eh?" 

" Right to go away I Well, I don't know, . 
I suppose she has . and I suppose I haven't any 
right to stop lier ; but it is annoying ; and yet it's 
highly ridiculous, isn't it? What on earth can 
have di'iven her away? !N'obody rude to her, I 
should think; she wasn't that sort of person. 



CHECKMATE. 163 

Well, I won't bore you any more now about it, 
particularly as you're busy. We shall meet at 
luncheon, and then we can talk further over this 
unpleasant affair." And with a smile to Sir 
Charles, and another slight bow to i\Ii\ Effingham, 
she left the room. 

'' Well, you certainly have done yom* work 
excellently, Mr. Effingham," said Sir Charles, 
as soon as the door had closed ; "in the most 
masterly manner !" 

" Yes, it ain't bad, I think," said Mr. Effing- 
ham, with a ghastly attempt at a grin; "I told 
you it was all square." 

"Yes; but I had no notion it would come 
about so quickly." 

" Why, I hadn't half time to tell you about 
it. However, there it is, done, cut, and cbied, 
. all finished except the payment ; and I'm ready 
for that whenever you like." 

" Our agreement was, that the cheque was 
to be sent to London, to an address which }'ou 
gave me . " 

" Yes ; but as Fm here, I mav as well take 



164 EUNNIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

it myself. Yon haven't got it in notes or gold, 
have yon? It would be handier." 

^^ No, not sufficient ; but they would change 
my cheque at the bank in Torquay, I've no 
doubt." 

" No, thank yon, never mind ; it ain't worth 
the trouble. I shall have to go to town I sup- 
pose, and I sha'n't want it till I get there . that 
is, if you can lend me a couple of sovereigns 
just to help me on my way. Tliank you ; much 
obliged. Now, vou've p:ot mv address, and vou 
know Avhere to find me when you want me; 
and you may depend on not seein' me for a 
very long time. Good morning to you." 

He took the cheque and the sovereigns and 
put them in his waistcoat-pocket, made a clumsy 
bow, and was gone. Then Sir Charles Mitford 
rose from his chair and walked to the window, 
radiant with delight. It was all clear before 
him now ; the incubus was removed, and he 
was free to carry out his projects. 

Mr. Effingham strode down the avenue, switch- 
ins his stick and muttering : 



CHECKMATE. 165 

'^ Done ! sold ! swindled I" lie exclaimed ; " re- 
gularly roped, . that's what I am ! It was lucky 
I kept my face before the Bart., or I should 
never have collared the cheque; but that's all 
right. So far he thinks it was my doin', and 
forked out accordin'. That's the only bright part 
of it. To think that a yellow-faced meek-lookin' 
thing like that should have taken me in to that 
toon ! AYhat can her game be ? To get clear 
of the lot of us ? . that's it ! Pretendin' to be all 
square with me, and then cuttin' and runnin' 
and shakin' it all off I Oh, a deep un, a reg'lar 
deep un ! Now what's my game ? After her 
as hard as I can. Where will she make for? 
London, I should think, . try hidin' some where. 
Ah I if she does that, I'll ferret her out. It'll 
be a quiet place that I don't hunt her up in, 
with the means I have for workin' a search. 
Here's two skivs to the good from the Bart. 
1*11 meet the dog-cart and get doAvn to Torquay, 
and go up at once by the express. Hallo I gate, 
there 1" 

'^ Why, you are in a hurry, sir !" said the 



1.6 EUKN'ING THE GAUNTLET. 

old portress, coming out ; ^' maist as i:>ressecl as 
the Yomig woman as knocked me np at day-da^^ni 
tins morning." 

"All! what was that?" said Mr. Effingham, 
stopping short. 

" I would have told vou this morning when 
you came in ; but you were so short and snap- 
pish !" said the old lady. " She came down wi' 
a little passel in her hand, and knocked at my 
door and ast for key. And I got up to let her 
out, and there were a fly outside . Mullins's fly, 
and young Mullins to drive ; and she got in, and 
off they went." 

" Ay, ay ; where does Mullins live ?" 

" Just close by Mitford Arms. His f^ither 
were wi' my father . " 

'' Yes, yes ; thank you ! all right ! good-bye I" 
and Mr. Effingham rushed off up the by-lane 
to wdiere he knew the dog-cart was waiting. 



CHAPTER VIIl. 

COLONEL ALSAGER'S COUNSEL. 

When Lam-ence Alsager awoke the morning after 
Miss Gillespie's piano-performance, liis tlioughts 
immediately turned to the mysterious note which 
he had received on the previous evening, and he 
stretched out his hand and took it from the dress- 
ing-table, where he had placed it just before drop- 
ping off to sleep. He read it again and again, and 
each perusal strengthened his belief. It was writ- 
ten by Miss Gillespie . of that he had little doubt 
. and was intended to convey a warning of proxi- 
mate danger to Lady Mitford, and counsel to him 
to avert this danger if possible, by remaining at 
Redmoor. It seemed further to imply that some 
protection which had hitherto been extended over 
her would necessarily be withdrawn, and that his 
presence was consequently more than ever need- 



168 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

fill. At tliis conclusion Laurence arrived ; it was 
but a lame and impotent one, after all, and he 
determined to seek tlie solution at an interview 
with Miss Gillespie as soon as possible. 

He was the earliest in the breakfast-room, and 
found a batch of letters lying in his accustomed 
place. They were of all kinds, . foreign letters 
from men whose acquaintance he had made 
abroad, and the gist of whose correspondence 
lav in an endeavour to tempt him to come out 
to them again ; a business letter or two about 
the investment of some spare cash ; a line from 
Blab Bertram, wondering when L. A. was coming 
to town, and "what was the use of leaving Eg}^3t 
if you stuck down in Devon ?" and a thick old- 
fashioned letter, on yellowish gilt-edged paper, 
sealed with a large seal, and directed in a bold 
yet tremulous hand . his father's. Alsager's con- 
science pricked him as he came upon this letter 
at the bottom of the little pile ; he had been two 
months in England, after two years' absence, and 
had not yet fomid time to visit his father. Tliey 
had been always very good friends ; indeed when 



Laurence was at Eton, the tie between tliem 
was of the strongest, and they were more like 
brothers than father and son. With the youncr 
man's hfe at Oxford their relations were a little 
less^ intimate ; Lam'ence was beginning to see life 
with his coevals, and found Sir Peregrine's society 
a check and hinch-ance on his enjoyment. Tlie 
father j^erceived this, and weakly alloAved liimself 
to be annoyed at it. He was hurt and jealous at 
liis son's preference of younger companions, at 
his own inability to amuse or interest liis son's 
friends ; and from that time forth there was a 
slight estrangement Ijetween them. Laurence had 
the enjoyment of his mother s fortune on coming 
of age, so that he was perfectly independent of his 
father ; and his joining the Guards was entirely 
his own doing, and to a certain extent against 
his father's wish. Sir Peregrine was of that old- 
fashioned school which abhorred London and its 
ways, and thought a country gentleman ought to 
live entirel}' on his own estate, in superintending 
which, and in joining the sports of the field, he 
would find plenty of amusement and occupation. 



170 RUX^TING THE GAUNTLET. 

Their ideas and tastes being thus different, it 
was tacitly felt by both that they were best 
apart, and dui'ing the last few years they had 
not met a dozen times. Sir Peregrine's annual 
visit to London was generally made in the winter, 
when Laui'ence was staying with country friends ; 
and Laurence found little attraction in the dozy, 
prosy county-magistrate society which the old gen- 
tleman gathered round him at Knockholt. 

But his conscience pricked him when he saw 
the old gentleman's letter, which had been for- 
warded to him from his club . pricked him sharply 
after he had opened it and read as follows : 

" Knockholt, Friday. 

" My dear Lance, . If you have not any very 
particular engagements, I think it would be as well 
if you were to come down here for a day or two. 
Tliere are some things I want to talk over with 
you, and I think the sooner om' business is done 
the better. I had a nasty fall a fortnight ago, 
Avhen I was out with Lord Hawkshaw's pack; 
and though Gralton says it's nothing, I Avas a 
good deal shaken at the time, and feel it has 



COLOXEL ALSAGEr's COUNSEL. 171 

jarred me more than tliey think ; for I have an 
odd Idnd of all-overish pain, which I can't explain 
to them, and can't account for to myself. Not that 
I am going to die, that I know of; but one does 
not fall lightly wdien one weighs fifteen stone, nor 
get over a cropper quickly when one is sixty-seven 
years old. So, my dear Lance, put up with the 
old house and the old man for a few days, and 
come. I have a surprise for you. . Your affec- 
tionate father, P. A. 

^^ P.S. Captain Freeman saw you looking out 
of the club-Avindow when he was in London in 
January. He says you had a beard like a billy- 
goat. For God's sake, my dear Lance, go to a 
barber before I see you ! I hate all such foreign 
affectations. P. A." 

Laurence looked grave over the letter, but 
could not help smiling at the postscript, so cha- 
racteristic of his father. He did not at all like 
the aspect of affiiirs at Knockholt ; his fiither was 
evidently far more hurt than either the doctors 
imagined or he himself woidd allow. His ward, 



172 EUNNIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

Miss Manningtree, and lier governess, resided with 
the old gentleman; but Laurence knew too little 
of either to feel confidence in their capacity, their 
care, or their judgment in the matter of medical 
advice. They might think Galton all-sufficient 
and infallible ; he didn't. He would go down at 
once, at least as soon as he had learned from 
Miss Gillespie what really was meant by her mys- 
terious letter. He had been too long dallying 
at Capri; but now that duty called him away, 
he would obey cheerfiiUy. By the time he had 
finished his letter and formed his resolution. Cap- 
tain Bligh had entered the room, and had plmiged 
deeply into his breakfast, wliicli he took standing, . 
now making a dive at the toast-rack, now impaling 
a bloater, now walking romid and poming out a 
cup of tea ; for there were no ladies present, and 
the Captain was in a luuTy, having much business 
on hand. 

" Morning, Alsager," said the Captain, when 
Laurence looked up. " Queer start this, isn't it?" 

"What? I'm only just down; I've seen no- 
body and heard nothing." 



COLONEL ALSAGER'S COUNSEL. 173 

'^ Oh, about that girl that sung last night, . 
Mrs. Hammond's o-overness. What's her name ?" 

o 

^^ Miss Gillespie?" 

" Ay, that's she ! Wouldn't have thought it of 
her. would you ?" 

"What's she done?" 

"Done! Bolted, that's all! . bolted slick 
away, no one knows where !" 

"What on earth for?" 

" No one knows that either. Rummest thing 
is, that she hasn't taken any thing with her . any 
thing of any body else's, I mean. Noav, if she'd 
walked off with some of that little Hammond 
woman's swell clothes, or jool'ry, one could un- 
derstand it ; but she's left a lot of her own 
behind !" 

" Did she giye no hint of this? Has she left 
no explanation ?" 

"Well, I don't know about explanation. She's 
left a note for Mrs. Hammond, which I' ye got in 
my pocket. Mrs. Hammond gaye it to Mitford, 
and lie sent for me and handed it oyer, and asked 
me what I thouMit of it." 



174 RUN>s^IXG THE GAUNTLET. 

" It's not private, I suppose. May I look at 
it?" 

^^ By all means . nothing private about it. 
Can't conceive why Mitford gave it to me. I can 
do nothing with it." So saying, Captain Bligh 
took out the little scrap of paper from his waist- 
coat-pocket, and handed it to Alsager. 

There was no lono^er the least doubt about 
Laurence's mysterious correspondent. Both notes 
were in the same hand^vriting. 

At luncheon that day Miss Gillespie's disap- 
pearance was the principal theme of conversation, 
and many and various were the comments it 
evoked. Lady Mitford seemed a little scandaKsed 
by the circumstance ; but Mrs. Hammond, her first 
astonishment over, treated it very lightly. She had 
always thought Miss Gillespie a " curious person," 
she said ; there was always something "odd" about 
her. Yery likely, when they got back to town, 
they would find she woidd return to them. Per- 
haps, after all, the reason of her flight was that she 
was a little bored in the countrv. And then Mrs. 



COLONEL alsager's col^nsel. 175 

Hammond forgot all about Miss Gillespie in her 
delight at ha\dng Sir Charles Mitford sitting next 
her again, . at finding him paying her little atten- 
tions and compliments, talking to her in a dropped 
voice, and regarding her with deep tender glances, 
just as he had done in the first days of her visit to 
Eedmoor. She delighted in all this, and her de- 
hglit was increased when she marked the grave 
gloom on Laurence Alsager's face, as she shot a 
glance of saucy trimnph across at him. Tlien he 
guessed the meaning of Miss Gillespie's note more 
thorouo'hly than he had vet done. She had had 
some hold either on Mrs. Hammond or on Sir 
Charles ; that was gone, and he alone was left to 
do his best to keep them in check. And what 
could he do ? Any overt act of his would be 
misconstrued by Mrs. Hammond, and tm-ned to 
her own pm*poses, while over Mitford he had not 
the smallest power. What could he do ? Had 
Lord DoUamorc given any sign of intending to 
persecute Lady Mitford with his attentions, Lau- 
rence thought that his staying in the house might 
be of some use ; but Dollamorc had hitherto been 



176 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

perfectly respectful. So Alsager determined that 
he would remain a couple of days longer, and then 
start off for Knockholt. 

After luncheon a proposal was made to go and 
see some new horses which Captain Bligh had 
inspected when last in Torquay, and which he 
thought might be obtained as bargains. So most 
of the party adjourned to the stable-yard, where 
these horses had been brought; and the visit 
ended in a pair of them being put to, and Sir 
Charles and Mrs. Hammond mounting the phaeton 
to which they were harnessed. The horses were 
young and fresh, and plunged a great deal at 
starting ; but Sir Charles had them w^ell in hand, 
and with his companion by his side and a groom 
in the back-seat, went flying down the avenue. 
It was fall an horn- before they returned, and Sir 
Charles's verdict on the pair was that they were 
too hot to hold. He had had all his work, he 
said, to keep them at all within bounds. Mrs. 
Hammond looked flushed and elated; but she 
went straight up to Lady Mitford, and told her 
how she had enjoyed the drive, and was full of 



COLOXEL ALSAGER's COUNSEL. 177 

praises of Sir Charles's powers of coaclmiau- 
sliip. 

That evening Sir Charles took Mrs. Hammond 
in to the clinino'-room, and addressed liis conver- 
sation principally to her. He drank a great deal 
of wine both with and after dinner, and was in 
more boisterous spirits than any of his friends had 
yet seen him. When they went into the drawing- 
room he made straight for Mrs. Hammond's 
chair, and there he remained the whole evening, 
talking to her in a lowered tone, and regarding 
her with o-lances the fire of which had by no 
means been subdued hy the quantity of claret he 
had di'unk. Poor Georgie ! The events of this 
day, ctdmmating as they were, had totally upset 
her and had reduced her xevj much to the same 
condition as when she begged Alsager to be her 
charioteer to Egi'emont Priory. There could be no 
mistake about it now. Sui'ely it was a flagrant 
case ; and the colour flushed in her cheeks as she 
saw Mrs. Masters's shoulder-slirugs and marked 
Lord Dollamore's ill-disguised cynical manner. 
Poor Georgie ! She asked Mrs. Chartcris to sing, 

VOL. II. N 



178 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

and sat and listened to lier as usual, and thanked 
her at the end of the performance ; and she chatted 
with the T}TLTell girls, and she took the deepest 
interest in Mrs. Masters's embroidery, . and all the 
time her heart was sick within her, and she kept 
stealing glances at the couple seated in the. em- 
brasure of the window, with their heads so nearly 
touching. All present noticed her state of mind ; 
but no one understood it or pitied it like Laurence 
Alsager, who began to confess to himself that Avhat 
Dollamore had prophesied at the club was un- 
doubtedly coming true, so far as Mitford was con- 
cerned ; and did not the wife's future, even in 
Lord DoUamore's prophecy, hinge upon the hus- 
band's conduct ? It was a most horrible shame ; 
but how on earth vras he to protest against it? 
He had no position to enable him to do any thing 
of the kind. Tliere was only one thing that he 
could do, and that was to speak to Laura Ham- 
mond. He could do that; it might not be of 
mucli use, but lie would do it. 

So, accordingly, the next morning after break- 
fast Colonel Alsager sent to Mrs. Hammond a 



COLONEL ALSAGEPt's COL^'SEL. 179 

polite little note, in which he presented his com- 
pliments, and requested the pleasure of a few 
minutes' conversation; and to which a verbal 
answer was returned to the effect that Mrs. Ham- 
mond would be delighted to see Colonel Alsager, 
if he could come up at once. He followed the 
lady's-maid, and fomid Mrs. Hammond in the 
boudoir, dressed in her habit and hat. She re- 
ceived him with great cordiaKty. 

'' I am so sorry to have sent what may have 
seemed a peremptory message. Colonel Alsager," 
said she ; " but the fact is. Sir Charles has been 
round here jast now, and we have arranged a 
little riding-party, . ^lie and I, and Emily Tyrrell, 
and Captain Bligh, and Mr. Somers, and one or 
two more ; and I promised to be ready by eleven." 

" Make no excuses, pray," said Laurence, in 
a hard dry tone. " I won't detain you, as your 
time's valuable, by any preamble. I will simply 
ask, are you determined to persist in }'our present 
course ?" 

" In what course, my dear Colonel Alsager ?" 

^' In bringing destruction on a household. 



180 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Laura Hammond ! In blighting the happiness 
of a young wife, and spreading snares for a fool- 
ish husband ! In rendering yom^self conspicuous, 
and your host contemptible ! Do I speak plainly 
enough?" 

^' Scarcely," said she with a little smile; " for 
though you insult me, and give way to yom* own 
rage, you do not condescend to . or you dai'e not 
. explain your motives. Don't think that I am 
weak enough to imagine that you are jealous of 
me, Laurence. I laiow you too well for that. 
I know that whatever command I may have had 
over you is past and gone. But perhaps the pas- 
sion, the caprice that I had for you . call it what 
you will . continues. Suppose it does ? Suppose 
the sight of you, the meeting with you after so 
long a separation, has renewed the dormant 
flame? You scorn me, and I see you prostrate 
at the feet of a sweetly pretty piece of propriety 
and innocence . don't interrupt me, please . who 
then becomes my rival? Revenge is sweet, espe- 
cially to women, you know. This child of the 
fields makes herself my rival, . I make myself hers ! 



COLONEL ALSAGER's COL^N'SEL. 181 

I show to you and others, that if you care for me 
no longer, there are others who will. I show to 
her and others, that if she is preferred to me by 
one I . yes, I love, . I am preferred to her by one 
she loves. As yet I have never run second for 
any thing for Avhich I've entered. Colonel Alsager, 
and I don't intend to do so now." 

" You are arguing on utterly false premises, . 
you are talking Avorse than nonsense. Between 
me and the lady to whom 3'ou allude there is 
nothing. You need not smile in that way. I 
swear it I She is as pure as . " 

'' Oh, pray spare me ! Don't faU into raptures 
about her purity, . there's a good creatm'e. Dear 
me, dear me ! this must be a very bad case, when 
a man like Colonel Alsager takes a j:>oetical view 
of his lady-love, and talks about her purity." 

*^ I came to ask you to abandon this shameless 
flirtation, Laura Hammond, for the sake of our 
old fi'iendship, . as an act of kindness to me. Your 
reply is mockery and ridicule. I may use other 
means to bring about what I want." 

" Ah, you threaten ! Tlicn I shall certainly 



182 EUNXING THE GAUKTLET. 

get Mr. Hammond to figlit yon ! He was ont 
once at Xusser abaci, or Hylmijee, or some such 
place, I believe. And we can prop liim up on 
liis crutches, and get his man to hold him, and 
I've no doubt he'd be strono; enouo-h to fire a 
pistol. . Xo," she added, suddenly changing her 
tone, " don't threaten, and don't thwart me ; 
else let our innocent young friend look to her- 
self. I'll break her heart, and then I'll spoil 
her name, . that's all. And now, I really must 
run away. Sir Charles wiU have been waiting 
for me full ten minutes." She touched the brim 
of her hat, in salute, with the handle of her 
riding- whip, gathered up her habit with her other 
hand, and left the room. 

'' And that is the woman," said Lam-ence, 
looking after her, " for whom I nearly broke my 
heart : whose rejection of my suit caused me to 
leave England, . intending, hoping, never to re- 
turn. Great Heavens ! once in that state, what 
idiots we become ! Think of this fool flinging 
away a pearl of price, reputation, decency, . and 
all for that! Think of that poor child his wife 



COLONEL alsager's COL'XSEL. 183 

having pinned lier faith and her affections on to 
such a shallow oaf! There can be no doubt about 
Miss Gillespie's meaning now ; no doubt that, partly 
from innate devilry, partly from pique, Laura 
Hammond will pursue her scheme to the very 
end. And I am powerless to interfere." 

He went down into the library with tlie in- 
tention of writincT a letter to his father announcino- 
his immediate arrival ; but as he entered the room, 
he saw through tlie deep bay-window fronting 
him, which looked down upon the terrace, the 
cavalcade departing down the avenue. At some 
considerable distance behind the others rode Sir 
Charles Mitford and Mrs. Hammond ; and he was 
bending towards her, and talking in an apparently 
impressive manner. 

Laurence shrugged his shoulders and turned 
away in disgust; but he had not reached the 
writing-table before he heard a deep sigh, suc- 
ceeded by a passionate sobbing, and turning 
quickly round, saw Lady Mitford leaning against 
the window and half-hidden Ijy the hea^y cur- 
tains, . her face buried in her hands, her whole 



184 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

frame convulsed Avitli the violence of her grief 
Laurence would have retreated from the room, 
but his footsteps had attracted her attention ; and 
as she looked round their eyes met. He at once 
approached her, saying, " You will believe me 
when I say that it was quite by chance I entered 
the room. Lady Mitford, . without the least idea 
that you were here ; but I am glad now that I 
came, for you are, I fear, very unwell ; and . " 

" It is nothing," she said, with a strong but 
ineffectual effort to resume her usual calmness ; 
*^ it is nothing, indeed. Colonel Alsager ; a little 
silly woman's weakness . nothing more. I am 
over- tired, I think ; we ha^'O been up later the 
last few nights, you knoAv, and I am so totally un- 
used to dissipation even of the mildest kind." 

^^ You will be better when you return to Lon- 
don, perhaps," said Laurence ; "I have a strong 
notion that the marsh on this great Eedmoor is 
any thing but a sanitary adjunct to the property. 
I should really advise your getting back to town as 
soon as possible, now Parliament has met ; and 
soon every body will be there." 



COLONEL ALSAGER's COLrS'SEL. 185 

Li London, Laurence thought, ]\L's. Ham- 
mond will at all events be out of the house, and 
in other ijaietv there migiht be a chance of Mit- 
ford's gettino; rid of his infatuation. 

" Oh, I'm frightened at the veiy thought of 
returning to to^^^l ; and yet, down here, there 
are . I mean . it's . how very silly of me I . you 
must excuse me, Colonel Alsager, I am any thing 
but strong;" and poor Georgie's tears began to 
flow ao-ain. 

^' So I see," said Laurence, in a very gentle 
tone. She had seated herself in one corner of a 
low brown morocco-leather couch that stood across 
the window. Hitherto he had been standing, but 
he now placed himself at the other end of the 
sofa. 

" I think," said he, bending forward, and 
speaking in the same low earnest voice, . " I think, 
dear Lady Mitford, that you will be disposed to 
give me credit for taking a deep and friendly 
interest in you." 

She looked at him tlu'ouo;li the tears that still 
stood in her splendid eyes . a frank, trusting, honest 



186 EUXis^ING THE GAUNTLET. 

glance; and, as lie hesitated, slie said, ^' I know 
it . I have proved it." 

'' Tlien, tliongii jour sex is taught to believe 
that mine is thoroughly selfish and heartless, . never 
moving without some end for its own benefit in 
view, . you still believe that what I am about to 
say to you is dictated simply by the hope to serve 
you, the desire to see you happy ?" 

She bowed her head, but did not speak this 
time. Her tears were gone, but there was a pain- 
ful look of anxiety in her eyes, and the spasmodic 
motion of the muscles of the mouth betrayed her 
agitation. 

"You are very young," he continued, "and 
wholly unacrjuainted with the Avorld. I am cer- 
tainly past the freshness of youth, and I should 
think there are not many of my age more 
thoroughly versed in the vrorld's ways. And 
one of its ways, dear Lady Mitford, one of its 
never-failing and most repulsive ways is to rob 
life of the glamour with which youth invests it ; 
to hft up a corner of the silken curtain of the 
fairy temple and show the rough bare boards and 



COLONEL ALSAGER's C0L3SEL. 187 

wooden trestles beliincl it; to tlu'ow stumbling- 
blocks in tlie patlis of happiness, and to drag 
down those now falling to a lower depth ; to 
poison truth's well, to blacken innocence, and to 
sow. distrust and misery broadcast, . these are 
among the world's ways. To be pure, noble, 
and beloved, is at once to provoke the world's 
hatred. Is it any wonder then that some of its 
emissaries are plotting against you f 

A faint blush overspread her cheeks as she 
said, ^^ I have done nothing to provoke them." 

^^ Pardon me," said Laurence, " you have 
offended in the three ways I have just pointed 
out : there are few who offer such a combina- 
tion of offences. And the world will have revenge 
for all. To besmirch your purity, to lower the 
nobleness of your nature, are tasks which as yet 
it dare not attempt. But to prevent yom' being 
beloved, . by those whose love you have a right 
to claim, . is apparently, not really, fai* more 
easily done." 

'^ It is, indeed," cried poor Georgie, mourn- 
fidlv; "it is, indeed." 



188 ru]s:n^ing the gauntlet. 

" I said apparently, not really," continued 
Lam-ence. " To defeat such an attempt as tins 
is the easiest thing in the world, if you only have 
the savoir faire^ and will use the weapons in your 
armory. Even in the most purely pastoral times, 
love in marriage was not all that was requisite 
for happiness. If Phyllis had done nothing but 
sit at Cory don's feet and worship him . if she had 
not been his companion and friend as well as his 
wife, . now talking to him about the crop in the 
forty-acre pasture, now telling him of the pigs 
eating the beech-nuts under that wide-spreading 
tree where that lazy Tityrus used to lie in the 
summer ; moreover, if Corydon had not had his 
farm and flock to attend to, . he would at a very 
early period of their married life have left her 
solitary, while he sported with Amaryllis in the 
shade, or played with the tangle of IS^e^era's hair." 
He stopped as he marked her half-puzzled, 
half-frightened look. " Dear, dear Lady Mit- 
ford," he continued, "let me drop parable and 
mystery, and speak plainly to you. I am going 
away to-morrow or the next day, and should 



COLOXEL ALSAGER's COUNSEL. 189 

probably have left with tliis unsaid ; but the acci- 
dental sight of yoiu' sorrow has emboldened me 
to speak, and . and you know I would say no- 
tliing which you should not hear." 

At the last words she seemed reassured, and 
with a little effort she said, " Speak on, pray, 
Colonel Alsager; I know I can trust you en- 
tirely." 

'' Thank you," he said, with a -very sweet 
smile ; "I am very proud of that belief. Xow 
listen : you married when you were a child, and 
you have not yet put away childish things. Your 
notion of married life is a childish romance, and 
you are childislily beginning to be frightened be- 
cause a cloud has come over it. In his wife a 
man wants a companion as well as a plaything, 
and some one who will amuse as well as worship 
him. Your husband is essentially a man of this 
kind ; his resources within liimself are of the veiy 
smallest kind ; he cares very little for field-sports, 
and he conjugates the verb s'ennwjer throughout 
the entire day. Consequently, and not unnatu- 
rallv, he becomes readily charmed when anv one 



190 RUNNIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

amuses liim and takes him out of himself, . more 
especially if that some one be pretty and otherwise 
agreeable. Why should not you be that some 
one ? Why should not you, dropping . pardon 
me for saying it . a little of the visible worship 
with which you now regard him, . why should 
not you be his constant companion, riding with 
him, making him drive you out, planning schemes 
for his amusement ? If you once do this, and get 
him to look upon you as his companion as well as 
his wife, there will be no more cause for tears, 
Lady Mitford, depend upon it." 

"Do you think so? . do you really think so? 
Oh, I would give any thing for that !" 

"And get him to London quickly, above all 
things. You are to have your opera-box, I heard 
you say ; and there is the Park ; and in this your 
first season you will never be allowed to be quiet 
for an instant." 

" Yes ; I think you're right. I will ask 
Cliarley to go back to town at once. Tliere will 
be no difficulty, I think. The Charterises are gone ; 
Mrs. Masters and the Tyrrells go to-morrow ; and 



COLOXEL alsager's couxsel. 191 

Captain Bligh is going to Scotland to look at some 
shooting -quarters for Charley in the autumn. 
There are onlj . only the Hammonds." 

" I really do not think it necessary to take 
them into account in makino; vom' arrano-ements," 
said Laurence. '^ Besides, unless I'm very much 
mistaken, when Mrs. Hammond finds the house 
emptying, Mr. Hammond's bronchitis wiU either be 
so much better that there will be no liarm in his 
o-oino^ to to^Yn, or so much worse that there will 
be imperative necessity for his consulting a Lon- 
don physician." 

" And now, Colonel Alsager, how can I suffi- 
ciently thank you for all this kind advice ?" said 
Georgie hesitatingly. 

" By acting up to it, dear Lady Mitford. I 
hope to hear the best accomit of your health and 
spirits." 

" To hear I Will you not be in London ?" 

" Xot just at present. I am at last really 
going to my father's, and shall remain there a few 
weeks. But I shall hear about }'ou from Bertram, 



192 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

'' There will be no one more welcome," said 
she, frankly putting out her hand. 

Just at that moment the door opened, and Mr. 
Banks advanced and handed a closed envelope to 
Alsager, saying, " From the railway. Colonel." 

It was a telegraphic message ; and as such 
things were rare in those days, Laurence's heart 
smik within him before he broke the envelope. 
It was from Dr. Galton at Knockholt, and said, 

" Lose no time in coming. Sir Peregrine has 
had a paralytic stroke." 

Half an hour afterwards Lam'ence was in a 
phaeton spinning to the railway. His thoughts 
were friU of self-reproach at his having hitherto 
neglected to go to his father ; but ever across 
them came a vision of Georgie Mitford in the 
passion of her grief. " Ah, poor child," he said 
to himself, "" how lovely she looked, and what a 
life she has in prospect ! I am glad I have left 
her, for it was beginning to grow desperate . and 
vet how I long, oh, how I long, to be at her side 



CHAPTER IX. 

KXOCKHOLT PARK. 

The old home Avliicli Laurence Alsager had so 
long shghted, and to which his heart suddenly 
tumed with a strange wild longing, almost power- 
ful enough, he thought, to anniliilate the space 
between it and Redmoor, had seen many genera- 
tions of Alsagers beneath its peaked and gabled 
roof. The house stood in a fine park, and oc- 
cupied a commanding situation on the slope of a 
well-wooded hill. The features of the scenery 
were such as are familiar in the midland counties : 
rich and fertile beauty, with uplands ankle-deep 
in meadow-grass, tall patriarchal trees, which 
stood in solemn unending conclave, group by 
group or singly, with benignant outstretched 
arms, and wide-spread mantle of green and rus- 
set; bright shallow streams, flashing under the 
VOL. II. 



19-1 RUN^^IXG THE GxVUNTLET. 

sunbeams, and rij^pling darkly in the shade. All 
the land about the picturesque and irregular old 
house was laid out, partly by nature and partly 
by art, on ornamental principles; and away to the 
right and left stretched a Avide expanse of farm- 
lands, whose aspect suggested a thorough practical 
knowledge of the science of husbandry, and a 
satisfactory return in profit. The house was sur- 
rounded by a broad stone-terrace, bounded by a 
low balustrade, and flanked at each of the corners 
by a large stone -vase containing flowers, which 
varied with the season, but were never missing 
from these stately jardinieres. These Abases were 
tended, in common with the formal flower-garden 
and the particular pet parterre which she called 
"her own," by Helen Manningtree, the orphan 
ward of Sir Peregrine Alsager, whom Laurence 
remembered as a quiet pretty little girl, who had 
been frank and free with him in her childhood, 
timid and reserved wlien he had last seen her, 
just before he had been driven abroad by the 
furies of disappointment and wounded pride, and 
whom he was now to meet again, a grace- 



KXOCKHOLT PAKK. 195 

fill, gracious, well - disciplined, and attractive 
woman. 

Knockliolt Park was one of those rare places 
which present a perfect combination of luxury and 
comfort to the beholder, and impress the latter 
element of their constitution upon the resident 
visitor. Bien etre seemed to reign there ; and the 
very peacocks which sti'utted upon the terrace, 
and tapped at the dining-room window as soon as 
Sir Peregrine had taken his accustomed seat at 
the head of the long table, seemed less restless in 
their vanity and brighter in their plumage than 
their confreres of the neighbom'ing gentlemen's 
seats. The brute creation had fine times of it at 
Knockholt Park, except, of course, such of their 
number as came under the denomination of ver- 
min ; and those Sir Peregrine was too good a 
farmer, to sav nothino; of his beino; too enthu- 
siastic a sportsman, to spare. Horses were in 
good quarters in the stables and the paddocks of 
Knockholt Park ; and well-to-do dogs were to be 
found every where, the kennel and the dining- 
room included. Sir Peregrine had the liking for 



196 KUMs'DsG THE GAUKTLET. 

animals to be observed in all kindly natures wbicli 
are solitary without being studious, and which 
affords to such natures a subtle pleasure, a sym- 
pathy which does not jar with their pride, a com- 
panionship which does not infringe upon their 
exclusiveness. 

Sir Peregrine Alsager was essentially a soli- 
tary man, though he hunted pretty regularly and 
shot a little ; though he fulfilled the duties of 
county hospitality with resignation, which county 
perceptions mistook for alacrity; and though he 
associated as much as most resident country 
gentlemen with the inmates of his house. Tliese 
inmates were Helen Manningtree and her ci-devant 
governess, Mrs. Cliisholm, a ladylike accomplished 
person, and a distant relative of Sir Peregrine, 
who had offered her a home with him when the 
charge of Helen had devolved upon him, almost 
simultaneously with the death of Mrs. Chisholm's 
husband, . an over- worked yomig curate, who had 
fallen a victim to an epidemic disease, in conse- 
quence of the prevalence of which in the parish 
his rector had found it necessary to remove him- 



KNOCKHOLT PARK. 197 

self and liis family to a more salubrious climate, 
but had not found it necessary to procure any 
assistance for the ciu'ate. They were pleasant in- 
mates, but scarcely interesting, . would hardly have 
been so to a younger man ; and there was a cer- 
tain reserve in Sir Peregi'ine's manner, though it 
never lacked kindness, and was distinguished for 
its courtesy and consideration, which maintained 
their relative positions quite unchanged. A young 
girl would have been an unintelligible creatm-e 
to Sir Peregrine, even if she had been his ovm 
daughter; and he contented himself with taking 
care that all Helen's personal and intellectual wants 
were amply supplied, and all her tastes consulted 
and gratified : he left the reading of the enigma 
to others, or was content that it should remain 
unread. 

Life at Knockholt Pai'k had rolled on very 
smoothly on the whole, until the accident which 
recalled his son to his neglected home had befallen 
Sir Peregrine ; and if the master of the fine old 
house and the fine old estate had had a good deal 
of loneliness, some bitterness, not a little wistful 



198 FtUXXIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

liac^o'ard remembrance and yearninp; reo;ret, a sense 
of discordance where lie longed for harmony, with 
a disheartening conviction that he had not the 
faculties requisite for setting it right, and ^yould 
never find them in this world, among his daily 
experiences, the decent and decorous mantle of 
pride had hidden these discrepancies in the general 
order of things from every perception but liis own. 
If the hale old gentleman, on whom every eye 
looked with respect, and who had filled liis 
place with honour all the days of his life, had 
unseen companions in those walks shared visibly 
by his dog alone ; if the handsome stately libraiy 
where he sat o' nights, and read all that a country 
gentleman is ever expected to read, was haunted 
now and then by a shadowy presence, by a beck- 
oning hand ; if the gentle whisper of a voice, 
whose music was heard in its full melody among 
the angels only, came oftener and more often, as 
"the tender o'race of a day that was dead" re- 
ceded more and more into the past, and stirred the 
slow pulses of the old man's heart, . he was all the 
happier, with such solemn happiness as remem- 



KXOCKHOLT TARK. 199 

brance and anticipation can confer, and no one 
was the wiser. 

If " county society" in tliose parts liad been 
brighter as a collective body, or if tlie individuals 
who composed it had had clearer notions of mili- 
tary life, and the obligations of a lieutenant-colo- 
nel, the long absence of Laurence Alsager from 
his father's house might have been made a sub- 
ject of ill-natured and wondering comment ; but 
the particular county to which Knockliolt and its 
master belonged was rather remarkable for ob- 
tuseness, and there was a certain something about 
the old baronet which rendered it impossible to 
say unpleasant things in his presence, and difficult 
even to say them in his absence ; and so Laurence 
Alsager escaped almost scot-free. Helen Man- 
ningtree felt some indignant wonder occasionally 
at the only son's prolonged absence from his 
fiithcr . indignant, bo it observed, on Sir Pere- 
grine's account, not on her own. Helen was very 
sensible, and as little vain as it was 2)ossible for 
a nice-looking and attractive girl to be, without 
attaining a painful height of perfection ; and so 



200 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

she did not wonder that Laurence Alsager had not 
been induced by curiosity to see her . of whom Sir 
Peregrine had doubtless frequently spoken to him 
. to visit his old home. Her life had been too 
simple and well regulated to enable her to com- 
j^rehend an estrangement between father and son 
arising from diversity of sentiment alone ; but it 
had also been so devoid of strong affections, of 
vivid emotions, that she was not likely to regard 
Laurence Alsager's conduct from a particularly 
elevated point of view. It was wrong, she thought, 
and odd ; but if Laurence had gone to Knockliolt 
at stated periods, and had conformed outwardly 
to filial conventionalities, Helen would have been 
the last person in the world to perceive that any 
thincr was wantino; to the streno^th and sweetness 

o o o 

of the relationship between Sir Peregrine and his 
only son. 

Mrs. Cliisholm . a woman who had known love 
and bereavement, struggle and rest, but who was 
childless, and in whom, therefore, that subtlest 
instinct which gives comprehension to the dullest 
had never been awakened . felt about it all much 



KNOCKHOLT PARK. 201 

as Helen did; but she expressed less, and tlie little 
she permitted herself to say was cold and vague. 
Coldness and vagueness characterised Mrs. Chis- 
holm, because sorrow had early chilled her heart, 
and no one whom she loved had ever addressed 
himself to the awakeninor of her intellect. The 

o 

curate had not had time, poor fellow ; he had had 
too much to do in persuading people to go to 
church who would not be persuaded ; and Ids 
Sophy had been so pretty in the brief old time, so 
cheerful, so notable, so lovable and beloved, that 
it had never occurred to him that her mind might 
have been a little larger and a little stronger with 
advantage. Tlie time was brief, and the curate 
died in the simple old faith, leaving his pretty 
Sophy to outlive him, his love, and her prettiness, 
but never to outlive his memory, or to cease to 
glory in that unutterably -precious recollection, 
that her husband had never found fault with her 
in his life. On the whole, then, Laurence Alsager 
was gently judged and mildly handled by the worthy 
people who had the best right to criticise his con- 
duct; and perhaps the knowledge that tliis was the 



202 EUXNIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

case added keenness to tlic pang of self-reproach, 
wliicli made liis self-inflicted punishment, Avitli 
wMcli lie read tlie brief but terrible news flashed 
to his conscious heart along the mar\-eUous elec- 
tric wire. 

Evenino: had fallen over stream and meadow, 
over upland and forest, at Knockholt. It had 
come with the restless and depressing influence 
which contrasts so strangely with the calm and 
peace it brings to the fulness of life and health, 
into the lofty and spacious chamber where Sir 
Peregrine lay, prostrate mider the victorious hand 
of paralysis. The mysterious influence of serious 
illness, the shadow of the wings of the Angel of 
Death, rested heavily upon the whole of that de- 
corously-ordered house; and the watchers in the 
chamber of helplessness, it may be of pam, . who 
can teU ? who can interpret the enforced stillness, 
the inexorable dumbness of that dread disease ? . 
succumbed to its gloom. Mrs. Chisholm and 
Helen were there, not, indeed, close by the bed, 
not watching eagerly the motionless form, but 
gazing alternately at each other and at the doctor. 



KN'OCKHOLT PARK. 203 

vrho kept a vigilant watcli over the patient. Tliis 
watch had, if possible, increased in intensity since 
sunset, at which time Dr. Galton had perceived a 
change, visible at fii'st to the eye of science alone. 
Tlie- dreadful immobility had certainly relaxed ; the 
rigidity of the features, blended with an indescri- 
bable but wofully- perceptible distortion of the 
habitual expression, had softened; the plum-like 
blueness of the lips had faded to a hue less start- 
lingly contrasted with that of the shrmiken and 
ashy features. 

^' He Avill recover from this attack, I hope . I 
tliink," said the doctor, in answer to a mute ques- 
tion which he read in Helen's eyes, as he stood 
upright after a long and close investigation of the 
patient. "Yes, he will outlive this. I wish 
Colonel Alsager were here." 

" We may expect him very soon," Mrs. Chis- 
liolm said; "he would start immediately of com'se, 
and we know tlie telegraph-message would reach 
in time for him to catch the up-train." 

As she spoke, wheels were heard on the dis- 
tant carriage-di'ive. Sir Peregrine's room was on 



204 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

the north side, that farthest from the approach; 
and immediately afterwards a servant gently 
opened the door . ah, with what needless caution ! 
. and told Mrs. Chisholm that the Colonel had 
arrived, and desired to see her. Tliere was more 
awkwardness than agitation in Mrs. Chisholm's 
manner as she hurriedly rose to comply w^ith this 
request, but was interrupted by Dr. Galton, who 
said: 

'' No, no, my dear madam, . I had better see 
him myself; I can make him understand the 
necessary care and caution better than you can." 

Mrs. Chisholm returned to her seat in silent 
acquiescence ; and for the ensuing half-hour she 
and Helen sat sadly looking at the helpless form 
upon the bed, and occasionally whispering to one 
another their several impressions of how Laurence 
Alsager " would bear it." 

What Laurence Alsager had to bear, and how 
he bore it, was not for any one to see. He held 
himself aloof even from the gentle scrutiny he had 
so little reason to dread. Li half-an-hour Dr. 
Galton reentered Sir Peregrine's room, looking 



KXOCKHOLT PARK. 205 

yer}' grave, and requested Mrs. Cliisliolm and 
Helen to withdraw. 

"I am going to let Colonel Alsager see his 
father," he said; ^' and I think there should be 
no one else by. We can never know exactly how 
much or how little the patient feels, or knows, or 
is affected, in cases like these ; but one at a time 
is an admirable rule." 

" He will find us in the long drawing-room when 
he wishes to see us," said Mrs. Chisholm; and then 
she and Helen left the room, and went in silence 
along the wide corridor, and down the broad flat 
staircase of fine white stone, with its narrow strip of 
velvet-pile carpeting and its heav}^ carved balus- 
trade, terminated by a fierce figure in armour hold- 
ing a glittering spear, with a mimic banderol bla- 
zoned with the device of the Alsasers. Tlie wide 
stone hall, at the opposite extremity of which the 
door of the long drawing-room stood open, the hea\y 
velvet lyortiere Avithdrawn, was hmig with trophies 
of the chase and of war. Tiger-skins, buffalo- 
horns, the cUpouilles of the greater and the lesser 
animals which man so loves to destroy, adorned 



206 RUXNIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

its walls, diversified by several handsome speci- 
mens of Indian arms, and a French helmet, pistol, 
and sabretache. Four splendid wood-car^dngs, 
representing such scenes as Snyders has painted, 
were conspicuous among the orthodox ornaments 
of the hall. Tliey were great favourites with Sir 
Peregrine, who had bought them in one of the old 
Belgian cities on the one only occasion when he 
had visited foreign parts . an awful experience, to 
which he had been Avont to allude with mingled 
pride and repugnance. Helen glanced at them 
sadly as she crossed the hall ; then tm-ned her head 
carelessly in the direction of the great door, which 
stood open, and before which a huge black New- 
foundland lay at full length upon the marble steps. 
At the same moment the dog, whose name was 
Faust, rose, wagged his tail, twitched his ears, 
and cantered down the steps, and across the ter- 
race in an oblique direction. 

" Who is that, Helen ?" asked Mrs. Chisholm, 
as she caught sight of Faust's swift- vanishing 
form. " Some one is coming whom the dog 
knows." 



IvXOCKHOLT PARK. 207 

"It is only Mr. Farleigh," answered Helen ; 
but her reply must have been made quite at ran- 
dom, for she had not advanced another step in the 
direction of the door, and could not possibly have 
seen, from her position in the hall, who was ap- 
proaching the house at that moment. 

Mrs. Chishohn had a natural and spontaneous 
inclination towards curates. She respected . in- 
deed, she admired . all the ranks of the hierarchy 
and all their members, and she never could be in- 
duced to regard them as in any way divided in 
spirit or opinions. Tliey were all sacred creatures 
in her eyes, from the most sucking of curates to the 
most soapy of bishops ; but the curates had the pre- 
eminence in the order of this remarkably unworldly 
woman's estimation. Her Augustine had been a 
cm-ate ; he might, indeed, have become a bishop in 
the fulness of time, and supposing the order of 
merit to have been attended to by the prime- 
minister in 'posse ; but fate had otherwise decreed, 
and his apotheosis had occurred at the curate- 
stage of his career. For this perfectly laudable 
and appreciable reason Mrs. Chisholm liked the 



208 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Reverend Cutlibert Farleigh, and would have 
liked him had he been the silliest, most common- 
place, most priggish young parson in existence . 
had he had weak eyes and a weak mind, Low- 
Church opinions, and a talent for playing the 
flute. But the Reverend Cutlibert had none of 
these things. On tlie contrary, he was a hand- 
some manly young fellow, who looked as if he 
possessed an intellect and a conscience, and was 
in the habit of using both ; who had a tall well- 
built figure, fine expressive dark eyes, and an in- 
dependent, sensible, cheerful manner, which few 
people could have resisted. Helen Mamiingtree 
had never made any attempt at resisting it. She 
had known Cutlibert Farleigh for eighteen months, 
and she had been in love with him just twelve out 
of the numl:>er. She was not aware of the circum- 
stance at first, for she had had no experience of 
similar feelings ; she had had none of the preli- 
minary feints and make-believes which frequently 
precede the great passion of such persons as are 
calculated to feel a great passion, and the tepid 
sincerity of such as are not. Helen had never 



KNOCKHOLT PAEK. 209 

experienced a sensation of preference for any one 
of the limited and not very varied number of 
young country gentlemen ^vliom she had met since 
she " came out" (the term had a restricted signifi- 
cance in her case); and when she did experience 
and avow to herself such a sentiment in the in- 
stance of the Reverend Cuthbeii: Farleigh, she 
readily accounted for it to herself by impressing 
on her own memory that, however young he 
might look and be, he was her spiritual pastor 
and master . and, of course, that occult influence 
affected her very deeply . and by making up her 
mind that he preached beautifully. -And Cuth- 
bert ? What was the young lady with the brown 
eyes, and the bro^\ai curls, and the fresh healtliful 
complexion ; the young lady who was not indeed 
strictly beautiful, nor, perhaps, exactly pretty, but 
who was so charming, so graceful, so thoroughly 
well-bred ; such an innate lady in thought, word, 
and deed, in accent, in gesture, in manner ; . 
what was she to him ? He had asked himself that 
same question many a time ; he asked it now, as 
he came up to the open door . rarely sluit at Knock- 
VOL. II. P 



210 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

holt Park, save in the rigorous depths of winter . 
and he came to the conckision, as he thought of 
the manifest hixnry and elegance in whose enjoy- 
ment Helen had been reared, and of the probable 
fortune which she would possess, that he had better 
postpone answering it mitil he should have become 
a bishop. 

Helen, who did not try to analyse her o'SAai 
perturbations, and was wholly unconscious of 
Cuthbert's, received him with her accustomed 
gentle sweetness, but with a sedate and mournfal 
gravity adapted to the circumstances. When the 
ladies had brought their lengthy and minute nar- 
rative to a close . a narrative which embraced 
only the history of twenty-four hours, for Cuth- 
bert was a regular and attentive visitor . he in- 
quired about Colonel Alsager. Had he been 
informed ? had he been sent for ? had he come ? 

'^ Yes, to all yom- questions, Mr. Farleigh. 
Colonel Alsager is now in the house, in Sir Pere- 
grine's room ; but as yet we have not seen him." 

Tlie sensitive and expressive face of the cm-ate 
was clouded by a look of pain and regret. He 



KXOCKHOLT PARK. 211 

and Colonel Alsagcr liad never met ; but the 
young clergyman knew Sir Peregrine better, per- 
haps, than any other person knew him, and re- 
spected- him deeply. He coidd not regard Lau- 
rence's conduct so lightly, he could not acquit 
him as easily, as others did. He blamed him 
heavily, as he sat and listened to the women's 
talk ; and with the . blame keen compassion min- 
gled; for he knew, with the mysterious insight 
of a sympathetic nature, all that he must suffer 
in realising that regret must be in vain, must be 
wasted now, must be too late. 

The occasion was too solenm to admit of so 
trivial a feeling as curiosity- ; but had it not been 
so, that feminine sentiment would undoubtedly 
have predominated among the emotions with which 
Mrs. Chisholm and Helen Manningtree received 
Colonel Alsager, when, after a leng-thened inter^-al, 
he made his appearance in the long drawing-room. 
As it was, their mutual greetings were kindly but 
subdued. Tlic presence of illness and danger in 
the house superseded all minor considerations, and 
Colonel Alsager might have been a guest as fa- 



212 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

miliar as he was in reality strange, for all the 
emotion his presence excited. Mrs. Chishohn 
introduced Cuthbert Farleigh, and added to the 
usual formula a few words to the effect that he 
was a favoured guest with Sir Peregrine, which 
led Alsager to receive the introduction warmly, 
and to j^rosecute the acquaintance with zeal. Tlie 
curate thawed under the influence of the ColonePs 
genial manner, . so warm and attractive, with all 
its solemn impress of regret, fear, and uncertainty. 
After a little while the women went away again 
to resume their dreary watch : and Dr. Galton 
came do^^m to make his report, and to join 
Alsager at his late and much-needed dinner. A 
telegraphic message had been sent to London to 
seek further medical assistance ; but the great man, 
who could do so little, could not reach Knock- 
holt before the mornino'. In the mean time there 
was little change in the state of the patient ; but 
Dr. Galton adhered to the hopefiil opinion he had 
formed at sunset. Cuthbert Farleigh went away 
from the Park, and sat down to the preparation 
of his Sunday's sermon with a troubled mind. 



KNOCKHOLT PARK. 213 

"What a capital, good fellow Alsager is," lie 
thought, " with all his faults ! What a number 
of questions he asked about her! He takes a 
great interest in her. Well, it would be a very 
natural and a very nice thing." It is granted, 
is it not, on all hands, that the abandonment of 
projjer names and the substitution of pronouns . 
which, whether personal or impersonal, are at 
all events demonstrative . is a very suspicious cir- 
cumstance in certain cases ? 

Sir Peregrine Alsager did not die, as Laurence 
had thought, and dreaded that he was to die, with 
the silence between them unbroken, the estrange- 
ment unremoved. Notliing could undo the past, 
indeed; but the present was given to the father 
and son ; and its preciousness was valued duly 
by them both. In a few days after Laurence's 
arrival the paralysis loosened its grasp of his 
father's faculties ; and though he still lay in his 
bed shrunk, shrivelled, and helpless, he could see, 
and hear, and speak. Sometimes his words were 
a little confused, and a slight but distressing lapse 



214 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

of memory caused him to pause and try painfully 
first to recall the word he wanted, and next to 
accomplish its utterance ; but gradually this . diffi- 
culty wore away, and the old man spoke freely, 
though little. He was greatly changed by his ill- 
ness, . was most pathetically patient ; and his face, 
a little distorted by the shock, and never more to 
wear the healthy hue of his vigorous age, assumed 
an expression of tranquil waiting. The supre- 
macy of his will was gone with the practical abo- 
lition of his authority. He let it slip mmoticed. 
He cared little for any thing now but the presence 
of his son and the progress of the mornings and 
the evenings which were making the week-days 
of his life, and wearing towards the dawn of the 
eternal Sabbath. He liked to have Helen with 
him, and would regard her with miwonted interest 
and tenderness, . keenest when she and Laurence 
met beside his couch, and tans:ed together, as they 
came gradually to do, very often at first for his 
sake, and afterwards, as he hoped, as he never 
doubted, for their own. Yes, the keen anxiety, 
the foresight, the intensifying of former mental 



KNOCKHOLT PARK. 215 

attributes which characterise some Idnds of phy- 
sical decay in persons of a certain intellectual and 
moral constitution and calibre, showed themselves 
strongly in Sir Peregrine Alsager, and centred 
themselves in liis son. He had asked nothing, 
and had heard little of his wandering and purpose- 
less life ; but that little had made the old man . 
held back now, on the brink of the eternal verity, 
by no scruples of coldness, of pride, of pique, or of 
scrupulosity . very anxious that his son should 
marry, and settle do^vn to live at Knockholt Park 
at least a fair proportion of the year. With that 
considerate, but perhaps, after all, beautiful, sim- 
plicity which restores to age the faith of youth, 
and builds her shrines for aU the long-shattered 
idols. Sir Peregrine reasoned of his own life and 
his own experience, and applied his deductions to 
liis son's far different case. He was, however, too 
wise to put his wishes into words, or even to make 
them evident without words, to their objects. But 
there were two persons in the small group who 
tenanted Knockholt Park who laiew that the dear- 
est wish of Sir Peregrine's heart, that desire wliich 



216 r.UNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

overpassed the present and projected itself into 
tlie inscrutable futm-ej when its fruition might 
perchance never be known to him, was that Lau- 
rence Alsager, his son, should marry Helen Man- 
ningtree, his ward. Tlie two who had penetrated 
the innermost feelino-s of the old man were Cuth- 
bert Farleigh and Mrs. Chisholm. 

How sped the days with Colonel Alsager in 
the old home? Heavily, to say the least of it. 
He had midergone strong excitement of various 
kinds ; and now reaction had set in, with the un- 
speakable relief of his father's reprieve from im- 
mediate death. During his journey from Kedmoor 
to Knockholt he had been an unresisting prey to 
bitter and confused regrets ; so bitter, they seemed 
almost like remorse ; so unavailing, they touched 
the confines of despair. The scenes in which he 
had lately played a part, the problems he had 
been endeavom-ing to solve, rushed from his ^dew, 
and retired to the recesses of his memory, . to come 
out again, and occupy him more closely, more 
anxiously than ever, when the cruel grasp of sus- 
pense and terror was removed from his heart ; 



KXOCKHOLT PARK. 217 

when the monotony of the quiet house, and the 
life regulated by the exigencies of that of an in- 
valid, had fairly settled do\Mi upon him ; when 
all the past seemed distant, and aU the future 
had more than the ordinary uncertainty of human 
existence. Tliere was no estrangement between 
Laurence and his father now ; but the son knew 
that there was no more similarity than before. 
Their relative positions had altered, and with the 
change old things had passed away. Tlie ]oale 
and shrunken old man who lay patiently on liis 
couch beside the large window of the library at 
Knockliolt, at which the peacocks had now learned 
to tap and the dogs to sniff, was not the silent 
though urbane, the hale and arriere countiy gen- 
tleman to whom his Guardsman's life had been an 
unattractive mystery, and all his ways distasteful. 
That Guardsman's life, tliose London ways, the 
shibboleth of his set, even the distinctive peculi- 
arities of his own individuality, had all been laid 
aside, almost obliterated, by the ch'ead reality 
which had drawn so near, and still, as they both 
knew, was unobtrusively ever nigh at hand. 



218 RU^'KDsG THE GAUNTLET. 

Father aiid son were much together at certain 
regulated times ; and Laurence was mifaihng in 
his scrupulous observance of all the wishes, his 
intuitive perception of all the fancies of the in- 
valid. Still tliere were many hom's of solitude 
to be got through in every day ; and Laurence 
Alsas:er held stricter and truer commune with his 
own heart, while they passed over the dial, than 
he had ever been used to hold. Tlie quiet of the 
house; the seclusion of the Park, in which he 
walked and rode; the formal beauty of the garden, 
where he strolled with Helen Manningtree, and 
listened to her enthusiastic expectations of what 
its appearance would be when the time of flowers 
should have fully arrived; the regularity of the 
household ; the few and trivial interruptions fi'om 
without ; . all these things had a strong influence 
on the sensitive temperament of Laurence Alsager, 
and gradually isolated him within himself. There 
was nothing to disturb the retrospective and intro- 
spective cm-rent of his thoughts ; and in those 
quiet weeks of waiting he learned much of him- 
self, of life, and of truth . Imowledge which other- 



KNOCKHOLT PARK. 219 

wise might never have come to him. It was not 
very long before his mind recurred painfully to 
Redmoor and its mistress, whom he had left in 
a position of diiScuIty and danger. He remem- 
bered the counsel he had given her, and he won- 
dered whether it might avail. He pondered on 
all the eventualities which the trisie sagesse of a 
man of the world taught him to anticipate, and 
longed for power to avert them or to alter their 
character. He learned some wholesome lessons in 
these vain aspirations, and looked deeper into the 
stream of life than he had ever looked before. 

He looked at Lady Mitford's position from 
every point of view; he Aveighed and measured 
her trials, and then he began to speculate upon 
her temptations. All at once it struck him that 
he had ceased to fear Lord Dollamore ; that that 
distinguished personage had somehow dropped out 
of his calculations ; that he was occupying himself 
rather with her sentimental griefs than with the 
serious danger which he had believed, a little 
while ago, menaced her reputation and her posi- 
tion. He feared Laura Hammond, and he ar- 



220 RUXXIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

dently desired to penetrate the full meaning of 
Miss Gillespie's warning. He perfectly understood 
the difficulty of conveying to a mind so innocent 
as that of Lady Mitford the full force and meaning 
of the counsel he had given her, the hopelessness 
of inducing her to arm herself with a woman's 
legitimate weapon . the strong desire to please, . 
and getting her to use it against her hushand. 
She did not lack intelligence, but she did not 
possess tact; and her nature was too refined and 
straightforward to give her any chance in so mi- 
equal a contest as that into which her husband's 
wortlilessness had forced her. 

And now another truth came steadily up from 
the abyss into which Alsager was always gazing, 
and confronted him. Tliat truth was the motive 
which animated his thoughts and inspired his per- 
ceptions ; which gave him so clear an insight into 
Lady Mitford's position, and enabled him to read 
her heart with more distinctness than she herself 
could have interpreted it. One day Lam'ence 
Alsao^er knew, and aclaiowledo^ed to himself what 
this motive was, whence came this intuition. He 



KXOCKHOLT PARK. 221 

loved Georgie Mitford. Yes : the idle specula- 
tion, the indignation of a true gentleman at be- 
holding the innocent wronged and the trusting 
deceived ; the loyal instinct of protection ; the 
contemptuous anger which had led him to detest 
Laura Hammond and to desire her discomfitm-e ; 
the tender and true sympathy of a world-worn 
man with a pure and simple woman, to whom the 
w^orld and its ways are all unknown and unsus- 
pected; the sin-inking from beliolding the suffer- 
ing which experience must inflict, . all these had 
been evident . they had existed in utter integrity 
and ^-itality. Alsager had not deceived himself 
then, neither did he deceive himself now ; and 
though they still existed, they had receded from 
their prominence, . they did but supplement an- 
other, a more powerful, a more vital reality. He 
loved her . he never doubted the fact, never ques- 
tioned it more. He loved her v/ith a love as much 
superior to, as much stronger, holier, truer, and 
more vital tlian, any love which lie had ever be- 
fore felt or fancied . as his present self-commmie 
was more candid, searching, and complete than 



222 EUNNIN'G THE GAUNTLET. 

any counsel ever previously held in tlie secret 
chambers of his brain and heart. He had set- 
tled this point with himself, and was moodily 
pondering on the possible consequences of the 
fact, and on the alteration in his own position 
towards Lady Mitford which it implied, when he 
received a letter from Georgie. It was not the 
first, . several notes had passed between them in 
the easy intimacy of their acquaintance ; but it 
was the first since that acquaintance had strength- 
ened into friendsliip. And now, for him, fi'iend- 
ship too had passed away, and in its place stood 
love . dangerous, delicious, entrancing, bewildering 
love. So Georgie' s letter had altogether a differ- 
ent value and significance for him now. This was 
the letter : 

" Eedmoor, . Karch 18 . . 

" Dear Colonel Alsagee, . Sir Charles re- 
ceived your kind note, but has been too busy to 
write ; so he has asked me to do so, and I comply 
with ver}' great pleasm'e. I need hardly say how 
truly glad we were to hear of th^ improvement in 
Sir Peregrine's state, and how earnestly we hope 



KNOCKHOLT PARK. 223 

lie may completely rally. All things are going on 
here much as usual. Poor Mr. Hammond is very 
ill, . failing rapidly, I am sure ; this week he is 
suffering fearfully from bronchitis. They talked 
of going away, but that is of course impossible. I 
am a good deal with him, and I think he likes me. 
Lord Dollamore has come back from town, and is 
staying here, . doing notliing but lounge about 
and watch every body. Is there any chance that 
we shall have the pleasure of seeing you again 
if we are detained here much longer ? I hoped 
Charley would have taken me to see my father, 
who has been ailing this cold spring weather ; but 
I fear the long delay here will prevent that, . he 
will be impatient to get to town as soon as pos- 
sible. Pray let us hear from you how Sir Pere- 
grine is. Charley is out, but I know I may add 
his kindest regards to my own. . Yours, dear Co- 
lonel Alsager, always sincerely, 

'^ Georgina Mitford. 
"P.S. I have not forgotten your advice for 
a minute, nor ceased to act upon it, and to thank 
you for it fi'om mv heart. But . it is so difficult to 



224 RU]S^^ING THE GAUNTLET. 

yvrite upon tliis subject . difficult to me to write 
on anjj for, as you know, I am not clever, un- 
fortunately for me. Could you not come ?" 

Laurence read and re-read this simple letter 
witli unspeakable pain and keen irrepressible de- 
light. She trusted him ; she thought of him ; she 
wished for his presence ! Could he not come ? 
she asked. No ; he could not. But supposing he 
could . ought he? Well, he was a brave man 
and a true, and he faced that question also. How 
he answered it remains to be seen. 

The days passed at Knockholt Park, and re- 
sembled each other very closely. Laurence saw 
a good deal of Cuthbert Farleigh, and liked him 
much. He wondered a little, after the manner of 
men, at the content yielded by a life so unlike his 
own, or any that his fancy had ever ])ainted ; 
but if he and the cm-ate did not sympathise, they 
coalesced. Lam'ence wrote again to, and heard 
again from. Lady Mitford. 

There was not much in her letter apart from 
her kind and spnpathising comments upon his ; 



KNOCKHOLT PARK. 225 

but he pjatherecl a o:oocl deal from tlie tone which 
unconsciously pervaded it. He learned that she 
had not succeeded in breaking up the party at 
Eedmoor; that Sir Charles had invited a fresh 
relay of county guests ; that Mr. Hammond's 
health was very precarious ; and that Georgie had 
not been gratified in her wish to see her father. 
The letter made him more uneasy, more sad, by 
its reticence than by its revelations. If he could 
but have returned to Redmoor ! . but it was im- 
possible. If he could have left his father, how 
was he to have accounted for an uninvited return 
to Sir Charles Mitford's house ? He did not 
choose, for many reasons, to assume or cultivate 
such relations with the worthy Baronet as going 
there in an informal manner would imply. 

So March and April slipped awa}', and Lau- 
rence Alsager was still at Knockholt, in close 
attendance upon his father. One day in the last 
week of April, Laurence was returning from a 
sohtary ramble in the park, intending to read to 
his father for a while, if he should find that Sir 
Peregrine (sensibly feebler, and much inclined to 

VOL. II. Q 



226 EUNNDv-G THE GAUNTLET. 

slumber tlu'ougli the brightest hours of sunshine) 
could bear the exertion of listening. As he 
emerged from the shade of a thick plantation on 
the north side of tlie house and approached the 
terrace, he obsen-ed with alarm that several ser- 
vants were assembled on the steps, and that two 
came running towards him, with evident signs of 
agitation and distress. He advanced quickly to 
meet them, and exclaimed, " Is any thing wrong ? 
Is my father worse ?" 

" 1 am sorry to tell you. Sir Lam-ence . " 
began the foremost of the two servants. And so 
Laurence Alsager learned that his father had 
gone to liis rest, and that he had come to his 
kingdom. 



CHAPTER X. 



Lady Mitfoed remained in tlie library, where 
Colonel Alsager had bidden her farewell, for a 
long time after he had departed. She was sorely 
perplexed in spirit and depressed in mind. She 
was heartily grieved for Alsager, whom she had 
learned long ago to distinguish from the crowd 
of casual acquaintance by whom she had been 
surrounded as soon as her '' brilliant marriage" 
had inti'oduced her to the London world. Implicit 
confidence in him had come to reconcile her to the 
novel feeling of distrust towards others, wliich had 
gradually, under the deteriorating influence of her 
recent experiences, taken possession of her. He 
represented to her a great exception to a rule 
whose extent she had not yet thoroughly learned 



228 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

to estimate, and whose existence pained and dis- 
gusted her. His conversation with her just before 
his departure had ratified the tacit bond between 
them ; and as Lady Mitford sat gazing idly from 
the wide window down the broad carriage-drive 
by which the riding-party had departed, she dwelt 
with grateful warmth upon every detail of Alsager's 
words, every variation of his manner and inflec- 
tion of his voice. 

" At least he is my friend," she thought ; " and 
what a comfort it is to know that ! what a support 
in the state of wretched micertaint)' I seem doomed 
to !" Anon she ceased to think of Colonel Alsager 
at all, and her fancy strayed, as fancy always does, 
to scenes and subjects whence pain is to be ex- 
tracted. If any stranger could have looked into 
that handsome and luxurious room just then, and 
seen its tenant, he would have recoiled from the 
contrast and contradictions of the picture. She 
sat, as Alsager had left her sitting, on a low brown- 
morocco couch, facing the deep bay-window ; her 
hands lay idly in her lap, her small liead was bent 
listlessly forward ; but the o^aze of the lustrous and 



LORD DOLLiJIORE's COUNSEL. 229 

tliouglitful eyes Avas fixed and troubled. The soft 
tempered liglit touched her hair, her quiet hands, 
the graceful outlines of her figure, and the rich 
folds of her dress with a tender brilliance, but no 
sunshine from within lighted up the pale brow or 
brightened the calm sorrowful lips. Time passed 
on, and still she sat absorbed in her thoughts, 
until at length the loud chiming of the clocks 
aroused her. She threw off her preoccupation 
by an effort, and saying half aloud, "At least 
they shall not return and find me moping here," 
she passed out of the library. She paused a 
moment in the hall, debating with herself whether 
she would betake herself at once to the piano in 
her dressing-room, or go and inquire for poor old 
Mr. Hammond, to whom she had not yet made 
her customary daily visit. Lady Mitford was in 
the mood just then to do a kindness; her heart was 
full of Alsager's kindness to herself, and she sent 
for Mr. Hammond's man, and bade him tell his 
master she requested admittance to his room if he 
felt able to see her. 

" I suppose if he had not been," she added 



230 RXJKNIKG THE GALTs^TLET. 

mentallj, ^^his wife would have been afraid to 
have left him to-day." 

Lady Mitford had made considerable progress 
in the science of life since the friend who had 
left her presence that morning had seen her for 
the first time at the Parthenium, but she had need 
to make a great deal more before she could be 
qualified to comprehend Laura Hammond. 

Georgie fomid Mr. Hammond pretty well, and 
tolerably cheerftil. The feeble old man liked his 
gentle and considerate hostess. He had liked her 
when he Avas in health; and he liked her still 
better now that the languor of illness rendered 
him liable to being fatigued by ordinarily dull 
or extraordinarily brilliant people. Georgie was 
neither, . she was only a gentle, refined, humble- 
minded, pure-hearted lady; and the old man, 
though of course he did not admire her at all in 
comparison with his own brilliant and bewitcliing 
Laui'a, and had considered her (under Lam'a's 
instructions) rather vapid and commonplace the 
preceding season, was in a position just then to 
appreciate these tamely admirable quaHties to their 



LORD DOLLAMORE's COUNSEL. 231 

fullest extent. She remained with Mr. Hammond 
until the sound of the horses' hoofs upon the avenue 
warned her that the cavalcade was returning. She 
then went hastily down the great staircase, and 
reached the hall just in time to see Mrs. Hammond 
lifted from lier saddle by Sh' Charles with demon- 
strative gallantry, and to observe that he looked 
into her face as he placed her upon the gromid 
with an expression which rendered words wholly 
superfluous. The unborn strength which had been 
created by Alsager's comisel was too weak to bear 
this sharp trial. Georgie shrunk as if she had 
been stung, and abandoning her brave purpose of 
giving her guests a cheerful greeting at the door, 
she took refuge in her own room. 

On this day Sir Charles for the first time de- 
parted from the custom he had maintained since 
their marriage, of seeking Georgie on his retm-n 
home after any absence. It was a significant 
omission ; and as she took her place at the dinner- 
table. Lady Mitford felt that the few hours which 
had elapsed since Colonel Alsager had given her 
that counsel, which every hour became more difii- 



232 KUKNDsG THE GAUNTLET. 

cult for her to follow, had made a disastrous dif- 
ference in her position. She would make a great 
effoi-t. she would do all that Laurence had advised, 
but how if Sir Charles estranged himself from her 
altogether? . and even to her inexperience there 
was something ominous in any marked departure 
from his accustomed habits, . what should she do 
then ? He might either persist in a tacit estrange- 
ment, which would place her at a hopeless disad- 
vantage, or he might quarrel with her, and end all 
by an open rupture. Georgie was beginning to 
miderstand the man she had married, without as 
yet ceasing to love him ; and it is wonderful what 
rapid progress the dullest of women will make in 
such knowledge when they are once set on its 
right track. 

Lord Dollamore took Lady Mitford to dinner, 
as usual, on that day, and Sir Charles gave his 
arm to Mrs. Hammond. He had entered the 
drawing-room only a moment before dinner was 
annomiced, and had not exchanged a word with 
his wife. Among the first topics of conversation 
was Colonel Alsager's departure, which Sir Charles 



LORD dollamore's couxsel. 233 

treated with much indifference, and to whose cause 
IVIrs. Hammond adverted with a pert flippancy, so 
much at variance with her customary adherence to 
the rules of good taste that the circumstance at- 
tracted Lord Dollamore's attention. He made no 
remark when she had concluded her lively sallies 
upon the inconvenience of fathers m general, the 
inconsiderateness of fathers who had paralytic 
strokes in particular, and the generic detestability 
of all old people ; but he watched her closely, and 
when her exclusive attention was once more 
claimed by Sir Charles, whose undisguised devo- 
tion almost reached the point of insult to the re- 
mainder of the company, he smiled a satisfied 
smile, hke that of a man who has been somewhat 
puzzled by an enigma, and who finds the key to 
it all of a sudden. A little was said about Miss 
Gillespie, but not much; she was speedily rele- 
gated to the category of " creatm'es" by Mrs. 
Hammond, and then she was forgotten. The 
general conversation was perhaps a little flat, as 
general conversation is apt to be under such in- 
harmonious cu'cumstances ; and Lady Mitford's 



234 EUNNrN'G THE GAUNTLET. 

assumed spirits flagged suddenly and desj^erately. 
A feeling of weariness, of exhaustion, which 
quenched pride and put bitterness aside, came 
over her; a dreary loathing of the scene and its 
surroundings ; a swift passing vision of the dear 
old home she had left so cheerfully . abandoned 
so heartlessly, she would now have said . of the 
dear old father of whom she had thought so little 
latterly, whose advice would be so precious to 
her now, . only that she would not tell him for 
tlie world ; a horrid sense of powerlessness in 
the hands of a pitiless enemy . all these rushed 
over her in one cold wave of trouble. Another 
moment and she would have burst into hysterical 
tears, when a low firm whisper recalled her to 
herself. 

" Command yom^self," it said ; " she is look- 
ing at you, though you camiot perceive it. .Drink 
some wine, and smile." 

It was Lord Dollamore who spoke, and Lady 
Mitford obeyed him. He did not give her time 
to feel surprise or anger at his interpretation of 
her feelings, or his interposition to save her from 



LORD DOLLAMORE's COUNSEL. 235 

betraying tliem; but instantly, with tlie utmost 
ease and readiness, lie appKed himself to the task 
of enlivening the company, and that so effectually, 
that he soon gained even the attention of the pre- 
occupied pair at the other end of the table , and 
turned a diimer- party which had threatened to 
become a lamentable failure into a success. It 
was a bold stroke ; but he played it witli coolness 
and judgment, and it told admirably. Lady 
Mitford lifted her candid eyes to liis as she left 
the dinmg-room, and there was neither anger nor 
reproach in them ; but there was gratitude, and 
the dawn of confidence. 

"Just so," thought Lord Dollamore, as he 
drew his chair up to the table agaui ; " she's 
the sort of woman who must trust somebody ; 
and she has found out that her reclaimed Charley 
is not to be trusted. I'll see if I can't make her 
trust me." 

It suited Laura Hanunond's hmnour to exert 
her powers of pleasing on this evening, or per- 
haps even her audacious spirit quailed before the 
ordeal of the female after-dinner conclave, and she 



236 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

was forced to cover her fear by bravado. At any 
rate, she appeared in an entirely new character. 
The insolent indolence, the ennui which usually 
characterised her demeanour when there were no 
men present, were thrown aside, and she dehber- 
ately set herself to carry the women by storm. 
She talked, she laughed, she admired their dresses, 
and made suggestions respecting their coiffures. 
She offered one a coj^y of a song impurchasable 
for money and miprocurable for love; she pro- 
mised another that her maid should perform cer- 
tain miracles of millinery on her behalf; she sat 
down at the piano and played and sang brilliantly. 
Lady Mitford watched her in silent amazement, 
in growing consternation. The witchery of her 
beauty was irresistible ; the power of an evil pur- 
pose lent her the subtlest seductive charm. The 
dark-gray eyes flashed fire, and glowed with tri- 
umph ; the wanton mouth trembled with irrepres- 
sible fmi. 

It was an easy and a common thing for Laura 
Hammond to captivate men, and she really 
thought nothing about it, imless some deeper 



LORD DOLLAMORE's COUNSEL. 237 

purpose, some remoter end happened, as in the 
present instance, to be in view ; but women, to 
tell the simple truth, always feared, generally en- 
vied, and frequently hated her ; and she enjoyed 
her triumj^li over the ^' feminine clique," as she 
disdainfally called them, at Kedmoor thoroughly, 
and with keen cynical appreciation. She played 
her game steadily all that evening. When the 
gentlemen came into the drawing-room she al- 
most ignored their presence ; she was innocently, 
ingenuously polite, but she admitted no exclusive 
attentions; she never relapsed for a moment in 
her wheedling, but never overdone, civilities to the 
women. She brought forward the bashftil young 
ladies ; she actually played a perfect accompani- 
ment, frdl of the most enchanting trills and shakes, 
to a feeble bleat which one of them believed to be 
a song ; and when Sir Charles Mitford, whose 
tmgovemed temper and natural ill-breeding in- 
variably got the better of the conventional re- 
straints which were even yet strange to him, 
endeavoured to intciTupt her proceedings, she 
stopped him with a steakhy ujJiftcd finger, and a 



238 



RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 



warning glance directed towards his wife. Her 
victim was persuaded that he ftdlj understood 
her ; he rendered her admirable ruse, in his feeble 
way, the warmest tribute of admiration ; and he 
left the room with a vague consciousness that the 
indifference which had been for some time his 
only feeKng towards his wife was rapidly turning 
into hatred. 

Laura Hammond's own game was not the 
only one she played that night. Lord Dolla- 
more had watched her quite as closely as Lady 
Mitford, and to more purpose. He saw that . 
whether from mere sheer recklessness or from 
some deeper motive, which he thought he could 
dimly discern . she was hmTying matters to a 
crisis, and that he mio-ht take advantas^e of the 

7 O C5 

position which she had created. They were dainty 
jewelled claws with which he proposed to snatch 
the fruit he coveted from the fire ; but what ot 
that ? they were cruel also ; and when they had 
done his work he cared little what became of 
them. Let them be scorched and bm^nt ; let the 
sharp talons be torn out from their roots ; . what 



LORD DOLLAMORE'S COUNSEL. 239 

cared he? So lie watched the fehne skill, the 
deft, supple, graceful dexterity of the woman, 
with a new interest . ^personal this time ; any he 
had previously felt had been mere connoisseur- 
ship, mere c}Tiical curiosit}', in a marked and 
somewhat rare specimen. 

Every evidence of this observation, exery sign 
of this new interest, was carefully and successfully 
suppressed. When all other eyes were turned on 
Mrs. Hammond, his never rested on her even by 
accident. She sang ; and while the greater part 
of the company gathered round the piano, and 
those who could not obtain places near the singer 
kept profound silence, and listened with eager 
intensity, Dollamore ostentatiously suppressed a 
yawn, turned over the upholstery- books which 
ornamented the useless tables, scrutinised the 
chimney-decorations, and finally strolled into the 
adjoining room. Equally artistic was liis de- 
meanour towards Lady Mitford. He was deli- 
cately deferential and frankly cordial ; but neither 
byword or look did he remind her of the service he 
had rendered her at dinner. Georme migbt have 



240 EUX^'IKG THE GAUisTLET. 

been slow to compreliencl genius and appreciate 
wit, but she recognised delicacy and good taste 
at a glance ; and so it fell out that when she 
received Lord Dollamore's ^^ good - night" she 
thought, as she returned the valediction, " Tliere 
is one man besides Colonel Alsager over whom 
she has no power. Lord Dollamore holds her in 
contempt." 

Tlie next morning at breakfast Lord Dollamore 
announced regretfully that he must leave Redmoor 
for a few days, but hoped to retru'n by the end of 
the week. He addressed this annomicement to 
Sir Charles Mitford, who was gazing intently on 
Mrs. Hammond as she broke the seals of several 
notes, and tossed them down one after another, 
half read, with a most reassuring air of indiffer- 
ence. Lady Mitford was not present; breakfast 
was a free and unceremonious meal at Redmoor, 
to wliich every body came when every body liked, 
and nobody was sm-prised ifany body stayed away. 
Sir Charles expressed polite regret. 

" Dear me !" exclaimed IMi's. Hammond, 
" how veiy sorry Lady Mitford will be ! Bereft 



LOED DOLLAMORE'S COUNSEL. 241 

of lier two courtiers, she will be bereaved indeed. 
First Colonel Alsager, and now Lord Dollamore ! 
She will be quite au desespoir.^'' 

" I* wish I could hope to make so deep an im- 
pression by my absence, Mrs. Hammond," he 
answered, in the careless tone in wdiicli one re- 
plies to a silly observation made by a petted child. 
'^ Mitford, can you come with me into the library 
a minute?" And he moved away, taking wdth 
him a parcel of letters. . " When you are spiteful, 
and show it, you grow \Tilgar, madame," he mut- 
tered under his breath . " after the manner of 
your kind . and a trifle coarse ; but Mitford is not 
the man to see that, or to mind it if he did." 

Half an hour later Lord Dollamore had left 
Redmoor; and as he leant back in the railway 
carriage wliich bore him towards town, he quietly 
reviewed all that had taken place during his visit, 
and arrived at a conclusion perfectly satisfactory 
to himself Tlien he resolved to think no more 
of the matter till his return ; and dismissed it 
with the reflection that ^' Mitford was a regular 
beast, . low, and all that;" but that she ^Svas a 
VOL. IT. R 



242 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

devilish nice woman; . no fool, but not clever 
enough to bore one, and pretty enough for any 
thing." 

Matters continued prett}' much in the same 
state at Redmoor during the week wliich followed 
Lord Dollamore's departure. Ladj Mitford wrote 
to Colonel Alsager, and heard from him ; but her 
letter . ^that which we have seen him receive at 
Knockholt . said as little as possible of the real 
state of affairs. The truth made a faint attempt 
to struggle out in the postscript; but pride, re- 
serve, an instinct of propriety, the nmnberless 
obstacles to a woman in such a position as that 
of Lady Mitford telling it in its entirety to any 
man, rendered the attempt abortive. Could he 
not come? she had asked liim. Could he not 
come ? she asked herself, in the weary days 
through which she was passing . days of which 
each one was wearier and more hopeless than its 
predecessor; for things were becoming desperate 
now. Tlie other guests had taken their leave, 
])ut still the Hammonds remained at Redmoor. 
Not a woman of the party but had known Lam'a's 



LORD DOLLAMORE's COUNSEL. 243 

hollowness and falsehood well . liad known that 
the powers of fascmation she had employed were 
mere tricks of cmming art; but they were all 
fascinated for all that. Laura had made the close 
of the time at Redmoor incomparably pleasant, 
whereas its opening had been mideniably dull ; 
and there was another reason for their letting 
JVIrs. Hammond do^vai easily. They had remained 
as long as they could in the same house w^itli her ; 
and how were they to excuse or account for their 
having done so, if they disclosed their real opinion 
of her character and conduct ? It was a keen 
privation, no doubt, not to be able to descant upon 
the " doings" at Eedmoor, but they had to bear 
it; and the only alleviation within their reach 
was an occasional compassionate mention of Lady 
Mitford as " hardly up to the mark for her posi- 
tion and fortmie, and sadly jealous, poor thing!" 

It would have been impossible, in common 
decency, to have avoided all mention of the de- 
parture of the Hammonds ; and accordingly Sir 
Charles Mitford told his wife, as curtly and sul- 
lenly as possible, that she might make her pre- 



244 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

parations for going to town, as he supposed they 
would be moving off in a few days. Georgie 
had suffered dreadfully, but the worst was over. 
The keen agony of outraged love had died out, 
and the sense of shame, humiliation, terrible ap- 
prehension, and uncertainty, w^as uppermost now. 
In her distress and perplexity she was quite alone ; 
she had no female friend at all in any real sense 
of the word. It was not likely Sir Charles Mit- 
ford's wife should have any ; and the only friend 
she could rely upon was away, and hopelessly 
detained. Tlie only friend she could rely on . 
As she repeated the lamentation over and over 
ao-ain in the solitude of her room, and in the 
bitterness of her heart, did it ever occui' to her 
that the only friend she could rely on might be 
a dangerous, though not a treacherous, one; . 
that slie was crying peace, peace, where tliero 
was no peace ? 

" When we know what the Hammonds are 
:oino; to do, I shall write to Dollamore," said 
Sir Charles. He spoke to Georgie. 

Slie felt an eager longing to see her old home, 



LORD D0LLA3I0RE's COUNSEL. 245 

and to breathe a purer moral atmosphere than 
that of Redmoor. ^' I can only suffer and be 
perplexed here," she thought. " Let me get 
away, and I can think freel}', and make up my 
mind to some line of action. Out of her sight, 
I should be easier, even in town ; and how much 
easier at home ! . once more in the old place, and 
among the old people, where I used to be before 
I knew there were such women as this one in 
the world." So she thought she would do a 
courao-eous thino:, and ask Sir Charles to take 
her home for a little, as soon as the Hammonds 
should have left Redmoor. 

She came to this resolution one morning be- 
fore she went down to breakfast, . ^before she had 
to encounter Mrs. Hammond, who brought a 
fresh supply of ammunition to the attack on each 
such occasion ; whose beauty was never brighter 
or more alluring than when she arrayed it in the 
elaborate simplicity of Parisian morning -dress ; 
who was not sufficiently sensitive to he journalih'ey 
and who might always cherish a well-founded 
confidence in her own good looks, and the perfect 



2'i6 RUNNIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

efficiency of her weapons. Not that Georgie was 
fighting her any longer on the old terrain; she 
has retreated from that, and had no other object 
now than to shield herself from the perpetual 
sharp fire of Lam-a's polished impertinence, her 
epigrammatic sarcasms, her contemptuous pity. 
Lady Mitford, whose good sense was apt to do 
its 23roper office in spite of the tumult of feeling 
constantly striving to overpower it, wondered 
sometimes why Lam'a took so much trouble to 
wound her. '^ She has made sure of Sir Charles," 
the pure simple lady would say to herself, when 
some sharp arrow had been shot at her, and she 
felt the smart, not quite so keenly as the archer 
thought perhaps, but keenly still. " She does 
not need to turn me into ridicule before him, to 
expose my defects and gaucheries; she does not 
need to test his devotion to her by the strength 
and impenetrability of his indifference to me, . at 
least not now. She is clever enough to know 
that wit and humom', sarcasm and finesse, are all 
thrown aAvay upon him, if she is showing them 
off for her own sake." Of a sm-ety Lady Mit- 



LORD dolla:\iore's counsel. 247 

ford was rapidly learning to estimate Sir Charles 
aright. ^' Her beauty and her imscrupulousness 
have fascmated him, and all the rest is more 
likely to bore him than othenNnse. If she were 
in love with liim she might not understand this ; 
but she is not in love with him . not even after 
her fashion and his o^ni ; and I am sure she does 
tmderstand it perfectly. What does she throw so 
much \agilance away for, then? . for she never 
loses a chance. Why does she waste so much 
energy on me ? Of course, I know she hates me ; 
and if she be as good a hater as such a woman 
should be, she would not be satisfied with the one 
grand injury she has done me : hatred might be 
pacified by so large a sop, but spite v/ould crave 
for more. Yes, that miLst be the explanation . 
she is feeding spite." 

If the old clerg}'man who had cried over 
Georffie Stanfield on her weddino;-dav, and ut- 
tcred that futile blessing on the marriage which 
was so unblessed, could have heard her speak thus 
to her own heart, how utterly confounded and 
astonished that good, but not '' knowledgable,'* 



248 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

individual would have been! A few months in 
the great world to have turned Greorgie into this 
woman, who seeks for motives, who reads cha- 
racter, who has all the dreary cmming in inter- 
pretation of the human heart wliich his hfe-long 
experience had failed to impart to liim, though 
he had passed half a century in professional pro- 
clamation that "the heart of man is deceitful above 
all things, and desperately wicked." But it was 
not her short experience of the great world in 
any general sense which had so far forwarded her 
education in the science of Hfe as to enable her 
thus to analyse conduct and motives, . she had 
had a surer, subtler teacher; she had loved, and 
been betrayed she had hoped, and been de- 
ceived. She had dreamed a yomig girl's dream, 
and one by no means so exaggerated and exalted 
as most yomig girls indulge in ; and the awaken- 
ing had come, not only with such rudeness and 
bitterness as seldom accompany the inevitable dis- 
illusionment, but with such starthng rapidity, that 
the lasting of her vision had borne no more pro- 
portion to the usual dm-ation of "love's yomig 



LORD DOLLAMORE's COUNSEL. 249 

dream," than tlie forty winks of an after-clinner 
nap bear to the dimensions of "a good night's 
rest" Experience had not tapped at the sleeper's 
door, and hngered softly near the couch, and in- 
sinuated a gently-remonstrative remark that really 
it was time to rise . tenderly letting in the garish 
light by tempered degrees the while . cheerfully 
impressing, without hurry or severity, the truth 
that a work-day world . busy, stirring, dutifid, 
and real . lay beyond the glorified realms of 
slumber, and awaited the passing of the foot 
going forth to the appointed task over the en- 
chanted threshold. The summary process of 
awakening by wliich the sleeper has a basin full 
of cold water flung on his face, and is pulled out 
of bed by his feet, bears a stricter metaphorical 
analogy to that by which Lady Mitford had been 
roused from her delusion; and though she had 
reeled and staggered under it at first, the shock 
had effectually done its work. Georgie Mitford 
was a wiser woman than Georgie Stanfield could 
ever have been made by any more considerate 
process. 



250 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

All Lady Mitford's newly-sprung wisdom, all 
the acuteness slie had gained by being shar]:)encd 
on the grindstone of suffering, did not enable her 
to reach a complete comprehension of Mrs. Ham- 
mond's motives. She had not the key to the 
enigma ; she kaew nothing of Laura's former re- 
lations with Colonel Alsager. If she had ever 
heard the stoiy, or any garbled version of it, at 
all, it was before she had any distinct knowledge 
of, or interest in, either of tlie parties concerned, 
. when she was confused and harassed with the 
crowd of new names and unfamihar faces, . and she 
had forgotten it Even that advantage was her 
enemy's. Mrs. Hammond had been pecuhai'ly 
bewitching to Sir Charles, and preternatm-ally 
impertinent to Lady Mitford, at tlie brealdast- 
table, on the morning when Colonel Alsager's first 
letter had arrived; indeed, she had a little over- 
done h er part, which was not altogether unnaturaL 
Fierce passions, a violent temper, and a cold heart, 
form a powerful but occasionally troublesome com- 
bination, and imperatively demand a cool brain 
and steady judgment to control and utihse them. 



251 

Laura Hammond had as cool a brain and as steady 
a judgment as even a very bad woman could rea- 
sonably be expected to possess; but they were 
not invariably dominant. The cold heart did not 
always aid them successfully in subduing the 
violent temper ; and when it failed to do so, the 
combination was apt to be mischievous. On the 
occasion in question, Mrs. Hammond had been, 
to begin with, out of sorts, as the best-regulated 
natures, and the most intent on their purposes in 
their worst sense, will occasionally be. Sir Charles 
bored her, and she was on the ponit of letting Mm 
perceive the fact, and thus gi^^ng her temper its 
head, when the cool brain interposed and curbed 
it in time. She exerted herself then to bewitch 
and enslave tlie Baronet, even beyond his usual 
condition of enchantment and subjugation. Her 
success was complete; but its enjoyment was 
mitigated by her perception that it had failed to 
affect Lady Mitford. Tlie husband whom she had 
undoubtedly loved, and of whom she had been 
undeniably jealous, slighted her more openly than 
ever, and offered to her rival before her face un- 



252 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

disguised aiid passionate liomage; and yet Lady 
Mitford maintained 23erfect composure ; and though 
she was occasionally distraitej the exj^ression of 
her face indicated any tiling but painful thoughts 
as the cause of her abstraction. Her serene beauty 
was particularly impressive, and there was an in- 
definable added attraction in the calm unconscious 
grace of her manner. The quick instinct of hate 
warned her enemy that she was losing ground, 
and she listened eagerly, Avliile she never inter- 
rupted her conversation with Sir Charles, for an 
indication of the cause. It came quickly. Alsa- 
ger's letter was mentioned, and Lady Mitford 
imparted its contents to Captain Bhgh, who had 
dropped in late, and had not heard her communi- 
cation to Sir Charles. She looked away from 
Mrs. Hammond while she spoke, and while she 
and Bligh discussed the letter. Sir Peregrine's 
state, Lam-ence's detention at Knockholt, and 
other topics comiected with the subject. It was 
fortimate that she did not see Laura's face ; the 
sight would have eidightened her probably, but 
at the cost of infinite perplexity and distress, deep- 



LORD DOLLAMORE'S COUNSEL. 253 

ening and darkening a coming sorrow, swooping 
now very near to her unconscious head. The look, 
which would have been a revelation, lasted only a 
moment. It did not deform the ]3eauty . of the 
face, which it lighted up with a lurid glare of 
baffled passion and raging jealousy ; for that beauty 
owed notliing to ejcpression . its charm, its power 
were entirely sensuous ; ]3ut it changed it from the 
seductive loveliness of a wicked woman to the evil 
splendour of a remorseless devil. If Lady Mit- 
ford had seen it, the light which its Im'id fury 
would have flashed upon her might have been 
vivid enoufyh to show her that in the rage and 
torment whence it sprung, she was avenged ; but 
Georgie was not the sort of woman to be com- 
forted by that view of the subject 

Lady Mitford made her request of Sir Charles, 
and was refused more peremptorily than her 
letter to Laurence Alsagcr had implied. Tlie in- 
creasing rudeness of Mitford to his wife was cha- 
racteristic of the man. He had neither coiu'ao-c, 
tact, nor breeding ; and when he went wrong, he 
did so doggedly, and without making any attemjjt 



254 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

to mitigate or disguise the ugliness of the aberra- 
tion. His demeanour to his wife at this juncture 
exhibited a pleasing combination of viciousness 
and stupidity. He was maddened by the near 
inevitability of Lamia's departure. The Ham- 
monds must leave Redmoor, and there was no 
possibility of their going to town. Mr. Ham- 
mond's physicians had prescribed Devonshire air, 
and in Devonshire he must be permitted to re- 
main. Sir Charles heartily cursed the poor old 
gentleman for the ill-health by which he and 
Laura had so largely profited ; but curses coidd 
do nothing, . the Hammonds must go. He must 
be separated from Laura for a time, unless indeed 
B[ammond would be kind enough to die, or she 
would be devoted enough to elope with liim. Tlie 
latter alternative presented itself to Sir Charles 
only in the vaguest and remotest manner, and 
but for a moment. He had become very much 
of a brute, and he had always been somewhat of a 
fool ; but he had not reached the point of folly at 
which he could have supposed that Laura Ham- 
mond would forfeit the wealth for which she had 



LORD DOLLAMORE's COUNSEL. 255 

sold herself, and which in the course of natiu'e 
must soon fall into her hands, for any inducement 
of sentiment or passion. He had been brooding 
over these grievances alone in the libraiy, when 
Georgie, with whom he had not exchanged a 
dozen words for as many days, came in, and 
spoke to him, with a miserable affectation of 
unconsciousness, about a wish to visit her old 
home before their return to to^vn for the season. 
He refused with curt incivility and obstinacy ; 
and it is probable that the ensuing few minutes 
might have brought about a decided quarrel be- 
tween the husband and wife, had not Captain 
BHgh entered the room abniptly, and called out, 
apparently without noticing Lady Mitford's pre- 
sence : 

^' I say, Mitfbrd, you're wanted. Hammond 
is ever so much worse. Gifford has been round 
to the stables, to get a groom sent off for Dr. 
Wilkinson. . I beg your pardon. Lady Mitford, . I 
ouofht to have mentioned that i\Irs. Hammond's 
maid is looking for ?/oi^" 

Confusion reigned at Ecdmoor all that dav, 



2dQ kunning the gauntlet. 

which seemed likely, dm^iiig many hours, to have 
been the last of Mr. Hammond's life. Sir Charles 
felt that his morning meditation had had some- 
thing prophetic in it; here was the other alter- 
native almost within his grasp. At all events, 
whether he died a httle sooner or lingered a little 
longer, Mr. Hammond must remain at Redmoor. 
The evil day was postponed. Lady Mitford 
simply devoted herself to the invalid, and behaved 
towards ]\Ii\s. Hammond with magnanimous kind- 
ness and consideration, which might have dis- 
armed even Laura, had her inveterate coquetry 
and love of intrigue been the only animating 
motives of her conduct. She might have sacri- 
ficed the lesser passions to an impulse of the Idnd, 
but the greater . no. So she accepted all the 
delicate kindnesses which poor Georgie did her, 
she accepted the role of devoted and afflicted wife 
assigned to her before the household, and she 
hardened her heart against every appeal of her 
feebly-speaking conscience. With the following 
day the aspect of things changed a Httle. Mr. 
Hammond rallied ; the doctors considered him 



LORD D0LLA3I0RE's couxsel. 257 

likely to get over the attack ; and Lord Dollamore 
arrived at Eedmoor. 

" I didn't hear any thing from any body, 
Mitford, and so I came on according to previous 
arrangement," said his lordship, as he greeted 
liis host and looked about for Lady Mitford. 

Lord Dollamore had strictly adhered to liis 
programme. He never bm'dened his mind with 
the pursuit of t^vo objects at the same time. He 
had completely disposed of the business which 
had called him away, and with which the present 
narrative has no concern ; and he had come back 
to Redmoor as a kind of divertissement before the 
serious business of the season should commence. 
He entertained no doubt that he could resume his 
relation with Lady Mitford precisely at the point 
which it had attained when he left Redmoor. 
Georgie was not a fickle woman in any thing; 
rather methodical, he had observed, in trifles. 
The impression he had made was likely to have 
been aided rather than lessened by the interme- 
diate course of events at Redmoor. On the whole 
he felt tolerably confident; besides, he did not 

VOL. II. s 



258 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

very much care. Lord Dollamore's was a happy 
temperament . a fortmiate constitution, in fact . 
always supposing that life on this planet was 
tout potage, and nothing to follow. He could be 
pleasantly excited by the ardour of pursuit, and 
moderately elated by success ; but failm^e had no 
terrors for him ; he never fell into the weakness of 
caring sufficiently about any thing to fiimish fate 
with the gratification of disappointing him, in the 
heart-sickening or enraging sense of that elastic 
expression. 

Tlie Hammonds and Lord Dollamore were the 
only people now at Redmoor wdio could be strictly 
called guests. Captain Bligh was rather more at 
home than Sir Charles ; and one or two stragglers, 
who had remained after the general break-up, 
addicted themselves to the versatile and good- 
humom'ed vaurien, and were generally to be found 
in his company. Accordingly, and as he antici- 
pated. Lord Dollamore found Lady Mitford alone 
in the drawing-room when he quitted the delect- 
able society of the gentlemen. Mrs. Hammond 
had left the dinner-table, proclaiming her inten- 



LORD DOLLAMORE's COUNSEL. 259 

tion of at once resuming lier place by her hus- 
band's side . a declaration by wliich she secured 
two purposes : one, the avoidance of a tete-a-tete 
with Lady Mitford; the other, the prevention of 
a visit by her hostess to the sick-room, on any 
supposition that Mr. Hammond might require 
extra attention. During dinner she had been 
quiet and subdued ; her manner, in short, had 
been perfectly comme-il-faut^ and she was dressed 
for her part to perfection. She had kept alive 
Lady Mitford's gentler feehngs towards her ; she 
had forged a fresh chain for Sir Charles, who, 
like "Joey B.," had great admiration for pro- 
ceedings which he considered " devilish sly ; " 
and she had afforded Dollamore much amusement 
of the kind which he peculiarly appreciated . 
quiet, ill-natured, and philosophical. 

It does not much signify whether Laura went 
to her husband's sick-room at all, or how long she 
remained there ; but there was some significance in 
the fact, which Lord Dollamore found eminently 
convenient and agreeable, that Sir Charles sent a 
footman to tell my lady that he had business to 



2^0 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

attend to in the library, and requested she would 
send hi.H coffee thither ; and there was a fortunate 
coincidence in the adjournment of Captain Bligh 
and his companions to the smoking-room, with- 
out any embarrassing drawing-room parade at all. 
As Lord Dollamorc entered tlio room, Lady 
Mitford was bidding good -night to Mr. Ham- 
mond's little daughter, to whom she had been 
uniformly kind since the mysterious departure of 
Miss Gillespie. Lord Dollamore had hardly ever 
seen the child, whom her stepmother wholly neg- 
lected, leaving her to the care of her maid, if 
the foreign damsel who officiated in that enviable 
capacity chose to take care of her, . and to chance, 
if she did not. Laura Hammond hardly knew 
that Lady Mitford had taken the child under her 
kindly protection, and had kej)t her with her 
during many of the hours of each day which she 
was not obliged tf> devote to her social duties; 
but the child's fatlier knew the fact, and felt 
grateful to the one woman, after his senile fa- 
shion, without daring to express or even to feel 
any condemnation of the other. As the child left 



LORD DOLLAMORE's COUNSEL. 2()1 

tlio room, Lord Dolhiinoro, looked after lior for a 
moment before ho closed the door ; then he ^Yent 
np to Liidy Mitford's sofa by the hreplaee, and 
said qnietly : 

''-Mrs. Hannnond is as admirable as a step- 
mother as in all the other relations of life, I fancy." 

Georgie made no reply, and he did not appear 
to expect any. Tli(>n eanie !Sir Charles's mess- 
age ; and Dollamore watched Lady Mitforel closely 
dui'ing its delivery, and nntil the servant had left 
the room, carrying a single cnj) of coffee on a 
salver. 

" Does Mrs. Hannnond disdain that celestial 
beverage?" ho asked then, in a voice so full of 
meaning that Lady Mitford startinl and blushed 
crimson. This synn)tom of anger did not dis- 
concert Lord ])ollaniorc> in the least. lie hail 
made np his mind to use the first opportunity 
which should present itself, and it had come. Of 
course she would start and blusli, no inalter how 
he phrased liis meaning; ])ut tlu; start was rather 
graceful, and the blush was decidedly beconn'ng. 

" I don't know. I . what do you mean, Lord 



2G2 RUNNIXG THE GATIN'TLET. 

Dollamore? Mrs. Hammond lias gone to her 
room ; you heard what she said ?" 

'' I did ; and I don't beheve a word of it. 
' My poor dear Hammond' will have very little 
of her society this evening. Lady Mitford/' he 
said, with a sudden change of tone, *'how long 
do you intend to endure this kind of thing ? Now 
I know what you are going to say ;" . he put up 
his hand with a deferential but decided gesture, 
to prevent her speaking; . "I am quite aAvare that 
I have no business to talk to you about Mitford 
and Mrs. Hammond. I could repeat all that con- 
ventional catechism about the whole duty of men 
and women without a blunder ; but it's all non- 
sense . all h^ioocrisy, which is worse. I am a 
man of the world, and you are a woman of the 
world, or nearly : you will very soon be completely 
so. Allow me to anticipate the j^eriod at which 
your education will be finished, and to sj^eak to 
you with perfect frankness." 

Georgie looked at him in complete bewilder- 
ment. What did this new tone which he had 
assumed mean ? . To insult her ? No : she had no 



LORD DOLLAMORE's COUNSEL. 203 

reason to think, to fear any thing of that kind. 
Had he not done her at least one substantial 
service . had he not saved her from ridicule, from 
affording her enemy a triumph? Had not his 
manner been always respectfid, and, in his in- 
dolent way, kind? Even while he spoke of her 
as '^nearly" a woman of the world, she knew that 
he was thinkino; of her newness, her ifaiorance of 
that very world, and of life. Perhaps she should 
only expose herself to ridicule on his part now, if 
she shrank ft'om hearing him. It was certain 
that things had gone too far . the state of affairs 
had become too e^^dent . for her to affect indig- 
nation or assume prudery, without making her- 
self supremely ridiculous ; besides, there was 
already a tacit confidence l^etween them, which 
she could neither ignore nor recall. She wished 
vaguely that Colonel Alsager had l)een there; then, 
that some one might come into the room ; but 
she felt, amid her perplexity and pertm'bation, a 
strong desire to hear what he had to say to her . 
to learn what was the view which a man so com- 
pletely of society, and so capaljle of interpreting 



264 riUKNTN'G THE GAUNTLET. 

its judgment, took of her position and prospects. 
Nervously, 3'et not unreadily, slie assented; and 
Lord DoUamore, standing on the liearth-rug and 
looking down at lier bent head and drooping eye- 
lids, spoke in a low tone : 

'^ You are no match for Mrs. Hammond, Lady 
Mitford. You would not be, even if you did not 
laboui' mider the insurmomitable disadvantage of 
being Sir Charles's wife. Tliat must be as evident 
to yourself . for you are wonderfully sensible and 
free from vanity . as it is to the lookers-on, who 
proverbially see most of the game. You have 
feeling and delicacy, and she is encumbered by 
no such obstacles to the attainment of any pur- 
pose she may set before her. But because you 
can't fight her on any ground, that's no reason 
why you should let her make you wretched, and, 
above all, ridiculous." 

" She cannot. I." 

Georgie had looked up with an angiy beau- 
tiful flush on her cheeks and a sparkle in her eyes, 
wliich J\L.'s. Hammond's could not have managed 
by any contrivance to excel. But when she saw 



LORD DOLLAMORE's COUNSEL. 2(35 

the look that was fixed on her, her eyes fell, and 
she covered her face with her hands. It was not 
a bold glance ; it was quiet, powerfid, and pitying 
. pitying from DoUamore's point of view, not of 
her grief, but of her "greenness." 

"She can, and she has. Lady Mitford; but 
it will be your o^^ii fault, and a very silly fault 
too, if she has that power much longer. Look 
the truth in the face ; don't be afraid of it. You 
have lost Mitford's affections, I suppose you will 
say; and there never was any one so miserable; 
and so forth. It's quite a mistake. Mitford 
never had any affections . he had, and has, pas- 
sions ; and they will be won and lost many and 
many a time, long after you will have ceased 
even to notice in what direction they may happen 
to be straying. Because your reign was short, 
you fancy Mrs. Hammond's will be eternal. 
Pooh ! It will come to a timely end with the 
beginning of the opera-season ; and nothing will 
remain to her of it but a rent in her reputation . 
which even that endm-able material will hardly 
bear . and much mortification. Your reign is 



266 RUNNIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

over, as yon believe ; and we will grant, for the 
sake of argumentj that you are right. Well, what 
remains to yon after this terrible imaginary be- 
reavement of Mitford's affections? Why, Mit- 
ford's fortmie, Mitford's rank, and a position 
which, if you were mider his influence, might 
very possibly come to grief; but wdiich you, 
free and blameless, . a very pleasant combina- 
tion, let me tell you, and one that many a woman 
would gladly purchase at the price of a little sen- 
timental blighting, . will elevate and dignify. If 
you' will only realise yom- position. Lady Mitford, 
and act with good sense, you have as briUiant a 
destiny before you as any woman not afflicted 
with a mission could possibly desire." 

The dream she had dreamed . the home-life 
her fancy had pictured . came back in a moment 
to Georgie's mental vision ; and she said, in a 
tone of keen distress : 

" Don't say these things. Lord Dollamore. 
I know you don't mean them ; but they sound 
cold and wicked. How could I care for any posi- 
tion ? and what is wealth to me ?" 



2G7 

^' Pretty mucli what it is to eveiy rational 
being, Lady Mitford . happiness ; or if not quite 
the real sterling thing, the very best plated or 
paste imitation of it procurable in this state of 
existence. But you have not only wealth, rank, 
position, and a career of fashion and pleasure to 
look forward to ; there are other things in your 
futui'e. Think of your youth, estimate your 
beauty ; . stay . no, you cannot do that ; you 
never could conceive the effect it must produce 
on men who are o-entlemen and have taste. If 

o 

you ever learn to use its full power, you will be 
as dangerous as Helen or Cleopatra." 

He had spoken in a calm business-like man- 
ner, which dismiised the real freedom of lus 
speech ; but he lingered just a little over the last 
few words, and then went on hurriedly : 

"What chann do you think Mrs. Hammond, 
or all the women like her . who swarm like vi- 
pers in society . will have against you? I am 
not flattering you, Lady Mitford, . you know that ; 
I am merely telling you the simple truth. Your 
experience has been naiTow, and yoti think all. 



2Q8 



EUXN^DsG THE GAUNTLET. 



or most men, are like Mitford. Because slie has 
beaten you in this inglorious strife, do you think 
she could rival you in a grander and higher war- 
fare?" 

'^ Liglorious !" she said, amazed. ^' Oh, Lord 
DoUamore, he is my husband !" 

Dollamore smiled . not at all a pleasant smile ; 
there was too much contemptuous toleration in it. 

^'Your husband! Yes, he is youi' husband; 
but is he therefore any the less a commonplace 
and ^-ulgar-minded person ? You are too clever, 
Lady Mitford" (he understood the art of praising 
a woman for those qualities which she does 7wt 
possess), "to believe in or repeat the stupid 
methodistical cant which would limit a woman's 
perceptions, sympathies, and associations, to her 
husband only, . a worse than Eastern bondage ; 
for it does not involve indulgence, and it sins 
against knowledge. You are not going to ^live 
forgotten and die forlorn,' because you have 
married a man who is certainly not much better 
than his neighbours, but who is really no worse. 
Of course he does not suit you, and he never 



LORD dollamore's couxsel. 269 

would have suited you, if Mrs. Hammond had 
never existed. You would have fomid that out 
a httle later, and rather less unpleasantly, per- 
haps ; but why not make the best of the early 
date of the discover}-, which, after all, has its 
advantages? Mitford does not ^understand' you 
. ^that's the phrase, I think. Well, it's no worse 
because he does ^ understand' some one of a lower 
cahbre, which is wonderfully like his own. He 
won't annoy you in any way, I daresay ; he is ill 
at ease in society at the best, and he will keep 
out of it, . out of good society, I mean . your set. 
He will find resom-ces at his own level, I daresay. 
Then do not trouble yom'self about him ; by and 
by, I mean, when the Hammond will be nowhere. 
Of course that business vexes you now; peoj^le 
always are vexed in the comitry by things they 
would never care about in town. It's the trees 
and the moon and the boredom, I suppose. Make 
up your mind not to trouble yourself about him : 
study the advantages of your position well, and 
determine to take the fullest possible cnjo}^neut 
of them all." 



270 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

He paused and looked at her, Avitli a covert 
anxiety in liis gaze. She sat quite still, and she 
.was very pale ; but she did not say a word. Her 
thoughts were painful and confused. Only one 
thing was clear to her : this man's counsel was 
very different from that which Colonel Alsager had 
^iven her. Which of the two would be the easier 
to follow ? Georgie had strayed . at least a Uttle 
way . into a dangerous path, when she acknow- 
ledged the possibility that it might be a struggle 
to act upon Alsager's, and might be even possible 
to follow Lord DoUamore's comisel. The pale 
face was very still ; but DoUamore thought he 
could read indecision in it. He drew a Httle 
nearer to her, and bent a little more towards her, 
as he said : 

" Do you really believe . do you even make- 
believe . that love is never more to be yours ? 
Put such a cruel delusion far from you. You 
find it hard to live without love now ; you grieve 
because you cannot keep the old feeling alive in 
your own heart, as keenly as you grieve because 
it has died in your husband's. You will find it 



LORD DOLLAMORE's COUNSEL. 271 

impossible in the time to come. Then, when the 
tribute of passionate devotion is offered to you, 
you will not always refuse to accept it. Tlien, if 
one who has seen you in these dark days, radiant 
in beauty and unequalled in goodness, . one whom 
you have taught to believe in the reality of . " 

A servant entered the room, and handed Lady 
Mitford a small twisted note. It was from Sir 
Charles, and merely said, " Come to me at once 
. to the library." 



CHAPTEE XL 

MR. Effingham's progress. 

When Mr. Effingham returned to toTvii after his 
signal discomfiture at Redmoor by Miss Gillespie, 
lie had only two objects in view : one to prevent 
Griffiths finding out that he had gone so near to 
achieving success, but yet had failed; the other, 
to find out whither the yomig woman, who had 
so cunningly betrayed him, had betaken herself. 
Tlie first was not very difficult. Tlie meeting with 
the object of his search do^vn at a comitry-house 
far away in Devon was too improbable to present 
itself to a far more brilliantly gifted person than 
Mr. Griffiths ; while the receipt of five sovereigns 
(Sir Charles's donation had tliis time been repre- 
sented at twenty-five pounds only) gave that 



MR. Effingham's progress. 273 

gentleman an increased opinion of his friend's 
powers of persuasion, and rendered liim liopeful 
for the futiu'e. 

The accomplishment of the second object was, 
however, a different matter. Mr. Effingham's 
innate cnnnincr tauo^ht him that after all he had 
said to Miss Gillespie . or Lizzie Ponsford . about 
the source of his instructions, the company of 
her old acquaintances . Messrs. Lyons, Griffiths, 
Crockett, and Dmiks . was about the last she 
would be likely to affect ; and yet in their society 
only would he have opportmiitics of seeking her. 
Tln'ouo^h the oft-threaded mazes of that tano;led 
web, in and out, from haunt to haunt, Mr. 
Effingham once more wended his way, . asking 
every one, prying into every corner, listening 
to every conversation, . all to no purpose. He 
began to think that the object of his search 
must have departed from her original intention, 
and instead of coming up to London, have halted 
on the wa}- ; but then, what could she have done 
alone, miaided, without resources, in any provin- 
cial town? Mr. Effingham took to frequenting 
VOL. II. T 



274 RUNNDs'G THE GAUNTLET. 

the Devonshire pubhc-houses and cofFee-shops, . 
queer London holes kept by Devonshire people, 
who yet preserved a little clannish spirit, who took 
in a Devon paper, and whose houses were houses- 
of-call for stray children of the far West, sojoiu-n- 
ing for business or pleasure in London. Many 
a long talk was there in Long Acre or SmitMeld, 
sui'rounded by the foetid atmosphere and the dull 
riunblings of metropolitan life, of the Exe and 
the Dart, of the wooded coast of Dawlish and the 
lovely bay of Babbicombe, of purple moor and 
flashing cataract, of wresthng-matches and pony- 
fairs. The cads who dropped in for an accidental 
half-pint stared v>ath wonder at the brown coun- 
trymen, on whom the sun-tan yet remained, who 
talked a language they had never heard, in an 
accent they could not understand ; who had their 
own jokes and their own allusions, in which the 
jolly landlord and his wife bore their part, but 
which were utterly unintelligible to the Cockney 
portion of the customers. In these houses, among 
the big burly shoulders of the assembled Devon- 
ians, Mr. Effingham's perky little head was now 



MR. EFFINGHAM S PROGRESS. 2(0 

constantly seen. They did not know who he was ; 
but as he was invariably polite and good-natured, 
took the somewhat ponderous provincial badin- 
age with perfect suavit}', and was always ready 
to drink or smoke with any of them, they tolerated 
liis presence and answered his questions respecting 
the most recent arrivals from their native comity 
civilly enough. But all was una^'ailing ; to none 
of them Avas the personal appearance of Miss. 
Gillespie known. The presence of any stranger 
in their neighbourhoods would not have passed 
minoticed ; but of the few sojourners who were 
described to him, none corresponded in the least 
to that person whom he sought so anxiously. 

Would she not attempt to persevere in the new 
line of life which she had filled at Redmoor and 
succeeded in so admirably? As governess and 
companion she had been seemingly happy and com- 
fortable ; as governess and companion she Mould 
probably again try her fortune. Forthwith 31 r. 
Effingham had a wild desire to secure the services 
of a desirable yomig person to superintend the stu- 
dies of his supposititious niece; and Mrs. Bar- 



276 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

bauldson, "who kej)t a " governess agency," and 
Messrs. Chasuble and Rotchet, who combined the 
providmg of governesses and tutors with " scho- 
lastic transfers," vulgarly known as ^'swopping 
schools," the engagement of curates, and the sale of 
clerical vestments and ecclesiastical brass - ware, 
were soon familiarised with Mr. Effingham's 
frequent presence. He di'opped in constantly at 
-their establishments, and took the liveliest inter- 
-lest in the registers, looking through not merely 
the actual list of candidates for employment, but 
^searching the books for the past three months. 
He paid his half-crown fees with great liberality, 
or else the manner in wliich he used to bounce in 
and out the waiting-room and examine the features 
of the ladies there taking their tm'u to detail the 
list of their accomplishments to the clerk, was, to 
say the least of it, irregular, and contrary to the 
regulations of the establishment. But all to no. 
pm'pose, . ^lie could learn nothing of any one in the 
remotest degree resembling Miss Gillespie : his 
search among the governess-agencies had been as 
futile as his visits to the Devonshire public-houses. 



277 

and all Mr. Effingham's time and ti'ouble had been 
spent in vain. 

What should he try next ? He really did not 
kno\y. He had, ever since his \'isit to Redmoor, 
been rather shy of Mr. Griffiths, fearing lest that 
worthy person might learn more than it was ne- 
cessary, in Mr. Effingham's opinion, he shoidd 
know. Griffiths was to him a very nsefal jackal, 
and it was not meet that the jackal's opinion of the 
lion's sagacity and strength should be in any way 
diminished. Chance had so far fa\'oiu'ed him that 
Mr. Griffiths had recently been absent from town, 
having accepted a temporary engagement of an 
important character, as occasional croupier, occa- 
sional door-keeper, to a travelling band of gam- 
blers, who were importing the amusing games of 
French hazard and roulette into some of the most 
promising to^\nis in the Midland Counties. 

One night Mr. Effingham was sitting in a very 
moody state at " Johnson's," sipping his grog and 
wondering vaguely what would be the next best 
move to make in his pursuit of Miss Gillespie, 
when raising his eyes, they encountered Mr. Grif- 



278 EITKNING THE GAUNTLET. 

fitlis,. Mr. Griffiths, and not Mr. Griffiths. Gone 
was the tall sliiny hat, its place ocenpied by a 
knowing billycock ; gone were the rusty old clothes, 
while in their place were garments of provincial 
cut indeed, but obviously costly material : a slouch 
poncho greatcoat kept Mr. Griffiths's body warm, 
while Mr. Griffiths's boots, very much contrary to 
their usual custom, were sound and whole, and hid 
Mr. Griffiths's feet from the garish eye of day. 
Moreover, Mr. Griffiths's manner, usually a pleas- 
ing compound of the bearing of Ugolino and the 
demeanour of the Banished Lord, Avas, for him, re- 
markably sprightly. He threvr open the swing- 
door, and brought in his body squarely, instead of 
buttino^ vao-uelv in with tlie tall hat, as was his 
usual custom ; he walked down the centre of the 
room, instead of shuffling round by the wall ; and 
advancino' to the box in which Mr. Effinojham was 
seated in solitary misery, he clapped him on the 
back and said, ^' D'Ossay, my buck, how are 
you?" 

The appearance, the manner, and the swagger- 
ing speech had a great effect on Mr. Effingham. 



MR. Effingham's progress. 279 

He looked up, and after shaking hands with his 
friend, remarked, '' You've been doin' it up 
bro^\ai, Griffiths, . ^}'ou have. Thej must have suf- 
fered for this down about Hull and Grimsby, I 
should think ?" And with a comprehensive sweep 
of his fore-finger he took in Griffiths's outer man 
from his hat to his boots. 

" Well, it warn't bad," said Mr. Griffiths, with 
a bland smile. '' The yokels bled wonderful, and 
the traps kept off very well, considerin'. I'm 
pretty full of ochre, I am ; and so far as a skiv or 
two goes, I'm ready to stand friend to them as 
stood friend to me, D'Ossay, my boy. No ? Not 
hard up ? Have a drink then, and tell us what's 
been ""oino; on." 

The drink was ordered, and Mr. Effingham 
began to dilate on the various phases of his pursuit 
of Lizzie Ponsford. As he i)roceeded, Mr. Grif- 
fiths went through a series of jxantomimic gestures, 
which with him were significant of attem])ts to 
arouse a dormant memory. He ruljl.x'd liis head, 
he scratched his ear, he looked up witli a singu- 
larly vacant air at the i)endent gas-light, lie re- 



280 



EUNNING THE GAUKTLET. 



garcled his boots as tliougli they were strange 
objects come for the first time within his ken. At 
length, when Mr. Effingham ceased, he spoke. 

" It must have been her !" said he, imgram- 
matically but emphatically, at the same time bring- 
ing his fist down heavily on the table to express his 
assertion. : 

"What must haA'e been her, Griffiths?" in- 
quired Mr. Effingham, who was growing irritated 
by tlie extremely independent tone of his usually 
deferential subordinate, . " why don't you talk out, 
instead of snuffling to yourself and makin' those 
faces at me ? What must have been her ?" 

Successful though he was for the time being, 
]\Ii\ Griffiths had been too long subser\aent to the 
angry little man who addi'essed him to be able to 
shake off his bonds. He fell back into his old 
state of submission, grumbling submission, as he 
said : 

"You're a naggin' me as usual, D'Ossay, you 
are ! Can't let a cove think for a minute and try 
and recollect what he'd 'card, . you can't. What I 
was tryin' to bring back was this . there's a cove 



MR. EFFINGHA3l's PROGRESS. 281 

as I know, a theatrical irent, c:cts cnf]cao;ements for 
lakers and that, and provides managers of pro- 
vincial gaffs with companies and so o'n. He was 
down at Hull, he was, and he come into our place 
one night with Mr. Munmorency of the T. R. 
there, as often give us a look up ; and when Ijusi- 
ness was over . we was rather slack that night . 
we went round to his 'otel to have a glass. And 
while we was drinkin' it and talkin' oyqy old times, 
he savs to me, ' Wasn't you in a swim with old 
Lyons and Tony Butler once ?' he says. ' Not 
once,' I says, ' but a good many times,' I says. 
' I thought so,' he says ; ' and wasn't there a hand- 
some gal named Ponsford, did a lot of business for 
them?' he says. ^ Tliere was,' I says; ^ fortune- 
tellin' and Mysterious- Lady business, and all that 
gaff,' I says. ' Tliat's it,' he says ; ' I couldn't 
think where I'd seen her before.' ' When did you 
see her last ?' I says. ' About three Aveeks ago,* 
he says, ^ she come to me on a matter of business, 
and claimed acquaintance with me ; and though I 
knew the face and the name, I could not tliink 
where I had seen her before.' " 



282 RUNNTXG THE GAUlS'TLET. 

'' Didn't you ask liim any thing more about 
her?" said Mr. Effingham. 

'' m, I didn't. 'Twas odd, wasn't it? but I 
didn't. You see I wasn't on your lay then, D'Ossay, 
my boy, and I Avas rather tired with hookin' in the 
'arf-crowns and calc'latin' the bettin' on the ins 
and outs, and I was enjoyin' my smoke and lookin' 
forward to mv nio;ht's rest." 

" A^^iat a sleepy-headed cove you are, Grif- 
fiths !" said Mr. Effingham with great contemjjt. 
'' T\"hat do you tell me this for, if this is to be the 
end?" 

"But this ain't to be the end, D'Ossay dear ! 
Mr. Trapman's come back by this time, I dessay, 
and we'll go and look him up to-morrow and see 
whether he can tell us any thing of any real good 
about this gal. He's a first-rate hand is Trapman, 
as knowin' as a ferret ; and it won't do to let him 
know what our game is, else he might go in and 
spoil it and work it for himself So just you hold 
your tongue, if we see him, D'Ossay, and leave 
me to manage the palaver with him." 

Mr. Effino-ham oave an uno;racious assent to 



MR. Effingham's progress. 283 

his companion's suggestion, and, practical always, 
asked him to name a time for tliis meeting on the 
next dav. Mr. Griffiths suoffifested twelve o'clock 
as convenient for a glass of ale and a biscuit, and 
for finding Mr. Trapman at liome. So the ap- 
pointment was made for that hour; and after a 
little chat on subjects irrelevant to the theme of 
this story, the worth}' pair parted. 

The biscuit and the . several . glasses of ale had 
been discussed the next day, and Mr. Griffiths was 
maunderinMy hintinir his desire to remain at John- 
son's for some time longer, when Mr. Effingham, 
burning with impatience, and with the semblance 
of authority in him, insisted upon his quondam 
parasite, but present equal, convoying him to the 
interview with Mr. Trapman. Mr. Trapman's 
Dramatic Agency Office, so notified in blue letters 
on a black board, was held at the Pizarro Coffee- 
house in Beak Street, Drury Lane. A dirty, bye- 
gone, greasy, used-up little place the Pizan*o Coffee- 
house, with its fly-ljlown playbills hanging over 
its wire-blind, its greasy coffee-stained lithograph 
of Signer Poleno, the celebrated clown, with his 



284 EUXNIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

performing dogs ; its moss-covered basket, which 
looked as if it had been made in a property-room, 
containing two obviously fictitious eggs. The sup- 
jjorters of the Pizarro were Mr. Trapman's clients, 
and Mr. Trapman's cHents became perforce sup- 
porters of the Pizarro. When an actor was, as he 
described it, '' out of collar," he haunted Beak 
Street, took '^ one of coffee and a rasher" at the 
Pizarro, and entered his name on Mr. Trapman's 
books. Tlie mere fact of undergoing that 2:>rocess 
seemed to revivify him at once. He was on Trap- 
man's books, and would probably be smnmoned at 
an hour's notice to crive 'em his Hamlet at South 
Shields : a capital fellow, Trapman ! . safe to get 
something through him ; and then the candidate 
for provincial histrionic honour would poodle his 
hair under his hat and take a glance at himself in 
the strip of looking-glass that adorned the window 
of the Eoscius' Head, and would wonder when that 
heiress who should see him from the stage-box 
O.P., and faint on her mother's neck, exclaiming, 
" Fitzroy Bellville for my husband, or immediate 
suicide for me !" would arrive. 



MR. Effingham's progress. 285 

Tliere was a strange clientele always gathered 
round Mr. Trapman's door so long as the great 
agent was visible, viz. : from ten till five ; old men 
in seedy camlet cloaks with red noses and bleared 
eyes . " heavy fathers" these . and ciTiel misers 
and villanous stewards and hard-swearing admi- 
rals and libertine peers ; dark smiken-eyed gray 
men, with cheeks so blue from constant shaving 
that they look as if they had been stained by woad ; 
virtuous and vicious lovers ; heroes of romance and 
single walking-gentlemen ; comic men with fmmy 
faces and funny figures, ready to play the whole 
night through from six till tsvelve in four pieces 
and to interpolate a " variety of singing and 
dancing" between each; portly mati'ons . Emilias 
and Belvideras now . who have passed their entire 
life upon the stage, and who at five years of age 
first made their appearance as flying fairies ; shar]) 
wizen-faced little old ladies, who can still '' make- 
up young at night," and who are on the look-out 
for the smart sonhrette and singing-chambermaid's 
line ; and heavy tragedians . these most difficult of 
all to provide fur . with books fidl of testimonials 



28U RUKNIN'G THE GAUNTLET. 

extracted from tlie potential criticisms of provincial 
jom-nals. The ladies looked in, made their in- 
quiries as to " any news," and went away to their 
homes again ; but the gentlemen remained about 
all day long, lomiging in Beak Street, leaning 
against posts, amicably fencing together with their 
ashen sticks, gazing at the playbills of the metro- 
politan theatres, and wondering when their names 
will appear there. 

Through a little knot of these upholders of the 
mirror, Mr. Effino;ham and Mr. Griffiths made their 
way up the dark dirty staircase past the crowded 
landing, until they came into the sanctuary of the 
office. Here was a dirty-faced boy acting as clerk, 
who exliibited a strong desire to enter their names 
and requirements in a large leather-covered book 
before him ; but Griffiths caught sight of Mr. 
Trapman engaged in deep and apparently inter- 
esting conversation with a short dark man in a 
braided overcoat, and a telegraphic wink of re- 
cognition passed between them. As it was the 
boy's duty to notice every thing, he saw the wink, 
and left them without fiu'ther molestation, mitil 



MR. Effingham's progeess. 287 

Mr. Trapman had got rid of his interlocutor, and 
had come over to talk to them. 

"Well, and how are you?" said he, slapping 
Mr. Griffiths on the back.. " Servant, sir," to 
Mr. Effingham. . "And how are you?" Slaps 
repeated. 

" Fust rate," said Mr. Griffiths, poking him 
in the ribs. " This is Mr. Effingham, friend of 
mine, and a re-markably downy card I" 

" Wouldn't be a friend of yours if he wasn't," 
said Mr. Trapman, with another Ijow to D'Ossay. 
"Well, and what's up? Given up the gaff, I 
suppose. Seven to nine ! all equal ! . no more of 
that just now, eh ?" 

" No ; not in town. Sir Charles Rowan and 
Colonel Ma^aie at Scotland Yard, they know too 
much, . they do. No; I ain't here on business." 

"No?" said Mr. Trapman, playfully. "I 
thought you might be goin' in f)r the heavy 
father, Griffiths, or the comic countryman, since 
your tour in the provinces." 

Mr. Griffiths grinned, and declared that Mr. 
Trapman was " a chaffin' him." " My friend, 



288 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Mr. D'Ossay . Effingham is more in that line," 
he said ; ^^ a neat figure, and a smart way he's 
got", 

"Charles Sm-face, Mercushow, Roderigo, . 
touch-and-go comedy, . that's his line," said Mr. 
Trapman, glancing at Mr. Effingham. " One fi'- 
pmi-note of the Bank of England, and he opens at 
Smiderland next week." 

Mr. Effino^ham had been starino; in mute won- 
der at this professional conversation ; but he un- 
derstood the last sentence, and thought enough 
time had been spent in discussing what they 
didn't want to know. So he put on his impetuous 
air, and said to Griffiths, " Go in at him now I" 

Thus urged, and taking his cue at once, ]Mi\ 
Griffiths said, " No, no ; you've mistaken our line. 
What we want of you is a little information. Oh, 
we're prepared to pay the fee !" he added, seeing 
Mr. Trapman's face grow grave under a rapid im- 
pression of wasted time; "only . no fakement; 
let's have it gosj^el, or not at alL" 

" Fire away !" said Mr. Trapman. " I'm here 
to be pumped . for a sovereigii !" 



MR. effixgham's phogress. 289 

The coin was produced, and handed over. 

" Now," said Mr. Trapman, having tested it 
with his teeth, and then being satisfied, stretched 
out his arm in imitation of a pump-handle, "go 
to work!" 

" You recollect," said Griffiths, " telling me, 
when we met down at Hull, that one of our old 
lot had been to see you lately . a girl called Lizzie 
Ponsford." 

" I do perfectly." 

" It's about her we want to know . tliat's all." 

" It ain't much to tell, but it was curous, . that 
it was. It's six weeks ao-o now, as I was a-sittin' 
in this old shop, finishin' some letters for the post, 
when I looked up and saw a female in the doorway 
with a veil on. I was goin' on with my letters, 
takin' no notice, for there's always somebody here, 
in and out all day they are, when the female hfted 
up her finger first warning-like, like the ghosts on 
the stage, and then pointin' to Tom, the boy there, 
motioned that he should go out of the room. I 
was a little surprised ; for though I had enough of 
that sort of thing many years ago, I've got out of 

VOL. IL U 



290 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

it now. I tliouglit it was a case of smite ; I did 
indeed. However, I sealed up tlie letters, and told 
Tom to take 'em to tlie post ; and then the female 
came in, shnttin' the door behind her. When 
she lifted her veil, I thought I knew the face, but 
couldn't tell where ; however, she soon reminded 
me of that first-rate gaff, in . where was it ? . out 
Oxford Street way, where she did the Mysterious 
Lady, and Seenor Cocqualiqui the conjurin', and 
Ted Spicer smig comic songs. I remembered her 
at once then, and asked her what she wanted. 
' An engagement,' she says. ' All right,' I says ; 
^ what for ?' ' Singin'-chambermaid, walkin'-lady, 
utility, any thing,' she says. ^Walkin'-lady, to 
grow into leadin' high comedy, 's yom- line, my 
dear,' I says : ' you're too tall for chamber- 
maids, and too good for utility. Now, let's look 
up a place for you.' I was goin' to my books, 
but she stopped me. ' I don't want a place,' she 
says : ' I ain't goin' to stop in England ; all I 
want from you,' she says, ' is two or three letters 
of introduction to managers in New York. You^-e 
seen me before the public ; and thougli you've 



MR. Effingham's progress. 291 

never seen me act, you could tell I wasn't likely 
to be nervous or stammer, or forget my words.' 
' Xo fear of that,' I says. ' Very well then,' she 
savs, ^ as I don't want to lian;2: about when I cret 
there, but want them to o;ive me an appearance 
at once, just you write me the letters, and' . ]ut- 
tin' two sovereigns on tlie table . 'make 'em as 
sti'ong as you can for the money.' Oh, a clever 
girl she is ! I sat down to write the letters, and 
in tlie middle of the first I looked up, and I >ays 

' Tlie bearer, Miss , what name shall I say ?' 

' Leave it blank, Mr. Trapman, please,' says she, 
bm'stin' out laughin' ; ' I haven't decided what 
my name's to be,' she says ; ' and when I have, I 
think I can fill it in so that no one will know it 
ain't your writin'.' So I gave her the letters and 
she went away ; and tliat's my story." 

Mr. Griffiths looked downhearted, and was 
apparently afraid that his patron would imagine 
he had not had his money's worth ; Ijut Mr. Ef- 
fingham, on the contrary, seemed in iinicli Ixttcr 
spirits, and tlianked Mr. Trapman, and proposed 
an adjournment to the Rougepot close by in Salad 



292 EUN^'IXG THE GAUNTLET. 

Yard, where they had their amicable glasses of 
ale, and discussed the state of the theatrical pro- 
fession generally. 

When they had bidden adieu to Mr. Trapman 
and were walking away together, Mr. Griffiths re- 
verted to the subject of Miss Ponsford. 

" There's an end of that little game, I s'pose," 
said he ; " that document's lost to us for ever." 

^^ Wait I" said Mr. Effingham, with a grin; 
" I ain't so sure of that. She's gone to Xew York, 
you see ; now, I know every hole and corner in 
^ew York, and I'm laiow^n every where there, as 
w^ell as any Yankee among them. I could limit 
her up there fifty times easier than I could in 
London." 

'^ I daresay," said Mr. Griffiths ; '^ but you see 
there's one thins: a trifle against that ; vou ain't in 
New York." 

" But I could go there, I s'pose, stoopid !" 

"Yes; but how, stoopid? You can't pad the 
hoof over the sea; and them steamers lay it ou 
pretty thick, even in the steerage." 

"I'm goin' to America within the next week, 



Griffiths, and I intend a friend of mine to pay for 
my passage." 

^^ AVliatl the Bart, again?" 

" Exactly. Tiie Bart again !" 

" And what game are you goin' to try on with 
him now ?" 

"Ah, Griffiths, that's my business, my boy. 
All you've got to do is to say good-bye to your 
D'Ossay to-night, for he's got to jom'ney doAvn to 
that thunderin' old Devonshire again to-morrow; 
and before a week's out he intends to be on the 
brjny sea." 

For the second time Mr. Effingham travelled 
down to Redmoor, and obtained an interview witli 
>Sir Charles Mitford. He fomid that gentleman 
very stern and haughty on this occasion ; so Mr. 
Effingham comi)orted himself with gi-eat hmnility. 

" Now, sir," said Sir Charles, " you've broken 
your word for tlie second time. What do you 
want now ?" 

" I'm very sorry. Sir Charles . no intention of 
givin' oflPcnce, Sir Charles ; but . " 



294 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

" You've not got that. that horrible bill ?" 
'^ N-no, Sir Chai'les, I haven't ; but." 
'' Then what brings you here, sir ? more extor- 
tion ? . a fui'ther attempt to obtain money under 
false pretences?" 

" 'Noy no ; don't say that, Sh' Charles. I'll 
tell you right off. I may as well make a clean 
breast of it. I can't find that document any 
where. I don't know where it is ; and I'm sick 
of cadgin' about and spongui' on you. You know 
when I first saw you up in towji I told you I'd 
come from America. I was a fool to leave it. 
I did veiy w^ell there ; and I want to go back." 
. ^^WeU, sir?" 

'^ AVell, just as a last chance, do that for me. 
I've been true to you; all that business of the 
young woman I managed first-rate . " 
". I paid you for it." 
^' So you did; but try me once again." 
'^ Tell me exactly what you want now." 
'' Pay my passage out. Don't even give me 
the money ; send some cove to pay it, and bring 
the ticket to me ; and he can come and see me off. 



MR. Effingham's progress. 20.3 

if he likes, and give me a trifle to start with on 
the other side of the water ; and you'll never hear 
of me again." 

Sir Charles reflected a few moments ; then 
said, " Will you go at once ?" 

*^ At once . this week ; sooner the better." 
*' Have you made any inquiries about ships?" 
^^ There's one sails from Liverpool on Friday." 
" On Friday . and to-day is Saturday ; just a 
week. I sha'n't trust you in the matter, Mi\ 
Butler," said Sir Charles, taldng up a letter lying 
on the table. " I shall adopt that precaution Avhicli 
you yourself suggested. A fi'iend of mine, coming 
through from Scotland, will be in Liverpool on 
Wednesday night. Yes," he added, referring to 
the letter, " Wednesday night. I'll ask him to 
stop there a day, to take yoiu' ticket and t(.) see 
you sail ; and with the ticket he shall give you 
twenty pounds." 

Mr. Effino-ham was delimited ; he had sue- 
ceeded better even than he had hoped, and he 
commenced pouring out his tlianks. But Sir 
Charles cut him \-cry short, '^aying : 



296 RIIN^nXG THE GAUXTLET. 

"You ^vill ask for Captain Bligli at tlie 
Adelplii Hotel; and recollect, Mr. Butler, tliis is 
the last ti'ansaction between us;" and lie left 
the room. 

" For the present, dear sir," said Mr. Effing- 
ham, taking up liis hat ; " the last transaction for 
the present ; but if oiu* little Xew-York expedition 
turns up trumps, you and I will meet again on a 
different footing." 

On the Friday morning Mr. Effingham sailed 
from Liverpool for ^ew York in the fast screw- 
steamer Pocahontas, his ticket having been taken 
and the twenty pomids paid to him on board by 
Captain Bligh, who stood by leaning against a 
capstan wdiile the vessel cleared out of dock. 



END OF VOL. II. 
RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 



CHAPTEK L 

A CRISIS AT REDMOOR. 

When Mrs. Hammond left the dinner-table on the 
evening destined to add a new sorrow to Georgie 
Mitford's sorely-troubled lot, she really had gone, 
as she had announced her intention of going, to 
her husband's room. The old man was lying in 
his bed, propped up with pillows, his face turned 
to the large window, tln-ough which the rays of 
the moon were shining, and mingling in a cold 
and ghastly manner with the light in the room. 
The invahd had a fancy for seeing the dark clumps 
of trees on the rising ground, and the cold moon 
shining over their heads. Gilford, his confidential 
servant, sat at the bed's head, and had been read- 
VOL. III. B 



2 RUNNING THE GAtJNTLET. 

inir to liis master. Mrs. Hammond asked liim 
several questions in a tone of interest which sounded 
almost genuine as to how Mr. Hammond had 
been ; and then saying she meant to remain witli 
the invalid for a while, she dismissed him, and 
took her seat by the window, in a position en- 
abHng her to see quite distinctly a portion of the 
broad carriage-drive to the right of the entrance, 
across which the rays of the moon flung their mi- 
interrupted radiance. Laura did not exert herself 
much for the amuse ment of the invalid. The few 
questions he asked her she answered listlessly, then 
sunk into silence. After a short time her step- 
daughter came softly into the room to bid her 
father good-night. 

" You are rather late, Alice ; where have you 
been?" said Lam-a, without turning her head to- 
wards the child, still looking fixedly at the patch 
of groimd in the moonlight. 

" With Lady Mitford, mamma," answered 
Alice. 

" Have the gentlemen left the dining-room ?" 

'^ Lord Dollamorc came into the drawing-room, 



A CRISIS AT REDMOOR. 6 

and I saw Sir Charles crossino; the hall into the 
library ; but I don't know about the others," an- 
swered Alice. 

Mrs. Hammond said no more; and Alice, 
having received an affectionate embrace from her 
father, and the coldest conceivable touch of Mrs. 
Hammond's lips on the edge of her cheek, went 
off to bed. The silence continued in the sick 
man's room, and Laura's gaze never turned from 
the window. At length a figure passed across the 
moonht space, and was instantly lost in the dark- 
ness beyond. Then Mrs. Hammond drew down 
the blind, and changed her seat to a chair close by 
the bedside. She took up the book which Giffbrd 
had laid down, and asked her husband if he would 
like her to read on. 

" If you please, my dear," said Mr. Hammond, 
"if it won't tire you ; and you won't mind my 
faUing asleep, which I may do, for I feel very 
drowsy." 

Laura was quite sure it would not tire her to 
read, and she would be delighted if her reading 
should have so soothing an effect. 



4 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

'^ If I do fall asleep, you must not stay witli 
me, Laura ; you must go downstairs again. Pro- 
mise me you will ; and you need not call Gifford, 
. I don't require any one ; I am much better to- 
night." 

Very well; Laura would promise not to stay 
in his room if he should fall asleep ; and as she 
really did think him very much better, she would 
not summon Gifford. 

Mrs. Hammond possessed several useful and 
attractive accomplishments ; among others, that of 
reading aloud to perfection. She did not exhibit 
her skill particularly on this occasion . her voice 
was languid and monotonous ; and the author 
would have had ample reason to complain had he 
heard his sentences rendered so expressionless. 
She read on and on, in a sullen monotone ; and 
after a quarter of an hour had elapsed, she had 
the pleasm'e of seeing that her kind intention was 
fulfilled. Her voice had been very soothing, and 
her husband had fallen into a profomid sleep. 
Tlien she passed through an open door into her 
dressing-room, and reappeared, wrapped in a dark 



A CRISIS AT REDMOOR. 5 

warm cloak, the hood tlu'own over her head. If 
any one had taken the place she had so lately occu- 
pied at the window, that person would have seen, 
after the lapse of a few moments, a second figure 
flit across the moonlit space, and disappear into 
the darkness beyond. 

About half an hour later. Banks tapped at the 
door of the smoldng-room, and was gruffly bidden 
to " come in" by Caj)tain Bligh. 

" If you please. Captain," said Banks, upon 
whom the atmosphere of that particular apartment 
always produced a distressingly-choky and eye- 
smarting effect, . ^^if you please. Captain, I can't 
find Sir Charles. He ain't in the Kbrary, nor yet in 
the droring-room, and he's wanted very particular." 

" Perhaps he has gone up to see Mr. Ham- 
mond," suggested Bligh. 

"No, Captain, he ain't; I've bin and ast 
Gifford, and he says as his missis has been along 
o' the old gentleman since dinner-time, and she's 
there now, and nobody ain't with them." 

" That's odd," said Captain Bligh; "but who 
wants him ? Perhaps I might do." 



6 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

" I beg your pardon, Captain," said the per- 
emptory Banks, "but nobody won't do but Sir 
Charles hisself. It's a party as has been sent up 
from Fishbourne, where my lady comes from, and 
his orders is to see Sir Charles alone, and not to 
let out his message to nobody else." 

The good-natured Captain looked extremely 
grave. Only one occurrence could have rendered 
so much j^recaution necessary, and he conjectured 
at once that that occurrence had taken place. 

" I fear Mr. Stanfield is dead," he said to his 
companions. " I must go and find Mitford. Just 
excuse me for a wliile, and make yourselves com- 
fortable here, will you? . Come with me, Banks, 
and take care your mistress gets no hint of this 
person's being here." 

" There ain't no fear of that. Captain," re- 
plied the man ; " my lady's in the droring-room, 
along o' Lord Dollamore; and I knew that Sir 
Charles worn't there, so I didn't go to look for 
Mm." 

The Captain found the messenger in the li- 
brary, where Banks had sent liim to await Sii' 



A CKISIS AT KEDMOOR. 7 

Charles's appearance. He Avas a respectable 
elderly man, and lie answered Captain Bligli's 
inquiry at once. He liad been sent by poor 
Georgie's old friend, tlie curate, to convey to Sir 
Charles Mitford the melancholy intelligence of Mr. 
Stanfield's death, which had taken place early that 
morning; and particulars of which event were 
contained in a letter wdiicli he was charged to 
deliver to the Baronet. He had received spe- 
cial injunctions to commmiicate the event to Sir 
Charles alone, and leave it to be " broken" to Lady 
Mitford by her husband. The simple curate had 
little thought how difficult Sir Charles would find 
it to assume even a temporary sympathy with the 
feelings of liis wife. 

Captain Bligh ordered refi-eshments to be served 
to the brmger of evil tidmgs ; requested him not to 
commmiicate with any of the other servants ; and 
strictly enjoining Banks to secrecy, went out of the 
front- door and into the shrubbery on the left of 
the house. Mitford was not miaccustomed to take 
fits of sullen moodiness at times, and the Captain 
thought that he might perhaps find him walldng 



8 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

about and smoking, in all the enjoyment of his ill- 
hmnour. 

The intelligent Banks had asked Gifford if he 
thought it likely that Sir Charles was in his master's 
room, in the presence of several of the ladies and 
gentlemen of the household, assembled in a com- 
fortable and spacious apartment wliich the inso- 
lence of a dominant class caused to be known as 
the servants' -hall. Among the number of those 
who heard the question and its answer was Made- 
moiselle Marcelline, Mrs. Hammond's "own maid." 
She was a trim-looking French girl, who had not 
any thing remarkable in her appearance except its 
neatness, or in her manner except its quietness. 
She was seated at a large table, on Avhich a number 
of workboxes were placed, for the women-serv^ants 
at Redmoor greatly affected needlework, and had 
a good deal of time to devote to it ; and she was 
embroidering a collar with neatness, dexterity, and 
rapidity, eminently French. Mademoiselle Mar- 
celline made no observation, and did not raise 
her eyes, or discontinue her work for a moment, 
during the discussion as to where Sir Charles 



A CRISIS AT REDMOOR. 9 

could be, which had ensued upon Banks's inquiry. 
She had spoken only once indeed since his entrance. 
When GrifFord had said Sir Charles could not be in 
Mr. Hammond's room, because her mistress had 
been, and was there still, he had asked, '^ Isn't she 
there still, mam'selle ?" Mam'selle had answered, 
" Yes, Monsiem- Giffore, madame is there still." 

Mademoiselle Marcelline was so very quiet a 
little person, and differed so much from French 
ladies'-maids in general, by the miobtrusiveness 
of her manners and her extreme tacitm*nity . 
to be sure she spoke very little English, but that 
circumstance is rarely found to limit the loquacity 
of her class . that her exit from the servants' -hall 
was scarcely noticed, when she presently looked 
at her little Geneva watch, made up her em- 
broidery into a tidy parcel, and went away with 
her usual noiseless step. Mademoiselle Marcelline 
mounted the stairs with great deliberation, and 
smiling a little, imtil she reached the corridor into 
which the suite of apartments occupied by the 
Hammonds opened. The rooms were five in 
number, and each commmiicated with the other. 



10 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Tliey were two bedrooms, two dressing-rooms, 
and a bathroom. The latter occupied the central 
space, and had no external door. Mademoiselle 
Marcelline entered the last room of the suite, cor- 
responding with that in which Mr. Hammond lay, 
. this was Laura's bedroom, . and gently locked 
the door. She passed through the adjoining apart- 
ment . ^lier mistress's dressing-room . and paused 
before a large wardrobe, without shelves, in which 
hung a number of dresses and cloaks. She opened 
the doors, but held them one in each hand, looked 
in for a moment, and then shut them, and smiled 
still more decidedly. Then she softly locked the 
door of this room, w^hich opened into the corridor, 
and passing through the batlu'oom, secured that of 
Mr. Hammond's dressing-room also ; after which, 
with more precaution against noise than ever, she 
glided into the old man's room. He was sleeping 
soundly still, and his face looked wasted and ashen 
in the abstraction of slumber. Mademoiselle Mar- 
celline glanced at him, slu:ugged her shoulders, sat 
down on a couch at the foot of the bed, where she 
was effectually screened fi.'om view b}' the heavy 



A CRISIS AT REDMOOR. 11 

car red bedpost and the voluminous folds of the 
purple curtam, and waited. 

Mean time, Captain Bligh had not succeeded in 
finding Sir Charles, though he had sought for liini 
in the shrubbery and in the stable-yard. He could 
not make out whither he had gone, and retm'ned to 
the house to take counsel with Banks. Tliat func- 
tionary suggested that Sir Charles might have gone 
up to the keeper's house ; and though the Captain 
could not imagine why Sir Charles should have 
gone thither at such an inconvenient time, as he 
had no other to offer, he accepted tliis suggestion, 
and said he would go thither and look for him. 

" Shall I go with you. Captain ?" asked Banks, 
who felt cm'ious to discover what ^'Mitford was 
up to." 

Since Mr. Effingham's visit, and the polite 
fiction of the yacht . endeared to Mr. Banks by his 
ovm joke about tlie Fleet Prison, which he consi- 
dered so good that society was injm^ed by its sup- 
pression within his own bosom . tlie incredulous 
flunkey had experienced an increased share of the 
curiosity with which their masters' affairs iuvari- 



12 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

ably inspire serA^ants. He was mucli pleased then 
that Captain Bligli answered, 

" Yes, yes, you can come with me." 

The keeper's cottage was not very far from the 
great house, from which, however, it was entirely 
hidden by a thick fir-plantation which covered 
a long and wide space of midulating land, and 
through which several narrow paths led to the open 
ground beyond. The Captain and his attendant 
struck into one of those paths, which led directly 
in the direction of the keeper's house. 

" We can't miss Sir Charles, I think, if he 
really has gone up to Hutton's," said the. Captain. 

'^ No, sir, I think not, unless he has taken a 
very roundabout way," answered Banks. 

They walked quickly on for some distance, the 
Captain's impatience momentarily increasing, and 
also his doubts that Mitford had gone in this direc- 
tion at all. At length they reached a point at 
which the path, cutting the plantation from east 
to west, was intersected by one running from 
north to south. Here they paused, and the Cap- 
tain said testily, 



A CRISIS AT REDMOOR. 13 

'' By Jove, Banks, I liardly know what to do. 
The messenger from Fishbourne's shut up in the 
library all this time, and all the servants in a 
fuss, and Sir Charles not forthcoming ! I wish I 
had broken the news of her father's death to Lady 
Mitford before I came out ; it would have been by 
far the best plan. She's sure to hear it by acci- 
dent now." 

The Captain spoke to himself rather than to 
the servant, and in a particularly emphatic voice . 
a testimony to his vexation. Then he strode on- 
wards with increased speed, little knowing that he 
had spoken within the startled hearing of the man 
whom he was seeking, and who was so near him, 
as he stood where the paths met, that he could 
have touched him by stretching out his arm, . 
touched him and his cowering frightened com- 
panion. 

They kept a breathless silence until the Cap- 
tain and Banks were quite out of hearing. Tlien 
Sir Charles said : 

" What is to be done ? Did you hear what 
Bligh said, Lam-a? Some one has been sent 



14 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

from Fishbom-iie to tell me that Mr. Stanfield 
is deaclj and they are searching for me every- 
where. What a cursed accident! There is not 
a chance of concealing your absence. My dar- 
lings my life, what Is to be done?" 

She was very pale and trembling, and the 
words came hard and hoarse, as she rej^lled, 

'' I know not. If we must brave it out, we 
must; but there Is a chance yet. Do you stay 
here, and meet Bllgh as he comes back ; you can 
be strolling along the cross path. Ha^'e you a 
cigar ? No ; you are in dinner-dress, of course. 
Stay ; you have an overcoat on ; search the pockets. 
Yes, yes ; what luck ! Here's a cigar-case, and 
your light -box hangs to your chain, . I'll never 
call it vulgar again, . light a cigar at once, and 
contrive to show the light when you hear them. 
I will go to the house. You left the side-window 
open, did you not ?" , 

"Yes, yes." His agitation was increasing; 
hers was subsiding. 

" If I can get into the house unseen, all is 
right. I can pass through ni}^ own rooms into 



A CRISIS AT EEDMOOR. 15 

Hammond's. Send there for me if all is safe ; 
the servants think I am there." 

She turned away to leave him ; but he caught 
her in his arms, and said, in a tone of agony, 

^^ Laura! Lam-a ! if I have exposed you to 
danger . if . " 

" Hush !" she said, disengaging herself; '^ you 
have not exposed me to danger any more than I 
have exposed myself; but don't talk of this as a 
hojieless scrape until vre know that there is no way 
out of it." She vfas out of sight in an instant. 

Mademoiselle Marcelline sat at the foot of Mr. 
Hammond's bed without the least impatience. 
She did not fidget, she did not look at the clock, 
she did not doze. The time passed apparently to 
her perfect satisfaction. The invalid slept on very 
peacefully, and the whole scene wore an emi- 
nently comfortable aspect. At length her acute 
ears discerned a light footfall at the end of the 
corridor, and then she heard the handle of Mrs. 
Hammond's dressing-room door gently turned . 
in vain. Tlien the footstep came on, and another 
door-handle was tm'ued, equally in vain. 



16 RUNTs'ING THE GAUNTLET. 

Mademoiselle Marcelline smiled. " It would 
have been so convenient for madame to have hmig 
her cloak up and smoothed her hair before mon- 
sieur should see her, after madam e's promenade in 
the clear of the moon," thought Mademoiselle 
Marcelline. " What a pity that those tiresome 
doors should unhappily be locked ! What a sor- 
rowful accident!" 

Tlie door opened, and Lam-a looked cautiously 
into the room. All was as she had left it; the 
sleeping face of her husband w^as turned towards 
her. The pathetic unconsciousness of sleep was 
upon it; she did not heed the pathos, but the 
unconsciousness was convenient. Tlie minutest 
change that would have intimated that any one 
had entered the room would not have escaped her 
notice, but there was no such thing. She came 
in, and softly closed the heavy perfectly-hung 
door ; she made a few steps forward, uttered a 
deep sigh of relief, and said in an involuntary 
whisper, " What a risk, and what an escape !" 

Her heavy cloak hung upon her; she pushed 
back the hood, and her chestnut hair, in wild dis- 



A CRISIS AT REDMOOE. 17 

order, slione witli red gleams in the fire-light. 
She lifted her white hands and snatched impa- 
tiently at the tasselled cord Avhich held the gar- 
ment at the tlu'oat ; and Mademoiselle Marcelline 
emerged from the shadow of the bed-cm'tainsj and 
with perfect propriety and an air of entire respect 
requested that madame would permit her to re- 
move the cloak, which was so heavy, and also 
madame's boots, wliich must be damp, for the 
promenade of evening had inconveniences. 

Lam'a started -saolently, and then stood looking 
at the demm'e figure before her with a kind of 
incredulous terror. Mademoiselle MarceUine com- 
posedly mitied the refractory cords and removed 
the mantle, which she immediately replaced in the 
wardrobe. Would madame have the goodness to 
consider what she had said about the boots, and to 
go into her dressing-room? Madame followed 
her Kke one in a dream. She placed a chair 
before the dressing-table, and Laiu'a mechanically 
sat down ; she took off her boots and substituted 
slippers; she restored the symmetry of the crushed 
di'ess ; she threw a dressing-gown over the beauti- 

VOL. III. c 



18 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

ful shoulderSj folded it respectfully over the bosom, 
heaving with terror and anger, and began to 
brush her mistress's hair with a wholly miper- 
turbed demeanour. Laura looked at the demure 
composed face which appeared over her shoulder 
in the glass, and at length she said : 
" How came you in that room?" 
"Ah, madame, what a happy chance ! One 
came to the salon of the ser^-ants, and demanded 
of Monsieur GifPore if Sir Charles might be in the 
chamber of monsieur. Then Monsieur Giffore 
say that no ; that madame was there, and ist here. 
And Monsieur Giffore asked me if he have reason ; 
and I say, ' Certainly, madame is still in the 
chamber of monsiem*.' " 

" Well," said Laura, for Mademoiselle Marcel- 
line had paused, " what has that to do with your 
being in that room ?" 

" It has much, if madame will take tlie trouble 
to listen. I know that servants are curious, . ah, 
how curious servants are, my God ! . and I thought 
one of them might have cm-iosity enough to see 
for herself madame, so affectionate, passing the 



A CRISIS AT EEDMOOR. 19 

long, long evening with poor monsieur, who is not 
gay, . no, he is not gay, they say that in the salon 
of the sei'^^ants. So, as it is not agreeable to be 
listened and spied, and as servants are so curious, 
I locked the doors of the rooms consecrated to the 
privacy of madame, and rejoiced to know that 
madame might read excellent books of exalted 
piety to monsieur, or refresh her spirits, so tu'ed 
by her solicitude, with a promenade in the clear of 
the moon . ^madame is so poetic ! . as she chose, 
without being teased by observation. I respect 
also that good Monsieur Giffore, and I would 
not have him disprove. ' Madame is still there, 
mam'sell ?' he asks ; and I say, ' Yes ; madame is 
still there.' " 

All the time she was speaking, Mademoiselle 
Marcelline quietly pursued her task. The long 
silken tresses lay now in a well-brushed shining 
heap over her left arm, and she looked at them 
with complacent admiration. 

" Heaven ! but madame has beautiful hair !" 
she went on, wdiile Laura, pale and motionless, 
sat taking into her heart the full meaning of this 



20 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

terrible complication of her position. " It is, how- 
ever, fortunate that she does not adopt the English 
style, for promenades at the clear of the moon are 
enemy to curls . to those long curls which the 
yomig ladies, lastly gone away, and who were so 
fond of madame, wore. They avoided the damp 
of the forest in the evening, the young ladies; 
they were careful of their curls. But madame 
has not need to be careful of any thing . nothing 
and nobody can hurt madame, who is so beloved 
by monsieur. Ah, what a destiny ! and monsieur 
so rich !" 

She had by this time braided the shining hair, 
and was dexterously folding the plaits round 
and round the small head, after a fashion which 
Laura had lately adopted. Still her mistress sat 
silent, with moody downcast eyes. As she inter- 
rupted her speech for a moment to take a fi-esh 
handful of hairpins from the dressing-table. Banks 
knocked at the door of the adjoining room. Made- 
moiselle Marcelline did not raise her A'oice to bid 
him enter; always considerate, she remembered 
that an indiscreet sound might trouble the repose 



A CRISIS AT REDMOOE. 21 

of the invalid, so slie stepped gently to tlie door 
and opened it. 

" Is Mrs. Hammond here, mam'sell ?" asked 
Banks. 

'^ Oh, but yes. Monsieur Banks, madame is 
always here." 

" Not exactly," thought Banks, puzzled by 
her idiom ; but he merely said, " Bad news has 
reached the family. My lady's father is dead, 
which he was a good old gentleman indeed ; and 
she ain't seen him neither, not for some time; 
and my lady she's been a faintin' away in the 
libery hke any thin' ; and Sir Charles, he's been 
a holdin' of her hup, leastways him and Lord 
Dollymore, and there's the deuce to pay down 
there." 

Mademoiselle listened with polite attention to 
Mr. Banks's statement of the condition of affairs ; 
but she was not warmly interested. 

" Monsieur Banks will pardon me," she said ; 
"but at present I coif madame; I think he de- 
manded madame ?" 

" Yes, I did, marm'sell," said Banks, abashed 



22 BUNKING THE GAUNTLET. 

and convicted by this quiet little person of undue 
loquacity; "only I thought you'd like to hear. 
Mostly servants does ; but," here Mr. Banlcs floun- 
dered again, "you ain't much like the rest of us, 
miss . mam'sell, I mean." 

Mademoiselle Marcelline acknowledged the 
compliment with a ^'ery frigid smile, and again 
inquired what she might have the pleasure of 
telling madame, on the part of Monsieur Banks. 

" Sir Charles begs Mrs. Hammond will come 
down to the libery if quite convenient to her, as 
he wishes to speak to her about some necessary 
arrangements." 

Mr. Banks delivered his messao:e with elabora- 
tion, and waited the reply with dignity. Made- 
moiselle Marcelline repeated the communication 
to her mistress, word for word, and did not suffer 
the slightest trace of expression to appear in her 
face. 

" Yes, I will go down immediately," said 
Laura, much relieved at the prospect of escaping 
from the presence of her maid, and having time 
to consider her position. 



A CRISIS AT REDMOOR. 23 

Mr. Banks went away to deliver Mrs. Ham- 
mond's message, and mademoiselle, in perfect 
silence, removed the dressing-go^vvn from lier mis- 
tress's shoulders ; and Laura, her dress in complete 
order, and her nerves to all appearance as well 
arranged, rose jfrom her chair. 

'' Give me a lace-shawl," she said, in her cus- 
tomary imperious manner ; "if Lady Mitford has 
lost her father, she will not be gratified by my 
making my appearance in full-dress, and I have 
no time to change it." 

" Madame is so considerate," remarked Made- 
moiselle Marcelline, as she folded a web of fine 
black lace round Mrs. Hammond's form; "and 
Lady Mitford owes her so much. Poor lady, she 
is sensitive ; she has not the courage of madame. 
Madame must form her." 

" Go for Gifford to sit with Mr. Hammond," 
said Laura. " You can wait for me in my room 
as usual ;" and she walked out of the dressing- 
room, having previously ordered her maid to mi- 
lock the door, without any outward sign of dis- 
turbance. Slowly she went down the great stair- 



24 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

case, and as she went she asked herself, " Shall I 
tell Charles ? Could any worse complication arise 
out of my concealing this dreadful thing from 
him ?" At length she made up her mind, just as 
she reached the door of the library. "No," she 
said, " I will not tell him. He has no nerv^, and 
would blunder, and the less one tells any man the 
better." 

Poor Georgie, now indeed lonely and desolate, 
had been taken to her room, and induced to lie 
down on her bed, by the housekeeper and her 
maid, who proposed to watch by their unhappy 
mistress all night. She and Sir Charles were to 
proceed to Fishbourne on the following day. She 
had earnestly entreated her husband to take her 
with him, and he had consented. She was quite 
worn-out and stupefied with grief, and had hardly 
noticed Mrs. Hammond's presence in the librar}^ 
at all. It was agreed that Lord Dollamore should 
leave Redmoor on the following day, a little later 
than Sir Charles and Lady Mitford, and that the 
Hammonds should go to Torquay as soon as the 



A CRISIS AT REDMOOR. 25 

physicians would permit tlieir patient to make so 
great an effort. 

^^ It is impossible to say how soon I shall get 
back, or how long I may be detained," said Sir 
Charles; " and it's a confoimded nuisance having 
to go." 

Lord Dollamore looked at him with tranquil 
curiosity, and tapped first his teeth and then his 
ear with his inseparable cane. 

" I hope they Avill make you comfortable here. 
Bligh will see to every thing, I know. Perhaps 
they won't let Hammond move at all . very likely, 
for there's an east vnnd . and you'll be here when 
we retm-n." 

Very gravely Mrs. Hammond answered him : 
" That will be impossible, Sir Charles. Lady Mit- 
ford could not possibly be expected to have any 
one in her house under such circumstances. Mr. 
Hammond must be brought to Torquay." 

Sir Charles was puzzled; he could not quite 
understand her tone ; he did not think it was as- 
sumed entirely, owing to the presence of Lord Dol- 
lamore, for that had seldom produced any effect on 



26 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Laura. No, she was completely in earnest. She 
gave her hand to each gentleman in turn, but the 
clasp she bestowed on each was equally warm ; and 
when Sir Charles, as she j^assed out of the door, 
shot one passionate glance at her, unseen by Dol- 
lamore, she completely ignored it, and walked 
gracefully away. 

"By Jove!" said Lord DoUamore, when he 
had gotten rid of Mitford and was safe in his own 
room, " it was a lucky thing Buttons made his 
appearance just when he did. I should have hope- 
lessly committed myself in another minute ; and 
then, on the top of that fine piece of sentiment, 
we should have had the scene of this evening's 
news. No matter how she had taken it, I should 
have been in an awful scrape. If she had taken 
it well, I should have had to do a frightful amoimt 
of sympathy and condolence . the regular ' water- 
cart business' in fact ; and if she had taken it ill, 
egad, she's just the woman to blurt it all out in a 
fit of conscience, and to believe that her father's 
death is a judgment upon her for not showing me 
up to Mitford ! As it is, the matter remains in a 



A CRISIS AT REDMOOR. 27 

highly-satisfactory condition ; I am not committed 
to any thing : I might have been pleading my own 
cause, or a Mend's, or some wholly imaginary 
personage's ; and I can either resume the argu- 
ment precisely where I dropped it, if I think pro- 
per, or I can cut the whole affair. Bless you, my 
Buttons !" 

As Georgie was driving over to the railway- 
station on the following day, . ^her maid and she 
occupying the inside of the carriage, and Sir 
Charles, availing himself of his well-known ob- 
jection to allow any one but himself to drive when 
he was present, to avoid a tete-a-tete with his wife, 
on the box . she raised her heavy veil for a while, 
and di'awing a letter from her pocket, read and 
re-read it through her blinding tears. It was fr'om 
Colonel Alsager. At length Georgie put it away 
and lay back in the carriage, with closed eyes, 
thinking of the writer. 

" He has suffered a great deal also," she 
thought ; " and he has more to suffer. How sorely 
he must repent his neglect of his father ! as sorely 



28 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

as I repent my neglect of mine." Here the tears, 
whicli had akeady burned her eyelids into a state 
of excruciating soreness, burst forth again. " What 
must he have felt when he read his father's letter ! 
. the letter written to be read after the writer's 
death, . the letter he will show to me, he says, 
though to no one else in the world, except, I 
suppose, the young lady whom Sir Peregrine en- 
treated him in it to marry. I wonder if he will, . 
I wonder if she is nice, and good, and likely to 
make liim happy! It is strange that a similar 
calamity should have befallen him and me. He 
can feel for my grief now . I have always felt for 
his!" 



CHAPTER 11. 

MK. WUFF'S "new star." 

"Miss Constance Greenwood, the new actress!" 
" Go and see Constance Greenwood on the 18th !" 
" Constance Greenwood as Lady Malkinshaw !" 
Such were the placards in enormous letters which 
glared upon Laurence Alsager from every dead 
wall and hoarding on his passage fr-om the railway- 
station to his old rooms in Jermpi Street. Lau- 
rence could not forbear smiling as he glanced at 
them . could not forbear a laugh as, at the club 
over liis dinner, he read the advertisements of the 
forthcoming appearance of Miss Greenwood at the 
Theatre Royal, Hatton Garden, for which national 
estabhshment she had been secured by the im- 
Ijresario, Mr. Wuff, at an expense hitherto un- 
paralleled . at least so said the advertisements. 



30 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Yes ; Mr. WufF had done it at last ! He had 
cut himself adrift fi'om the moorings of mediocrity', 
as his nautical dramatist expressed it, and it was 
now sink or swim with him. He was " going in 
a j^erisher," he said himself; and having set his 
fortune on a die, he was just waiting to see 
whether it turned up six or ace. 

When Mr. Wuff came into a smn of money 
on the death of a distant relative, and, forsak- 
ing the necessary but hardly popular calling of a 
sheriffs-officer, took the Theatre Royal, Hatton 
Grarden, and opened it with a revival of the legiti- 
mate drama in general and of Shakespearian plays 
in particular, he made a very great hit. It was 
so long since any one had attempted to represent 
Shakespeare, that an entirely new generation had 
sprmig up, which, egged on by its elders, went 
religiously to the first performance of all the cele- 
brated plays, and tried very hard indeed to think 
they both understood and liked them. Tlie news- 
paper press too was very noble on the subject. Mr. 
Wuff, so said the critics, was the great dramatic 
resuscitator of the age. What ! People had said 



MR. wuff's ^^new star." 31 

that the taste for the legitimate was exploded ! Tlic 
answer to that was in the crowds that thronged to 
T. E., Hatton Garden. And then the critics went 
on to saj that the scenery by Mr. Slapp, with 
wonderful moonliglit effects such as had never 
previously been seen, was thoroughly appreciated ; 
and that the mechanical arrangement for the ap- 
pearance of Banquo's ghost amongst the micon- 
scious Tlianes was a marvel of theatrical deception. 
Was it Shakespeare or Slapp who drew ? Buncle, 
a heavy, ignorant, ill-educated man, who had 
played fom'th-rate parts with the Dii majores in 
those "palmy days" of which we read, and who now, 
faute de mieuXj found himself pitchforked into the 
leading characters, thought it was Shakespeare . 
and Buncle ! The knowing ones thought it was 
the novelty of the reproduction and the excellence 
of Slapp's scenery which caused the success ; and 
the knowing ones were right. Shakespeare, as 
interpreted by Bimcle, Mrs. Buncle, and Stam- 
pede, . whom Bmicle always took about with liim 
to play his seconds, . drew for a certain length of 
time. Then the audience thinned gradually, and 



32 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

WufF found it necessary to supplement King Lear 
with the Harem Beauties . a ballet supported by 
the best band of corypMes in Europe; and that 
was a really good stroke of policy. While Buncle 
was lying down and dying as Lear, the club-men 
came trooping into the house ; and Bmicle's apo- 
strophes to his dead daughter Cordelia were nearly 
inaudible in the creaking of boots and the settling 
into seats. The pit cried " Hush !" and " Shame !" 
but the swells did not care about the pit, and the 
curtain fell on Buncle thirsting for aristocratic 
blood. The ballet at first attracted largely. As 
the time for its commencement approached, the 
military clubs were drained of their members, who 
went away in a procession of hansoms from Pali 
Mall to Hatton Garden ; and }'ou could have 
counted more pairs within WufF's walls at one 
time than were to be found, save on special occa- 
sions, at St. Stephen's. 

But the ballet, after a time, ceased to draw; 
and Mr. Wuff could not supplement it by an- 
other, for the conjpMes had all returned to their 
allegiance to the manager of the Opera-house, 



33 

whose season had just commenced. Mr. WufF 
was in despair ; he dared not shut the house, for 
he had to make up his rent, which was required 
with inexorable punctuality by the committee of 
gentlemen who owned the theatre. He must try 
something ; but what was it to be ? WufF and his 
treasurer, Mr. Bond, . always known as Tommy 
Bond, an apple-faced white-headed old gentle- 
man, who had di'opped into the theatrical world 
no one ever laiew whence, and who had held 
a place of trust with all the great managers of the 
T. R., Hatton Garden, for thirty years, . were 
closeted together. 

^^ What's it to be. Tommy?" repeated Mr. 
WufF for the twentieth iime. '' They've had it 
all round, hot and strong ; and what's the caper 
for 'em noAv, I don't know." 

" What do you think of reviving Julius Ccesar? 
Tlie classic costume has not been seen on these 
boards for years." 

" What! Billy's Julius Ccesar? No, thank you! 
I've had enough of Bill to last me some time . and 
that brute Buncle drawing fifteen pound a week, 

VOL. III. D 



34 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

and bellowing his lungs out to thirty people in the 
pit ! No, no ! Is there a good lion-and-camel 
lot about ?" 

Mr. Bond shuddered ; he was frequently 
prompted to shudder in his conversation with Mr. 
WufF. He was a great believer in the elevating 
tendencies of the drama ; and when he thought of 
lions and camels on the same boards which he 
had seen trodden at different times by those great 
actors and rivals, Grumble and Green, he could 
not refrain from shuddering. But his business 
instincts made him turn to a file of the Era on the 
table, and he said, after consulting it : 

'' Tliere's Roker's troupe at North Shields." 
'^ How long since they've been in town ?" 
'' Oh, two years ; and then they were only at 
the "Wells . you can scarcely call that town ; and it 
didn't interfere a bit with our people, you know." 
" Eoker's are performing lions, ain't they?" 
"Yes; they'll let him do any thing to them, 
when they're in a proper state." 

"All right! Write to him about terms at 
once ; and send to Darn ajnd tell him we want a 



MR. WUFF'S ^^ NEW STAR." 35 

piece to bring out this lot at once. Must be 
Eastern, because of the camel . long procession, 
slaves, caskets, and all that kind of thing, and a 
fight with the lion for Roker. That's all Roker's 
to do, mind ; he can't act a bit." 

Mr. Roker was driving such an excellent trade 
with the pitmen of the North, that he refused to 
come to London except on terms which Mr. Wuff 
would not give ; and so that enterprising manager 
was again in a strait. Mr. Trapman had been 
called into council, had ransacked his books and 
his brain in search for novelty, but all to no pur- 
pose; and things were looking very serious for 
Mr. WuflP, when one morning Trapman nished 
from his office and arrived breathless in the man- 
ager's sanctum. 

" Wliat is it?" asked WufF, who was sitting 
vacantly looking at Bond, poring over files of old 
play-bills. 

" We've got it at last, I think!" said Trapman, 
pointing to an open letter in his hand. " You've 
heard of Constance Greenwood?" 

" Yes, yes !" struck in Mr. Bond eagerly. 



36 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

'' Milman was here last week, . -just arrived from 
New York, . and he says that for the leading-lady 
business . modern time, I mean . he'd never seen 
any thing like her." 

"Yankee, ain't she?" asked Wuff coldly. 

" Not a bit of it," rephed Trapman. " She's 
English bred and born ; only been out there three 
months ; never played any where before, and made 
a most tre-mendous hit. 1 saw the New- York 
papers about her first night. They'd got up a 
report that she was the daughter of an English 
nobleman, and had run away because her father 
was cruel to her; and this crammed the house. 
The girl's acting did the rest. Every one says 
she's very clever, and she was making no end of 
dollars a-night." 

" Well ?" said Wuif, who was working up into 
excitement. 

" Oh, I thought you did not care about it," 
said Trapman. " I've a letter from her here in my 
hand, saying that she's taken a sudden desire to 
England, and wants me to get her an engagement 
in a first-class theatre. I've got newspapers by 



ME. WUFF'S " NEW STAR." 37 

the same mail, describing lier farewell benefit, and 
speculating, in the way those chaps do over there, 
about what can have made her want to go to 
England so suddenly. But there's no doubt 
she's a clipper, and I came at once to offer her to 
you." 

" I'll have her !" shouted Wuff, jumping up. 
"First-class theatre she wants, eh? This is the 
shop. Let's have a look at her letter?" 

" Can't do that, . it's a private letter," said 
Trapman ; " but I'll teU you her terms : ten 
pound a -night settled, and share after a hun- 
dred." 

"That'll do. Now, Tommy Bond, just sit 
do^vn and write a stunnin' advertisement, and put 
that story about her being a nobleman's daughter 
into shape, . only make her run away because she 
was in love, and wanted to earn money for the 
support of her lover, who was blind. . Eh, Trap- 
man, that ought to wake 'em up ? . And send the 
story to little Shiffon, who does that column of 
lies, and ask him to stick it in next week. . What's 
her line, Trapman ?" 



SS BUNNIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

" Genteel comedy and interesting business of 
the highest class, . ladj of the present daj, you 
know." 

'^ All right ; then I sha'n't want Buncle." 

"]N'ot a bit; get rid of him at once. But I'll 
tell you what; Pontifex has quarrelled with the 
Parthenium people . he was with me yesterday 
. and I'd pick him up to support her." 

Mr. WufF agreed to this, and told Mr. Trap- 
man to take the necessary steps ; and that gentle- 
man then took his departure. 

" Wasn't going to let WufF look at her letter," 
said he, as he walked away ; " wouldn't do at all. 
What a doosed clever gal I Wliat does she say ?" 
and he pulled the letter from his pocket : " ^ Not a 
word to any one until after my appearance. After 
that I sha'n't care.' All right, my dear ; you may 
depend upon me." 

Mr. Wuif went to work with a will, and 
spared no expense in liis biUs and advertisements. 
The nobleman's daughter's story was duly filtered 
tln-ough the newspapers, and popidar cm-iosity was 
excited. ]\Iiss Constance Greenwood arrived from 



MR. WUFF'S " NEW STAR." 39 

America by the next mail, bringing with her an 
American play, founded on a French subject, full 
of interest, and what we should in the present day 
call sensation, but wretchedly written. This play 
was given to the accomphshed Spofforth; and 
under his manipulation it became a very capital 
acting drama, with a splendid character for Miss 
Greenwood, and very good chances for Ponti- 
fex. Wuff, Bond, Spofforth, and Oldboy, the 
critic of the Statesman, had a little dinner at Wuff 's 
house before the evening dress-rehearsal, which 
Miss Greenwood had requested before the pro- 
duction of the piece ; and they were all delighted 
with what they saw. Oldboy was especially 
pleased. ^' I thought," said he, ^^that lady-like 
women left the stage with Miss Fortescue ; but 
this girl restores my hopes." And Wuff winked 
at Spofforth, and they both knew that meant a 
column and a half the morning after the perfonn- 
ance. 

Sir Lam-ence Alsager di'ove straight from the 
railway-station to the Maecenas Club, where his 



40 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

servant was waiting for him with his dressing- 
things. As he pushed through the streets, the 
placards on the walls announcing the theatrical 
novelty for the evening recalled to his mind the 
night of his return from the East. Then he drove 
to the Club, then he had returned to be present at 
the first representation of a theatrical novelty ; but 
ah, how different was his state of mind then from 
what it was now ! Then the iron had passed over 
the slight scratch which he at that time imagined 
was a wound, and had completely cicatrised it ; now 
a real wound was gaping and bare. Kismet ! kis- 
met ! the old story. That night he saw Georgia 
Mitford for the first time ; and ever since then 
what had he not suffered on her account ! All, 
what had she herself not suffered, poor child I His 
absence from London and his manner of life down 
at Knockholt had precluded him from hearing 
any recent news of her ; and he wondered whether 
tlie lapse of time had had any effect on Sir Charles 
Mitford's mad infatuation, or whether it still con- 
tinued. More than any thing else, Laurence 
wanted to laiow whether Lady Mitford's domestic 



MR. WUFF's " NEW STAR." 41 

misery was known to the world at large, or con- 
fined, to the few acquaintances who had such splen- 
did opportunities of inspecting it in the quiet of 
Redmoor. He knew that her first appearance in 
society had excited a great deal of notice, a 
great deal of admiration, and, consequently, a 
great deal of en^y ; and he was too much a man 
of the world not to feel certain that any thing to 
her disadvantage would be sought out with the 
greatest perseverance, and spread abroad with the 
greatest alacrity. And it was to her disadvan- 
tage, in the eyes of society, that her home was un- 
happy; there Avere people in numbers who would 
declare that the result was her fault; that she 
was prim, puritanical, bad-tempered; that her 
jealousy was perfectly ridiculous ; that her missy 
ways and affectation rendered it impossible for 
any man to live with her. There were numbers 
of people who would take an opposite view of the 
question, and who would pity her . not indeed 
with that pity which is akin to love, but fi'om a 
feehng springing from a very different som'ce, . a 
pity which consists in loudly denouncing the cause 



42 RUNNING THE GAOn'TLET. 

for compassion, and wondering how the person to 
be compassionated can endure what has to be gone 
through. There would be people who could not 
understand how any thing otherwise could have 
been expected : a young person from the bourgeoisie 
introduced into the nous-autres class must expect 
that the silly fancy which had captivated her hus- 
band would not lastj and must be prepared to take 
the consequences of her vaulting ambition. The 
Clanronald and Taffington set would infallibly 
regard it from this last-mentioned point of view, 
accordingly. 

How Laui-ence Alsager's blood boiled witliin 
liim as all these thoughts passed tlu-ough his 
mind. During the quietude of his life at Knock- 
holt, he had had sufficient opportunities so tho- 
roughly to catechise himself, so perfectly to dis- 
sect the feelings of his breast, as to leave no 
doubt in his own mind that he loved Lady Mit- 
ford deeply and passionately. Tlie notion of tlie 
guardian angel, the protecting genius, which he 
had so encouraged at first, had now entirely faded 
out, and he had not scrupled to show to liimself 



43 

the actual state of his feelings towards her. Not 
that they would ever be known ; he had made 
up his mind to keep them rigidly locked in his 
own bosom. But still it was worse than horrible 
to think that the woman in whose service he 
would willingly have perilled his life, was in 
all probability dragging on a miserable exist- 
ence, exposed to the perverse misunderstand- 
ings or degrading pity of the world ! On these 
latter points he should soon be assured. Tliey 
discussed every body at the Maecenas ; and 
if there had been any thing sufficiently notice- 
able in the Mitford menage to call for comment, 
it was sure to receive the freest and most out- 
spoken discussion in the tabak-j)arliament of the 
Club. 

Meanwhile, the mere notion of being back in 
London conduced in no small degree to raise Lau- 
rence's spirits. His time at Knockholt had been, 
he felt, far from unprofitably spent ; he had had 
opportunities not merely of examining his o^vn 
heart, but of making himself acquainted witli the 
hopes and fears, the wishes and prospects of some 



44 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

of those with Avhose lives he was to a certain ex- 
tent concerned. He had had opportunities of 
carrying out certain pet projects of the good 
old man, wliose last days he had been permitted 
to console ; and he had been enabled to take up 
that position in his comity which was required 
of him, not merely by the hollow ordinances of 
"gentility," but by the great binding rivets of 
society. He hoped in all honesty and humility 
to be able " to do his duty in that state of life un- 
to Avliich God had called him;" but he felt all the 
delight of a schoolboy out of bounds in laying-by 
the county magnate, tlie landed proprietor, the 
many-acred wealt^iy baronet, for a time, and 
making a very small unit in the grand population 
of London. Tlie crowded streets, the gas-lamps, 
the dull rumble of the passing vehicles, . all were 
delightful to him ; and as he drew up at the club- 
door, he felt happier than he had done for many 
a long day. 

He dressed himself and went down into the cof- 
fee-room, which he fomid thronged. Mr. WufF's 
advertisements and bills had been so far fruitful, 



MR. wuff's "new star." 45 

that two-thirds of the diners at the Maecenas seemed 
from their talk to be going to the Hatton- Gar- 
den Theatre. Laurence was welcomed with great 
cordiality by all who knew him, and had nume- 
rous offers of "joining tables;" but he expected 
George Bertram, and when he found that that 
pillar of the state did not arrive, he preferred 
dining by himself. The solitary life he had been 
leading, the event which had led to that life, the 
reflections which had engrossed him since he had 
led it, . all 3oncurred to prevent him from suddenly 
plmiging into the light gossip of a club-room. 
After dinner, finding that the piece in which 
Miss Constance Greenwood was to appear did not 
commence until half-past eight, he went into the 
smoking-room, where most of the diners had 
assembled, and in addition to them. Lord Dolla- 
more. He looked up and saw Alsager's entrance ; 
then stretched out his hand, and pointed to a 
vacant seat on the couch beside him. 

" My dear Alsager, delighted to see you, . 
honestly and truly deHghted! How are you? 
What a hermit you have become ! though of 



46 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

course I understand, . family-business and all that; 
and what has brought you up at last . not this 
new play ?" 

" Well, I can scarcely say that ; but I wanted 
a something to come up for . a something, I mean, 
beyond law-business . and perhaps this Avondrous 
advertisement of WufF's turned the scale." 

'' Tliey tell me the gal's deuced good. Spof- 
forth, who saw her last night, was here this morn- 
ing, and says she's really wonderful. Tliis is the 
second time you've done this sort of thing, . coming 
back on the first night of a great theatrical event. 
It's not half a bad idea, because you see a lot of 
peoj)le you know, and get rid of ^ how-d'ye-do's' 
in one large parcel." 

" There arc some who were present on the 
last occasion whom I shall not see to-night, I 
sujDpose," said Laurence. " I Avas thinking," he 
added, as he saAv Dollamore whispering to his 
stick, " of George Bertram." 

" No !" said Dollamore, '^ the Blab has been 
missing for the last fortnight. It's rumom-ed 
that he has g-one as a mute into the serv^ice 



MR. WUFF S "new STAR. 47 

of the Pasha of Egypt. I thought you were 
aUuding to our friends in Devonshire : a nice 
business that." 

^' Indeed ! I, as you know, have been absent 
from town for months, and have heard nothing." 

" Well, you won't listen to me, I suppose, 
because you'll imagine I am prejudiced, recollect- 
ing all I said to you on the subject in this very 
room after Spofforth's play. But you won't deny 
that, so far as you had opportunities of judging 
while we were down at Redmoor, I was right ?" 

"Right, so far as your estimation of the man 
went, certainly . " 

" Oh, as for the lady, there is no one can 
entertain a higher opinion of Lady Mitford than 
myself. The degradation that that brute is bring- 
ing upon her . " 

" Degradation ! Do you mean to say that 
Mitford's infidelities are known . about . gene- 
rally?" 

" My dear Alsager, you think I colour and 
exaggerate. Let us pump that well of candour, 
Cis Hetherington. If there is an honest opinion 



48 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

about, it will ])e procurable from that son of Anak. 
. Well, Cis, going to the play ?" 

'^ Course I am," responded that scion of the 
aristocracy, lazily lifting his head from the otto- 
man ; '^ every body's going, seems to me. What's 
the woman like ? Yankee, ain't she ? Don't like 
Yankees, . all speak through their noses, and say 
' I guess ;' at least, all that I've ever seen do, 
and that's only on the stage." 

" She's not Yankee ; she's an Englishwoman, 
they tell me ; though of course that story of the 
nobleman's daughter is all bosh. However, Wuff 
has worked the oracle splendidly. Every body's go- 
ing. Here's Alsager come up to town on pui'pose." 

" Is that Alsager sitting next to you ?" asked 
Cis Hetherington, raising himself on his elbow 
and lookino; frill at Laurence. " I thouo-ht it 
looked like him, and I wondered he didn't speak 
to me. But I suppose he's grown proud since 
he's become a Bart." 

" You old idiot ! I shook hands with you in 
the hall as I came in," said Laurence, laughing. 
" What's the news, Cis ? how are all youi' people ?" 



MR. wuff's "new star." 49 

" First-rate, old boy ! Westonhanger's gone 
abroad . to America, I mean ; Sioux Indians, and 
that sort of thing. Wanted you awfully to go with 
him, but thought you were doing monseigneur on 
your terre. Asked about you no end, give you 
my word ! And the Duke's really tremendous ! 
'pon my soul, some fellow ought to put him in a 
book ! Ever since the row about the repeal of the 
Com Laws has been coming to a head, he's been 
like a Imiatic. He thinks it's all up with every 
thing, and is sure we shall have a revolution, and 
that he'll have his head cut off by the mob and 
stuck on a pike, and all that kind of thing." 

"And Algy Forrester?" asked Dollamore. 

" Algy Forrester was here to-day," said Heth- 
erington ; " came to me about a devilish unplea- 
sant thing. That fellow Mitford, whom you both 
know" (" Now, then, listen !" said Dollamore), . 
" that fellow Mitford has asked him . Algy, I mean 
.to put him up here. And Algy came to ask if 
I'd second him, and I told him I'd see Mitford 
d . d first. And so I would. I ain't a strait-laced 
party, and don't go in for being particularly vir- 

VOL. III. E 



50 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

tuous myself; but I'm a bachelor, and am on mj 
own hook. But the way that fellow Mitford treats 
that nice wife of his is neither more nor less than 
blackguardly, I think ; and so I wouldn't mind 
telling him, if I'd the chance." 

" Hallo, Cis !" said Marldiam Bowers, who 
was sitting near; "shut yom- stupid old mouth. 
You'll get into a mess if you give tongue like 
that, . get cut off in the flower of your youth; 
and then what weeping and wailing there'll be 
among the ten tribes, and among those mifortu- 
nate Christians who have been speculating on 
your autograph. Not that you're wrong in what 
you say about Mitford ; for if ever a cad walked 
this earth, that's the man." 

"Ah! and isn't she a nice woman?" said 
Hetheriup-ton. "When she first showed in town 

o 

last season, she took every body's fancy; even 
Kunnymede admired her, and the Duchess asked 
to be introduced, and they were quite thick. 
Wonderful! wasn't it? And to think of that snob 
Mitford treating her as he does, completely ne- 
glecting her, while he's Well, I don't know; 

1^ 



MR. wuff's "new star." 51 

I suppose it's all right ; but there ain't many things 
that would please me better than dropping on to 
that party . heavy." 

" You're always dropping on to parties, Cis," 
said Bowers ; " but you had better keep quiet in 
this case, please. You would have to make your 
OA^ai chance of getting into the row, for of course 
the lady's name must not appear . " 

"Oh, don't you be afraid of me, Marky; I'm 
all right!" said Cis, rising and stretching him- 
self " You won't mind my stamping on Mit- 
ford's feet, . accidentally, of course, . if we find 
him in the stalls." And the two Guardsmen 
started away together. 

" Well," said Lord Dollamore, leaning for- 
ward towards his companion, " was I right or 
wrong ?" 

" Eight ! terribly right !" said Alsager, with a 
set rigid face. 

" You would not have accepted my testimony, 
thinking perhaps that I had motives for exagger- 
ation, or was prompted by an arnere 2^.nsee, in 
which, on my word of honour, you're wrong. 



UNIVERSITY OP 

. I ..lAMO I IDDftP 



52 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

But those fellows are merely types of society ; 
and their opinion, somewhat diiferently expressed, 
is society's opinion." 

"Has not Mitford's madness cooled down at 
all?" 

" It is worse, far and away, . ^worse than ever . " 

" And that woman ?" 

"Ah," said Lord DoUamore, " she's been very 
quiet lately, owing to her husband's death. " Poor 
old boy ! poor old Percy Hammond ! But she's up 
in town, I miderstand, now ; and I don't think . " 
and here DoUamore's crutch -handled stick was 
evidently whispering confidences into its master's 
ear, . " I don't think Master Mitford will find it 
all straight sailing in that quarter just now." 

" How do you mean ? What would induce 
her to chano-e to him ?" 

o 

"Well, you see, she's a widow now, with a 
comparatively small income ; for I suspect poor 
old Percy knew more than he ever let on, and 
instructed Trivett to prepare his will accordingly. 
So that, besides wanting a husband, she'll want 
him rich ; for she's one of the best hands at get- 



MR. wuff's "new star." 53 

ting through money in England. With a husband 
in posse, Mitford's attentions would not do at all." 

" Ah, I see ; but is not her character too well 
known ?" 

" Not a bit of it ; her powers of attraction are 
enormous still. Why, if I'm rightly informed, a 
Russian whom you know, I think, . Tchernigow by 
name, . is making the running there ah-eady." 

" I know him ; he was madly in love with her, 
I heard, the season before last; followed her to 
Baden and about." 

" That's the man ! Well, he's revenu . not to 
his premier, which was probably some Cossack 
peasant-girl . but to one of his amours, and is 
desperate." 

" He's enormously wealthy. If she accepted 
him, there might yet be a chance of happiness for 
Georgie . Lady Mitford, I mean." 

" Don't you believe that for an instant, Al- 
sager !" said DoUamore, looking keenly at him ; 
"you're not posted up in that family history. 
Matters have gone too far now; there is only 
one way in which Sir Charles Mitford could 



54 EUNNDs^G THE GAUXTLET. 

really be of service to his wife, and that is by- 
dying. But I'm afraid she would not think so, 
poor girl !" Tlien seeing his companion looking 
very grave, he said, " Come, it's no use brooding 
over these matters ; let us go the theatre." 

The theatre was crammed, as Mr. Wuff had 
anticipated. The audience was composed of 
pretty much the same class of people as those 
present on the first night of Mr. SpofForth's play 
at the Parthenium ; with the exception of those 
who w^ere most strongly remembered by Alsager. 
He had known that the Mitfords and Mrs. Ham- 
mond could not be there, and there was httle to 
interest him among the audience. The curtain rose 
on the piece of the evening, and every body's at- 
tention concentrated on the stage. Shortly after- 
wards came the appearance of the new actress, 
who was hailed with shouts of encom'agement and 
applause by Mr. Wuffs supporters in boxes, pit, 
and gallery. She seemed not in the least over- 
come by her reception, but bowed gracefully, 
and entered immediately on the business of the 



00 

piece. Tlie character she played was that of a 
liigh - bred wealthy girl, beloved by a young 
yeomau- farmer of the neighbourhood, who pro- 
poses to her, but she mocks at his gaucheries, and 
rejects him with scorn. He accepts his defeat, 
and goes away to travel on the Continent with 
his brother. It is not until he is gone that she 
finds how deeply she had really loved him ; but 
he is gone never to retm-n, and so she accepts 
the attentions of, and is engaged to, a silly peer. 
Then comes the Nemesis. The girl's father is 
ruined, the peer jilts her, and she is left in 
wretchedness, when the yeoman - farmer comes 
back a polished gentleman. There is an admir- 
able scene of intensity between them, and, of 
course, all ends happily. Tlie character of the 
heroine seemed excellently suited for Miss Green- 
wood, who, gradually winning the confidence of 
the audience, worked them to a pitch of enthu- 
siasm in the last scene, and brought down the 
cm'tain with a universal verdict of her combining 
thorough knowledge of the usages of society and 
lady-like manners with great dramatic power. 



56 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Of course she was recalled before the cur- 
tain; and then as she swept across the stage, 
clasping her bouquet to her bosom, and occasion- 
ally bowing low, her eyes lit full on those of 
Laurence Alsager. And then for the first time 
Laurence Alsager, who had been puzzling his 
brain about her ever since she appeared on tlie 
scene, recollected w^ho she was, and said half 
aloud, '' The woman who wrote me the note ! . 
Miss Gillespie, without a doubt !" 



CHAPTER III. 

LOVE AND DUTY. 

Lady Mitford was alone on the afternoon of the 
following da J, when Sir Laurence Alsager was an- 
nounced. She w^as often alone now; for the world 
falls readily and easily away, not only fi:om the 
forsaken, but from the preoccupied . from those to 
whom its gaieties are childish follies and its in- 
terests weariness. She had fallen out of the ranks, 
as much tlu*ough inclination as in compliance with 
the etiquette of mourning; and it came to pass often 
that the aft:ernoon hours found her, as on this occa- 
sion, sitting alone in her splendid, vapid, faultless, 
soulless home. The softened light which reached 
her stately figure and irradiated her thoughtfiil 
face showed the grace and loveliness which distin- 
guished her mitouched, undimmed. Under the 
discipline of sorrow, under the teacliing of dis- 



58 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

appointment, her face had gained in expression 
and dignity, . every line and curve had strength 
added to its former sweetness ; the pure steadfast 
eyes shone with deeper, more translucent lustre, 
and the rich lips met each other with firmer pur- 
pose and more precision. The perfecting, the re- 
finement of her beauty, were sensibly felt by Al- 
saffer as he advanced towards the end of the room 
where she was seated in the recess between a large 
window and a glittering fireplace. She sat in a 
deep low chair of purple velvet ; and as she leaned 
slightly forward and looked at him coming rapidly 
towards her, his eye noted every detail of the picture. 
He saw the glossy hair in its smooth classic ban- 
deaux, the steadfast eyes, the gracious, somewhat 
grave, smile, the graceful figm-e in its soft robe of 
thick mourning silk, and its rich jet ti'immings ; 
he saw the small white hands, gentle but not 
weak, . one extended towards him in welcome, the 
other loosely holding an open book. In a minute 
he was by her side and speaking to her ; but that 
minute had a deathless memory, . that picture he 
was to see again and again, in many a place, at 



LOVE AND DUTY. 59 

many a time, and it was never to be less beautiful, 
less divine for him. He loved her . ay, he loved 
her . this injured woman, this neglected, outraged 
wife, this woman who was a victim, crushed under 
the wheels of the triumphal car which had maimed 
him once on a time, though only slightly, and by 
a hurt soon healed by the balsam of contempt. 
Was she crushed, though ? Tliere was sorrow in 
that grand face . indeed, to that look of sorrow it 
owed its grandeur, . but there was no pining; there 
was sad experience, but no weak vain retrospec- 
tion. All the pain of her lot was written upon 
her face ; but none could read there a trace of what 
would have been its mortification, its bitter humi- 
liation to commoner and coarser minds. It mat- 
tered nothing to her that her husband's infatuation 
and their mutual estrangement were topics for 
comment to be treated in the style current in so- 
ciety, and she herself an object of that kind of 
compassion which is so hard to brook : these were 
small things, too small for her range of vision ; she 
did not see them . did not feel them. She saw the 
facts, she felt their weight and significance ; but 



60 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

for the rest! If Lady Mitford had progressed 
rapidly in knowledge of the great world since she 
had been of it, she had also graduated in other 
sciences which placed her above and beyond it. 

"I am fortunate in finding you at home, Lady 
Mitford," said Alsager. 

She answered by a smile. They had got be- 
yond the talking of commonplaces to each other, 
these two, in general ; but there was a sense of 
oppression over them both to-day, and each w^as 
conscious that it weighed upon the other. The 
remembrance of the talk to which he had listened 
at the Club, of the light discussion of Sir Charles's 
conduct, of the flippant censure of the woman who 
had won him from liis wife, was very strong upon 
Alsager ; while she, . of w^hat was she thinking ? 
Who could undertake to tell that ? who could ca- 
tegorise the medley which must occupy the mind 
of a woman so situated ? Was she suffering the 
sharp pangs of outraged love ? or was she endur- 
ing the hardly less keen torture of discovering that 
that which she had believed to be love, had che- 
rished in her breast as the true deity, had given, 



LOVE AND DUTY. 61 

in that belief, to her husband, was not love, but 
only a skilful (and innocent) counterfeit, only a 
mock jewel which she had offered in good faith for 
the flawless pearl of price ? Who can tell ? She 
could hardly have answered such a question truly, 
if she had put it to herself at the close of the 
interview which began after so commonplace a 
fashion. ** 

" I have not seen you since your father's 
death," said Lady Mitford, gently; and in a tone 
which lent the simple words all the effect of a 
formal condolence. " You have not been long in 
town, I'm sure ?" 

" No, indeed," he said ; "I have but just 
returned. There is so much to be done on these 
occasions; there are so many forms to be gone 
through ; there is so much immediate business to 
be transacted, in the interests of the living, that . 
that," . he hesitated; for he had neared that preci- 
pice so dreaded by all nowadays, the exhibition 
of natural emotion. 

" That one has to wait for leisure to mourn 
for the dead," said Lady Mitford. "Ah, yes, I 



62 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

understand that. But you remain in town now, 
do you not?" 

Tliere was a tone of anxiety in tlie question 
which struck on Alsager's ear with a sound of 
music. She had missed him, then, . she would 
miss him if he went away again ! He loved her 
well, ay, and worthily, contradictory though that 
may seem; but his heart was stirred with a joy 
which he dared not analyse, but could not deny, 
at the thought. He answered hurriedly, " Yes, 
I remain here now." And then he changed his 
tone, and said eagerly, 

" Tell me something of yourself How has it 
been with you since we met last?" 

"Of myself!" she replied sadly; and her 
colour' flushed and faded as she spoke, and her 
restless fin2:ers trifled with the ornaments of her 
dress. " Myself is an unprofitable subject, and 
one I am weary of I have nothing new to tell, 
. nothing you would care to hear." 

He dissented by an eager gesture; but she 
appeared not to perceive it, and went on, witli 
attempted gaiety : 



LOVE AND DUTY. 63 

" We have missed you di'eaclMly, of course. 
I need not tell you what a void your absence 
must necessarily make. We all know you are 
beyond spoiling." 

She looked at him, and something in his face 
warned her not to pursue this tone. She felt 
vaguely that the position was um'eal, and must be 
changed. He knew, as she supposed, what she 
was thinking of; she knew, as he fancied, what 
he was thinking of; and though, as it happened, 
each was wrong, it was manifestly absurd to 
carry on false pretences any longer. Woman-like, 
she was the first to brave the difficulty of the 
situation. 

" You have come to me," she said steadily, 
and looking at him with the clear upheld gaze 
peculiar to her, " because you have heard some- 
thing which concerns me nearly, and because, 
man of the world, . of this heartless world aromid 
us, . as you are, and accustomed to such things, 
still you feel for me ; because you would have 
prevented this thing if you could; because you 
tried to prevent it, and failed ; because you knew 



64 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

. ^yes, Sir Laurence Alsager, because you knew the 
extent and the power of the danger that menaced 
me, and my helplessness : say, am I right ? . for 
these reasons you are here to-day." 

The composure of her voice was gone, but not 
its sweetness ; her colour had faded to a marble 
paleness, and her hands were firmly clasped to- 
gether. Alsager had risen as she spoke, and was 
standing now, leaning against the low velvet- 
covered mantelpiece. He answered hurriedly, and 
with scant composure : 

^^Yes, Lady Mitford, for these reasons, and 
for others." 

" For what others?" 

This, almost in a whisper. 

"Never mind them now," he said impetu- 
ously ; and then the superficial restraint which he 
had imposed upon himself gave way, broke do^vn 
before that strongest and most terrible of tempta- 
tions, the sight of the sorrow and the silent con- 
fidence of the woman one loves, granted at the 
moment when a hope, a guilty hope, that that love 
may not be vain, begins to stir, like life, at one's 



LOVE AND DUTY. 65 

heart. She slu'ank a httle back in the chair, but 
she looked at him as earnestly as before. 

" It is all true, then," he said, . and there was 
a tone of deep and bitter hatred in his voice, . " all 
true. The prophecy I heard among those fellows 
the first time I ever heard your name . the coarse 
knowledge, the cynical foresight, . all true. That 
heartless demon has caught his shallow natui'e in 
her shallow lure, and worked the woe of an angel !" 

His voice rang with a passionate tremor, his 
eyes deepened and darkened with the passionate 
fervom- which glowed in them. His impetuous 
feeling mastered her. She had no power to arrest 
him by a conventional pln'ase, though he had over- 
stepped more than conventionality by invading the 
sacred secrecy of her domestic grief. 

" Yes, Lady Mitford," he went on ; ^^ I have 
retui-ned to find that all I feared, . more than I 
feared, . ^has befallen you. It was an unequal 
contest ; you had only innocence and purity, an 
old-fashioned belief in the stability of human rela- 
tions and the sanctity of plighted faith ; and what 
weapons were these in such a fight? No wonder 

VOL. III. F 



()() RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

you are vanquished. No wonder she is triumph- 
ant . shameless as she is heartless. I womid you," he 
said, for she cowered and trembled at his words ; 
'^ but I cannot keep silence. I have seen shame- 
ful thmgs, . I am no stranger to the dark passages 
of life ; but this is worse than all. Good God I to 
think that a man like Mitford should have had 
such a chance and have thrown it away! To 
think that." 

'' Hush, Sir Laurence !" she said, and stretched 
her hand appealingly towards him ; "I must 
not hear you. I cannot, I will not affect to 
misunderstand you; but there must be no more 
of this. I am an unhappy woman, . a most 
wretched wife; all the world . all the little 
world we think so great, and suifer to torment 
us so cruelly . knows that. Pretence between 
us would be idle ; but confidence is impossible. 
I cannot discuss Sir Charles Mitford's conduct 
with any one, least of all with you." She 
seemed to have spoken the last words unawares, 
or at least involuntarily, for a painful blush 
rose on her face and throat. 



LOYE AND DUTY. 67 

" And why," lie eagerly asked, . " why least 
of all with me ? I have been honoured by your 
friendship, . I have not forfeited it, have I? I 
know that conventionality, which is a systematic 
liar and a transparent hypocrite, would condemn 
in theory a woman to keep her garments folded 
decorously over such mortal heart-wounds ; I 
know that poets snivel rhymes which tell us 
how grand and great, how high and mighty it 
is ^ to suffer and be strong.' I know how easy 
some people find it to see others suffer, and 
be perfectly strong in the process ; but such 
rubbish is not for you nor for me. I cannot 
retm'n to London and hear all that I have 
heard ; I cannot come here and look upon 
you . " his voice faltered, but he forced it into 
the same hmTied composure with which he had 
been speaking. '' I cannot see you as I see 
you now, and talk to you as an ordinary morn- 
ing visitor might talk, or even as we have talked 
together, when these things were coming indeed, 
but had not yet come." 

She was leaning forward now, her face tm-ned 



68 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

towards him, but hidden in her hands. He 
gazed at her with a kindhng glance, and strode 
fiercely back and forward across the wide space 
which lay before the window. 

" I am not a good man," he went on, " ac- 
cording to your standard of goodness. Lady Mit- 
ford ; but I am not a bad man according to 
my own. I have had rough tussles with life, 
and some heavy falls ; but I swear there is a 
dastardly, cold, heartless ingratitude in this bu- 
siness which I cannot bear ; and in the sight of 
you there is something terrible to me. Men 
know this man's history ; we know from what 
degradation you raised him ; we are not so 
blind and coarse that we cannot guess with 
what fidelity and patience you loved him when 
it was at its deepest. And now, to see him 
retm-n to it; to see him, Avithout any excuse of 
i:)overty or struggle, in the enjoyment of all that 
fate and fortune have blindly given him; to see 
liim play the jmrt of a liar and a villain to you 
. to you . to see you left unprotected, openly 
neglected and betrayed, to run the gauntlet of 



LOVE AND DUTY. 69 

society sucli as ours ! I cannot see all this, 
Lady Mitford, and pretend that I do not see 
it; and what is more, you do not wish that I 
could. You are too true, too womanly, to form 
such a wish; and you are too honest to express 
it, in obedience to any laws of cant." 

He went near to her ; he bent down, he 
lowered his voice, he gently drew aAvay the 
hands that hid her face from him ; they dropped 
into her lap, nerveless and idle ; the first tears 
he had ever seen in her eyes dimmed them 
now. 

" You mean kindly, as you have always 
meant to me, Sir Laurence," she said ; " but we 
cannot discuss this matter, . indeed we cannot. 
I am weaker than I ought to be, . I should not 
listen to this ; but oh, God help me, I have no 
friends ; I am all alone, all alone !" 

If she had been beautiful in the pride and 
dignity of her sorrowfiil composure, if his strong 
heart had quailed and his firm nerve had 
shrmik at the sight of her pale and placid grief, 
how far more beautiful was she now, when the 



70 RUNKIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

restraint liaci fallen from her, wlien the eyes 
looked at him from the shadow of wet lashes, 
and the perfect lips trembled with irrepressible 
emotion ! 

"No !" he said vehemently; and as he spoke 
he stood close before her, and stretched his hands 
towards her, but without taking hers : the ges- 
ture was one of mingled denial and appeal, and 
had no touch of boldness in it ; . " no, you are 
not alone ; yes, you have friends, . at least you 
have one friend. Listen to me, . do not fear to 
hear me ; let us at least venture to tell and listen 
to the truth. This man, to whom you were 
given as a guardian angel, is quite miworthy 
of you. You know it ; }'oiu' keen intellect ac- 
cepts a fact and all its consequences, however 
terrible to your woman's heart, and does not 
palter with the truth. Ai'e you to be always 
miserable because you have been once mistaken ? 
If you had known, if you had been able to com- 
prehend the real natm'e of this man, would you, 
could you ever have loved him ?" 

She put up her hand with a faint gestui'e of 



LOVE AND DUTY. 71 

protest ; but he impetuously waved it away, and 
went on, once more striding up and down. 

" Ko, no ; I must speak ! There can be no 
more reticence now. You would not, you could 
not have loved him, this heartless, imgrateful 
profligate, as tasteless and low as he is faithless 
and vicious, . this scoundrel, who, holding good 
in his grasp, has deliberately chosen evil. Ay, I 
ivill say it, Lady Mitford ! You could not have 
loved him, and you know it well; you have 
admitted it to yourself before now, when you 
little dreamed that any one . that I . would ever 
dare to put your thought in form and shape before 
you. What did you love? A girl's fancy, . ^a 
shadow, a dream ! It was no reality, it had no 
foundation, and it has vanished. Your imagi- 
nation drew a picture of an injured victim of 
circumstances, . a weak being, to be pitied and 
admired, to be restored and loved I The truth 
was a selfish scomidrel, who has retui'ned in 
wealth with fresh zest to the miserable pleasures 
for which he lived in poverty; a mean-hearted 
wretch, who could care for your beauty while it 



72 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

was new to him indeed, but to whose perception 
yoii^ your heart and soul, your intellect and 
motives, were mysteries as high and as far off as 
heaven. Ai-e you breaking your heart. Lady 
Mitford, under the kindly scrutiny of the world, 
because the thistle has not borne figs and the 
thorn has not given you purple grapes ? Are you 
sitting down in solitary grief because the animal 
has done according to its kind, because effect has 
resulted from cause, because the wisdom of the 
world, wise in the ways of such men, has verified 
itself? Do you love this man now? Ai'e you 
suffering the pangs of jealousy, of despair ? No, 
you do not love him ; you are suffering no such 
pangs. You are truth itself, . the truest and the 
bravest, as you are the most beautiful of women ; 
and you cannot, you dare not tell me that you 
love this man still, knowing him as you know 
him now." He stopped close beside her, and 
looked at her with an eager, almost a fierce 
glance. 

"Why do you ask me?" she gasped out 
faintly. There was a sudden avoidance of him 



LOVE AND DUTY. 73 

in her expression, a shadow of fear. "Why do 
you speak to me thus ? Oh, Sir Laurence, this . 
this is the worst of all." She was not conscious 
of the effect of the tone in which these words 
were spoken, of the pathos, the helplessness, the 
pleading tenderness it implied. But he heard 
them, and they were enough. They were faint 
as the murmiu" of a brook in summer, but mighty 
as an Alpine storm ; and the barriers of conven- 
tional restriction, the scruples of conscience, the 
timidity of a real love, were swept away like 
straws before their power. 

" Why?" he repeated, " because I love you !" 
She uttered a faint exclamation ; she half rose 
from her chair, but he caught her hands and 
stopped her. 

" Hush !" he said ; " I implore you not to speak 
till you have heard me ! Do not wrong me by 
supposing that I have come here to urge on your 
unwilling ear a tale of passion, to take advantage 
of your husband's crime, your husband's cowar- 
dice, to extenuate crime and cowardice in myself. 
Before God, I have no such meaning! But I 



74 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

love you . I love you as I never even fkncied I 
loved any woman before ; though I am no stranger 
to the reality or the mockery of passion, though 
I have received deep and smarting wounds in 
my time. I wish to make myself no better in 
your eyes than I am. And I love you . ^love you 
so much better than myself, that I would fain 
see you happy with this man, even with Mm^ if 
it could be. But it cannot, and you know it 
You know in your true heart, that if he came 
back to his allegiance to you now . poor bond of 
custom as it is . you could not love him, any 
more than you could return to the toys of your 
childhood. I read you aright ; I know you with 
the intuitive knowledge which love, and love only, 
lends to a man, when he would learn the mystery 
of a woman's nature. You are too noble, too 
true, to be bound by the petty rules, to be 
governed by the small scruples "\\^hich dominate 
nine-tenths of the women who win tlic suffrages 
of society. You have the courage of youi* truth- 
ftilness." 

He stood before her, looking steadfastly down 



LOVE AND DUTY. 75 

upon her, his arms tightly folded across his chest, 
his breath coming quickly in hurried gasps. She 
had shrunken into the recesses of her velvet chair, 
and she looked up at him with parted lips and 
wild eyes, her hands holding the cushions tightly, 
the fingers hidden in the purple fringes. Was 
it that she could not speak, or that she would not ? 
However that may have been, she did not, and 
he went on. 

"Yes, yes, I love you. I think you knew it 
before?" She made no reply. " I think I have 
loved you from the first, . from the moment 
when, callous and hlas4 as I had come to believe 
myself . as, God knows, I had good right to be, 
if human nature may ever claim such a right, . I 
could not bear to see the way your fate was 
drifting, or to hear the chances for and against 
you calculated, as men calculate such odds. I 
think I loved you from the moment I perceived 
how completely you had mistaken your own 
heart, and how beautifully, how innocently loyal 
you were to the error. While your delusion 
lasted. Lady Mitford, you were safe with me 



76 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

and from me, for in that delusion there was 
security. While you loved Mitford, and believed 
that he returned your love, you would never have 
perceived that any other man loved you. But 
you are a woman who cannot be partially de- 
ceived or undeceived; therefore I tell you now, 
when your delusion is wholly at an end, when it 
can come no more to blind your eyes, and rend 
your heart with the removal of the bandage, that 
I love you, . devotedly, changelessly, eternally. 
You must take this fact into account when you 
meditate upon your future ; you must number this 
among the component parts of your life. Hush ! 
not yet. I am not speaking thus through reck- 
less audacity, availing itself of your position ; you 
know I am not, and you must hear me to the 
end." 

She had made a movement as if about to 
speak, but he had again checked her ; and they 
maintained their relative positions, he looking 
down at her, she looking ivp at him. 

" We are facing facts. Lady Mitford. I love 
you, not as the man who left you, in your first 



LOVE AND DUTY. 77 

year of marriagej for the worthless woman who 
forsook me for a richer lover, and would have 
.vvronged the fool who bought her without a 
scruple, could she have got me into her power 
again . not as he loved you, even when he came 
nearest to the truth of love. That woman, yom- 
enemy, yom- rival,' ^ . he spoke the word with 
a stringent scorn which would have been the 
keenest punishment in human power to have in- 
flicted on the woman it designated, . ^'she knows 
I love you, and she has struck at me through you ; 
struck at me, poor fool . for she is fool as well 
as fiend . a blow which has recoiled upon herself. 
She has taught me how much, how well, how 
devotedly I love you, and learned the lesson her- 
self thereby, for the intuition of hate is no less 
keen than that of love. But why do I speak of 
her? Only to make you understand that I am 
a portion of your fate, . only to lay the whole truth 
before you ; only to make it clear to you that mine 
is no chance contact, no mere intrusion. I am 
not a presumptuous fool, who has dared to use a 
generously-granted friendship as a cover for an 



78 KUKNING THE GAUNTLET. 

illicit passion. Have patience with me a little 
longer. Let me tell you all the truth. You 
cannot dismiss me from your presence as you 
might another who had dared to love you, and 
dared to tell you so ; you cannot do tliis." 

" Why?" she asked faintly, but with an angry 
sparkle in her eyes. For the second time she 
said that one word. 

" Because I have injured you. Lady Mitford, . 
injured you unconsciously, unintentionally; and 
that is a plea which cannot fail, addressed to such 
as you. Had I never crossed your path, the 
woman for whom your husband has ^vronged you 
would never have crossed it either. I am the 
object, you are the victim, of the hatred of a she- 
devil. You don't suppose she cares for Mitford, 
do you?" 

" Not if she ever loved you," was the reply. 

Alsager passed it over, but a sudden light 
flashed into his face. 

" Of com-se she does not. She has played her 
ruthless game skilfully according to her lights, 
and your happiness has been staked and lost 



LOVE AND DUTY. 79 

Indirectly, I am the eause of this. Was the 
feeling which came o^er me the first time I saw 
you a presentiment, I wonder ? Well, no matter ; 
you see now that I am a portion of your fate. 
You see now that a hidden tie binds us together, 
and that the folly, the delusion of my youth, and 
the mistaken love of your girlhood, have borne 
mysterious common fruit." 

She sat like one entlu'alled, entranced, and 
listened to him; she bent her head for a mo- 
ment as he took an instant's breath, but she did 
not attempt to speak. His manner changed, grew 
softer, and his voice fell to almost a whisper : 

" May not this mysterious tie of misfortune 
mean more to us?" he said. " May not the 
consolation come, as the curse has come, and all 
the designs of our enemies be disconcerted? I 
do not say my love is worthy of your acceptance, 
. I am too much travel-stained in my wanderings 
in the world's ways to make any such pretension ; 
but it is yours, such as it is . faulty, imperfect, 
but loyal and eternal. I love you, Lady Mitford, 
and I ask nothing of you but permission to love 



80 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

you freely and fully; I ask your leave to give 
you all tlie devotion of my heart, all the loyalty 
of my life. I know how the world would hold 
such a demand ; but I care nothing for the world, 
and I fancy you know it too well to care much 
for it now. You cherished a delusion long and 
sacredly; it was at least a noble one, but it is 
gone, and the world can neither satisfy you for 
its loss nor substitute another. Dearest . " he 
paused ; she shivered, but she said not a word, . 
*^ dearest, what remains ?" Inexpressible tender- 
ness was in his voice, in his bending figure, in his 
moistened eyes. Tliere was a moment's silence, 
and then she spoke, replying to his last words : 

" Duty, Sir Lam-ence, . duty, the only tiling 
which is not a delusion ; that remains." 

He drew back a little, looking at her. She 
raised herself in her chair, and pointed to a seat 
at a little distance from her own. She was deadly 
pale, but she did not tremble, and her voice was 
firm and low as she said : 

" Sit down, and listen to me." 

He obeyed, silent and wondering. Perhaps 



LOVE AND DUTY. 81 

he had not told himself exactly what he had 
expected, . perhaps no one ever does, when the 
emotions of the heart are called into evidence ; 
but he knew that it was not this. Had he more 
to learn of this woman whom he had so closely 
studied; had her nature heights which he had 
not seen, and depths which he had not compre- 
hended? Breathless he waited for her words. 
Li an agony of suspense he looked at her averted 
face, wliich appeared to address itself to something 
in the distance, . which had settled into a wondrous 
composure at the command of the strong will. 
He had not estimated that strencrth of will aright ; 
he had made the common mistake of overlookino; 
a quality because he had not seen it in active 
employment. There was neither confusion nor 
weakness in the manner of the woman to whom 
he had just spoken such words as no woman could 
hear unmoved ; and there mingled strangely with 
his love something of wonder and of awe. 

After a little interval, which seemed endless to 
him, she turned her face towards him again, laid 
her hand heavily upon her breast, and spoke : 

YOL. m. G 



82 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

"You have been cruel to me, Sir Laurence, 
in all that you have said ; but men, I believe, are 
always cruel to women if they love them, or have 
loved them. I acquit you of intentional cruelty, 
and I accept all you say of the necessity for the 
truth being spoken between us in the new phase 
of our relation which you have brought about to- 
day." 

The intensity of her face deepened, and the 
pressure of her hand grew heavier. He mut- 
tered a few words of protest, but she went on as if 
she had not heard him. 

" You have spoken words to me. Sir Lau- 
rence, wliich I should not have heard ; but they 
have been spoken, and the wrong cannot be un- 
done. It may be atoned for, and it must. Nei- 
ther these words nor any other must be spoken 
between us henceforth . " 

He started up. 

" You cannot mean this," he said ; "it is im- 
possible ; I do not beheve it, . I will not bear it." 

" Be still and hear me," she replied ; " I kept 
silence at your desire, . you will not, I am sm'e, do 



LOVE AND DUTY. 83 

less at mine. I too must speak to yon, nninter- 
rupted, in the spirit of that truth of which you 
have s]3oken so eloquently and with such sophistry 
.yes, with such sophistry." 

Once more she paused and sighed. 

" Speak to me, then," he said ; and there was 
true, real anguish in his tone. " Say what you 
will, but do not be too hard on me. I am only 
a mortal man ; if I have offended you, it is be- 
cause you are an angel." 

" You have not offended me," she said very 
slowly: "perhaps I ought to be offended, but I am 
not. I think you judge me aright when you say 
that truth holds the foremost j^lace in and for me : 
therefore I tell you truth. You have grieved me ; 
you have added a heavy burden to a load which 
is not very easy to bear, though the world, which 
you exhort me to despise and to deny, cannot lay 
a feather's weight upon it. Your friendshi]3 was 
very dear to me, . very precious ; I did not knov\r 
how dear, I think, mitil to-day." 

How eagerly he listened to the thi-illing voice ! 
how ardently he gazed into the dreamy beautiful 



84 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

eyes ! how breathlessly he kept the silence so hard 
to maintain ! 

^^ If I could use any further disguise with my- 
selfj Sir Laurence, if self-deception could have 
any fui'ther power over me, I might terminate 
this interview here, and tell you, and tell myself, 
that it should be forgotten. But I have done with 
self-deception." 

'^ For Grod's sake, don't speak in that bitter 
tone !" Alsager said entreatingly ; " spare me, 
if you will not spare yom'self " 

'^ No," she replied ; ^^ I will spare neither you 
nor myself. Why should I? Tlie world has spared 
neither of us . will spare neither of us; only it will 
tell hes, and I will tell truths,. that's all." 

Her colour was heightened, and her eyes were 
flashing now; but the pressure of her hand upon 
her bosom was steady. 

" You have read my story aright : I know 
not by what art or science . but you have read it. 
If, as you say, you have an involuntary share, 
an unconscious responsibility in my hea^y trial, 
it is a misfortune, which I put away from my 



LOVE AND DUTY. 85 

thoughts ; I hold you in no way accountable. 
My sorrow is my own; my delusion is over; my 
duty remains." 

" Do you speak of duty to Sir Charles Mit- 
ford ?" asked Alsager with a sneer. 

"Yes," she said gently; "I do. Your tone 
is miworthy of you, Sir Laurence ; but I pass it 
by ; for it is the tone of a man of the world, tc 
whom inclination is a law. Can my husband's 
faithlessness absolve me from fidelity? Is his 
sin any excuse for my defection from my duty? 
You say truly, I cannot love him now as I loved 
him when I did not know him as he is ; but I can 
do my duty to him still . a hard duty, but imper- 
ative. The time will come when this woman will 
weaiy of him, of her vain and futile vengeance ; 
and then . " 

"Well, Lady Mitford, and then.?" asked 
Alsager in a cold hard voice. 

She looked at him with eyes in which a holy 
calm had succeeded to her transient passion, and 
replied : 

" Then he will return to me, and I must be 



Ob RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

ready to meet him without a shade upon my con- 
science, without a blush upon my cheek." 
He started up angrily, and exclaimed : 
" You pass all comprehension ! What ! You 
are no longer in error about this man ; the glamour 
has passed. You know him for the cold cynical 
profligate he is ; and you talk of welcoming him 
like a repentant prodigal ; only yom'self it is you 
are prepared to kill . ^your own pride, your o'vvn 
delicacy, your own heart ! Good Grod ! what are 
good women made of, that they set such mon- 
strous codes up for themselves, and adhere to them 
so mercilessly !" 

" He is my husband," she faltered out ; and 
for a moment her courage seemed to fail. The 
next she rose, and standing by the mantelpiece, 
where he had stood before, she went on, with 
hurry and agitation in her voice : '' Don't mis- 
take me. Love is dead and gone for me. But 
this world is not the be-all and the end-all; 
there is an inheritance beyond it, reserved for 
those who have ' overcome.' Duty is hard, but 
it is never intolerable to a steadfast will, and a 



LOVE AND DUTY. 87 

mind fixed on the truth. Time is long, and the 
round of wrong is tedious ; but the day wears 
through best to those who subdue impatience, and 
wrong loses half its bitterness when self is con- 
quered. I have learned my lesson, Sir Lam-ence, 
and chosen my part." 

" And what is to be mine ?" he said, with 
angr}' impatience, . "what is to be mine? You 
moralise charmingly, Lady Mitford; and your 
system is perfect, with one little exception . and 
what is that? A mere nothing, a trifle . only a 
man's heart, only a love that is true ! You are 
all aKke, I believe, bad or good, in this, . you will 
pine after, you will endm'e any thing for, a man 
who is false to you, and you will tread upon the 
heart of one who is true. What do you care? 
We do not square with the moral code of the good 
among you, nor with the caprice and devilment 
of the bad ; and so away with us ! I am ' crueF 
to you, forsooth, because I tell you that you no 
longer love a worthless profligate, who sj^orts with 
your peace and your honour at the bidding of a 
wanton ! I am ' cruel' because I tell you that I, 



88 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

who have innocently wronged you, love you with 
every pulse of my heart and every impulse of my 
will ! Is there any cruelty on your side, do you 
think, when you talk, not puling sentiment . I 
could more easily pardon that ; it Avould be mere 
conventional silliness . but these chilly, chilling 
moralities, which are fine in copy-books, but which 
men and women abandon with their ^\Titing- 
lessons ?" 

" Do they ?" she said with imperturbable gen- 
tleness ; "I think not. You are angry and 
unjust. Sir Laurence, . angry with ;?i6, unjust 
to me /" 

The keen pathos of her tone, its innocent plead- 
ing utterly overcame him. 

" Yes," he cried ; "I am unjust, and you are 
an angel of goodness ; but . I love you, . ah, how 
I love you ! . and you reject me, utterly, utterly. 
You reject me, and for liim! You give her a 
double triumph ; you lay my life waste once 
more." 

He stopped in his hm-ried walk close to her. 
She laid her hand upon his arm, and they looked 



LOVE AND DUTY. 89 

at one another in silence for a little. She broke 
it first 

" And if I did not reject you, as you say . if 
I accepted this love, this compensating truth and 
loyalty, which you offer me, what should I be, 
Laurence Alsager, but her compeer ? Have you 
thought of that? Have you remembered that 
there is a law in marriage apart from and above 
all feeling ? Have you considered what she who 
breaks that law is, in the sight of God, in the 
unquenchable light of her own conscience, though 
her conduct were as pure from stain as the 
ermine of a royal robe ? I am speaking, not 
chilly, chilling moralities, but immortal, immutable 
truth. In the time to come you will remember 
it, and believe it; and then there will be no 
bitterness in your heart when you recollect how 
I bade you farewell !" 

The lustrous eyes looked into his with a gaze 
as pure as an infant's, as earnest as a sibyl's, 
and the gentle hand lay motionless upon his 
arm. 

^^How you bade me farewell!" he repeated 



90 KUNKIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

in a hoarse voice. "What do you mean? Are 
you sending me from you?" 

"Yes," she answered; "I am sending you 
from me. We have met once too often, and 
we must meet no more. You say you love me ;" 
she shrunk and shivered again, . " and . and I 
believe you. Therefore you will obey me." 

"No," he said resolutely; " I will not obey 
you ! I will see you, . I must. What is there 
in my love to frighten or to harm you ? I ask 
for nothing which even yom- scrupulous con- 
science might hesitate to give ; I seek no change 
in the relation that has subsisted between us for 
some time now." 

"Dreams, dreams," she said sadly; " mi- 
worthy of yom- sense, . miworthy of your know- 
ledge of the world. Nothing can ever replace 
us on our old footing. The words you have 
spoken to me can never be unsaid. They are 
words I never ought to have heard . and . " 
In a moment her firmness deserted her, her voice 
failed ; she sank into a chair, and burst into pas- 
sionate tears. 



LOVE AND DUTY. 9-1. 

^^ You would not have them unsaid !" he cried ; 
^^ tell me that you would not! Tell me that the 
coldness and the calm which those streaming tears 
deny are not true, are not real ! TeU me that I 
am something in yom' life, . that I might have 
been more! Dearest, I reverence as much as 
I love you; but give me that one gleam of 
comfort. It cannot make your heavenly rectitude 
and pm-ity poorer, while to me it wiU be bound- 
less riches. Tell me that you could love me if 
you would; tell me that the sacred barrier of 
your conscience is the only one between us ! I 
swear I will submit to that ! I will not try to 
shake or to remove it Nay, more, I will leave 
you, . if indeed you persist in commanding my 
absence, . if only you will tell me that mider 
other circumstances you would have loved me. 
Tell me tliis ! I ask a great, a priceless boon ; 
but I do ask it. Dearest, will you not answer me?" 
Her agitation, her tears, had reassm'ed him, had 
broken the speU which her calmness had imposed. 
The hope that had come to him once or twice during 
their interview came again now, and stayed. 



92 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

There was no sound for a while but that of 
her low rapid sobs. The clocks upon the mantel- 
pieces in the suite of rooms ticked loudly, and 
their irritating metallic voices mingled strangely 
with the rushing pidses of Alsager's frame, as he 
leant over her, . one arm aromid the back of her 
chair, the other hand upon its velvet arm. His 
face was bent above her drooping head ; liis thick 
moustache almost touched the waved ridges of 
her scented hair. He implored her to speak to 
him; he poured out protestation and entreaty 
with all the ardour of his strong and fiery nature, 
with all the eloquence which slumbered in him, 
unsuspected even by himself Little by little she 
ceased to weep, and at length she allowed him to 
see her face. Again he renewed his entreaties, 
and she answered him. 

" You try me too far, and I am weak. Yes, 
I would love you, if I might !" 

"Then you do love me!" he exclaimed. 
" You and I are no dreaming boy and girl, no 
Knight and Dame of old romance, but man and 
woman ; and we know that these shades of differ- 



LOYE AND DUTY. 93 

enee are merest imagination. We love each 
other, and we know it. We love each other, 
and the acknowledgment makes the truth no 
truer. I am ungenerous, you would say; I am 
breaking the promise I have but just made. 
Yes, I am ; but I love you . and you love me !" 
He had dropped on one knee beside her chair 
now, and as he spoke he caught her hand in his. 
Without any sign of anger or prudery, she 
withdrew her hand quietly, but resolutely, and 
signed to him to rise and be seated. He obeyed 
her; but exultation shone out from every line 
and feature of his face. 

" You are ungenerous," she said, . " very un- 
generous, and very cruel ; but I will not the less 
be true in these the last words I shall say to you. 
If I have dreamed of a life other than mine, 
of love well bestowed and faithfiJly returned, it 
was only in the most passing, transient visions. 
My lot is cast ; my mind is made up ; my heart 
is fixed. I Hn^er here for a few moments lonofer 
because they are the last I shall ever pass alone 
with you. Do not interrupt me, or I tenninate 



94 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

this interview on the instant. This subject must 
never be renewed, . indeed it never can be ; for 
you know my resolution, and I know you will 
respect it. The past remains with us; but the 
future has no common histor}^ for you and me. 
When I have ceased speaking, and that door has 
closed behind you, you must remember me, if 
you do not see me, and regard me if you do, as a 
woman wholly devoted to her wifely duty, of whom 
to think otherwise is to do a deadly wrong." 

He stood before her as pale as she liad been ; 
somethino; wrathful and somethino; reverential 
contended in his expression. She waved her 
hand with a slight gesture, and went on : " Now 
I have done with myself; there is no more 
question of me. But of you. Sir Laurence, 
there is much and serious question. Your life 
is aimless and unreal. Give it an object and 
an aim ; invest it with truth, occupy it with duty. 
I am speaking with you face to face for the last 
time, and I go back to the old relation which 
you have destroyed for a tew minutes. In that re- 
lation I speak to you of your father's death-bed 



LOVE AND DUTY. 95 

request. Fulfil it ; and by doing so, end this vain 
and sinful strife, . quell this demon which deludes 
you." 

" YoLi mean that I should marry my father's 
ex- ward, I presume?" said Alsager coldly, 

"I do." 

" Thank you. Lady Mitford. Your proposition 
is fall of wisdom, however it may lack feeling. 
But there are smidr}^ objections to my carrying 
it into effect. The lady does not love me, nor do 
T love the lady." 

" You hardly know her," Lady Mitford said 
with a timid smile ; " you have not given your- 
self any opportunity of testing your power of 
obedience to your father's dying wish. You can- 
not judge of how she would be disposed towards 
you." Once more she smiled timidly and sadly. 
'^ You would have little cause to fear ill-success, 
I should think." 

" Except that in this case. Lady Mitford, the 
lady's affections are preengaged, and she is doubt- 
less a miracle of constancy." 

" You speak bitterly, Sir Laurence, but your 



96 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

bitterness will pass, and your better nature will 
assert itself." 

" Is tliis all you intend to say to me, Lady 
Mitford ?" 

"This is all. My words will supplement 
themselves in silence and reflection, and you will 
acknowdedge that I have spoken the truth . that 
I am as true as you believe me." 

" And are we to part thus ?" he asked in a 
slightly softened tone. 

A quick spasm crossed her face, but she an- 
swered him at once, and looked at him as she 
spoke, "Yes!" 

He bowed profoundly. She held out her hand. 
On the third finger was a heavy-looking seal-ring, 
which she constantly wore. As he coldly took the 
hand in his, his eyes fell upon this ring. She 
marked the look, and when he released her hand, 
she drew off the ring and offered it to him. 

"You are angry with me now," she said; 
"but your anger will pass away. "When no shade 
of it remains, wear this for my sake, and make its 
motto, which is mine, yours." 



LOVE A2^D DUTY. 97 

He took the ring, and without looking at it, 
dropped it into liis waistcoat-pocket. Then he 
stood quite still as she passed him with her usual 
graceful step, and watched the sweep of her soft 
black robe as she walked down the long room, 
and disappeared tlu'ough a door which opened 
into her boudoir. 

Late that night, Alsager, angry still, dark and 
wrathful, tossed the ring with a contemptuous 
frown into a jewel-case ; but he first took an im- 
pression of it in wax, and read the motto thus : 
" Fortiter. Fideliter. Feliciter." 



VOL. m. 



CHAPTER IV. 

SIR Laurence's letter. 

Helen Manningtree and Mrs. Chisholm pur- 
sued their customary mode of life at ELnockholt 
Park after, as before, the dejiarture of Sir Lau- 
rence. Helen missed the OTave and courteous 
gentleman whom she had learned to like so 
much, and her at first distant association with 
whom had grown into intimacy and confidence. 
Sir Laurence was a most agreeable companion ; 
well-informed, and entirely without any sort of 
pretension. He had seen a great deal of the 
world . in the geographical sense of the term, as 
well as in every other ; and his anecdotes of 
travel and descriptions of foreign lands had mi- 
flagging interest for Helen, whose experience 
had indeed been narrow, but whose readinof 
had been various and extensive. Li the tliou^ht- 



SIR Laurence's letter. 99 

ful mood into which Alsager had fallen . in the 
serious frame of mind which had become almost 
habitual wdth him now . he would probably have 
been voted a bore by ^' society," supposing that 
he had placed himself within reach of its suf- 
frages ; but Helen knew nothing of the tastes 
and fashions of the great world, and to her Lau- 
rence was all that was most companionable and 
pleasant. He was not indeed so gifted, so culti- 
vated a creature as Cuthbert Farleigh; but then 
. who was ? who could be expected to be ? And 
Helen, whose circle of acquaintance included a 
dozen unmarried men at the most, believed with 
perfect good faith that she had exercised the 
soundest judgment and discretion in her selec- 
tion of the Reverend Cuthbert, from " all the 
world," as the individual to whom alone she 
could render unqualified respect and intrust the 
happiness of her future hfe. That resolution, be- 
fore mentioned, by which the curate had bound 
liimself, to liimself, to wait mitil he should be a 
bishop, or for the occuiTence of any other equally 
improbable event, was rather in the way of Helen's 



100 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

happiness, either present or future ; but she was 
not much disquieted by the delay. Cuthbert had 
seen no symptoms of an alarming nature to indi- 
cate any "intentions" on Colonel Alsager's part 
prior to Sir Peregrine's death, and he was ig- 
norant of the existence of the old Baronet's letter, 
in which he had iu*ged a marriage with Helen 
upon Sir Laurence. He had begun to think, 
within a very few days of Colonel Alsager's ar- 
rival at Knockholt, that he had been foolishly 
apprehensive in the first instance. Was it at all 
likely that, at Colonel Alsager's age, and in his 
position, with his opportunities of seeing, and re- 
commending himself to, the fairest and most fasci- 
nating women in the world, he should be entirely 
heart-free and ready to fix his affections upon liis 
father's ward? Of course Cuthbert was quite aware 
that Laurence Alsager could never by any possi- 
bility have met any one half so worthy of ad- 
miration and of love as Helen Manningtree ; but 
he was a young man of candid mind, and ready 
to acknowledge that a man might be preoccupied 
to the extent of being miable to recognise the un- 



SIR Laurence's letter. 101 

approacliable excellence of Helen without being 
guilty of absolute stuj)idity or unpardonably bad 
taste. So, on tlie whole, these young people were 
tolerably comfortable in their minds, and felt an 
equable though unexpressed confidence in their 
mutual affection and in the future. The circum- 
stance of Sir Peregrine Alsager's wiU making no 
mention of Helen . in fact, having been made 
before she became liis w^ard, and during Lady 
Alsager's lifetime . had taken them both by sur- 
prise, and affected them differently. Helen had 
always known that her own very moderate in- 
come . which Sir Peregrine had always supple- 
mented by a liberal allowance . was all that 
she actually possessed, or had any positive right 
to expect. But she had never entertained any 
doubt that her guardian intended to leave her a 
handsome provision, and she experienced a con- 
siderable shock when she learned that he had not 
done so. She could not understand it, and she 
was still more puzzled and surprised when Sir 
Laurence told her that he found himself a very 
much richer man than he had ever expected to 



102 EUNNIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

be. Helen had too much good sense, and even 
in her sechided hfe had learned to estimate facts 
and to eschew sentimental fallacies ; so she did 
not affect to be indifferent on the subject, or to 
think that it was quite as well to be poor as to be 
rich, to be dependent as to be independent ; l^ut 
she did think and feel with very consoling sin- 
cerity that Cuthbert would have no more scruples 
about asking her to share his lot when her own 
had ceased to be of a nature to contrast with it. 
So she accepted her altered position cheerfully, 
and asked Sir Laurence wdiat he would advise her 
to do, with a true-hearted freedom from anger or 
jealousy which elevated her to a great height in 
the mind of the new Baronet. Sir Laurence made 
her an evasive answer, and begged her to defer 
any decision on the subject until his return to 
Knockholt. He was going away, first to town, 
and then abroad, he told her, most probably ; and 
she and Mrs. Chisholm must remain and take 
charge there for him. He would keep up the 
establishment just as it had been, with the excep- 
tion of the stable department. Helen acquiesced 



SIR Laurence's letter. 103 

with great readiness. She was too completely 
a lady to feel any awkwardness in such an ar- 
rangement, and she knew well that Laurence's 
interests would be best served by her accepting 
his offer. 

" I will stay here then," she said, " and go 
on just as usual. I don't know whether you are 
aware that I was Sir Peregrine's almoner. Am I 
to be yom's ? Tlie farm-bailiffs, the keepers, and 
all the rest of your people, are my excellent good 
friends. I shall get on capitally with them, and 
go my old rounds in the village, and so forth. 
But I want to know what I am to do about the 
charities, the schools, and the promiscuous appli- 
cations to the ^ great house.' " 

" I would give you unlimited credit with Todd, 
Helen, for all your requirements in that way, but 
that I fear you would be too conscientious to make 
sufficient use of it. But stay ; the best plan will 
be to arrange it with Farleigh. Yes ; I'll speak to 
him, and tell Todd he is to give him any thing he 
asks for. I daresay he won't mind a little addi- 
tional trouble in the cause of his poor people ; and 



104 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

you can do the visiting and all that as usual, and 
report to him." 

Sir Laurence looked at Helen as he made this 
remarkably convenient proposition for rendering 
the intercourse between the Park and the Rectory 
(for Cuthbert lived at the rector's house ; that is 
to say, in a corner of it) more frequent than it 
was at present. Helen grew extremely red, and 
then tui'ned the conversation. 

" So, I suppose," said she to Mrs. Chisholm, 
after Sir Laurence had taken his leave, and the 
two women were talking over his visit and all the 
late events, . "so I suppose we shall Hve here 
until Sir Laurence is married; and then, when 
he brings a handsome, dashing, fashionable Lady 
Alsager down here, you and I, dear old woman, 
will go and live in the village ; perhaps that pretty 
little house with the roses and tlie little white 
fomitain, just big enough for the two ducks that 
are always swimming in it, may be vacant then ; 
and I daresay Laiu'ence would give it to us rent- 
free, and we should be very snug there ; but we 
would not have ducks, except for dinner; and 



SIR Laurence's letter. 105 

Lady Alsager would have us up to tea, I dare- 
say, when there were no fine people at the Park. 
What do you say to all this, Mrs. Chisholm? 
doesn't it sound pleasant? What a cosey little 
place it is ! don't you think so ?" 

^^ My dear Helen, how you do run on !" said 
the calmer IVIi's. Chisholm ; " you are quite in 
spirits to-day." 

She was ; for in her sketch of the rural abode 
with the roses there had been an mimentioned 
element. Helen thought the house would be 
quite the thing for a curate. Helen was always 
thinking about a curate ; and in that respect there 
was considerable sympathy between her and her 
companion, for Mrs. Chisholm was almost always 
tliinking of a curate too. Helen's curate was liv- 
ing ; Mrs. Chisholm's was dead. The girl's heart 
was in the dream of the future ; the woman's, in 
the memory of the sacred past. 

Cuthbert Farleigh had received the intelligence 
of Sir Peregrine Alsager' s unaccountable conduct 
towards Helen Manningtree with mingled feelings. 
He was by no means a commonplace young man, 



106 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

though not the hght of learning and the mirror 
of chivalry which Helen beheved him. Her over- 
estimate of him did him no harm, for he enter- 
tained a tolerably correct opinion of himself; and 
if the future were destined to unite them, it would 
probably not militate against her own happiness 
either. Tlie mistake she made was in degree, not 
in kind, . a distinction which makes all possible 
difference. A sensible and dutiful woman may 
find out that her husband is not possessed of the 
qualities with wliich she has believed her lover to 
be endowed, to the extent with which she accre- 
dited him, and her love and esteem may not suffer 
by the discovery. She would probably recognise 
that if she had overrated him (and what a dread- 
ful woman she would be if she had not !) on some 
points, she had also failed to discover his merits 
on others, until the intimacy of domestic hfe had 
restored the balance of judgment. Tlie mistake, 
which lays a woman's life waste in its rectifica- 
tion, is that Avhich endows a man with quaUties 
wliich he does not possess at all, . the mistake 
which leads to the conviction that tlie man she 



SIR Laurence's letter. 107 

has married is not tlie man she lovedj and bur- 
dens her with an actual duty and a lost ideal. If 
Helen Manningtree were ever to many Cuthbert 
Farleigh, she would incur no such danger; she 
would have to pay no such price for the indulg- 
ence of undisciplhied imagination. He was a 
good and a clever man, and was as highly and 
wholly disinterested as it is j)ossible for a human 
being to be, to whom the consideration of meat, 
drink, clothing, and house-rent is one of rational 
importance. 

He regarded his position with respect to Helen 
as very much improved by the fact that Sir Pere- 
grine Alsager had not left her the fortune, which 
the gossips of the neighbourhood had taken for 
granted, and even annomiced " on authority." 
On the other hand, he grieved that she should be 
deprived of the luxm^ious home and the opulent 
manner of life to which she had been so long 
habituated ; and as he was not at all a conceited 
man, . albeit flattered and exalted by all the ladies 
in the parish, which is ordinarily the bane of 
curates, . it did occur to him that perhaps Helen 



108 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

might have been better and happier if Sir Pere- 
grine had left her the fortune, and he had adhered 
to his resokition of leaving her to its enjoj-ment, 
unwooed bj him. Such a supposition was not 
likely to last long ; its cold chill would pass off 
in the sunshine of free and acknowledo-ed love. 
Free and acknowledged love ? Yes, the curate was 
going to tell Helen, as soon as he should have 
learned the 2:)articulars of her position, that she 
had not erred in believing that he loved her, and 
to ask her to take all the risks and all the cares 
of a life which could never have any brilliancy or 
any luxury to offer her, for the sole consideration 
of sharing them with him. He had not the smallest 
doubt of his success. Helen's nature was too true, 
and too well knoAvn to him, to render a misgiving 
possible ; still, the near approach of the assurance 
of his hope made him grave and solemn. The 
orphan-girl loved and trusted him; without him 
she was alone . alone in a world which is not very 
easily gotten through with tlie best of help and 
companionship. The sense of a great responsi- 
bility rested upon him, and liis heart was lifted up 



SIR Laurence's letter. 109 

in no merely conventional or professional prayer. 
So Cuthbert made up his mind, and felt very 
quiet and solemn about it. That mood would pass 
away ; it would be succeeded by the dazzling de- 
light, the splendid triumph, the fertile fancy, and 
superhuman hope and exultation of love, as it 
ought to be ; but it is a good omen for any woman 
whose lover addresses himself to his wooing in 
such a temper. 

Tlius it fell out that Helen and Cuthbert, 
standing together by a window which opened on 
the broad stone terrace, and watching poor Sir 
Peregrine's peacocks, as they marched up and 
down outside, talked of a future which was to be 
common to them both, and was to date from the 
expiration of the year of mom^ning for Sir Pere- 
grine Alsager. Helen had told Cuthbert how she 
had sketched such a charming picture for Mrs. 
Chisholm, of the house with the roses ; and they 
had talked a good deal of the nonsense incidental 
to their position, and which is so much pleasanter 
than sense, . about whether she had thouo-ht of 
him ? and if she had, w^hy she had ? . for there is 



110 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

a subtle resemblance to Jack Bunsby's monologue 
in the dialogues of lovers ; . and then the conver- 
sation drifted away to Sir Laurence Alsager. 

'^ We must tell him, my own Helen," said the 
curate; ''he has been very kind to you, and I 
daresay will be very much disgusted at your 
making so poor a marriage." 

The girl looked reproachfully at liim, but smiled 
in a moment, and said, " Go on, Cuthbert; you 
are not worth contradicting, you know." 

'' No, but . " said Cuthbert, remonstrating, 
"you must let me set the world's view before 
you. No doubt Sir Lam'ence will think you very 
foolish ; but he will always be our friend, . I feel 
sm-e of that, . though I know he is so different, 
and lives in so different a world, under so differ- 
ent a system. Sometimes, Helen, I have had an 
idea that he found out my secret ; though I never 
could see an inch farther into his life and his 
heart than it was lis good pleasure I should look. 
Yes, my darling, he must know all about us, and 
soon ; for you must remember that it may make 
a difference in all his plans and arrangements, 



SIR Laurence's letter. Ill 

if he finds you are not to remain liere after next 
spring." 

^' I hardly think it will do that," said Helen ; 
^^ I fancy he will establish Mrs. Chisholm here en 
permanence ; that is to say, nntil he marries." 

"Is he likely to marry? Have you heard of 
any thing of that sort ?" 

" Oh, no ! he has never talked of any girls to 
me. He has never said any thing the least like 
intending to marry. Tlie only woman he ever 
speaks of . and he does talk of her, and sometimes 
hears from her . is Lady Mitford ; you remember, 
you told me about her marriage, . the daughter of 
Mr. Stanfield, your old tutor, you know." 

' ' Of course I remember. How strangely things 
come about ! it really seems as if there were only 
t\vo sets of people in the world; for one never 
meets any one with whom one has not some 
link of communication ! And Georgie Stanfield is 
Laurence Alsager's female crony and correspond- 
ent ! How and where is she ?" 

" In town, I believe ; but I don't know much 
about her. He used to speak of her vaguely, in 



112 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

talking to mo of the great world and its hollow - 
ness, as of one whom he greatly liked and es- 
teemed, and who was mifortunately circumstanced. 
He said he would have asked Lady Mitford down 
here in the autumn, if he could have asked her 
without her husband ; but that, of course, was im- 
possible, and he could not invite Sir Charles Mit- 
ford. I believe they are very unhappy. Tliink of 
that, Cuthbert, . a husband and wife unhappy ! a 
splendid home, with rank and wealth, and mis- 
ery !" The girl lifted solemn eyes fall of wonder 
and compassion to her lover's face. " Sir Laurence 
wished that I could know her, for her sake, he 
kindly said." 

^^ I wish you could, Helen ; you would com- 
fort her and do her good : and yet I would not 
have you saddened, my child, and made wise in 
the possibilities of life, as you must be if you had 
the confidence of an unhajipy wife. You are better 
without it, darling . far better without it." 

Then the curate remembered the alarm he had 
felt when Colonel Alsager made his appearance 
at Knockholt Park ; and he confessed it to Helen, 



113 

who laughed at him, and pretended to scold him, 
but who was not a little pleased all the time. 

" You stupid Cuthbert !" said the young lady, 
to whom the curate had ceased to be an object of 
awe since their engagement; "it never came into 
Laurence's head to wish to marry me ; and I am 
certain it never crossed any human being's ima- 
gination but your own that such a thing could 
ever happen." 

The Reverend Cuthbert was reluctantly obliged 
to break off the conversation at this point, and go 
about liis parish business. So he took leave of 
Helen, enjoining her to write to Sir Laurence that 
very day, and to make him acquainted with their 
engagement, . as Mrs. Chisholm, who had just 
entered the room, and to whom he referred the 
matter, gave it as her decided opinion that the 
commmiication should be made by Helen. 

The post was not a subject of such overwhelm- 
ing importance at Knockliolt Park, its pmictuality 
was not so earnestly discussed, nor was there as 
much excitement on its arrival, as at the gene- 
rality of country-houses. Mi's. Chisholm had very 

VOL. III. I 



114 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

few correspondents; Helen had only two, exclu- 
sive of Sir Laurence ; and no letters were " due" 
at this particular time : hence it happened that 
the ladies often left the breakfast-table before the 
arrival of the letter-bag, and that its contents 
awaited their attention undisturbed through more 
hours of the day than most people would believe 
possible. Mrs. Chisholm never read the news- 
l^apers until the evening, and Helen never read 
them at all, being content with Cuthbert's version 
of public affairs. On this particular morning, 
however, Helen thought proper to remain in the 
breakfast-room mitil the post shoidd arrive. Tlie 
truth was, she shrmik from the task of ^vriting 
to Sir Lam-ence, and she knew she ought to set 
about it at once ; so she lingered and fidgeted 
about the breakfast-room long after Mrs. Chis- 
holm had betaken herself to her daily confabu- 
lation with the housekeeper. Thus she was alone 
when the letter -bag was brought in, and she 
turned over its contents, expecting to find them 
of the usual uninteresting nature. Tliere were 
several letters for Sir Laurence "to be for- 



SIR Laurence's letter. 115 

warded," a number of circulars, a few letters for 
some of tlie servants, tlie customary newspapers, 
and lastly . a mission for Helen herself It was a 
large letter in a blue envelope, and directed in a 
law}'er-like band. Helen opened it, feeling a 
little frightened, and found that the cover enclosed 
a packet addressed to her, in the hand of Sir Lau- 
rence Alsager, and marked " Private." 

" What on earth can Laurence be writing to 
me about that requires such precaution?" thought 
Helen anxiously ; and then she rang the bell, 
handed over the other letters to the footman for 
proper distribution, and retired to her own room, 
where she read the following : 

" Dover. 

" My dear Helen, . I am devoting the last 
evening which I shall pass in England for an 
indefinite period, to writing to you a letter, which 
I shall take the precaution of sending so that its 
existence may be kno^\ai to none but you, at the 
present time. A certain portion of its contents 
must necessarily be communicated to others ; but 
you will use yom' discretion, . upon which in this, 



116 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

and all other things, I rely with absolute con- 
fidence. 

'' You must not let this preamble alarm you ; 
there is nothing to occasion you any trouble or 
sorrow in what I am about to say to you. It wiU 
be a long story, and I daresay a clumsily-told one, 
for I am eminently unready with my pen ; but it 
will interest you, Helen, for my sake, and for 
your own. When I tell you that this story is not 
a new one, . that it does not include any thing 
that has occurred after I left Knockholt, though 
I am indirectly impelled to write it to you by 
circumstances which have happened since then, . 
you will wonder why I did not tell it to you in 
person, during the period when our companion- 
ship was so close and easy, . so delightfiil to me, 
and I am quite sure I may add, so pleasant to 
you. I could not tell you then, because I was 
not sufficiently sure of myself. I had an experi- 
ment to try . an experience to undergo . before I 
could be certain, even in the limited sense of 
human security, of ni}- o^\tii ftitiu'e ; and till these 
were over and done with, all was vague for me. 



SIR Laurence's letter. 117 

They are over and clone with now ; and I am 
going to tell you all about yourself, and a good 
deal about myself. 

" You know that among the sorrows of my 
life there is one which must be life-long. It is 
the remembrance of my conduct to my father, and 
of the long tacit estrangement which preceded our 
last meeting, and which, but for a providential 
interposition, might never have been even so far 
atoned for and mitigated as it was before his 
death. It would be difficult to account for this 
estrangement ; it is impossible to excuse it ; there 
never was any reproach on either side, . indeed 
there could not have been on mine, for the fault 
was all my own, . and there never was any expla- 
nation. My father doubtless beheved, as he was 
justified in believing, that any wish of his would 
have little weight with me, . he seldom expressed 
one ; and I am convinced that one thing on which 
he had set his heart very strongly, one paramount 
desire, he cautiously abstained from expressing, 
that he might, byjkeeping me ignorant of it during 
his lifetime, give it the additional chance of reali- 



118 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

sation v/liicli it might derive from the sanctity 
of a j)osthumous appeal to the feelings of an 
midutifal and careless son, when those feelings 
should be intensified by unavailing regret. I did 
learn, dear Helen, after ^the barrier of eternal 
silence had been placed between mj father and 
me, that he had cherished one paramount desire, 
and that he had resorted to such an expedient in 
order to induce me to resj)ect and to fidfil it. 

'^ My amazement and discomfiture when I 
fomid that my father's will was of so far distant 
a date that it made no mention of you were 
great. I could not understand why he had not 
supplemented the will which existed by another, in 
which you w^ould be amply provided for, and liis 
wishes concerning your future fully explained. 
My long and wilful absence from my father had 
prevented my having any real acquaintance with 
you. To me you were merely a name, . seldom 
heard, hardly remembered. Had I not gone to 
Knockholt when I did, you would have remained 
so ; and there was no one else who could be sup- 
posed to take an obligatory interest in you. How 



SIR Laurence's letter. 119 

came it, I tliouglit, that my father had taken no 
precaution against such a contingency . which, in 
fact, had so nearly been a reahty. You will say 
he trusted to the honour and the gentlemanly 
feeling of his son ; and so I read the riddle also ; 
but reflection showed me that I was wrong. A 
more strictly just man never lived than my father ; 
and he must have been strictly unjust had he 
allowed the futm-e fortunes of a young girl whom 
he had reared and educated . who had been to 
him as a daughter for years . to depend upon the 
caprice or the generosity of a man to whom she 
was an utter stranger, and between whom and 
herself the tie of blood was of the slightest descrip- 
tion. IS^or was delicacy less characteristic of my 
father than justice. (Ah, Helen, how keenly I 
can see all these things now that he is gone !) He 
would have shrunk as sensitively as you would 
from any thing which would have obliged you and 
me to meet for the first time in the characters of 
pensioned and pensioner. I knew all this ; and I 
was utterly confounded at the absence of any later 
will. I had the most complete and diligent search 



120 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

made; but in vain. There was no will, Helen, but 
there was a letter. In the cbawer of the desk 
which my father always used, there was a letter. 
How do you think it was addressed ? Not to ' my 
son' . not to ' Colonel Alsao;er :' but to ' Sir 
Laurence Alsager, Bart.'! It was a painful letter 
. painful and j^recious : painful because a tone of 
sadness, of disappointment, of content in feeling 
that the writer hadjiearly reached his term of life, 
pervaded it ; j^recious because it was full of par- 
don and peace, of the fulness of love for his only 
son. I cannot] let you see the letter, . it is too 
sacred for [any eyes but those for which it was 
intended ; but I can tell you some of its contents, 
and I can make you understand its tone. As a 
mother speaks to her son going forth into the arena 
of life, the night before their parting, in the dark, 
on her knees by his bedside, with her head upon 
his piUow ; as she speaks of the time to come, when 
she will watch and wait for him, of the time that 
is past, whose memories are so precious, which she 
bids him remember and be brave and true; as she 
makes light of all his faults and shortcomings, . so 



sm Laurence's letter. 121 

did my dear old father . my father who had grown 
gray and old; alone, when I might have been 
with him, and was not . write to me. God bless 
him, and God forgive me ! He never reproached 
me, living ; what pmiishment he has inflicted 
upon me, dead ! The letter was long ; and 
it varied, I think, tln^ough every key in which 
human tenderness can be smig. But enough of 
this. 

"A portion of the contents concerned you 
nearly, my dear Helen. I can repeat them to 
you briefly. I knew, and you know, that your 
father and my father . very distant relatives . 
had been playmates in boyhood, and attached 
friends in manhood. We knew that yom- father 
died on his voyage home from India, and just 
after he had consigned you and yom' black nurse 
to the care of the captain of the ship, to be sent, 
on landing, to Knockholt Park. I believe you 
have your father's letter to my father, in which 
he. solemnly, but fearlessly, entreats his protection 
for the orphan child, whose credentials it is to 
form. He had left your mother and her baby in 



122 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

an alien grave at Barrackpore, and I suppose he 
had not the strength to Kve for you only, ' little 
ITelly/ as they called you then. At all events, 
he died; and 1 knew in a vague kind of way 
about that, and my father's care of you, and how 
you grew up with him, and made his home cheer- 
ful and happy, which his only son left carelessly, 
and forsook for long. The letter recapitulated all 
this, and told me, besides, that your mother had 
been my father's first love. Perhaps she was 
also his only love . God knows. He was a good 
husband to my mother during their brief married 
life, I am sure; for I remember her well; and 
she was always smiling and happy. But the 
girl he loved had preferred Kobert Manning- 
tree with nothing but his commission, to Pere- 
grine Alsager with a large estate and a baronetcy 
for his fortunate future. My father, preux chevalier 
that he was, did not forget to tell me that she 
never repented or had reason to regret that pre- 
ference. Thus, Helen, you were a legacy to liim, 
bequeathed not alone by friendship, but by love. 
As such he accepted you ; as such he prized you, 



SIR Laurence's letter. 123 

calm and imdemoustrative as lie was; as such it 
.vvas tlie cherished pui'pose of his life to intrust you 
to me . not that I was to be your guardian in his 
place, but that I was to be your husband. He 
thought well of me, in spite of all, you see ; he 
did not despair of liis ungracious son, or he never 
would have dreamed of conferring so great a pri- 
vilege on me, of suffering you to incm' so great a 
risk. He had had this darhng project so strongly 
in his mind, and yet had been so convinced that 
any betrayal of it to me would only prevent my 
seeking you, that my persistent neglect of the old 
home had a double bitterness for him; and at 
length, two years ago, hearing a rmnour that I 
was about to marry one of the beauties of the 
season, he relinquished it, and determined to make 
a will, bequeathing to you the larger portion of 
his imentailed property. The rumour was true 
as to my mtentions, but false as to my success. 
The lady in question jilted me for a richer mar- 
riage, thank God ! I don't say this from pique, 
but fr'om conviction ; for I have seen her and her 
husband, and I have seen her since her husband's 



124 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

death. She did not hold her perjured state long ; 
nor did she win the prize for which she jilted me. 
I am a much richer man than her husband ever 
wasj and he has left her com2:)aratively poor. In 
a storm of rage and disgust I left England, with- 
out going to Knockholt . without having seen you 
since your childhood . without bidding my father 
farewell. This grieved him much: but I was free; 
I was not married. I was labouring mider angry 
and bitter feelings towards all womankind. I 
should come home again, my father thought, still 
immarried, and his hope would be fulfilled. He 
did not make the Avill. I remained away much 
longer than he supposed I should have done, and 
not nearly so long as in my anger and mortifi- 
cation I had determined to remain. You know 
the rest, dear Helen . ^you know that I lingered 
and dallied with time and duty, and did not go to 
Knockholt until it was all but too late. A little 
while before he met with the accident, my father 
had written a letter somewhat similar in pm'port ; 
but he had not seen me then, and I suppose it was 
not warmly affectionate enough for the old man's 



SIR Laurence's letter. 125 

liking, and he "s^Tote that which I now mention at 
many, and, I fear, painful, intervals of his brief 
convalescence. It was finished just a week be- 
fore he died. 

"You will have read all this with emotion, 
Helen ; and I daresaj at this point your feelings 
will be very painful. Mine are little less so, and 
the task of fully explaining them to you is deli- 
cate and difficult. The truthfalness, the candour of 
your natm'e will come to my assistance when you 
read, as their remembrance aids me while I write. 
My first impulse on reading my father's letter 
was to exult in the thought that there was any 
tiling possible to me by which his wishes could 
be respected. My second . and it came speedily . 
was to feel that the marriage he desired between 
us never could take place. Are you reassm^ed, 
Helen ? Have you been frightened at the image 
yom' fancy has created, of a debt of gratitude to 
be discharged to Sir Peregrine at the cost of your 
own happiness, or disavowed at the cost of seeming 
cold, ungrateful, and undutifiil? Have you had 
a vision of me in the character of an importunate 



126 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

suitor, half imploring a concession, half pressing 
a right, and wholly distasteful to you? If you 
haye, dismiss it, for it is only a vision, and never 
will be realised to distress you. Why do I say 
this ? Because I know that not only do you not 
love me, but that you do love Cuthbert Farleigh. 
Forgive the plainness and directness with which 
I allude to a fact yet, perhaps, unavowed to him, 
but perfectly well known by and acknowledged 
to yourself. No betrothal could make you more 
truly his than you have been by the tacit promise 
of your OT^ai heart . I know not for how long, but 
before I came to Knockholt Park, I am sure. If 
I had not seen the man, I should equally have 
discerned the fact, for I am obsen^ant ; and though 
I have, I hope, outlived the first exuberance of 
masculine conceit, I did not err in imputing the 
tranquil lady-like indifference with which you 
received me to a preoccupied mind, rather than 
to an absence of interest or curiosity about the 
almost unknown son of your guardian. Life at 
Knockholt Park has little variety or excitement to 
offer; and the advent of a Guardsman, a demi- 



127 

semi-cousin, and an heir-apparent, would liave 
made a little more impression, would it not, had 
not the Church secured its proper precedence of 
the Army ? I perceived the state of things with 
satisfaction ; for I liked you very much from the 
first, and I thought Cuthbert a very good fellow ; 
just the man to hold yom' respect all his life long 
and to make you happy. In ray reflections on 
yom- share, then, in the impossibility of the fulfil- 
ment of my father's reqiuest, I experienced little 
pain. My o^wn was not so easily disposed of after 
his death as during his life. I was destined to 
frustrate his wishes. Had you and I met, as we 
ought to have done, long before ; had I had the 
good fortmie to have seen you and learned to 
contrast you with the meretricious and heartless 
of yom- sex, who had frittered away my heart 
and soui'ed my temper, perhaps, Helen, I might 
have won you, and the old man might have been 
made happy. 

^^ We met mider circumstances which made 
any such destiny for us impossible, for reasons 
which equally affected both. My preoccupation 



128 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

was of a (lifFerent soii; from yours ; it had neither 
present happiness nor ftiture hope in it, . it had 
much of tlie elements of douht and fear; but 
it was powerfrd, far more powerftd than I then 
thought, and powerful it will always be. All this 
is enigmatical to you, dear Helen, and it must 
remain so. I would not have said any tiling about 
it, but that I owed it to you, to the friendship 
which I trust will never know a cliill, to prevent 
your supposing that your share in the frustration 
of my father's wishes is disproportionate to mine. 
I would not have you think . as without this ex- 
planation you might justly think . that I magna- 
nimously renounce my claims, my pretensions to 
your love in favour of the actual possessor. No, 
Helen ; for us both our meeting was too late. 
We Avere not to love each other ; I was not to be 
suffered to win the heart of a true and priceless 
woman, such as you are, when I had not a heart 
to mxe her in exchanefc. But thouo^h we Avere 
not to love each other, we wore destined to be 
friends, . friends in the fidlest and firmest sense; 
and, believe me, friendship between a man and 



129 

.woman, with its keen sympathy, its mirestrained 
confidence, and its perfect toleration, is a tie as 
valuable as it is rare. 

'' Now I have told you almost all I have to 
tell about my father's letter. I suppose we shall 
both feel, and continue always to feel, that there 
was something hard, something almost cruel in 
the fate which marked him out for disappoint- 
ment, and you and me for its ministers. But this 
must be ; and we must leave it so, and turn to the 
present and vital interests of our lives. We shall 
tliink of liim and mom'n for him none the less that 
we will speak of this no more. 

" Strong as was my father's desire for our 
marriage, dear Helen, and his persuasion that it 
would come to pass, in his abstraction and his 
want of observation he failed to take Farleio-h 
into account ; or perhaps, like all old people, he did 
not realise the fact that the child, the girl, had 
grown into a woman. He did not quite forget to 
proA^de for the contingency of its non-fulfilment. 
' If, for any reason, it may not be. Lance,' he 
wrote . Mf Florence Hillyard's child is not to be 

VOL. in. K 



130 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

the mistress of tlie home which might have been 
her mother's, see that she has a dowry befitting 
my daughter and your sister.' No sentence in his 
letter touched me more with its simple trust than 
did that. 

'' I have seen very clearly into the state of 
your feelings, as I am sure you allow, and I don't 
think I have blundered about that of Farleigh's. 
He has not told you in formal words the fact 
patent to every one's observation, that he en- 
tirely reciprocates yom* devotion (don't be vexed, 
Helen ; one may pet a curate, you know), because 
he is poor, and you were likely to be rich. He 
believes, as every one believes, that you are as 
poor as himself : a belief, by the way, which does 
not say much for the general estimate of mij cha- 
racter . ^but that does not matter ; and in that faith 
he will not hesitate any longer. Will you be dis- 
creet, and say nothing at all of my intention of 
carrying out this privately-expressed wish of my 
father? Will you prove your possession of the 
qualities I give you credit for, by leaving Cutlibert 
in the belief that he will have in you a portionless 



SIR Laurence's letter. 131 

bride, save for your dowry of beauty and Avorth ? 
I really almost think you will, Helen, especially 
as, though you do not need any further confirma- 
tion of Farleigh's nobility of mind than the silence 
he has hitherto kept, and the alacrity with which 
he will now doubtless break it, it will be well for 
Mrs. Chisholm and for myself, yom- only friends, 
to know how amply he fulfils our expectations. I 
almost think you will ; but I intend to make assm-- 
ance doubly sure by not giving you the slightest 
satisfaction on the subject of my intentions. When 
your marriage is near, you shall learn how I mean 
to fulfil my father's last injunction, but not till 
then ; and if you tell Farleigh any thing about it 
mitil I give you leave, I voav I won't give you a 
shilling. 

^' You see I have written myself into good 
spirits, dear Helen ; the thought of you cheers me 
almost as your kindly presence would do. What 
more have I to say ? Not much more of myself, 
or of yourself, save that the dearest and warmest 
wish I entertain is for your w^elfare. 

'' I shall send from my first halting-place on 



132 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

the Continent full instructions to Todd, in case my 
absence should be much prolonged. I camiot 
speak with any certainty of its duration ; it does 
not depend on my own inclination. 

" And now, in conclusion, I am going to ask 
you to do something for me, wliicli I shall take as 
the truest proof that the friendship I prize and 
rely upon is really mine. I am sm'e you have not 
forgotten the friend I mentioned to you . Lady 
Mitford. I have seen her in town, and found her 
in much grief and perplexity. The cause of her 
sorrow is not one on which I can venture to enter 
to you ; but it is deep-seated, incurable. I am 
much distressed for her, and can in no way defend 
or comfort her. She was an only child, mother- 
less, and brought np in seclusion by her father, . 
an exemplary country clergyman, but a man w^hose 
knowledge of the world was quite theoretical and 
elementary, and who could not have trained her 
so that she would know how to encomiter such 
trials as hers ; he probably did not know that such 
could exist. As I told you at Knockholt, she has 
no female friend ; unfortunately she 7ias female 



133 

enemies . one in particular. My great wisli is to 
procure her the one, and defend her from the 
other. I may fail in the latter object ; but you, 
Helen, can aid me, if you will, to fulfil the former. 
I have spoken to her about you, and have assured 
her that she might trust in your kindhness, though 
yoiu' inexperience is far greater than her own. I 
cannot bring you together now . there is no time 
or opportunity; but I want you to promise me 
that, if at any time during my absence from Eng- 
land Lady Mitford asks you to come to her, you 
will go promptly, and will be to her all that it is 
in you to be to one unjustly oppressed, cruelly 
betrayed, and sorely afflicted. Will you do this 
for me, Helen ? and will you give me an assm-ance 
that I may rely upon you to do it (this is the only 
portion of my letter which you need reply to, if 
you have any feeling that you would rather not) 
before next Wednesday, and addressed to me at 
the Hotel Meurice, Paris ?. Always affectionately 
yours, 

" Laurence Alsager." 



CHAPTEK y. 

A '' TERCEL GENTLE." 

Sir Laurence Alsager's angiy mood was of 
short duration. Tlie day after that interview in 
which he spoke words that he had never intended 
to speak, and heard words which he had never 
thought to hear, he felt that a great change had 
fallen upon him. Tliis woman who had rejected 
his love, not because she did not reciprocate it, 
but because it was unlawful; this woman who 
had had the strongest and subtlest temptation 
which can assail the human heart set before her . 
the temptation at once of consolation and of re- 
taliation, of revenge upon the husband who had 
deceived and the enemy who had injured her, 
and who had met it with utterly disarming recti- 
tude ; this woman, to whom duty was dearer than 
love, . she had changed the face of tlie world and 



A " TERCEL GENTLE." 135 

the meaning of life for liim. He had many times 
behoved a he, and not seldom had he worshipped 
a sham ; but he has detected the one and exposed 
the other, and gone on liis way, not much the 
worse for the delusion, and a good deal wiser for 
the experience. Life had, however, never brought 
him any thing like this before, and he knew it 
never would agam. He should never love, he 
could never love, any other woman than this peer- 
less one who could never be liis, from whom her 
own mandate . he knew its power and unchange- 
ableness . had severed him, whom he must leave 
in the grasp of sorrow and perplexity. He mused 
long and painftdly over the interview of the pre- 
ceding day, and he asked himself how it was that, 
dear as she had been to him, early as he had 
ceased to struggle against her influence, he had 
never understood the strength, the dignity, the 
perfect rectitude of her character before. It never 
occurred to Sir Lam-ence that he had not looked 
for these qualities ; that he had never studied her 
disposition but in the most superficial way ; that 
his love for her was fomided upon no fine theory 



;136 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

whatsoever ; that it had sprung up partly in admi- 
ration of her exceeding beauty, partly in chival- 
rous compassion for her disastrous situation, and 
found its remaining constituent in a hearty con- 
tempt and abhorrence of Sir Charles Mitford. In 
short, Sir Laurence did not understand that he 
had done just as other people do, . fallen in love 
with a woman first, and fomid out what sort of 
woman she really was afterwards. 

Sir Laurence's reverie had lasted a long time 
before the consideration of his own immediate 
movements occupied any place in it. When it 
did so, he formed his resolution with his accus- 
tomed promptitude. He had told them at Knock- 
holt that he might perhaps go abroad; and now 
abroad he would go. He must leave London ; he 
could not bear to witness the progress of this 
di'ama, in which he had so vital an interest, only 
as an ordinary spectator. He was parted from 
her ; she was right . there could be no pretext of 
friendship in their case. Even if he could have 
obscured her clear perception and misguided her 
udgment ; even if he could have persuaded her to 



. A "tercel gentle." 137 

receive him once more on the footing of a friend, 
he would have disdained to avail himself of such 
a subterfuge. The surest test a man can apply to 
the worth and sincerity of his love is to ask himself 
whether he would deceive its object in order to 
win her : if he can honestly say no, he is a true 
lover and a gentleman. Sir Lam-ence asked himself 
such a question, and was answered, no. He could 
not stand the Club-talk ; he could not meet those 
men to whom she furnished matter for conversa- 
tion, . ^not insolent indeed, so far as she was con- 
cerned, but intolerable in its easy, insouciant, flip- 
pant slang and indolent speculation in the ears 
of the man who loved her. He could not stop it ; 
if he remained in to^vn he must endure it, or for- 
sake the society of all his customary associates, 
which was not to be thought of. Such a course 
of proceeding as that, in addition to depriving liim 
of resources and leaving him notliing to do, would 
give rise to no end of talk and aU kinds of sm'- 
mises. If he started off suddenly, nobody knowing 
why, and went nobody knew where, it would be 
all right, . it wordd be only " Alsager's queer 



138 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

way;" but if lie stayed in town and saw no one, 
or changed his set, then, indeed, that would be 
quite another matter. One's own set has tolera- 
tion for one's queer ways, to which tliey are ac- 
customed, but they decidedly object to any but 
habitual " queerness ;" they will not bear with 
new developments, with running off the rails. 

Yes, he would go ; and the sooner the better. 
There was nothing to detain him now. He would 
have liked to see Miss Gillespie perhaps ; but, after 
all, what good could it do ? Her connection with 
the Hammonds, and through them wdth the Mit- 
fords, had long been at an end ; her mysterious 
note had warned him that her power was over; 
so that what could she do ? and what had he to 
say to her ? Persons of her sort were never safe 
to talk to, and were so fall of caprice tliat she 
might either resent his visit or ignore the subject 
of Lady Mitford altogether; if she had ever had 
any interest in her, and it had been genuine, it 
was not likely she retained it now. ISTo ; he 
would not linger for the purpose of seeing her, . 
he would go at once. Whither ? To Paris first, 



A " TERCEL GENTLE." 139 

of course ; and then he would consider. Was he 
always to be a wanderer? he thought; was he 
never to realise any of the good resolves, . to put 
in practice any of the views he had been in- 
dulging in lately? Was Knockholt to remain 
masterless, because he could not settle down to 
the interests and the occupations which sufficed 
for other and better men? . men who had not 
been exempted from the common lot either; . 
men, to many of whom their heart's desire had 
not been granted. Could he not now do as his 
father had done? 'No, not yet; the restlessness 
of mental trouble was upon him ; the pain of un- 
accustomed moral processes; the shivering chill 
of the dawn of a new kind of light and a new 
system of thought. No doubt this would not be 
always so ; after a time he could find rest and 
tranquillity in the duties and enjopnents of a 
country baronet's existence. Was this what she 
meant ? Was this strength to do, and fidelity in 
adhering to duty, the noble law by wliich she 
ruled her life ? Were they to bring him to the 
happiness which seemed so distant, so impossible? 



140 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Were not the words upon the ring her message, 
her counsel, her command ? Ah, well, if so, he 
might . he would try to follow them some day; 
but for the present he must get away. Like every 
wounded animal he must seek refuge in flight ; he 
must get him to the covert. 

Sir Laurence Alsager did not remember, amid 
all his musings, that he was alone in the enjoyment 
of this resource ; that slie remained where her feet 
trod on thorns, and heart fed on bitterness . re- 
mained in the straight path of her duty, strong 
and faithful. 

Yes, he would go at once, . that evening. He 
gave his servant the necessary orders, and then 
applied himself to writing letters on matters of 
business. While thus engaged a note was brought 
to him, and he was informed that the bearer 
awaited the answer. The note was enclosed in 
an oblong envelope, bordered with black about an 
inch deep, so that room was barely left for the 
address. He knew the handwriting well ; he" had 
been accustomed to see it in combination with 
every kind of coquetry in stationery; and he 



141 

smiled grimly as he noted the mingled hy]^)Ocrisy 
and coquetry of this very pretty and impressive 
affliction in black and white. 

"What the devil is she at now?" thought Sir 
Lam-ence, as he broke the accm-ately- impressed 
seal. He had not had any communication with 
Mrs. Hammond since he left Red moor in the 
spring; he had heard not quite all perhaps, but 
enough about her to make him shrink from any 
further acquaintance with her, as much from dis- 
gust of herself as from indignation on Lady Mit- 
ford's account ; and he gave her too much credit 
for a sufficiently accurate knowledge of the ma- 
chinery of London society, and the unfailing cir- 
culation of scandal, to entertain any doubt that 
she Avas well aware that he must inevitably hear, 
and had by this time heard, the stories that were 
rife about her. He was not in the least aware 
to how great an extent she had been actuated by 
torturing jealousy of him, though, as he had told 
Lady Mitford, he knew one of her motives was 
revenge ; but he was prepared to give Laura 
Hammond credit for any amount of spite of 



142 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

which human nature is capable ; still, what pur- 
pose could she have to serve by opening any com - 
munication with him? He read the note as he 
asked himself the question. It was dated from 
the house in Portman Square, and contained only 
a few lines. Mrs. Hammond had heard of Sir 
Laurence Alsager's arrival in town, and was par- 
ticularly desirous of seeing him. She begged he 
would send her a line to say whether he could 
conveniently call upon her the same evening ; she 
said evening, as no doubt his mornings were fully 
occupied with the business entailed by his acquisi- 
tion of rank and fortune, on which she begged 
to offer her congratulations; and she equally, of 
course, did not go out any where, or receive (or- 
dinary) "v-isitors. She hoped Sir Laurence Alsager 
would comply with her request, as she wished to 
speak to him concerning a person in whom he was 
interested, and whom his acquiescence would ma- 
terially benefit (underlined), and she remained liis 
most faithfidly. 

" A snare and a bait," said Laurence, as he 
stood with the note in his hand, uncertain what 



143 

reply lie should make. His first impulse was to 
write that he was leaving London that afternoon ; 
but he hesitated to do that, as it occurred to him 
she would be surprised at the abruptness of such a 
step, and setting her serpentine sagacity to work, 
might arrive at guessing something at least proxi- 
mate to the truth. Curiosity ; a strong conviction 
that Laura would not venture to tamper with his 
patience too far, and would not have dared to take 
this step without some motive ; a vivid recollection 
of the interview which had taken place between 
them before^ the memorable visit to Kedmoor, of 
his threat, and Laura's evident appreciation of its 
sincerity; finally, an irresistible longing to hear 
wdiat Laura might have to say about Lady Mit- 
ford, and a vague dread that a refusal might in 
some indescribable way injure her, . decided him. 

He wrote a short formal note, to the effect 
that Sir Laurence Alsager would have the honour 
of calling upon Mrs. Hammond at eight o'clock 
that evening, despatched it, and then returned to 
his letters. 

Sir Laurence did not dine at the Club that 



144 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

day ; lie was in no mood to meet the men whom 
he must have met, and who would have made him 
pay the price of his popularity by inopportunely 
insisting on his society. He dined at a private 
hotel, and eight o'clock found liim at the door of 
Mrs. Hammond's house. 

He was shown into an inner drawing-room, 
which was brilliantly lighted, and where he was 
left alone for a few minutes. Then Mrs. Ham- 
mond appeared, and came towards him holding 
out her hand. 

" I cannot congratulate you on your appear- 
ance, Sir Laurence," she said, as she seated her- 
self in a low deep chair and looked up at him. 
Tlie look was a peculiar one ; intent observation 
and some anxiety were blended in its expression. 
He had taken a seat at her invitation, and was 
quite grave and self-possessed, while he preserved 
with exactness the manner of a man who was 
there in obedience to a summons, not of his o-svn 
wish or act, and who was waiting to learn the 
motive which had dictated it 

Laura Hammond looked handsomer than he 



145 

had ever seen her, as she sat in the lighted room 
in her deep mourning- dress, whose sombre hue 
and rich material toned down the sensuous style 
of her beauty, and lent it that last best touch of 
refinement in which alone it had been wanting. 
Sir Laurence Alsager observed this increased 
beauty, but merely with an artistic sense of its 
attraction. To him Lam-a Hammond could never 
be aught but despicable and repulsive; and he 
was just then in the mood in which a man be- 
lieves that only one woman in the w^orld is really 
beautiftd. She had conformed to custom in her 
dress so far as the weeds went, but she did not 
wear a widow's cap. Nothing would have induced 
her to disfigure herself by such a detestable inven- 
tion ; and though she knew she should be talked 
about, she considered that a minor evil. Her fine 
silky chestnut-hair, preserved fi:om contact with 
the hideous cap, was banded smootlily on her fore- 
head, and gathered into an unadorned knot at the 
back of her head, showing the profile and the deli- 
cate little ears to perfection. More beautiful than 
ever she undoubtedly was ; but yet, as Laurence 
VOL. m. L 



146 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

looked at her with close attention, he noticed that 
she had grown suddenly older in appearance. 
Even supposing all her former light and dashing 
manner to be resumed, the sombre dress to be laid 
aside, and the brilliant toilette in which Laura had 
been unrivalled among English women to have 
taken its place, a change had come over her. A 
line above the brow, . a horizontal Hue, not the 
sharp perpendicular mark that intellectual toil 
sets; a tighter closing of the hps, too seldom 
closed before ; a little, a very little, less elasticity 
in the muscles which produced and banished the 
ever-flitting smile, . ^these were faint, but certain, 
indications. 

'^ I have not been ill, Mrs. Hammond," re- 
plied Sir Laurence gravely; "but I have had a 
good deal of trouble lately, and that does not im- 
prove one's looks. But," he went on, " you wished 
to see me ; may I inquire why ? I am leaving 
town shortly ; and . " 

He paused ; his natural courtesy arrested him. 
He could not tell Mrs. Hammond so very plainly 
that he was anxious to get away from her as soon 



A " TERCEL GENTLE." 147 

as possible. She saw it though, and she reddened 
with sudden anger, which in an instant she brought 
under conti'ol. 

"You are amazingly business-like, Sir Lau- 
rence ! The influence of your late onerous experi- 
ences in the character of Gentilhomme Campagnard^ 
no doubt. By the way, how do you like it all ?" 

" All ? I hardly catch your meaning. Since 
my father's death I have been, as you suppose, 
very much occupied, and I cannot say I like the 
details of a transfer of property aiid responsibility 
much." 

" Ah, but the property itself, I meant, . the 
title and the fortune, the ^county -magnate' busi- 
ness, and the ward; above all, the ward." 

She spoke in a playful tone ; but she watched 
him closely, and Sir Laurence saw it. 

" She has heard something about Helen, and 
she is on a false scent," he thought. " Perhaps it 
is just as well to let her deceive herself." 

So he replied, still gravely, still unwarmed by 
her manner, which was half caressing and half 
contemptuous : 



148 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

" They are all good things in their way, Mrs. 
Hammond; and if their way be not yet mine, 
mine will be theirs some day, I hope." 

" Ah, then, it's true !" she exclaimed. " You 
are really going to marry and settle ; you are 
going to assume the semi-sporting, semi-bucolic, 
but entirely domestic character, which is so very 
charming, and which will suit you so perfectly ; 
and henceforth the all-conquering Colonel wall be 
sought for in vain under so admirable a travesty !" 

Still he was grave and immovable. Her per^ 
siflage had no more power to charm, her ridicule 
to annoy, than her beauty had power to please 
him. It was all silly chatter; and he wondered 
at himself as he remembered the time when he 
preferred the nonsense, occasionally adulterated 
by slang and invariably spiced with spite, which 
she had talked then and always, to any words of 
wit or wisdom. She still watched liim, mider cover 
of her light manner, narrowly. 

" You know as well as I do what is the ordi- 
nary amount of truth in public rumour, Mrs. 
Hammond. But you must excuse me for again 



149 

reminding you that I am here at your request, 
and that you summoned me hither with some 
purpose. It was not to talk of my affairs and 
prospects, I presume." 

He spoke the last words in a harsh and angry 
voice invohmtarily. Ang^er against her, and some- 
thing very hke hatred of her, were strong within 
liim, and grew stronger rapidly. He looked at 
her careless face ; he marked her sensuous soignee 
beauty ; and he remembered the fair woman whom 
he had seen struck down by her merciless hand in 
the dawn of her innocent happiness, in the pride 
of her hope and love. He would make her say 
her say and leave her, or he would leave her with 
it misaid ; he was sorry he had come. What 
could this woman do but harm to any one; to 
him, and to lier most of all ? 

" No, Colonel Alsager, . I beg your pardon, 
Sir Laurence, . / cannot always remember how 
times are changed, you see, . it was not. It was 
for a purpose which you may think a little less 
welcome, and perhaps even more trifling ; it was 
to talk to you . of myself." 



150 RUNNESTG THE GAUNTLET. 

" Of youi'self, Mrs. Hammond ! What can 
you liave to say of yourself that I ought to hear, 
or you to sj)eak ?" 

" Much," she said vehemently ; and in a mo- 
ment her manner changed. He had a perfectly 
distinct recollection of her on the last two occa- 
sions when he and she had spoken together, espe- 
cially on the last, when she openly defied him; 
when she had declared that she still loved liim ; 
when she had furnished him with the clue to her 
conduct which he had unravelled for Lady Mit- 
ford's enlightenment ; when she had said, " I will 
break her heart, and then I will spoil her name." 

Had she done so? had this woman fulfilled her 
tlu-eat? Very nearly; she had almost broken 
Georgie's heart, and she would certainly ruin her 
reputation if he . Laurence Alsager . did not reso- 
lutely withdraw, and deprive her of any pretext 
for slander. And so it had come to tliis : the 
woman he had undertaken to defend, for whose 
sake he had foregone so much pleasure and neg- 
lected so much duty, could be saved only by his 
absence ! He knew that Lam-a was "talked of," 



A " TERCEL GENTLE." 151 

and therefore persons unskilled in the science of 
society might suppose that she could not do much 
harm by talking of another woman ; but Alsager 
was an adept, and he knew that a stone will bruise 
and maim, and even kill, if well -aimed and suffi- 
ciently heavy, though the hand that tlu-ows it be 
ever so much stained with sin. He feared . he 
feared exceedingly for the woman he loved, and 
whom tliis she-devil hated. He noted the change 
in Laura's manner before she spoke, and he feared 
still more. ^ 

" I have much to say, and I will say it," she 
went on vehemently; " and you shall listen to me ! 
What ! am I to have won at last, and at the end 
of such deception and slavery, the reward I have 
done all and suffered all for? and then am I to 
keep a decorous silence, and see it all made waste 
and worthless? Don't look at me in that grave, 
polite, criticising Avay, Laurence, or you will drive 
me mad!" 

Sometliing of menace and something of ap- 
peal in her manner, a startling energy in her ges- 
ture, and the hoarse intensity of her voice, tlu'ew 



152 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Alsager off his guard; this was so totally new 
to him. He had seen her in many moods, but 
never in one like this. Tenderness, coquetry, 
a mock gust of passion, all the tricks of fence 
of the most finished flirt he had seen her play, 
and he had found them out . perhaps she had 
never really deceived even when she had most 
completely fascinated him ; but he had never seen 
her thus, he thought, and he was right. She was 
in earnest ; he was about to understand her fully 
now. She had risen impetuously from her seat, 
and approached him, and he had risen also; so 
they stood confr'onting each other. There was no- 
thing artificial in the expressive grace of her atti- 
tude ; her figure was perfect, and she was grace- 
ful always . never more so than now, when she 
was carried away into a forgetfulness of her own 
beauty, which, if it had been habitual, would have 
made Laura Hammond irresistible. Her eyes 
flashed, and her smooth brow reddened ; but her 
beauty gained by every subtle change of expres- 
sion, as she poured out a torrent of impetuous 
words. 



A " TERCEL GENTLE." 153 

" Did you tliiiik I had forgotten our last meet- 
ing and our last parting? Did you think I had 
forgotten the words you spoke then, and those with 
which I answered them ? Did you think the past 
was all blotted out, and those tlu'ee horrid years 
were gone like an ugly dream ; those years during 
which you banished yom'self for love of me, . yes, 
Sir Laurence Alsager, for me, . ^you cannot deny 
it, you can't take that from me, you can't transfer 
that jewel to lier crown of triumph, . ay, start 
and stare ; I know it all, you see, . and then came 
back to torture me by indifference, by neglect, by 
preference of another . and what another! my 
God ! that made it a thousand times worse . ^before 
my face ! What do you take me for that you 
think I would endure this, and when the time 
came for speech keep silence !" 

She was trembling violently now; but as he 
looked at her, with all the amazement he felt in 
liis face, she put a strong control on herself and 
stood quite firmly. 

" For God's sake, what do you mean ?" stam- 
mered Sir Laurence. " What are you talking 



154 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

about ? What is it that you must say ? What is 
it that I have done ?" 

" You ask me what I mean ; you . jon . did I 
not tell you then . ^when you pleaded to me for 
the woman who had rivalled me with you . that I 
loved you ? Did I not tell you then, I say, and 
did you not know it?" 

'' You did tell me that you loved me then, 
Mrs. Hammond, and I did not beheve you. You 
had told me the same thing before, you know, 
many a time, and you married Mr. Hammond. 
You married liim because he was very rich, . per- 
haps you might have hesitated had he not also 
been old and silly ; but he was, and your calcula- 
tions have succeeded; . ^you are rich and free. 
Once before, when we talked upon this subject, I 
said we would not go into it any more. To you 
it cannot be profitable''' (he laid an emphasis upon 
the word), " and to me it is very painfid. ' That 
time is dead and buried,' and so let it be. I can- 
not conceive why you have revived its memory ; 
but, whatever yom' j)m'pose, it can have no suc- 
cess dependent on me. I have no bitter memory 



. A "tercel GENTLE." 155 

of it now ; indeed, for some time I have had no 
memory of it at all. I know it is hard for a 
woman to believe that a wound inflicted by her 
can ever heal, and I daresay men show the scars 
sometimes, and flatter the harmless vanity of 
their ci-devant conquerors. But I am not a man of 
that stamp, Mrs. Hammond ; I have good healing 
flesh, I suppose, as the sm'geons and the nurses 
say; at all events, I have no scars to show." 

He made a step in advance, as if to take his 
hat from a small table ; and she saw that he in- 
tended to leave her. 

"No," she exclaimed; "you shall not go ! I 
am utterly resolved to speak with you ; and you 
must hear me. I will be as cold and as calm as 
you are; but you must hear me, if not for my 
sake, or your own, for Lady Mitford's !" 

She motioned him to his seat, and smiled . a 
little momentary smile and full of bitterness. He 
sat down again, and she stood by the mantelpiece, 
on which she laid her hand, and for a moment 
rested her head upon the palm. Something for- 
lorn in the attitude caught Alsager's attention; 



156 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

then he knew that she was acting, and acting well. 
Fuiy, perhaps ferocity, might be natural to Laura 
Hammond mider certain circumstances ; but for- 
lornness never. When she next spoke it was in 
a softer tone, and she kept her face towards him 
in profile. It was her best look, as he remem- 
bered, and as she remembered also; for though 
she was not acting now in all she said . though 
she was more real throughout the whole of their 
interview than she had ever been before, nothing, 
except indeed it might have been severe bodily 
pain, could have reduced Laura to perfect reality. 

" I believe," she said, " the best way I can 
make you miderstand why I sent for you, and 
T^iat I want to say to you, is to tell you the truth 
about those three years." 

'^ As you please," he answered ; "I cannot 
conceive how their history can concern me, ex- 
cept that portion of it which I have witnessed; 
and that has concerned, and does concern me. 
But I am here at your request, and I will go only 
at your dismissal." 

" When I married, and you went away," she 



157 

began, "I was not very unhappy at first; there 
was novelty and success, and there was luxury, 
which I love," she said with emphatic candour. 
" Mr. Hammond was not a disagreeable man, and 
I never suffered him to get into the habit of con- 
trolling me. He was inclined to try a little, but 
I soon convinced him it was useless, and, especi- 
ally at his age, would make him uncomfortable. 
So he left off." Her voice hardened now into the 
clear metallic tone which Laurence remembered 
so well. 

" By degrees, however," she continued, " every 
tiling grew irksome; and a horrid weariness 
and sense of degradation stole over me ; not 
because I loved wealth and luxury any less, but 
because of the price I had to pay for it. And you 
had made it dearer to buy, for you had gone 
away." 

*^ Yes," he said, " I had gone away ; and you 
would have liked to have me stay, and be experi- 
mented on, and victimised for your delight, . I 
can understand that; but I should have fancied, 
Mrs. Hammond, you knew me too well to suppose 



158 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

you could have played such a game as that with 
me." 

^^I would not have played any game with 
you," she said . ^not angrily, rather sadly. " How 
unjust you are ! how mijust men always are ! 
they-" 

He interrupted her. " Pi'ay do not indulge 
me with that senseless complaint which women 
who, like you, are the bane and the torment of 
men who love them with an honest, and the utter 
ruin of men who love them with a dishonest love, 
make of their victims. I have long ceased to be 
yours, Mrs. Hammond ; but I am not unjust I 
say again, you would have made me ridiculous as 
readily as you had made me wretched. I don't 
deny it, you see. I am much astonished, and 
rather ashamed when forced to remember it; but 
I am not weak enough to deny a wealN:ness. To be 
so would argue that it is not entirely corrected." 

He was provoking her to anger, but not alto- 
gether unintentionally ; his best means of coming 
at her real purpose would be by tlu'owing her oiBF 
her guard. 



159 

^^ I say again," she repeated, ^^ you are unjust ; 
I would not have played any such game. I would 
have become used to my position in time ; I would 
have seen you in the world ; I would have seen 
you gradually forgetting me. It would not have 
been our angry parting, and a dead dull blank, 
. time to feel to the utmost all the horrors of a 
marriage without love. No woman, I believe, 
would sell herself, at least in marriage, which 
must last, if she could estimate them aright. And 
then such a meeting as om-s ! Do you remember 
it, Laurence ?" She stole a very effective look at 
him here. 

" Yes, I remember it," he said shortly. 

"A horrid interview we had then, . ftdl of 
sneers and bitterness on your side, and not in 
the least real on mine." 

" Is this a pleasanter one, Mrs. Hammond ?" 
said Sir Laurence, who perceived that her levity 
was coming up again, and desired to suppress 
it. " I camiot perceive the utiHty of this retro- 
spect." 

**I daresay not," she answered coolly; "but 



160 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

I do." The pretty air of command was entirely 
lost on Alsager. She saw that it was, and ground 
her teethj . a pleasant symptom of passion which 
she never could suppress. " By the time we met 
again," she continued, " I was sick and weary . 
not only of the price I had to pay for the wealth 
I had bought, but of the wealth itself. Of course 
I never changed my opinion of the value of 
money. I don't mean that ; but I did not get 
as much out of the wealth I had pui'chased as I 
might have done. I was very much admired, 
and quite the fashion, but somehow I tired of it 
all ; and then . then, Laurence, I fomid out why. 
I found out that I really had more heart than I 
believed, and that it was in your keeping." 

" Pshaw !" he said, angrily and impatiently ; 
" pray don't talk like this. You are drawing on 
your imagination very largely, and also on my 
vanity. The latter is quite useless, I assure 
you." 

" Think what you like, say what you will, . I 
loved you. I knew it by the listlessuess that 
was always upon me ; I knew it better by the 



A " TERCEL GENTLE." 161 

disappearance of that listlessness when they said 
you were coming home ; and I knew it best of 
all when . when do you think, Sir Laurence 
Alsager ?" 

" I really could not presume to guess when 
you made such a discovery, Mrs. Hammond." 

" Indeed ! I will tell you, then. I learned it 
best of all when the first pang of jealousy I had 
ever felt in my life seized me. I had often heard 
yom- name coupled with that of some woman of 
fashion. I had heard a multitude of speculations 
about yom- affairs of the heart ; but I never feared 
them . I never believed in them; I never knew 
that I had so vital an interest in them mitil 
your own look, your own manner, your own 
indecision of purpose about the visit to Redmoor 
betrayed you to me, and told me who was my 
rival." 

^' Your rival !" said Sir Laurence in astonish- 
ment. " Surely you did not suppose I had re- 
turned to England to be caught again m your 
toHs ?" 

" I don't know what I thought ; I don't care. 

VOL. III. M 



162 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

I only know that when you and I parted, you 
loved me, and were angry with me, . it was 
passionate love and passionate anger, . and that 
when you and I met, not only had you ceased to 
be angry, but you were rapidly succumbing to 
the influence of another woman . a woman utterly 
different from me ! Not more beautiftd, . I deny 
that ; she has not the art of being beautiful ; she 
has only the material. A woman whom I hate ; 
whom I should have hated and would have in- 
jured, I believe, if you had never seen her. Yes ; 
and you actually dared to menace me on her ac- 
count; you presumed to pit yourself against me 
as her champion. You forgot that such champion- 
ship hardly serves its object, in the eyes of the 
world." 

Sir Laurence uttered an exclamation of dis- 
gust ; and was about to rise, when she stepped 
forward close to liim, and laid her hands lightly 
upon his breast for an instant. 

"No, no, Laurence," she said; "bear witli 
me. I did not mean it ; not quite that. Can you 
not understand me? All, my God! how pitiless 



A "tercel GENTLE." 163 

men are ! Wliile tliey want to win us, where is 
the end of their toleration? We may sin as we 
please, provided we do not sin against them and 
their self-love. But when that is over, they can- 
not judge us harshly enough ; they have even 
less pardon and pity for the sins into which they 
have driven us than for any other." 

"You are talking utter nonsense, Mrs. Ham- 
mond," said Sir Laurence ; " and nonsense it is 
painful to me to hear. Your temptations are of 
your own making, and your sins are of your own 
counselling, not mine. I would have made you 
my wife, but you preferred . and I thank you 
for the choice . another de&tiny. Am I to blame ? 
You have chosen to cherish a distempered fancy 
which has no foundation in truth, and am I the 
rutliless being who has robbed you of it ? You 
have chosen to solace the tedium of yom- uncon- 
genial marriage by a proceeding as vile and un- 
principled as any woman ever ventured on, to her 
eternal shame. Harsh words, Mrs. Hammond, 
but true ; and now you endeavour to lend an air 
of melodrama to a transaction which was in reality 



164 IIIINNIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

as commonplace as it was coarse. You find it 
hard to put your relation with Sir Charles Mitford 
on a sentimental footing, . he is hardly a subject 
for sentiment, I think ; and you have invented this 
tragical theory of an indirect revenge upon me. 
Tush ! I gave you credit for more tact." 

This was well and boldly said; for Sir Lau- 
rence had but one object in view, . ^to do the best 
he could for Lady Mitford in this encounter with 
her foe. He knew as he spoke, as he looked into 
the unmasked face before him . pale and deformed 
with jarring passions . that the motive was real, 
though secondary; it had indeed only come to 
supplement the first, wliich had led Laura to em- 
ploy her fascinations upon Sir Charles ; but it had 
always been stronger, and had latterly completely 
swallowed up the other. 

" Shall I never make you understand me ?" she 
said passionately; "will you persist in bringing 
thincTS that are unreasonable to the touchstone of 
reason? I don't know, I don't care how absurd 
what I am saying may somid ; it is true, ti'ue, 
Laurence Alsager, . as sure as death is true, or 



A '^ TERCEL GENTLE." 165 

any love tliat ever was more bitter. Yes, it is 
true : now think your worst, and say your worst of 
me ; still you must see that I am far more wretched 
than she is. What had I to endure ? What had 
she ? I won her husband from her. If I did, was 
he a prize, do you think ? A selfish, sensual, brain- 
less fool ; a man without taste, or manners, or 
mind ; a man who is a living contradiction to the 
theories of race and education ; a man of whom she 
must have sickened in a year, if she had ever 
gained sense enough to find him out. She is not 
very clever, you know, and she might have taken 
longer for the discovery, if the habitual society of 
men who are gentlemen had not enlightened her. 
But she had a more sm'e and rapid teacher, who 
brought her consolation too." There was a world 
of malevolent meaning in the tone in which she 
said this. 

'' What do you, what mn you mean ?" he 
asked. 

" All, you are getting interested now. Sir Lau- 
rence, when my discourse turns on her. Wait a 
little, and I will explain. I asked you what did 



166 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

she lose ; I need not ask you what did I gain : the 
one includes the other." 

" He was her husband," said Sir Laurence. 

" Her husband !" repeated Laura, with intense 
scorn. " You have caught the cant of the pro- 
prieties' school, have you ? Her husband ! And 
what were you ? My lover, Laurence. Ay, you 
may forget, you may deny it ; but you were, the 
day you landed in England, . I should have only 
needed oj)portunity to win you back again. Her 
husband !" (with a bold hard laugh) " she might 
have taken mine, and welcome !" 

Sir Laurence looked at her in growing disgust. 
Lord Dollamore was quite right; there was a 
strong dash of vulgarity about Lam'a Hammond, 
and it appeared whenever she lost her temper. 

"Yes," she went on, more and more angrily; 
"think of her, and think of me. She suffered the 
tortiu'es of jealousy, did she ? of lawful legitimate 
jealousy, for which good people would give her 
pity, if she were not too proud to take it. She 
suffer ! What did I suffer ? I tell you, Laurence 
Alsager, she could not suffer what I suffer ; it is 



A " TERCEL GENTLE." 167 

not in her, any more than she could love as I love. 
She is a handsome cold egotistical woman, who 
thinks of her rights. Her husband belonged to 
her, and I took him, and she didn't like it. She 
felt it much as she would have felt my stealing her 
pearls or her Dresden china, I daresay ; but suffer ! 
Why, she's what is called a good woman ; and if I 
chose to break with Mitford, he would probably 
now return to her, for he likes her rather ; and she 
would receive his apologies, and all would be right 
again. Yes, she'd stoop to this stupid meanness, 
because he's her husband^ you know ; and matri- 
mony is such a remarkably sacred institution, that 
a man may do any thing he pleases. And you talk 
to me of a woman like lier suffering !" 

Sir Laurence made no answer. He was think- 
ing how truly, from her own debased point of view, 
Lam^a Hammond read the character of the woman 
she had injured so deeply. 

'^ You don't answer. Tell me, don't you know 
she would be reconciled with Mitford to-morrow, 
if he asked her?" 

.' I cannot tell you, indeed," he said coldly ; 



168 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

'^ you had better ^ break with Mitford,' as you 
phrase it, and find out." 

" Will you not at least acknowledge that I had 
to suffer? The time of my bondage was short, 
but she deprived my freedom of all its value. She 
has won you, Laurence ; and what is it all to 
me? I don't believe, in all her well-regulated 
life, she ever experienced such a pang as J felt 
when I saw her indifferent to Mitford's brutal 
neglect, and to my insolence, one morning, be- 
cause she had just had a letter from you ; a com- 
monplace letter enough. Sir Laurence . she told 
us all about it . but I never can forget, or forgive 
the serenity of her face ; it seemed as if she had 
been removed into a world apart from us all." 

How little she dreamed . how far, in her blind 
furious anger and self-abandonment, she was from 
dreaming of the secret stealthy delight with which 
the listener heard her words ! 

"You impute to Lady Mitford yom' own 
ideas, your own indifference to right, Mrs. Ham- 
mond ; she is a woman who is incapable of wrong- 
ing her husband, even in thought, though that 



A " TERCEL GENTLE." 169 

husband be no worthier than Mitforcl. She rules 
her Hfe by principles, and in her estimate of 
marriage regards the obligation rather than the 
individual." 

" Indeed ! Tliat's a very pretiy sentence, Sir 
Laurence, and you have learned your lesson like 
a very docile little boy. But hadn't you better 
reserve it for repetition elsewhere ? for really sen- 
timents of such grandeur are quite thrown away 
on me." 

She was exasperated to the highest pitch by 
his perfect coolness, and tears of rage stood in her 
eyes. He had preserved an imperturbable compo- 
sure ; neither her passion nor her sarcasm moved 
him. Desperately she caught at the one hope 
that remained. She came towards him suddenly, 
dropped upon her knees by his side, and hid her 
face, covered with her hands, on his arm, while 
he sat astonished and confused. 

" Laui'ence !" she sobbed, " listen to me. Do 
you not know that all the wicked things . I say 
are said because I am miserable ; because the love 
of you and the loss of you have turned me into 



170 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

something that I dread to think of and to look 
into ? Have some compassion on me ! I wronged 
you, I know ; but can you not forgive me ? Do 
you think the prize I won brought me any peace ? 
Be merciful to a woman's vanity and weakness. 
Am I the only woman who is weak and vain? 
You did love me once ; you could love me now, if 
you would only put aside your pride, if you would 
only try to be merciful to the errors which I have 
so bitterly repented. Laurence, this woman, who 
has been the cause of all . whose wrongs are upon 
her own head . what can she ever be to you? 
You know she is, according to yom- own account, 
too good to be tempted from her duty, while I . I 
am free ; there is no barrier between us now . 
and I love you." 

She raised her drooping head, she let her 
hands fall, and she looked at liim. Tlie time had 
been when such a look would have brought Lau- 
rence Alsager to her feet; but now, he had said 
truly,." that time was dead and buried." 

He rose with an air of stern detennination. 
She had risen from her knees, and had re- 



A " TERCEL GENTLE." 171 

snmed her chair. She was deadly pale ; her eyes 
were wild and haggard; and she caught her 
breath with a sort of gasping sob, which threat- 
ened a burst of hysterical passion. Laurence 
spoke low and sadly : 

" When you come to think over what you 
have just said, you will be angry with yourself 
for ha^ang uttered, and with me for having 
heard, such words. I will not dwell upon them, 
nor will I voluntarily remember them. If you 
had never caused me more than the pang which 
yom' first faithlessness to mvself made me suffer, 
I might, indeed, have pardoned it, for the sake 
of the old glamom-, and made myself miserable 
by marrying a woman whom I could not re- 
spect, because I had once loved her. But that 
the woman who jilted me for Percy Hammond's 
rupees, then betrayed Hammond for Sir Charles 
Mitford, and would now discard Mitford for me . 
by the way, I am a much richer man than Ham- 
mond was; barring the widowhood, your specu- 
lation has been defective . should di-eam, in the 
wildest paroxysms of a woman's unreasonableness, 



172 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

that I could be cajoled, or bribed, through my 
interest in another, to put her in my honoured 
mother's place, is beyond my comprehension." 
She looked at him, still with wild haggard eyes, 
and still she sobbed, but shed no tears. 

" Farewell, Mrs. Hammond," said Sir Lau- 
rence, as he took his hat, and turned towards the 
door ; " you and I are not likely to meet again. 
I hope the remembrance of this interview will 
induce you to consider whether it might not be 
better for you to endeavour to imitate the woman 
whom you have not only injured, but vainly en- 
deavoured to traduce." 

" Curse her !" hissed Laura, in a tone that was 
no more like a woman's than were her words. 
" Let her look to it ! I will punish you, Lau- 
rence Alsager, through her." 

" No, you won't," he said ; " for the first move 
you make in that direction, I will write to Mit- 
ford (I shall never be without information), and 
inform him that you did me the honour to propose 
to break with him in my favour." 

" He would not believe you," she said, in a 



173 

voice hardly audible from the intensity of her 
passion. 

" Oh, yes, he would ; Mitford is not a fool on 
every point; and rumour says he's jealous, which 
is likely to quicken his intellects. At all events, I 
advise you to let Lady Mitford alone." 

^^ Let her look to it," said Laura; " I owe this 
to her, and I will pay it." 

He smiled, bowed, and left the room. She 
started from her chair, and listened, with her 
hands clasped upon her temples, till she heard the 
half-door shut; then she knew that he was gone 
. ^then she knew that her bold game was lost . 
and she felt that she should never see him more, 
who was the only man she had ever loved, even 
after her own cold and shallow fashion. She gave 
way to no passion now; she smoothed her hair, 
glanced at the glass, and rang the bell. When 
it was answered, she directed that Mademoiselle 
Marcelline should be sent to her. Demure, quiet, 
and respectful as ever, Mademoiselle Marcelline 
entered the room. 

" Marcelline," said Laura (she addressed her 



174 TvUXN^NG THE GAUNTLET. 

maid by her name now), "I am going to my 
room. Come to me in half an hour ; I want to 
talk to you about something." 

" A letter came for madame this evening," 
said mademoiselle; "but I took it from the valet 
de cJiamhre, as I thought madame did not care 
to be disturbed." 

Mrs. Hammond opened the letter. It was 
from her solicitor, and informed her that the final 
decision of the com't, on her application for the 
guardianship of her stepdaughter, had been given 
that day against her. She frowned, then tlnrew 
the letter down, with a short laugh. 

" Every tiling is against me, I think. How- 
ever, it is rather fortunate for Alice." 

At the same hour on the followinor eveninof 
Sir Laurence Alsager was writing his letter to 
Helen Manningtree from Dover. 



CHAPTER YI. 

NATURE AND AET. 

Lady Mitford's composure had been shaken by 
her interview with Sir Laurence Alsager more 
rudelj than by any of the events which had suc- 
ceeded each other with such rapidity in the course 
of the short but troublous time since her marriage. 
She had reckoned upon his friendship to support 
and his society to cheer her, and now . they must 
be rehnquished. There could be no doubt, no 
hesitation about that; and she did not doubt or 
hesitate, but she suffered, as such keenly sensinve 
and highly-principled natures can suffer, whose 
only possible course is to do the right thing, and 
pay, without having counted, the cost. 

All the loneliness, all the dreariness of her lot 
came on her foreboding spirit, as she sat alone in 
her dressing-room, two days after her parting in- 



176 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

terview with Sir Laurence. She had been thinking 
of the day at Eedmoor when their first confidence 
had been interchanged; she had been remembering 
his counsel, and taking herself to task for having 
neglected it, or, at any rate, for not having tried 
more earnestly and more persistently to follow it 

'^ I must have been to blame in some degree," 
she thought; " I ought to have tried to please him 
more; but . " and then she sighed . " I had been 
used to please him without trying, and it is hard 
to realise the change; and before one does realise 
it, it is too late. I wonder if there is any case in 
which it would not be too late from the first; I 
wonder if any woman in the world ever yet suc- 
ceeded in retaining or recovering the heart of any 
man when it had once in the least strayed from 
her. I don't grieve for myself now, . I cannot; 
but I blame myself. I might have tried . no doubt 
I should have failed ; but still I might have tried. 
I might have asserted myself from the moment 
that they met at Redmoor, and I saw her clasp his 
hand as she did. But what is the use of asserting 
oneself, of putting one's position, one's conven- 



NATURE AND AET. 177 

tional rights, against the perverted strength of a 
man's will? No, no; there is no security where 
the question is one of feeling ; in the insecure hold- 
ing of love we are but tenants-at-will." 

She thought thus mournfully of her ovm. lot, 
and condemned herself for faults she had not com- 
mitted ; she thought of Alsager, and took herself 
to task because she could not repress or deny the 
keen and compensating joy which the knowledge 
that he loved her gave; she thought of her hus- 
band with infinite compassion, with apprehension, 
and with hopelessness. The downward course had 
been run with awful rapidity by Sir Charles Mit- 
ford. Since he had discarded the gentle influence 
of Georgie, the benignant restraint, the touch of 
higher aspiration, and purer tastes had vanished, 
and he had returned to all the low habits and 
coarse vices of his earlier career. Georo;ie knew 
this vaguely, and she experienced all the horror 
and disgust which were natural to such a mind as 
hers. At first, when she recognised in the fullest 
extent the fact of her husband's infatuation with 
Mrs. Hammond, she coidd not understand why he 

VOL. III. N 



178 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

should not be restrained by that passion, as he had 
been by his evanescent love for herself, from coarse 
and debasing pleasui'es. But she soon found out, 
by the light of her clear perceptions and the aid of 
her intuitive refinement of mind, how widely dif- 
ferent were the sentiments which she had imio- 
rantly compared; and learned that wliile there is 
no temporal salvation for a man so powerful as 
love, there is no swifter or surer curse and ruin 
than an illicit passion. When Georgie came to 
miderstand this fully, her apprehensions concern- 
ing her husband reached a height of intensity 
which would have been unreasonable, had she not 
l^ossessed the painful knowledge of what his former 
career had been. She had hardly understood it at 
the time indeed, and her father had softened mat- 
ters down very much, partly through the invincible 
amiability of his own disposition, and partly be- 
cause he believed, in simple sincerity, that all 
" Charley's" misbehaviour had been caused by 
want of money alone ; and that once rich, and 
holding a responsible position, he would not again 
be assailed by temptations to disreputable conduct 



NATURE AND ART. 179 

Whence it is presumable that the good 2)arson 
knew a o-reat deal more of the next world than he 
knew of this. 

Lady Mitford's dreary reverie was interrupted 
by the entrance of her maid, who handed her a 
letter from Alsager. As she took it in her hand, 
she saw that it had been sealed with the ring 
which she had given him, and she broke it open 
with mingled joy and fear. Tlie letter was brief, 
kind, and earnest. Sir Laurence told her that he 
was leaving England, and wished, before doing 
so, to place within her reach a som^ce of consola- 
tion which he felt she might too surely need. 
Then, in a few words, he told her of his letter 
to Helen Manningtree ; and besought her, in any 
emergency, in any unpleasantness, if she were ill, 
or even if she were only lonely, . as he knew she 
had cultivated no intimacies in her own circle, . 
to send for Helen. He had not waited for Helen's 
reply ; he knew so well how warm and sincere an 
acquiescence in his request it would convey. He 
told her of the attachment existino; between Helen 
and the curate, and said, ^^ Had there been no 



180 BUNKING THE GAUNTLET. 

other reason for my rejecting your advice, I knew 
she was, at the time of my father's death, virtually 
affianced to Cuthbert Farleigh." 

Lady Mitford paused in her perusal of the 
letter at this point. 

'^ Cuthbert Farleigh !" she repeated ; " surely 
it must be the same . it must be poor papa's old 
pupil ; how very odd, if it should be ! If he had 
ever mentioned me before him at Knockholt, he 
would have remembered me." 

Her thoughts strayed back to her childhood 
and her old home, and she sat absorbed in reverie. 

'' How thoughtful he is for me !" she said to 
herself softly ; ^'how truly considerate! I will 
obey him in this and in every thing. I will make 
this young lady's acquaintance . not just yet, but 
later, when I am more composed." 

And then she thought how delightftil it would 
be to talk with Helen about Laurence; to hear 
from her all the particulars of his life at Knock- 
holt; to make all those researches and studies 
which have such an ineffable attraction for lovino- 

o 

hearts. There could be nothino; wroncr in tliis : 



NATURE AND ART. 181 

men and angels miglit scrutinise her feelings to- 
wards Laurence Alsager, and find nothing to 
blame. 

Tliere was little more in the letter, which con- 
cluded with an expression of the warmest regard. 

Lady Mitford felt happier for the receipt of this 
parting note from Sir Lam'ence. It seemed to 
decrease her loneliness . to sm-romid her with an 
atmosphere of protection. Georgie had never 
associated much with women in her father's se- 
cluded parish. The inhabitants had been chiefly 
of the lower classes; and since she had emerged 
from the gushing schoolroom period, she had 
had none of those intimacies which make up so 
great a part of the happiness of young woman- 
hood. Perhaps she had concentrated her affections 
in the object who had proved so unworthy all the 
more obstinately, and had lavished them upon him 
all the more unrestrainedly, because she had none 
of the lesser claimants for them. 

She looked forward now with almost girlish 
pleasure to making Helen's acquaintance and win- 
ning her affections, as she determined she would 



182 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

try to do ; and she was surprised at herself as she 
felt her spirits rising, and recognised in herself 
more energy and hopefulness than she had felt for 
a lono: time. 

. Time slij)ped away, weighted though it was 
with care, and brought no change in Sir Charles 
Mitford's evil life. The husband and wife rarely 
met now ; and when they did, their casual asso- 
ciation was distressing to Lady Mitford, and em- 
barrassing to him. Their wealth, the magnitude 
and style of their establishment, and the routine 
of life among persons in their j)osition, afforded 
them facilities for a complete and tacit estrange- 
ment, such as the pressure of narrow circum- 
stances would have rendered impossible. Tliey 
went their separate ways, and were more strange 
and distant to each other than the merest surface 
acquaintances. Lady Mitford was, as it was na- 
tural to suppose she would be, the last person to 
hear particulars of her husband's conduct ; but 
she watched him as closely as her limited oppor- 
tunities permitted. For some time she had ob- 
served that he seemed restless and unhappy, aiid 



NATURE AND ART. 183 

that the moroseness and discontent, which had 
been early indications of his relapse from his im- 
proved condition, Avere trying to the household, 
and, on the rare occasions when she had to en- 
counter them, distressing to her. He had no air 
of triumph now ; he had no assured complacency 
of manner: these were gone, and in their place 
were the symptoms of suffering, of incertitude, of 
disappointment. 

^^ I suppose she is treating him mikindly," 
Lady Mitford thought. " It must be something 
concerning her wliich is distressing him ; he does 
not care about any thing else. He is so infatuated 
with her now, that I verily believe, when he drinks 
to the frightful excess he sometimes does, it is to 
stupefy himself between the time he leaves her and 
the time he sees her again. Poor fellow! poor 
Charley !" 

She pitied him now with all her good and 
generous heart. Perhaps the time that she had 
foreseen Avas near . the time which she had once 
hoped for, and now dreaded, though prepai'ed to 
meet it with all the dutifulness of her natm-e . the 



184 PvUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

time when the wicked woman who had taken him 
from her, who had laid the fabric of her happiness 
lowj woukl tire of him and discard him ; and he 
woidd seek forgiveness from the wife he had so 
cruelly wronged. 

The moodiness and moroseness, the restlessness 
and irritability of Sir Charles had been peculiarly 
noticeable for some time after Lady Mitford had 
received Sir Laurence's letter, and they had not 
failed to receive the imprecations of the servants'- 
hall. Lady Mitford had been aware that much 
information might have been obtained through 
that fruitful medium, but she would not at any 
time have deigned to have recourse to it; and 
would have shrunk from doing so with additional 
distaste just now, as she could not avoid perceiving 
that she was the subject of closer observation than 
usual on the part of the domestics, especially her 
own maid and Mr. Banks. 

One day, when Lady Mitford returned from 
her solitary drive, and having alighted from her 
carriage, was passing through the hall, she was 
encountered by Captain Bligh, coming quickly 



NATURE AND ART. 185 

from the library. She saluted him com^teously, 
and was about to pass on, when he begged to be 
permitted to speak with her. She acquiesced, and 
they went upstairs and into the long drawing- 
room. 

She knew in a moment that he had come to 
tell her bad news, and she nerved herself to bear 
it, whatever it might be, by a strong effort. He 
waited until she had seated herself, and then said : 

'' I fear. Lady Mitford, I can hardly escape 
some share of your displeasure, incurred by my 
having undertaken the mission which has brought 
me here to-day." 

She looked at him, and tm-ned very pale, but 
she remained quite silent and still. 

" You are frightened. Lady Mitford. Pray 
don't fear any thing. Tliere is much to grieve 
you, but no cause for alarm." 

" Sir Charles . " she stammered. 

" Sir Charles is well ; there is nothing of that 
sort the matter. But I have a painful task to 
fulfil. Lady Mitford, are you aware that Sir 
Charles has left London ?" 



18G RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

She fell back in her seat, and deatlilike cold 
crept through her. She did not faint, but a mo- 
mentary sensation like fainting passed over her. 
Her eyes closed, and her hands grew cold and 
damp. It had come, then, the catastrophe ! She 
was deserted ; he had left England with that 
woman ; and it was all over ! She was to be 
alone, and he was utterly ruined ; there was no 
hope, no rescue for him now ! 

Captain Bligh was not a person adapted to act 
with discretion in a crisis of this kind. He did not 
understand women's ways, as he was accustomed 
to proclaim. He had a kind heart, however, and 
it supplied the deficiencies of his judgment. He 
merely handed Lady Mitford a scent-bottle, and 
waited until she had recovered herself. After 
a few moments she sat upright and opened her 
eyes. 

'^That's right!" said the honest Captain en- 
couragingly; ^' I knew you woidd bear it well; 
I knew you had such pluck. By Jove, I haven't 
forgotten the ponies !" 

" Tell me what you came to say. Captain 



NATURE AND ART. 187 

Bligh," said Lady Mitford. " I am quite strong 
now ;" and she looked so. 

" Well, the truth is, Lady Mitford, things have 
gone too far, and Sir Charles is conscious of the 
fact. I would not have done such a thing for any 
one in the world but him. He and I have always 
been good friends, though he has done many tilings 
I could hardly stand. You mustn't mind my not 
being polished, . I don't mean to be rude ; but I 
have such mipleasant things to say, that, by Jove, 
I can't manage to say them pleasantly !" He 
flomidered very much in his speech, and fidgeted 
distractingly ; but she sat quite still and listened 
to him. At last he blurted out desperately, " The 
truth is, that she-devil Laura Hammond has driven 
him mad ! She has snubbed liim, and tried to 
throw him over, and gone off to Baden without 
letting him know." 

" Without letting him know ! Then they are 
not gone together? I thank God!" said Georgie 
emphatically. 

" Gone together! No ; she never would be such 
a fool as that, whatever he might be. I beg your 



188 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

pardon, Lady Mitford. She has gone, as he be- 
lieves, with the intention of tlirowing him off 
entirely, and trying it on with Tchernigow, the 
Russian, you know; and Mitford would not stand 
it, and he has gone. He heard something last 
night which exasj^erated him, and he came to my 
rooms this morning . only a small portmanteau 
with him . and told me he was going. He told 
me to come down here, and send Banks off to- 
night with his things. I said every thing I could 
think of, but it was no use, . he was simply des- 
perate. Then, Lady Mitford" . and here Cap- 
tain Bligli lowered his voice, and spoke with 
great gentleness . " then I asked him if he re- 
membered the consequences of this to you,'''' 

" To me. Captain Bligh ! What worse conse- 
quences can come to me than have come al- 
ready?" 

^^ Many, Lady Mitford, and much worse. 
You cannot live any longer under the same roof 
with Sir Charles ; the scandal is too open and too 
great. He will disgrace himself, and make him- 
self ridiculous at Baden, if much more serious 



NATURE AND ART. 189 

mischief does not ensue ; and you must keep aloof 
from the scandal." 

" I am as much aloof from it as I can be here, 
I think, Captain Bligh," said poor Georgie; " and 
I Avill not leave my husband's house until he bids 
me. He may find that his going to Baden is use- 
less ; if she is resolved to discard him, she will do 
so as resolutely and as effectually there as here. 
No, Captain Bligh ; this is my home, and here I 
will remain until I see the end of this matter. I 
will not forsake him, as he has forsaken me, at the 
beginning of it ; I will not heap additional dis- 
grace upon him, and give this story additional 
pubhcit)^, by leaving his house, miless he has told 
me, through you, to do so." 

^No, no, Lady Mitford," said Bligh; "he 
has not done that. He begged of me to come to 
you, and tell you that he had gone. He would 
not try to deceive you, he said ; if he could induce 
her to allow him to remain with her, he would, and 
never retm-n to England. Yes, indeed, . so far 
had his madness driven him : but at all events he 
would never ask you to see him again ; and what- 



190 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET, 

ever arrangements you might choose to make, he 
would be quite prepared to carry into effect. He 
said he supposed you would not remain here." 

" He was mistaken," she said, very quietly 
and sadly ; "I will remain here. Tell me what 
more passed between you, Caj^tain Bligh." 

" Indeed, not much, dear Lady Mitford. He 
was di'eadfiilly excited and wretched, and looked 
fearfully ill, . he had been drinking deeply last 
night, I am sure, . and his manner was agitated 
and incoherent. He talked of his persecutions 
and his miseries, as every man who has the best 
blessings of life at his command and throws them 
away does talk ; and his lamentations about this 
cursed infatuation of his were mixed up with self- 
reproaches on your account, and imprecations on 
the men who have tabooed liim, and especially be- 
cause he was rejected at the Maecenas." 

" Poor Charles !" said Lady Mitford musingly ; 
" all the enemies he has ever had could have done 
him little harm, had he not doubled in his own per- 
son the strength of his enemies to injure him. He 
began ill ; and when he made an effort to do well, 



NATURE AND ART. 191 

some gloomy recollection, some haunting fear, al- 
ways seemed to keep him back. There was some 
evil power over him, Captain Bligh, before this 
woman laid her spells upon him . a power which 
made him moody and wretched and reckless* 
Tliis was a subject upon which it was impos- 
sible for me to speak to him ; and I accounted for 
it easily enough, and I have no doubt with toler- 
able correctness.- You know, and I know, that 
the eai'ly years of Sir Charles's life were full of 
dark days and questionable associations. He was 
unfortunate at least as much as guilty ; and not 
the smallest of the misfortmies of such a career is 
the power it gives to miscreants of every kind to 
embitter one's futui-e and tarnish one's fame, to 
blight the hopes and the effoi'ts with which one en- 
deavours to rise above the mud-deposit of folHes 
and sins repented and abandoned. There has 
never been a case, I am sure, in which a man who 
had gone extensively wrong, and who then tried 
to go right, and got a good chance of doing it^ 
was not pursued and persecuted by harpies of the 
old brood, whose talons perpetually branded him^ 



192 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

and whose inexorable pursuit kept him constantly 
depressed and miserable. Then he will be driven 
to excitement, to dissipation, to any thing which 
will enable him to forget the torture ; but this 
very necessity deprives all his efforts of vigour, 
and renders him hopeless of success. I am con- 
fident that some such merciless o-rindino; misery 
lay hidden in Sir Charles's life. I saw it veiy 
shortly after we came to town ; and I had rea- 
son to suspect that he met with some annoy- 
ance of the same kind down at Redmoor. But 
he never told me, and there is no good in our 
speculating upon any matter of this kind. I 
can hardly consider myself entitled now to in- 
quire into any affair of his. Did he give you 
any instructions. Captain Bligh ? did he give you 
any address ?" 

" No," replied the good-natured Captain, quite 
saddened and distressed to witness her misery, and 
moved at the same time to great simple admira- 
tion by her composure and finnness, which the 
Captain denominated "pluck." " Ho did not say 
many words to me. He told me to come here and 



NATURE AND ART. 193 

tell you what I have told you, and he said he 
would write. Let me leave you now, dear Lady 
Mitford, and let me retm'n to-morrow and take 
your commands." 

"Thank you," she said simply; and then he 
left her ; and perhaps in the whole course of his 
chequered existence, and among his numerous and 
varied experiences, he had never felt so much pure 
and deep respect for any woman as for the deserted 
wife to whom he had had to disclose the full mea- 
sure of her sorrow. 

The days passed, and no tidings of Sir Charles 
Mitford came. Georgie had seen Banks, and 
had iriven him some directions relative to the 
things which Sir Charles required him to take to 
Baden, in an unconcerned and dignified manner, 
which had impressed that functionary as much as 
her conduct of the previous day had affected Cap- 
tain Bligh. 

" She's a deal too good for Mitford, and al- 
ways was, even before he took to brandy and that 
ere Laurer 'Ammond," soliloquised Mr. Banks ; 
" and I hope,'for my part, he'll never come back." 

VOL. III. ^ 



194 RUNKTKG THE GAUNTLET. 

Mr. Banks left town early in the morning of 
the day which succeeded the interview between 
Lady Mitford and Captain Bligh, and Georgie 
remained in her own rooms the entire day. An 
agitated restlessness was upon her, a feehng of 
suspense and apprehension , which deprived her 
of the power of thinking consecutively, and dis- 
tracted her sorrow by changing its character. 
She expected to see Captain Bligh, and in her 
confused state of mind she had forgotten to say 
that no other visitors were to be admitted. At 
tlu'ee in the afternoon, as she was sitting in her 
boudoir, striving, quite ineffectually, to fix her 
attention on some piece of feminine industry, a 
servant announced, , 

" Miss Gillespie." 

Lady Mitford heard the name with mibomided 
astonishment. At first she associated no idea what- 
ever with it ; she felt certain she had never known 
any one so designated. But before the beai'er of 
the name entered the room, she had remembered 
the handsome yomig woman whose suj^erb sing- 
ing and sudden disappearance had occasioned so 



NATURE AND ART. 195 

much wonder and discussion at Eedmoor. The 
association of ideas was not pleasant ; and it was 
with a heightened coloui', and something in her 
manner different from its customary graceful 
sweetness, that she rose to receive her unlooked- 
for visitor. 

Miss Gillespie was looking very handsome ; 
and the agitation under which she was evidently 
labom'ing had not the usual effect of destroying 
ease and gracefulness. She had always been quiet, 
and to a certain extent ladylike in her manners. 
Even in the Lizzie-Ponsford days she had not 
degenerated into the coarseness which might have 
been suj^posed to be an inevitable attendant or 
result of such a career. Tlie ease and rapidity 
with which she had mastered the high-comedy 
style of performance, the finish of her acting, and 
the perfect appreciation of the refinement and re- 
pose which mark the demeanour of the true grande 
dame, afforded ample proof of Miss Gillespie's tact 
and readiness. She had needed only the acces- 
sories, and now she had procured them ; and as 
she walked slowly and gracefidly up to the spot 



196 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

where Lady Mitforcl stood to receive lier, lier ricli 
and elegant but studiously-simple dress, lier cour- 
teous gesture of salutation, and her nicely-modu- 
lated voice were all perfect. 

" I daresay you have forgotten me, Lady Mit- 
ford," said she, " though you were very kind 
indeed to me when I accompanied my employers 
to your house at Kedmoor ; and your kindness 
made my position very different from what it had 
ever been before under similar circumstances." 

" Pray be seated. Miss Gillespie," said Lady 
Mitford, softened by her respectful and graceful 
manner; " I am very glad to know that you have 
any pleasant recollections of your visit at Red- 
moor." 

" But you are at a loss to account for my 
seeking you here. Lady Mitford, and ventm-ing 
to call upon you without having first asked and 
obtained your permission." 

Georffie's nature was so truthful that even tlie 

o 

little every -day conventional matter-of-course 
falsehoods of society refused to come trippingly 
from her tongue. She was surprised at Miss 



NATUKE AND ART. 197 

Gillespie's visit, and she had let it appear that 
she was. 

" If I am at a loss to account for your visit," 
she said, in her own sweet persuasive manner, 
" do not therefore suppose that it is not agreeable 
to me. I am very glad to see you. Miss Gillespie ; 
and I hope it was not any unhappy circumstance 
which obliged you to leave Kedmoor so abruptly 
at that time." 

'' One of the objects of my visit to you to-day. 
Lady Mitford, is to explain my conduct on that 
occasion. I am sure you will be infinitely sur- 
prised to learn that you were nearly, though un- 
consciously, concerned in it." 

" I, Miss Gillespie ! Surely I had not done 
any thing . nothing had occurred at Redmoor . " 

"No, no; you mistake my meaning, which, 
indeed, I must explain, if you will permit me to 
do so, by telling you a long story. Have I your 
permission. Lady Mitford ?" 

Georgie's astonishment was increasing. She 
marked the earnest gaze her strange visitor fixed 
upon her. She saw how her face softened and 



198 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

glowed as she looked at her. She kiiew that this 
young woman had a kindly feeling towards her; 
and she was so lonely, so deserted, that she felt 
gratefnl for that, though the person who bestowed 
it upon her was only a humble governess. She 
stretched cut her hand by a sudden impulse, and 
Miss Gillespie caught and Idssed it with intense 
fervour. 

" You shall stay with me as long as you please, 
and tell me all your story, Miss Gillespie. I have 
done nothing to deserve the interest I see you feel 
in me ; but I thank you for it." 

Her visitor did not immediately reply: she 
sat looking at Georgie's face, more beautiful in its 
expression of grief and courage than when it was 
at its brightest, as though she were learning the 
features by heart. Lady Mitford blushed a little 
under the scrutiny, and smiled, as she said : 

" You look at me very earnestly. Miss Gil- 
lespie. What is there in my face to fix youi' 
attention ?" 

" There is every thing that I once did not be- 
lieve in, while I longed to see it. Tliere is beauty, 



NATURE AND ART. 190 

Lady Mitford . well, I have seen enough of that ; 
but there is truth and gentleness, sweet self-for- 
getfuhiess, and an impulse of kindness to every 
thino^ that lives and feels and can suffer. The 
first time I saw that face I thought of the common 
saying about the face of an angel; but I soon 
ceased to think it was like that. Angels are in 
heaven, where their sinless and sorrowless sphere 
lies. Such women as you are on earth, to teach 
those who, standing afar off, see them, to hope, and 
believe, and take comfort, because they exist and 
have their part in the same troubled world with 
themselves, but always bringing the image and the 
ideal of a better nearer, and making it real." 

Her voice trembled, and tears stood in her 
eyes. Georgie wondered more and more. 

" When I have told yon my story, Lady Mit- 
ford," she went on, ^^ you will be able to under- 
stand in a degree . you never could quite compre- 
hend it . the effect that such a woman as you pro- 
duces upon such a woman as I ; for I studied you 
more closely than you could have suspected in 
that brief time at liedmoor ; and I hold a clue to 



200 KUNKING THE GAUNTLET. 

your history^ of whose existence you were igno- 
rant." 

" Do not tell me any thing that it will pain 
you to repeat, Miss Gillespie," said Georgie, see- 
ing that she hesitated and changed colour. 

'^ In that case I should tell you nothing, Lady 
Mitford ; for there is little in my life that has 
not been painful. I daresay you would find it dif- 
ficult to realise, if I could put it before you in the 
plainest words ; and I am sure, even if you did 
realise it, you would judge it mercifully . you 
would remember the difficulties and the dano-ers 
of such an existence, and suffer them to have their 
weight as against its sins and sorrows. You know 
what it is to be motherless, Lady Mitford; but 
yours was a guarded childhood, hedged about with 
pious care and fatherly love, . they told me all 
about you down at Redmoor. Mine was a mother- 
less childhood ; and my father was a thief, and 
the companion of thieves. This is the simple 
English of the matter. You would not mider- 
stand the refinements and distinctions by which 
the dishonest classes describe their different ranks 



NATURE AND ART. 201 

in the army of tliieves ; you coiilcl not compre- 
hend the scenes and the influences among which 
my childhood was passed ; and I will not try to 
explain them, because they have no bearing upon 
what it concerns you to hear." 

She had rested her arm upon a table beside 
her chair, and supported her head on her hand. 

" My wretched childhood had passed by, and 
my more wretched girlhood had reached its prime, 
when I was brought in contact with Sir Charles 
Mitford." 

Georgie recoiled, turned very red, and uttered 
an exclamation. 

'^ I was associated at that time with some men 
who made their livelihood in a number of dishonest 
ways ; and one of them had in his possession a 
document, by means of which he had maintained 
a hold over Mitford, then a young man of small 
means and very indirect expectations. The man I 
speak of died, and accident placed me in possession 
of the document. It was a forged bill !" 

Lady Mitford covered her face with her hands ; 
and as Miss Gillespie continued, the slow tears 



202 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

"began to force their way through the slender 
fingers. 

'^ Others knew of the existence of this bill, 
Lady Mitford, and I have no doubt whatever that 
they traded upon their knowledge. Every eifort, 
direct and indirect, was made to get the bill out of 
my possession ; but I resolved to keep it, and every 
eifort failed. Perhaps I might have used it for 
my own purposes against Sir Charles some day, if 
I had never seen or known you. It is certain that 
I should have given it to him, and set him free for 
ever from an apprehension which constantly beset 
and tortured him, had I not known how unwor- 
thily he was treating you, how completely all the 
hard lessons of his life of poverty and shifts had 
failed to con'ect his low instincts and his utter un- 
trustworthiness. Don't cry, dear Lady Mitford, . 
your tears pain me keenly; I must draw them 
forth a little while, and then I trust to dry them. 

" I saw Sir Charles when he first visited Mrs. 
Hammond at Torquay. By that time I had drifted 
to land somehow, and I had contrived to get my 
wandering feet within the confines of respectability. 



2?ATUEE AXD ART. 203 

I was quiet, even liappy, in Mrs. Hammond's em- 
ployment, though I soon perceived her to be the 
most worthless of her sex. That, however, trou- 
bled me little ; and when Sir Charles came to the 
house and recognised me, and I said a few words 
to him which were not pleasant to hear, and I 
saw that he was in the toils, as he had so often 
been before, I did not much care either. I dis- 
liked and despised him, and I liked to think of the 
hidden weapon in my possession, and to picture 
his amazement if he knew that not only was I 
Lizzie Ponsford, . acquainted with all his doings 
and all his disreputable associates, . but that I actu- 
ally held in my possession the document for wliich 
he would have given so large a price, and which 
w^ould have ruined him at any moment. I liked to 
laiow that my presence made him uncomfortable, 
and I suffered him to experience that discomfort 
to the fullest extent. 

" You are shocked. Lady Mitford; such feelings 
are incomprehensible to you ; but I tell you simply 
and plainly that they were mine, because I am 
coming to the portion of my story which concerns 



204 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

you. I went to Redmoor with Mrs. Hammond, 
and on the first evening of our visit I saw that you 
were suspicious and uneasy. I saw you, Lady 
Mitford ; I observed you closely, and I loved you ; 
not so much as I did afterwards, when every day 
brought some gift, some grace, some beauty of 
your mind and disposition freshly before me ; not 
so much as I did when your sweet gentleness, your 
kindly courtesy, your unfailing consideration filled 
me with sentiments which I had never known be- 
fore, when for the first time I learned what it was 
to be cared for as an individual. Do you remem- 
ber the day you took me to your dressing-room, 
Lady Mitford, and lent me some of your favourite 
books, and talked with me of what kind of reading 
I liked, and showed an interest in me, as if I had 
been a lady and one of your most considered 
guests ? No, you do not remember it, but I do. 
Then I determined to use the power I had over 
him on your behalf. I knew it would not avail 
long ; I knew if even he were rescued from her, he 
never could realise your hopes, never could be 
worthy of you ; but at least I could control him for 



NATURE AND ART. 205 

the time. I tried, and succeeded. I threatene'fl 
him with exposure if he did not desist. I cannot 
tell you exactly the course of subsequent events, . 
I have never been able to make that out to my 
satisfaction ; but I have a theory, which I think is 
a right one. A few days after I had the interview 
I have mentioned with Sir Charles, a man appeared 
who had been mixed up in many of the transactions 
of the time past to which I had been a party. He 
met me, and told me a story which I did not be- 
lieve, but which altered my position completely. 
He had come down to get me away ; and whether 
he came as Sir Charles's employd or on his own 
account, I have never been certain. I believe the 
latter to be the more likely. He had two alterna- 
tives at liis command : he might expose me if I 
refused to leave Redmoor quietly, and destroy all 
my hopes of attaining respectability in future, or 
he might take the bill from me by force or fi-aud, 
if I yielded to his tin-eats. I did neither ; I tem- 
porised ; I made an appointment with him for t^\o 
o'clock on the following day, and I left Redmoor, 
without clue by' which I coidd be tracked, at day- 



206 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

break. Let who would be the author of Mr. Effing- 
ham's proceeding (he called himself Effingham), I 
had balked their scheme, and I turned my back on 
Redmoor with one bitter pang of regret mingled 
with my triumph. I should see your face, Lady 
Mitford, no more, and I could no longer interfere 
to prevent the deadly wrong which was being done 
by your faithless husband and your false friend ! 

^' All such regrets were, however, utterly vain. 
The imminent risk of exposm-e left me no choice. 
At least I would punish Sir Charles so far : he 
should never have the bill . he should never have 
the satisfaction of feeling that that ghost was laid. 
So I left the only place in which I had ever tasted 
happiness, and set my face to the hard world again. 
But before I stole away from your house that morn- 
ing, I wrote a line to Colonel Alsager, and told 
him to take up the watch I had been obliged to 
relinquish. You are astonished. Lady Mitford; 
and well you may be. I had never exchanged 
more than a dozen sentences with Colonel Alsager : 
but I knew that the interest he felt in you was in 
no way inferior to mine; while his opportunities 



NATURE AND AKT. 207 

of exhibiting it were infinitel}^ greater, and so I 
wTote to liim." 

" What did you do, Miss Gillespie, when you 
left Redmoor ? I fear you had very little money. 
Forgive me if I offend you, but I gathered that 
from something Mrs. Hammond said." 

'' You are right, Lady Mitford ; and it is like 
you to think of a need which you have never 
known. I had very little money; but I had a 
friend who put me in the way of earning some . 
how, I will tell you when I have finished the 
portion of my story in which you are interested." 

The gentle look of forbearance and compassion 
in Georgie's face seemed to touch Miss Gillespie 
very deeply. Once more she took her hand and 
kissed it. Then she continued : 

^^ I went to America, and for a long time I 
heard nothing of you, though I longed most 
ardently to do so. The echoes of the great 
world did not reach me in the distant sphere of 
my toil, and I longed to know how the onh' 
person with Avliom I had ever felt true human 
sympathy was weai'ing through her da}-. Tliis 



208 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

may seem to you an unnatural and overstrained 
sentiment; and so it would be in the mind of any 
one who had any natural ties, or who was less 
desolate than I; but you must be able to com- 
prehend my life before you could understand these 
inconsistencies. Let me leave this, then, unex- 
jjlained, and tell you that I came back to England, 
and that I have heard all that has befallen you 
since I went away. I have never felt any thing 
that has happened to myself in my vagabond life so 
much. Incidents I heard, but no one could tell 
me any thing of you individually, . of how you 
were bearing your trials, of what face you showed 
the world, which would coldly criticise you . a 
creature as far beyond its compreliension as any 
angel in the heaven far beyond their sphere." 

8he spoke with intense feeling, and her fine 
face glowed with the depth of her sympathy and 
admiration. 

" At last I caught sight of Colonel Alsager." 

Georgie blushed, but her visitor did not ap- 
pear to observe her emotion. 

" I knew he could tell me what I thirsted to 



NATURE AND ART. 209 

know, and I went to lils hotel on the following 
day, but failed to see him ; and when I sent a 
note, asking him to let me speak a few words 
with him, it was returned. Colonel Alsager had 
left town. I learned that his father was dead, and 
he, of course, a baronet now ; but I heard nothing 
further . no one could tell me if his absence were 
likely to be prolonged. I had the strongest, the 
most insatiable desire to see you, Lady Mitford. 
I wanted to see the face that I had never for- 
gotten, and find it as beautiful, as good as ever." 

Georgie smiled sadly. "Ah, Miss Gillespie, 
I have suffered much, and am greatly changed." 

" Only for the better," she said eagerly; " only 
for the better. Every line in your face is lighted 
up with spiritual light now. When I saw it last, 
the girlish softness had not left the features and 
given the expression fair play," 

Her enthusiasm . her feehng . were so real, 

and there was such a strong dash of the artist in 

her remarks, that it would have been impossible 

to resent them. Lady Mitford once more smiled 

sadly. 

VOL. III. p 



210 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

" I knew there was no chance that I should 
see you in any jouMic place . yom- deep mourning 
precluded that possibility . and so I resolved to 
come here and present myself boldly before you. 
In the ordinary sense of society, between you and 
me there is a gulf fixed; but I thought your 
gentleness would span it. It has done so. You 
have permitted me to speak to you face to face ; 
you have gratified the wish which another might 
have resented as mere insolent curiosity." 

^^Why do you speak thus, Miss Gillespie? 
Why should there be a gulf between you and me ? 
I am not aware of any reason. I do not despise 
you because you are a governess, because you use 
the talents and the education you possess to earn an 
honourable livelihood. Why do you speak thus ?" 

Miss Gillespie looked at her, and an expression 
of deep suffering crossed her face. 

" I will explain my meaning presently," she 
said ; '^ but now I have something else to say. 
Is it true that Sir Charles Mitford has followed 
this woman to Baden ? They say so at the clubs, 
and I heard it this morning. Pardon me, and 



NATURE AND ART. 211 

tell me. I don't ask tlie question for my own 
sake, or out of idle curiosity. I have a serious, 
a most serious meaning." 

" Yes, it is too true," said Lady Mitford. 

" Then listen. He must be brought back : he 
is only gone to mortification and ridicule. I know 
a great many queer people, and I hear a great 
many strange things ; and I heard this to-day : 
Mrs. Hammond is going to marry the Eussian 
Prince Tchernigow, a man who is a violent, jeal- 
ous, brutal .\^Tetch, . I know all about him, . a 
man whose cruelty and vindictiveness are not to 
be sm'passed : her punishment is in safe hands. 
Dear Lady Mitford, I understand that look. You 
don't wish her to be punished, I am sure . quite 
sm'e of that ; but if she marries Tchernigow, she 
must be. But it is not w^ith that ^ve are con- 
cerned: it is to bring him home . to rescue him 
from danger and disgrace and ridicule, for your 
sake ; and you can do it . you, and you only." 

Georgie was breathless with astonishment. 
Miss Gillespie rose and caught her by both hands. 
Then she went on speaking with great rapidity : 



212 TvUKNIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

"Yes, I say you can do it. Write to liim 
b-day . now, this very hour . and tell him Lizzie 
Ponsford has been with you; that she holds the 
bill which he employed that poor wretch Effing- 
ham to get for him ; that Effingham cheated him 
from first to last . from the time of the Albatross 
till the day he went to the bottom of the sea 
with the Pocahontas. Tell him he shall have 
it placed in his hands on the day he returns to 
London. Your letter will reach him when he has 
learned the faithlessness of the woman for whom 
he has betrayed you. Do you not think it will 
touch him, written as you will write it, . with the 
gentleness, the pity, the pardon it will convey? 
At the moment of his greatest exasperation, in the 
full tide of his bitterness, a way of escape from 
one constant, overhanging, torturing cause of un- 
easiness will be removed ; and by whose hand ? 
Yours !" 

She paused, breathless in her excitement, and 
took from her bosom a paper, which she laid on 
the table before Lady Mitford, who looked at it 
pale and trembling. 



NATURE AND ART. 213 

" You will do as I say, dear Lady Mitford . 
you will do it for liis sake, and 3'our own, and for 
mine? Let me have the satisfaction of knowing 
that I have been able to do this service for you 
. the only service I haA'e ever done any one ; 
the only one, I fear, I have ever wished to 
do." 

" Oh, no, don't say that," said Lady Mitford. 
" You misjudge yourself; I am sure you do, dear 
Miss Gillespie, or why should you have felt so 
much for me, and done me such a service ? Do 
not write hard things against yourself. I will do 
this . it may succeed ; but whether it succeeds or 
not, I shall be ever grateful to you, ever bless you 
^r this act; and you will let me serv^e you in 
turn . you will tell me your wishes, and let me 
tiy to carry them out. You said you would tell 
me how you have been engaged since you left 
Redmoor." 

" Thank you, dear Lady Mitford," said Miss 
Gillespie, in a low deep tone ; " but you cannot 
serve me. I told you there was a gidf fixed be- 
tween you, the patrician lady, and me. I am an 



214 EUKNING THE GAUNTLET. 

actress, and my stage-name is Constance Green- 
wood." 

Ladj Mitford wrote the letter to Sir Charles, 
as her strange visitor had counselled her to do. 
She suffered much in writing it ; she hoped much 
from its effect. Time rolled over, and she knew 
that Sir Charles must have received the letter ; 
then she comited the days which must elapse 
before the answer could arrive, and, arming her- 
self with patience, she waited. 



CHAPTER YII. 

AMONG THE SPRINGS. 

It was the month of September, and the little 
town of Baden was full. It is now tlie big town 
of Baden, and is still, during its season, fiUed to 
overflowing ; but the company is by no means so 
select, so pleasant, so agreeable as it used to be. 
The vor-eisenbalin Baden was as superior to the 
present excursionists' resort as was the ante-rail- 
way Ascot Meeting to what now is merely a suc- 
cession of Derby-days in Bucks. Tlien, when 
you posted in from Strasbourg, or arrived in the 
dlwagen from deadly-Hvely Carlsruhe, you found 
Mr. Rheinboldt, the landlord of the Badischer Hof, 
attended by the stoutest, the best-tempered, and 
the stupidest even of German porters, coming for- 
ward to meet you with the pleasantest of greet- 
ings. You had ^Titten on beforehand if you were 



216 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

a wise man, and your old room was ready . one of 
that little row of snug dormitories set apart for 
bachelors, and looking on to the trim garden. 
You had a wash, with more water than you had 
met with since you left home (they were beginning 
to understand the Enghsh mania for soap-and- 
water at the Badischer Hof even so long ago), and 
you made your toilette and came down to the five- 
o'clock table-criiote, where you fomid most of the 
people who had been there the previous season, 
and many of their friends whom they had induced 
to come. Most of the people knew each other or 
of each other, and there Avas a sociability' among 
them which the railway has utterly anniliilated. 
Now London sends her bagmen and Paris her 
lorettes; but in those days, if " om- Mr. Johnson" 
got as far as Parry by way of Cally or Belong, he 
was looked upon as an intrepid voyager, while 
very few Parisian ladies, save those of the 
best class, came into the Grand Duke's tei'ri- 
tory. 

It was hot in England in that September, but 
it was hotter at Baden. With the earliest da\Aii 



AilONG THE SPEINGS. 217 

came tliick vapours rolling down from tlie Black 
Forest, encompassing tlie little town with a white 
and misty shroud, wliich invariably presaged a 
sultry day, and invariably kept its promise. All 
day long the big red-faced sun glared down upon 
the denizens of the pleasantest corner of Vanity 
Fair ; glared in the early morning upon the water- 
drinkers sipping the nauseous flmd in the thick 
and heavy glass tumblers, and tendering their 
Ivi'eutzers to the attendant maidens at the Brim- 
nen ; glared upon them as they took the pre- 
scribed constitutional walk, and returned to the 
hotel to breakfast ; glared upon the fevered gam- 
blers, who, with last night's excitement only half 
slept off, with bleared eyes and shaking hands 
and parched throats, took their places round the 
gaming-tables as the clock struck noon, and eyed 
the stohd- faced croupiers as intently as though 
the chances of the game were to be gleaned from 
a perusal of their fishy eyes or pursed moutlis. 
The revellers who were starting off for picnics 
to the Black Forest, or excursions to the Favour- 
ite or Eberstein-Scliloss, glanced up with terror 



218 r.UNNIXG THE GAUisTLET. 

at the scorching red ball in the sky, and bade 
courteous Mr. Rheinboldt, the landlord of the 
Badischer Hof, to see that plenty of ice ^yas 
packed with the sparkling Moselle, and to let 
Karl and Fritz take care that an unlimited supply 
of umbrellas was placed in the carriage. Tlie 
Englishmen, whom M. Benazet, the proprietor 
of the gaming-tables, grateful for their patronage, 
had provided with shooting, or who had received 
invitations to the triehjagd of some neighbouring 
landowner, looked with comic wonder, not un- 
mixed with horror, at the green jerkins, fantastic 
game-bags, couteaux de chasse, or hmiting-knives 
(worn in the belt), and general appearance of 
their foreign friends ; and then when lunch-time 
arrived, and they saw each German eating his 
own sausage and drinking fi'om his own particular 
flask, which he never dreamed of passing, they 
recollected with dismay the luncheons at similar 
parties in England, the snowy cloth laid mider 
the shade of the hedge, the luscious game-pie, tlie 
cooling claret-cup, the glancmg eyes and natty 
ankles of those who had accompanied the luncheon. 



AMONG THE SPRINGS. 219 

Hot ! It was no word for it. It was a blazing, 
tearing, drying, baking, scorching heat, and it 
was hotter at Baden than any where else. 

So they said at least, and as they were from 
almost every part of the civilised world, they 
ought to have known. There were English 
people, swells, peers and peeresses, bankers and 
bankeresses, a neat little legal set, . Sir Nisey 
and Lady Prions, Mr. Tocsin, Q.C., Mr. Serjeant 
Stentor, and some of the jmiior members of the 
bar, . a select assortment of the Stock-Exchange, 
and some eligible young men from the West-end 
government-offices. There were joyous Russians, 
whose names all ended in "vitch" and ^^gorod," 
and were otherwise utterly unpronounceable, who 
spoke all Em'opean languages with equal fluency 
and facility, and who put down rouleaux of napo- 
leons on the roulette -table where other people 
staked thalers or florins. There were a few 
Frenchmen and French ladies ; here was an 
Austrian gross-herzog or grand-duke, there some 
Prussian cavalry subalterns who could not play 
at the table because they spent the half-crown of 



220 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

tlieir daily allowance in roast veal, Bairisch beer, 
and a horrible compound called "grogs an rhum," 
which they drank at night, " after," as they said 
to themselves, "the English fashion."' 

It had been hotter than ever during the day, 
but the day was happily past and over, and the 
moon was streaming on tlie broad gravelled Platz 
in front of the Gonversations-haus, and the band, 
stationed in the little oil-lamp-illumined kiosk, 
were rattling away at Strauss's waltzes and 
Labitskey's galops. The gamblers were already 
thronging the roulette and trente-et-quarante tables ; 
and of the non-gamblers all such as had ladies 
with them were promenading and listening to 
the music, while the others were seated, drinking 
and smoking. It was a splendid evening; the 
diners at the late tables-cVhote were wending their 
way from their hotels to the promenade; the 
consumers of the German mittagsessen were listen- 
ing to the band in delicious anticipation of the 
Teh-hraten and the haring-salad and the hok-hier, or 
the Ahrbleichart, at which another half-hour would 
see them hard at work ; thq clamourino: for coffee 



AMONG THE SPEIXGS. 221 

was incessant, and the liead-waiter, Joseph, who 
was so like BoufFe, was ahnost driven out of 
his wits by the Babel of voices. They chattered, 
those tall occupants of the little wooden round- 
tables . how they chattered ! Tliey turned round 
and stared at the promenaders, and made their 
comments on them after they had passed. They 
had something to say, some remark, either com- 
plimentary or disparaging, to make upon all the 
ladies. But there was only one man who seemed 
to attract any special attention, and that was the 
Russian Prince Tchernigow. 

A man of middle height, with brown-black 
hair, a perfectly bloodless complexion, stern deeply 
smiken eyes, a stiff moustache bristling over a 
determined mouth. A man with small hands 
and feet, and apparently but little muscular 
development, but strong, brave, and vindictive. 
A man whose face Lavater might have studied 
for months without getting beyond the merest 
rudiments of his science . impassive, unaltering, 
statuesque. He never played but with rouleaux 
of napoleons . twenty in a rouleau ; and though 



222 KUNXIXG THE GAUNTLET. 

the space in front of him was shining TN-ith gold 
at one moment, or laid bare by the sweeping 
rake of the croupier, . winning or losing, his ex- 
IDression would not change for an instant. He had 
been to Baden for two or three seasons running, 
and was beginning to be looked upon as an 
habitue; the croupiers acknowledged his taking 
his seat, intending to do battle, by a slight grave 
bow; he had broken the bank more than once, 
and was a lion among the visitors, and notably 
amongst the English. Tchernigow's horses and 
carriages, his bold play, his good shooting, the 
wonderful way in which he spoke our language, 
his love of solitude, his taciturnity, his singular 
'physique^ were all freely discussed at the late 
tables-cVhote of hotels at which the prince was 
not staying. His reputation of beau joiieur caused 
him to be followed as soon as he was seen going 
into the rooms, and his play was watched, and 
humbly imitated by scores. He seldom attended 
the balls, and very rarely danced, though he 
valsed to perfection ; and all the women in the 
room were eager for his selection. His appear- 



AMONG THE SrRTXGS. 223 

ance on the promenade always excited attention, 
but he never irave the smallest sio^n of havino- 
observed it. 

Among those who looked up as Prince Tcher- 
nigow passed was Lord Dollamore, who was 
seated at one of the tables, with no companion 
save his invariable one . his stick. Dollamore 
generally came to Baden every year. The place 
amused him ; it was a grand field for the display 
of the worst passions of human nature, . a study 
which always afforded him infinite delight. He 
never iilayed, but he was constantly hovering 
romid the tables ; and there was scarcely an in- 
cident which happened in the seething crowd, 
scarcely a change which swept across the faces 
of the leading actors, that passed unnoticed by 
him. He did not dance; he would have been 
prevented by his lameness from indulging in such 
pastime, even had his taste impelled him to it ; 
but he was a constant attendant at the balls which 
M. Benazet provided for the amusement of his pa- 
trons ; and looking on at the actual life before him 
as he might have looked on the mimic life of a 



224 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

theatrical representation, he had innumerable con- 
ferences with his stick on all he saw and heard, 
and on the arguments which he deduced there- 
from. He immensely enjoyed being seated, as he 
was then, in the calm autumnal moonlit evening, 
with a cup of excellent coffee by his side, a cigar 
in his mouth, and the ever-shifting panorama of 
human faces passing before him. 

" Tliat Tchernigow is really delicious !" he 
said to himself . or to his stick . as he looked after 
the Russian, and marked the excitement which he 
created; ^^ there's a savage insolence about him 
which is positively refreshing in these days of 
bowing and scraping and preposterous politeness. 
How they chatter, and gape, and nudge each other 
with their elbows about him ! and what a suj^reme 
indifference he affects to it all ! Affects ? Yes, 
mon prince, it is accepted as the real thing by 
these good people, but we are not to be taken in 
by veneer, no2is autres ! It would require a very 
small scratch indeed to pick off the Petersburg- 
cum-Paris polish, and to arrive at the genuine 
Calmuck substratum. Only to look at you to tell 



AMONG THE SPRINGS. 225 

that Nature's handwriting never lies ; and if ever 
there were a more delightfully truculent, ruffianly, 
bloodthirsty savage than youi'self, mon prince, I 
am very much out in my ideas. God help the 
woman on whom you ever get a legitimate hold ! 
Ah, and that reminds me . ^what has become of 
the widow? There is no doubt that Tchernigow 
was badly hit in London. The only man received 
at her house, the only man permitted to assuage 
her grief, to wipe away those tears which doubt- 
less flowed so constantly for poor Percy Ham- 
mond I What an audacious little de\dl it is ! How 
pluckily she fought that business of guardian- 
ship to the child; and how gracefally she retired 
from the contest when she saw that she had no 
chance, and that defeat was inevitable ! She's the 
cleverest woman, in a certain way, that I've ever 
met with; and I'd take my oath she's playing 
some long-headed, far-sighted game now, and that 
Tchernigow is the stake. No more flirtation and 
coquetry . for the present . les eaux sont basses; 
the widow is hard up, and means to recoup herself 
by a rich marriage. Tliat's why that infatuated 
VOL. III. g 



220 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

cad Mitford was snubbed so severely. I think 
she comprehends that Tchernigow will stand no 
nonsense, and as he is the parti at present in view, 
his will is law. She can't have given up the 
chase : but how on earth is she working it ?" 

A smart natty-looking little man in evening 
dress, with smoothly-brushed hair and elaborately- 
trimmed whiskers, faint pink coral studs, Httle 
jean-boots with glazed tips, irreproachable gloves, 
and a Gribus hat . a little man who looked as if he 
had just stepped out of a bandbox . stopped at 
Lord DoUamore's table, and with a bow half-de- 
ferential, half-familiar, glided into the vacant chair. 

^'Ah, how do you do, Mr. Aldermaston?" 
said Lord DoUamore, looking up, . " how do you 
do? and what is the latest news in this Liferno?" 

Every one who knew Mr. Aldermaston made 
a point of asking him the news, well knowing that 
they could apply to no better source for the latest 
gossip and tittle-tattle. Mr. Aldermaston nomi- 
nally was private secretary to Lord Waterhouse, 
the First Commissioner at the Liland-Irrioation 
Office, and he had been selected for that onerous 



AMONG THE SPRINGS. 227 

post for his distinguished personal appearance and. 
his obsequious toadyism. It was not a position 
involving a great deal of work, though any one 
noticing the regularity with which a large leather 
despatch-box, bearing a gilt cro^vn, and ^^ Charles 
Aldermaston, Esq., P.S., I.I.O.," was deposited for 
him by an official messenger in the hall of the Alfred 
Club, might have thought otherwise. The inferior 
portion of the duty was performed by a clerk, and. 
Mr. Aldermaston contented, himself with taking 
Lord Waterhouse's signature to a few papers occa- 
sionally, and recei\ang a select few of the most 
distinguished persons who wished for personal in- 
ter^^ews. This left him plenty of leism'e to pursue 
his more amusing occupation of purveyor of gossip 
and inventor and retailer of scandal. In these 
capacities he was without a rival. He always 
knew every tiling ; and if he did not know it, he 
invented it, which in some respects was better, as it 
enabled him to flavour his anecdotes with a piquancy 
which was perhaps wanting in the original. He 
found occupation for his ears and tongue in a 
variety of topics; the hea^'iest subjects were not 



228 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

excluded, the lightest obtained a place in his re- 
pertoire. The rumour of the approaching change 
in the premiership, while passing through the 
Aldermaston crucible, encountered the report of 
Mademoiselle de la Normandie's refusal to dance 
her pas seid before Mademoiselle Riviere; the 
report of Lady Propagand's conversion to Roman- 
ism did not prevent Mr. Aldermaston's giving pro- 
per additional publicity to the whisper of Miss 
de Toddler's flight with the milkman. 

There w^ere not many people who liked Mr. 
Aldermaston, though there were a great many 
who feared him; but Lord DoUamore was among 
the former class. "He is a hlagiieiiry^^ Dollamore 
used to say; " and a hlagueur is a detestable beast, 
but necessary to society ; and Aldermaston is cer- 
tainly clean. He knows how to behave himself, 
and Is In fjict an Ananias of polite society. Be- 
sides, he amuses me, and there are very few people 
in the world who amuse me." 

So Lord Dollamore always spoke to Mr. Alder- 
maston at the Club, and encouraged him to tell his 
anecdotes; and when he found him at Baden, looked 



AMONG THE SPKINGS. 229 

upon him as one of the resources of the place, . a 
purveyor of news infinitely fresher, more piquant, 
and more amusing than was to be fomid in the 
Aveek-old Times or the tln-ee-days-old Galignani^ 
wliich he fomid at Misses Marx's library. 

So he again repeated, " And what's the latest 
news in this Inferno, Mr. Aldermaston?" 

" Well, there's very little news here, my lord, . 
very little indeed ; except that yomig Lord Plaid- 
ington is gone . sent away tliis mornmg." 
" Sent away?" 

^^Yes; his mother, Lady Macabaw, wouldn't 
stand it any longer. Last night. Lord Plaidington 
took too much again, and began throwing the empty 
champagne-bottles out of the window of the Angle- 
terre ; so Lady Macabaw sent him off this morning 
with his tutor, the Eev. Sandford Merton, and 
they've gone to Strasburg, on the way to Italy." 

" Serve liim right, the young cub. I went 
away early last night . any heavy play late?" 

"Yes; a Frenchman whom no one had seen 
before won a hatful at roulette, and some EngHsh- 
man whom no one seemed to know backed him 



230 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

and stood in. They looked like breaking the bank 
at one time, but they didn't." 

" Was Tchemigow at the tables?" 

" No ; the Prince did not show up at all, . has 
not been there for the last three nights." 

" So much the worse for Benazet ; but what 
does it mean?" 

" Well, I've a notion about that that I wouldn't 
broach to any one but your lordship. I think I've 
found the clue to that story." 

'^ What story ? what clue ?" 

" Prince Tchernis^ow's sudden cessation from 
play. You know what a mania it was with him. 
It must have been something special to make him 
give it up." 

" And what is the something special?" 

^^ A woman." 

" Ah !" said Lord DoUamore, warming at 
once into interest; '' malheureux en jeUj lieureux 
en amour ^ . the converse of the ordinarily-received 
motto. Has Mademoiselle Feodor ai'rived from 
the Graiete ? or who is the siren that charms om- 
Prince from the tables ?" 



AMONG THE SPRINGS. 231 

'' Mademoiselle Feodor has not arrived, but 
some one else has. A much more dangerous per- 
son than Mademoiselle Feodor, and with much 
more lasting hopes in view." 

Lord DoUamore looked keenly at his com- 
panion, and said, " I begin to find the scent 
warming; but I make it a rule never to guess. 
Tell your storj, Mr. Aldermaston, please." 

" Well, you know. Lord Dollamore, I'm stay- 
ing at the Russie, and I've made myself so agree- 
able to" Malmedie, the landlord there, by little bits 
of civility, that he generally comes up to my room 
in the morning and lets me know all that is going 
on. He showed me a letter that he had about a 
week ago, written in French, saying that a lady 
wanted rooms reserved for herself and maid ; that 
she would not dine at the table -d'hote, being an 
invalid, and coming only for the benefit of the air 
and the springs, but should require dinner and all 
her meals served in her own rooms. The French 
of the letter was excellent, but the idea of retire- 
ment looked essentially English. I never knew a 
Frenchwoman, in however bad a state of health. 



232 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

who could resist the attractions of society; so, 
though I said nothing to Malmedie, I guessed at 
once the lady was English ; and as there seemed a 
mystery, I determined to penetrate it." 

Lord Dollamore smiled, and whispered some- 
thing to his stick ; something of which the French 
word " cliiffonnier''' and the English word '^ garb- 
age" were component parts ; but Mr. Aldermas- 
ton did not hear the sentence, and only marking 
the smile, proceeded : 

^^Tliey were expected on AYednesday after- 
noon, and I took care to be about. They came 
in the eilimgen from Carlsruhe, . a deuced fine- 
looking woman, with her face hidden in a thick 
black veil, and a very neat trim little French 
waiting-maid. The servant was French, but the 
boxes were English, . I'd take my oath of that. 
There was a substantial solidity about their make, 
a certainty about their locks and hinges, such 
as never yet was seen on a French box, I'll stake 
my existence." 

'' You have wonderful powers of observation, 
Mr. Aldermaston," said Dollamore, still grinning. 



AMOISG THE SPRINGS. ' 233 

'' Your lordship flatters me. I have a pair of 
eyes, and I think I can use them. I kept them 
pretty tightly fixed on the movements of the new- 
comers. Dinner was sent up to their rooms, but 
before it went up the lady's-maid went out. I 
was strolling about myself, with nothing to do just 
at that time, so I strolled after her. She went 
into tlie Angleterre, and in a few minutes came 
tripping out again. She went back to the Rus- 
sie, and so did I. I had nothing to do, and sat 
down in the porch, behind one of those tubs with 
the orange -trees, to smoke a cigar. While I was 
smoking it, who should come up but Prince Tcher- 
nigow ?" 

" Prince Tchernigow !" cried Lord DoUamore. 
'' Connu! I'm in full cry now, Mr. Aldermaston. 
But continue your story." 

" Prince Tchernigow," continued Mr. Alder- 
maston, " and no one else. He asked for Ma- 
dame Poitevin, in which name the rooms had been 
taken, and he was shown upstairs. He came the 
next day twice, twice yesterday ; he was there 
this morning; and just now, as I came away 



234 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

from the table -cV hole ^ I met him on the steps 
2:omp: in." 

"Mr. Aldermaston, you are impayohle P'' said 
Dollamore. " I must pay a compliment to your per- 
spicacity, even at the risk of forestalling the con- 
clusion of your narrative. But you have told it so 
admirably, that no man with a grain of sense in 
his head could avoid seeing that Madame Poitevin 
is Mrs. Hammond." 

^^ Exactly, . I have not a doubt of it," said the 
little man; "and if so, I think you and I, my 
lord, know some one whose state of mind must be 
awful." 

" Yes," said Lord Dollamore, rising from his 
chair ; " I see what you mean, and you're doubtless 
right. Poor Percy Hammond's relatives must feel 
it acutely. Grood-night, Mr. Aldermaston ;" and 
he bowed and moved off. 

" I'm not going to let that little cad indulge in 
any speculations about the Mitfords," said he to 
his stick. " That woman's far too good to be dis- 
cussed by such vermin as that ;" by which we may 
judge that Lord DoUamore's opinion of Lady Mit- 



AMONG THE SPRINGS. 235 

ford had altered as his acquaintance with her had 
progressed. 

The deductions which Mr. Aldermaston had 
made from this last experiment in espionage were 
tolerably correct. Lam'a Hammond was in Baden 
mider the name of Madame Poitevin, and accom- 
panied by the never- failing MarcelHne. 

She had hurried away from London for two 
reasons. The first, and by far the most import- 
ant, was to perfect the conquest of Tchernigow ; 
to clinch home that iron band which for the last 
two months she had been fitting romid the Rus- 
sian's neck; to bring him to make the offer of 
his hand at once. The short time passed in Lon- 
don since her husband's death had been spent in 
looking her future boldly in the face, and calcu- 
lating within herself how she should mould it for 
the best. Lord DoUamore was right in one of his 
conjectures about her : she had made up her mind 
that the course of her life must henceforth be en- 
tirely altered. She knew well enough that even 
the short time she had been away from London 



236 TvUNNIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

and its world was sufficient to render her name 
almost forgotten; and slie determined that when 
it was next mentioned it should be in a very dif- 
ferent tone from that formerly adopted towards it. 
Respectability . that state so often sneered at and 
ridiculed by her . she now held in the highest 
veneration, and determined to attain to. She 
had her work to do ; to restore herself in the 
world's good opinion, and to make, as soon as 
decency would permit, a good marriage. Tlie 
last position gained, the first would necessarily fol- 
low. All she had to do, she thought, was to keep 
herself in seclusion and choose her intended victim. 
. She thought of Sir Laurence Alsager at once. 
She had yet for him a remnant of what she ima- 
gined was love, but what was really thwarted pas- 
sion. Her feelings were stronger for him than for 
any other man; and he had large wealth, and a 
good old family title, and the good opinion of the 
w^orld. "When, after his interview with her, she 
saw the utter futility of her plans so far as he was 
concerned, she was enraged, but by no means de- 
feated. The cast must be made in another direc- 



AMONG THE SPRINGS. 237 

tion, and at once. Prince Tchernigow was in 
town ; she knew it, for slie had had more than 
one note from him durino; her sechision in the 
country, and she knew that Tchernigow was 
hanging on in town on the chance of seeing her. 
Tills flashed across her the moment Lam'ence had 
quitted her, and her heart gave a great leap. 
That was the man ! He was a prince ; he was 
three times as rich as Alsager, and was known in 
the best society of every capital in Europe. Life 
with him as his wife would not be spent buried 
two-thirds of the year in a great gaunt country- 
place, where interest in the Sunday-schools and 
the old women and the clergyman's charities 
were the excitements ; life with him would be one 
round of gaiety, in which she would be not a fol- 
lower, but a leader. He had been madly in love 
with her two years before ; and fi'om what she 
knew of his nature, she believed the passion still 
remained there. That could be easily ascertained. 
She would Avrlte him a note, bidding him to come 
and see her. 

Tchernigow came at once. He had not been 



238 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

with Laura ten minutes before her sharp eyes had 
looked into his heart and read its secrets so far 
as she was concerned. He was chafing under a 
latent passion, a thwarted wish. When, just at 
the close of their companionship at Baden, two 
years ago, he had ventured to make open protesta- 
tion of his devotion to her, and she had tui'ned on 
him with great dignity and snubbed him merci- 
lected indeed in his manner, but inwardly raging 
like a volcano. He had never met with similar 
lessly, he had bowed and left her, cool and col- 
treatment. With him it was a question of throw- 
ing the handkerchief, to the delight of Nourmahal 
or whoever might be the lucky one towards whom. 
his highness tossed it. Tlie ladies of the corps 
dramatiqiie of the different Parisian theatres were 
wild with delight when they heard that Tchernigow 
had arrived in Paris, and the will of mon Cosaque, 
as he was called by more than one, was supreme 
and indisputable among them. This was quite 
a new thing. Not merely to have his proffered 
love rejected, but to be soundly rated for having 
dared to proffer it, was to him almost inexplicable. 



AMONG THE SPRINGS. 239 

It lashed him to fmy. For the next season he 
kept away from London, determined to avoid the 
siren who held him in her toils, yet despised his 
suit. Then, hearing of her widowhood and her 
absence from London, he came to England with a 
half-formed determination in regard to her. He 
saw her, and almost instantaneously the smoulder- 
ing fires of his passion were revivified, and blazed 
up more fiercely than ever. 

He had more encouragement now, but even 
now not very much. He was permitted to declare 
his devotion to her, to rave in his odd wild way 
about her beauty, to kiss her hand on his arrival 
and dej)arture . nothing more. Trust Lam'a Ham- 
mond for knowing exactly how to treat a man of 
Tchernigow's temperament. He came daily; he 
sat feasting his eyes on her beauty, and listening . 
sometimes in wonder, but always in admiration . 
to her conversation, which was now sparkling with 
"vvit and fun, now brimming over with sentiment 
and pathos. Day by day he became more hope- 
lessly entangled by her fascinations, but as yet he 
had breathed no word about marriage ; and to that 



240 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

end, and that alone, was Laura Hammond leading 
him on. But when Parhament was dissolved, and 
town rapidly thinning; when Laura's soHcitor 
had written urgently to her, stating that ^^the 
other side" was pressing for a final settlement of 
affairs . ^which meant her abdicating her state and 
taking up her lowered position on her lessened 
income . Tchernigow called upon her, and while 
telling her that he was going to Baden, seemed to 
do more than hint that her hopes would be ful- 
filled, if she would consent to meet him there so 
soon as her business was accomj^lished. 

This was the j)rincipal motive which had in- 
duced her to start for the pretty little Liferno on 
the borders of the Black Forest. But the other was 
scarcely less cogent. The fact was, that Lam'a 
was wearying rapidly of the attentions of Sir 
Charles Mitford. Her caprice for him was over. 
He had never had the power of amusing her ; and 
since she knew that Laurence Alsager had left 
England, she saw that she could no longer wreak 
her vengeance on him by punishing Lady Mitford 
through the faitlilessness of Sir Charles. Mitford 



AMONG THE SPRINGS. 241 

saw that she was growing weary of him . ^marked it 
in a thousand different ways, and raged against it. 
Occasionally his manner to her would change from 
what she now called maudlin tenderness to savage 
ferocity ; he would threaten her vaguely, he would 
watch her naiTowly. It required all Laura's na- 
tm'al genius for intrigue, supplemented by Mdlle. 
Marcelline's adroitness, to prevent his knowing of 
Tchernigow's visits. In his blind infatuation he 
was rapidly forgetting the decencies of life, the 
convenances of society; he was gettmg himself 
more and more talked about ; what was worse, he 
was getting her talked about again, just at the 
time when she wanted to be forgotten by all men 
. save one. Mitford had followed her into the 
country, and only quitted her on her expressed de- 
termination never to speak to him again unless he 
returned to London at once, and saved her from 
the gossip of the neighbourhood. She knew he 
would insist on seeing her constantly when she 
returned to town. Hence her flight, with only 
one hour's stoppage in London . and under a 
feigned name . to Baden. 

VOL. III. B 



242 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

" ' I pray you come at once,' " said DoUamore, 
three clays after his conversation with Mr. Alder- 
maston, reading to his stick the contents of a 
dainty little note which he had just received; . " ' I 
pray you come at once. . Yours sincerely, Laura 
Hammond.' Yery much yours sincerely, Laura 
Hammond, I should think. What the deuce does 
she want with me ? Is she going to drive us 
three abreast, like the horses in the diligence ? and 
does she think I should like to trot along bet^^een 
Mitford and Tchernigow ? Not she ! She knows 
me too well to think any thing of that sort. But 
then what on earth does she want with me ? 
*I pray you come at once.' Egad, I must go, I 
suppose, and ask for Madame Poitevin, as she 
tells me." 

He lounged up to the Hotel de Russie, asked 
for Madame Poitevin, and was shown into a room 
where Laura was sitting, with Marcelline reading 
to her. DoUamore recollected Marcelline at once ; 
he had an eye for beauty in every class, and had 
taken not imfavourable notice of the trim little 
soubrette during his stay at Pedmoor. Ho won- 



AMONG THE SPRINGS. 243 

dered now what had caused this sudden elevation 
of her social status, and did not ascribe it to any 
good source. But he had little time to wonder 
about Marcelline, for she rose at once, and pass- 
ing him with a slight bow, left the room as Mrs. 
Hammond advanced with outstretched hand. She 
looked splendidly handsome ; her eyes were 
bright, her cheek flushed, her step elastic. Dolla- 
more thought he had scarcely ever seen her to 
such advantage. 

" You are surprised at my having sent to you, 
Lord Dollamore?" said she as soon as they were 
seated. 

'''No, indeed, Mrs. Hammond; I'm never sur- 
prised at any thing. A man who has tm^ned forty 
and suffers himself to be surprised is an idiot." 

" Turned forty ! Well, when you reach that 
ao^e you shall tell me whether there is truth in that 
axiom." (" Flattering me !" said Dollamore to his 
stick; "wants to borrow money.") "But at all 
events you don't know why I asked you to come." 

" I have not the remotest idea." 

" How should you have? Tlu'ee hours ago I 



244 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

myself had no anticipation of tlie occurrence of 
circumstances which have induced me to ask you 
to share a confidence." 

" Hallo !" said DoUamore to his stick ; " I 
share a confidence ! She ought to have sent for 
Aldermaston." But he said aloud, "If lean be 
of any help to you . " 

"You can be of the very greatest assistance. 
You may have heard how I have been left by my 
husband ; how Mr. Hammond's relatives, by their 
cruel and secret machinations, so worked upon 
him in his enfeebled state as to induce him to 
make a most shameful will, by which I was robbed 
of all that ought to have been mine, and left with 
a beggarly income !" She had not forgotten that 
will, and any recm-rence to it made her cheek 
flame in earnest. 

Dollamore bowed. He ought to have expressed 
some pity or some astonishment ; but he had never 
during his life been guilty of any conventionality. 

" In this strait," she continued, " I have re- 
ceived succour from a totally unexpected quarter. 
In the most generous and delicate manner Prince 



AMONG THE SPKINGS. 245 

Tchernigow has this day made me an offer of his 
hand." (Dollamore said he was never surprised, 
but if the stick was on the alert it must have 
heard him whistle.) " We are to be married at 
once !" 

" Very satisfactory indeed," said Dollamore. 
" Fancy being a princess, with ' vassals and serfs 
by your side' ! Very deHcious indeed." 

" Oh, I'm so happy!" cried Laura, with that 
feigned ecstasy of joy which she had so often in- 
dulged m ; '^ the Prince is so charming !" 

" Is he indeed ?" said Dollamore. " Yes ; 
some people require to be known thoroughly be- 
fore they're appreciated. But Avhat will a friend 
of ours say to this ? I mean Sir Charles Mitford." 

'^Ah!" said Laura, who turned pale at the 
name ; " that is exactly the subject in which I 
require your assistance." 

"Mine! How can I help you? Suppose he 
were to come here . " 

"It is that I am dreading. I took every pre- 
caution to hide my destination. I came here under 
a feigned name ; I have lived in the strictest re- 



246 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

tirement, having seen no one but the Prince since 
I have been here ; and yet I never hear a carriage 
dash up to the door of the hotel but I rush to the 
window, and concealing myself behind the cur- 
tains, look out in the full expectation of seeing 
him leap into the portico. If he were to come 
now, mider j)resent circumstances, what should I 
do ? . good God, what should I do ?" 

" What should you do? Tell liim to go back 
again. You are not his wife, for him to bully 
and curse and order about. You are not bound 
to give in to his cowardly whims, and need not 
endure liis ruffianly insults.'* 

" You don't know him now; you don't know 
how frightful his temper has become to every one 
who crosses liim. No, no, no, we shall be mar- 
ried at once, and leave this place ; and should he 
come here afterwards, I trust you to tell him no- 
tliing more than you can possibly help ; above all, 
to keep silence as to om' intended route." 

'' That will be easily managed, by your not 
teUing me which way you intend going. I'll do 
what I can to help you, lili's. Hammond; but I 



AMONG THE SPRINGS. 247 

may as well say, that tlie less I am brought into 
contact with Sir Charles Mitford, the better I shall 
be pleased." 

" At all events you will do as much as I have 
asked you ?" she said. 

" I will ; and as that principally consists in 
holding my tongue, I shall have no difficulty in 
doing it. When are you to be married ?" 

" To-morrow morning, at Frankfort, where 
there are both Russian and English embassies; 
and whence we start to . " 

" You forget; I was not to know your route." 

" I had forgotten," she said with a smile. She 
seemed reassured ; her colour came again, and as 
she held out her hand, she said, " I may rely on 
you?" 

^^ Rigidly to do nothing," he said; and took 
her hand, and left her. 

" She's a very wonderful woman, and she cer- 
tainly has had a great run of luck," said Dolla- 
more, as he walked back to his hotel. " To think 
of her o;ettino; hold of this Calmuck savao;e ! By 



248 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Jove ! rich as he is, she'll try and find her way 
to the bottom of his sack of roubles. Tchemigow 
is wealthy, but his intendant will have to screw 
up the moujiks to the last copeck to provide for 
madame's splendid power of spending. She's evi- 
dently completely frightened of Mitford now. It 
must be sheer brutality that has done that, for he 
was no match for her in spirit, or any thing else." 
As he said this, he arrived at the Badischer 
Hof, before the door of which was standmg a 
dust-covered carriage with two steaming horses ; 
and in the hall Lord Dollamore saw a man, 
whose back was towards him, talking earnestly 
to Mr. Aldermaston. The man turned romid 
at the sound of footsteps, and then Dollamore 
saw that it was Sir Charles Mitford. 



CHAPTER YIII. 

REAPING THE WHIRLWIND. 

Yes ; Sir Charles Mitforcl had arrived in Baden. 
He had written several times to Mrs. Hammond 
in her country retreat, and, getting no reply, had 
called at her London house. The old charwoman 
there left in attendance was as vague as Mrs. 
Hammond could possibly have wished her to be 
about her mistress's movements. She had been 
there. Lor' bless me, yes, she had been there ; 
but when was it ? . We'nesday week, she thought, 
but won't be by no means certain. It was the day 
as she had had b'iled rabbit for dinner ; she knew 
that, 'cos she was preparin' the onions when there 
come that thunderin' rat-tat at the door, which 
quite discomposed her and made her 'art jump 
into her mouth. What had happened then ? Not 
much . a puttin' a few things together, which the 



250 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

missis and the Frenchwoman managed between 
them. And then she was sent out for a cab ; and 
the cab came, and they all got into it, and the cab 
went off. Where ? She couldn't say ; leastways, 
they would not let her hear the direction . told 
the cabman to drive straight on, and they would 
tell him presently ; that was all she knew . ^yes, 
that was all she knew, and all Mitford could get 
out of her by the closest cross-questioning. Laura 
Hammond had escaped him ; but of her destina- 
tion he was absolutely ignorant. 

How could he hit upon her track? Tlie old 
woman . the last person who had seen her . was 
exhausted and pumped out, and had told next to 
nothing. Was there no one who could help him 
in this strait ? . no one who could make some sug- 
gestion as to the best mode of discovering the 
fugitive ? Yes ! . a sudden brilliant thought struck 
him . the man who had discovered him when, as 
he thought, he lay so closely hid, . the detective, 
Inspector Stellfox. 

He had given a handsome present to the in- 
spector when he came into his kingdom . how 



KEAPING THE WHIRLWIND. 251 

long ago it seemed ! . and lie liad seen him 
several times since on public occasions, . at the 
Opera, at Chiswick Flower-shows, at the Derby, 
and similar popular resorts. He had the inspec- 
tor's address somewhere, . at some police-station 
down in the City ; and he went to his desk, and 
turned over a heterogeneous collection of papers, 
and found it. Then he sent Banks down to the 
station-house ; and that evening Inspector Stellfox 
was shown into Sir Charles's study, and placed by 
him in possession of ihe facts. 

The inspector went to work in his OAvn special 
way. It was a peculiar job, he said, and not too 
easy to work out ; but he had hopes. He went 
back to the station-house, and commmiicated as 
much as he chose to tell to two of his best men. 
Tlien aU three went to work. They fomid out 
the cabman who had taken Mrs. Hammond to the 
South-Eastern Eailway; they found the porter 
who had taken the boxes off the cab, and the lug- 
gage-labeUer who had marked them ; they fomid 
the tick-clerk who had registered them " in transit," 
and whose book showed not merely the number of 



252 KUKNING THE GAUKTLET. 

pounds' weight, but the name in which they were 
entered. They were booked for Cologne, . one 
could not in those days register any farther, . 
and for Cologne Sir Charles started immediately. 
There he picked up the trace. Two French ladies 
had arrived by the Ostend train, and gone . not 
to any of the grand hotels bordering the Rhine, 
but to a second-rate house, yet quiet and tho- 
roughly respectable for all that . the Briisseler 
Hof, kept for the last thirty years by Anton 
Schumacher. Were they recollected there? Of 
course they were. Anton Schimiacher's eldest 
son Franz had been rather fetched by the trim 
appearance of the younger lady, and had gone 
down with them to the boat, and seen them on 
board the Koniginn Victoria, and recommended 
them specially to the care of the conducteiir, who 
was a great friend of his. Where did they take 
ticket for ? Why, at liis advice, they took them 
for Cassel, on the left bank of the river. They 
were going, as he understood, to Baden-Baden, 
and he had advised them to sleep at Bai'th's . a 
right clean comfortable hotel in Cassel . and then 



EE APING THE WHIRLWIND. 253 

post on to Frankfurt, where they could spend the 
afternoon and the night, and so get on right plea- 
santly to Baden the next day. 

To Baden ! Sir Charles Mitford's heart sunk 
within him as he heard the words. Baden ! That 
was where Laura had been so talked about for her 
desperate carrying on with Tchernigow nearly 
three years ago. And she was gone there now, 
and Tchernigow had disappeared from London ! 
Doubtless they had arranged it all between 
them, and he was thrown overboard and sold. 
His mind was at once made up : he would follow 
her there or to the end of the earth ; what did 
it matter to him ? He told Banks to pack a 
small travelling-valise; he called at Bligh's on 
his way to the station and gave him certain in- 
structions, and he was off. Not a word of fare- 
well to Georgie ; not a look of kindness ; not a 
kiss of love for that poor child lying broad awake 
and listening to his footstep as he stole through 
the house at early morning ! What could he have 
said to her ? . ^he, going in search of Ms para- 
mour, Avho had thrown him over, . what could 



254 RUNNING THE GAXJNTLET. 

he have said to the wife whom he had so cruelly 
treated, so recklessly betrayed ? 

So Sir Charles Mitford, after long and tedious 
days of travel, arrived at Baden, as we have seen ; 
and the first person he encountered, ere he had 
scarcely put foot in the hall of the Badischer Hof, 
was Mr. Aldermaston. He had know^i him in 
London, and was perfectly aware of his qualifica- 
tion for news. There was no reticence in Sir 
Charles Mitford now ; no coming delicately to the 
subject ; no beating about the bush : all that had 
vanished long since. Besides, if there had been 
any delicacy remaining, Mr. Aldermaston was 
scarcely the kind of man for whom it would have 
been employed. So Sir Charles said at once, and 
hurriedly : 

" How do, Aldermaston ? Been here long ?" 

"Ah, Sir Charles, how do you do? Just 
arrived, I see. Yes ; I've been here . oh, three 
weeks about." 

"Then you can tell me? Is Mrs. Hammond 
here ?" 

" There's no such name in the Fremdenhlatt . 



KEAPING THE WHIRLWIND. 255 

the Gazette des Etrangers, you know." His little 
eyes twinkled so, that even Mitford's dull compre- 
hension was aroused. 

" But for all that, she's here. Tell me, for 
God's sake !" 

" Well, there's a French lady here, . says she's 
French, that's to say, . called Madame Poitevin, 
who might be Mrs. Hammond's twin sister." 

^'Ah!" Mitford gave a long sigh of relief. 
" I suppose she's attracted the usual amoimt of 
attention among all the people here, eh ?" 

'^ She w^ould have, doubtless, had she ever 
courted it. But the truth is, she has never left 
her hotel." 

^^Xever left her hotel!" echoed Mitford, ob- 
viously delighted. " Which is her hotel ? where 
is she staying?" 

"At the Kussie, lower down the town." 

" Here under a feigned name, and never 
leaving her rooms, . that's strange," said Mit- 
ford. 

"Yes; must be dull for her," said little 
Aldermaston, looking up to see the effect his 



256 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

words had on his companion ; " lives in strict 
seclusion." 

" Does she indeed ? Poor girl ! poor Laura !" 

'' Yes, . only one person permitted to see her ; 
only one who is allowed to mingle his tears with 
hers." 

" One person ! and who is that?" 

'^ And a friend of hers, . Prince Tchernigow." 

^^ Damnation !" screamed Mitford ; ^^ is he 
here? That cursed Russian with his saUow face 
has always been hanging about her ; and is he 
here now ?" 

" Oh, yes, he's here now; has been here for 
the last month, and has seen her twice every day 
since she arrived. I happen to know that," said 
Mr. Aldermaston, " from private sources of in- 
formation." 

" He has, has he ? Curse him !" said Mitford, 
white with rage. 

"Oh, yes, he has; and curse him if you like 
to me," said Mr. Aldermaston. " He's no friend 
of mine ; and if he were, I don't know that I've any 
right to object because a gentleman curses him. 



REAPING THE WHIRLWIND. 257 

But I don't think I\l curse Mm too strongly to 
Mrs. Hammond when you see her." 

"Why not?" 

" Well, simply because he's going to be mar- 
ried to her to-morrow morning." 

"To be married to her ! You lie, sir ! . you 
he!" 

" I say, look here, M'.. Sir Charles Mitford ; 
there is a point which must not be passed; . 
thus far shalt thou go, you know, and that sort 
of thing ; . and you must not tell a gentleman he 
lies . 'pon my soid you mustn't !" 

"I beg yom- pardon; I scarcely know what 
I'm saying. To be married to-morrow morning ! 
. to be married !" 

"Oh, yes; it's all right; it's not what you 
said, you know, but as true as possible. I know 
it for a fact, because I was at the post-office just 
now, and I saw letters addressed to the Russian 
ambassador, and to Mr. Koch, our consul at 
Frankfurt ; and Malmedie told me that the prince's 
man has been over here to order a carriage and 
relays for the morning." 

VOL. III. S 



258 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

" What did you say the name was under which 
she was passing?" 

^^ Madame Poitevin. But why ?" 

" Nothing . no matter ; now the Hotel de 
Russie ! . all right ;" and he started off up the 
street. 

" Cest lid! mon DieUj madamef c'est luiP'' 
That was all Mademoiselle Marcelline had time to 
utter as she opened the door of Mrs. Hammond's 
rooms to a hasty knock, and a tall figure strode 
past her. Mademoiselle Marcelline, even in the 
fading evening light, recognised the well-known 
form of Sir Charles Mitford ; but her exclamation 
caused Mrs. Hammond to think it was Prince 
Tchernigow of whom she spoke, and to impute 
Marcelline's evident terror to the fact that she had 
not then put the finishing touches to her toilette 
or her coiffure. 

When she saw who was her visitor, she made 
up her mind instantaneously to the line of conduct 
to be jDm'sued, and said : 

" May I ask the meaning, Sir Charles Mit- 



REAPING THE WHIRLWIND. 



259 



ford, of this strange intrusion into a lady's private 
rooms?" 

He stopped still, and winced under her cold 
words as though cut by a whip. When he regained 
his voice, he said : 

" Laura ! Laura ! what does this mean ?" 

" That is what I call upon you to explain. 
You come unannounced into my rooms, and then 
ask me what it means. You have been dining, 
Sir Charles Mitford!" 

"Ah, I know what you're up to, then ; but 
you're not right . I'll swear you're not right. Not 
one drop of any thing have I had for God knows 
how many hours. But I'm faint, weary, and heart- 
broken. TeU me, tell me, you heartless devil, is this 
true that I've heard ?" He alternated from maud- 
lin sentimentality to fierce rage, and it was difficult 
to say under which aspect he was most detestable. 

" Let go my hand," said she, trying to snatch 
her A^T-ist fi'om his clutch; " let go my hand, or I'll 
call for assistance ! How can I tell whether what 
you have heard is true or not, when you've not 
had sense enough to tell me what it is ?" 



260 RUNNmG THE GAUNTLET. 

She spoke in a deadly cold metallic voice ; 
and what she said roused him to a pitch of ftuy. 
Ever since she had first discovered that he occa- 
sionally resorted to the hrandy-bottle, she had 
tamited him with covert allusions to his drinking, 
well aware that nothing rendered him so savage. 

" Curse you !" he said ; " that's your old 
taunt. Did you not hear me say that nothing 
had passed my lips for hours ? Now, answer me 
one question, or rather first hear me speak. I 
know all." 

"Do you?" said she with a sneer; "then 
you are a cleverer man than I ever imagined you 
to be !" 

" Prince Tchernigow is in Baden." 

"And what of that?" 

" He visits you daily . twice a-day?" 

"And w^hat of that? Why should he not? 
What is that to you?" 

" Oh, Laura ! . oh, my darling Laura ! What 
is it to me, she asks ? I, who worship her shadow, 
who would put my neck down for her to tread 
upon ! . Then he does visit you ?" 



REAPING THE WHIRLWIND. 261 

'' He does visit me. Does that answer con- 
tent you ? You deny that you have been drinking, 
Sir Charles Mitford, and yet you go on with tliis 
senseless rodomontade !" 

" Then let him look out for himself, Laura 
Hammond ! . that's all I have to say ; . let him 
look out for himself." 

" He is perfectly able to do that, if there were 
occasion. But there is no occasion now!" She 
took her cue from Dollamore's hint. " I am not 
your wife, Sir Charles Mitford, for you to bully 
and tlu'eaten. You have no hold over me. And 
if you had, I am not a puny white-faced sniveUing 
schoolgirl, to be put do^^Ti by big words and black 
looks !" 

" You are not my wife !" he repeated. " Ko, 
God knows you speak truth in that, at all events ! 
You are not my wife." . 

His voice fell, and the tone in which he uttered 
these words was very low. Did a thought come 
over him of the "white-faced snivelling school- 
girl" Avho was liis wife, and whom he had quitted 
without one word of adieu ? Did the white face 



262 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

rise up in judgment before him then, as it 
would rise up in judgment on a certain grand 
day? He passed his hand across his eyes and 
sat silent. 

" No, I am not your wife," she continued, 
" thank God ! I never would have been your wife. 
And now listen, for this is the last time you and I 
will ever be alone together ; yes . I swear it . the 
last time ! What we have been to each other . 
the nature of the tie between us . you know as 
well as I. But what prompted me to permit the 
establishment of such a tie, you do not laiow, and 
so I will tell you. Eevenge ! Sir Charles Mitford, 
revenge ! . that was the sole spiu' that m-ged me on 
to aUow my name to be coupled with youi's . to 
allow you to think that you had a hold over me, 
body and soul. You imagined I cared for you ! 
That poor piece of propriety in England was jealous 
of me ! . jealous of my having robbed her of her 
pet-lamb, her innocent Southdown ! I cared for 
you then as much as I care for you now . no, I 
wrong you, I cared for you a Kttle more then, just 
a little more, because you were useful to me. 



REAPING THE WHIRLWIND. 263 

Now my need for such a tool is ended, and . I 
cast you off!" 

She stood up as she said these words, and 
made a motion with her hand, corresponding to 
the speech, as though throwing him away. He 
looked at her in astonishment . then his face dark- 
ened, and he said : 

" Do you dare to tell me this ?" 

" I dare any thing," she replied, " as you might 
have learnt ere this. Do you recollect the night 
in the fir-plantation, when your friend Captain 
Bhgh came out in search of you, and we stood 
together within an arm's-length of him ? What 
did I dare then?" 

" Not so much as you dare now, if you did but 
know !" said Mitford. " You knew then that, had 
the worst come to the worst, you had a man at 
your feet who was prepared to brave all for you ; 
who would have scorned the world and all that 
the world could say; who would have taken you 
far away out of the chance of its venom and the 
breath of its scandal, and devoted his life to se- 
curing yom- happiness. Yom' reputation was even 



264 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

then beginning to be tainted; your name had 
even then been buzzed about, and you would 
have gained . ay, gained . rather than lost by the 
fortunate accident which would have made one 
man jour slave for ever !" 

'^ I had no idea you had such a talent for elo- 
quence," said she calmly. " Even in your mad- 
dest access of passion . for you are, I suppose, the 
^ one man' who was prepared to do such mighty 
things . ^you never warmed up to say so many 
sensible words consecutively! But suppose you 
are arguing on wrong premises? Suppose there 
is a man who is prepared to do all that that hypo- 
thetical ' one man' would have dared ? Prepared 
. ay, and able . to do more ! More, for that ' one 
man' was married, and could only have placed me 
virtuously in the eyes of the world after long and 
tedious legal ceremonies. Suppose that there is 
now a man able and willing . nay more, dying . 
to make me his wife, what then ?" 

" Then," said Sir Charles, ^^I go back to what 
I said before . let him look to himself . let him 
look to himself!" 



HEAPING THE WHIRLWIND. 265 

"He is perfectly ready to do so, Sir Cliarles 
Mitford," said a low deep voice. 

Both turned, and both saw Prince Tchernigow 
standing in the doorway. Laura gave a great 
start and rushed to his side. He put his arm 
calmly round her, and said : 

" Do not disturb youi'self, Laui'a ; there is no 
occasion for fright." 

" Ah !" said Mitford, with a deep inhalation of 
his breath, "I have found you at last, have I? 
You are here, Prince Tchernigow ! So much the 
better ! Let me tell you, sir, that . " 

" Even Sir Charles Mitford will recollect," said 
Tchernigow, "that one chooses one's language in 
the presence of ladies!" Then, in a lower tone, 
" I shall be at the rooms in half an horn' !" 

Mitford nodded sulkily and took up liis hat. 
Tlien, with a Ioav bow to Mrs. Hammond, he left 
the room. 

An hour had passed, and the space in front of 
the Kiirsaal was thronged as usual. At a table by 
himself sat Sir Charles Mitford, drinking brandy- 



266 RtTNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

and- water, and ever and anon casting eager glances 
round him. His eyes were bloodshot, his hand 
shook as he conveyed the glass to his lips, and his 
whole face was puckered and livid. The aspect of 
his face brightened as he saw Prince Tchemigow 
approaching him. Tchemigow was alone, and was 
making his way with the utmost dehberation to 
the table at which he saw Mitford seated. He 
came up, took off his hat with a grave bow, 
and remained standing. Mitford swallowed what 
remained of his drink, and stood up beside him. 

" You were waiting for me, M. Mitford?" said 
Tchemigow. " I am sorry to have detained you ; 
but it was unavoidable. You used words just 
now . in a moment of anger doubtless . which you 
are already probably sorry for." 

" They were words which I used intentionally 
and with deliberation," said Mitford. " I spoke 
of some man . then to me unnamed . who had 
come between me and Mrs. Hammond . " 

" I scarcely understand tlie meaning of the 
phrase ' come between,' M. Mitford. It is doubt- 
less my ignorance of yom' language to which I 



EEAPING THE WHIRLWIND. 267 

must ascribe it. But how could any one ^come 
between' a married man and a widow . grant- 
ing, of course, that the married man is a man of 
honour?" 

Mitford gromid his teeth, but was silent. 

" And supposing always," continued Tcherni- 
gow, "that there was some one sufficiently inte- 
rested in the widow to object to any ' coming 
between' ? . some one who had proposed himself 
in marriage to her, and who intended to make her 
his wife ?" 

The truth flashed across Mitford in an instant. 
He was beaten on all sides ; but there was yet a 
chance of revenge. 

" And suppose there were such a fool," he 
said, . "which I very much doubt, . the words 
I used I would use again, and if need were, I 
would cram them do^\m his tlu'oat !" 

'^ Eh Men, M. Mitford P'' said Tchcmigow, 
changing his language, but ever keeping his quiet 
tone, . "eh hien! M. Mitford^ decidement vous etes 
un IdcheP^ 

A crash, a gathering of a little crowd, and the 



268 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

waiter . wlio was so like BoufFe . raised Prince 
Tchernigow from the ground, with a Kttle blood 
oozing from a spot beneath his temple. ^' He had 
stumbled over a chair," he said; "but it was 
nothing." 

In deep consultation with his stick, Lord Dol- 
lamore was lounging round the outer ring at the 
roulette-table, Avhen Sir Charles Mitford, with a 
flushed face and dishevelled hair, with rmnpled 
wristbands and shirt-collar awry, made his way 
to him, and begged for a few minutes' conver- 
sation apart. 

Shrugging his shoulders, and obviously un- 
willing, DoUamore stepped aside with him into 
an embrasure of the window, and then Mitford 
said : 

" I am in a mess, and I want your help." 

" In what way ?" 

" I have had a row with Tchernigow . you can 
guess about what; he insulted me, and I struck 
him. He'll have me out of course, and I want 
you to act for me." 



HEAPING THE WHIRLWIND. 2G9 

Lord DoUamore paused for an instant, and 
took tlie stick's advice. Tlien lie said : 

'^ Look here, Sir Charles Mitford : in the least 
offensive way possible, I want to tell you that I 
can't do this." 

" You refuse me ?" 

"I do. We were acquaintances years ago, 
when you were quite a boy ; and when you came 
to your title you renewed the acquaintance. I 
did not object then ; and had things continued as 
they were then, I would willingly have stood by 
you now. But they are not as they were then ; 
they are entirely changed, and all for the worse. 
You have been going to the bad rapidly for the 
last twelve months; and, in short, have compro- 
mised yourself in a manner which renders it im- 
possible for me to be mixed up in any affair of 
yours." 

" I miderstand you perfectly, Lord Delia- 
more," said Mitford, in a voice hoarse with rage. 
" The next request I make to you . and it shall be 
very shortly too . ^will be that you will stand, not 
by me, but before me !" 



270 EUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

" In that case," said Dollamore, with a bow, 
. " in that case, Sir Charles Mitford, you will 
not have to complain of a refusal on my pari" 

Mitford said nothing, but he was cut to the 
quick. He had noticed . he could not, even with 
his blunted feelings and defiant temper, avoid 
noticing . that men's manners towards him had 
lately much changed ; that acquaintances plimged 
up byestreets as they saw him coming, or buried 
themselves in the sheets of newspapers when he 
entered the club-room ; but he had never been 
directly insulted before. He would revenge him- 
self on Dollamore before he left Baden; mean- 
while there was business on hand, and who should 
he ask to be his second ? Mr. Aldermaston, of 
course ; and he sought him at once. Mr. Alder- 
maston was only too delighted. To be second to 
a baronet in a duel with a prince, and then to 
have the story to tell afterwards, particularly if 
one of them killed the other . he didn't much care 
which . ^^vould set him up for life. Mr. Alder- 
maston agreed at once, and was put in commu- 
nication with Prince Tchernigow's friend ; and 



REAPING THE WHIRLWIND. 271 

tlie meeting was arranged for sunrise in the Black 
Forest, just above the entrance to the Murgthal. 

Prince Tchernigow called on Laura late in 
the afternoon on which these preliminaries were 
arranged. It is needless to say that he did not 
liint at them to her; indeed such care had he 
taken, that Laura had no idea Sir Charles 
Mitford had met the Prince since their first 
interview in Baden, though j)robably Mademoi- 
selle Marcelline might have been better in- 
formed. But Tchernigow said that on reflection 
it appeared to him better that she should go to 
Frankfurt that evening, . it would put a stop to 
any chance of talk, he said, and he would join her 
there at the Romischer Kaiser the next morning. 
Laura agreed, as she would have agreed to any 
thing he might have proposed . so happy was she 
just then ; and while the visitors were engaged at 
the late table-d'hote, a carriage drew up to the 
side-door of the Hotel de Russie, and Mrs. Ham- 
mond and Mademoiselle Marcelline started for 
Frankfort. 



272 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Lord Dollamore was in the liabit of break- 
fasting late and substantially. The tables were 
generally laid for the first tahle-cVMte before the 
easy-going Englishman came lounging into the 
salle-a-manger about ten o'clock, and sat doTvn 
to his hifteck aux pommes and his half-bottle of 
Leoville. He was not a minute earlier than usual 
on the morning after he had refused to act for 
Mitford, though he felt certain the meeting had 
taken place. But he thought very little of it ; he 
had seen so many duels amongst foreigners which 
never came to any thing beyond an interchange of 
pistol-shots, or which were put an end to after the 
drawing of first blood by a sabre-scratch. It was 
not until the door was flmig open, and Mr. Alder- 
maston, with his face ashy pale, with his travelling- 
clothes on and his courier's bag slung romid 
him, rushed into the room, that Lord Dollamore 
felt something really serious had happened, and 
said, " Good God, Aldermaston ! Avhat has gone 
wrong? Speak, man!" 

^^The worst!" said Aldermaston, whose voice 
had lost its crisp little society-tone, and who spoke 



HEAPING THE WHIRLWIND. 273 

ill a lioarse low whisper, . "the worst! Mit- 
forcl's hit !" 

"Killed?" 

" No, he's alive still ; was at least when I left. 
We got him into a woodcutter's hut close at hand, 
and there's a German doctor with him ; but from 
all I can make out, there's no hope. I must be oflp 
over the frontier, or I shall get in a mess myself. 
Send me a line to the Grand Laboureur at Antwerp, 
and let me know all, will you? Good-bye." 

The scene which he had witnessed seemed to 
have had the effect of causing Aldermaston to 
age visibly. His whiskers were lank, his hair di- 
shevelled, the hand which clasped Dollamore's was 
cold and clammy ; and as he hurried from the room 
it would have been difficult to recognise in him 
the usual bright chirpy little news-purveyor. 

As soon as he was gone Lord DoUamore 
ordered a carriage to be got ready, and sent 
round to the Hotel d'Angleterre to Mr. Keene, the 
eminent London surgeon, who had arrived two 
days before, and who, on hearing what had hap- 
pened, at once consented to accompany DoUamore 

VOL. III. T 



274 , RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

to where the wounded man was lying. As they 
proceeded in the carriage, they exchanged very 
few remarks. Mr. Keene whiled away the time by 
the perusal of the new number of tlie Lancet^ which 
had reached him by that morning's post, and which 
contained some delightfully-interesting descrip- 
tions of difficult operations; and Dollamore Avas 
immersed in reflections suggested by the natm-e of 
the errand on which he w^as then journeying. He 
had always had a poor opinion of life in general : 
and Avhat he had witnessed lately had not tended 
to raise it. His prophecies regarding Mitford had 
been more speedily and more entirely fulfilled than 
he had expected. Mitford had gone to the bad 
utterly and speedily; and Lady Mitford had had 
to run the gauntlet in the fullest acceptation of the 
phrase, . had afforded a topic for the blasting 
tongues of all the scandal-mongers in London, 
from no fault of her own, poor child, but from the 
baseness and brutality of her husband. 

These thoughts occupied him till the carriage ar- 
rived at a point beyond which it was impossible for 
it to proceed further. The man who had driven 



REAPING THE WHIRLWIND. 275 

Mitford and Aldermaston over in the morning, 
and who had accompanied DoUamore's carriage as 
guide to the spot, preceded Lord Dollamore and 
Mr. Keene over rough ruts and among intertwining 
trees, mitil at length they reached the hut. Dolla- 
more pushed the door open and looked in, and saw 
a figure half-dressed, and with the front of its 
shirt soaked with blood, lying on a heap of straw 
in one comer of the wretched hovel ; a peasant 
woman standing in the other corner, with two 
cliildren huddled round her knees; and by the 
prostrate figure knelt a placid-looking man in 
black clothes, . the German doctor. He held up 
his hand in warning, as the door creaked; but 
Mitford's eyes, tm'ned that way, had fallen on 
Dollamore, and he tried to beckon him to approach. 
Dollamore entered, and knelt down beside him. 
Mitford's lips were moving rapidly ; but Dollamore 
could distinguish not a word. Tlie dying man 
evidently comprehended this. With the last rem- 
nant of strength he raised himself until his mouth 
touched DoUamore's ear, and whispered : 
^^Georgie . forgive . " and fell back dead. 



CHAPTER IX. 

LAST WOKDS. 

The equipage and the establishment, the dia- 
monds and the dress of the Princess Teherni- 
gow, furnished the gay inhabitants of the gayest 
and most gossipping city in the world with a sub- 
ject for almost inexhaustible discussion. Tliere 
was no sameness about them, but an ever-varying 
change ; so that curiosity was never sated, and 
the last select few who had met the Princess, and 
told their story of her magnificence, had materials 
afforded them for a version of the princely splen- 
dours which differed materially from the version 
given by the select few of the immediately pre- 
ceding occasion. With the proverbial impene- 
trability of the French to English social facts 
and customs, the Parisian hemi monde could not 
be made to miderstand that there was ^^ any thing 



LAST WORDS. 277 

against" the Princess. Tliey knew and cared no- 
thing about the date at Avhich the former husband 
of that fortunate lady had departed this Hfe, and 
that at which he had been replaced by the Prince. 
Many good-natui'ed and strictly moral English 
people endeavoured to instruct the Parisian mind 
on this point, and to make it understand that 
the Princess would have some difficulty with 
" society" in her ovm comitiy. But these idees 
insulaires had no success. 

Tchernigow had been popular in Paris before 
he had gratified it by bringing a new princess to 
sparkle and ghtter, by her beauty and her splen- 
dom', in the Bois, at the Opera, at the balls, and 
at the Com-t. Paris admired the Calmuck ; first 
because he was so immensely rich, because there 
was nothing in the place, wliich contams every 
thing in the world worth having, that he could 
not buy; and secondly because he was odd, so 
bizarre; because liis character was as much out 
of the common as his wealth, and his eccentri- 
cities afforded them an increasing som'ce of re- 
mark and speculation. He was the most polished 



278 EUNKIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

Russian that had ever appeared in Parisian so- 
ciety . the most widely removed from the train- 
oil-drinking and no-shirt-wearing tradition of the 
Muscovites. 

And the Princess? She had not been by 
any means unknown to fame in Paris. She had 
visited that city during her first bridal tour, and 
she had had a great success. The freshness and 
perfection of her beauty, which owed nothing to 
artificial means, but could bear any kind or degree 
of light ; the piquancy of her manner, her fii'st- 
rate seat on horseback, her dancing, . all these 
things had captivated the Parisians. Then, was 
she not so interesting, this beautiful little EngHsh 
lady, whose husband was so far fr-om young ? It 
was so charming to see them together, because one 
knew that in England marriages of reason had no 
place ; and this fair creature must have reposed her 
affections in the feeble elderly gentleman, to whom 
she was so delightfully dcA^oted, and who was so 
proud of her. She had had a train of admirers 
then, naturally ; but it was early days, and there 
was nothing very 'pronond. 



LAST WORDS. 279 

Mrs. Hammond has been in Paris again and 
again after tliat first successful appearance ; and 
if her devotion to the feeble elderly gentleman had 
been less conspicuous, her beauty and her vivacity 
had been more so. Of course she was " talked 
about;" but that mysterious and terrible word has 
one signification and effect in London, and quite 
another in Paris ; and Mrs. Hammond's reign was 
undimmed. 

When the Prince and Princess Tchernigow 
made their appearance on the scene in their at- 
tractive character of bride and bridegroom, con- 
siderable cm'iosiiy had been excited about them, 
quite apart from the legitimate interest to which 
they were entitled on their separate merits, and 
to which their union added vigour and intensity. 
The Baden story had of course got about, with 
more or less correctness of time, place, and cir- 
cumstances; and the combination of a duel, in- 
volving the death of his adversary, with a wed- 
ding, in which the bride had been afficliee to the 
slain man, was an irresistibly piquant anecdote, . 
and " so like" Tchernigow. 



280 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

The Princess came off remarkably well in the 
innumerable discussions to which the affair gave 
rise. In the first place Mitford was dead, which 
was a great point ; and in the second, the cata- 
logue of the Prince's luxuries included some use- 
ful and devoted toadies, who made it their business 
to spread abroad a report which gained ample 
credence, that the unfortunate Englishman Avas a 
violent fellow, who had no manners, and who had 
assumed a tone towards Mrs. Hammond wholly 
unjustified by their antecedents ; in fact, had per- 
secuted that lady, and been ecccessivement hrutcde. 

So it was all plain-sailing with the Prince and 
Princess, and even the women took the liveliest 
interest in the latter. Poor dear creature, they 
said, how very sad, but how charmingly romantic 
it was ! To think that she had been quite ignorant 
of the duel, and had not had the least idea that 
her bridegroom had shot a man just before he 
had married her ! When she discovered it, how 
strange she must have felt! Tliey wondered if 
it made her experience for a moment a very little 
of repulsion. But no, probably not, . the Prince 



LAST WOBDS. 281 

was really sucli a gentleman ; and tlie other de- 
plorable person it was impossible to pity. 

Prince Tcliemigow possessed a mansion in the 
Champs Elysees ; and thither, a short time after 
the arrival of the pair, all Paris (presentable Paris, 
of course) flocked to pay their respects, and in- 
spect the magnificence of the possessions in the 
midst of which Tcherniirow had installed his bride 
. doubtless the most precious of them all. Then 
came brilliant entertainments, and the Princess 
achieved at one stroke the almost incredible emi- 
nence of being declared by common consent the 
best-dressed woman in Europe . Paris meaning 
that continent, of com'se. 

It was at the second of these entertainments 
that Madame de Soubise remarked to Madame 
de Somme, in a pregnant little sentence, be- 
ginning with the invariable " dites-donc^ cTiere 
AdeUj " that Madame la Princesse seemed a 
little distr'aite, and had begun to wear rouge 
like the rest of the world. Madame de Somme 
acquiesced in her friend's remark, and farther 
added on her own account, that the English 



282 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

complexions, undeniably charming, were very 
evanescent, and that really the Princess had no 
longer the appearance of being young. It was on 
the same occasion that several of the company had 
asked who was the ^^ petite dame^^ so beautifidly 
dressed, so quiet, and yet so spirituelle^ to whom 
the Princess was so caressing, and the "best" 
men were invariably presented. The "^9^^iVe 
dame'^ was small and shght, pale-faced, and 
rather plain, perhaps, than pretty. Her featmres 
had nothing remarkable about them, and her 
figure was redeemed from insignificance only by 
the taste and richness of her dress. But she was 
eminently attractive; and before long rmnom'S 
circulated about the salons to the effect that the 
little lady . the close, the inseparable fi'iend of 
the Princess ; a charming L'ish widow, who spoke 
French remarkably well, but with perhaps the 
slightest defect in the accent (it is so difficult to be 
certain that one is taught by persons who are 
comme il faut) . was as witty, as brilliant, as her 
friend was beautiful. She was so completely at 
her ease, and she enjoyed herself so much; and 



LAST WORDS. 283 

how delightful it was to see the affection which 
subsisted between the little lady and the Princess ! 
Did one hint to the former that the Princess 
looked a little fatigued, she would be all concern 
and agitation ; she would fly to her cherished 
Laura, and ask her in fervent tones if the plea- 
sures, the dehghts of this evening of Paradise 
had been too much for her ; and the two women 
would form the prettiest tableau in the world. 

Did any of the worshippers at Laura's canape, 
beside which the Prince, most attentive of bride- 
grooms, most devoted of men, kept his place 
steadily all the evening, admire the vivacity, the 
wit, the grace of the little lady, the Princess 
would reply warmly, that her dear Lucy was 
fortmiate in possessing such a charming flow of 
spirits ; and Tchernigow would remark that 
Madame Seymour was indeed a captivating 
islander, but that he understood the Irish ladies 
resembled the French in wit and vivacity. 

When the season in Paris approached its ter- 
mination, the beau monde was distressed to learn 
that the health of the Princess was not in so 



284 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

satisfactory a condition as the host of friends who 
were desolated by the inteUigence could have de- 
sired. She was as much seen as ever ; she was 
the gayest of the gay, the richest of the rich, the 
most brilliant of the brilliant; but she was not 
as beautiful at the close of that season as she had 
been at the beginning; and it was not to be 
denied that Lady Walford and Mrs. Fane . the 
last new brides and beauties from the EngHsh 
capital . ^liad as many admirers, if not more. 

Tlie Princess still dressed better than any 
woman in Europe, conventionally defined; and 
her diamonds at least were unapproachable, 
though there might possibly be brighter eyes to 
be seen now under the Paris moonlight and wax- 
light. 

" Going to St. Petersburg, are they?" said 
Lord Dollamore to his bosom-friend the Malacca 
cane, as he retreated gracefully fi'om the side of 
the Princess's carriage, after a brief conversation 
with her. "Going to St. Petersburg, are they? 
She does not look enchanted ; on the contrary, 
rather frightened, T thought. And that little 



LAST WORDS. 285 

devil Marcelllne doing her beloved compatriots 
with such perfect composure and success ! I 
woidd not have lost seeing that for a good deal. 
Gad, the bow she bestowed upon me when the 
Princess introduced me would have done credit 
to a duchess ! Madame Se}Tnour, hey ? . and 
Irish ! By Jove, I have not enjoyed any thing 
so much for an ao-e !" 

Lord Dollamore walked on chuckling and tap- 
ping his ear in his old manner. After a little his 
face o^rew oTaver, and his confidences with his 
cane were resumed in a different tone. 

^^ What the deuce has come over her, I won- 
der?" he said. "I see a change; but I don't 
exactly know where it is. Is it in her face ? is 
it in her manner ? She's very handsome . she's 
wonderfully handsome still, though she rouges ; 
but that's of com-se here . every one does it; 
though it's not a case of painting the lily, so 
far as the Parisiennes are concerned. Stop, 
though : there's such a thing as an orange - 
lily . I forgot that. It's something in the ex- 
pression, I fancy . something which gives one 



2SQ PvUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

an impression that she is thinking of one thing 
and talking of another, which was never la belle 
Laura's way: she knew her mo?ide better than 
to shock their self-love by any thing of that kind. 
Yes ; that's it, by Jove !" and Lord Dollamore 
struck himself quite a sharp little blow on the ear ; 
" I've hit it : the exj)ression in her face is fear !" 

When Lord Dollamore had stepped back from 
the side of her carriage, and the horses were once 
more whirling it along, to the admiration of the 
multitude, the Princess sank back upon the lux- 
urious cushions with a deep sigh. Madame Sey- 
mour looked at her with steady composure and 
not a little contempt. 

" Agitated, are you ?" she said ; " and quite 
upset by old memories and all that sort of thing ? 
What a weak fool you are ! You are thinking of 
the last time you and that very estimable noble- 
man met, 1 daresay, and feeling quite sentimental. 
If you would remember, in addition, what you in- 
tended to do when that interesting inter^aew took 
place (I remember it : I thought I never saw any 
thing cooler or cleverer than his polite unconscious- 



LAST WORDS. 287 

ness of the identity of yoiu' dame de compagnie ; he 
used to walk with me in tlie shrubberies at Red- 
moor, and V\Q given him a kiss occasionally for a 
guinea), . if you Avould remember what you in- 
tended to do, and how completely you have done 
it, it would be more to the j^urpose." ' 

Tlie Princess turned towards her companion, 
and said in a hurried broken voice : 

" You are wrong, Marcelline, . you are quite 
wrong ; I was not thinking of any thing of the 
kind. I was only thinking of this horrible journey 
to Russia. It terrifies me." 

" Yes ; but every thing terrifies you, jow. know. 
How odd that Madame la Princesse should not be 
entliousiasme at the prospect of beholding the an- 
cestral home of Monsiem- le Prince, of being pre- 
sented to the p-racious and urbane monarch who 
rules the Russias and the Russians ! Tliey are a 
little difficult to rule as individuals, I fear ; but 
as a nation, no doubt, charming. I should have 
thought madame would have seized the occasion 
with transport." 

" Marcelline," pleaded Laura, ". don't laugh at 



288 EUNNIKG THE GAUNTLET. 

me ; I am in deadly terror of this journey. You 
can save me from it if you will. Do, do, Mar- 
celline ! It is all dreadful enough even here, 
where I have some protection . where at least he 
dares not kill me. But if I am taken there, to his 
dreadful country, I shall be quite helpless in his 
hands. He might kill me there, and none would 
interfere . no one would even know, perhaps." 

" How ignorant she is !" thought Mademoiselle 
Marcelline, '' and how cowardly ! He has im- 
pressed himself upon her tolerably effectually, this 
lacquered savage, and she has succumbed. These 
Englishwomen are very shallow after all, no mat- 
ter how bad they may be." 

Tlie Princess still pleaded, and Mademoiselle 
Marcelline, having derived sufficient amusement 
just then from her companion's w^ealaiess, and 
being somewhat fatigued by her importmiity, told 
her at length, and shortly, that she desired to 
enjoy the di'ive, and therefore intended to change 
the subject. For her part, she did not particu- 
larly care about going to Eussia ; she understood 
tliat travelling in that empire had not been suffi- 



LAST WORDS. 289 

ciently systematisecl on that scale of comfort in- 
dispensable to persons of condition; and, on the 
whole, she rather thought they were not likely to 
go to Russia just then. 

Madame Seymour's apartments in the Hotel 
Tchemiffow were amono^ the most luxurious and 
elegant which that palatial edifice contained. 
They were inferior to those of the Princess in size 
alone ; in every detail of comfort and sybarite 
ease they equalled hers. A tiny and delicious 
little boudoir made one of the suite; and this beau- 
tifid retreat was the scene that same evening of 
a rather remarkable conversation. Tlie speakers 
were the mistress of the gem-like apartment and 
Prince Tchernigow. The former . dressed in 
the most tastefid and becoming evening-dress it 
was possible for human milliners to concoct, and 
adorned with jewels, which also differed from 
those worn by the Princess chiefly by their size . 
and the latter, in his usual faultless attire, had 
met in the boudoir previous to accompanying the 
Princess to the very last entertainment at which 
they intended to appear. 

VOL. III. U 



290 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

" Well, Marcelline," said the Prince, " you 
did me the honour to summon me. What is it ? 
Merely that I should tell you that you never 
looked so charming?" 

^^ For nothing of the sort," said she, putting 
aside the compliment as beneath her notice and 
beside the question ; ^' I sent for you to tell you 
that the Princess does not wish to go to St. Pe- 
tersburg. She is nervous, I believe, and has 
some strange notions of the impunity of Kussian 
princes on their own versts. At all events, she 
does not wish to go." 

" I am perfectly aware of that fact, Madame 
Seymour," said the Prince, with a peculiar smile ; 
^^but we are going to St. Petersburg, quand 
wem^." 

"Yery well," said Marcelline ; and she held 
her wrist towards the Prince, as a tacit intimation 
that he was to button her dainty glove. ^' Tlien 
we shall not meet for some time, for I have not 
the most remote intention of going to St. Peters- 
burg." 

" What !" said the Prince, with an angry stai't. 



LAST WORDS. 291 

" You will not come ? You are not serious, Mar- 
celline ?" 

"I am perfectly serious, Prince Tchernigow. 
I have no intention whatever of going to St. Pe- 
tersburg at present, and I beg I may hear no 
more on the subject. Have the goodness to ascer- 
tain if the Princess is ready!" She sat down and 
turned over the leaves of a book. 

Tlie Prince walked two or thi-ee times up and 
dovm the little apartment, and swore a Cossack 
oath or two under his breath. Then he stopped 
opposite to her and said : 

'^ "Where will you consent to go to, then, Mar- 
celline ?" 

^^ H-m !" She paused, with an exasperating 
air of indecision. '' I don't exactly know ; I think 
I shouldn't mind the Mediterranean." 

As she took her place beside the Princess, 
whose beauty was less brilliant than ever that 
evening, and whose depression her attendants 
had not failed to mark, she said, " Don't look 
so wretchedly subdued and terrified, Madame la 
Princesse; you are not going to behold your 



292 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

princely spouse fti the cradle of his race and the 
midst of a grateful peasanty. You are going to 
the Mediterranean instead." 

And then she said to herself, " Poor -vvretch ! 
I am glad I saved her from that, for the present. 
I really object to torturing her, -when there's no- 
thing to gain." 

Another season, and another, and the Hotel 
Toiiernigow opened its hospitable doors, and main- 
tained its reputation for splendour, proftision, and 
fashion. But the health of the Princess afforded 
more and more reason for solicitude to the host 
of friends who were desolated by the intelligence 
that she was indisposed; and the beauty of the 
Princess began to require that adornment from 
dress which it had hitherto bestowed upon the 
utmost resources of decoration. Ugly rumours 
regarding the princely rrK^nage had begun to circu- 
late ; and a few, a very few,"'of those in high places 
had abated the alacrity with which they had been 
wont to welcome the appearance of the Muscovite 
mamiate in their salons. French societv does 



LAST WORDS. 293 

not tolerate overt brutality ; and there had been a 
story about a fall, and a broken arm ; and though 
no doubt both circumstances were purely acciden- 
tal, and indeed the fullest particulars were given 
to the numerous callers, who were so anxious 
to hear of the dear Princess's progress towards 
recovery, the matter left an unpleasant impres- 
sion, which all the efforts made by the Princess 
to convince the world that she was not only the 
richest, but the happiest, woman in Paris did not 
succeed in removino^. 

What efforts they were ! How she rouged, 
and dressed, and danced, and talked ! How she 
di'ove out with the Prince, and talked to him, 
and smiled at him ! How she playfully wore the 
injured arm in a very conspicuous sling, and 
lamented that she was obliged to let "Alexis" 
drive her darling ponies for her, until her tire- 
some arm should be quite well, and how he per- 
fectly ruined them ! How she talked about the 
polished parquets as being so charming, but then 
so dangerous, . " witness my poor arm, you 
know," . and held the beautiful limb out for 



294 IIUNNIKG THE GAUKTLET. 

pity and admiration ! How she complained that 
she could not ride any more that season, the in- 
jury having been inflicted on the ^'bridle-arm;" 
and exulted in the promise of " Alexis" that if 
she would only take good care of herself, and get 
quite well, she should hunt in Leicestersliire next 
season I 

It was all very clever, but it did not do ; and 
Tchernigow knew that it did not ; and the Prin- 
cess knew it also, and better. 

One night, at the Italiens, an Englishman 
who had known the Princess in former days saw 
her in her box, sitting radiantly in the front, 
while Madame Seymour occupied a less promi- 
nent position, and a couple of the most fasliionable 
dandies of the day occupied the background. This 
gentleman had left a party of ladies in the boxes, 
and gone down to the stalls, and he now remarked 
to his companion : 

" How awfully she is altered ! I never saw 
such a wreck in so short a time. And sm-ely that 
lady with her is some one I have seen before. 
Do you know who she is, DoUamore ?" 



LAST WORDS. 295 

" Yes, I do, of com-se. That lady is Madame 
Seymom*, an L*isli lady, a widow of large fortune, 
who is devotedly attached to the Princess Tcher- 
nigow. She lives with her, . for her, it almost 
appears ; and she speaks French so hke a native, 
that it is difficult to distinguish any difference." 

"Ah, then, I am A^T:ong; and we don't know 
her," said the gentleman, still looking curiously at 
the party. 

" Well, perhaps you don't exactly know her," 
said Dollamore ; "but you are right in tliinking 
you had seen her. Madame Seymour used to 
be known at Kedmoor as Mademoiselle Marcel- 
Ime, and she was Mrs. Hammond's maid." 

His hearer's exclamation of astonishment was 
checked by a sudden commotion in the Princess's 
box. She had recognised the English party at 
the moment when liis companion addressed his 
last question to Lord Dollamore. She had fought 
hard for a moment against her overwhelming 
emotion ; but the days of Laura's sti'ength and 
self-mastery were over, and she fell fainting from 
her chair. 



296 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

Very shortly after this occurrence the paternal 
yearnings of tlie Czar to behold Prince Tchemi- 
gow once more in the land of his birth proved 
too strong for resistance. The Prince and Prin- 
cess left France for Holy Russia ; and that was 
the last that was seen of them in Paris. 

Miss Constance Greenwood, Miss Gillespie, 
Lizzie Ponsford . Avhich you will . never saw 
Lady Mitford after that memorable occasion on 
which she yielded up possession of the forged bill. 
A considerable time afterwards Lady Mitford 
wrote to her a long and sweet letter, in which she 
reiterated her thanks for the great service which 
Miss Gillespie . so she still called her . had in- 
tended doing her ; but she said, ^' even had the 
talisman which you left with me possessed the 
powers which you wished to invest it with, it was 
useless . it was too late." Lady Mitford added, that 
she had not forgotten the name under which Miss 
Gillespie had told her she was pm'suing a thea- 
trical career; that she had made inquiries, and 
found that " Miss Constance Greenwood" was 



LAST WORDS. 297 

spoken of in the highest terms, not merely for 
lier transcendent abilities, but for the rectitude of 
her conduct. In conclusion, Lady Mitford invited 
her correspondent to come and stay with her when 
she would, and not to fail to apj^ly immediately 
and directly to her when she was in strait or diffi- 
culty of any kind. 

People had said that Miss Constance Green- 
wood's stage-tears were the most natural tlu'ough- 
out the profession. Tliey were not nearly so natm'al 
as those which welled up hot and blinding into her 
eyes as she perused Lady Mitford's letter, and 
which showered down thick and heavy on to the 
paper as she pressed it to her lij)s. That letter is 
yellow with age now ; but, all stained and tear- 
blurred as it is, it is the choicest object in that 
dehcate little desk in wliich Miss Constance Green- 
wood keeps all her treasures. 

Not that she was Miss Constance Greenwood 
very long after the receipt of that letter. She had 
risen to the very height of popularity with the 
public, and had drawn a large amomit of money 
into Mr. WuiTs treasury, when Mr. WuflP sent 



298 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

for lier one day to his room, and told lier in con- 
fidence that Mr. Frank Likely was going to give 
up the Partheninm next week and go into the 
Queen's Bench, where he would remain until he 
was " whitewashed;" after undergoing which pro- 
cess he and Mrs. Likely would undertake an en- 
gagement at the Hatton- Garden Tlieatre. " And 
the worst of it is," said Mr. WufF, . '.' the worst 
of it is, my dear, that Mrs. Likely says she won't 
have any better-looking woman than herself i)laying 
leading business in the theatre. Tliat's a compli- 
ment to you, my dear ; but it seems that you must 
go; and as I've made an engagement with the 
Likelys, I am afraid you and I must j^art at the 
end of the season." 

Miss Greenwood shrugged her shouldei's and 
bowed her head. She knew that with her present 
prestige any manager in London would be glad to 
engage her. She was in no hurry, therefore, to 
seek for work. The Pai'thenium closed ; Mr. Frank 
Likely' s body was seized by the myrmidons of the 
sheriff; Mr. Wuflfs season came to an end; and 
still Miss Greenwood had not looked after another 



LAST WORDS. 299 

en o^a clement, thouojh she liad innumerable offers of 
terms. 

How did Sir Laurence Alsager, so far away 
from England, keep au courant with London the- 
atrical matters? Just as Miss Greenwood was 
weighing two offers in her mind, doubtful which 
to accept, she had a \^sit from an old gentleman, 
who aimoimced himself as Sir Laurence Alsager's 
solicitor, and handed her a letter . a letter which 
said that the TNTiter had never forgotten her in- 
tended kindness to a certain person ; that he had 
heard of her theatrical success, and desired to 
serve her. Would she not like to be the lessee of 
the Parthenium . then, as he understood, vacant? 
If so, his lawyer had instructions to act in any way 
she wished ; to draw what money she required, and 
to carry tlu:ough the arrangement for her. Miss 
Greenwood gave a little cry of delight ; her old 
love of fun sprung up in her. How glorious it 
would be to beat the Likelys with their o^wn 
weapons, and in their o^wn den! She accepted 
Sir Laurence Alsager's kind proposition, she said ; 
and while the lawyer went to work at his business, 



300 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

slie went to work at liers. She set the eminent 
SpofForth to work on a new piece ; she engaged 
Dacre Pontifex, who was as distasteful to Mr. 
Frank Likely as was Miss Greenwood to his wife. 
She got together a capital stock-company, and 
took the town by storm. Every thing prospered 
with her, and at the end of each season she found 
large gains. She has long since repaid Sir Lau- 
rence Alsager's advance ; and she has now great 
wealth, and some one to share it with her. Dacre 
Pontifex, wdio had so long made love to her on 
the stage, at length made love to her in earnest ; 
and as he had always proved himself a thorouglily 
good fellow, she accepted him, and there is no hap- 
pier couple in England. They have almost given 
up acting now ; but they still retain the theatre, 
and are thought highly of by all who know them. 

And Lord Dollamore? Lord Dollamoi'e still 
lives, as well as, and in some respects better than, 
ever. He superintended all the arrangements for 
sending Sir Charles Mitford's body to England 
under the charge of Banks . a duty which that 



LAST WORDS. 301 

functionary performed with the greatest rehict- 
ance, declaring that he liad not been engaged to 
"wait upon corpses;" and tlien Dollamore had a 
long and serious consultation with his stick, the 
subject of which was whether it would be expe- 
dient for him to make any change in his mode 
of life. The idea of marriage had never entered 
his head; but now that he knew Lady Mitford 
was fi'ee, he began to experience a curious sensa- 
tion at his heart, which caused him at first the 
wildest astonishment, and then a considerable 
amount of trouble. He had watched Georgie 
through all her ti'ials and temptations, and the 
sight had impressed him deeply. For the first 
time since manhood he confessed (to himself) a 
belief in virtue, bravery, and selflessness ; for the 
first time in his life he felt an irrepressible yearn- 
ing towards the possessor of these qualities; and 
he thought how the companionship of such a woman 
would illumine the decline of his aimless, pm-pose- 
less life. 

He was for some days in doubt .\^'hether he 
should not return at once to England, and after 



302 KUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

a decent interval proceed tentatively to see whe- 
ther an offer of his hand to Lady Mitford would 
be likely to be successful; but he finally decided 
otherwise. He was no longer young; his manner 
of Hfe was formed; and he doubted whether he 
should have strength to keep to all his good reso- 
lutions . in which case, and in the event of his 
marriage with Greorgie, her old troubles would be 
renewed w^hen she had less strength to bear them. 
There is no doubt, however, that the mere fact 
of his indulging in such thoughts proved that he 
was to a certain extent an altered man. His 
tongue is much less bitter, his manner much less 
rough, his thoughts much less cynical than they 
were. The person who suffers most from liim 
now is the chef of the Maecenas, when Dollamore 
rules the House-Committee. When that unfortu- 
nate Frenchman hears from the house-steward 
that Lord Dollamore has been seen whispering 
to his stick about an entree or an omelette, he 
knows what to expect the next day. 



LAST WORDS. 303 

When Lady Mitford was told by Caj^tain 
Bligli, who executed his task with great feel- 
ing, if not witli profound skill, that her waiting 
was all in vain, . that her letter had never reached 
her unfortunate husband, but had been carefully 
enclosed with the effects of the deceased, and con- 
signed to the custody of Mr. Banks, she was not so 
completely overwhelmed as might have been ex- 
pected. She Hstened patiently to all the details 
which it was considered necessary to give her, and 
bore herself with a gentle fortitude which sm- 
prised all who saw her. 

Tlie remains of the unfortunate Baronet arrived 
in due time; the funeral was "performed;" and 
Sir Charles Mitford rested in the family burial- 
place . the most unfortunate of a race who 
had been generally rather uninterestingly pros- 
perous. 

Lady Mitford found herself very rich, j^ot 
only did she come into possession of an ample 
jointure, but the entire sum destined for a pro\'i- 
sion for younger children was bequeathed to her, 
in case of the non-existence or death of such 



304 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

clilldren. She was very miicli surprised to find 
that Sir Charles had made a will, not many months 
prior to his death, by which he had left her 
considerable personal property also ; so that her 
position was an enviable one, as far as pecmiiary 
affairs were concerned. How far that was, she 
had yet to learn. She had courage, resignation, 
and patience ; and she had the good gifl of common 
sense, enabling her to lay plans and make arrange- 
ments with judgment and foresight : but she was 
not cold-hearted, nor callous, and the time lay yet 
a good way distant at which she could reckon her 
riches and feel her freedom. 

The next heir to the title and entailed estates 
was a boy named Edward Mitford, whom Lady 
Mitford had never seen, and who, with his widowed 
mother, lived in an obscure village in Warwick- 
shire, where the heir to so much wealth and posi- 
tion picked up a very indifferent education at a 
school of fourth -rate pretensions and sixth -rate 
performances. No mention of this youth had 
been made by Sir Charles, who had, very natu- 
rally, bestowed no thought upon the distant con- 



LAST WORDS. 305 

tingeiicy of liis succession. Tlie house in London 
had been rented by Sir Charles for a term of 
years ; and Lady Mitford determined to retain it 
in her own possession. Having formed this re- 
solution, and ascertained all that was necessary 
relative to her position, Lady Mitford wrote to 
the Reverend Cuthbert Farleigh. She recalled 
herself to his recollection, and appealed to his 
kindness. She was very friendless, she said, and 
wanted advice. Sir Laurence Alsager had told 
her that the kindness of heart which had been so 
distinguishing a characteristic of Cuthbert Far- 
leigh in his boyhood was no less conspicuous in 
his more advanced and responsible years, and she 
asked him to come to her. She did not make any 
mention of Helen in the letter ; she would defer 
that until they could talk it over, she thought ; 
and then he would perhaps make her an offer 
of Helen's society, which she would gladly ac- 
cept. 

The Reverend Cuthbert answered the letter in 
person ; and the meeting between the former 
friends and companions under such altered cir- 

VOL. III. X 



306 Rms^NING THE GAUNTLET. 

cumstances could hardly have failed to be affect- 
ing. Georgie thanked him with all her heart, 
and felt less lonely and desolate that evening than 
she had felt since the day on which Sir Laurence 
Alsager had left her. He had arrived late ; and 
they agreed to postpone the discussion of the seri- 
ous matters on which Georgie desired his advice 
until the following day. 

As Lady Mitford sat alone that night before 
the bright fire in her dressing-room, she passed 
her life before her in mental review. She ques- 
tioned herself concerning the grief which she felt 
so keenly, and yet blamed herself for not feeling 
with still greater acuteness. The oppression, the 
vague gloom of a great change, of a tremendous 
shock, from whose first effects she had not suffered 
so much as from that which succeeded, were on 
her. The dreadful death of her husband appalled 
her ; less because it was he who had been killed, 
and because he had been killed in so awful a 
manner, than because it seemed to set the seal 
of the curse upon their marriage. She saw that 
marriage now as it was, . a mistake first ; then a 



LAST WORDS. 



307 



disaster ; finally, a catastrophe ; . and slie recoiled 
with horror from the awful lesson of life thus 
opened out before her. 

" Swift and sui'e," she thought, " punishment 
has followed wrong in Ms case. It seems hard, 
too ; he was not the only man beguiled by a wan- 
ton woman, not the only man who betrayed and 
deserted his wife. Little as I have seen of the 
world, I have seen instances of the same thing ; 
but these men, who had as little conscience, had 
more self-control, more judgment, more self-re- 
spect, and did not expose themselves to the risks 
which he dared, and which have been fatal to 
him. Poor fellow ! poor Charley !" 

Her reveries always ended thus, in sweet wo- 
manly compassion and forgiveness. She did not 
deceive herself; she did not lament for Sir Charles 
with the intense and passionate grief of bereave- 
ment ; she did not make any false estimate of her 
loss, or give way to any sentiment in which the 
perfect truth did not abide ; but she slu^ank ap- 
paUed and miserable from the contemplation of so 
total a wreck as her wretched husband's life had 



308 IIUN>'ING THE GAUNTLET. 

been, from the possibilities of sin and suffering 
which it revealed to her. 

Lord Dollamore had written to her, . Banks 
had brought the letter; and so she learned that 
the last thought of the dvino; man had been of 
her, the last word he had spoken had been her 
name. Georgie did not attach greater importance 
to this fact than it deserved. She knew how to 
discriminate between remorse and repentance too 
well to make a mistake ; but she was very thank- 
ful for the message, very thankful that her hus- 
band had been permitted to utter it. She knew 
that in the ftiture, as long as she should live, those 
words would be a comforting recollection to her ; 
and she fully comprehended how much harder it 
would all have been to endure, had the silence 
which had subsisted between her and Sir Charles 
for several days before he lefl town never been 
broken, even by those two gasping, hardly-articu- 
late sounds. 

Cuthbert Farleigh and Lad}^ Mitford held a 
long consultation, as they had agreed to do ; and 
during its j^rogress the cm'atc learned that she 



LAST WORDS. 309 

was acquainted with the fact of his engagement 
to Helen Manningtree ; and Lady Mitford im- 
parted to him the permission and counsel Sir 
Laurence Alsao;er had o;iyen her to ask Helen 
to come to her in any time of need. 

'^ You have had more than one such time of 
need, dear Lady Mitford," said Cuthbert, " since 
Sir Laurence wrote to you and to Helen ; and 
why have you never made a sign, why have you 
never asked Helen to come to you ?" 

" Because I could not think it right, Cuthbert. 
The trouble I was in was of a peculiar kind, . my 
sorrow was the result of another's si^.:". ; and I don't 
think it would have been right to have brought a 
yomig girl like Helen in contact with it. When I 
think of my own girlhood, when I remember how 
far I was from the mere knowledge of such per- 
versities in human relations being possible, I am 
sure I was right." 

Cuthbert Farleigh remembered his own words 
to Helen, . " You are better without the confidence 
of an mihappy wife," . and admired the direct- 
ness with which the instinct and the principle of 



310 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

this woman had guided her to a similar conclu- 
sion. 

" But now," she said, " that is all over. "WTien 
you and I come to the end of our conversation, let 
the days which preceded the dark and terrible one 
of his death" . she paused for a moment to com- 
mand her voice, . " let them be consigned to obli- 
vion. Tliere are no faults in the grave ; all is so 
trifling, so small, so contemptible in the presence 
of that great mystery. I think it is a happy thing, 
Cuthbert, that the death of a person who has 
ever been beloved blots out not only anger, but 
dulls remembrance. I know this is the truth, that 
many and many a day I sat brooding over small 
oficnces, little slights, trifling but significant de- 
partures from the courtesies and the graces of 
love ; and oh, how miserable such brooding made 
me ! Well, I forget them all now ; every trace of 
bitterness has disappeared, . I remember only all 
the good there was in my poor Charley. Yes, 
Cuthbert, he is mine again noAv; he had ceased 
to be hers before he was slain ; now he is mine 
again, and I am not going to dwell on his faults." 



LAST WORDS. 311 

Cuthbert Farleigh was privately of opinion that 
Lady Mitford proposed to herself an exceedingly 
limited sphere of contemplation in respect to her 
late estimable lord ; but he admired, he reverenced, 
as every man with the heart of a gentleman must, 
the simple, beautiful, unreasoning instinct of 
womanly tenderness. 

"So now," she went on, "there can be no 
harm in Helen's coming to me. I am a widow 
so much sadder and more pitiable than other 
widows, that I cannot talk of him whom I have 
lost with that free outspoken pride which is so 
instinctive in other women, and which must be 
so sweet and so bitter too, so precious and so 
terrible. I am truly widowed ; for life robbed 
me of my husband before death came to hide 
him fi'om my eyes. The world will cease to 
talk about him soon, and it will forget me when 
it does not see me. There will be nothine: ob- 
jectionable in the quiet life which I shall ask 
Helen to share with me until you ask her to 
leave my home for yom's." 

Helen Manningtree obeyed Lady Mitford's 



312 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

summons ; and from the first hours of their mu- 
tual association Sir Laurence Alsager's hopes and 
expectations were fulfilled. The}^ " suited each 
other" exactly, and their companionship was be- 
neficial to both. 

Helen Manningtree and Mrs. Chisholm corre- 
sponded with great regularity with Sir Lam'ence, 
now travelling somewhere in the East, and fur- 
nishing the most inscrutable addresses for their 
letters, the attempt to decipher which they ordi- 
narily gave up in despair and pasted them bodily 
on the envelopes. Their letters were written from 
London and fi'om Knockholt respectively, and 
furnished the recipient with the fullest particulars 
respecting their writers, and the most accurate 
details of the few events which marked the first 
year of Lady Mitford's widowhood. 

Thus from Helen Sir Laurence learned that 
the young Sir Edward and his mother had 
come to town on Lady Mitford's invitation, and 
that Georgie and the quiet little lady from the 
country soon became great friends ; that the young 
baronet was a promising boy enough, but given 



LAST WORDS. 313 

to idleness, the avoidance of soap -and -water, 
and the pui'suit of useless amusements, sucli as 
cricket and fishing, as contra-distinguished from 
classical and useful learning ; that his mother and 
Lady Mitford having duly consulted the family- 
advisers, and received from them the simple 
comisel that they had better manage the boy as 
they thought proper, had considered that the very 
best way of managing him would be to establish 
him comfortably under the charge of a private 
tutor of unusually desirable attainments. 

When Helen next wrote she informed Sir 
Laurence that the private tutor of unusually 
desirable attainments had been found in the 
person of Cuthbert Farleigh, who had, moreover, 
been provided with a very comfortable living 
not very far distant from Knockholt, by virtue 
of a mysterious arrangement whereby somebody 
gave up this piece of preferment at the present, 
in consideration of some other " good thing " of 
a similar kind which would be at the young 
baronet's disposal in the future. Helen did not 
understand the arrangement very clearly, but 



314 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

she had a perfect appreciation of its results ; and 
though her account of the transaction, as written 
"out" to Sir Laurence (who, though he wrote 
vaguely of coming soon, was still beyond the 
reach of civilisation and spelling), was remark- 
ably confused, two facts appeared with unmis- 
takable clearness. Tlie one was that the family- 
lawyers were satisfied with the arrangement 
(" There's no simony in it, then, or bedevilment 
of that kind," thought Sir Laurence, relieved 
when he ascertained this first fact) ; the second 
was that Helen's marriage could not take place so 
early as she and Cuthbert had hoped, because 
since Cuthbert had ceased to be a curate, the 
cares of property and position had fallen upon 
him, involving the repairing and altering of liis 
parsonage-house, new furnishing, &c. &c. " So 
now, as it is so far off, dear Laui'ence," wrote 
Helen, '^you really must come home in time for 
my wedding. I think we should have put the 
event off, at all events, in order to achnit of 
Lady Mitford's being present; and now, as her 
year's deep mom-ning will have more than ex- 



LAST WORDS. 315 

pired, she has promised to come. Indeed, I rather 
think our marriage will take place here. You 
would be much surprised, if you could see her, 
at her cheerfulness. I am sure it must arise 
fi'om her perfect forgetftdness of self She lives 
entirely for others, and her serenity and sweet- 
ness tell that peace is the result. Sir Edward 
is greatly attached to her; he and Cuthbert 
also get on very well together. As usual, Lady 
Mitford sends her kindest regards." 

From Mrs. Chisholm Sir Lam'ence received 
good tidings of affairs at Knockliolt Park. That 
excellent lady prided herself upon her letter- 
writing, fondly flattering herself, at times, that 
she tmnied her sentences in something of the 
same manner in which her gifted Augustine had 
rounded those flowing periods which had been so 
effective when the departed curate occupied the 
pulpit at St. Parable's. She liked writing letters, 
and especially to Sir Laurence ; and though she 
furnished him with plentiful details concerning 
individuals of whose identity he had the most 
vague and confused ideas ; and though she was 



316 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

very pathetic indeed on the theme of Cuthbert's 
removal " to a sphere of, I trust, greatly extended 
tisefiilnesSj but that usefulness to others to be pur- 
chased at the price of a relapse into spiritual desti- 
tution here very sad to contemplate," . Sir Lau- 
rence liked receiving her letters. 

The truth was, his heart yearned towards 
England and home. He had imposed upon him- 
self a fixed term of absence, and nothing would 
have induced him to abridge that period ; but aU 
his resolution did not check his imagination, did 
not arrest his fancy, did not quell his longing for 
its expiration. The smallest details which reached 
him from the distant households in which he was 
held in such affectionate remembrance had in- 
effable charm for him. He found himself, under 
the most unpropitious circumstances and in the 
most unheard-of j)laces, writing lengthy epistles 
to Mrs. Chisholm . letters fidl of almost feminine 
inquisitiveness, and enjoining the immediate de- 
spatch of voluminous replies. He rejoiced the 
good lady's heart by the sympathy which he ex- 
pressed in all the local matters which she detailed ; 



LAST WORDS. 317 

and he soothed her sorrows concemmg the de- 
parture of Cutlibert by so dexterous an argument 
in favour of the almost inevitable ehgibility of the 
curate destined to succeed him, that Mrs. Chisholm 
actually prepared to receive him with a gracious 
and hopeful welcome. Sir Laurence was right; 
only a young man of exemplary piety and con- 
scientious intentions in the direction of parish- 
work would be at all likely to accept so poor a 
provision as the curacy at Laneham, . no doubt 
all would be well ; and she hoped dear Cuthbert 
would not be led away by his preferment. It was, 
however, melancholy to observe how great a con- 
trast sometimes existed between the lowly and 
hard-working cm'ate and the proud, lazy, and 
worldly-minded rector. She trusted such a con- 
trast might never exist in the case of dear Cuth- 
bert. 

The simple-minded lady was thinking, as she 
thus expressed her guileless hopes and fears, of 
one curate to wdiom preferment never came, and 
whom it never could have spoiled. She had a 
strong conviction that if there should prove to be 



318 ri:nning the gauntlet. 

any celestial institution at all resembling a bench 
of bishops in a future state, she should find her 
Augustine occupying a very prominent place 
among its occupants. 

So the time passed on, and the period appointed 
for Helen's marriage drew near. The wedding 
was to be a very quiet one, as Lady Mitford had 
insisted on its taking place at her house, and the 
first year of her widowhood would haA^e expired 
only a few weeks before the time for the mamage. 

Mrs. Chisholm, Mrs. Mitford, the young baro- 
net, and the Reverend Cuthbert Farleigh (rector 
of Everingham and principal on this auspicious 
occasion) J Helen, and her hostess, were assembled 
at Lady Mitford' s house on the last evening but 
one before the event. They were all together in 
the drawing-room, and were engaged in discussing 
the chances for and against the arrival of Sir Lau- 
rence Alsager in time for the wedding. 

" I am afraid he has made a mistake," said 
Cuthbert, " about a steamer to Trieste. I can find 
no announcement of one for a week to come." 

^^ No, no," said Helen ; '' Laurence said he 



LAST WORDS. 319 

would come, and Laurence will be here. I would 
not give liini up if we were all in the church." 

"What do you think, Lady Mitford?" asked 
Sir Edward; "I'm awfully anxious to see this 
Sir Laurence you and Helen are for ever jawing 
about, . I'm sure he's awfully jolly, though I sup- 
pose he's no end of a swell." 

The Reverend Cuthbert Farleigh considered it 
his duty to correct the young gentleman's ver- 
nacular at this juncture, and Lady Mitford did 
not appear to have heard the question. At all 
events, she allowed it to remain unanswered. 

At that moment a servant brought Helen a note. 
" Come by hand from the Clarendon, ma'am," he 
explained. 

Helen exclaimed rapturously : 

" It's from Lam-ence ! He's in London ! We 
shall see him to-morrow ! There, Cuthbert, you 
incredulous person, will you ever doubt Laurence's , 
promise or dispute my opinion again ?" 

" Certainly not, after the day after to-morrow, 
Nelly," replied Cuthbert. 

There was a small enclosure in Sir Laurence's 



320 RUNNING THE GAUNTLET. 

note to Helen, which she had slipped into her 
pocket unperceived. It bore Lady Mitford's name ; 
but Helen waited until she was about to take leave 
of her, as usual, for the night at the door of her 
own room before she handed it to her. When 
she was alone Georgie opened the note. It was 
very brief; it contained only three words. They 
were : 

" fortiter . fideliter 

Feliciter?'* 

Georgie's reply to this query was perfectly 
satisfactory to Sir Laurence Alsager. 



THE END. 
