
BEHIND THE CURTAIN 



CHAPTER I. 

STRANGE COMPANIONS. 

While the capricious flittings of fashion 
have driven the aristocrat and the man of 
taste from Grosvenor-square to the neigh- 
bourhood of Belgravia — while hitherto 
unnoticed and unfrequented thoroughfares 
have suddenly sprung up into consequence, 
and others have sadly fallen from their 
high estate into mere rendezvous of com- 
merce — ^the Albany — the dull old Albany, 
dark and drear, ^lemn and cheerless, 
has still preserved that dignified position 
that she has so long and so proudly 
maintained. Amid the wreck of all her 
VOL. I. 1 



2 STRANGE COMPANIONS. 

former rivals, palatial sets of chambers, 
lodgings worthy of a princely tenant, 
have displayed their luxuries to the 
eye of the wanderer, and wooed the 
choice of many a man of fashion. Yes ! 
in all the prized attributes of bachelor 
life, none have yet eclipsed the cloister- 
like Albany, or weaned a single denizen 
from her gloomy halls. 

Cheerfully paying a high rent, the in- 
habitants of this desirable location centre 
all their joys within the immediate pre- 
cincts of their chambers, and thus the 
rooms in this privileged spot are furnished 
with an elegance and richness seldom 
dreamt of in other apartments. 

We will now introduce our readers into 
one of these snug and luxurious hold- 
ings. The lady or the gentleman who 
peruses these pages is requested to 
picture to himself or herself the most 
richly-decorated saloon imaginable, a 



STRANGE COMPANIONS. 3 

bright fire bums gaily in the weU-planned 
stove, the red velvet curtains are drawn 
so closely that they assist effectually in 
shutting out the noise caused by the rain 
which falls on the verandah of the court- 
yard. On either side the hearth is placed 
an easy-chair, while between them stands 
a small marqueterie table, on which a host 
of unopened letters, an inkstand and 
other materials for writing, are carefully 
placed. Over the back of one of the 
fauteuils is thrown the rich dressing- 
gown of the owner of these well-appointed 
rooms. His slippers (the work of some 
fair lady's hands) are placed before it. 
This is palpably the seat of him to whom 
all the surrounding luxuries belong. 

But where is he ? where is the lord of 
this earthly paradise ? Evidently far fi'om 
home, for each of the easy-chairs is occu- 
pied by a servitor. Than this nothing 
can be plainer; for while the opposite 

1—2 



4 STRAK6E COMPAKIOSS. 

seat is filled by a servant in a smart 
groom*» livery, in that of the master 
lounges one who, though dressed in a 
plain suit of black, may be at once re- 
cognised as a favoured — a confidential 
valet. 

A few words will serve to introduce our 
narrative. 

" So," asked the latter, " your missus 
has quite determined on giving up my 
master ?'* 

" Most decidedly, Mr. Coleman ; there 
ain't no doubt about it." 

" But I always imagined they were, 
as it were, engaged io be married ?" 

" And so they was." 

"Well then, John, why does your 
young lady change?" 

" *Cause, Mr. Coleman, your master is 
also changed." 

^* Common^, sUl vous plait. ^* 

•• Well, it ain*t no secret. When Miss 



STRANGE COMPANIONS. 5 

Windham was a-going to be married to 
him, he was heir to a hearldom. But now, 
as his brother has married abroad, and 
missus don't see no chance of Mr. Sydney 
becoming a lord, why yon see she thinks 
she can go to a better market." 

" Well now, I think as this conduct is 
oonpittypoo shabby. Ain't he as much 
an Honourable now as when she said 
'yes?' Wasn't he (as far as morality 
goes) just the same. then as he is now? — 
the most strict, proper young gentleman 
in all England? Hasn't he a good 
fortune ?" 

"Honly an allowance from my lord, 
Mr. Coleman." 

" Well, it's all the same ; and after all, 
he may become a nobleman yet. I'm 
convinced, if he'd only take to the Church, 
they'd make him a bishop at once. But 
tell me, Mr. John, do you happen to 
know — of course I only mean by guess — 



6 STRANGE COMPANIONS. 

what's in the Kttle note youVe just 
brought ?" 

" Well, Mr. Coleman, I don't mind con- 
fessing to you I does. I'll tell you all 
about it. Tou must know " 

What he would have added his friend 
never learnt, for at that moment the 
magnificent buhl clock on the mantelpiece 
struck ten, and Coleman jumped up, and, 
well aware of his master's invariable 
punctuality, dismissed his companion 
without the slightest ceremony, an act 
for which John rather appeared to be 
obliged than offended, feeling far from 
desirous of meeting the gentleman to 
whom he had brought the note. 

" Bon soTy' said the valet, as he closed 
the door upon him. 

Nor was the step taken prematurely 
or unnecessarily, for the faithful Coleman 
had scarcely had time to look over the 
notes on the table and guess at the names 



STRANGE COMPANIONS, 7 

of their writers as well as their contents, 
when the knocker sounded loudly, and the 
next instant the proprietor of the chambers 
entered, and after exchanging his Poole- 
built coat and well-made boots for his 
dressing-gown and slippers — a task in 
which he was ably assisted by his devoted 
servitor — ^he threw himself back in his 
arm-chair, and for a couple of minutes 
shut his eyes and preserved silence. 

During these few seconds we will 
slightly sketch the Honourable George 
Sydney, who now indulges in a waking 
slumber, occupied by those thoughts 
which we will hereafter more fully dissect, 
overcome by the vast exertion of having 
just addressed a large and critical assem- 
bly — a body of the most learned pandits 
— ^prizemen in our most severe uni- 
versities, who frequently congregate in 
Exeter Hall for the purpose of listening 
to the finest oratory of the day, ready to 



8 STRANGE COMPANIONS. 

cut to shreds the superficial speaker or 
the weak champion of peculiar tenets, 
to quarrel with doubtful arguments, to 
detect classical errors, to point out false 
quantities, and crush the nascent spirit 
imsupported by that confidence which is 
often alone due to experience. Before 
this hypercritical assemblage had Sydney 
often appeared with triumph ; he had 
only now left the id, their " idol of the 
hour." 

George Sydney was singularly gifted 
in every way. The son of the late Earl 
of Grantchester (raised to an Earldom for 
his vast abilities as a statesman), the 
brother of the present wealthy and 
generous peer, handsome in person, 
fascinating in manner, proud to that 
exact degree which renders pride a matter 
alike of envy and admiration; deeply 
read, a fine orator, a close arguer, an 
unequalled linguist ; alike the pet of the 




STRANGE COMPANIONS. 9 

drawing-room and the pride of the hunt- 
ing-field; the arbiter in all matters of 
taste, a model for every pious Christian, 
rich, young, and active, gay without flip- 
pancy, thoughtful without gloom, the 
Honourable George Sydney was equally 
courted by the grave and the gay, the 
theologist and the politician, the states- 
man and the flirt — ^nay, so bright seemed 
his future prospects that the veriest 
managing mother in England (and who 
can equal her in cunning ?) would gladly 
have encouraged his addresses to her 
handsome daughter, had he deigned to 
tender them. Tes, such is the youth 
who now, starting from his reverie, ex- 
claims — 

v" Coleman, bring me some sherry and 
seltzer; I feel somewhat fatigued. Has 
any one called during my absence ?'' 

" No one, sir, of any consequence. The 
Archbishop sent to remind you of his 



10 STRANGE COMPANIONS. 

grace's assembly next Thursday; the 
poor man you promised to get into the 
institution, sent his wife for information; 
and lastly, Miss Windham's groom came 
with a note, which I have placed among 
the others on the table. While you look 
over them, I'll go and get you the wine 
and seltzer, sir." 

"You may add a small caviare toast. 
I am really greatly exhausted." 

" Yes, sir !" rephed the man, quitting 
the room, but taking care to make no 
noise in closing the door, for be it well 
understood that extreme quiet and noise- 
less obedience always characterize the 
household of a high-born gentleman. 
The servant of the nobleman and the 
flunkey of the parvenu are as widely 
difierent in their manners as their mas- 
ters. The essence of true breeding is 
quietude ; fussyness is the overboiling of 
wealthy vulgarity. Masters and servants 



STRANGE COMPANIONS. 11 

equally share in these distinctive attri- 
butes. 

Note after note was examined, but 
few excited much interest. There was a 
pressing invitation to join a party of plea- 
sure-seekers to Ascot, which was contemp- 
tuously thrown aside ; a call for charity 
was honoured by being placed in George's 
portfolio ; a request to attend at the oflfice 
of Messrs. Lily and Co. on the follow- 
ing morning caused some slight curiosity ; 
a somewhat warm address accompanying 
a lovely bouquet was pooh-poohed ! and 
carelessly devoted to the flames; a de- 
mand for a considerable amount which 
immediately followed was treated with 
anything but levity — the unwelcome re- 
quest for payment was crushed in the 
young man's hand as he frowned rather 
than uttered a deep curse on his impatient 
creditor — the next moment the painful 
missive was torn into countless fragments ; 



12 STRANGE COMPANIONS. 

.last came Miss Windliam's note; in it 
the young lady — ^the " heartless jilt," as 
George styled her — requested him to 
send back some old letters written in her 
halcyon days of affection, and a beautiful 
miniature painted by Hawkins. The 
cool, off-hand style of the letter was 
wounding to the ambitious young man. 
He felt that he was not only declined, 
but scorned, by the fickle heiress; she 
fairly told him she required her portrait 
back, as she desired to give it to her 
future husband. Lord Urmstone ; and as 
his lordship happened to be what is usually 
designated a steady-going personage, the 
idol of Exeter Hall felt himself deeply 
degraded in being thus removed to make 
way for such a rival. " A helpless^ silly 
noblemaUy' as George would have de- 
scribed him on the platform ; " an amorous 
imbecile^ as he now called him, and then 
threw down the cold-blooded production. 



STRANGE COMPANIONS. 13 

Coleman now returned, and perceiving, 
with that acuteness for which his class has 
ever been famed, that his master was in 
a bad humour, would, after having placed 
the wine on the table, have quietly re- 
tired, but was stopped by his master's 
voice. 

" Coleman, if any person calls, which 
is hardly likely at this late hour, deny 
me. If any letters are left, keep them 
till morning, I wish to pass a few hours in 
serious meditation ;" and George reached 
down a volume beautifully bound — so 
beautifully indeed, that its sacred contents 
could not be mistaken. 

"Til take care no one disturbs you, 
sir ;" and Coleman again turned towards 
the door. 

"Stay, stay; 'tis not probable, but 
'tis just possible, a female may seek ad- 
mittance." 

" A lady, sir ?" 



•J 9y 



14 STRANGE COMPANIONS. 

" Not exactly a lady" — the valet stared 
— "not exactly a lady, but a person of 
the greatest respectability, though moving 
in a lower sphere of society — that is, I 
may say, she assists me in dispensing my 
charities. I wish her always to be ad- 
mitted when I am at home.'' 

" Of course, sir, as you desire it.^ 

"Good night, Coleman," added his 
master. The servitor understood the 
poHte dismissal, and instantly left the 
room. Sydney at once took up the book 
before him; although we cannot posi- 
tively read his thoughts, yet to all appear- 
ance he was soon deeply immersed in its 
serious contents. He was not, however, 
destined to remain long at his studies, in 
less than ten minutes the servant again 
appeared. 

"The lady— that is, the person, sir, 
you mentioned, is here; she insists on 
seeing you.'' 



STRANGE COMPANIONS. 15 

" Of course she does— show her in in- 
stantly ; and hark you, you may retire to 
bed. I will see her out." 

Coleman stood amazed. He had ever 
looked upon his patron as a model of pro- 
priety ; here was a decided infraction of 
all rules of respectability — nay, so shocked 
was he at this strange procedure, that, 
had not his master coughed loudly — 
which was a sure indication of his dis- 
pleasure — we are by no means certain 
that he would have complied with the 
orders given him without remonstrance ; 
but seeing that the said patron was by no 
means in a humour to be trifled with, he 
left the door, muttering as he went along, 
" She walks like an old 'un — she speaks 
like an old 'un — she is an old 'un — so 
there can't be much harm in it." 

In a few seconds more he ushered in a 
tall female, wrapped in a large loose cloak, 
and closely veiled, to whom George indi- 



16 STBANGB COMPANIONS. 

cated the opposite fauteuil, and by a mo- 
tion of his hand invited her to sit. With 
this invitation she instantly complied, 
seated herself snugly exactly in front of 
her host, and fussily settled herself down 
as the much-excited servant withdrew, 
wondering who the "strange woman" could 
be. Nay, so great was his ire, that he 
afterwards contemplated (as he expressed 
it himself) turning Mr. Sydney off, lest 
his own character for high morality 
might suffer. 

For a few instants not a word was 
spoken ; both parties remained mute, but 
not equallyimmovable. George evidently 
writhed beneath the weight of his emo- 
tion ; the female sat bolt upright, motion- 
less as a statue. The former gazed at 
her earnestly; his looks bespoke his 
anxiety to hear her voice. He plainly 
invited her to speak first; but the 
mysterious visitor either purposely or 



STRAKOS COMPANIOKS. 17 

through ignorance misunderstood the in- 
▼itation, and remained silent. After a 
severe struggle, George, by a mighty 
effort, spoke. His voice, earnest, anxious, 
though subdued, hissed like a serpent as 
he asked — 

"Is it over?" 

"What, sir?" demanded the woman, 
who now, throwing up her veU, displayed 
a countenance devoid of a single trace of 
kindly feeling: her dull, lujstreless blue 
eye; her straight nose; her thin lips, 
thrown forward by prominent teeth ; her 
deeply-ftirrowed cheek; her somewhat 
hanging brow, bespoke her character, and 
made her hearer, though long accustomed 
to her looks, almost turn away with dis- 
gust as she demanded — ''Whaty sir? — what 
over? I reallydon't quite understand you." 

"You do, you know you do; drop 
this cunning game; we are alone— speak 
plainly." 

VOL. I. 2 



18 8TRA50E COXPAHIOHS. 

'' Please, sir, may I take a drop of 
wine y asked the other, amply filling her 
glass. ^' My walk has flurried me above 
a bit ; besides, these 'ere stone steps are 
sadly tiring/' 

" Take a bottle if you like — a cask — 
anjrthing ; but come at once to the point ; 
this dallying is as silly as it is dan- 
gerous/' 

" So I thinks ; but you is so unreason- 
able; you don't ask a straightforward 
question, but says something mysterious, 
and then flies into a passion with a poor 
widder 'cause she don't clearly understand 

you." 

'* You understand me well. I know you 
do/' 

" Well, then, say what it is you wants 
to know, for I'm rather in a hurry ;" and 
she tossed down another bumper i^f 
Sydney's best sherry. 

**' I ask you — is it over ?" 



STRANGE COMPANIONS, 19 

*' Well, if your meaning's what I sup- 
poses it is — ^mind, I only says I supposes^'' 
and to his disgust she winked at her 

pious entertamer — **if,it be you know 

« 

whaty it's not even come on yet." 

"Then, may I ask what brings you 
here ?" 

" La, sir, there's a dozen things ; in an 
affair like this, all should be square and 
regular." 

" Hush !" 

" Eight ; there be nothing like caution ; 
so, if it pleases you, I'll just look outside 
— ' safe bind, safe find ;' " and the woman 
rose, and, after looking out to see that the 
coast was clear, coolly bolted the door, and 
returned to her luxurious seat. 

Sydney was by this time thoroughly 
disgusted with her vulgarity ; the elegant, 
thA courted, the proudest member of every 
circle could ill brook the contamination 
of this ci:eature's presence, but he for- 

2— a 



20 STBANQE COMPANIONS. 

tunately abstained from exhibiting liis 
feelings. 

" All's right now !'* cried the beldame, 
throwing herself back, all secure from 
intruders. " You see, sir, it would be just 
as bad for you as for me, if this little 
affair got wind ; so we can't be too 
cautious." 

The partnership which the we implied, 
cut George to the quick ; but, only anxious 
to get the interview over as sooft as pos- 
sible, he again demanded— 

" Once more» my good woman, what 
brought you here ?" 

" Good woman, indeed 1 I don't think 
that's quite respectful ; but never mind, let 
bygones be bygones ; I comed here oijly to 
ask you to give me your promise in writing 
that when I've done as you wished me — 
mind, not till then, I wants nothing ip- 
fiEur— you'll sign to pay me one hundred 
pounds/* 



STRANGE COMPANIONS. 21 

" Idiot ! do you think me mad ?** cried 
George, starting up violently. 

" Well, as you likes !'* replied his com- 
panion; also rising and helping herself to 
another glass of wine. " I£you don't care 
about the affair, I'm sure / don't. After 
all, it's a dangerous job. The Earl's werry 
hasty, and remarkable 'cute." 

The slow and cold utterance of these 
few words had given George time to 
see his folly, and he hastened to explain. 

"Silence, my good Mrs. Eearden; sit 
down :" and they both resumed their seats. 
"Don't speak so loud ; and now let us talk 
quietly over this matter. My only reason 
for declining to give you a written docu- 
ment, arose from a fear that you might 
misuse it." 

" Well, that's true, and I likes your 
caution, that's what I do. I don't 
blame you, by no means j but just look 
now, if I really wished to injure you^ 



22 STRANGB COMPANIONS. 

couldn't I do so without any writing? 
couldn't I ?" 

" Hush I" 

" Besides, ain't I now as innocent as an 
unborn babby ? Lord love you, I could 
have you taken up and punished ; while as 
to mCy I'd get rewarded for my informa- 
tion. You remember " 

" Nothing, I i:emember nothing ; I said 

nothing, I will swear I said nothing ; and 

if I deny eV, I should like to know who'd 

dare to doubt the word of George 

' Sydney ?" 

" Oh, if that's your little game, we'll 
soon see it played out ; to-morrow morn- 
ing I'U " 

" What ?" roared the now infuriated 
young man. " What ? speak, or by Heaven 
I'U annihilate you;" and he rushed to- 
wards her. 

" No, you wont !" coolly replied the 
woman, who, without moving from her 



STRANGE COMPANIONS. 23 

seat, had firmly grasped the beU-rope. 
George saw he was in her power. He 
at once smothered his irate feeling, and, 
smiling, said — 

" I was only joking, my dear Mrs. 
Eearden ; I too well know your fidelity 
to fancy for a moment that you would 
betray an old Mend." 

" Oh ! honour among thieves !'* 

Poor Sydney winced, but he afiected 
to laugh at the vulgar aphorism. 

" TeU me now — think for a moment — 
is there no other way by which I can 
secure your valuable co-operation ?" 

"Well, I suppose you mean my sarvices. 
I only see one way — give me fifty pounds, 
and t'other half when all is over. I shall 
require it directly, for I want to go to the 
Continent, to see a relative of mine as is 
living there." 

"I don't approve of paying before- 
hand." 



24 STBANGE COMPANIONS. 

" Perhaps not ; and I don't approve of 
ninning my head into a halter without 
stumpy down ; so at once give me the 
rhino, or the bargain's off." 

'* I don't believe I have as much in my 
desk." 

"Oh, a cheque will do; I'lJ get it 
changed in the morning, and nothing wiU 
happen before night— I knows when it 
will come on." 

George Sydney ground his teeth to- 
gether ; but he did not allow his annoy- 
ance to appear. He opened his case, 
and wrote out a cheque for fifty pounds, 
and handed it to Mrs. Eearden. 

" This wiU do, I hope ?" 

" Well, I don't know. Tou see it's made 
payable to Mrs. Thompson. Now, you see, 
I'm not Mrs. Thompson." 
• " ' Or bearer,' payable to any one ; such 
is the form of every cheque. Of course 
I need not point out to a woman of your 



STBANQE COMPANIONS. 25 

ability, that it would not do to put your 
name to the document. By-the-by, don*t 
take it yourself to the bankers'; send it in 
by some third person — a man will look 
best." 

"Hum! I understand. If there be 
anything wrong, I'll let you know early/' 
said Mrs. Eearden, slowly rising from her 
chair. 

" There can be nothing wrong ; but, if 
anything should occur, let me know before 
eleyen o'clock, as at that time I shall go 
to church." 

" Church ! 7ou go to church ! ha ! ha ! 
ha!" 

"Do make less noise," chimed in 
Sydney, in a tone of vexation he could 
not conceal; "do make less noise; the 
servants are all in bed." 

" In bed !'* chuckled Mrs. Eearden, who 
now began to show unmistakable signs of 
inebriety. " In bed ! How funny ! I'd like 



26 STRANGE COMPANIONS. 

to go up and pull *ein out ; they'd be so 
astonished. Shall we, eh ?" 

" For shame, my good friend ; you for- 
get that my household is composed of 
persons of serious respectability : and 
now, my dear madam, allow me, as our 
business is over, to see you out. This way, 
if you please ; take care of the mat." 

"Lord love ye, Mr. George, what a 
row you make ! Why, I am accustomed 
to — " here the woman gave a fair stumble. 
"I am, I say— I say," added she, hic- 
cuping, " yes, I am " 

By this time she was fairly outside the 
door, which George shut on her ; and, as 
he turned to seek his bed, he oflTered up 
a mental prayer, if such a term can 
possibly be applied to such a wish, that 
the old hag might break her neck, or die 
of spontaneous combustion, as soon as she 
had completed the little job now entrusted 
to her. 



27 



CHAPTER n. 

A CANDIDATE FOR PARLIAMENT. 

There are certain lawyers* offices in 
Westminster where fitting individuals 
p,re selected to represent certain counties 
and certain boroughs. The rich are in- 
vited to take shares in this Parliamentary 
lottery, the poor ane tempted into doing 
so by pecuniary aid; in either case, talents, 
and, if possible, good station, axe required. 
These qualifications proved, the whole 
weight of the highest political party is 
thrown into the scale, and every efibrt 
made by the combined club to secure a 
seat for the candidate they have thus sent 
down. • 

Now, it so happened that a borough — 



28 A CANDIDATE FOB ]PABLIAMENT. 

a borough notorious for its venality, had 
just become vacant. Votes in the House 
were about this time nearly balanced ; so 
nearly indeed, that each seat became a 
prize well worth struggling for. The 
Liberal party, ever on the alert, made up 
in activity for the funds which were more 
amply provided by the aristocratic clique. 
The latter had naturally become alarmed, 
and so the high parties were now solemnly 
assembled at Messrs. Lily and Co.'s for 
the purpose of nominating their man. 
Just as the task became most difficult, 
from serious and conflicting views, George 
Sydney walked in. Now, when parties 
disagree in their choice on any one sub- 
ject, nothing so readily calms the strife as 
a neutral ground on which their debate 
may be carried out. The Honourable 
George Sydney was a man of rank, for- 
tune, and talent, deeply wedded to the 
Tory interests. Popular with the Church 



A CANDIDATE FOB FABLIAMEITr* 29 

party for his ansteie and nnbending Pro- 
testantism ; beloTed by the lower orders 
for his excessive charity, who could be 
so fit as he ? To give way in favour of 
such an eligible candidate was far from a 
defeat on either side ; so a single word, a 
look, sufficed to bring the contending 
poHticians to a perfect understanding, 
and those who had vrarmly disputed 
only a moment before now solicited, in 
friendly union of opinion, the new comer 
to stand at once for the borough of 
Trafford. 

" My dear friend," said Lord Trough- 
ton, as he clasped the hand George ex- 
tended towards him, "you are the very 
man for them ; you are sure to get in." 

" You will have no one to oppose you 
but a wretched Alderman who has already 
been beaten more than once." 

George, however, hesitated. He looked 
solemn, and shook his head. 



30 'A CANDIDATE FOB PARLIAMENT. 

Now, if we are to believe Sheridan, a 
shake of the head means a great deal, and 
so seemed to think those assembled. They 
had evidently seen Lord Burleigh use 
this caput gesture in the Critic with con- 
siderable effect, and they hastened to pave 
the way for the doubting candidate. 

"My dear sir, I will guarantee that 
the expenses will be under 1200/.,'* 
chimed in the wily lawyer. 

" No, my lord, I think I must really 
decline the honour; I have several 



reasons." 



Now, when a man says that he only 
thinks a thing, he is still open to persua- 
sion; so Lord Troughton again pressed 
forward. 

"Consider well, my dear friend," in- 
sinuated his lordship. 

" Aye, it were a glorious thing for our 
party," added a parvenu who always 
aimed to attach himself to his superiors. 



A CANDIDATE FOR PARLIAMENT. 31 

"I have done so/' replied George. 
" In the first place, I do not feel quite 
equal to the fatigues of the House." 

" What then, will you do as a peer ?" 
asked one who had hitherto remained 
silent. 

"Oh! I am happy to say there is 
no chance of that ; Lady Grantchester, I 
rejoice to tell you, hourly expects to be 
confined, and ere another day elapses I 
sincerely hope I shall be able to congratu- 
late my dear brother • on the birth of an 
heir." 

" That's unlucky for you." 

" By no means ; I have long desired to 
see such an event occur. Besides, to tell 
you the truth — and I hope I never utter 
anything else — ^the late hours consequent 
on a Parliamentary life would sadly inter- 
fere with my higher duties." 

"Higher duties?" screamed Lord 
Troughton. "What can be higher 



32 A CANDIDATE TOR PARLIAMENT. 

than that of legislating for your 
country ?" 

" My lord, my lord, you forget yourself 
sadly. Pardon me for reminding you 
that we have duties to perform far more 
serious and important — there is another 
and a better world/' and George pointed 
towards Heaven. 

"Forgive me, Sydney, forgive me; I 
forgot your extreme notions on these 
matters. 

" Besides," added George, " to be made 
emperor of the world I would not lend 
myself to bribery. The man who squanders 
his wealth in thus corrupting the best 
principles of an honest constituency has 
much to answer for. Alas! his couch must 
some day be painfully haunted by the 
recollection. I feel strongly on the sub- 
ject, very strongly. Nothing should in- 
duce me to do that, which I look upon as 
criminal-a wked advantage teken by 



A CANDIDATE FOR PARLIAMENT. 33 

the rich man over the poor one. Bribery 
I abhor. Grood morning to you, my lord 
— ^good morning, gentlemen ; I am going 
to hear the service at the Abbey, the bell 
is already tolling ;" and with these words 
the man of austere principles left the 
apartment. 

"I hate these canting fellows," ex- 
claimed Lord Troughton as the other 
shut the door ; " I had a great mind to 
quarrel with him for daxiug to lecture 
me. 

"We could expect nothing less," 
observed the lawyer, "from one of the 
Exeter Hall school — I told you he 
wouldn't do ; so now let us think of some 
one else," and they again resumed their 
deliberations. 

"Why didn't they offer to pay my 
expenses, fools that they were ? I'd have 
snapped at it. But of all short-sighted 
people in the world, the most diabolically 

VOL. I. 3 



34 A CAKDIDATE FOB PABLIAMENT. 

SO are your acute politicians. Ah ! here 
comes the Bishop of London. I must be 
doubly solemn during the service;" and 
with this observation George Sydney 
entered Westminster Abbey. 



35 



CHAPTEE III. 

THE BEREAVED MOTHER. 

There is a palatial residence^ situated 
within three miles of the metropolis, 
celebrated for its architectural beauties, 
the fa9ade displaying a taste which calls 
forth from all who approach it an inquiry 
as to the name of him who had so ele- 
gantly designed it. The opposite side, 
which looks into park-like grounds, is 
equally beautiful, the back windows of 
the principal floor being within twelve 
feet of a noble terrace, through which 
a stone stair rises, and thus gives admis- 
sion to the banqueting-hall. The rest of 
the floor is devoted to splendid drawing- 
i^ooms and dining-rooms, to which are 

3— a 



36 THE BEREAVED MOTHEB. 

attached a library and billiard-room, as 
well as the sleeping chamber of the noble 
proprietor. 

It was within this mansion that the 
Countess of Grantchester lay writhing 
in pain, beneath the lace curtains of her 
sumptuous couch. Ill-suppressed moans 
told of those agonies which from time 
to time assailed her. No rank, no wealth 
could save her from these — ^the common 
lot of all mortality. But a hope of final 
triumph — a conviction that ere long her 
sufierings would be amply repaid, checked 
her every complaint, and she used her best 
endeavour to conceal her pain, rather 
than utter a term which might seem 
ungrateful to the Dispenser of all bless- 
ings — ^the gracious Providence who would 
probably within an hour grant her ardent 
prayer, and enable her to press to her 
bosom a son and heir to the house of 
Grantchester — a child that would form a 



THE BEREAVED MOTHEB. 37 

still closer link between herself and her 
adored husband. 

" Your ladyship suffers ?'* inquiringly 
suggested the obsequious medical man 
who stood by her bedside. 

"I suffer dreadfully from thirst, my 
lips and throat are parched ; might I not 
have something to moisten them ?" 

"Of course you can. Nurse," added 
he, turning to Mrs. Eearden, who sat 
close to her employer's pillow, "what 
drink is provided for her ladyship to 
take?" 

"None, sir; I have none here; but 
there's some capiUaire in the store-closet, 
and if I might dare to ask you to go 
down to the study, because the Earl 
might not like me, as I'm a stranger, 
to enter there; and if you'd only mix 
something for my lady, poor dear, 
blessed martyr, I'm sure it would do 
her good. In oorse, doctor, I wouldn't 



38 THE BEREAVED MOTHER. 

presume to ask you to go, but I 
knows my lady couldn't bear a-parting 
with me even for a minute, she's so 
narvous." 

" But if anything should occur during 
my absence?'' 

"Oh, there ain't no fear of that; 
besides, sir, if anything occurred, I'd 
ring loudly, and you'd know you was 
wanted." 

" Do give me something ; my lips are 
so parched I can scarcely speak," mur- 
mured the sufferer. 

" I go, dear lady ; I'll be back in five 
minutes. Nurse, don't let your mistress 
h^ve anything while I'm absent;" and 
with this observation the doctor left 
the chamber. 

Presently the patient sighed loudly. 

"All's right; I thought it was so," 
mentally ejaculated Mrs. Bearden, as she 
first rushed to lock the door of the rpom, 



THE BEItEAVBD MOTHBB. 39 

B.nd then flew to the bedside of Vbb 
lovely young countess. 

What then passed it is not our 
province to describe; but in two or 
three minutes more the monthly njirse 
hurried from that bedside, bearing iii 
her arms a male infant. The little 
creature gave a single scream, which 
Was at once deadened by a flannel 
wrapper thrown over its mouth by the 
nurse, who quickly carried her burden 
to an adjoining room, which overlooked 
the garden, and, taking a Kght in her 
hand, she waved it to and fro before 
the window. 

In less than a' mimite a human head 
appeared. Mrs. Bearden threw open the 
sash, and handed the new-born babe to 
a man, who stood on a short ladder 
outside. In return, she received from 
him a careftdly -enveloped object, and, 
as quick as thought, shut the window 



40 THE BEREAVED MOTHEB. 

down^ and hastily returned to the luxu- 
rious chamber of Lady Grantchester ; here 
she seized a foot-bath^ and instantly 
filling it with boiling water from a 
kettle on the fire, plunged into it the 
corpse of a recently bom child, then 
violently pulling the bell, and unbolting 
the door, she began to sob and cry, 
without noticing the anxious, though 
low-toned, inquiries of the newly-made 
mother. In another moment the doctor 
rushed in. 

"What's the matter? what's the 
matter ?" 

"Oh! doctor, it's all over. My lady 
has been safely brought to bed of ^" 

"Of what?" eagerly demanded the 
medical man. 

" A still-bom baby ! a male child." 

A harrowing scream from the bed 
reminded the speakers of their want of 
caution. 



THB BESSAyBD HOTHBB. 41 

*'I put it into a warm bath, hoping 
it might reviye. But, alas ! I don't see 
no signs." 

The piteous sobs and sighs of Lady 
G^rantchester were really heart-rending; 
even to an accoucheur and a monthly 
nurse they were painful; and whil* the 
doctor murmured his deep sympathy, 
Mrs. Eearden kept up a chorus of " Poor 
lady! who'd a-thought it ?" 

The dead body was raised from the 
vessel of hot water, and the doctor, after 
a moment's examination, pronounced it 
" dead — ^bom dead." 

At that moment, a noise was heard; 
they turned round, and, to their horror 
and surprise, beheld the wretched mother 
standing near them. She had sprung 
from her bed, and now in phrenzied 
accents screamed out, 

*' 'Tis false ! 'tis false ! I heard it cry." 

*'Not so — not so," soothingly replied 



4i! THE BEREAVED MOTHEB. 

the obsequious son of iEsculapius ; *' Ihe 
poor little creature never breathed. I 
will stake my professional reputation 
that those lungs were never inflated 
by natural breath. Do believe me, 
dear lady* Alas 1 I wish it were other-^ 
wisel" 

" I heard it cry. I sweto I did." 

"Doctor, my lady raves. As I'm an 
honest woman, that 'ere child was bom 
as you see it J 

" I know it was. To science the fact 
is clear; had it ever breathed even a 
single respiration, I should have known 
it, and thrown a heavy responsibihty 
on you.'' 

"You're perfectly right, sir. Oh, my 
lady, don't take on sO ; the doctor can see 
it never had no breath ; indeed it nevei* 
had." And she mentally added, "It's 
lucky I didn't do as Jie told me. If 
t had, I'd have been foxmd out; now 



ij. » 



THE! BEREAVED MOTHEB. 4S 

all's right here^ and t'other shall pay 
me for the fnght IVe had." 

"Do return to your bed/* urged the 
medical man; **your ladyship will en- 
danger your life by this exertion/' 

" And what is my life now ? I tell you 
they have murdered my angel child/1j 

Just then the Earl of Grantchester, 
one of the most amiable of men and 
devoted of husbands, quietly entered the 
room— from which he had been per- 
suaded to absent himself only during 
a single hour, to attend to his duties 
in the House of Lords ; and as he now 
came in, the last observation of his 
beloved wife, her excitement, and the 
manner of all, struck him with such 
strange astonishment, that, overcome by 
emotion and terror, he had hardly strength 
to inquire the cause of the scene around 
him, 

" Alas ! my lord," interposed the doc- 



44 THE BEBEAVED MOTHEB. 

tor, ** here is the body. I am sorry to 
say that, from certain indications, the poor 
little infant never conld have breathed. 
Look, my lord." 

''I say it again, the child has been 
murdered !" 

"Do, do be calm, dear Agnes. Ee- 
member that, if it be His will, we must 
not repine. My dear sir, your medical 
knowledge I have the highest respect 
for; but the blow has fallen so sud- 
denly and heavily on me, and Lady 
Grrantchester is so fearfully excited, that, 
to satisfy all parties — ^nay, I am sure the 
step will meet with your approbation — 
I shall call in three of the first accoucheurs 
in London to pronounce their opinion — 
not that I doubt yours — ^but my wife 
seems so positive. The loss of an heir to 
the House of Grantchester must be looked 
into." 
. *'How lucky that I didn't stop the 



THE BEREAVED MOTHER. 45 

breath of the real one !" murmured Mrs, 
Eearden to herself. 

" My lord, I sincerely sympathize with 
your feelings, and highly approve of 
your suggestion; but just now we 
have something of more importance to 
attend to/* 

" What can be of more importance ?" 

The doctor approached the peer and 
whispered — "The countess has lost her 
reason. I trust it is only for a time; 
but at present she is " 

"Doctor, doctor — you kill me. My 
beloved Agnes ! " 

"Yes, Gerard, he is there in heaven. 
I see him beckoning — ^I'll come, my beau- 
tiful boy ; yes, Til come to you, and leave 
these foul murderers ^* 

*' Alas ! you see, my lord,*' groaned the 
doctor, pointing to his patient, " she is a 
lunatic.** 

" Yes, my lord, there am^t no dqubt ; no 



46 THE BEREAVED MOTHER. 

doubt about it whatsomever/* joined in 
Mrs. Eearden. 

The Earl rushed towards his wife ; but, 
glaring at him, she accused him of plotting 
with the destroyers of her darling child. 

" Yes, yes ; I know he is a seraph now. 
I heard his last cry — ^his cry doubtless for 
help — yet his inhuman father was not 
there to help him. Yes, my bright in- 
fant, your mother could not save you; 
but she wiU join you in heaven." And 
the wretched demented one burst out in 
a wild song. 

The Earl could bear no more. He threw 
himself into an arm-chair, and, covering 
his fiice with his hands, the hero of many 
a well-sustained fight burst into tears. 
The doctor took him by the arm, and 
with what he imagined words of comfort, 
led him gently from the place. 

The callous nurse, who, soothing only 
for hire, cared little for the grief she had 



THE BEBEAVED MOTHEB, 47 

caused, now partly by force, pariiy by 
entreaty, again placed the poor lady in 
her bed, and then, ringing the bell, 
several persons were soon assembled, who 
formed a truly sorrowing group (for Agnes 
was beloved by all who served her) around 
her couch. The doctor returned and made 
arrangements that her ladyship should be 
strictly watched. The nurse glided from 
the room. 

Standing near the door, she found 
George Sydney ; the traces of tears were 
still plainly visible on his cheeks. The 
nurse silently opened the door of an ad- 
joining chamber ; he followed her in. 

"Well, IVe done it. It was a werry 
hard struggle." 

'^Hush! hushl Come and speak to 
me at my owii house, but not here ; walls 
have ears.*' 

" Give me my money V whispered 
Mrs. Bearden. 



48 THE BEBEAVED MOTHEB. 

" Wait/' answered George. 

" Not a moment — my life is in danger ! 
I qnit England to-morrow for ever ; give 
me my money, or '* 

'*Well, well, here it is;" and Sydney 
took out a pocket-book, in which were 
severalbank-notes,countedoutfiffcy pounds, 
and handed them to Mrs. Bearden. 

"Ten pounds more for my travelling 
expenses, or I must remain in London/* 

" Cormorant ! will nothing satisfy you ? 
But remember, this is your last /' and he 
handed her another ten. 

**Well, now we are square for the 
present." 

"Present? what do you mean? I've 
overpaid, you/* 

" Yes, yes, I understand ; and now I'll 
trouble you not to leave this room for 
some minutes, for it wont do for us two 
to be seen trotting about together: so 
mind, don't stir ; do you hear me ?" 



THE BEREAVED MOTHER. 49 

" This tone to me ! Do you forget our 
relative positions ?" 

"Not at all. In public Tm a poor 
nurse, and you a fine, dasliing young 
fellow, as will — thanks to me — ^be a grand 
lord one of these days; but in private, 
you know, we're partners." 

" Partners, woman ! Partners in 
what ?" 

"In crime ! So mind your eye. Master 
George, and don't you ruffle my feathers. 
Behave well, and you wont hurt. Good 
night, and pleasant dreams to you," added 
she, as she left him. 

"Curses on her; would that I could 
destroy her !" muttered George. 

The nurse was returning to the sick 
chamber, but was forbidden to re-enter it 
for the present, as her appearance evidently 
excited her ladyship. 

" You're right, doctor ; TU come back 
in the morning and see the dear creature. 

VOL. I. 4 



50 THE BEBEAVED MOTHEB. 

Ah! she's a hangel of goodness when 
she's in her right senses ; but she^s sadly 
troubled just now. IVe several little odd 
jobs to do at home ; so I begs respectfully 
to take my leave. Ill call and take my 
wages mi things in the morning, and I 
hopes to find her poor dear ladyship better. 
Poor thing ! Eich and poor, we all sujQTers 
alike/' sighed she, with a look upwards 
as she left the presence of the medical 
man and descended the handsome stair* 
case of Qrantchester House. 



51 



CHAPTEE IV. 



OLD ST. Giles's. 



"Well, when youVe done sipping yonr 
cat-lap stuff, rn trouble you to explain 
what all this here means. Tou knows 
I'm not to be hoodwinked or deceived. 
Mother Eearden— ever since we kept 
company youVe been a trying that *ere 
dodge on me, but it wont do — so now 
tell me the truth, the whole truth, or you 
may repent it." 

These words were uttered by a coarse- 
looking labourer — ^probably, from his ap- 
pearance, a nawie — a good-looking rough 
man, whose age might be forty-five, but 
whose well-taaoned skin and prematurely 
furrowed face might well defy a critical 

4 — 2 



52 OLD ST. Giles's. 

guesser to pronounce the exact years he 
numbered. A pickaxe, a shovel, a spade 
and a hod, rested in the comer, and 
the visitor to this out-of-the-way region 
(for we paint the back room of a lodging- 
house in one of the four streets which 
still remain to teU where St. Giles's of the 
olden times existed, and of which Mrs. 
Eearden was the proprietor, and to which 
she was an occasional visitor, as at the 
present moment — her professional address 
being very far superior to this locality) 
might be tempted to believe that the man 
before him was simply an Irish labourer 
or a British nawie ; but to confess the 
truth, which we are ever bound to supply 
to our readers, there did exist certain 
gentlemen who not unfrequently loll 
about the streets of London dressed in* 
tight - blue uniforms, with letters and 
numbers on their collars, who privately 
refused to believe these to be the sole 



OLD ST. Giles's. 53 

employments of Jem Marks. It is true he 
had never got into any serious scrape but 
once; but he had often been suspected, 
and poor dear Mrs. Eearden (as her neigh- 
bours called her) was generally blamed for 
keeping company with such a scampy 
chap. Mrs. Eearden, however, scorned 
their opinions, and hung the remnant of 
her affections (no great weight) on the 
weak support of Jem Marks's manly 
beauty. 

" Don't you think, my dear Jem, that 
if I asked you to go and fetch a bottle of 
Old Tom, and gave you a five-pound note 
out of the ten pounds which I received 
for this last job, it would be a deal better 
way than telling you a long story about 
how I earned it ?" 

"So you may think, but / doesn't; 
so you may as well out with it at 
once.'' 

" But Jem, darling, it's a nasty affair ; 



54 OLD ST. Giles's. 

you're better clear of it. If I tells it, you 
becomes an accomplice, and I'd rather 
suffer myself than see you suffer." 

" Gammon, Sal ! soft sawder wont go 
down with me. Do you think as how I 
believes you only got ten pounds for 
steaHng one babby and substituting, as 
Poll Marshall says, another for it ?" 

" I hopes you didn't teU PoU of it." 

" Not too much. Of coorse I had to 
say something when I carried off her dead 
kid, and gave her a sovereign for it. But 
I didn't teU her uncommon much, for Pm 
blessed if I had anything to teU." 

" So much the better ; now run and get 
the gin. Here's a bottle ; that 'ere tea has 
made me dreadful thirsty, I do declare." 
At that moment a child placed in the bed 
cried out. Mrs. Eearden flew across the 
room, and with alacrity began feeding it. 

" What the dickens are you after? Why 
don't you finish the brat?" 



OLD ST. Giles's. 55 

" Jem, Jem ! you don't understand ; 
that 'ere babby is a fortun to us as long 
as it Kves, and I'll take care it shan't 
never die while I blows my bellows. It's 
a regular income to us." 

" No ; is it, though ? Well, then, Sal, 
I'll take care on it. We'll give it some 
gin when I comes back." 

" No ; it's a lord's child, and will turn 
up its nose at our common stuff. It's 
of a rare good family.'* 

" And how. Mother Eearden, did you 
get into such good company ?" 
• " I was strongly recommended there by 
the gent as is to support us for the 
fiiture." 

" What ?" screamed the amazed Jem. 

" I am't joking. He somehow or other 
got acquainted with me, as you will have 
it, and then he seduced my principles, as 
he called 'em, and then he bribed me to 
throttle this little chap ; and, to make it 



56 OLD ST. Giles's. 

easy for me, he introduced me to the Eaxl 
and the doctor, and swore that, though I 
warnt the most polished, yet I was the 
most clever nurse in all the world, and 
so I gets in; and then he thinks I was 
such a fool as to go for to do it, but I 
didn't ; you got Poll's dead kid just in 
the nick of time — to antomize it, as you 
told her — and so I passed it off on the 
lord as his child, and I brought this here 
little fellow away." 

'• And what did you get for aU this ?" 

" Ten pounds." 

" No more ?" 

" No, upon my life, that was aU ! But 
you shall fairly have half; so now run and 
get the liquor ;" and Mrs. Eearden went 
to her cloak, which she had hung up, and 
from its ample folds pulled out a pocket- 
book, from whence she took a ten-poimd 
note. But this seemed scarcely to satisfy 
her ; she still eagerly looked through the 



OLD ST. Giles's. 57 

different compartments, and, after satis- 
fying herself that there was really no 
more in it, dropped it on the floor with a 
groan, and in agonizing tones ejaculated — 
" I'm a ruined woman ! I'm undone. Oh, 
I'm lost — lost for ever !" 

"What's the matter, Sal?'' asked her 
companion, carelessly. 

"Oh, it's gone, all gone. I'll go to 
the purlice in the morning. Oh, these 
London thieves, curse 'em !'' 

" Don't curse 'em, mother. What have 
you lost ?" 

" Fifty pounds in good notes," sobbed 
the woman. 

" Why, you said you'd only ten." 

" I know I did, but that was a Ke. I 
had fifty pounds besides this ten." 

" Then yoii meant to chizzle me ?" 

" Not by no means. I meant to sur- 
prise you first and then to divide it 
afterwards, fairly. You needn't smile ; 



58 OLD ST. Giles's. 

indeed I did. Ton my life, Jem, I really 
didr 

"Ah, then there's no harm done/' 
replied Jem. " Here's the cash, and now 
for once we'll halve it fairly, though I 
suspect you seldom does;" and he pro- 
duced the money, which he had cunningly 
abstracted from Mrs. Bearden's cloak 
whilst she was engaged in feeding the baby. 

Whether her happiness at thus re- 
covering one- half of her lost treasure, or 
her anger at being thus robbed, predomi- 
nated, it is impossible to know ; suffice it 
to say that, after a moment's consideration, 
she smoothed (as far as was possible) her 
wrinkled forehead, and joined in the laugh 
which now burst from her rough wooer. 

A few minutes more and the spirits 
sparkled on the table, harmony was 
restored, and confidence at its height. 

" And now, Sal, tell us, old brick, what 
do you mean to do with the young 'un ?" 



OLD ST. Giles's. 59 

" I shall put it out to wet-nurse with 
Poll — she*s the werry one. As her child 
is dead it will be a comfort to her, and 
she'U do it for a couple of bob a week." 

" And who's to pay her ?" 

" I will," proudly replied the monthly 
nurse — "/will; it'U only cost about five 
pound a year, and I can afford that much 



now. 



€( 



I loves you dearly, Mrs. Eearden, 
you he's so sharp; you aUays makes 
something out of everything." 

"And I means to do so. And now 
let's talk of something else." 

" So we will, darling, if you likes." 

" But, I say, you forgot to give me the 
change out of the sovereign I gave . you 
for the gin." 

** Lor' 1 so I did. But never mind that 
now; let's hav^ a cosy chat, Sal — ^hang 
money, we've got plenty — diet's enjoy our- 
selves. Fasten the door, light another 



60 OLD ST. Giles's. 

candle, and may I be smashed if we don't 
make a night of it ! It's too late for you 
to return to Eussell-street to-night, so 
let's make ourselves comfortable/' 

"So we will," replied Mrs. Eearden, 
forgetting to press for her change ; " it's 
a poor heart that never rejoices." 

We will pursue their orgie no further. 
We have seen quite enough of them. 



6] 



CHAPTER V. 



RESCUED. 



We will, for the better condensing of 
our narrative to a proper length, skip 
over ten years — ^years which individually 
have comprised a whole history, changed 
men's fortunes, witnessed the last rites 
of sepulture bestowed on thousands, em- 
bracing in its cycle the proud announce- 
ment of even many a royal birth; wars 
liave raged, and the same hands who 
only yesterday sought to destroy each 
other have been since clasped in amity; 
whole nations have been swept away, 
and new kingdoms started into existence ; 
the peer has become a beggar, and the 
beggar a peer. The heir of good fortune 



i 



62 BESCTTED. 

may wonder at the rapid improvements 
of the world; the bereaved widow may 
grieve to see that the son shines as 
brightly as when he whom she loved 
was wont to bask beneath its rays. 
Ten years have brought an age of 
change — of care and happiness to count- 
less thousands. To London as a city, 
to her ways, her habits, and her fashions, 
the lapse has scarcely been perceptible; 
the wanderer returns, and finds his 
parents sitting down to almost the same 
identical meal, and precisely at the same 
hour as they indulged in it before he went 
away; he seeks a place of amusement 
—he sees the same faces he left; while 
the rector of the parish appears as if 
his sermon had been a continuous stream 
of eloquence, poured forth without inter- 
ruption since the last sabbath before his 
departure. The traveller who thus finds 
all unchanged, turns away with disgust 



RESCUED. 63 

on thus discovering himself practically 
to be but a single — a wretched iota, in 
the great world in which he lives, un- 
noticed and uncared for. 

But far different from these are the 
feelings of the boy who has passed the 
two first lustres of his Efe, and embraces 
within that period the every recollection 
of the past. To him the ten years have 
been a life-^ — ^an age, and aU that has 
gone before it seems only as a well- 
invented narrative, a pleasing fiction. To 
him the future abounds with hope and 
joy; but all boys are not happy, for 
many a poor lad has had his bright 
young spirit crushed by tyranny and 
poverty, and those pure feelings intended 
by a beneficent Creator to lead a future 
man to heaven, diverted into channels 
of discontent and crime. 

The boy who now slowly paced beside 
the Eegent^s Canal, within a few yards 



64 BBSCUED. 

of the Harrow-road bridge, was 'not, 
however, yet stained with crime. The 
only guilty thought which had ever 
assailed his young mind had just passed 
through it, and that thought had as 
instantly been chased away by a superior 
feeling of right — ^that feeling of right 
which from one's birth lurks within our 
bosom, and blooms without extraneous 
aid in the breast of every human being. 
He had scanned his situation — he had 
reflected on his ways ; he foresaw the 
misery of his future lot. For a single 
instant, then, did the unhappy youth 
dream of an antidote which the spirit 
of evil whispered in his ear. How easily 
he might end all his woes by plunging 
into the sluggish stream before him! 
He took one pace forward, and, as he 
did so, he looked up towards heaven. 
The appeal was not in vain — an ever- 
watchful Providence at once obliterated 



BESCUED. 65 

the vile suggestion, and gave him courage 
to bear up against misfortune. With a 
proud smile of triumph he threw back 
his bright tresses, and wiping the tears 
from his eyes, he showed a noble, hand- 
some face, a countenance that no poverty 
could destroy, as he loudly exclaimed, 
as if in answer to the wicked spirit 
that had just prompted him, ** No ! Q-od 
will help me if I'm good," and he cahnly 
continued his walk. 

In front of him walked a nurse, 
carrying a lovely child, some twelve 
months old, dressed with all the ex- 
pensive luxury which wealth can bestow. 
The woman was humming a tune as 
she went along, bearing in her arms 
her sleeping charge ; the poor lad would 
have given worlds to have entered into 
conversation with her (for he felt sadly 
lonely), but she appeared to be far too 
fine a lady for him to presume to address, 

VOL. I. 5 



66 BESCUED. 

SO he silently followed her along. Pre- 
sently a loud shout was heard ; an infu- 
riated buU suddenly appeared in the 
towing-path, pursued by several butchers 
and a host of boys all shouting as loud 
as they could, and thereby increasing the 
rage of the savage animal. The creature 
came roaring and tearing on; in a mo- 
ment the lad, with that instinct of self- 
preservation which is implanted in us all, 
wafi safely ensconced in a tree ; not so 
the poor girl, who, seeing immediate and 
imminent danger, jumped into the canal. 
The animal galloped on, and was soon 
past the spot ; only two or three of the 
mob remained behind, and endeavoured 
to drag the nurse out of the water. At 
length, though with difl&culty, they did so, 
and re-ascended the bank, probably un- 
aware that a poor little infant was still 
behind. By this time, the lad, who had 
watched the whole scene, was down, and 



BBSCUED. 67 

running to tlie edge of the water, eagerly 
called on the bystanders to assist him in 
rescuing the child — ^but all in vain ; the 
water was ten feet deep, and none of them 
could swim. John (for such was the boy's 
name) did not hesitate for a moment ; he 
threw off his jacket and plunged in ; the 
baby had sunk, but he dived down, for he 
was a good swimmer, and after one or two 
failures, rose up with the little being in 
his arms. He handed it to a bystander 
before he left the water. On coming on 
land himself, however, he was overcome, 
and became insensible for a few minutes ; 
but soon recovering, was hastening from 
the scene, evidently fearing his long ab- 
sence from home might get him into 
trouble, when the nurse, who was profuse 
in her thanks, insisted on knowing his 
name and address. He gave them : they 
ran thus — "John Marks, Little-street, St. 
Giles's." 



\ 



68 BESCUED. 

"What a horrid place!" uttered the nnrse. 

" I hope the child is none the worse, 
ma'am ; good-bye !" cried the boy, as he 
scampered off as quickly as his legs could 
carry him. 

And now again we turn to the scene of 
our last chapter ; a comfortable dinner is 
on the table, and at it are seated Jem 
Marks and Mrs. Eeaxden, or, as they are 
now called — ^having lately gone through 
the ceremony of marriage — Mr. and Mrs. 
Marks, while a third place remains vacant 
as if for an expected guest. 

" Drat that boy ! says I ; where can he 
be loitering ? I only wish I had a hold of 
his ears.'* 

"I wish I had him by the scruff of 
the neck ! I'd half break his idle young 
hack/' 

" Marks, you're werry wiolent in talk." 

" Oh, it's very fine for you ; you thinks, 
'cause you got into a grand lord's house 



BESCUED. 69 

by the back door, you may get in again ; 
but there ain't weazens to stretch, or 
babbies' breaths to stop, every day in the 
week/' 

" Hush ! don't be a fool." 

" Call me a fool again, and I'll punch 
your head, Mother Marks, as you names 
yourself." 

"No, you wont; I holds the purse, 
and if I gives you a shilling, may I 
be " 

** Stop, stop, mother, that'U do ; don't 
be wiolent; it's all through this cussed 
boy ; I've a mind to turn him out neck 
and crop." 

" That would be clever. Why, 'twas 
only last March we got twenty pounds." 

" Tes, but then we keeps him, and by 
threatening this psalm-singing chap, we 
could get the money just as easily if he 
were away. Why, he still believes him 
to be dead ; I am sure I wishes he wur." 



70 BEscniD. 

" Jem, you is an ass^ and no mistake. 
WeVe Kved so fax by supposing to have 
killed him ; by-and-by we'll play t'otber 
game, and make our fortunes by restoring 
him/' 

" Well, that's clever ; I'm blessed if it 
am't. But who'd believe our word ?" 

" Never mind," said Mrs. Marks, ora<5u- 
larly shaking her head — "never mind. 
I can see through a milestone as well as 
most people. Besides, I likes the boy; 
they say he's the image of me." 

A mouthful he was about to swallow 
went the wrong way and nearly choked 
Marks. He was smothering a laugh at 
the preposterous idea of the beautiftil boy 
resembling the withered old hag before 
him; when, fortunately for him, the sub- 
ject of their conversation entered, and 
endeavoured to steal quietly to his seat. 

" Where have you been, you imp of the 
devil ?" roared Marks. 



•i >» 



BBSGUED, 71 

Mrs. Marks started up and seized him, 

" Why, yoTir clothes are all wet and in 
a muck. IVe a mind to give you a good 
hiding, you little warmint. Where have 
you been, eh ?'* 

" In the canal," 

"In the canal! What brought you 
there ?" asked the female. 

" I wish you'd never corned out of it, 
growled Jim. 

Please, I jumped in to save a baby/' 
Did you succeed ?'' 

" Yes/* 

" Did they give you anything ?" eagerly 
demanded Mrs. Marks; "if they did, 
give it me — ^it belongs to me.*' 

" But they gave me nothing." 

" Then you're an idle, good-for-nothing 
young blackguard, to go and jump in the 
water and spoil all your clothes for no- 
thing. And now tell m6 the truth/' 

" I always do," sobbed the boy. 



<t 



tt 



72 KESCUED. 

" What brought you up there ?'* 

"Please, mother, Mr. Figgins turned 
me out of school." 

" Out of school ! what for ?'' 

" Because you never paid him, and he 
said 'twas setting a bad example. He 
gave me a severe caning, and took away 
my slate and books, to show the other 
boys what it was not to pay. He called 
you both by bad names." 

" Hang him ! I'll be quits," muttered 
Marks. 

"And so, sir, you chooses to behave 
bad, and gets turned out of your school 
and punished afore all the boys ?' 

" It was not my fault, mother.' 

"Don't answer me, you imperent 
feUow !" 

"You keep our dinner waiting. But 
I'U punish you ; you shan't have none 
to-day, and to-morrow your father " 

" He ain't no cub of mine." 



i99 



99 



BESCUED. 73 

" Silence, Jem. To-morrow your father 
will get you a box and a set of brushes, 
and wiU expect you to support yourself and 
bring us the profits. This here schooling's 
all bosh ; we ain't a-going to keep you 
in idleness, I can tell you/' 

The boy sought his bed in tears, 
throwing out his clothes to be dried. The 
worthy couple resumed their meal. 

Ere they had finished it, the clatter of 
a carriage and horses was heard in the 
narrow street ; unwashed heads were pro- 
truded from every window ; every door- 
way was fiUed with a curious crowd of 
admiring observers. And no wonder ; it 
was the first time such an equipage had 
been seen in this locality. Tes ; a splendid 
chariot, emblazoned with a nobleman's 
arms, drawn by two spirited horses, who 
seemed to bear with impatience the con- 
trol of the magnificently-liveried coach- 
man, actually rolled down Little-street, 



74 BESCUED. 

St. Giles's, while two gold-bedecked and 
powdered footmen condescended to inquire 
the address of Mr. Marks from door to 
door. Jem, who had heard this, turned 
pale, slammed-to the door, and screamed 
out — " Sal, find me a hiding-place ! Tm 
blowed if it's not the Lord Mayor come 
to take me up about that little affidr in 
the City; hadn't I better get up the 
chimney ?" 

" No, you can't ; don't you see there's a 
fire ? Get xmder John's bed. I'll send 'em 
on a wrong scent; they shan't gammon 
me — there now, do be quick. Try to catch 
my Jem, indeed, it's like their imperdence. 
Now let 'em come if they dare ;" and she 
flung open the door just as one of the 
powdered lacqueys had beguu to strike on 
it with his gold-headed cane. 
"What do you want?" 
" Does Mr. Marks live here ?" 
"What's that to you? Suppose he 



HESCUED. 75 

does, what then? but then agin, supposing 
he doesn't?" 

" His lordship desired me to ask/' 

" I knows ; IVe seen the beak, but he 
shan't have my Jem. He's gone into the 
country; so the Lord Mayor may go 
ahead, and not come looking arter poor 
people; he'd better be a-taking care of 
the City." 

'*I really don't xmderstand you," re- 
monstrated the man. 

" Let me out ; there is some mistake, 
Thomas," mildly observed the occupant 
of the carriage — " let me out. My good 
woman," he added, approaching the ex- 
nurse, " if you are the wife of Mr. Marks, 
you can tell me if he has a son, a remark- 
ably fine, daring boy." 

" He hasn't no children," indignantly 
replied Mrs. Marks. 

" Then I am in error; I regret it much, 
and will withdraw. I had hoped that one 



76 RESCUED. 

SO good would not have given a fictitious 
name and address. He evidently wished 
to avoid my thanks, and the reward his 
bravery had so justly merited/' 

"Eeward?" 

" Tes, madam. I am Lord ITrmstone ; 
my only daughter was nearly meeting 
with a watery grave, from which she was 
saved with difficulty by the courage of 
the fine lad I now so earnestly seek. Can 
you assist me in my search ?*' 

Mrs. Marks nearly fainted with delight. 
Here was good fortune with a vengeance, 
but how was she to get at it ? She now 
clearly saw that the little hero was the 
child she had just punished and disowned. 
She was, however, reUeved from her per- 
plexity by a strange stroke of luck. While 
his lordship's back was turned, Jem had 
crept from xmder the bed, fearful lest his 
wife should monopolize the treasure, and 
stood beside the nobleman. 

" I'm Jem Marks, your lordship." 



BESCUED. 77 

"Indeed! that's fortunate — ^yon can 
then tell me; have you a boy of about 
ten or eleven years old ?" 

" Indeed I have, my lord." 

" Is he at home ?'' 

" Yes, my lord/' 

" I would like to see him, then," added 
the peer, sitting down. 

"Of course you shall." And in less 
than three minutes the fellow re-appeared, 
dragging in the poor child. 

" My darling boy," whined Mrs, Marks, 
" I trusts you ain't caught cold from your 
wetting." 

" I put the little chap to bed to prewent 
him having one," said Marks, trying to 
speak softly. 

The peer embraced the boy ; and, 
turning up his long locks, gazed on 
him with evident admiration. Then 
again he kissed his forehead, and turn- 
ing to the wonder-struck couple, he 
said — 



(( 



€( 



78 RESCUED. 

" Tou will allow me to take your son 
with me ?'* 

Of coorse, my lord." 

He ain't exactly our child, you see/' 
chimed in Sally ; " he's a hoflFspring of a 
poor relative as is dead, so weVe adopted 
him, and treats him exactly as if he was 
a babby of our own ; don't we, Johnny ?" 
And as he did not answer, she gave him 
a sly pinch which made him wince with 
pain. 

Whether Lord Urmstone saw this or 
not I cannot say; he made no remark, 
but hurried the little fellow into his car- 
riage, and in a few seconds the proud 
horses and the still prouder menials shook 
from their feet the squalid dust of this 
most disgusting neighbourhood. 

Delighted at the idea of the reward 
they anticipated, the joy-loving pair got 
an extra pint of their favourite beverage ; 
and by drinking to each other, to the boy 



BESCUED, 79 

who was to make their fortune, and to 
the peer who was to reward them for his 
conduct, they got so confused that they 
with difficulty made out the contents of 
the following note, which reached them 
late in the evening: — 

"Mr. Marks, 

"As the boy I took from your 
house to-day is not your own child, you 
can care little for him — ^indeed, he does 
not speak highly of your affection. In 
your line of life, the burden of maintain- 
ing and causing to be educated the child 
of another must press heavily on you ; I 
therefore take charge of the lad, and 
relieve you from all ftirther responsibility. 
His bringing up will now devolve on me. 
He shall be trained properly, but only 
with notions fitting his Qwn sphere. This 
will amuse me, and perhaps solace me for 
many other cares that weigh me down." 



\9> 



80 RESCUED. 

" But, I say," chimed in Mrs. Marks, 
" ain't there no money ? I'm blessed if 
he shall have him for nothing." 

" Don't be a fool — don't it take all the 
expense oflF our hands?' 

" He's a stingy old rascal." 

**That he be. But let's finish the 
letter — ^there's more on it, though there 
bean't no enclosure." 

"To com-pen-sate ('what a plaguy 
long word!') for the loss of his services, 
I have ordered my secretary to call 
and give you a cheque for twenty-five 
pounds; and this sum I will forward 
you every year, as long as he remains 
with me. But if you attempt to come 
near him, or communicate with him 
without my express permission, that al- 
lowance will be instantly stppped. 

" Urmstone." 



€C 



Hurrah!" shouted Marks; "keep him 



•J- » 



BESCUED. 81 

and welcome. Til be whipped if I want 
the brat." ' 

"Well, somehow or other, wirtue 
allays reaps its own reward. I brought 
up that boy well — didn't I send him 
to school for a bob a week ?" 
" Yes, but you never paid it.^ 
"Well, that's no odds. But here's 
the Earl's jolly* good 'ealth— ' 'andsome 
is, as 'andsome does.' Suppose we have 
another quartern or so ; we has lots of 
the tin. 'Pon my life, that boy's inwalu- 
able. I feels so sleepy, Mark;" and 
down dropped her head beside that of her 
husband, in hopeless intoxication. 



VOL. I. 6 



82 



CHAPTEE VI. 



THE SPONGIXG-HOnSE. 



Th. law for capturmg^^d impAonix^- 
the unhappy debtor is now, fortunately, 
modified. The poor fellow using his 
every exertion to gain sufficient money 
to pay off his debts, can no longer be 
pounced upon and hurried off to a jail, 
where years of compelled idleness — 
years during which the distracted brain 
weakens in its powers by feeding on 
itself within stone walls, and loses 
its brightest intellect before his liberty 
is restored. Cut off from his family and 
friends by personal hatred, or carried off 
for pohtical reasons, the wretched man 
who was in those days unable to satisfy 



THE SPONGING-HOUSB. 83 

his creditors, was at once shut up in a 
prison, but not until he had been fleeced 
of his last shiUing by some extortionate 
Israelite, in his filthy domicile of profli- 
gacy, where the son of the captor often 
played the part of a money-lender on in- 
terest (now unheard of), while his brother 
drew up the necessary papers, and pre- 
sented a biU of chaorges Mghtfiil to be- 
hold. A cousin or a hanger-on haply may 
chance to be a wine-merchant ; and as a 
large portion of the loan is represented 
by this luxury, he not only furnishes it, 
but afterwards repurchases it (sometimes 
within an hour), at a fearful loss. In 
these sponging -houses, everything is 
paid for with ready money. No bill 
is made out, for even the thievish pro- 
prietor would himself have blushed at 
seeing his monstrous charges recorded on 
paper. 

Yes, such was the law — now much im- 

6—3 



84 THE SFOKOmO-HOUSE. 

proved, though still open to beneficial 
changes. 

But to return to our narrative, and 
to those laws as they are now carried 
out. 

In the back parlour of a wretched street, 
not a hundred yards from Chancery-lane, 
sat a debtor. His face, screened from 
observation by his hands, his desponding 
attitude, the occasional beat of his foot, 
all bespoke the grief of the man^ who (as 
we said before) now sat in Mr. Ephraim's 
well-barred room. 

There is no cushion on the greasy 
chair, the oaken table is bedaubed with 
ink and disfigured with letters cut in it, 
the uncarpeted floor is slightly sanded, 
the walls are ungraced by pictures. A 
coarse repast stands untouched in a 
corner, while in its place stands a bottle 
of sherry and an iU-wiped ghss; every- 
where dirt and carelessness greet the eye. 



THE SPOXGING-HOUSE. 85 

No wonder, then, that the elegant man 
before us groans in spirit, at being thus . 
detained within this pandemonium. 

And now he turns round and displays 
the handsome face of George Sydney. He 
does so as a snuflBing Jew boy announces 
that Abraham Smith wishes to speak to 
him. 

" Show him in," quicUy said George, 
" and light a fire — ^I feel cold — and bring 
me a bottle of port — old port, if you 
have it.'* 

"The best r 

" Of course — ^why do you linger ?*' 

''Cash down — ^no tick here — debtors 
allays pay beforehand.'* 

George threw down half a sovereign in 
disgust. 

"Well, I don't think that's enough. 
Mr. Ephraim allays charges eighteen 
shillings for his best port." 

"Well, then— there— will that do?" 



86 THE SPONGING-HOUSE. 

cried the man of refinement, throwing 
down another; "take what you like, but 
leave me/* 

Abraham Smith entered, and at once 
seated himself; the obsequious Israelite 
had evidently a short memory, for he 
forgot all signs of his former respect, and 
even omitted to take off his hat. 

"Veil, youVe sent for me — ^vat have 
you got to say ? Going to pay, eh ?" 

" You know I can't. Heaven knows I 
would, if I could." 

" I say, the less you says about that 
*ere place the better ; swindlers don't go 
there.'* 

" Swindlers ! Do you presume *' 

"Lor' blesh my shoul — ^a storm in a 
butter-boat. Don't trouble yourself to 
get into a passion for this here trifle; 
you'll hear a deal more before I've done 
with you. Don't you call it a swindle 
to dress up your walley as a clergyman, 



THE SPONGING-HOUSE. 87 

and tell me he was the Eeverend Mr. 
Coleman, a Christian parson, with a large 
fortune, and so induce me to cash your 
jint bill ? Didn't you tell me the Hearl 
would do hanything for you, and now I . 
'ears he wont have nothing to say to 
you; and didn't you 'umbug me about 
being made a lay bishop ; and wasn't you 
all the time a trying to get into Parlia- 
ment to shirk being arrested ? Bather 
rummy for an 'onest man. I don't sup- 
pose forgery would com^ much amiss to 
such a chap as you." 

" Forgery, you villain !'* 

" Oh, call names ; they don't break no 
bones. Mind, I don't say as how you 
'ave committed forgery, 'cause that's hac- 
tionable ; but I says, and I believes it 
too, you wouldn't a-mind doing it." 

"Let us drop this," hastily said George; 
" I sent for you to ask you if there was 
no way of arranging this business ?" 



88 THE SFONOING-HOUSE. 

" None, unless you can pay." 

" You know I can't/' 

*'I know you are a swindling scamp, 
and ril see if I can't prosecute you and 
your pal for conspiracy; robbing an 
'onest man out of his good money/' 

" Tou only gave me sixty pounds and 
some wretched wine, which I gave yon 
back, for a three-months' bill of three 
hundred pounds/' 

" Veil, and too much, too ; ain't I lost 
the sixty pounds?" 

"Tou may very well wait till the 
death of Lord Grantchester ; he's in a 
deep decline/' 

" That's a he/' 

George, irritated beyond endurance, 
bit his lip till the blood came. 

" Besides, / don't care for Lord Grant- 
chester, not I ; I believe he's a bad 'un 
too; tame ducks don't come from wild 
ducks' nests." 



THE SPONGING-HOUSB. 89 

The Jew boy came in, put the port on 
the table, and handed George a note. 
The worthy Abraham filled two glasses 
of the old port just brought in, and 
gulped down one after the other. Having 
read the note, George appeared to feel 
triumphantly joyful, and murmured, " It 
is from my brother.'* 

*' Hang your brother ! I don t care for 
him, not I. Besides, I don t believe it." 

''Is my lord's servant to wait?'* asked 
the boy. 

" No," replied George. The boy with- 
drew. 

The creditor began to get fidgety ; his 
eyes grew wide open; he took off* his 
hat, as if by accident, and said, in a less 
bullying tone — 

" If I could only believe that letter's 
from the Hearl." 

"Bead it," cried George, carelessly 
throwing it across to him. 



90 ^ THE SPONGING-HOUSE. 

He did so ; it ran thus : — 

" My deab George, — 

"I have just heard of your steange 
misfortune. In half an hour I wiU be 
with you ; my only and attached brother 
must not remain in durance a moment 
longer than is necessary. I only wait 
for the arrival of my lawyer, when I 
wiU come, my dearest George, and restore 
you to liberty. I trust this contretemps 
may not transpire, as it might injure you 
with some of your friends; although, as 
you say, it must ever redound to your 
credit, as the money was raised to save 
the family of a poor clergyman from ruin. 
You were ever kind-hearted and generous ; 
but, alas ! I fear you are sometimes, as in 
the present instance, sadly victimized. 
Expect me in half an hour. 

" Tour affectionate brother, 

" Gbantchbster/* 



J 



.i 



THE SPONGING-HOUSB. 91 

The reading of the letter concluded, 
neither spoke a word for a moment or 
two ; at length George broke silence, and, 
in a somewhat exulting voice, asked — 

"Well, what do you think of that, 
Mr. Smith?" 

" Weny, werry satisfactory, Mr. Syd- 
ney ; the Hearl's a trump ; and now I'm 
really glad, though it went to my heart 
at the time to do so, that I arrested you ; 
for, you see, it's brought your noble 
relatives forward. So, if you'll allow me 
we'll drink to the 'ealth of his lordship ; * 
and he gulped down a bumper. 

" Well, it's lucky there's no detainers.' 

"None; I had the hoffice searched 
and 'ad there been any, I would 'ave paid 
'em, and so made one transaction of it.' 

" Ton pay them ! why, you were just 
pressing me for your money." 

"Veil, I vas a little irritated, 'cause a 
worthless young chap had done me out 



\ 



•j- 99 



92 THE SPONGING-HOUSB. 

of a large sum this morning, and so I 
spoke warmly. But, Lor' love ye, I never 
meant nothing ; so far from it, if you 
want any more money you shall have it.' 

"Then if I want any?*' 

" Veil, my good sir, I'd do anything in 
life to help you, but I shan t have no 
funds tiU to-morrow, and then you can 
have a hundred or two, if you likes." 

" I suppose, then, I may leave this at 
once?" 

" Veil, not exactly ; it's not reg'lax, and 
I likes to do all these matters reg'lar; 
besides, if you was once let out, the Heaxl 
wouldn't pay for you, and so you'd better 
stay here for both our sakes. You may as 
well teU his lordship that the debt's a 
Utile more; because, you see, there are 
some hexpenses, and I 'opes you wont 
forget that I've treated you like a gentle- 
man, and 'ad you brought 'ere •in a 
cab." 



THE SF0N6ING-H0USB. 93 

" For which I paid." 

Abraham Smith was deaf to this ob- 
servation. 

"And now, as my lord is a-coming, 
I'll cut, and perhaps you'll get the 
amount, some three hundred and fifty 
pounds/' 

" Not so ; three hundred pounds ex- 
actly, for which you gave me sixty 
pounds.'* 

"Veil, veil, perhaps it is only three 
hundred pounds; but then I told you 
just now, there's the hexpenses. Good- 
bye, Mr. Sydney; if I can be of any service, 
let me know." And the fellow bowed 
himself out, inwardly scorning and de- 
testing the victim he had made. 

The money-lender had scarcely left the 
house when Lord Q-rantchester arrived. 
Though ten years had passed since his 
double bereavement, yet he was still the 
man of noble bearing that had so widely 



94 THE SPONOING-HOUSE. 

won the love of the opposite sex; but 
his hair had now become white, and his 
fine countenance bore evident marks of 
deep and lasting sorrow. 

I will not attempt to paint the scene 
which followed: the candid, heartfelt 
outpourings of the grieved nobleman; 
his deep annoyance at thus seeing his 
dear brother incarcerated; nor will we 
depict the hypocritical assurances, the 
false tales, the pious appeals, of George 
Sydney, It is enough to tell, that the 
younger brother obtained six himdred 
pounds from the peer to pay off the debt, 
promising to follow him in an hour, and 
that within that period he again saw Mr. 
Abraham. Smith, and compromised the 
debt for one hundred and fifty pounds ; 
having been compelled, in order to do so, to 
vow most solemnly that it was all he had 
been able to obtain from the Earl. Smith 
was deceived by the affected annoyance 



THE dPONGING-HOUSB. 95 

of the splendid Tartuffe, and eagerly 
grasped tlie ready money. 

Abraham rejoiced in his triumph. 

George Sydney conquered the Jew, 
and, with four hundred and fifty pounds 
in his pocket, strode off to Grantchester 
House. 



96 



CHAPTEE VII. 

m 

THE CONSULTATION. 

m 

In the almost regal dining-room of 
Grantchester House sat three individuals 
around a magnificent grate, whose marble 
decorations bespoke the hand of an Italian 
master, while the low stove itself dis- 
played that enlivening blaze which is 
only known in England. The magnifi- 
cent dining-table, whose polished surface 
reflected the fine cut crystal, was pushed 
back, and everything bespoke the fact 
that— ^the meal over — the party now sat 
in serious consultation. 

The Earl reclined back in gloomy 
silence — his quivering lip bespoke the 
deep anxiety he felt in the issue of the 



THE CONSULTATION, 97 

conversation which was about to take 
place. On either side of him his brother, 
the Honourable George Sydney, and a 
medicai man, whom he had brought with 
him. The former seemed almost moved 
to tears, and frequently cast up his eyes 
to Heaven, as if appealing for aid in the 
coming council; the latter seemed to 
quit with regret the delicious wine he 
had been sipping. 

Yes ; such was the party assembled at 
Lord Grantchester's the night after the 
strange occurrences we have just described. 

" Alas ! my lord," sighed our friend 
the doctor, " you must not indulge in a 
hope ; I fear there is no chance of her 
ladyship's recovering her reason." 

The Earl, however, seemed determined 
to hope against hope, and firmly remon- 
strated — 

" I never saw Lady Grantchester look- 
ing better." 

VOL. I. 7 



99 



99 



99 



98 THE CONSULTATION. 

" In body, I admit ; but in mind ^'• 

"Did she not speak reasonably? did 
she not answer coherently ? 

"That is true, my dear brother, 
chimed in Sydney ; " but alas ! 

" Yes ; her ladyship is not afflicted by 
what may be styled lunacy, but rather 
a fearful monomania ; she believes that 
her offspring was murdered/' 

" I am aware of it ; I heard it all from 
behind the screen you placed before me ; 
but this was the only subject on which 
she was irrational." 

"So much the worse," sighed the 
doctor, shaking his head. 

"I really consider that both you and 
George drew her out unfairly on this 
subject." 

" Not I, dear brother !" 

"We did so purposely," hastily said 
the other. " We wished to test her lady- 
ship's sanity." 



TEE CONSULTATION. 99 

" On all else she was sane ?" 

" Not at all. That she appeared so, I 
admit ; but since she still indulged in this 
sad delusion, she could not have been 
really sane on any subject. No ; the one 
lurking madness may to-morrow extend 
itself to others, and in an instant, from 
the most perfect seeming good sense, she 
may turn to some fresh hallucination. As 
murder is now uppermost in her thought, 
she might indulge in suicidal propensities, 
or suddenly endeavour to destroy those 
whom, in her better health, she most 
fondly loved.'' 

"Indeed, doctor," loudly exclaimed 
George, " my brother must be protected 
from such a possible danger. His kind 
and ajffectionate heart must not thus over- 
come his better reason." 

" I wish I was dead !" lowly murmured 
the Earl. 

"Heaven forbid!" quickly rejoined 

7— a 



100 THE CONSULTATION. 

George. " Eemember, you have other ties 
to live for." 

" None.'' 

"Have you not a brother-^a fond, 
doating brother, whose every pride and 
wish is centered in your 

"Eight, right, George ! I was ungrate- 
ful, selfish ; but the agony of this blow is 
hard to bear. Doctor, one last question 
— Is it not possible that Agnes may 
recover ?" 

" It is possible. But '' 

" Then," cried the peer, starting up, 
" to Heaven I leave the result. Before 
the Throne of Grace I will plead my 
cause, and He who never turned away 
from the mourner's prayers wiU hear me. 
Yes, yes, I feel it — she mil recover, and 
till then I'll bear my fate with patience." 

" Grantchester, you speak like a man 
and a Christian. But now let us change 
the subject. Doctor, you recommended 



THE CONSULTATION. 101 

my brother to try a change of air ; to- 
morrow I have agreed to accompany him 
to his estates in the south of Ireland/* 

" He conld not do better/' 

" Besides, it will divert the current of 
his thoughts. He has lately received 
several complaints against his land steward 
and his agent. These may be true or 
false ; but he is anxious to inquire per- 
sonally into them/' 

•I 

" It is my duty, George, to do so." 

* 

" If his health does not then improve 
decidedly, we will try the Continent." 

" It is of no use — mine is no malady 
of the organs : it is misery that is wearing 
out my frame/' 

" Come, come, rouse yourself. Let us 
have some of the old Eomany. Burgundy 
is better suited to this cold climate than 
claret." 

The wine was called for and drank. 
The Earl handed a cheque of considerable 



102 THE CONSULTATION. 

amount to the obsequious medical man, 
who promised to take charge of Lady 
Grantchester and frequently to visit her 
in the splendid mansion, which mocked, 
by its gaudy display, the misery of its 
unhappy inmates. George drove back 
with him to town, and, desuing Coleman 
to be ready to start with him by the next 
evening s maU train for Ireland, retired to 
sleep. 

The guilty often sleep soxmdly ; not so 
the pure-minded but aflSicted man. The 
Earl of Grantchester, without a single 
fault, passed that night in wakeful watch- 
ftdness. 



103 



CHAPTEE Vni. 



THE VILLA. 



Mingled among the small villas which 
grace the banks of the Begent's Canal» 
as it flows through St. John's Wood — 
facetiously styled by the leading news- 
paper, the " Torest of the Evangelist" — 
at whose doors the smartest broughams 
in London draw up, and whence many of 
the finest anonyms in the metropoUs 
gaily issue forth — amidst these pleasing 
cottages, distinguished by their gay cur- 
tains and their single birdcage, may be 
found some of the finest and very best 
suburban residences which imagination 
can picture or wealth produce. It was 
at the carriage-gate of such a mansion 



104 THE VILLA. 

that George Sydney rang on the morning 
of his intended trip to Ireland, and with 
that easy tone which denotes an habitual 
visitor, demanded from the gatekeeper 
whether her ladyship was at home — a 
question which, having been replied to in 
the affirmative, the honourable gentleman 
strolled on, and entered the hall-door 
without knocking. 

In a bay-windowed saloon, a still 
beautiful woman reclined, playing with 
a miniature Blenheim spaniel, whom we 
may readily believe to have been more 
than ordinarily pampered, since it now 
sulkily refused to accept of a small 
chicken-bone which the fair ruin before 
us vainly endeavoured to conciliate him 
with. Shall we dare to tell the truth? 
shall we not be suspected of exagge- 
ration when we account for the ill-temper 
of Fidelio, the canine gourmet before us, 
by stating that his dogship felt hurt in 



THE VILLA. 105 

being thus offered cold poultry^ instead 
of the warm sweetbread that formed his 
usual meal? His fondly-attached mis- 
tress seemed rather to prize him for his 
aristocratic taste than to blame him for 
his daintiness, for she coaxed him and 
soothingly apologized for the remissness 
of her cook ; and yet this elegant crea- 
ture, the woman of unfading beauty, had 
a husband and a child, to whom she — 
strictly speaking — owed the love that she 
lavished on the long-eared brute. Sepa- 
rated by her own misconduct from the 
partner of her bosom and her now lovely 
daughter. Lady Urmstone almost shed 
tears at the ill-temper of her dog. 
To this unhappy state of mind had the 
once widely-admired Julia Windham 
come at last. 

Without any preannouncement, George 
Sydney entered. A blush — a look of 
pleasure, lit up the fair one's counte- 



106 THE VILLA. 

nance, as, throwing off the lately-petted 
spaniel, she now rushed to meet her 
visitor, and in that reproachful tone, 
so flattering to the ear of man, she said, as 
she stretched forth her well-shaped hand— ^ 
"Come at last! I thought you were 
never coming ; I trust, now you are here, 
you will stay." 

"Not so, Julia; I cannot— dare not/* 
"How, dearest George? you alarm 



me. 



<t 



Never mind; don't trouble me for 
explanations; you will know all soon 
enough." 

" Has anything happened ? " 

" Yes-no— nothing particular; but I 
must be off to Ireland by to-night's 
mail." 

" Some love affair ? " 

" Don't be silly ; you know well — ^you 
ought to know you are the only woman 
I ever cared for." 



THE VILLA. 107 

" I wish I could think so/' replied the 
lady, with a sigh ; *' but alas ! you said 
so only a few hours before you proposed 
for Maty Davenport." 

"Don't worry me, Julia; don't eter- 

V 

nally harp on the same string ; you well 
know I never loved her ; you are aware 
that, at the moment, I was in pecuniary 
difficulties, and that the girl — for whom 
I did not care one rush — ^had half a 
county for a fortune; it would have 
benefited us both." 

*' George, George, you well know I 
care not for money; besides, I have already 
more than I can spend. Lord Urmstone 
lias refused to touch one sliilling of my 
property; I have aU I desire save your 
love, and sometimes I strongly doubt 
that/* 

" Julia, I have only a few minutes ; I 
have no time for boyish dalliance; I 
came to ask you a favour/' 



108 THE VILLA. 

"Has not the world seen how I . have 
sacrificed all for you ?" 

"That has nothing to do with the 
question; the world knows you are 
separated from your silly, good-natured 
husband ; who, by-the-by, has picked up 
some beggar's brat and put him in the 
army ; the world believes your separation 
arises from difference of tempers ; Urm- 
stone himself almost believes it. None 
on earth suspect our liaison, and you are 
a fool indeed to yourself and a traitress 
to me, if ever you reveal it. Thank 
Heaven, my character is beyond sus- 
picion." 

"George, do I deserve this doubt?" 
and her ladyship's eyes filled with tears. 

" Do, do, stop this useless exhibition — 
there is no one here to admire it; I 
neither believe in women's tears nor 
sympathise with them." 

*' George, you cut me to the soul." 



THE VILLA. 109 

" Very likely ; but, as I said before, I 
came to ask a favour; will you accord 
it?" 

" Decidedly, if within my power/* 
" Oh, that it certainly is, for only this 
moment you said you had a surplus of 
wealth. I want a thousand pounds." 
"What for?" 

"Am I bound to degrade myself by 
explaining?" 

"Not so, dear George; but I asked 

you to see how it could be managed. I 

really have not got it.^ 

" I don't believe it, Julia.' 

" Shall I swear by all- 

" Pooh ! you know how lightly I hold 

oaths. You are trifling with me ; you 

allow me to be ruined through your 

parsimony, and then expect me to believe 

your oaths; when, with such little 

wooing, you broke those you solemnly 

plighted at the altar." 



•J. >» 



!•_ >y 



i9 



110 THE VILLA. 

" This to me — ^to me ?" almost screamed 
Lady TJnnstone, throwing herself into an 
arm-chair, and, covering her face with her 
hands, sobbing loudly, while George, kick- 
ing aside the petted Fidelio, who snapped* 
at him, coolly stirred the fire. "Tes, 
sir,'* added she^ rising, and by a violent 
effort subduing her sorrow—" yes, sir, 
I speak the truth : I am overdrawn at 
my banker's ; my steward will only remit 
to me next month. Remember, sir, the 
last five hundred I drew was for the arch- 
hypocrite George Sydney, whose conduct 
the world shall know/* 

Sydney felt alarmed; he had good 
sense enough to be aware that an infu- 
riated tigress is a tame animal compared 
to an enraged woman. 

"Julia, dear Julia, my temper is 
somewhat ruffled, I acknowledge. I start 
for Ireland to-night, or rather, I ought 
to do so ; the probability is that I shall 
be arrested before I can leave town. Tell 



THE VILLA. Ill 

me, Julia dear, could you not borrow it 
from Sir WiUiam Trufton? He could 
refuse you nothing you asked him." 

" Are you aware of the infamous pro- 
posals he made to me ? would not this be 
encouraging them ?** 

'' Perhaps it might appear so ; I admit 
it might; but, Julia dearest, in this 
world we must sometimes temporize; 
nothing can be wrong which promotes a 
good result/' 

Lady TJrmstone had up to this mo- 
ment cleverly concealed her feelings, but 
this last proposition was too much for 
her to bear tamely ; she drew herself up 
to her full height, and with that dignity 
for which she had been so famed a few 
years before, addressed her nnfeeUng- 
her dishonourable seducer — 

" Leave the house, George Sydney ! 
leave the house, ere the roof falls ' in and 
crushes you ! '* 

"Pooh!'* muttered George, "I am 



iC 



it 



112 THE VILLA. 

happy to see that Mrs. Siddons has left 
so talented a successor/' 

" Sneer at me, insult me as much as 
you like, I deserve it for thus giving up 
all to trust in one who wears the com- 
plete garb of piety." 

Only the cloak, JuUa." 
Interrupt me as you will, I care not. 
What is past cannot be undone. Oh! 
how I wish it could !" and, clasping her 
hands, tl^e wretched woman fell upon her 
knees. 

"Julia, do you know that at this 
instant you look exactly like Guido's 
celebrated Magdalene ? " 

Nature could bear no more. 

The goaded woman started up and 
flew to the bell, which she pulled vio- 
lently. "And who made me so? who 
caused my fall, and lost me the chance of 
a future heaven? Villain, it was you! 
Leave the room ! leave the house ! and 



THE VILLA. 113 

never dare to approach me again ! " cried 
the broken-hearted but infuriated lady, as 
she threw herself on the nearest couch. 

The servant entered. 

"I wish your ladyship good morning; 
I trust you will shortly be better," said 
George, as he took up his hat, and, after 
desiring the footman to send her maid to 
Lady TJrmstone, left the house. 

As he walked round the comer, he 
muttered to himself, " It was time to cut. 
For her own sake, she'll be silent; a 
penniless heroine is far too romantic for 
me. I believe, after all, I had better 
stick close to Grantchester." And with 
these words Sydney jumped into his 
hrougham, which awaited him, and drove 
down to take leave of the most austere 
Bishop in the House of Lords. 



VOL. 1. 8 



114 



CHAPTEE IX. 



THE VICTORIA CROSS. 



Though Lord Urmstone had long since 
given up his active share in the world of 
politics, yet, having once felt deep interest 
in them, he still dwelt with pleasure on 
the passing events of the day, and never 
omitted to retire to his library immedi- 
ately after breakfast to study the columns 
of that journal which, for the modest 
sum of one groat per diem, forms the 
opinion, guides the views, and rules the 
consciences of at least ten thousand 
well-educated readers, who, without the 
promptings of the all-powerful limes 
newspaper, would be compelled to think 
for themselves— an ingrate task to more 



THE VICTORIA CROSS. 115 

than one-half the number. To the peer 
before us, the populax journal was other- 
wise valuable. The doings of his com- 
peers, the movements of the gay world, 
the foreign news — all bore their charms. 
Eapt in its varied narratives of opinions, 
his lordship frequently sat for hours to- 
gether enjoying the record of those 
passing events in which he now played 
the part of a passive spectator. 

In such a mood was he seated, when 
the door suddenly opened and a lovely 
young girl, sparkling in all the bright 
charms of youth, imbued with the un- 
equalled grace which seems the peculiar 
attribute of our female aristocracy, came 
bounding into the room. 

The peer looked up, and would pro- 
bably have felt annoyed at this untimely 

intrusion, but when he beheld before 

* 

him his lovely child, her countenance 
radiant with unusual joy, her bright 

8— z 



116 THE VICTORIA CROSS. 

locks thrown back, her blue eyes spark- 
ling with emotion, every other feeling 
was at once absorbed in proud affection, 
and he tenderly inquired the cause 
of her unexpected though welcome 
visit. 

" Oh, papa, papa ! I'm so happy," 
cried Emily. " My birth-day has indeed 
been ushered in with joyful news.'' 

" How so, my love ?" 

*' I am sixteen to-day, and I have just 
received " 

'* I know — ^the set of pearls I ordered 
to be sent you. They have arrived 
earlier than I expected." 

"Not so, papa — ^better than that — 
better than all the pearls and diamonds 
in the world !" 

" What is it ?" 

« Guess." 

**I really cannot, my dearest Emily. 
There's little beyond your welfare that 



THE VICTORIA CROSS. 117 

can give me pleasure," said Lord TJrm- 
stone, with a sigh. 

" Fie, papa, you forget — ^look here !" 
and she held up a letter. "It is from 
China ; look at the post-mark." 

"Indeed!" cried her father, iaking it 
and scanning the superscription. " But, 
alas ! it is not from John, by the hand- 
writing. I hope nothing ha. befaUen 
him;" and the old noble tore open the 
letter with trembling hands. Had he 
watched his child, he would have seen the 
colour fade from her cheeks, and her 
whole frame tremble with emotion. 

" Thanks to Providence, all is right ; 
it is from my old friend. Colonel Doveton, 
who writes about John. I am, however, 
so agitated — so startled by the sudden 
news, that I am unable to read the letter. 
May I then ask you, my darling child, to 
do so for me ?" 

" With pleasure, papa ; though, to 



118 THE VICTORIA CROSS. 

confess the truth, I am rather flurried 
myself." She took the communication, 
and, after scanning it for a few seconds, 
read aloud : — 

"My dear Lord, 

" I am truly happy to be able to 
give you a good account of your proteg^, 
Ensign Marks, who arrived here soon 
after the corps had disembarked, and 
handed to me your lordship's letter 
of strong recommendation. It scarcely 
needed this to secure to him my favour, 
for, putting aside the great pleasure I had 
in attending to your lordship's wishes, 
the steady bravery and invariable good 
conduct of this young subaltern would 
surely have won my approbation and 
friendship. His strict attention to his 
military duties, his endurance during 
several severe trials, his kindness to those 
around him, have endeared him to us all. 



THE VICTORIA CROSS. 119 

and make me deeply regret his inability 
to write personally to you; while, on 
the other hand, it gives me sincere de- 
light to record, as his immediate com- 
manding officer, the bold feat of daring 
which has advanced him in no common 
degree along the envied path of glory/' 

The peer felt a tear of joy trickle down 
his cheek. 

Emily paused as she lowly uttered — 
" Oh, papa, I fear that he may be hurt." 

"Go on, love, we shall soon know all.'' 

She resumed : — 

" I think the best way of conveying to 
your lordship an exact sketch of the 
scene in which our young friend has 
played the part of a hero, will be by 
quoting from the official account of it, 
which I had the honour to transmit to 
the Governor-General in Incda, and to 
the Commander-in-Chief at home." 



120 THE VICTORIA CROSS. 

" Oh, think of Johnny being called a 
hero !" cried Emily, in ecstasy. 

"Bead on," cried the equally pleased 
old nobleman. 



"An hour before day-break on the 
morning of the 9th, the force under my 
command left Ching Loo and advanced 
in three columns towards the Peeko 
fortress, garrisoned by the rebel troops, 
said to exceed in number 6000 men, well 
armed and trained. The force under my 
command did not exceed 1500 men, and, 
as our artillery were not yet come up, 
the attempt might seem rash. I had„ 
however, learnt from authority I could 
rely on, that reinforcements were hourly 
expected by the enemy ; I therefore trust 
your Excellency will not blame me for 
thus hazarding an attack. After two 
hours' painful march we at length came 
in sight of the fortress, which was even 



THE VICTORIA CROSS. 121 

more strongly fortified than I had ex- 
pected. The waUs, which were formed 
of solid clay, were about twenty feet 
high, at the foot of which was a deep 
fosse some twelve or fifteen yards wide. 
For at least a hundred paces in front of 
this, a bleak plain extended, wholly un- 
sheltered. This plain was commanded 
by the rebels, who swarmed as thick as 
bees on the ramparts. The instant we 
debouched we were met by a tremendous 
fire from the enemy, whose gingal-balls 
brought down at least a dozen of our 
men. Had we been in line, the havoc 
would have been frightful. We, how- 
ever, presented so small a front, that our 
loss was, comparatively speaking, very 
slight. By a mistake, Captain Thompson 
led his company a few paces forward, 
when nearly one-third of the men in- 
stantly were placed fiora de combat A 
party of volunteers advanced with scaling 



122 THE VICTORIA CROSS. 

ladders, but were at once, and with great 
loss, compelled to retreat. I never recol- 
lect witnessing a more gallant fire. I 
was about to call a council, consisting of 
the field officers under my command, 
when Ensign Marks of my own regiment 
stepped forward, and expressed a wish to 
lead a portion of his company to the 
assault. This I refused. But, as I did 
so in the following words — * No, I might 
sanction a volunteer or two to go on and 
make a reconnaissance, but I cannot — 
will not risk the lives of any body of 
men' — the brave ensign took advantage 
of my words, and snatching from a brother 
officer the light duplicate of the regi- 
mental colour which we sometimes carry 
on a march, he dashed forward, calling 
on his covering sergeant to follow him. 
This the poor fellow did, and I beg to 
recommend his family to your Excel- 
lency's best attention. Ensign Smith also 



THE VICTORIA CROSS. 123 

rushed out and joined in the rapid run 
which the others took towards the for- 
tress. For several instants the rebels 
seemed scarcely to believe their eyes, and 
omitted to fire, reserving for the Urger 
body their murderous volleys; but on 
seeing these young men dash forward (as 
they believed, unsupported), they recom- 
menced their fearful assault, and in less 
than three minutes poor Ensign Smith 
was stretched a corpse. Sergeant Keena- 
han and Ensign Marks stiU rushed on. 
How they escaped the balls that rained 
around them, even to this moment ap- 
pears to me a miracle. The officer, it 
appears, was, from a recent accident, un- 
able to swim; so, on approaching the 
fosse, he requested his sergeant to jump 
in, and instantly following him, supported 
himself with his arm on the shoulder of 
the swimmer, and thus they gained the 
other side. Here, however, there was no 



124 THE VICTORIA CROSS. 

bank whereon to land — the water actually 
washed the walls of the fort — so, mount- 
ing on the back of his non-commissioned 
officer, we could see Ensign Marks actu- 
ally hewing out with his sword places for 
his feet in the clay wall. Bullets now 
came swifter and more furious than ever ; 
but, being close under them, the rebels 
could not take good aim at them, and the 
work I have described had gone on for 
above a minute, when a chance shot 
struck poor Sergeant Keenahan, who 
sank to rise no more; while Ensign 
Marks springing from him, grasped some 
projecting object, and placing his foot in 
the hole he had made, gained a firm foot- 
ing. Never can I forget the agony — ^the 
excitement of that moment. The men 
could no longer be restrained; they rushed 
forward, alike callous to danger and pru- 
dence. They naturally believed that 
their young officer, long before they ar- 



THE VICTORIA CROSS. 125 

rived, would have fallen a victim to his 
temerity, but they were determined, even 
at the imminent risk of losing their 
lives, to avenge his death. Just as they 
reached the bank (leaving many dead and 
wounded on the plain), they saw the 
British flag fly on the walls, yet no sign 
of surrender had been shown. They 
leaped into the water as the fire of 
the enemy suddenly slackened, and soon 
reached the opposite side, whence they 
managed, without opposition, to escalade 
the walls. Arrived on the top of them, 
they found that the enemy had fled, our 
colours were reared triumphantly on the 
battlements, and at the foot of them lay 
the hero of the day, severely and danger- 
ously wounded/' 

Poor Emily could bear no more ; she 
uttered a loud scream and fell fainting 
on the floor. In a short time, she was 



126 THE VICTORIA CBOSS. 

brought back to her senses by the usual 
restoratives, and again calmed by her 
father s reminding her that, in the com- 
mencement of the letter, her playfellow 
had decidedly recovered from the injuries 
he had received. 

"You are agitated, my dearest girl. 
Be calm, and I wiU myself endeavour to 
make out the rest of the letter." 

" Oh ! do, do !'* eagerly cried Emily ; 
" and mind, don't conceal anything from 



me. 



t< 



Nothing, dear Emily. 



99 



" It appears that the enemy, seeing our 
flag suddenly appear on the glacis, be- 
Heved that we had made a lodgment on 
some other point, and that our whole 
force would soon come into action. The 
courage which the strength of their posi- 
tion had lent them suddenly deserted 
them, and they retreated in the utmoist 



THE VICTOBIA CROSS. 127 

disorder. Thus it may truly be said that 
the Peeko Fort was taken by a single 
individual — 3, fact, I believe, unparalleled 
in the history of war. Ensign Marks, 
by the loss of two of his senior officers, 
became a lieutenant, by rotation, on the 
field; and as his wound, from which he 
has now quite recovered, may break out 
again, if detained in this warm climate, I 
beg to recommend to your Excellency 
that Lieutenant Marks be promoted to 
the rank of captain unattached, and sent 
home to Europe. I also fill up the official 
form, submitting his name and strongly 
recommending him, as a proper candidate 
for the noble distinction of the Victoria 
Cross. 

" Such, my dear lord, is my account of 
the deeds of your protegd, of whom you 
may well be proud. I have every reason 
to believe my application in his favour 
will be readily complied with; and, in 



128 THE VICTOBIA CBOSS. 

this case, he will probably arrive as soon 
as this letter, which I must now condnde 
by assnring yonr lordship how truly 
I am, '' Your faithful servant, 

''James Doveton, 
*' Colonel and Brigadier. 
*' To the Right Honourable 

" The Earl of Urmstone." 



€t 



Papa, papa — is he not a hero? only 



imagine 

" My dear Emily, he is indeed a noble 
fellow; but you must really moderate 
these exuberant transports of joy." 

'* Indeed, indeed I cannot. Oh I I am 
so happy; I must go and tell every- 
body;" and away ran the enthusiastic 
girl. 

The Earl had scarcely resumed his seat 
when a loud cry was heard — ^it was the 
voice of Emily. He started up, and, 
rushing to the door, beheld his lovely 



THE VICTOKlA CEOSS. 129 

daughter, half fainting, supported by the 
right arm of a handsome young man of 
little more than twenty-six years of age. 
His flashing black eye, his brilliant 
teeth, his noble countenance, but above 
all, his left arm in a sling, at once 
announced him to the peer, who now, 
almost as much pleased as Emily, eagerly 
stepped forward to welcome Captain John 
Marks, the hero of the Chinese cam- 
paign. 

An abler pen than mine must describe 
the inti^rview which followed — one far 
better schooled in human anomalies must 
account for the fact, that tears in abund- 
ance — ^like drops of rain through heaven*s 
bow — moistened the smiles of unmingled 
joy ; and why, when recovery had chased 
away the pains of the past, Emily Urm- 
stone cried piteously as her old playmate 
recounted 

** The dangers l^e had passed." 
VOL. I. 9 



130 



CHAPTEE X. 

AN UNWELCOME VISITOR. 

" I WANTS to see Mr. Sydney/' 

" Then you must call some other time, 
for my master and I are about to visit 
Erin — our sister kingdom, as the Times 
calls it. Mr. Sydney is packing, so you 
had better pack too," replied our friend 
Mr. Coleman. 

"I shan't do no such thing, Mr. 
Bone-polisher,*' rudely answered Mr. Jem 
Marks, for he was the visitor on the 
present occasion. 

" You are a saucy blackguard — b, cannil, 
as we say in French." 

*' I'll punch your cocoa-nut. Master 
Lickplate, as we says in EngUsh ;" and 



AN UNWELCOME VISITOB. 331 

Jem held up a fist that might have heen 
mistaken for a shoulder of mutton. 

''BateT screamed Coleman, and he 
slammed the door in his face. 

" That 'ere dodge wont pay," growled 
Marks, and he began hammering away 
with the knocker. 

Coleman, having put up the chain, 
opened the door a few inches and de- 
manded — 

" Fellow ! what do you want ?" 

"Tour master, my jolly menial!" 

" He wont see you." 

« Yes, he will !" 

" Who are you ?" 

" Tell him Mr. Marks is here on the 
part of his friend Mother Rearden. He'll 
know what I means. Come, quick ! d'ye 
hear, eh?" 

Coleman closed the door ; and, in the 
firm hope of his master's ordering him to 
fet<5h a policeman to carry off the 

9— a 



132 AN UNWELCOME VISITOB. 

intruder, lie sought out George Sydney, 
who was amusing himself by burning 
some hundreds of old letters and papers. 

Coleman delivered the message ver* 
batim. To his surprise, George pondered 
for a moment; and then, in a tone of 
vexation, said — 

" Show the visitor in/' 

The wondering servant left the room, 
strangely puzzled by this new mystery. 

" Marks ! Marks !'' muttered George ; 
" I cannot help thinking I have heard 
the name before ; yet I cannot tell where. 
This is, doubtless, some pettifogging 
attorney, probably armed with mysterious 
hints in order to alarm me ; but as she 
cannot (for her own sake) have made any 
revelations of the facts, I will be on my 
guard and betray nothing. This wily 
limb of the law shall gain nothing, from 
our interview " 

At this moment the door opened. If 



AN UNWELCOME VISITOB. 133 

Coleman had been surprised at Jem's 
appearance, still more so was Sydney at 
the extraordinary visitor now shown in. 
A beard, the growth of at least a week, 
displayed a golden-tinted field of stubble ; 
the uncombed hair thrust up as the fellow 
took off his cap. The giant form and 
slouching gait of the intruder fiUed him 
with wonderment and disgust, and as the 
feUow thr^w himself into a well-covered 
chair, and nodded to Coleman to " be off," 
George could not repress an exclamation 
of horror and annoyance. 

" You re Mr. Sydney, I presumes ?" 

"You do presume,** cooUy retorted 
Q-eorge; but the retort was as unfelt 
as the blow of a parasol on a buffalo's 
hide. 

" Well, I supposes you is that gent/' 
The other nodded assent. " Do you know 
who I am ? — can't you guess ?" 

** Indeed I cannot, unless you are an 



134 AN UNWELCOME VISITOB. 

escaped Patagonian savage dressed up in 
sailor's attire/' 

"Them's fine words, but I doesn't 
understand 'em. Let's come to the pint — 
I'm Jem Marks, as married Sal Eearden." 

" I trust, in her connubial state wedded 
to such gentle perfection, Mrs. Eearden 
is quite weU." 

" Well, she is and she isn't ; she had a 
touch of the rheumatiz lately, so I comed 
for her. But I'll trouble you, my young 
spark, to call her by my name — ^Marks, 
Sally Marks — for the future." 

At this insolent style of address, the 
pet of Exeter Hall felt the indignant blood 
of six hundred years' ancestry rush to 
his cheeks ; but he wisely kept his temper, 
and the ruffian went on — 

"WeU, my wife had a doctor to pay, 
and she wants twenty pounds ; so hand it 
over, and I'U give it to her carefully." 

*' I shall do no such thing. I have 



AN UNWELCOME VISITOB. 135 

already overpaid the woman for a trifling 
service she once rendered me." 

" Whew ! here'^s a go I You calls 
throttling a babby a trifle, do you? 
Darned if you're not a cool 'and !" 

George turned deadly pale, and, sink^ 
ing into his fauteuil, he covered his face 
with his hands to hide his fearful emotion. 
His worst fears had never painted such a 
danger. His secret — the tale that might 
blast his reputation, and even bring him 
to a felon's death— was in possession of a 
third person, and mch a person — one too 
powerful to assault, too reckless to defy. 
Here was a yawning precipice over . 
which he would probably fall during his 
future life. It may now fairly be ad- 
mitted that Sydney had more than once 
formed plans to get rid of Mrs. Eearden. 
Yes, such had been his dream \ but here 
was a monster — an inaccessible monster 
in human form— a sharer in the dread 



136 AN UNWELCOME VISITOR. 

secret that robbed him of his rest. Had 
a pistol been within his grasp, he would 
have nsed it on himself; but even self- 
destruction would not avail him. When 
stretched a corpse, the facts would be 
divulged ; and he who had sacrificed 
much to maintain a spotless character 
would, in after ages, be branded as a 
murderer. The thought was too dread- 
fill. George groaned, and rocked himself 
to and fro in mental agony. 

" I say, master, don't you take on so ; 
there am't no harm done. Tip us the 
twenty, it wont ruin you, and we'll be as 
mum as the grave ; we really wants cash 
just now." 

"Yes,'* slowly replied George, deter- 
mined to fight against despair ; " but I 
was promised long since that these de- 
mands should cease." 

"Well, they ain't demands," said 
Marks, before whose mind punishment 



AN UNWBLCOME VISITOR* 137 

for extortion began to glimmer ; " they 
ain't demands, they're merely requests." 
** Well, and suppose I refuse ?'' 
'' Well, I'U sing— I'U blab— that's aU." 
" What ! and hang your own wife ?" 
" Well, I doesn't know that I should 
be very sorry for that." 

"Suppose I now send for two police- 
officers and forestall your tale, and paint 
you in such a light that your evidence 
would not be taken ?" sharply cried 
Q-eorge, seizing the bell-rope, 

Marks didn't like the turn which affairs 
were taking, so he modulated his voice — 
" I'm not to be bullied ; I only wants 
justice." 

Sydney read his triumph at a glance, 
and assumed a severe tone. 

" If I give you these twenty pounds, 
out of friendship for my old friend Mrs. 
Eearden — ?— " 



<€ 



Mrs. Marks/' interrupted Jem. 



138 AN UNWELCOME YISITOB. 

" Well, never mind, sirrah ! if I do 
this, will you undertake to say that this 
is the last time I shall be annoyed P'* 

" Well, I would willingly say yes ; but 
Mother Marks is sadly awaricious. Lord 
love'el I'm only ababby in her hands, 
and you know how she sarves 'em," 
added the feUow, with a chuckle. 

Sydney aflfected not to hear the latter 
part of the speech, and went on — 

"Will you guarantee me that this 
shaU be the last demand ?'* 

« Mate it fi%, and may I never eat 
another meal if ever Sal or I troubles you 
agam! 

" But how can I rely on you ?" 

" In the first place, I scorns to betray 
a pardner ; and as to my wife, hang me if 
I wouldn't pison her, if she attempted 
such a thing without my leave; and 
besides, my good chap, d'ye see, if I 
takes my oath, I does so volimteerily, and 



AN UNWELCOME VISITOR. 139 

I*m sure to keep it. Tm not forced to 
give iir-on the contrairy, Td rather let 
matters bide as they be/' 

Sydney, however, saw the advantage he 
had gained, and his experience and read- 
ing taught him that wretches of this kind 
— repudiating all virtue, aU law, all truth 
— ^would still occasionally keep their oaths 
to an accomplice — and alas 1 Sydney felt 
himself so — and after all, it was worth 
the trial. So he went to his writing-desk 
and handed over a fifty-pound note to Jem. 

" Thank'ee 1 All's now right, and 
may I be lagged if Mother Marks or I 
ever molests you again on this score ! If, 
however, I can at any time be of use, tell 
me. Tou knows my address." 

Jem, however, who now vdshed to be 
aU civility, still Imgered. 

** What more do you want ?" 

" Nothing, Mr. Sydney; youVe behaved 
as a real gentleman, and I'll do the same.'' 



140 AN UNWELCOME VIlSITOB* 

" What, then, are you waiting for ?" 
• "Why, I wish you'd allow your fine 
sarvant-man to go with me and get this 
note changed ; not as I suspect it to be a 
flash 'un — no, I'm sure it's all right; 
but, you sees, they might ax me queer 
questions about it, and if I mentioned 
your name it might bring you into 
trouble." 

At this moment Coleman came in with 
a note. 

" Gto with this person, Coleman, and get 
a bank-note changed for him at the branch 
in BurUngton-street," said George, as he 
retired to his dressing-room. 

" Well, wonders will never cease !" 
inwardly ejaculated Coleman. " Give 
me the note; we'U soon have gold for 
it." 

"You're a good 'un, you are; you 
flunkies are uncommon cute, but you 
ain't a-going to 'andle my flimsy." 



AN UNWELCOME VISITOR. 141 

" Well, then, to save trouble, 1*11 change 
it for you,'* cried the other, pulling out 
five sovereigns. 

" Five sovs be darned ! I wants fifty. 
Look here 1" and he displayed the aristo- 
cratic note. 

Coleman was dumbfoundered. He 
began to think he had made some mis- 
take ; it might be a joke — a nobleman 
in disguise — ^in fact, he began to think 
that no one else could so grossly insult 
him. So, in a rather more civil manner, 
he rejoined — 

" Along a la Bank of England !'* and 
led the well-pleased Jem to their western 
establishment, where the note was quickly 
turned into gold. 

" Bon-jwr'* said Coleman. 

" Go to Bath r* replied Jem ; and then, 
as he turned to go home, he muttered, 
** Ay ! Sal toUl kick up a row and scold, 
but I don t care ; it's time to give up that 



142 AN UNWELCOME VISITOR. 

COW, it^s nearly dry ; we'll see what we 
can make out of t'other f* 

"With these words he buttoned up his 
pocket, containing forty-nine pounds, and 
turned into " The Grapes/' his favourite 
public-house, there to enjoy himself. 

Mrs. Marks was iU in bed at home ; 
the visit to George had been the sole pro- 
ject of Jem. He therefore wished to be 
well armed with spirits ere he encountered 
his wife's reproaches. 



143 



CHAPTEE XL 



KINGSTOWN. 



It was on one of those beautifnl, clear, 
dry mornings whicli so seldom visit our 
sister isle, in early spring, that a splendid 
schooner was observed to enter into the 
reaUy beautiful bay of Dublin — a bay 
only lacking the presence of another Ve- 
suvius to eclipse its fair rival at Naples. 
In some respects it is true that it is in- 
ferior ; but not so to the eye of him or 
her who floats into its magnificent area. 
To the seaman it loses its best charm in 
the shallowness of its waters, the dan- 
gerous shoals, and the broad sands which 
stretch from Blackrock to the Pigeon- 
house ; but to the tourist it is a scene of 



144 KINGSTOWN, 

beauty which he can never forget, so per- 
fect in every respect is the surrounding 
scenery. 

Lord Urmstone*s yacht — for such was 
the vessel we have alluded to — ^had just 
passed Ireland's Eye, hugging somewhat 
closely the beetling hill of Howth, as a 
lovely young girl and a handsome young 
man ascended to the quarter-deck. They 
had never been to Ireland before, and 
consequently had never beheld one of 
Nature's most favoured spots. Brayhead 
arose in bullying defiance, running far 
into the sea, to challenge and menace the 
approach of the mariner. The chain of 
splendid Wicklow hills, broken by the 
greater and lesser Sugar-loaf Mountains, 
seemed a bold frontispiece to a work of 
grandeur; while the white cottages of 
the little town, and the surroimding villas, 
with their green meadows and tranquil 
aspect, bespoke comfort and refinement. 



KINGSTOWN, 145 

Presently the vessel entered the harbour 
of Kingstown — decidedly the most beau- 
tifiil marine enclosure in Europe. The 
terms of delight which burst from the lip» 
of Emily, as she beheld the lovely scene 
before her, instantly called up her fond 
father, and the next instant the aston- 
ished trio stood in wondering admiratiou 
of aU around them. The ofl&cer com- 
manding the man-of-war on the station 
politely came in his gig to welcome his 
old friend Lord Urmstone to Ireland, 
and in his boat the old peer, with his 
daughter and adopted son, were rowed 
ashore, and within a few minutes more, 
lodged most comfortably in the Boyal 
Hotel. 

The arrival of the old peer, who had 
once held one of our ministerial secretary- 
ships, was soon bruited abroad, and, as 
great men usually proceed on to Bray, 
the advantage, the honour, of thus securing 

VOL. I. 10 



146 KINGSTOWN. 

an ex-minister was keenly and sensibly 
felt by all ranks in Kingstown, who, with- 
out appearing to do so, soon assembled in 
each other's houses to consult how his 
lordship should be treated. 

" He is a Protestant, of course, and I 
believe a High Churchman," carelessly 
said Mr. Phelan to Sir William O'Flinn, 
as they beheld him drive past the club- 
house door. 

"Then I shall not call on him — ^he's 
half a Papist already." 

" Oh, I can't believe that. He was a 
member of Lord Eaby's government." 

" That alters the question. He must 
be a Tory and a Protestant; and as to 
his moral character " 

" Oh," interrupted OTlinn, " that's his 
own look-out. If he belongs to the right 
sort, his private behaviour can be of no 
<3onsequence to you or me. I suppose he'll 
put up for the Kildare ?" 



KINGSTOWN. 147 

^*I don't know — and, faitli, I don't 
•care. We've got old ones enough — ^we 
want some young blood, Sir William. 
We'll meet at the Garrison Theatricals to- 
morrow ;" and away bustled Mr. Phelan. 

" That fellow's a Papist in his heart, I 
feel confident," muttered the Baronet, as 
his friend left him. 

" O'Flynn wants to rook the young 
hands at whist,^' said Mr. Phelan to 
himself, as he stepped into the Dublin 
train. 

It is a strange fact, that it is no un- 
common occurrence to hear an Irishman 
abuse another, even his dearest friend, 
when absent from him ; the only balance 
of justice being, that he himself is 
sure to come in for his turn, when he 
is out of sight. 

" I shaU certainly call on Lord Urm- 
stone in the morning," said Mrs. O'Eeilly. 
^* I must present him with some of our 

W—7. 



148 KINGSTOWN. 

new tracts; they are really very edify- 
ing. 

'* If you will allow me, I will accom- 
pany you/' chimed in Mrs. O'Hara, " for 
I want him to subscribe to the ^ Birds 
Nest* the finest charitable institution in 
Ireland/' 

" I belong to the ' New Birds' Nest/. '* 
muttered Miss Hanahan (a stiff old maid), 
*' and, if he takes my advice *' 

" Your advice, indeed !" said Mrs, 
O'Hara ; " I should like to know who yoi^ 

"Whatr 

" Hush ! silence, ladies !" cried Lady 
Borsely, an Irish physician's wife, who 
hoped that, as the Dublinites were now 
everywhere seeking to find people to whose 
memory they might erect statues, perhaps^ 
her husband might some day figure in 
bronze ; and above all, as Lady Borsely 
was a lady of title and fortune, and pro- 



KINGSTOWN. 149 

prietor of a handsome mansion, her 
<5hiding was well received, and at her 
bidding the disputants at once cabned 
their ire. 

" Do you think we could form a depu- 
tation to point out to his lordship how 
truly he would be benefited at the chapel 
of that godly preacher, the Eeverend John 
Stubbs, whose eloquence will probably 
touch the heart of the statesman, and 
show him, as he has done us, how utterly 
he is lost to all hope? This blessed re- 
vival has shown me my sure danger — my 
sure fall ; might it not have the same 
-effect on his lordship ?'' 

** Oh ! it would indeed be horrible," 
cried Miss Doyle, a would-be young girl 
of sixty summers, "if the poor deluded 
one were tempted to attend the Mariners' 
Church." 

" Some say," said Miss Hanahan, who 
had not yet recovered from her spiteful 



150 KINGSTOWN. 

feelings, "that it is the Established 
Church, and really I begin to think that 
I shall attend it." 

" For shame, Bridget ! for shame !" 
said Lady Borsely ; and then an argument 
somewhat bordering on what is vulgarly 
called a row ensued. 

Let us now turn to the younf/ ladies. 

They had seen a remarkably handsome 
young man disembark. It was soon 
known that he was an oflficer, a hero, and 
the adopted son of a nobleman. What 
their feelings on this occasion were is 
perhaps better not described ; suffice it to 
say, that the great majority of these truly 
lovely girls — ^for Kingstown stands pre- 
eminent in female beauty — determined to 
display their bright golden locks, set off 
by becoming little hats and pert feathers, 
their sparkling, full blue eyes, their ala- 
baster complexions — for they are not of 
the coarse, ruddy school — their pearl- 



KINGSTOWN. 151 

white teeth, and their well-turned ankles 
on the pier at four o'clock, when the new 
arrivals would probably walk out, rather 
than stay at home, and only emerge as 
usual after "tea," and thus share with 
the owls and the bats the gloomy hours 
of darkness on their favourite promenade. 
A strange whim, which may possibly 
arise from the belief that the Kingstown 
beaux only visit that locality after dinner, 
being all day engaged in Dublin. This 
is just possible, for it is utterly beyond 
credence that any other motive can induce 
these Hibernian syrens to come forth after 
heaven has veiled her face, and hidden, 
not only their personal charms, but the 
rich dresses (far too rich for good taste), 
and the wide-spreading crinolines — the 
seeming glory of these beauteous creatures, 
who, in less showy dresses, would be 
beings little less than perfect. 

If the Eoman Catholic party felt any 



152 KINGSTOWN. 

bitter feeling at thus seeing a Saxon aris- 
tocrat, they kept it to themselves, per- 
fectly content in the comfortable belief 
that, as a Protestant, he could only lord 
it over them in this world ; his future — 
unless he recanted — was already settled in 
the most unsatisfactory manner. 

At the St. George's Club, Lord XJrm- 
fltone was spoken of : his name echoed at 
the Koyal Irish ; he was the theme of all 
the dinner - parties between Bray and 
Booterstown. In a word, the quiet peer 
and his unaffected domestic circle had 
already caused a sensation in Ireland. 



wmK/mmmmmmm^wiffmmmrmf^mmmm 



153 



CHAPTEE XII. 



A BENEFACTOR. 



Lord XJrm stone sat at one of the draw- 
ing-room windows of the Eoyal Hotel, 
scanning with admiration the unequalled 
scene before him. Never had he seen 
anything more lovely, and as he put down 
the telescope, he reflected with true sorrow 
— with poignant anguish, that this " Grem 
of the Ocean/' this " Flower of the Sea,'' 
should be disfigured as it is by rival 
factions, and that the sword of Heaven 
should be used on every occasion to hew 
down political enemies. Lord XJrmstone 
was a good and really pious Christian : 
for the first time he felt that he was in a 
land where feelings of liberality in religion 



154 A BENEFACTOR. 

were looked upon as bordering on infi- 
delity — ^where the single path to bliss 
was arbitrarily claimed by both sects — 
where tolerance was counted as disbelief 
and bigotry a virtue. The lisping child 
of one party is taught to believe, as soon 
as it can understand, that the Saxon tyrant 
is treading the path which leads to eternal 
punishment, crushing in his downward 
road liberty and faith ;» while on the other 
hand, the Protestant infant gets an apple 
from its proud father (as soon as it can 
utter the words) for drinking the health of 
the great and good King William, and de- 
struction to all Papists. " Yes," murmured 
the peer, as he threw down a few hal^ence 
to a squaHd crowd of beggars, who had as- 
sembled tostormhis lordship — "yes,if such 
feelings could be modified and religious in- 
tolerance cease, Ireland would indeed be the 
finest country in the world." Lord Urm- 
8tone,over whose countenance atrace of sor- 




A BENEFACTOR. 155 

row might be easily distinguished, arising 
from the recent loss of his fond mother, now 
turned to the young couple, and requested 
his daughter to leave the room for a few 
minutes, in order to prepare herself for a 
walk. Emily, however, plainly perceived 
that there were other reasons, and with a 
pouting lip she quitted the apartment — 
agitated she knew not why — ^hurt at this 
novel procedure, and, above all, fancying 
that it might portend something disagree- 
able to the young officer. 

" Bring me my desk, John ;" and the 
order being complied with, the peer drew 
forth a legal document, engrossed on 
parchment. 

" John, my dear boy, the death of my 
last and aged parent has fully reminded 
me of certain duties I owe to you." 

" To me, my lord r 

" Even so. I have brought you up from 
childhood, I have had you well educated> 



156 A BENEFACTOR. 

I have treated you as one of the family, 
and finally placed you in the army, 
from which, by my wish, you have just 
retired/' 

" Most true — most true, and more. If I 
•could narrate half the kindness — ^the affec- 
tion you have shown me, I should feel 
comparatively happy. But these favours 
are beyond enumeration. To repay even 
one of them is far above my power. I have, 
however, a constant hope that I may 
some day be able to prove to you my 
warm gratitude." 

" Enough; I know your disposition, and 
value it, as you will presently see. This 
is, I trust, the last day I shaU see John 
Marks in this world." 

"Oh, say not so, my benefactor — my 
more than father," cried the other, dropping 
on his knees ; " tell me my fault — I wiU 
endeavour to atone for it. My life is 
truly yours. Banish me for a while if I 



A BENEFACTOR. 157 



have offended, but do not — do not say for 



ever." 



"John, I was foolish. Arise; fear no- 
thing of the kind." 

Marks again seated himself, but his 
looks bespoke his inward agitation. 

"I was silly — childish, thus to play upon 
your feelings. I owe you an apology,, 
my dear boy, for thus trifling with you. 
Now listen : my mother, as you are aware, 
died some few weeks ago. Her jointure 
has fallen in to swell my already large 
income. Her private savings she has^ 
also left to me ; not fancying that I 
might want them, but as a token of her 
unreserved affection. Her maiden name 
was Leslie — ^she built a small residence in 
the north of England, and purchased the 
land around it, naming it Leslie Hall;, 
the whole property does not exceed, accord- 
ing to the estimate before me, 500/. a year. 
You understand ?" 



158 A BENEFACTOR. 

"Perfectly, sir." 

" This property is now yours, conferred 
on yon in perpetuity by the deed I now 
hold in my hand." 

"Oh, my gracious benefactor, this is 
more than I can bear — ^thus to endow a 
mere beggar ;" and the young officer now 
shed those tears from gratitude which 
refused to flow for any other cause. 

"Exactly; and you have just proved how 
rightly I have acted. None can now call 
you a beggar ; none can reproach you as 
the creature of my bounty. Ton are not 
rich, but you are independent — may it 
make you happy !" 

"My lord, my lord, I cannot speak, 
indeed I cannot." 

" One only condition do I annex ; I 
have had that condition legally drawn up 
and properly registered ; that you substi- 
tute for your surname, to which I feel sure 
you have no right, that of Leslie, one of 



A BENEFACTOR. 159 

the most proud and unblemished names 
in England." 

The newly-enriched youth threw him- 
self back in his chair, and, covering his 
face with his hands, wept aloud. 

At this instant Emily, who, though 
above the common vice of her sex, that 
of curiosity, had approached the door, 
hearing unusual sounds, rushed in. The 
sight that met her view struck her with 
silent astonishment. 

The peer, the only calm member of the 
party, rose, and quietly pointing to John, 
addressed his daughter — 

" Allow me, my dear Emily, to intro- 
duce you to Captain John Leslie, of Leslie 
Hall." 

The poor girl stood still without speak- 
ing, bewildered by the strangeness of the 
scene before her. 

Leslie (for so we must now call him) 
started up and rushed towards her, ex- 



160 A BENEFACTOR. 

claiming, " It is true, quite true. Oli, 
Emily !" Here the still puzzled girl, 
seeing all was joy, threw herself into his 
arms, and joined him in his flood of tears. 
The old peer, who truly looked upon 
both as his children, left the room, thus 
givinghis protege an opportunity to explain, 
and, truth to tell, to wipe away an in- 
truding drop, which, in spite of his stem 
nature, in spite of long and hard tutoring, 
arose to assert Nature's rights over the 
cold civilization of High Life. 



161 



CHAPTER XIII. 



IRISH SOCIETY. 



In the afternoon, Lord Urmstone drove 
out as far as Glenegary — one of the best 
suburbs of Kingstown, and thence pro- 
ceeded to the Ealliney Hill, whence he 
beheld another and still more magnificent 
view of this portion of the Irish Channel, 
and enjoyed that pure and delightful 
breeze that constitutes this part of Ireland 
one of the healthiest spots in the world. 
En passant, he had lunched with an old 
yachting acquaintance, one of the most 
hospitable men in the sister isle, whose 
good cheer and warm reception, whose 
beautiful villa, and whose good taste 
(shown by the choice selection of 

VOL. I. 11 




162 IRIwSH SOCIETY. 

^ * 

articles of vertii wldch filled liis^ 
residence) . displayed an example well 
worthy of imitation. He accompanied 
the party on their farther drive, and 
pointed out many of the interesting objects 
around them — ^including a glimpse of a 
small, quiet, sequestered cottage (for so 
it might be called), inhabited for many 
years by that once stirring leader who is 
said to have aimed at no less than the 
crown of Ireland. The quiescence and 
apathy of liis once noisy followers pro- 
bably read him a lesson on the evanes- 
cence of mob popularity. 

" Yes," said the ex-minister, turning to 
his daughter, " yonder is the residence 
of one who, forsaken by his former 
supporters, lived to reflect, alas ! not only 
on what he had allowed his stormy 
passions to makie him, but also to paint 
in vivid colours that which his good birth 
and brilliant talents might, by proper 



IRISH SOCIETY. 163 

application, have raised him to. Mischief 
and misconduct may still be rife in Ireland, 
but, thank Heaven, the spirit of national 
rebellion has ceased to exist." 

They now drove back to the town, and, 
alighting at the pier, sent the carriage 
away. Here the English family were 
truly struck by the wondrous beauty of 
the Kingstown ladies. Amongst at least 
three hundred of them, there scarcely 
appeared one plain woman — the great 
novelty they remarked seemed rather to 
be the almost entire absence of that " fat, 
fair, and forty" class, which so largely 
preponderates in all assemblies on the 
opposite side of the Channel. In thus 
qifcting the expression used by our fourth 
George to convey " ripe beauty," it is not 
meant to say that there were few women 
of forty years of age — ^far more astound- 
ing indeed was the fact ; for, out of the 
whole crowd there were not a dozen ladies 

11—2 



164 IRISH SOCIETY. 

whose ages might in any way be taken at 
a middling average. Of the three hundred, 
two hundred, at least, were young girls 
under twenty years of age, and about fifty 
above half-a-century in age. The belle 
passee, the sharp widow of thirty-three, the 
fading charmer of forty-five, were all absent, 
or so feebly represented as to be fairly 
eclipsed by the two extremes ; while the 
beaux consisted more or less of a dozen 
young officers in plain clothes, known 
from their confident lounge and bronzed 
faces ; three or four Kingstownians on a 
day's leave of absence from their respective 
offices, and a host of young boys, who, for 
the moment, seemed highly prized by the 
opposite sex, for they chatted and flirted 
with them, probably to keep these accom- 
plishments in working order during the 
absence of the youths' fathers or brothers, 
who could not arrive for another couple of 
hours. 

After a few turns, the usually popular 



IRISH SOCIETY. 165 

promenade was deserted, and his Irish 
friend pointed out to Lord Urmstone that 
the military band had arrived from Dublin, 
and were actually at that moment playing' 
beneath his lordship's windows. So the 
party adjourned there, and were indeed 
startled to see the magnificence of dress 
indulged in by our sisters of Erin. Their 
overwide crinolines — ^their sweeping trains 
— ^their frail bonnets, displaying the 
varied beauties of a full green-house 
within, and the plumage of an aviary 
without, called up, from its exaggera- 
tion of fashion, a smile on the face of 
the old peer. 

An aide-de-camp now came up and 
presented his lordship with a note from 
his Excellency the Lord-Lieutenant, invit- 
ing him and his family to dine at the Vice- 
regal Lodge on the following day. Lord 
Urmstone at once wrote to accept this 
pleasant " command," and, after a short 
interview with the officer, who turned out 



166 IRISH SOCIETY. 

to be the son of an old friend, resumed his 
walk in Grresham Gardens. 

" Do you go, my dear Wolfe, to the 
Lodge to-morrow?" asked he of the gentle- 
man with whom he had lunched. 

" Oh dear, no ; I am out of the 
set." 

" What do you mean ?" asked the other. 
*' Is the court cu'cle here so very exclu- 
sive r 

" By no means. Tou will find assem- 
bled what you will possibly deem a strange 
mixture — high and low, aristocratic and 
doubtful ; highly-titled tourists and local 
hangers-on, made up by a large body of 
the vice-regal staff and other military 
officers." 

" Is his Excellency, then, strong in his 
patronage of any particular religion or 
party ?" 

" By no means. He invites politicians 
of every shade ; and as to creeds, he is 



IRISH SOCIETY. 167 

m 

far more tolerant than any native of this 
'Country/' 

"How, then, is it yoa describe the 
circle around him as savouring of " 

" Oh, that is quite intelligible. His 
Excellency is one of the most amiable and 
kind-hearted men in the undverse. In 
true learning and knowledge, few can excel 
him ; as a statesman in the team of gov- 
ernment, he has proved his abilities. But 
his amiable qualities outweigh all these ; 
he would not only be kind to all, but 
intimate with all. He receives and 
accepts the one thousand hangers-on who 
exist alone in the atmosphere of the 
mimic court. He, I believe, first sets 
down on his list the ofl&cials he is bound 
to entertain, and then fills up the 
remainder with those passing visitors 
who thrust themselves into a semi-regal 
throng, for which neither their birth nor 
qualities ever intended them. They 



168 IRISH SOCIETY. 

crowd round the walls of Dublin Castle, 
and, assuming the tone of the existing 
Government, are ever ready to join any 
subscription, or support any scheme pro- 
posed by the authorities. When you 
have been some time in Ireland, you 
wiU, I am sure, deplore the servile flun- 
keyism — for it is the only term that 
truly describes it — displayed by some 
of our countrymen; a flunkeyism which 
truly disgusts the really patriotic and 
high-minded Irishman, the proud child 
of Hibemia's ancient race." 

Wolfe now took his leave, and the trio, 
after changing their dress, once more 
sought the captain's gig, which conveyed 
them on board the guard-ship, where they 
had agreed to dine with Captain and Mrs. 
St. Croix. The former might once have 
been, but was now no longer, a handsome 
man. One, however, of his greatest per- 
sonal disfigurements was the feature on 



IRISH SOCIETY. 161) 

which the peer gazed with the greatest 
admiration — ^his face had been injured in 
the service of his country. He had been 
struck by a musket-ball while performing 
a daring act of valour. He had won his 
high naval rank by true bravery and 
merit. He was that popular son of our 
isle, an undaunted British tar ; and Lord 
Urmstone accounted himself highly ho- 
noured in thus sitting down, even in a 
circumscribed cabin, to dinner in company 
with such tried warriors as Captain St. 
Croix and Captain Leslie — with two such 
lovely women as Mrs. St. Croix and his 
own darling Emily. 



170 



CHAPTER XIV. 



DUBLIN CASTLE. 



" From the many opportunities yon have 
had of observing the manners of the 
'Chinese, you can possibly inform me 
whether Christianity, as it has been as- 
serted, is known amongst them." 

"I scarcely understand you," replied 
Leslie, turning to his interlocutor, a very 
handsome man, distinguished alike by his 
aristocratic bearing and pleasing tone of 
voice. 

" Have they been visited by the light 
of the gospel?" demanded the first 
speaker. 

"T should say, though I had few 



DUBLIN CASTLE. 171 

opportunities of judging, that, like every 
creed throughout the world, there are 
certain shadowings of the Truth bestowed 
upon them. But, in the general accept- 
ance of the phrase, I should assert they are 
decidedly the most ridiculous idolaters in 
the universe/' 

" Eidiculous is scarcely the proper 
word," replied the other, sternly, drawing 
himself up. 

Leslie turned away ; why or wherefore 
he could not tell, but he had already im- 
bibed a dislike to his neighbour, and 
mentally set him down as a hypocrite. He 
would willingly have struggled against 
the belief, for which he could not but 
acknowledge to himself he had no just 
cause, but the instinctive feeling of 
aversion had entered his mind. As is 
often the case in society, why or where- 

■ 

fore he could not tell, sudden affections 
arise; but antipathies are not only still 



172 DUBLIN CASTLE. 

less traceable, they are more permanent 
in their nature/' 

" It is a fact, strange as it may appear," 
said Sir Patrick O'Mahon, at the other 
end of the vice-regal table, to one of the 
staff officers immediately facing him — " it 
is a fact patent to all, that some of the 
largest fortunes have been accumulated 
in this country by persons who have 
risen from the very lowest grades of 
society." 

"True; I have heard as much. La- 
bourers, bricklayers, and waiters have 
amassed large fortunes. But all the 
wealthiest individuals who have earned, 
by regular industry, brilliant positions, 
have almost invariably been Scotchmen 
and Englishmen ; see your most cele- 
brated and talented printer, look at the 
monster drapery-shops, note the names 
of some of your most thriving merchants 
and speculators, and you will find they 



DUBLIN CASTLE. 173 

all belong to the class alien — as desig- 
nated by the great Dan." 

" Ah, it may be so in Dublin." 
" Try your next city, Limerick, where 
some of the most successful provision- 
dealers, where many of your leading men, 
are imports from the sister country ; but, 
above all, the three great lace factories, 
which give employment to almost all the 
female industry in that city, have been in- 
troduced into Ireland, and are still pre- 
sided over by enterprising Englishmen." 

" Yes," chimed in a young sprig of 
nobility, " that's true ; besides, look at 
the number of English persons who, bon 
ffrCy mal gre^ have suddenly become pos- 
sessors of the largest estates in Ireland. 
Why, even a life assurance company now 
holds the princely acres of Dick Martin, 
while a worthy alderman of the city of 
London and a wealthy Scotch farmer 
have " 



174 DUBLIN CASTLE. 

"Enough, enough," interrupted the 
highly -irritated baronet ; "it is scarcely 
well-bred thus to attack a country which 
receives you so hospitably." 

" I am not to be lectured on manners," 
dryly observed the oflficer. 

"What can you expect?" murmured 
the young nobleman, shrugging his 
shoulders. 

A threat hung upon the lips of Sir 
Patrick, but he suppressed it. 

" Has yom- Excellency any further in- 
telligence respecting the attempted murder 
of Lord Grantchester ?" asked a high dig- 
nitary of the Church, addressing the Lord- 
Lieutenant. 

" Nothing whatever." 

" It is a sad and painful affair. Have 
they taken up the ruffian ?" 

"He is probably spending a pleasant 
time of it in the country, in spite of our 
soldier-like non-thieftakers," observed an 



DUBLIN CASTLE. 175 

unwelcome guest at the Lodge, invited 
there ex-offido. 

His Excellency frowned, but did not 
appear to notice this attack on his pet 
force. 

" Can you not assign some reason for 
this outrage ? Lord Grrantchester has ever 
been considered most kind to his ten- 
antry, and whenever distress has visited 
the South of Ireland, has ever been the 
first to remit their rents." 

" His brother,'' replied his Excellency, 
pointing to the stranger who had ad- 
dressed Leslie, '* Mr. Greorge Sydney, has 
only just arrived, and is probably in pos- 
session of the latest intelligence. What 
do you think, Mr. Sydney ?" 

" I am inclined to think that it was the 
act of some fanatic Papist.*' 

"It is more likely to spring from a 
deeper interest in his lordship's death," 
sharply and loudly retorted a leading 



176 DUBLIN CASTLE. 

member of the Irish bar, a staunch Eoman 
Catholic ; " no Papist, as you designate the 
assassin, could inherit on his decease." 

George Sydney turned deadly pale, and 
then his cheek became scarlet — ^his eyes 
flashed with rage ; but, controlling his 
emotion with an effort almost super- 
liuman, he mildly replied, " It may be so, 
though I was not aware that members of 
the bench ever prejudged causes or mo- 



tives. In England " 

"You will be late for our garrison 
theatricals. Captain Smithson,'* said his 
Excellency, desirous of stopping the un- 
pleasant altercation about to burst forth. 
• " True, your Excellency ; but I am 
amply repaid for the extra trouble it will 
give me, since Lady Emily has kindly 
promised to honour us with her presence." 
" You seldom fail in your applications." 
" Well, I believe I am fortunate," re- 
plied the young man, with a smile of 



DUBLIN CASTLE. 17T 

pleased vanity and the unmistakeable lisp 
of a gnardsman. 

Leslie sat on thorns. He did not see 
any marked pleasure in the manner of 
Emily, nor any gratification spring from 
the fop's attentions ; so why feel annoyed ? 
and, even if he had, it was surely no- 
business of his; what right had he tc 
interfere ? Yet, notwithstanding all thisy 
her brother by adoption felt very uncom-^ 
fortable, and wished the good-looking 
young fellow a thousand miles away. 

" Who do you think I met in Paris 
last season ?" asked a newly-arrived aide- 
de-camp ; "the once celebrated Lady Urm- 
stone." His Excellency coughed loudly, 
others tried to stop him, Lord Urmstone 
sank back in his chair, and the tears 
started into Emily's eyes. The blimder- 
ing speaker, however, was blind to all 
this, and went on — " She's still a wonder- 
fully fine creature. Do you know ?" 

VOL. I. 12 



178 DUBLIN CASTLE. 

"Allow me, Lord Arthur, to introduce 
you to Lord Urmstone ?" quickly inter- 
rupted their noble host. 

It was now the turn of the silly bab- 
bler to look foolish. He stammered 
something, and probably would have made 
matters worse; but his Excellency, with 
that taste which ever distinguishes him, 
started up, and, in a light-hearted tone, 
exclaimed — 

" Do not accuse me of any want of 
hospitality; but our carriage awaits us 
to convey us to the garrison theatricals, 
which will not commence till our arrival ; 
so allonSy messieurs — mesdames ; Lady 
Emily, will you accept my arm ?" 

And thus ended, in painful feelings 
and chafed tempers, an entertainment 
designed to increase the happiness of the 
higher circles; clearly illustrating that 
excellent rule which tells us that we 
may safely leave our meal to the super- 



DUBLIN CASTLE. 179 

vision of our Frencli cook, but that the 
wise selection of our company can alone 
be undertaken by ourselves, since a soli- 
tary cynic or an ill-assorted pair will 
destroy the calm gusto of a Lucullian 
feast. 



12- 



180 



CHAPTEE XV. 



THE THEATRE. 



The Theatre Boyal, Dublin, is a very 
handsome edifice, and, when filled as it 
was on the evening we speak of, presents 
a most brilliant appearance. The per- 
formance was given in aid of a popular 
charity ; the actors were to be composed 
of officers of the garrison. The Lord- 
Lieutenant had announced his intention 
of being present; the boxes, pit, and 
gallery were consequently crowded with 
a well-dressed audience ; the ladies being 
in evening dress, the military beaux in 
full uniform. To one unaccustomed to 
such a sight, the coup-d'oeil was positively 
dazzling. On the arrival of the vice- 



THE THEATRE. 181 

Tegal party, the National Anthem was 
played, and loudly chorused by an 
enthusiastic audience. An occasional 
address was well spoken by a young 
comet, and the performance proceeded 
in the usual unequal style which 
<listinguishes the efforts of theatrical 
amateurs. 

Emily was deHghted to find that reli* 
gious scruples forbade Greorge Sydney to 
enter a playhouse; she was therefore 
relieved from those looks of marked ad- 
miration which he had cast on the fair 
heiress, to her great annoyance, during 
the dinner-party. Seated next to her 
father, with her old playmate Captain 
Leslie leaning over the back of her chair, 
and an agreeable sub-secretary ready to 
give her every information touching the 
persons present, Emily might be said to 
be perfectly happy. 

She was not a little surprised, however. 



182 THE THEATRE. 

when some speech having been delivered 
which might be construed into a sneer at 
the Irish people, a loud groan, accompa- 
nied by hisses and catcalls, proceeded 
from the gallery, which, to her no less 
astonished gaze, on looking up, she per- 
ceived to be filled with well-dressed young 
men: these were no less than young 
students from Trinity College, who in 
Dublin fill the gallery of the Theatre 
Eoyal, and unhesitatingly pronounce their 
opinion on the pieces and actors produced 
before them. These strange critics were 
no less vociferous in their applause when 
anything flattering to their country was 
spoken; nor did they stand on much 
ceremony with the actors, to whom they 
frequently called out, addressing them by 
their proper names, and praising or 
censuring them, as they thought proper. 
These strange liberties did not seem to 
shock the rest of those assembled, such 



THE THEATRE. 183 

a mode of criticism being the usual habit 
of the frequenters of the principal BLiber- 
nian theatre. The grossness of former 
times, however, has much diminished, and 
the greatest objection now to be urged 
against this peculiar manner of approving 
or disapproving, is the extreme noise which 
these learned young gentlemen make. 

On the other hand it is to be urged 
that no better judges of acting or of music 
can be found. Between the acts, it is by 
no means an uncommon occurrence to 
hear some of the finest concerted pieces 
sung in the very finest style by the 
Trinity youths ; while their enthusiastic 
gallantry knows no bounds. The warm 
ovations profiered to their favourites ; the 
magnificence of the spontaneous oiferings ; 
the manner in which they not unfre- 
quently draw the fair actress or songstress 
back to her house amidst a blaze of 
torches, prove their warm hearts and 



184 THE THEATRE. 

sound judgments ; their great fault is an 
undue nationality, which condemns all 
wit, however brilliant, that can possibly re- 
flect upon their apparently idolized country 
— a country which they do not, however, 
hesitate to abuse on ordinary occasions. 

Points of religion, too, are subjects 
sure to draw down a storm of censure or 
approval. Talk of cutting off the head 
of a king, or dethroning a prince, not a 
word will be said ; but if the actor un- 
happily speaks of burning a bishop or 
striking a minister of their church, he 
will probably never be allowed to appear 
upon the boards again : thus the selection 
of a play becomes indeed a diflficult task. 
No second-rate singer can be foisted on 
an Irish audience ; a false note, a single 
turn omitted, will be at once remarked and 
denounced by the classic gallery ; while a 
certain popular tragedian was once forced 
to forego his favourite part of Hamlet, in 



THE THEATRE. 185 

deference to the opinion of the trouble- 
some gods who chose to consider the 
gravediggers* scene as irreligious, and 
insisted on the omission of the burial pro- 
cession in 'Eichard the Third.' Nothing 
less than the discriminating talents of 
the present lessee (Mr. Harris) codld 
make the Theatre Eoyal succeed. 

The performance on the present occa- 
sion was brought to an abrupt close by- 
one of the nicest actresses on the stage 
approaching too near the footlights ; her 
hoops, miscalled a crinoline, came in con- 
tact with gas, and in a moment the poor 
girl was on fire. Ere, however, it had time 
to injure her, a dozen young officers were 

on the stage, and Miss , in a state of 

insensibility, was carried into her dressing- 
room — happily, uninjured. 

The green curtain, however, fell, and on 
his Excellency rising and retiring, the 
entertainment came to an end. 



186 THE THEATRE. 

With little difficulty Lord Urmstone's 
carriage was found, and the coachman 
desired to return to Kingstown, the party 
being all somewhat fatigued by the civili- 
ties that had been offered to them. 



187 



CHAPTEE XVI. 

AN ACCIDENT PREVENTED. 

The hired vehicle in which the peer and 
his family returned to Kingstown, was one 
of those old-fashioned carriages drawn by 
a pair of horses, so universal in their use 
some half a century ago, when the con- 
venience of broughams was unheard of, 
and, when paraded in public, were saluted 
by the rather disagreeable sobriquet of a 
" demi'fortune' — a name which was meant 
to imply that the owner could not afford 
to keep more than one horse, and conse- 
quently was a fair subject for the sneering 
remarks of his richer neighbour. These 
foolish notions have, however, passed away, 
and the old traditional is seldom made 



188 AN ACCIDENT PEEVENTED. 

use of by members of the fashionable 
-circle. These somewhat cumbrous coaches 
are, for the greater part, hired as hack- 
ney carriages, or, in the more technical 
language of the stable-boys, as glass 
coaches. 

Somewhat worn out by the continual 
attentions kept up during the vice-regal 
banquet and the subsequent amateur 
performance, the trio were right glad, on 
entering the conveyance, to throw them- 
selves back in comers, and, to confess the 
truth, then and there fell into a profound 
^leep, rocked by the easy springs, which 
swung to and fro like a cradle as they 
travelled along the smooth and well cared 
for road which leads from the Irish metro- 
polis to her favourite suburb. 

What the retrospective dreams were 
which now visited the minds of the 
sleepers it is impossible to say ; suffice it 
to relate, all were buried in a calm slumber. 



AN ACCIDENT PREVENTED. 189' 

when a sudden jerk awoke them, and 
Leslie, starting up, lowered the window 
and looked out. 

In another moment, even before the 
peer had collected his scattered senses, 
while Emily was yet unclosing her eyes, 
he had burst open the door and jumped 
out. The action was seen by the wak- 
ing girl, who uttered a loud scream, 
and Lord Urmstone, naturally becoming 
alarmed, endeavoured at once to discover 
the clue to the scene before him. 

Tor an instant the carriage jolted over 
rough stones, and the horses were pro- 
ceeding with accelerated swiftness, when 
suddenly their speed was checked, and at 
the same instant the figure of a man was 
seen falling from the coach-box. By this 
time the vehicle had come to a full stop, 
and Lord Urmstone jumped out and at 
once solved the riddle. 

The coachman, during the performance 



190 AN ACCIDENT PREVENTED. 

at the theatre, had unhappily indulged his 
propensity for drinking ; and, in a state of 
intoxication, had endeavoured to drive the 
party to Kingstown, with the assistance of 
the footman, who was in almost as helpless 
a state as himself. The air had increased 
their confusion; objects began to swim 
before their eyes ; and, in a few minutes 
more, the reins dropped from the hands 
of the driver. The horses, finding them- 
selves thus set at liberty, at once increased 
their pace, and, crossing over some new- 
made road, in a few seconds would have 
upset the carriage into a deep dyke, when 
Leslie, jumping out, had, at the risk of his 
life, checked their wild career, and then 
climbing on the coach-box, had from thence 
hurled the two drunken men, and seizing 
the reins, had once more brought them 
under proper control. 

For several minutes the carriage pro- 
ceeded quietly on its way ; the father and 



AN ACCIDENT PREVENTED. 191 

daughter within it devoutly offering up a 
prayer to the Throne of all goodness — a 
prayer of thanksgiving for their late 
delivery from danger — a prayer in which 
their kind preserver's name was not for- 
gotten. Filled with the chastened thoughts 
that follow a good man's address to his 
Creator, they had leaned back in silent 
thought, when suddenly an outside car 
dashed past them ; torches were borne on 
it, and, by their light, the peer perceived 
that it was bearing forward in haste two 
human bodies. At a second glance, he 
perceived that the seeming corpses were 
no other than the insensible forms of the 
drunken coachman and the footman, who 
were thus carried back in seeming triumph 
to their respective houses. 

No wonder, then, that Lord Urmstone, 
on alighting, was greeted by a series of 
inquiries relative to the accident, and a 
general hope that " his lordship has not 



192 AN ACCIDENT PREVENTED. 

been much hurt, nor her ladyship, nor the 
young gentleman either ;" while a clamour 
of female tongues formed a running accom- 
paniment to the troublesome attentions of 
mine host and his numerous staff. 

In the dining-room sat a quiet, sedate- 
looking gentleman, who rose as Lord 
Urmstone entered, and, in the mitigated 
tongue called the Dublin accent, ex- 
plained that, being a physician, he had 
called to see whether he could be of any 
use. 

' ' None in the world, doctor. I'm equally 
obliged to you, but on this occasion IVe 
no cause to trouble you." 

" Indeed ! Faith, I heard that several 
of your limbs were broken." 

" None, I can assure you, doctor." 

" Well, my lord, if I can be of any other 



service " 



The peer began to think the practi- 
tioner rather intrusive, and, in that highly 



AN ACCIDBNT PREVENTED. 193 

dignified manner which our nobility can 
so well assume when they choose to adopt 
it, he bowed the smooth-tongued son of 
^sculapius out of the room. 

Scarcely had he done so, when a large, 
coarse-mannered man was announced as 
Sir Murdoch O'Kalmen. 

Lord Urmstone bowed. 

"I did myself the honour of calling, 
hearing tliat you have been overturned, 
that your daughter had dislocated her 
shoulder, and that your life was miracu- 
lously saved by an aide-de-camp of his 
'Excellency, who caught you as you were 
falling over the rocks. The driver, I am 
sorry to hear, was killed on the spot." 

"I am much obliged to you for the 
kind interest you express, but I must at 
once disabuse your mind of the fable 
which has been imposed on you: not 
one word of the narrative you have heard 
is true." 

VOL. I. 13 



« 



a 



194 AN ACCIDENT PREVENTED. 

" How provoking ! I've just repeated it 
at the Club/' 

" We take a different view of things— 
I rather feel thankful that the report is 
untrue." 

"Possibly so, my lord; but I unfor- 
tunately staked , my veracity on its cor- 
rectness. Are you sure no part is true?" 
Not a syllable." 

Ah ! then, you wont deny you dined 
at the Castle?" 

"Eeally, Sir Murdoch, or whatsoever 
your name may be, I am not here as 
a subject for your cross-examination." 

" Very true, very true ; but I am really 

sorry; that is ^My name, my lord, is Sir 

Murdoch O'Kilmen, the most celebrated 
surgeon in Dublin; and I rushed from 
the Club, where I was playing whist with 
the high-sheriff of rermough— a thorough- 
paced Orangeman— for the purpose of set- 
ting the young lady's shoulder." 



AN ACCrDENT PREVENTED, 195 

*'Had you inquired, sir, you would 
■have heard tiiat I have akeady seen and 
<iismissed one medical man/' 

" Yes, yes, I know that ; but I thought 
you did so from principle — the fellow is a 
rank Papi^." 

"And you?" 

** A staunch William:ite." 
. *^ Then allow me to tell you. Sir Mur- 
dock O'Kilmen, surgeon and Williamite, 
that I know no difference in Christian 
denomina;tioi3LS ; and, as an old man, I 
strongly recomtHSfeend you to drop these 
idle and wicked distinctions/' 

" If I did, I can tell you, lord as you 
are, that I should lose my best friends/' 

** If friends are only to be won and pre* 
served by religious intolerance on either 
side, I ioan only say i^at happy is he who 
lives frieinJless in this lovely country. 
Good evening, sir. You are perfectly wel- 
come to repeat my words at your Club/' 

13—2 



J 96 AN ACCIDENT PREVENTED. 

" I should be turned out if I did/' 

" The sooner the better, Sir Murdoch, 
if such are the feelings of your com- 
pany. I wish you good evening — I feel 
tired." 

Need we add how very strong were the 
expressions of gratitude now offered to 
Leslie; these he turned off with proper 
modesty, and had already stepped back 
one pace to allow Emily to pass, when, 
passionately seizing his hand, the lovely 
"girl imprinted a glowing kiss upon it, 
then uttering, in an agitated tone, " God 
bless you, my noble preserver !" she rushed 
upstairs. 

The nobleman turned away his head — 
in anger, in joy, or in sorrow — ^the young 
soldier could not perceive. Then, slowly 
following his daughter, he sought his 
room, but Leslie perceived that his hand 
trembled. 

Our hero threw himself in a chair, and 



AN ACCIDENT PREVENTED. X97 

for a full hour indulged himself in dreamy 
fancies — ^fancies we are forbidden to dis- 
close. He then retired, but not to sleep ; 
the first consciousness of a hopeless but 
devouring love already burnt within his 
bosom. 



1J*& 



CHAPTER XVII 

ATTEMPTED MURDER. 

"Allow me to present you my daugh- 
ter/* said Lord Urmstone, rising from his^ 
chair. " Allow me, dear Emily, to intro- 
duce you to my oldest and best friend,. 
Lord Crrantchester.^ 

" I am indeed delighted at being thus 
formally made acquainted with you, Lady 
Emily, though it is by no means the 
first time that we have met," cried the 
Earl, advancing and shaking Emily's 
hand with the warmth of an old friend. 
" I have known you from your birth, I 
have often admired you in childhood,, 
but any flattering anticipations I then 
indulged in are more than realised in the 



ATTEMPTED MUKDER. 199 

lovely girl I see before me. Excuse my 
seeming familiarity; but remember, I 
have long known you and loved you as 
the daughter of my respected friend Urm- 
stone/' 

"I am far from forgetting the many 
acts of kindness I received at your 
lordship's hands in early youth; be- 
sides, had I for a single day forgotten 
you, my father's daily praises would 
have continually reminded me of the 
good qualities of the Earl of Grant- 
chester." 

" You must indeed pass a happy life 
in the society of your daughter. It must 
more than compensate for the want of a 
male companion." 

" I do possess that treasure within my 
domestic circle." 

" Indeed 1 a nephew probably ? I know 
that you have no sons." 

" Tru^ ; but I have an adopted son. 



200 ATTEMPTED MUBBBB. 

whom I value as if he were my own off- 
spring." 

" Indeed ! and does your daughter ap- 
prove of this addition to the family ?" 

" Ah ! that I do," hastily exclaimed the 
lovely girl, blushing. " When you know 
Captain LesUe, I am quite sure you will 
like him." 

" Leslie ! I have heard that name before. 
A relative of yours was so called, was she 
not, Urmstone ?" 

"Most true; this young man has as- 
sumed her name on taking her properiy, 
which I have made over to him on his 
return from China." 

" Has your proteg^ been out there ?" 

" Yes, he was in the ■ regiment." 

" Bless me ! how strange ! the very 
corps in which the hero of the expedition 
served. Of course you have heard of 
him?" 

" How ?" 



ATTEMPTED MURDER. 201 

"What! have you not heard of the 
youth who may be said to have taken, 
vsingle-handed, a Pegoo Fort ? I hear he 
is to be the lion of the season." 

" Indeed," said Emily, with a sly glance 
" I am sure we shall be rejoiced at it." 

" Why so ?" 

" Because my adopted son Leslie is, 
I behove, the very gallant youth of 
whom you speak." 

" He is then well worthy of your friend- 
ship, and I can only add that I shall feel 
proud to know him." 

"Your lordship wiU soon be gratified, 
then," chimed in Emily, "for here he 



comes." 



At that moment the door opened, and 
Leslie cheerfully entered. Lord Grant- 
chester advanced a pace to meet him, 
holding out his hand to exchange 
civilities, when, looking up suddenly, he 
started back with a scream of terror. 



202 ATTEMPTED MIJROSS. 

" Agnes I beloved Agnes, can it be pos- 
sible !" tben^ passing his band over his 
fiwje, he seemed by a mighty effort to 
calm his agitation, and uttered in an 
nnder-tone— " No, no, it is impossible. 
I am mad: bnt he is the very image of 
her." Soon recovering his n5ual de- 
meanour, he stepped up to the astonished 
young man, aiid in the most courteous 
words assured him that his accidental 
likeness to one very, very dear to him, 
had for a moment upset his better reason. 
He now begged to apologise for thus 
giving way to a momentary agitation, 
and concluded by assuring the youth how 
proud he felt in thus making the ac- 
quaintance of one whose daring deeds 
were the theme, of every tongue. 

Mark Leslie, though somewhat taken 
aback by the strange behaviour of the 
Earl, and subsequently abashed by the 
broad flattery of the nobleman, yet 



ATTEMPTED MURDBB. 203 

managed to reply in suitable terms; 
then, turning to Lord Urmstone, he in- 
formed him that he liad secured post- 
horses to convey them to the beautifiil 
seat of Lord Powerscourt on the follow- 
ing day. 

"Kindly inform the landlord that 
Lord Grantchester has in the most 
friendly manner consented to share our 
dinner, and desire him to provide accord- 
ingly/' 

" It shall be done, sir," said Leslie, 
who, after whispering a word in Emily's 
ear, left the room. Emily soon after- 
wards followed. The Earl of Grant- 
chester's manner had undergone a 
complete change; the smile that had 
lit up his countenance on entering had 
fled, and for some mom^ts he threw 
himself back in his chair,, and shutting 
his eyes, observed a strict silence. This 
he broke by abruptly asking, "Where 



204 ATTEMPTED MURDER. 

did you meet with Captain Leslie ? is he 
connected with any of your family ?" 

" Not in the least. He is of humble 
birth ; said to be the son of one who bears 
a very indiflferent character. Indeed, it 
was to snatch him from the evil example 
of these people, that I first adopted 
him." 

"You made use of the words, 'said 
to be/ Is there any doubt respecting 
his parentage?" 

"None, I fear." 

" How did you become acquainted with 
him?" 

" He saved my daughter's life when she 
was a mere baby. He was then a stripling, 
but even thus early showed courage, for 
he plunged into the stream into which 
Emily had fallen, and, at the risk of 
drowning himself, saved her." 

"Noble boy! you did well to adopt 
him. I know not why, but my heart 



ATTEMPTED MURDBB* 205 



yearns toward him;" and again Lord 
Grrantchester became silent. 

Dinner was soon afterwards announced, 
and the younger members of the circle 
having joined them, they proceeded to 
discuss the meal. 

A witty northerner had dropped in, and 
having been asked to remain, vainly en- 
deavoured to instil some warmth into the 
party. Full of humour, he told anecdotes 
of the most laughter-stirring nature. He 
punned upon every sentence uttered; he 
made the room ring with his hearty and 
jovial laugh. But he alone was cheerful. 
Lord Urmstone was imperturbably grave, 
the younger couple were out of spirits, 
and Lord Grrantchester sat with his eyes 
fixed on Captain Leslie, to his great an- 
noyance; so the wit of the excellent 
magistrate fell on ungrateful soil. His 
cheerful smile changed by degrees into a 
look of disappointment, and he made the 



206 ATTBMFTEB MURDSB. 

excuse of an early-startiiig tram to leave 
the party, having urgent reasons, as he 
pleaded, for a speedy return to Dublin, 

When Emily had quitted the room. 
Lord Urmstone felt conscious that it wa« 
his duty to commence the conversation, 
which he did by asking Lord Grantchester 
the particulars of the late attempt made 
upon his life. 

"And has no one been arrested on 
suspicion ?" 

" No one." 

'* The police, then, must surely be to 
blame." 

" Not individually ; it is rather the 
organization of that force than any lack 
of jseal on the part of its members, that I 
Uame. The magistracies aa:e now become 
the perquisites of men of interest rather 
than men of intelligence. Their salaries 
are so good, their work so Ught, that 
they are reserved by Government as 



ATTEMPTED MURDEB. 207 

crowning ^fts to reward and provide for 
men of influence, as repayments for ser- 
vices in other branches. There are nearly 
five hundred of these lucky persons, their 
salaries varying from two hundred to 
five hundred per annum. They yepoit 
direct to their friends in Dublin Castie, 
and thus act on orders from a distant au* 
thority, instead of uniting in close co- 
op^ation with their brother magistrates. 
Thus a double power is created, and the 
unpaid justice, who resides within five 
miles of the sceae of an atrocious murder, 
is often left in ignorance of the outrage 
committed almost on his own estate, till 
the INiblin authorities have been made 
fully acquainted with it." 

'' These are the reddent magistrates, 
styled, in my day. Stipendiaxy Magis- 
trates." 

" Exactly so ; but mark me, TJrmstone : 
I am far irom blaming these gentlemen 



208 ATTEMPTED MURDER. 

— I do not quarrel with them, but with 
the system under which they act. I 
have not heard any complaints of their 
omitting to fulfil the duties that devolve 
on them ; but I do most seriously quarrel 
with the nature of those duties which 
make them country gentlemen instead of 
police magistrates." 

" But there are other oflGlcers ?" 

'* A host of them, styled by all sorts of 
fine names ; their number is legion, and 
they are well paid. In their favour I 
must say I never met with a more gentle- 
manlike or more active body of men. In 
a ball-room they are perfectly at home, 
and, dressed exactly as officers of the Eifle 
Brigade, they certamly form the chief 
ornament of our provincial parties." 

'* But what are they — how do they 
rank?" 

" They are all gentlemen — some of 
them, I believe, half-pay officers. In 



ATTEMPTED MURDER. 209 

sitatus they are nothing more nor less 
than the chief constables of your time, but 
thus placed to a certain degree beyond the 
immediate control of the local magistrate. 
These gentlemen are far from being as 
efficient as those under the old regime. 
But here again, no fault lies wdth the in- 
dividuals. They fiiUy and zealously carry 
out the views of their chiefs, and if the 
Government insist on making them mili- 
tary captains instead of police officers, it 
is no fault of theirs." 

" But the force itself — ^the common 
men, I mean — seem to be the finest body 
of men I ever saw," chimed in Leslie. 

" And so they are. For military pur- 
poses I have little doubt of their value, 
but as policemen you will, I fear, find 
them most inefficient, seeking rather to 
please the eye than to detect crime. These 
men are strapped and buckled up in tight 
green uniforms, on their heads they have 

VOL. I. \\ 



210 ATTEMPTED BlURDER. 

bright shining soldiers' shakos, on their 
hands they are bound to wear gloves, a 
tight girdle is fastened round their waists, 
to which is attached a pouch filled with 
heavy cartridge, and a sword-bayonet 
dangles beside their thigh nearly three 
feet in length ; they are drilled, and em- 
ployed on excise and other civil duties, 
they are encumbered with a heavy rifle, 
and thus proclaimed to all the district, 
thus exhibited to the sight of skulking 
runaways, they are desired to become 
thief-takers! a task to them (as it ha& 
turned out) next to impossible. Seen at 
a great distance, their approach is in- 
stantly signalled through a country ever 
ready to shield the assassin, and thus the 
police have no chance of overtaking them ; 
and indeed, if they did, encumbered as 
they are, the mimic soldiers would have 
but little chance of capturing them. The 
police force look right well at drill — ^tliey 



I 



ATTEMPTED MUBDBR. 211 

form an imposing feature in a procession, 
but to run after a flying malefactor would 
be indeed a scene ludicrous to behold/* 

" Then there is little chance of the 
would-be miu'derer being taken ?" 
" Not the slightest." 
" Can you trace any cause ?" 
" None. I have seldom been in the 
country, and have most certainly created 
no enemies. Mr. King, my agent, is the 
kindest of men, and beloved by my 
tenantry. The only way I can at all 
account for it is the bad spirit evoked 
and fostered by certain violent branches 
of the Press who live by pandering to 
the worst feelings of an excitable people, 
and often stir up angry passions by in- 
venting grievances which do not exist. 
To pull down respectability, to destroy 
order, may fairly be said to be the object 
of the journals I speak of" 

Emily now sent in to summon the 

14—2 



212 ATTEMPTED MURDER. 

party to the tea-table. Arrived there, the 
conversation became general, and the 
sincerest and kindest utterances of friend- 
ship were warmly reciprocated. 

Ten o'clock arrived, and as the Earl 
wished to reach Dublin by the last train, 
he rose, but requested a few words in 
private with his noble entertainer previ- 
ous to his departure. The young people 
also rose, and insisted on leaving the room. 

The two peers were thus left together. 
For a few moments both were silent ; at 
length Lord Grantchester spoke. 



213 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

SIMPATHY. 

" I TRUST, my dear friend, that you will 
pardon the strange request I have made, 
and that that which I am about to ask will 
not be deemed the offspring of mere idle cu- 
riosity. A feeling has this evening sprung 
up in my breast — a maddening emotion, 
for which I cannot account — I am almost 
driven to frenzy by it." 

" Do — do be calm," chimed in Lord 
Urmstone, who really began to think that 
the Earl had taken leave of his senses. 
" Tell me the cause of this agitation, and 
in a word say how I can serve you." 

" The youth who was here just now 
— tell me all you know about him." 



214 SYMPATHY. 

"With pleasure; though I fear the 
information will be scant. Until the day 
on which he saved Emily's life I never 
beheld him, and from that time until he 
entered the army he never quitted my 
roof;" and here Lord Urmstone narrated 
his interview with the Marks's, his adop- 
tion of their son, and the subsequent 
manner in which the youth had conducted 
himself. 

" And they have never sought to see 
him since he became a resident with 
you? 

" Never !" 

" It is strange — strange, indeed. It is 
scarcely natural that, if they were really 
his parents, they should never have en- 
deavoured to hold communion with him." 

" Eemember, my dear Grantchester, that 
such an attempt would have entailed the 
forfeiture of the allowance I now make 
them" 



SYMPATHY. 215 

" There is something in that — ^it may be 
as you say ; yet I can hardly reconcile it 
with my opinion of parental affection. 
But let that pass. Tell me, my dear Urm- 
stone, what are you going to do with 
this young man ? He tells me he is not 
going to remaini in the army. Have you 
provided him with any future — do his in- 
clinations point to any other profes- 
sion : 

" No. To tell you the truth, I have 
never thought of it. Leslie is young yet, 
and has already a fair competency." 

" Would he accept a post of ease and 
confidence? The salary, a thousand a 
year." 

" That would indeed be noble. Is 
the vacMicy in England, Ireland, or 
abroad? I should not like my adopted 
son to reside in another country." 

"I will be candid with you. I am 
Rowing old; my brother, on whom I 



216 SYMPATHr. 

reckoned for support, is so much engaged 
— at least, so he assures me — ^with theo- 
logical struggles, that he can find little 
time to devote to me : I therefore want 
an alter se — another self, a confidential 
secretary — ^to superintend my affairs and 
carry on my somewhat extensive corre- 
spondence. Now I have this night formed 
such an attachment for your protege, 
that, if he will accept the post, he may 
at once consider himself nominated to 
it. 

" My dear lord, your offer is most hand- 
some, and I can only say I shall strongly 
advise him to accept it. I will commu- 
nicate it to him in the morning.'' 

" Not so ! Now. Ay, I see you start 
in surprise ; but I can know no rest till 
I have Captain Leslie's decision." 

Lord Urmstone certainly began to doubt 
his noble guest's reason ; but he hastened 
to reply — 



SYMPATHY. 217 

*' As you wish it, I will at once seek 
him in his own chamber, and convey to 
him your most liberal offer." 

" Do so, I pray you." 

The ex-minister left the room. During 
the ten minutes he was absent. Lord 
Grantchester paced up and down the 
apartment, a prey to inward agitation. 
At length. Lord XJrmstone returned. 

" His answer — quick ! — ^What does he 
say? 

" He desires me to say ever3rthing that 
is grateful to your lordship " 

" Yes, yes ; but his reply to my pro- 
position ?" 

" For the present, he with many thanks 
declines it." 

" I thought so — ^I thought so. I am 
doomed — doomed to be disappointed." 
And, with a hasty salutation. Lord XJrm- 
stone rushed out, and was soon en route 
for Dublin. 



218 SYMPATHY. 

Emily soon after stole down, and in 
those peculiar coaxing tones which soften 
the heart of a father who believes in the 
perfection of his daughter, sought to know 
what that grave Lord Grantchester had 
wanted with " dear papa." 

The application, accompanied as it 
was by the fond kiss of filial love, was 
not to be resisted, and 'the pleased father 
at once recounted to his loved child the 
substance of his interview with Lord 
Grantchester. 

Had he watched his daughter's face 
during the narration and seen the changes 
of her countenance as he proceeded, he 
would at once have read the deep interest 
she felt in all that concerned her adopted 
brother. When he came to the con- 
clusion — ^to the decision of Leslie — ^the 
blood forsook her cheeks, she almost 
gasped for breath. In the next, her colour 
returned, and, as he stated the refusal of 



SYMPATHY. 219 

his protege to leave him, she exclaimed, 
in a tone of triumph — 

" Ah, I knew it ! I could have staked 
my life on it. Dear, dear John. Oh, 
how I love him ! I love him better than 
ever. How noble, how good he is to give 
up all for us !" 

" It was indeed most grateful of him, 
but I yet hope to persuade him to accept 
this most eligible offer." 

" What ! would you advise him to 
leave us ?'* 

" Dearest girl, it is for his own good. 
As a sister, you should counsel him to 
take advantage of Lord Grantchester's 
offer. We have both a sincere affection 
for him, but it must not blind us to the 
truth, nor allow any selfish feeling of ours 
to be a bar to his promotion." 

" Well, I dare say you are right, but 
couldn't you get something as good for 
him at home from your friends in power? 



220 SYMPATHY. 

They offered you a seat in the Cabinet. 
Surely you could get a trifle like this for 
an adopted son." 

" My darling child, you scarcely esti- 
mate properly the value of the offer made 
him. But we'll talk it over in the mom- 
ing. eooa-night, dei gi.1; remember 
we have a fatiguing day before us." 

" That's true ; so good night, papa !" 
She imprinted a kiss on his cheek, and 
sprang up the stairs. As she closed her 
bedroom-door, she uttered aloud — " God 
bless him!" Did she mean her father? 
We fear not. 



221 



CHAPTER XIX. 



THE ACCOMPLICE. 



A BRILLIANT fire burned in the apartment 
we have abeady described as belonging to 
George Sydney in the Albany ; a tray co- 
vered with refreshments stood on the table; 
a change of dress was placed on the back 
of one of the arm-chairs — all denoted an 
expected arrival. 

Our old friend Coleman was taking a 
last review of all these preparations, when 
the well-known knock of his master an- 
nounced the appearance of George Sydney. 
Not a moment was lost in opening the 
door, as the evening was cold and the 
hour somewhat advanced. The obsequious 
valet uttered a sincere welcome and ushered 



222 THE ACCOMPLICE. 

the young man into his comfortable 
saloon. 

" I trust you had a pleasant journey, 
sir," observed the servitor, in a low tone. 

." Have you got a cold, that you mum- 
ble in that way ? If not, speak out/' 

" I thought, perhaps, that you might 
not like your arrival to be generally 
known," rejoined Coleman, with a wink 
and a leer somewhat more familiar than 
he would have dared to have indulged in 
some twelve months before; the pecu- 
niary embarrassments of their superiors 
having often the effect of reducing their 
status, not only in their own opinion, but 
also in that of their servants. Thus Mr. 
Coleman did not look upon the Honourable 
George Sydney, after his sojourn in a 
sponging-house, with half the deference 
he had regarded him before. 

" And why, sirrah, may I ask — why 
should I desire to conceal my arrival ?" 



THE ACCOMPLICE. 223 

" Well, sir, I trust you will excuse me'* 
— ^for the valet felt rather awed by the 
cold tone of his employer — " I did not 
mean anjrthing, sir. But, if any of your 
creditors " 



" Enough. If any call, show them in." 

" Sir " 

" It is true. You will do as I desire 
you." 

"Then, sir (if I may make so 
bold), you mean to pay them; for Mr. 
Vaughan, the bootmaker, and Mr. Taylor, 
the coachmaker, were here this morning, 
and said " 

"Never mind what they said; it is 
immaterial to me. You will, however, 
remark that I know of no Miatera among 
my tradespeople. Vaughan is a boot- 
maker, Taylor a coachbuilder ; but Mr. 
Taylor indicates an equality I am indis- 
posed to admit." 

" Well, sir, I will be more cautious in 



224 THE ACCOMPLICE, 

future ; and I'm sure that when you pay 
them, they wont stand on any difference 
about what you like to call them." 

" Coleman, I never said I was going to 
pay them." 

" La ! sir, this moment you said " 

" I know what I said, and you would 
know also, if you would listen. I told 
you that I was in no fear of arrest — nor 
am I. The fact is, that I have just been 
attached for a time to the Kussian Em- 
bassy. No one can, therefore, molest 
me." 



" Indeed ! I was not aware- 



99 



" It is unnecessary that persons in your 
rank of life should be aware. I will, 
however, explain to you the fact. All 
persons (even menials) belonging to the 
Court or to Foreign Embassies are free 
from arrest for debt. I may, therefore, 
laugh at any attempt to interfere with my 
personal liberty." 



THE ACCOMPLICE. 225h 

A knock — a single, dry, hard knock 
was heard. Coleman went out to answer 
it ; he speedily returned. 

" I came, sir, to say that there is a hor- 
rible-looking man, who says he must see 
you. For my part, I think he's a bailiff's 
runner, and I should certainly have 
slammed the door in his face, but you 
said you did not care for such people ; so 
I came in to ask for your orders," and a 
sly smile stole over Coleman's face — 
almost a malicious one. 

** Show the man in," coolly said Greorge, 
who was just devouring a slice oifoie graa ^ 
" show him in." 

The servant seemed confounded, but 
covering his confusion by a hasty flight, 
he went out once more and returned,, 
showing in a rough, sinister-looking man^ 
closely muffled up, but who, on entering 
the warm room, at once threw aside his 
wrappers and displayed the features of one 

VOL. I. 15 



226 THE ACCOMPLICE. 

equally well known to master and man — 
the hard face of Jem Marks. 

" Leave the room, Coleman. Sit down, 
Mr. Marks," said George, with ill-sup- 
pressed anger. 

"I wonder what he's come about/* 
muttered the valet, as he reluctantly left 
the room. 

" And now, sir," asked Sydney, in a stem 
voice, " what brings you here, after your 
solemn promise never to trouble me 

"Well, that's fair; I did make the 
promise, as you says, and I means to keep 
it." 

" Then why are you here ?" 

"Oh! it ain't on that little business 
at all. Mother Marks more nor once 
wanted me to come, but I wouldn't. 
Honour's honour." 

" Then what brings you here now ?'* 

"Oh, I comes as a mutual friend 



THE ACCOMPLICE, 227 

atween you and another person, a friend 
of mine." 

George started in anger ; an exclama- 
tion of disgust was about to escape from 
him, but with the cold command over his 
temper which years of deceit had taught 
him, he merely asked between his serried 
teeth, "And pray, sir, who is your 
friend ?" 

" He's a Hirish gentleman as is lodging 
with my wife." . 

" And may I ask what I can possibly 
have to do with a person in his rank of 
life ?" 

"A good deal, I suspects, Master 
Oeorge," cried Marks, winking and laugh- 
ing at his own joke. 

His rage almost overcame Sydney's 
better reason ; but he kept his feelings in 
restraint, and merely asked — 

" Whence does the man come ?" 

** From Limerick." 

15—2 



226 THE ACCOMPLICE. 

George winced, and quickly demanded 
his name/' 

'' Pat Geary." 

The great man was at once subdued; 
he turned deadly pale, paused for a 
moment, and then asked, in an agitated 
lone — 

" What does he want with me ?" 

** A passage to Ameriky, and ten poimds 
in his pocket." 

And supposing I refuse F' 
He'll blab, upon my soul he will ! 
He swears he'll not swing for nor- 
thing." 

" And you know all ?" 

" Au r 

** How did you learn it ?" 

" I'll tell you. This here chap was a 
working where I sometimes does odd 
jobs, when a day or two ago one of the 
Bobs come and inquired arter him,'* 

'' Who are the Bobs ?" 



« 



(C 



THE ACCOMPLICE. 229 

"The poKce, a^ you calls 'em — ^the 
peelers. Well, he comes to me and asks 
me to make him inwisible. So, as old Sal 
had a room to spare — sl room as no beak 
in England could find out — I takes him 
and hides him, and after two days says I 
to him, * Pat,' for he told me that was his 
name like, ' Pat,' says I, * if you can't pay 
you must cut.' ' Well, I don't like that/ 
says he. ' Pay, then,' says I. ' I hain't 
no money.' *What did you come to 
London for, then?' says I. 'Because 
Ireland were a httle too warm for me," 
says he. * Not that I cared much for them 
dressed-up peelers; they couldn't catch 
me in a year ; they're too strapped up to 
run, and they're too much of the gentle- 
man-soldier to follow the hkes of me.* 
' Why did you come, then ?' chimes in 
Sal. 'I'll tell ye why,' says he. *A 
great lord, or something of the kind, gave 
me five pounds to shoot his brother, and 



230 THE ACCOMPLICE. 

promised me ten more if I did it all right 
like. He told me lie was a poor tenant, 
and the chap as I was to shoot was a 
ganger, so I didn t mind it mnch — I'd 
have done it for half the money/ " 

"And pray," asked Sydney, "what 
has all this narrative to do with me — 



these dnmken dreams of a fugitive Irish- 
manr 

*' Well, you'll see. It appears that 
when he went into Tipperary to change 
the five-pound note, the banker-chap made 
a fuss about changing it, and asked him 
where he got it, and then took it to 
another chap with a powdered head, who 
examined it through his spectacles, and 
said as it was all right, for the name as 
was written on the back was George 
Sydney ! Ah ! I told you you'd start — 
the only brother of the Earl of Grrant- 
chester !" 

George became a prey to agitation, and 



THE ACCOMPLICE. 231 

more than once uttered, " Fool ! idiot that 
I was !" and similar self-accusations. 

" Don't take on so," soothingly chimed 
in Marks ; " there bean't no harm done 

yet." 

" Of course not, of course not ! How 
is it proved that the note, though signed 
by me, had come from me direct? Why 
is Lord Grantchester's name intro- 
duced ?" 

" Merely because there's a reward put 
out of one hundred pounds to anyone who 
might capture the villain as shot at the 
Hearl of Grantchester. And as to the 
note, he went into Limerick and found 
out there that the description of George 
Sydney and the pretended tenent was, as 
it were, all one ; so he looks out for that 
gentleman, and hearing from them chaps 
as allays writes in favour of boys of his 
kind, that his employer had started for 
these here parts, he worked his way over 



•232 THE ACCOMPLICE. 

in a Limerick vessel, under the very nose 
of the peelers." 

" And how came you to know all this ?" 
" Oh, that ere's very simple. It appears, 
;as I told you, he was a week or so 
in London and couldn't hear nothing 
of the bird he wanted, and, as I said 
before, he was obligated to take a lodging 
at our Sal's, and one evening, when he 
was a-talking mysterious like about his 
employer — 'What's his name?' says I. 
* I shan't tell it,' says he. ' Then you're 
a fool,' says I, * for perhaps we can help 
to find him for you, and if there's a 
<5hance of that, we wont turn you out/ 
So upon that he up and tells us all. So 
I volunteers as a mutual friend, without 
^giving up your address, to come and 
see you, and probably save you from 
travelling across the mill-pond. 
" In a word, what do you want ?" 
'' Well, I likes reasonable talk. There's 



i 9i 



THE ACCOMPLICE. 233 

fifteen pounds for the Irisher s passage, 
and then he wants ten pounds in his 
pocket, and then there is two pounds 
and seventeen bob for my missus ; and I 
don't think, as an old friend, you'll grudge 
me a fiver for all my trouble. Altogether, 
you see, thirty-three pounds seventeen. 
(Marks was not an exact reckoner, but he 
seldom lost by his calculations.) Suppose, 
Master George, we say thirty-five, and I'll 
see Pat Geary safe off in the next vessel.'* 
"And if I say no?" 
" Well, it ain't for me to say a word." 
" Can't I silence the fellow with less ?" 
" Unpossible. You see he has ah-eady 
told it to Sal and me, and if he gets out 
of my crib and gets his tight hat on, he'll 
blab it to all the company, in spite of all 
the oaths he may swear. He's quite the 
gentleman when he's sober, but when he 
has his grog aboard, he's an awful talkety 
devH." 



234 THE ACCOMPLICE. 

"You know you have me in your 
power." 

" Oh ! not by no means." 

" You know you have. Here is the 
cash (and Greorge examined every note to 
see that it was not endorsed). Take it, 
Marks, and mind I look to you to see 
him safely off." 

" Oh ! upon my honour." 

The smile of contempt and scorn which 
this assurance elicited from George is not 
to be described. Fortunately for him, the 
ruflSan did not see it. 

" WeU, Master George." 

'^I wish you would call me Mr. 
Sydney." 

"Oh, Lord Sydney, if you likes it. 
Here's my address, and if at any time my 
services can be useful " 

"Be off," petulantly interrupted the 
other; "my greatest hope is that I 
shall never see you again." 



THE ACCOMPLICE. 235 

" Oh, I shan't intrude, I promise you. 
Grood night." 

" Good night," replied the other, shut- 
ting the door on him. " TU bum his 
filthy address." He took up the scrawl, but 
on second thoughts he added — " No, no, 
I'll keep it ;" and put it into his pocket. 

" Coleman, give me my night-light. 
I'm tired of these charitable appeals ;" and 
he entered his sleeping-chamber. 

The valet looked grave ; he knew 
that his master had uttered a false- 
hood, for he had listened at the door. 
But, fortimately for Greorge Sydney, he 
had only caught disjointed words. "Master 
George," however, rang in his ear, and as 
he retired upstairs he muttered — "I 
know better ; that ill-looking chap is no 
beggar." 



236 



CHAPTEE XX. 

THE ANONYMOUS LETTER. 

It had struck eleven o'clock before George 
Sydney, attired in a brocade dressing- 
gown, lounged in to breakfast, when, 
taking his seat, he deliberately helped 
himself to the various luxuries before him 
with that unstudied ease that bespeaks 
one accustomed to recherchS fare — one of 
those gourmets who, cradled in the lap 
of Wealth, seem to take the richest gifts 
of Art as a proper homage to their superior 
taste. The country gentleman eats his 
cold venison pasty or his kippered 
salmon with a rustically eager appetite ; 
the ordinary Londoner gobbles up his 
beef-steak or gulps down his new-laid 



THE ANONYMOUS LETTER. 237 

eggs with indecent haste ; but to the 
high-bred, pampered aristocrat, the meal 
before him is an object worthy of delibe- 
rate study. Thus, if wine still taints the 
palate, the lordly man of taste will pro- 
bably select salmon cutlets a VIndienne. 
To a pure tongue, the backbone of a 
pheasant or even the breast of a doubly- 
tainted grouse may not come amiss ; while 
a caviare toast or the more delicate pre- 
paration of a woodcock's trail, is by no 
means a bad avant courier to a cup of 
green tea, sweetened by sugar-candy and 
diluted by the cream of goat's milk. 
Thus prepared, the gastronomer may 
hold out till luncheon, the intermediate 
time being occupied by reading letters 
recently arrived by post and answer- 
ing them, giving audiences to country 
constituents, or debating points of dress 
with a tailor or a bootmaker. Indeed^ 
between the shadow of breakfast at eleven 



238 THE ANONYMOUS LETTER. 

^nd its reality, styled luncheon, at, say, 
about two o^clock, the rough work of the 
coming day may be got over. 

Such was the almost daily routine of 
Sydney's life, and in accordance with it 
he had just finished his first meal. He 
had looked over the deaths and marriages 
in the Morning Post^ and risen to ring 
the bell, when the ever-attentive Coleman 
brought him in three or four letters on a 
silver salver. 

At two of them he merely glanced. 
He at once perceived they were what is 
styled begging letters ; the third bore 
the name of his hated coachmaker (for 
we always hate those to whom we owe 
money) on the impressed seal. Without 
reading them, the trio were committed to 
the flames. The last that remained bore 
the Dublin post-mark. It was addressed 
in the handwriting of Lord Grantchester, 
and consequently claimed attention. 



THE ANONYMOUS LETTER. 239 

George rather seemed to shrink from open- 
ing it. This only made his valet more 
anxious to know the contents of it ; and 
in the hope of gleaning the news, or at 
least discovering from some word dropped, 
or from the general manner of his master, 
the purport of it, he purposely lingered 
in his duty of removing the breakfast 
things. George, however, seemed deter- 
mined to afford no clue. He said no- 
thing, but laying the letter on his desk, 
he contemplated it with serious calmness. 
Coleman was thus baffled and obliged to 
leave the apartment, without having 
acquired the slightest inkling of its 
nature. 

The door had hardly closed when 
Sydney nervously tore open the letter. 
As he read it through, his various emo- 
tions may be better imagined than de- 
scribed ; his best hopes were on the eve 
of shipwreck. A mysterious terror filled 



240 THE ANONYMOUS LETTER. 

his breast as he read the missive, which 

ran thus : — 

"My dear George, — 

"You will be surprised to hear 
that I am in Dublin, en route for England, 
and still more so when I tell you the 
cause of this sudden alteration in my 
plans. The day after you left me I re- 
ceived an anonymous communication, of 
which the enclosed is a copy : — 

" ' Lord Grantchester, your wife is con- 
fined in an asylum because she says her 
child was bom alive. Make it worth the 
writer's while, and the writer will prove 
that your lady speaks the truth, and that 
she is no more mad than you are. You 
must come over to England at once, and 
address a letter to X. Y. Z., Post-office, 
Great EusseU-street ; and according as 
you pays, so will you be restored to health 
and happiness. ' So no>ore. I know, 
you and my lady both.' 



THE ANONYMOUS LETTER. 241 

"Here, my dear George, the myste* 
rious communication ended. But so 
great was the shock to my nerves, 
aheady sadly weakened, that I took to 
my bed, aud, by the desire of my friend 
Sir William, called in medical advice. 
The physician who attended me strongly 
recommended change of air. Sir William, 
to whom I showed the note, equally 
strenuously desired me to follow up the 
clue which thus holds out a hope of hap- 
piness to me. So I at once determined 
to return by Cambridgeshire to Grant- 
<5hester House, where I trust to find you 
within a fortnight from the date of this 
letter. Be sure to be there, as I much 
wish to consult with you about this 
strange incident. I long to see you and 
obtain your valuable counsel, by which 
I shaU be entirely guided. 

" Tom' affectionate brother, 

" Grantchester/' 

VOL. I. 16 



242 THE ANONYMOUS LETTER. 

Three times did Sydney read the letter^ 
and each time felt more alarmed at its^ 
contents. 

"Yes, if my brother comes," solilo- 
quized the now wretched man, " I am 
lost ! The letter can only be written by 
one individual — ^the monthly nurse. But 
what of that ? She has me in her power ; 
and the question now resolves itself into 
the simple query, How can I stop her 
mouth? Yes, that is the question. 
Means, indeed, might be found ; but if 
even she is destroyed, her rufl&an husband 
shares the secret, and will reveal it. To 
bribe her to keep further secrecy would 
only be to ruin myself; when she has 
sucked my last pound she will turn on 
me. No, that will not do. My only 
chance would be to involve her still 
deeper in crime. Ah! a bright idea! 
If I were once Earl of Grantchester, I 
could then, perhaps, satisfy her cupidity -, 



THE ANONYMOUS LETTER. 243 

it is therefore clearly her interest to 
assist me, and in so doing I'll take care 
that I keep myself clear. It is a risk — 
it is a dreadful deed, — ^bnt it is necessary 
to my safety. This female fiend has 
driven me to the very edge of an abyss 
she herself shall leap into. Ay, my 
mind's made up; I'll at once write to 
her. Where is the horrid scrawl the 
fellow gave me ? Ah ! here it is. There, 
that will do. I little thought how useful 
I should yet find the old harridan. Now, 
then, her life or mine !" 

George rose and rang the bell ; Cole- 
man entered. 

"Take this note to Little-street, St. 
Griles's. Make haste back, and admit no 
one except the person to whom this letter 
is addressed. I would be alone." 

Coleman bowed obediently. George 
threw himself back into his chair to 
think, 

16—2 



244 



CHAPTEE XXI. 

THE HOUSEKEEPER. 

George had been down to Qxantchester 
House and prepared the servants for 
their master's early arrival. He had 
been to his clerical publisher and left a 
MS. pamphlet entitled "The Unseen 
Idols." This had been written during 
his stay in Ireland, and was intended not 
only to prove that ambition, avarice, 
gaming, and other passions were as much 
idols worshipped by men as the stone 
figures or bronze statues of Eoman anti- 
quity, or the wooden images of Caflfreland, 
but also to prove the idolatry of the 
Eoman Catholic Church — a favourite 
theme on which the pious Sydney was 



THE HOUSEKEEPER. 245 

never tired of descanting. He then 
drove into the City, and desired his stock- 
broker to sell out £1000 from the funds 
-he being sole trustee for this sum- 
which had been left by a dying parent to 
an infant child. As the money could 
not be called for for some years, it is 
possible that the trustee thought he 
might place it out at better interest — at 
least, so he alleged to the stockbroker. 
He next called at the houses of two of 
his most troublesome duns, and promised 
them each a third of their bills within 
forty-eight hours ; looked in at the 
Oxford and Cambridge Club, where he 
partook of a light dinner ; and, dismissing 
his brougham, walked home at about 
seven o'clock, there to await an expected 
visitor's arrival. Nor was he disap- 
pointed in his expectation; for within 
about half an hour we may see Mr. 
George Sydney and Mrs. Marks comfort- 



246 THE HOUSEKEEPER. 

ably seated beside a blazing fire, with 
wine and liqueur-stands of spirits on the 
table; for the former well knew the 
woman's weak point, and had prepared 
accordingly. 

Sarah Marks was now an old woman 
bordering on seventy years of age, but 
still hale and strong, though so much 
altered in facial appearance, that he of 
the Albany scarcely recognised her when 
she first entered the room with her hus- 
band. 

George, however, was of the opinion that 
three was bad company, so he suggested 
to Jem that Coleman should accompany 
him to a neighbouring tavern, and there 
afford him everything he might require 
to eat or drink, while he (Sydney) had 
half an hour's cosy chat with his wife. 
To this arrangement Marks at once 
assented. Coleman relished the idea of 
the orgie, but he scarcely approved of 



THE HOUSEKEEPER. 247 

being thus sent away ; he was, however, 
perforce compelled to seem pleased, and 
in a few moments the virtuous couple 
were left tUe-a4ete. 

George rose, locked the door, and put 
the key into his pocket. 

"What is that for?" demanded old 
SaUy. 

" For our mutual security. I wish to 
talk on matters which I do not desire to 
be overheard. Nay, don't look so alarmed, 
for although, as you see, I carry a loaded 
pistol in my pocket — (and here he showed 
one, but instantly returned it to its rest- 
ing-place)— I really mean you no harm ; 
although, were I to shoot you on the spot, 
jou'd richly deserve it." 

" Oh, sir !" trembhngly screamed Mrs. 
Marks, " you wouldn't, surely !" 

" Of course not. I have no intention 
of injuring you ; but, as you have placed 
not only my character but my very exist- 



248 THE HOUSEKEEPER. 

I 

ence in jeopardy, I demand the candid 
truth/' 

" I will speak the truth." 

" Swear that you will." 

" Well, I swears." 

" That wont do. Kiss this book ; kiss 
it fairly. That will do. Now, answer me 
the questions I choose to put. But first 
allow me to read to you a letter addressed 
to Lord Grantchester ;" and George read 
out the contents of the anonymous note. 

The old beldame rocked to and fro ia 
agitation within the ample fauteuil. 

" You have heard the letter ?" 

" I have." 

" Did you write it ?" 

" No, so help " 

"Enough; you are already on your oath. 
Now tell me, do you know who did write 
it?" 

" No." 

"Do you know who caused it to be 



THE HOUSEKEEPER. 24^ 

Written? You hesitate. It wont do. 
Yes or no ? as you value your life." 

" I do know who had it writ. It was 
our Jem." 

" And what did he and you mean by it ? 
You cannot restore the child to life that 
you so cruelly murdered !" 

" Come, Mister, that's a going a leetle 
too far. If I did destroy the child, who 
was it as paid me to do it ?" 

" I really can't tell," coolly and calmly 
repKed George. 

" Well, if that ain't — ^but never mind. 
Let bygones be bygones. All as I can 
say is, that I did not want- Jem to write 
that 'ere letter. But he's sometimes wery, 
wery obstinate, and so he wouldn't be said 
nay ; and if the child's dead, it can't do 
no harm." 

" What do you mean by the if? Did 
you not kill it ?" fiercely asked the 
other. 



250 THE HOUSEKEEPER. 

" In coorse I did ; but it ain't about 
that, I suppose, as you sent for me to have 
a talk. It ain't no doings of mine, and 
you'd a-better lecture Jem than me. I've 
been true to you, Mr. Sydney, and I don't 
expect to be snubbed, so here's your 
'ealth," and she tossed down a glass of 
raw spirits. " Ah ! that's good ; it warms 
one after that washy red stuff as you calls 
clearit." 

George pondered for a moment; he 
scanned his companion from head to foot ; 
he watched her glance, and saw that she 
was in the right mood for his purpose. 

" Mrs. Marks, if there was a basket of 
gold lying on your parlour-table — ^I mean 
gold that rightly belonged to you, — and 
that the door was open, and that you had 
only to go in and take it " 

" Yes." 

" And suppose a dog stood in the door- 
way and flew at you, and wouldn't allow 



\'9 



THE HOUSEKEEPER. 251 

you to go in and get it, what would you 
do to that dog ? 

" I'd kill him. Ay, that I would." 

" But supposing that dog was a man ?" 

" I'd do the same, if he stood between 
me and my gold." 

"And would you do as much for a 
friend ?" 

" Well, that's a hoss of another colour. 
I'd kill any man or dog that kept me 
from my rights. But I ain't a going to 
put my neck in a halter to gain nothing 
by it ; not I," and the old hag chuckled. 

" Of course not, Mrs. Marks ; but sup- 
pose you were well paid for it — say, a 
thousand pounds ?" 

"I'd throttle our Jem for half the 
money." 

" WeU, then, Usten. Let us suppose 
that I am the friend who needs your ser- 
vices, and am willing to pay well for 
them. Mind, I only say suppose I am. 



252 THE HOUSEKEEPER. 

Well, then, picture to yourself that the 
gold I spoke of meant the Grantchester 
estates, and that the dog that kept me 
out of them was my brother." 

" I'd kill him, if I was you !" 

"Mrs. Marks, you are evading my 
question. I do not ask your opinion as 
to what / should do ; but I ask you, 
what would you be ready to do ? Speak. 
No hesitation ; on your answer, perhaps, 
my life and happiness depend; perhaps 
yours." 

*' Well, for a thousand poimds ?" 

" I'll give it." 

•' It's a done bargain, then ; that is, if 
you can show me how it is to be done 
without risk." 

" Can you disguise your appearance so 
that no one can recognise you ; not even 
your husband ?" 

" I can. I have done so. But I am 
not bound to tell you when or where. 



THE HOUSEKEEPER. 253 

though I once saw you when you little 
suspected it." 

"Well, then, listen. My brother's 
housekeeper has just quitted him, in con- 
sequence of her failing health. Lord 
Grantchester has desired me to have the 
whole of his establishment ready to re- 
ceive him in a day or two. I shall ride 
over in the morning and tell the steward 
that I have hired a housekeeper, a Mrs. 
Thompson, a person I have long known. 
You will go there in the afternoon and 
take a note from me. Now, can you play 
the part ?" 

" That I can, and if any of them twigs 
me m " 

"Mrs. Marks, you must drop those 
slang expressions and assume a more dig- 
nified demeanour." 

" Well, I can do that. When I was 
young " 

"Never mind your youthful days, 



€C 



€C 



254 THE HOUSEKEEPER. 

rather remember the present risk. If 
you are discovered, you know the con- 
sequences.'* 

" I ain't afeard. But how's the job to 
be done ? Is Jem to help ?" 

" Oh, by no means ! Indeed, you must 
swear to me that you'll not even make 
him your confidante." 
My what?" 

That you'U never tell him anything 
about it." 

" But how can we manage it ?" 

" We ! we ! Remember, I have no- 
thing to do with it. You alone must 
carry it out." 

"Then I shan't have nothing to do 
with it." 

" Oh, as to that, for a thousand pounds 
I can find plenty of others, although, as 
an old friend, I gave you the first chance." 

" Well, that's kind of you, and as you 
says, a thousand pounds ain't to be 



THE HOUSEKEEPER. 255 

picked up every day. But you know, 
Mr. Sydney, I'm getting oldish, and I 
ain't very strong, and if it came to a 
struggle, I might get the worst of it." 

" All this, my dear friend, I have fore- 
seen. Look here (and George took a 
phial filled with clear liquor from his 
pocket) — ^look here ; one drop a day for six 
weeks would kill an ordinary man, two 
months would kill a giant. Now, a con- 
fidential housekeeper could surely manage 
to " 

"Oh, you are clever; our best lags 
ain't nothing to you. Of course I can do 
it." 

"And then, you see, there'll be no 
sudden death — no inquiries, inquests, or 
anything of that sort." 

" Upon my life I could hug you, you're 
so uncommon knowledgable." 

" I'll not trouble you to do so." 

" Well, give me the bottle." 



256 THE HOUSEKEEPER. 

"Not SO," replied the other, returning 
it to his pocket. " It shall be given you 
all in good time, with proper directions ; 
but hark, I hear them coming up. Unlock 
the door. That will do; appear to be 
intoxicated, and then Marks will take you 
away without asking any questions, and 
in the morning you can pretend to have 
forgotten all." 

"Ah! that is prime. Egad! do you 
know, I shouldn't mind getting drunk in 
earnest;" and with this she seized the 
rum and drank off nearly half a pint, then 
fell back apparently insensible in her 
chair. 

Coleman and Jem now entered. 

"Take that drunken woman away," 
angrily commanded Sydney; "why did 
you leave her here so long ? I could not 
retire, lest she should set fire to the house. 
Marks, I fear that you are little better. 
Coleman, see them safe downstairs." 



THE HOUSEKEEPER. 257 

And with a look of contemptuous pity. 
Lord Grantchester's brother left the room 
as Coleman conducted the inebriated 
couple down to the hall. 



VOL. I. 17 



25» 



CHAPTEE XXII. 

A FEARFUL ACCIDENT. 

Determined to enjoy the magnificent 
scenery of this part of the country, Lord 
Urmstone had preferred a kaveUing. 
carriage to the more ordinary transit by 
railway, the road passing through a 
rich and varied country, while the rail- 
way, clinging to the sea-shore, presented 
little more than a rugged line of coast — a 
line which could only be admired by the 
engineer, who in this and the still further 
branch to Wicklow, might well revel in 
delightfiil enjoyment, since some of the 
tunnellings and aerial galleries on this 
road are far more interesting than any in 
England. 



A FEARFUL ACCIDENT. 259 

Arrived at Bray, where his lordship 
had expected to meet with an old friend, 
he merely stopped at Breslin's Hotel for 
the purpose of procuring a Ught luncheon 
and its necessary accessories, which he had 
determined to enjoy in the grounds of 
Lord Powerscourt. He also procured the 
services of one who oflfered to act in the 
double capacity of cicerone and waiter; 
and thus provided, the excursionists pro- 
ceeded to one of the sweetest and most 
romantic spots fashioned by Nature either 
in this or in any other country. 

The party were all in high spirits, and 
after enjoying a delightful stroll through 
the grounds, they sat down to their 
improvised meal within sight of the 
celebrated waterfall — a waterfall which 
attracts the gaze of thousands of strangers 
every j'^ear. 

The permission thus to enjoy their 
banquet on this favoured spot was an 

17—2 * 



260 A FEARFUL ACCIDENT. 

especial favour granted to the old peer, 
who seemed to throw off twenty years of 
his life as he gazed on the youthful pair 
before him, and inhaled the fresh pure 
breeze that came cool and refreshing from 
the Wicklow hills. 

They were in the midst of their enjoy- 
ment when a messenger stepped up and 
presented Lord Urmstone with a tele- 
gram. Like true natives of Great Britain, 
all eagerly began to speculate on the 
" whence " such a missive could have 
come from? Who could have sent it? 
How could their movements have been 
traced? Expressions of surprise were 
loudly uttered — conjectures wildly formed. 
At length the peer turned to the boy who 
had brought it, and naively asked who 
had sent it. 

" Faith, then, your honour, it's not my- 
self that knows. But I'm surely think- 



A FEARFUL ACCIDENT. 261 

ing your lordship's honour might find it 
out, if ye opened it and read it." 

" It's strange I never thought of that \* 
and in some confusion he opened the 
despatch. "Ah, it's from Lord Grant- 
chester," said he aloud; then continued 
to read 

" If I may make so bowld to ask your 
lordship, is there any answer ?" 

" None, my lad ;" and the boy dis- 
appeared. 

"Should you like to hear the con- 
tents ?" asked Lord Urmstone. 

" Oh, by all means." 

It ran thus : — 



"My dear Urmstone, — 

" Having heard your intention to 
visit Lord Powerscourt's this morning, I 
telegraph to Bray, and thence desire my 
communication to be conveyed to you by 



262 A FEARFUL ACCIDENT. 

hand. I have made up my mind to cross 
to England in the Ulster steam-packet 
to-night ; the shock I have received will 
account for my not staying longer. I 
merely write one line of adieu in order to 
impress upon your mind that the oflfer 
I last evening made is still, and will be 
for some months, open to the acceptance 
of Captain Leslie. 

*' Yours ever truly, 

" Grantchester." 

All joined in regretting the strange 
freak of the noble Earl. Lord Urmstone 
felt pride in thus finding how highly his 
proteg^ was valued ; Leslie felt proud at 
the opportunity given him of showing 
his gratitude to his benefactor; while 
Emily felt proud of the youth's rejection 
of honours and wealth, because she could 
not help thinking, something— — Alto- 
gether, their regrets at Lord Grant- 



A FEARFUL ACCTOENT. 263 

^tester's departure were not unmingled 
with satisfaction. 

Their meal over, they again approached 
the waterfall. "I should like to taste 
the water," cried Emily, with all the 
coaxing tones of a spoilt pet who knew 
that her wishes were laws to those who 
surrounded her. 

In an instant our hero had flown back, 
and having got a glass, plunged it into 
the fountain, and handed it filled with 
liquid crystal to the beauteous girl, ask- 
ing at the same time, " Is there anything 
^Ise you'd like, dear Emily?" 

" Yes," said the wayward girl, triumph- 
ing in her power — "yes, do you see 
that blue flower which grows from the 
rock, and almost kisses . the cascade as it 
falls ? I should like to possess that." 

" You shall have it, then," determinedly 
cried Leslie ; and the next moment he 
began to scale the rocks. 



264 A FEARFUL ACCIDENT. 

The poor girl screamed out in agony, 
beseeching him to desist. She assured 
him she was only joking. If he valued 
her good opinion, he would return. In- 
deed, indeed, the feat was impossible. 
" John ! John ! come back ! You distract 
me ! Wretched girl that I am ! I was 
mad to dare you to such an enterprise ! 
Eeturn, if you love me l" 

Lord Urmstone joined in the eager 
prayer, but all in vain. The very assertion 
that the deed was impossible only urged 
the youth on, who, climbing from shrub 
to shrub, and balancing himself on ledges 
of rock that not unfrequently gave way 
beneath his weight, stiU endeavoured to 
reach the flowret^ which grew some fifty 
feet above the spot where his friends were 
standing. The poor girl put her hands 
before her eyes to shut out Leslie's danger. 
Even the ex-minister felt the cold chill of 
fear steal over him. Leslie alone appeared 



A FEARFUL ACCIDENT. 265 

happy and calm ; he still climbed upward, 
smiling as he overcame each danger, and 
occasionally turning his head to inspire 
his party with confidence by glancing on 
them. At length he was within three 
feet of the desired object; he gave a 
sudden spring and grasped the flower, but 
in so doing the ledge on which he stood 
gave way, and he was precipitated down 
to the first rock, which breaks the fall, and 
thence rebounding, he fell at the feet of 
Lord Urrastone and Emily in a state of 
happy insensibility. The latter swooned, 
but soon recovered consciousness, and 
with cries of terror assisted in bearing her 
adopted brother into the carriage, which 
was at once brought near the spot. 

The now wretched father and daughter 
drove into Bray, and instantly sent out 
for the best medical advice. An eminent 
physician and no less celebrated surgeon 
soon arrived and examined the injured 




266 A FEARFUL ACCIDENT. 

man. During the period of examination 
poor Emily was excludedfrom the chamber, 
but remained on the stairs, and on her 
bended knees oflfered up a prayer for the 
companion of her youth, mingling her 
orisons with terms of censure on her own 
wicked folly in thus having by a mere 
childish whim placed the life of her father's 
adopted son in jeopardy. 

The few minutes occupied by the 
doctors in their task seemed to her at 
least as many hours, and she was actually 
stretched on the landing-place overcome 
by agitation when they reappeared. 

Lord Urmstone rushed up and raised 
her, 

"Thank Heaven, Emily, there is 
nothing serious — not even a limb broken ! 
His escape has been miraculous. The 
pain of his contusions causes the groans 
you hear. He may possibly remain in- 
sensible some time." 



A FEARFUL ACCIDENT. 267 

Emily uttered no word, but tlie slight 
movement of her lips and her upturned 
eyes clearly portrayed the grateful prayer 
of thanks which she silently offered to the 
Giver of all blessings. 

'* We will send a draft, my lord, almost 
immediately. It will probably cause him 
to sleep — a state into which he may very 
possibly fall without recovering from his 
present insensibiHty. This is most de- 
sirable, and his nurse must be strictly 
cautioned on no account to wake him." 

" I will not do so," said Emily. 

" You ?" demanded her father. 

"Yes, papa, I will be his nurse. My 
folly caused this accident ; it is my duty 
to watch beside him. Nay, argue not, I 
am determined nothing shall prevent me. 
Doctor, have you any further directions 
for me to follow ?" 

"None," replied the senior; "but I 
fear yours will be a painful vigil," 



i 



268 A FEARFUL ACCIDENT. 

" And has not his been a painful acci- 
dent ? Papa, urge me not. Gentlemen, 
I shall be his nurse/' 

The medical men bowed. 

Lord Urmstone returned with her to 
the chamber ; a hoxisemaid was appointed 
to share the lovely creature's watch, and 
her father retired to his room. 




269 



CHAPTER XXIII. 



FIRST LOVE. 



It was a fine morning. The sun was 
darting its bright rays through the un- 
shuttered windows which looked out on 
the sea. Emily had arisen from her seat 
after an uneasy vigil to close the blinds, 
as Leslie, waking from his sound slum- 
ber, came to consciousness, and gently 
turning on his couch, asked, "Who is 
there?" 

" It is I, dear John ; I sat up with the 
nurse in case I could be of any use." 

" Emily !" exclaimed he, " dearest 
Emily, is it possible ? Surely you should 
not have been allowed thus to fatigue 
yourself for my sake. Indeed, I fear this 



270 FIRST LOVE. 

silly accident has caused you a great deal 
of trouble." 

" Not so — ^not so. But say, how do you 
feel?" 

"Bruised and somewhat sore; but in 
all else as well as ever." 

"Thank God!" warmly cried Emily, 
as falling on her knees she offered a devout 
and grateful prayer to the Creator of all 
blessings for the escape of her beloved 
friend. 

As she concluded the nurse approached, 
and with that instinctive tact which this 
class so often possess, seeing her distress, 
said, — 

" Please, Miss, could you spare [me for 
ten minutes to take a cup of tea P I al- 
ways have it at six ;" and without waiting 
for a reply, she gUded from the room. 

John had been silent. His eyes 
were closed, and none could have told 
from his placid look how warmly, how 



FIRST LOVE. 271 

strangely his heart beat ; how his pulse 
thrilled with equal pain and joy as he 
thus lay in seemingly calm meditation. 

" Emily, dearest," he at length said, in 
a suppressed tone, " yon love me ! you 
love me too well !" 

" I do love you, indeed, but not too 
well !" 

" You make me miserable by the con- 
fession, for, alas ! I fear your feelings are 
but an echo of my own — o, reflection of 
that adoration I feel for you." 

" And why should I make you miser- 
able, dear John?" inquired the artless 
girl, taking his hand; "why should 
you thus regret to find that I love you — 
love you dearly, and have done so from 
childhood?" 

"Emily, Emily — dearest Emily, this 
should not be." 

" What ! do you not, then, love me ?" 
suddenly cried the abashed girl. 



272 FIRST LOVE. 

" With all my heart and soul. Words 
are too cold to express my adoration." 

*' Why, then," cried Emily, now lightii^ 
np into bright smiles — " why, then, thus 
regret to find it returned? But stay; 
perhaps you think me too bold. I should 
not have exposed my feelings so openly. 
It is unmaidenly. Yes, yes, I see it all. 
You think me " 

" Not so, darling ; not so." 

'* I fear it is. But, then, recollect we 
have been brought up together. I have 
been used to tell you all my thoughts. I 
have no reserve from you. I knew you 
loved me, and I thought you would be 
pleased to find that I reciprocated it." 

"And so I am. The knowledge is 
ecstasy to me. It is the highest boon 
which Heaven could bestow. But alas ! 
what will your noble father say to the 
nameless ingrate who has won the heart 
of his child?" 



FIBST LOVE. 273 

" Oil, John, he loves you tenderly. He 
knows that to separate us would break 
my heart, and he will, for my sake, sanc- 
tion our love." 

"And shall I, the creature of his 
bounty, take advantage of a father's 
love to rob him of his daughter, to 
sully, by an alliance with a beggar's brat, 
the offspring of one of our proudest 
houses ?" 

" Oh, do not talk so." 

" No, Emily ; you must conquer this 
feeling ; you must calm down these sen- 
timents, and look upon me as a grateful 
dependent upon your father's bounty. 
Think of me as a brother, if you will, 
but nothing more." 

" What, then, will be my fate ?" 

"Noble and generous, courted alike 
for your beauty and talents, your rank 
and wealth, you will proudly take your 
place amidst the first daughters of the land. 

VOL. I. 18 



.s 



274 FIRST LOVE. 

Admired and beloved by all, you will soon 
forget, or at most remember as a once 
dear friend, the soldier of fortune who 
will at a distance watch your career and 
offer up a daily prayer for your prosperity. 
Yes ; one embrace ; one only and for ever !" 
And he pressed his lips to those of the 
poor girl, who was now crying, overcome 
by strong hysteria. 

At this moment the nurse re-entered 
the room, and commending his loved 
Emily to her care, he turned away to con- 
ceal his own emotion. The well-instructed 
servitor (for she had been listening at 
the door all the time) led her half-fainting 
charge from the room, with the usual re- 
commendation offered by such people on 
similar occasions, generally ending in — 
*' Cheer up. Miss; cheer up. All wiU 
yet be well. Here is your handkerchief, 
Miss. Lean on me. Cheer up, cheer 
up. Sunshine after a storm !" And thus 



FIRST LOVE* 275 

saying, she led the weeping Enuly from 
the room. i 

As the lovely girl quitted the chamber. 
Captain Leslie threw himself back fairly 
exhausted, and burst into tears. In such 
a display there is nothing unmanly. The 
pent-up feelings of manhood as much de- 
mand a vent as those of even the most 
delicate female. Yes ; the fast-falling 
drop has many a time bedewed the cheek 
of the hero. There are occasions when 
such emotion is ennobling. In the words 
of Haynes Bailey we find it thus graphi- 
cally expressed — 

'^ Go search the foremost ranks of Danger's dark 
career, 
Be sure the hand most daring there has wiped 
away a tear." 

And why not? Why should not the 
youth give way to his feelings, as his over- 
wrought mind scanned the past, the pre- 
sent, and the future ? Shall we say that 
he felt pained by the discovery he had 



i 



Ik 



276 FIRST LOVE. 

just made ? Par from it, in spite of that 
highly honourable feeling which told him: 
that he must fly the dearest object of his 
every hope, he stiH exulted ^ possessing 
the only heart he ever coveted. Proudly, 
as he thought on this, would a blush of 
triumph Hght up his speaking countenance, 
only to be chased as shudderingly he 
thought over the ruin he was bringing to 
her he professed to love — the agony he 
was entaihng on his kind and generous 
benefactor. Yes ; he had but one course 
left — that of flying her for ever. But 
could he forget her ? Never ! And then 
again, would she — could she — forget him ? 
Alas ! he dared not, even mentally, to 
solve the question. What had he de- 
sired? what had he sought or ex- 
pected ? To live near her — ^to hover round 
her in silence — ^to be her guardian and 
her slave. Alas! poor human nature. 
He little dreamed how light a word, how 
small an accident, might overturn this 



FIRST LOVE. 277 

l)eautiful Platonic scheme. It is true he 
had sometimes asked himself how he 
would like to see his Emily married to 
another. With the blind folly of ego- 
tism, he had almost persuaded himself 
he could forward such a step. Did he 
think so now ? No. He lived for her ; 
she lived for him. In that pure and 
artless manner in which true innocence 
is recognised, she had confessed her love 
— she had told him of her attachment ; an 
act unfeminine and bold in the woman 
of the world — a bright proof of unso- 
phisticated candour in Emily. Brought 
up together, hourly exchanging thoughts 
mid opinions, there was no forwardness 
in this disclosure. Leslie valued her for 
it. He would never have dared to 
own his attachment to her. A happy 
accident had revealed Emily's emotions. 
Lord XJrmstone's adopted son was at once 
the most happy and the most miserable 
being in existence. 



278 



CHAPTEE XXIV. 

HONOURABLE FEELING. 

It was abont three o'clock in the after- 
noon of the same day that Lord Urmstone 
was aroused from his studies by a knock at 
his dressing-room door, for^ in lieu of a 
better, he made use of this chamber as 
a study. In another minute Captain 
Leslie stood before him, evidently suffer- 
ing considerable pain, and leaning on a 
thick stick for support. The hero of 
China almost staggered into the room, 
and threw himself helplessly into a chair. 
The peer, alarmed at his pallor and 
visible agitation, started up and ap- 
proached him* 



N 



HONOURABLE FEELING. 279 

"You are ill; you should not have 
left your room." 

" I shall be better presently ; give me 
a glass of water. I feel easier now." 

"And why thus fooKshly quit your 
couch ?" 

" I wished to speak to your lordship." 

" Why, then, my dear boy, did you not 
send for me ? You well knew I would 
have visited you instantly." 

" You are all goodness, my lord. But 
I had a communication of importance to 
make to you." 

" Why are you thus formal, John ? 
You seem to address me rather with 
respect than affection. I feel hurt." 

" Not so, not so. Son never yet loved 
father as I love you." 

" Well, well, I believe you. But why 
this agitation ?" 

"My kind, my noble, my generous 
benefactor ; alas ! I must leave you." 



280 HONOURABLE FEELING. 

"Leave me!" almost screamed the 
peer — " leave me ! and why ? Surely 
nothing can have occurred to offend or 
hurt you. If you have any want un- 
satisfied, you have but to spealc, and it 
shall be supplied. If you dislike this 

country, we will return to . But to 

leave us. Impossible ! It would not 
only break my heart but that of your 
sister." 

" My lord, it pains me beyond expres- 
sion to say that I am compelled to 
do so." 

" Compelled ! What can you mean ? 
Who shall dare compel you to leave my 
roof?" 

" Oh ! ask me not." 

" Nay, I insist on it. I know you too 
well to believe that you would trifle with 
me. Who, then, or what is it, which 
calls on you to leave the house ?" 

''I really would rather not say. Be- 



HONOURABLE FEELING. 281 

lieve me, my kind benefactor, that it is 
no idle whim, no capricious fancy, that 
thus urges me to flight." 

" Flight ! The term is strange." 

"But true. Again I must repeat, I 
am compelled to fly." 

" By what compulsion ?" 

*' Honour." 

*' John, you speak in mysteries ; you 
deal in dark hints with one who has 
never had a secret from you. Explain, 
then, the meaning of all this." 

"My lord, my lord, I had hoped I 
should have been spared this painful 
humiliation, but since my silence might 
seem like ingratitude, I will at once 
open my inmost heart to you. You 
have a daughter ?" 

" Who has ever treated you with the 
consideration of a sister." 

" Alas ! alas ! my lord, 'tis worse, far 
worse.; the serpent that you have nursed 



282 HONOURABLE FEELING. 

and fostered in your bosom has dared to 
turn and sting you." 

" Whom can you mean ?" 

"The wretch before you. Yes, my 
lord, I have loved (unconsciously, it is 
true) that angel with an affection wUch 
I had hoped was only that of a brother a 
few hours ago. Accident revealed to me 
my guilt. I love her tenderly and fondly. 
Now, chase from your presence one who 
could have acted so basely ; load me with 
reproach ; I deserve it all." 

Tlie peer was greatly moved. A 
sudden light seemed to dawn upon him. 
After a short pause, he turned round and 
demanded — 

"And does Emily reciprocate this 
passion ?" 

" Alas ! too sincerely. But by no 
fault of mine. By all I hold dear, till 
this day I never directly or indirectly 
ever addressed her otherwise than as a 



HONOURABLE FEELING. 283 

sister — ^the cherished daughter of him 
who has succoured me from childhood. 
This day, however, the truth became 
apparent. In a paroxysm of delight on 
finding myself beloved by her, I con- 
fessed my feelings. A moment after, 
my better self prevailed. Honour bid 
me fly, aiud I am here to take a long 
farewell of your lordship. Emily I can- 
not dare to see again." 

Lord Urmstone, though deeply wounded, 
still felt the warmest affection for his 
adopted son, and his present upright 
conduct made him more dear than ever. 

Is there no way ?" 

No, my lord, none. I haw well 
pondered over it. I alone must be the 
victim in this sacrifice. 'Tis I who have 
courted this martyrdom ; consequently, I 
alone must sufier, without fortune, the 
creature of your bounty." 

" Nay, if riches could avail, you should 



(( 



i( 



284 HONOURABLE FEELING. 

share mine, dear boy. But alas ! tlie 
world." 

" The world ! The world would say 
you had given your daughter to the off- 
spring of some low wretch ; even too 
low, too worthless, to put in a claim for 
his paternity. No ; that could never be. 
Never shall it be said of me. Even the 
beggar s deserted child would scorn to 
take advantage of the touching charity 
which has been so nobly bestowed on 
him» No ; the thought, the very con- 
templation of such a situation must not 
be indulged in. It is heart-wounding to 
the wretched foundling, it would be 
debasipg to the high-born Emily." 

" Alas ! I fear you are right. What, 
then, do you intend to do ?" 

*' Within an hour to leave the country 
for ever.'* 

*' And whither go you ?" 

" Nay, I care not. I have sold out of 



HONOURABLE FEELIKG. 285 

the army ; I cannot, therefore, return to 
that profession ; but, enriched by your 
lordship's generosity, I can well live any- 
where." 

"I cannot allow you to act thus — ^to 
leave me without some settled plan. Even 
though separated by distance, I shall ever 
feel for you as a father ; and if my dear 
girl marries, you shall return to comfort 
my declining days." 

Poor John winced at the suggestion, 
but bowed an affirmative. 

" In the meantime, I must take parental 
authority on me, and guide your move- 
ments. You may remember Lord Grant- 
chester's anxious desire that you should 
accept the post of his secretary. Avail 
yourself of it. I shall then know, at least, 
that you are well off beneath the roof of 
a man of trust, honour, and good feeling. 
I will now go to the drawing-room and 
see how poor Emily is— ^I fear she will 



286 HONOURABLE FEELING. 

suffer from this blow — ^and then write a 
letter to my old friend, who will gladly 
extend a hearty welcome to you. As to 
you 

" I will to my chamber and pack up. 
I will not see Emily ; the trial would be 
too heartrending to bear. In an hour I 
will return here to obtain your lordship's 
letter, and (here his voice became choked 
with emotion) receive her last words to 
me, conveyed to me by the lips of my 
ever dear benefactor.'* 

And with these words John Leslie 
hurriedly left the presence of Lord XJrm- 
stone. 




287 



CHAPTEE XXV. 

SAFETY IN FLIGHT. 

To those who have never crossed from 
Holyhead to Kingstown in the magni- 
ficent steamers which have plied for the 
last few years on that station, it will be 
impossible to convey any idea of the supe- 
riority of these vessels, which are not only 
of gigantic proportions, but capable of tra- 
velling at a speed of nearly twenty miles 
an hour, fitted up as floating palaces, the 
deck guarded from overwhelming seas. 
The voyager leaves Kingstown harbour 
at about seven o'clock in the evening, 
and before eleven finds himself com- 
fortably riding beside Holyhead Pier, on 



288 SAFETY IN FLIGHT. 

which a railway has been constructed^ 
and where the mail-train awaits your 
arrival. Your baggage is shifted from 
the boat by the porters, and in about 
a quarter of an hour, without trouble or 
exertion, you find yourself flying towards 
London, seated in a railway carriage, at 
the rate of forty miles an hour, including- 
stoppages. 

Into the Munste^^ one of these beau- 
tiful ships, poor Leslie hurried. More 
than one acquaintance saluted him as he- 
passed — more than one endeavoured to 
detain him; but his feelings were far 
too sorely lacerated to permit the ap- 
proach of an ordinary babbler. He hur- 
ried on board, sought a- spot, whence,- 
undisturbed by his fellow-passengers, he 
might gaze upon that edifice under whose 
roof all he held dear resided. 

In less than half an hour the whole 



SAFETY IN FLIGHT. 289 

ft 

landscape had faded away, and Leslie 
began truly to feel tliat she was for ever 
lost to him. 

It began to rain heavily, and the young 
captain descended to the cabin, where a 
party of gentlemen were trying to while 
away the time by conversation. Leslie 
would rather have been allowed to reflect 
in silence over the events of the last 
twenty hours, but this was impossible. 
From the state-cabin to the wet deck 
there was no retreat. So hon gre^ mal 
^rky here he must remain, to Hsten to, 
or join in, as he might think proper, the 
story-telling circle, who, over their brandy 
and cigars, were endeavouring to amuse 
each other, and shut out the disagreeable 
howling of the autumnal gale. 

" We cut him down. But falling, he 
received a blow on the back of his head, 
which injured him for life. It has given 

VOL. I. 19 



290 SAFETY IN FLIGHT. 

me a horror of practical jokes/' added the 
narrator, who thus brought to a conclu- 
sion a tale he had been telling. 

" They generally end badly," chimed in 
a gentleman with red hair. 

" I would as soon sit in company with 
a royal tiger as a practical joker," gravely 
said a pale gentleman who sat in the 
corner ; " one of my friends has, indeed, 
been fatally affected by one of this class 
of amusements." 

" How so ?" asked the gentleman with 
the vegetable top-knot ; " how so ? do 
you really so sincerely dislike this sort of 
fun?" 

" I'U teU you," repUed the other. " Of 
all the nuisances which exist in a social 
circle, I cannot but look upon the prac- 
tical joker as the worst. To carry 
out what he styles his fun, he is ready 
to sacrifice everything. His practical 
jokes, for the moment, may, it is true. 



SAFETY IN FLIGHT. 291 

raise a laugh, but in ten cases out of 
twelve they end badly. Jim Seaford (a 
friend of mine) loved a hearty laugh, and 
he foolishly believed that the best way of 
raising one was to do so at the expense of 
some friend. One day, an old uncle, from 
whom he had considerable expectations, 
dined at his father's table. He was a 
stiff old martinet, pompous in manner, 
and rigid as a ramrod. He wore a high 
stock, polished boots, and a most elabo- 
rately-dressed wig. He bored everybody 
with his old miUtary anecdotes, which, 
though often repeated, were always hailed 
with applause; the key to this enigma 

being the fact that old Colonel had 

a landed estate of 7000Z. a year, which, 
as he was now above sixty years of age, 
must soon benefit his family and friends. 
His nephew Jim, however, was positively 
to have the estate. Now Jim was full 
of fun, and determined to do a most 

19—3 



292 SAFETY IN FLIGHT. 

laughable thing ; so he tutored a little 
boy of five years old, a cousin of his, in 
the art of practical joking. Nor was there 
a more apt scholar; for that day, when 
admitted to dessert, he stole behind the 
colonel's chair, and suddenly pulled off his 
wig. The party at first burst out laugh- 
ing, but seeing the old fellow's rage, they 
instantly became calm. The culprit was 
.ized. and in hi. fright botayed hi. in- 
structor. The consequences were evident. 
The child was sent to a boarding-school, 
as a present propitiation, and Jim was dis- 
inherited, as an example to all 'fiinny 
men/ He lost at least 100,000/., and a 
probable seat in Parliament. He is now 
a clerk in an attorney's oflSice at 80/. a 
year, but then he has the satisfaction 
of reflecting that it was a ' capital lark/ 

" Mark Thompson, a professor of these 
amusing antics, took a dislike to an old 
maid who lived opposite to him. So, one 



SAFETY IN PLIGHT. 293 

fine morning, he ordered every tradesman 
in the neighbourhood to supply her with 
certain articles on the following day. 
Of course he did this without being dis* 
covered. He sent the commands in her 
name, in short notes addressed to each. 
Never was there such fun ; he almost died 
with laughter when he saw the success of 
his hoax. There was the butcher, the mil- 
liner, the undertaker, a post-carriage from 
Newman's, and a hearse from Shillibeer's. 
Next came the sleek butler in search of 
situation; furniture of every descrip- 
tion, a parrot and a bull-dog. In a word 
the whole street was blocked up with 
the enraged tradesmen drawn thither by 

the supposed orders of Miss . Mark 

had a couple of ' fast ' youths to breakfast 
with him, who enjoyed the scene and 
applauded Mark's ingenuity. Whether 
the hoaxer himself or either of these 
friends were indiscreet enough to allow 



294 SAFETY IN FLIGHT. 

the secret to percolate, I know not, but — 
but certain it is — about twenty lawyers' 
letters arrived within a week, each more 
fiirious than the other. Mark began now 
to see that a practical jest may sometimes 
be reversed, and tried to allay the storm. 
At length, after much trouble and serious 
anxiety, he succeeded, at the cost of some 
of his pride and a sum of 1 50/., in calming 
the ire of the hoaxed tradespeople, and in a 
somewhat lowered tone he was about to 
leave town, when he received a dry note 

from Miss S 's solicitor. Here was 

quite a new feature — a new difficulty, not 
to be overcome. So, after trying every- 
thing else, he had to humble his pride 
and throw himself on the mercy of that 
lady, who allowed herself to be so far 
mollified that she gave up her action, 
after proving to Mr. Thompson that, if 
she thought fit, she could indict him for 
forgery, on condition that he twice 




SAFETY IN FLIGHT. 295 

inserted a most humble apology in the 
Times, and gave 100^. to the Middlesex 
Hospital. So Mark was compelled to 
consent to all this, the alternative being 
a flight for ever from his country. So he 
apologized, and paid, retired into the 
provinces, and always leaves the room 
when practical jokes are spoken of. 

** Tom Maxey, of the Hussars, was so 
brimful of fan, that one night he stole into 
Captain Smith's stable, and cut off*, that is, 
squared to the root, the magnificent long 
tail of Smith's Arabian charger. The 
next day Tom stayed in barracks all day, 
for he fully expected he should be 
suspected, and called out in consequence. 
He therefore remained in quarters in 
order to receive the challenge, and, if 
possible, get out of it. If this could not 
be effected, he would stand a shot ; such 
^ capital joke was worth it. The whole 
day passed, but no message came. He 



296 SAFETY IN FLIGHT. 

inquired, and found that Captain Smith 
had gone to London with the command- 
ing officer. He did not like this, but a& 
officers often run up from Hounslow, it 
was no great matter of surprise ; but he 
did feel astonished that Smith had made 
no stir on the subject. All passed off 
quietly. The next morning, however, 
the adjutant appeared at his door, and 
requested him to deliver up his sword. 
At the same time, he handed him a 
written paper, a paper styled in military 
parlance ' a crime/ It ran thus : — 

" ' Lieutenant Thomas Maxey, of the 
Hussars, will be tried on the follow- 
ing charge : — For conduct unbecoming an? 
officer and a gentleman, in stealing into 
Captain Smith's stables after dark on the 
night of the 12th instant, and then and 
there disfiguring and injuring a valuable 
Arabian horse, the same being the first 
charger of Captain Smith. 




SAFETY IN FLIGHT. 297 

• 

" ' Secondly, For passing a bad half- 
crown, knowing the same to be spurious, 
in payment of cab hire. 

" ' Thirdly, For dropping a quantity 
of pepper into an old washerwoman's tea^ 
who came into barracks in the exercise of 
her duty, and thereby causing her an 
illness of three days/ 

" ' So now, my dear friend,' added the 
adjutant, ' you had better prepare, as the 
court is to assemble on Friday, unless,^ 
indeed, you prefer resigning at once/ 

" Maxey eagerly embraced the sugges- 
tion. He is a collecting clerk to a re- 
spectable wine-merchant." 

The narrator had scarcely concluded 
his sketches, which were highly relished 
by his auditors, when a loud clamour on 
deck called everyone up from the cabin. 
Arrived here, they found the agitated 
commander of the vessel giving orders to 
stop the ship, and at once to lower one of 



298 SAFETY IN FLIGHT. 

the boats. These orders were obeyed 
with a celerity only known to British. 
sailors. But, even before the boat touched 
the water, we were all informed that a 
passenger had fallen overboard. 

In less than ten minutes a sudden rush 
to the side of the steamer made everyone 
aware that the seamen had succeeded in 
their task. But alas ! too late. The poor 
fellow's head had been struck by the 
flange of the paddle-wheel, and they now 
handed up the somewhat mutilated corpse 
of an individual, who from his dress was 
instantly perceived to be a clergyman of 
the Church of England. Leslie imme- 
diately recognised a gentleman he had 
seen drinking more than one glass of 
brandy and water ; but, as this is fre- 
quently done in the vain hope of checking 
sea-sickness, he had scarcely remarked the 
circumstance. The body having been re- 
moved to the captain's cabin, a strict 



SAFETY IN FLIGHT. 299 

inquiry as to the mode in which the 
accident had occurred was instantly made, 
but without any satisfactory result. 

Presently the commander came forward 
and requested that all further investiga- 
tions might cease, as he had privately 
ascertained how the misfortune had arisen. 
The sailors, with the majority of the pas- 
sengers, scattered themselves about; the 
captain beckoned a few of the most re- 
spectable persons by whom he was still 
surrounded into his cabin, and showed 
them the following paper, which had been 
taken from the dead man's pocket, having 
evidently been placed there for the pur- 
pose of being found : — 

" The act is my own. I have come to 
the resolution of committing suicide. I 
am neither agitated, nor am I mentally 
deluded. I calmly resolve to get rid of a 
life which has become a burthen to me. 
Make as little noise about it as may be 



300 SAFETY IN FLIGHT. 

compatible with your duty. Send the 
luggage I have on board to my brother's. 

Address ." 

Those who heard the letter read, looked 
awfully shocked. Leslie now found his 
privacy no longer disturbed. He turned 
away, and began seriously to weigh the 
advantages of life. But though for a 
moment he felt inclined to doubt its be- 
nefits, yet youth and good spirits soon 
overcame the feelings of a cynic, and, ere 
he arrived at Holyhead, hope once more 
took up her abode in his heart. 



301 



CHAPTEE XXVI. 



THE RAILWAY. 



On arriving at the pier, the London train 
was found waiting for the passengers, 
who, in less than a quarter of an hour, 
were safely stowed away in their respec- 
tive carriages, their baggage having been 
removed from the vessel and placed on 
the van by porters belonging to the 
railway company. Without exertion — 
even without the trouble of overlooking 
the transfer, all the luggage had been 
safely deposited in the train, which, in 
less than twenty minutes after the arrival 
of the vessel, was in full swing, flying at 
the rate of some forty or fifty miles an 
hour towards the British metropolis. 



302 THE RAILWAY. 

Opposite our hero sat a grave-looking 
old gentleman, whose countenance be- 
spoke extreme intelligence. In the oppo- 
site comer sat a remarkably handsome 
woman oJp'a certain age. She was dressed 
in the very height of the fashion. Her 
fingers were covered with rings of the most 
magnificent description ; a splendid watch 
was hung around her neck. She was 
evidently a lady of rank and wealth. A 
somewhat snobbish man sat next to her, 
who paid her considerable attention. 
Whether he was an old friend of the 
fair lady, or a mere travelling acquaint- 
ance, Leslie could not decide. But one 
thing was certain — he had evidently 
won the good opinion of his compagnon de 
*ooyagey who seemed both pleased and daz- 
zled by the continuous and brilliant con- 
versation of the gentleman in question. 
The older individual, who had evidently 
travelled, and by so doing had thrown off* 



THE RAILWAY. 303 

the mauvaise honte of an ordinary English 
traveller, politely accosted Leslie, who was 
not long in discovering that his neighbour 
was one of the very few specimens of the 
" Irish gentleman" left to remiM us that 
Erin once boasted the most polite, the 
best-read, the kindest-hearted men that 
ever existed. Our hero then gladly en- 
tered into conversation with his fellow- 
passenger, leaving the fascinating young 
man in the opposite corner and his hand- 
some neighbour to carry on their flirta- 
tion (for it really seemed worthy of this 
designation) without fear of interrup- 
tion. 

''You are not an Irishman, I presume ?" 
inquiringly demanded the old traveller. 
" From your accent, I should suppose you 
were a pure Saxon, as we love to call our 
fellow-countrymen on this side of the 
Channel.'* 

" Most true. I have only recently 



304 THE RAILWAY. 

visited the sister isle for a few months, 
and shall probably never return." 

" And how did you like your residence 
there?" 

" Living under the roof of my dearest 
friend, I was thoroughly happy." 

" I rather wished to know your opinion 
of our people and their ways ?" 

" To confess the truth, I had but few 
opportunities of judging." 

" I am happy to hear you say so. I 
am dehghted that you have not fallen 
into the common mistake, which your 
countrymen are somewhat apt to make. 
Because we tattle freely, and as freely 
state our views, the visitor believes he 
can thoroughly read our character, and 
discover our precise condition." 

" This is indeed an error." 

"Indeed it is. I have known many, 
many Englishmen, who have publicly de- 
clared that they thoroughly xmder stood 



THE RAILWAY. 305 

our people; that they not only had 
ascertained the amount of misgovernment 
on both sides of the Channel, but 
also proudly boasted that they had dis- 
covered, and should some day*or other 
offer to the nation, their panacea for aU 
the existing evils. These politicians had 
probably not been above six months in 
our country. The same individuals, some 
twelve months later, began to doubt the 
correctness of their views, and, long ere 
they left our shores to return to England, 
they one and all — ^at least, all those who 
possessed common sense and truth — de- 
clared that they knew nothing at all about 
it, and that the evils of Ireland were of 
that chameleon nature, that the appearance 
of them varied from day to day.'" 

"I believe they have been much im- 
proved during the last quarter of a 
century.'* 

"No nation ever equalled us in this 
VOL. I. 20 



306 THE RAILWAY. 

respect. The rollicking, good-hearted, 
thoughtless squire described by Lever in 
his works, no longer exists ; the Encum- 
bered Estates Bill has swept away this 
class, and compelled men to live pru- 
dently, or to sell their broad lands. This 
must naturally restrict the wide hospi- 
tality, once the boast of Ireland. The 
landlord who now receives his rents with 
a punctuality not surpassed in any coun- 
try in the world, is naturally called upon 
to pay ready money to his tradespeople. 
Now, sir, an Irishman would feed you on 
gold and silver, if it could be done, to 
prove his friendship. His house, his ser- 
vants, his horses, and his table are yours, 
so long as he does not let his cash pass 
away ; but when he is called upon to 
draw money from his purse, or to sign a 
cheque on his banker, his whole character 
alters, and he at once turns from reckless 
expenditure to wretched parsimony. He 



THE RAILWAY. 307 

is stiU kind, hospitable, and good-hearted 
— he cares not about giving that which 
cash has obtained ; but cash itself he has 
a horror of parting with. While Irish- 
men, like Indian officers, never saw or 
touched money, merely ordering luxuries 
to spring up which their agents paid for 
(who, by-the-by, in many instances, were 
enabled, in a series of years, to become the 
proprietors or mortgagees of estates they 
were agents to), Irishmen were all gene- 
rosity. But now that they dispense their 
own money in Ireland, and look after their 
own accounts in India, hospitality,, it must 
be confessed, has seriously faded away." 

"These are the gentry, I presume? 
What of your commercial classes? I 
have heard of several large fortunes made 
in Ireland." 

" A better field for profitable speculation 
does not exist. But I regret to say a 
small portion of the old national pride 



308 THE RAILWAY. 

still lingers, and a country gentleman — 
ricli or poor — ^hesitates long before he 
consents to estabHsh his child in trade. 
The consequence is obvious — Scotch and 
EngUsh adventurers (I make use of the 
term as a term of trade, not as a sKght) 
have come over to Dublin and to our 
principal cities, and opened monster esta- 
bUshments in which they have earned 
very large fortunes. Amongst our own 
people, but few Irishmen of undoubted 
respectability and moderate capital have 
risen high in commerce. Labourers on 
railways have by diUgence (it is true) 
become contractors, and as contractors 
amassed princely fortunes - bricklayers 
have become builders, and built whole 
towns and villages — ^money-lenders have 
died very rich— but none of them have 
begun with any capital, and by steady 
perseverance arrived at wealth; a man 
with money would scorn to enter into 



THE RAILWAY. 309 

trade. If such persons could be led to 
follow commercial pursuits, they would 
easily make fortunes. But here, as else- 
where, pride proves itself the bane of 
Ireland." 

" And the lower orders ?" 

"As far as steadiness goes, they are 
much improved, but their wit and joviality 
have passed away — with sobriety reflection 
has come in — and these reflections, though 
they guard them against intemperance 
and extravagance, are very apt to make 
them suspicious and discontented with 
their lot. The power of the priesthood 
is greatly diminished — ^men now begin to 
think and act for themselves. As a Pro- 
testant, I know I ought to rejoice at this ; 
but in honest truth, the result does not 
improve the people — the example and 
advice of an honest and intelligent pastor 
decidedly kept them in check better than 
their lay-meetings and self-will. An Irish 



310 THE BAILWAY. 

peasant, though strong and active when 
he chooses, is decidedly an enemy to 
hard work ; he can affect simplicity and 
stupidity, but believe me, a more intel- 
ligent and cunning being does not exist 
than he who, while he is seeming to strive 
to catch your meaning, is all the time 
endeavouring to read your character and 
discover how far he can get the biest of 
you. But here I must pause; I see we are 
nearly arrived at Chester, where I leave 
this train for the purpose of proceeding 
to the North. I sincerely hope, sir, we 
may meet again ;" and with a bow which 
would have done honour to Q-eorge the 
Fourth, he closed the conversation. 

Leslie could scarcely credit the fact, as 
they steamed into the vast station erected 
at Chester. The train had actually tra- 
versed the whole of North Wales at the 
rate of fifty miles an hour. Our hero was 
almost inclined to believe that their speed 



THE BAILWAY. 311 

had been still greater, for it seemed to him 
— amused as he had been by the old gentle- 
man's sketch of his countrymen — ^that he 
had not been an hour on the road. 

The lady and the Irishman had both got 
out, and the usual noise around, of scream- 
ing porters, jarring wheels, and slam- 
ming doors, had already begun to grow 
less, when the fair traveller rushed to the 
carriage door, accompanied by a porter, 
and in eager tones asked whether anyone 
had seen her watch. The railway servant 
introduced a lantern, and searched the 
seats and the floor of the carriage without 
success. The lady was in despair; the 
bauble was valuable — but that was 
nothing; it had been the gift of her 
deceased husband, and it broke her heart 
to lose it. The gentleman who had con- 
versed with her appeared deeply to sym- 
pathize with her, and assisted most ear- 
nestly in the search; but all in vain. 



312 THE BAILWAY. 

Just then the guard in chaxge came up — 
the loss was reported to him. He held 
high his lamp, aad looked into the carriage. 
Something seemed suddenly to strike him. 
He turned round abruptly to the lady, 
and said, in a short manner, " I'm very 
sorry, ma'am, hut I fear you'll never see 
your watch again ; hut it's not my busi- 
ness. Stand back, ma'am. Time's up." 
He violently shut the door, gave a loud 
whistle, and they were onte more racing 
with the pigeons of the air. 



END OP VOL. I. 



BEHIND THE CURTAIN 



CHAPTER I. 

AN AMUSING COMPANION. 

The railway train had scarcely passed over 
the first ten miles of its journey, when the 
stranger, addressing Leslie, solicited leave 
to smoke; at the same time presenting 
him a magnificent cigar-case, from which 
he requested him to take a " weed." Our 
hero, fortunately or unfortunately, as the 
case may be deemed by the reader, did 
not indulge in this pseudo luxury ; so he 
politely declined the proffered gift, won- 
dering, as he always did on similar oc- 
casions, how any person could like thus 
VOL. n. 1 



2 AN AMUSING COMPANION. 

to inliale a volume of smoke merely for 
the purpose of puflGlng it out again. But 
his cogitations were soon cut short by his 
feUow-traveller, who seemed so careless 
about smoking that it was quite clear he 
had only proposed the indulgence in order 
to break the silence and enter upon a 
chat. The towns they passed, the noble- 
men's seats, scenery, and landmarks — all 
were objects of remark to the gossiping 
voyageur. He seemed to know every 
locality, and to be acquainted with every 
family of distinction. He rattled away 
unceasingly, but certainly not unplea- 
santly. 

"Do you know the gentleman with 
the white cravat with whom you were 
conversing before you arrived at Ches- 
ter ?" 

" No, I do not. He seemed a person 
of great intelligence." 

" You are right. No man has had a 



AN AMUSING COMPANION. 3 

more extended view of this world in its 
every phase. One day a prisoner — the 
next almost an ambassador — a struggling 
pauper, and a merchant prince — con- 
demned to death — elected the chief officer 
of his city ; that individual must be better 
acquainted with life than any man I 
know." 

" And who is he ?" 

" Oh ! I forgot to tell you ; that is 
Mr. Britton of Strabane, the richest 
commoner in Ireland. He returned to 
his native land, and purchased the finest 
estate in the country." 

" Has he accumulated his wealth on 
the Continent?" 

" Yes, he gained it all in France, and, 
strange to add, during that penniless 
period, the French Ee volution. I'll tell 
you how it was : — ^Detained as a prisoner 
in the then disturbed country, cut short 
by the troubles in the career he meant to 

1— a 



4 AN AMUSING COMPANION. 

follow — that of a wine-merchant — he cast 
his eyes around to see how he coxild best 
invest his modest capital, which then only- 
amounted to £10,000. No safe invest- 
ment offered itself, and he began to fear 
he would have to live upon his capital. 
One day, however, the estates of all 
the absent nobles and large proprietors 
were confiscated, and at once became the 
property of the nation. A sale of these 
was decreed ; the national treasury was 
almost empty, so by this means they 
expected once more to replenish it. The 
day was fixed; the auction was to take 
place in Paris. Little time was given for 
reflection ; the cash was urgently needed. 
The assignats had wholly lost their value, 
a national bank-note for twenty pounds 
might be had for less than that number 
of shillings. Everyone looked forward to 
a national bankruptcy. Alas! in those 
days they had no ministers like Mr. 



AN AMUSING COMPANION. 5 

Chase ; credit was then not so easily ob- 
tained as in these days of greenbacks 
and broken promises. France was on the 
verge of ruin; the present sale might 
perhaps avert it. The first deposit was 
to be paid in gold or silver, amount- 
ing to some five per cent., the remainder 
was to be discharged within a week. 
During all this period, young Britton (for 
he was young then) gaily frequented the 
caf(6s and places of public amusement in 
Bordeaux. On more than one occasion 
he purchased government assignats for a 
mere nominal price. This was soon 
rumoured about, and the door of his 
house was actually beset by a clamorous 
crowd, seeking to sell their paper-money 
to the mad Englishman. To a very large 
extent the foolish fellow (as they styled 
him) indulged them. He purchased these 
notes to the amount of nearlv £200,000 
for about £6000 sterling. He carefully 



6 AN AMUSING COMPANION. 

packed them up ; then taking them from 
his bureau, where he in those times kept 
his money, he, with an old and attached 
servant, started for the French capital. 

" The day after he arrived, the national 
sales commenced. But few persons at- 
tended; some were deterred by family 
ties, others were without money, while 
those who had cash declined purchasing 
estates which the slightest counter-revo- 
lution would snatch from their grasp. 
Few, therefore, as I said before, attended ; 
but amongst those few, young Britton was 
conspicuous. He purchased two noble 
domains on the first day, and when called 
on for a deposit, paid in honest crowns. 
Those who were less lucky sneered at 
him ; the government oflBcers were civil 
almost to servility, and warmly invited 
the good Englishman to attend the fol- 
lowing day. He did so, and became the 
proprietor of some of the finest vineyards 



AN AMUSING COMPANION. 7 

in the neighbourhood of Bordeaux. He 
paid his deposit, and all went on well. 

" The following week the Englishman 
was called upon to complete his purchase. 
He attended at the prefecture, and ten- 
dered to the prefect the full amount in 
assiffnats ! The officer indignantly refused 
to receive them. Everyone was aware 
that the sales were made to recruit the 
finances of the country ; to obtain metallic 
security, not mere pieces of worthless 
paper ! 

*' ' Monsieur le Prefet, do you pre- 
sume to call government notes worthless 
paper ?' 

" * Not so,' replied the confused func- 
tionary ; ^ not exactly so. But the fact is, 
we want cash, we want gold or silver ; 
and this, although you are a foreigner, 
you might well know. Unless you can 
produce these, I shall cancel the sales 
and confiscate your deposits/ 



8 AN AMUSING COMPANION. 

" Young Britton was fully prepared for 
this outburst ; he had foreseen it ; so he 
calmly said — * Monsieur le Pr^fet, for the 
last time I tender to you the full amount 
of balance due on the estates I have pur- 
chased, in honest government bank-notes 
(read the promise on their face, endorsed 
by a representative of government), is- 
sued by them in lieu of cash. I now 
offer them to you, either in exchange for 
cash or in payment of my purchase- 
money. Eefuse them, and I will strike 
a docket of bankruptcy against the 
nation ; all Europe will confirm it/ 

" ' I shall commit you for this/ 

'* ' You do not dare. You know I am 
right/ 

" ' Well, sir, come here again to- 
morrow; I shall then have learnt the 
wishes of our most excellent government. 
Nor they nor I may be intimidated by 
such foolish threats ; but out of good feel- 



AN AMUSING COMPANION. 9 

ing towards you as a foreigner, they may 
be induced to relax a portion of their 
rules in your favour.' 

" The prefect was evidently at his wit's 
end. Our countryman now withdrew. 

" The next day the purchaser presented 
himself before the prefect; on this occasion, 
however, he was received in private, and, 
after a long and silly harangue, the oJBicial 
stated that the rulers of the nation had 
consented to his proposition, and that, on 
payment in assignats, the estates would 
be made over to him. 

" Now this was very well ; and as it 
was all that Britton sought, he ought to 
have been the happiest of men ; but some- 
how or other, he still felt far from satisfied. 
The French Government had given way 
too readily. The worthy and undoubted 
proprietor of rich French estates felt un- 
comfortable, he could not tell why, and 
began to doubt his thorough happiness 



10 AN AMUSING COMPANION. 

as he slowly trudged back to his apart- 
ments. 

" Determined to leave Paris as soon as 
possible, Britton ordered his clothes to be 
packed up. He wrote to his notary to 
come up from Bordeaux to complete the 
deeds, and sent the letter to the post by 
his old servant. 

" Scarcely had the man closed the door 
when a noise was heard as of men speaking 
loudly — the echo of many footsteps re- 
sounded. The next moment several 
National Guards, followed by a rough 
crowd of sanS'Cidottes, entered his room 
and arrested him as an aristocrat and an 
enemy to the nation. It was in vain to 
remonstrate; so the young Englishman 
was hurried off to prison, amidst the 
curses and the bloodthirsty cry of ' ala 
lanterne F shouted forth by a crowd who 
loved to see the blood of their fellow-men 
flow on the scaffold. 



AN AMUSING COMPANION. 11 

." At that period there were no unneces- 
sary delays in the proceedings of criminal 
jurisdiction. Britton was tried within a 
few hours of his arrest and condemned to 
death. He was hurried back to the Con- 
ciergerie, and thrown in amongst some 
other forty or fifty condemned prisoners. 
The difference of sex, the difference of 
rank, even the difference of crime, was 
here disregarded. The murderer or the 
mere mspecty the nobleman and the pilferer, 
were huddled together, alike awaiting the 
dreaded cart which was to convey them 
to execution. Nine was the usual number 
sent by this prison daily to feed its 
bloodthirsty child — the lately-invented 
' Guillotine.' Each prisoner bore a 
number and answered to it — as in the 
Bastille, the real name seldom transpired. 
The morning after his condemnation, the 
young Englishman saw the brutal official 
come to the door and call out his victims. 



12 AN AMUSING COMPANION, 

One by one they answered their number 
and stepped forth from their dungeon to 
the cart which was to convey them to 
execution. No form — no ceremony — ^no 
examination took place; some eight or 
nine victims were daily required, and the 
ofl&cial did not choose to lose his time in 
verifying the Ust, which, after all, was pro- 
bably only written down in numbers, and 
so identity was out of the question. The 
next day the fearful visitation was re- 
peated, and the young Englishman now 
fairly foresaw that he would be included 
in the next batch. Like many of our 
countrymen bom in the sister isle, our friend 
was extremely active, and, as death was 
inevitable in one way, he scarcely shrank 
from risking it in another. The following 
morning the keys began to grate in the 
lock. Britton had managed to stand near 
an open window— a privilege allowed to 
the wretched prisoners — the jail-room 
being some fifty or sixty feet from the 



AN AMUSING COMPANION. 13 

gioimd, and eveiy channel of escape firom 
the court-yard below closely goarded, the 
turnkeys were somewhat careless about 
the indulgence they, for certain presents, 
allowed to the condemned criminals 
under their charge ; so, as I said before, 
the window was left open. TJnperceived 
by his agitated fellow-prisoners, Britton 
quietly crept out of the window, and 
actually hung to the sill by his hands — ^a 
feat in gymnastics which the fear of 
public execution alone could enable him 
to perform — ^his whole weight was sup- 
ported by his fingers. But what of that ? 
To be dashed to pieces was far preferable 
to appearing and sujffering before a mob 
of sans-culottes. The very scorn of death 
gave him strength to execute the task. 

"The jailor came in, and as usual 
shouted forth, ' Number 1 !' 

" * Here,' cried a poor wretch, stepping 

■ 

forth. 

" ' Number 2 !' 



14 AN AMUSING COMPANION. 

" A fainting female feU forward. 

"'Number 3 r 

"With an oath and a shout of derision, 
a suspect of the sans-culotte school stepped 
down. 

" ' Number 4 !' 

" Another victim replied. 

" At length Number 9 was called — ^no 
one responded. The call was repeated — 
no answer. The jailor got fidgety, and 
began to look amongst the condemned 
crowd. At last a young man stepped 
out, who said, in a calm and steady voice, 
' I am not, I believe, to die for two days ; 
but to Unger in this suspense is intoler- 
able. Citizen, take me ; you have executed 
my father and my sister. I have no desire 
to live. Take me for Number 9.' 

" The jailor paused for a moment, but 
soon made up his mind. * Come along, 
citizen. We will find out this funny rogue 
to-morrow, be assured. So, allonsr and 



AN AMUSING COMPANIOl*. 15 

away went the cartful of victims. The 
horrified Englishman crept quietly in. 

" Within an hour his servant called to 
see him. He being the nephew of a 
popular member of the National Assembly, 
had obtained a free pass, and he now came 
to see his afflicted master. In a few 
moments he developed his plans, and 
proved his devotion by offering to change 
clothes with the prisoner, and giving him 
his pass, enable him to escape. 

" ' Not for worlds,' replied Britton; 'you 
would have to pay the penalty — you 
would lose your life in saving mine.' 

"'Not so. I am a Frenchman — my 
uncle is the most popular man of the 
day. We are nearly of the same size — 
you can pass for me. I shall, when 
found, insist on going forth. My tongue 
will at once prove I am not a foreigner. I 
have papers and letters of protection from 
my uncle that they dare not slight. I 



16 AN AMUSING COMPANION. 

shall deny all knowledge of you. The 
other prisoners are now below ; they will 
almost instantly return. Save, then, your 
precious life, for the sake of your wife and 
children. Do — do, before it is yet too 
late. Believe me, I will rejoin you to- 
wards evening in my own lodging, the 
address of which I have brought you. 
We will then get passports for Brussels. 
I shall travel as a gentleman, you will 
act as my postillion. Tour wife is even 
now in Paris. Her death will be the con- 
sequence of your refusal.' 

"Mr. Britton allowed himself to be 
* persuaded ; the change was effected, and 
in an hour more the escaped prisoner was 
in the arms of his beloved wife, who, with 
himself, felt most anxious about their 
servant. Some hours later he appeared, 
armed with passports and every necessary 
document. The barriers of Paris were 
pasfeed, Belgium was reached, and the 



AN AMUSING COMPANION. 17 

happy trio were saved. Not so the popular 
leader, who had unwittingly aided in 
their evasion. Two days later a new 
faction arose, and the once popular leader 
of the National Assembly was executed 
amidst the execrations of the fickle mob. 

" After a long exile, our friends learned 
that Napoleon was called to the Consular 
chair. One of his first acts was to pro- 
claim an extended amnesty towards those 
who chose to return to France. Britton 
and his family were among the earliest 
who took advantage of the permission : 
he joyfully returned to his early home. 
Soon after, the First Consul decreed that 
the sales of estates of those parties who 
had declined to return to France should be 
confirmed. By this one measure Britton 
became the possessor of property well 
worth £200,000. With this enormous 
capital he launched into the trade of vine- 
growing. By perseverance and integrity 

VOL. ir. 2 



18 AN AMUSING COMPANION. 

he soon doubled his capital. Peace with 
England enabled him to establish branches 
in this country. His fortune grew tiU 
it became colossal. The possessor of 
above a million pounds worth of property, 
holding securities in almost every country 
in Europe, he returned to his native 
land to end his days. A year ago he 
purchased a princely estate, and kept up 
the hospitality of Old Ireland. Yes, such 
is the history of the gentleman with whom 
you have recently been conversiDg." 

The sketch interested Leslie, who, after 
a few queries, became convinced of the 
truth of the narrative. 

" May I ask you," said his companion, 
as they approached London, " may I ask 
you to which hotel you are going, as you 
said just now you were nearly a stranger 
in the metropolis ?" 

" To tell you the truth, I have never 
thought of it; can you recommend me 




AN AMUSING COMPANION. 19 

any respectable^ quiet place, where I can 
put up for a few days ?" 

" You could not have selected a better 
cicerone. I know every caravanserai in 
London. I will take you to the inn where 
I shall sleep myself. As an habitue, they 
treat me with more than ordinary care 
there — we shall be just in time for a late 
dinner/* 

LesUe assented. In a very short time 
they entered the Euston station, where 
his new friend, after seeing the luggage 
thrown into a four-wheel cab, jumped into 
a Hansom, and called on the captain to 
foUow. Leslie already began to think 
he had formed too sudden an intimacy, 
but it was now rather late to withdraw, so 
he entered the vehicle, and drove on 
with that isolation of feeling which chills 
the heart of every stranger as he first 
traverses the wide streets of London, and 
feels himself, as it were, alone in the 

2—2 



"> 



20 AN AMUSING COMPANION. 

midst of a babbling crowd. Our hero 
strove to shake off this sensation, and was 
tolerably reconciled to his new position 
by the time he arrived at a second-rate- 
looking hotel in the neighbourhood of 
Piccadilly, where he found he could have 
a bed, and above all, a semi-bath in his 
bed-room. His companion was already 
surrounded by friends. 



21 



CHAPTER II. 



THE BILLIAED-ROOM. 



Having performed tliose ablutions which 
are at once so necessary and so luxurious 
after a long journey — ^having unpacked 
his portmanteau, and written a few hurried 
lines to Lord Urmstone, announcing his 
safe arrival in London — Captain Leslie 
descended to the coflfee-room, sincerely 
hoping that his late conipagnon de voyage 
might already have quitted the hotel. 
But it was not so fated. There he sat, 
apparently expecting the arrival of our 
hero, for whom he now declared he had 
been waiting dinner. He rang the beU, 
and in a few minutes a most luxurious 
meal was served, accompanied by such 



22 THE BILLIARD-ROOM. 

rare wines, that Leslie in his heart could 
not help admitting that his newly-found 
friend must be a gastronome of the very 
first water, accompanied by a feeling of 
surprise that a hotel of such modest pre- 
tensions could thus furnish a Lucullian 
feast. 

" My dear sir, I trust you ynR excuse 
the free manner in which I have treated 
you, but, seeing from the address on 
your portmanteau that you belonged to 
the sister service, I ventured, on the free- 
masonry allowed amongst us, to look 
upon myself as your friend, and conse- 
quently I ordered a dinner (being an 
habitue of this house) of which I trust 
you will freely partake, and then we will 
stroll out together. I have already learnt 
your name — allow me, in return, to in- 
troduce myself as Charles Johnston, 
First Lieutenant of Her Majesty's ship 
Cyclops" 



THE BILUABD-ROOM. 23 

Leslie rose and bowed, but it must 
be confessed, in doing so he did not ex- 
hibit that cordiality which might have 
been expected. This want of reciprocal 
warmth might arise from the strange and 
isolated situation in which the young 
captain found himself — ^he might be over- 
come by the fatigue of the journey — a, 
thousand other circumstances might have 
chilled him; but certainly, somehow 
or other, he would have far pre- 
ferred solitude to the good dinner before 
him, and sHence to the amusing gossip of 
his entertainer. 

But his coldness of manner seemed to 
have little effect on his garrulous neigh- 
bour, who rattled on, touching on every 
subject of the day. From his conversa- 
tion, Leslie gathered that he was a fre- 
quenter of all the most fashionable man- 
sions in town. He spoke of the balls he 
had been at at Holdernesse House, con- 



24 THE BILLIARD-ROOM. 

certs at the Duke of Devonshire's ; he 
had dined with the Duke, and even hinted 
that he was about to visit on familiar 
terms a member of the Koyal family. 
He had a stall at the opera, a snug 
comer in Arthur's Club — in a word, he 
was a distinguished bachelor, a decided 
member of the aristocracy. 

The dinner over, the stranger — for so 
Leslie continued to look upon Lieutenant 
Charles Johnston — proposed a stroll out, 
suggesting that a cup of coffee in a good 
caf6 would be preferable to a longer 
sojourn in a hot room, redolent with 
the aroma of made dishes and varied 
drinks. To this Leslie assented, and in 
a few moments they were strolling down 
Coventry-street towards Leicester-square 
— ^that general resort of second-rate 
foreigners and ill-conditioned night 
swells. Arrived liere, the naval officer 
dived into a well-lit coffee-room, followed 



THE BILLIARD-ROOM. 25 

by Leslie, who gladly gave himself up to 
the guidance of one who seemed so tho- 
roughly conversant with the ways of 
town. Here sat several grave gentlemen 
sipping " old port " (for which this esta- 
blishment has ever been celebrated) with 
the true gusto of experienced judges. 
The glass was never raised to the lips 
without a preliminary glance at the wine 
— ^the deep ruby wine — contained in it ; 
nor was it ever removed from the mouth 
without that significant smack which 
bespeaks an appreciation of the flavour 
of the grape. The race of port- 
wine bibbers is fast declining. The 
light claret, the sharp Chablis, and the 
sparkling growth of Champagne, have 
almost entirely eclipsed the good old black 
strap which once fed and strengthened 
our forefathers. But there are yet left a 
small body of wealthy and respectable 
men who sip the vinous juice of Portugal, 



26 THE BILLIARD-ROOM. 

dwelling upon its delicious flavour with. 
the same contentment with which they 
have, during the earlier hours of the day, 
gloated over the columns of some 
favourite political journal. In contradis- 
tinction to these, a group of noisy young 
men were loudly giving their opinions of 
the last new opera — only removing the 
delightful " weed," as they called it, from 
their mouths to refresh themselves with 
a draught of whisky-punch, or to give a 
flat contradiction to the assertion of any 
one who dared to differ in opinion. Be- 
sides these two classes of habitues, there 
was a continual influx and reflux of well- 
dressed men, who passed through a door 
at the lower end of the room, and as 
frequently returned. Their continual 
visits and their speedy exits naturally 
excited the curiosity of Leslie, who asked 
his cicerone who they were. 

" Oh, they are billiard-players." 



THE BILLIARD-ROOM. 27 

" And why do they go in and out ?" 

" The door that you see thrown open 
leads to a well-conducted billiard-room. 
Those who quickly return are probably 
those who, finding their friends not 
arrived, leave the establishment to return 
at a later hour." 

"I have not been within a billiard- 
room since I returned home." 

" Indeed ! Suppose we go in now ?" 

"Not so; I have a great dislike to 
playing with strangers." 

« So has everyone, my dear sir." re- 
plied Johnston. " I am but a tyro at 
the game, but if you'll come in " — ^and 
here he rose from his seat — "I'll play 
two or three games with you, only, how- 
ever, for half-a-crown each, in order to 
pay for the tables — ^I hate gambling." 

" So do I," replied our hero, as he rose 
to foUow the lieutenant, who now passed 
through the door. 



^8 THE BILLIARD-ROOM. 

There were only two or three gentle- 
men lolling about the room. The 
marker was playing with a youth of 
apparently some sixteen years of age. 
He was only a beginner, and Leslie 
wondered that anyone should take the 
trouble to look on. The match over, 
Johnston proposed to play Leslie a 
game at pyramid; as he was, however, 
a most indifferent player, he bargained 
that they should only stake a shilling a 
ball. Leslie mentally calculated that 
this was quite high enough, but he at 
once assented, and set to. 

By the result of the first game, our 
hero foimd himself the gainer of six or 
seven shillings; and, in order to render 
the match more equal, offered to give 
some balls. To this, however, his new 
acquaintance strenuously objected, and 
laughingly assured Leslie he would yet 
prove himself the better player of the two. 



THE BILLIABD-BOOM. 29 

The new pyramid had scarcely com- 
menced when Lieutenant Johnston, having 
whispered something to a bystander, sud- 
denly turned round and apologized toLeslie 
for abruptly leaving him, but urged as an 
excuse that a matter which brooked no 
delay required his instant presence, and 
at the same time appealed to any one of 
the bystanders to come forward and finish 
the game for him. 

To Leslie's undisguised astonishment, 
the youngster oflfered himself — a proflfer 
which our friend could scarcely help 
laughing at. 

"Ah, you may despise my play," 
squeaked the boy; "you may laugh at 
me ; but I can tell you I don't fear any 
of you, although you are old players, and 
I'm only a beginner." 

" Don't be a fool, Jack," said a grave- 
looking old man, smoking a clay pipe. 

" Well, I don't care. I'll play you any 



V^ 



30 THE BILLIARD-ROOM. 

day> old chap. It's all very well to laugh 
at me, hut I suspect it only springs from 
fear of me. Will you dare try me ?" added 
he, in a somewhat saucy maimer, to 
Leslie ; " or perhaps you d like to keep 
the twelve hoh youVe won ?" 

Angry, and at the same time determined 
to give the forward lad a good lesson, the 
captain at once assented. The balls were 
given out and the game began. 

" A shilling a ball, and half-a-crown on 
the result ?" 

" Done ! I do not wish to play high." 

" Oh, I don't care," cried young Impu- 
dence. "There's a stroke for you," 
exultingly added he, as he managed to 
execute a peculiarly difficult hazard. 

"It's only luck, you bragging brat," 
growled the man with a pipe. 

Nettled at the triumphant tone of the 
youngster, Leslie played his best, but he 
vainly endeavoured to win the odd ball. 



THE BILLIARD-ROOM. 31 

The result of the contest was what racing 
men call a dead heat. 

" 1*11 bet two to one you don't do that 
again," muttered the growler. 

" And so will I," added Leslie. 

** Done in crowns !'* roared the young- 
ster, laughing. 

Each party now played apparently their 
very best, but the result was again th6 
same, and the innocent beginner claimed 
his two crowns. This nettled the captain, 
who threw him the silver, and said, in a 
voice as calm as he could command, " Let 
this be our last pjrramid." 

" With all my heaxt.^ 

Poor Leslie now really opened his 
eyes with astonishment. Whether it was 
ill-luck or want of skill, he could not say, 
but one fact was certain, he could scarcely 
take a single ball ; and at the end of the 
game the lad was declared to be the win- 
ner by twelve balls clear. 



9> 



d 



32 THE BILLIARD-ROOM. 

" There seems to me something unfair 
in this." 

" You were only misled by your conceit 
in supposing you could play better than 
me. 

Amazed by this remark, Leslie threw 
down twelve shillings and half-a-crown. 
" There, young gentleman, there is the 
amount of your winnings. This will 
indeed give me a lesson not to play with 
strangers again, however young." 

" Pardon me," replied the boy, in 
the coolest manner; "your vanity as 
regards your bilUard-playing, will alway3 
mislead you. I can easily beat you. As 
to the cash, you are wrong." 

*'Did we not play for shilling balls, 
and half-a-crown on the game ?" 

"True, most true; but, according to 
the rules of this game — and I appeal to 
the marker — whenever there is a tie — an 
equality of numbers — the stakes become 



THE BILLIARD-ROOM. 33 

* 

double. The first pyramid was a shiUing 
a ball ; a tie took place, so the stakes were 
doubled. The same result with the se- 
cond ; they consequently again increased. 
So, you see, the last game each ball 
counted four shillings, and the winning 
stake became ten shillings. So fork out 
two quid eighteen bob, and look pleasant." 

" What ?" 

" Oh, I appeal to the marker — ^I appeal 
to the room." 

Everyone assented to the lad's state- 
ments. 

" I'U teU you what, however, Til do, if 
you like: I'll give you ten points at 
English billiards, and beat you, too, if you 
are not afiraid to try." 

Leslie had now completely lost his 
temper, and, in a fit of passion, accepted 
the boy's challenge. 

Game after game he lost. He bet wild 
odds, and refused to renew his contest 

VOL. II. 3 



S4 THE BILLIARD-BOOM. 

with Johnston, determined to win back 
some thirty pounds he had now lost to 
his yonthfdl opponent. 

The door opened, but so intent was 
Leslie on his game, that he scarcely looked 
Hp. Presently his name was pronounced, 
and in the following moment he found 
his hand grasped with all the warmth of 
true friendship by his brother officer — 
his companion through every danger — 
Major Wright. 

**What are you doing here?" asked 
the new comer ; *' what brings you to 
such haunts as these ?" 

" I am playing with a provoking young- 
ster, who beats me every game/' 

" Do you know your antagonist ?" 

" No ; I only arrived in London a few 
hours ago. I never saw him before." 

" So I thought," dryly replied Wright. 
" Leave off, and come with me." 

" Had I not better finish the game ?" 



THE BILLIARD-ROOM. 35 

" Pshaw ! throw down your cue, and 
come out of this sink of iniquity." 

" Well, as you like. But really, Tm 
ashamed to confess it, I've lost thirty 
pounds to this youth, and I have not 
more than ten in my pocket. Can you 
save me the annoyance of giving him 
a cheque? Lend me twenty till the 
morning." 

" Grive him the ten — ^it's quite enough." 

The major said this loudly, and, as 
Leslie thought, rudely, but no one took 
any notice of his words. Advancing to 
the table, he now raised his voice, and 
addressed, as it were, all present — 

" This gentleman is a friend of mine. 
You have evidently been amusing your- 
selves at his expense, and he is willing to 
pay for it. Ten pounds is a large sum 
for the short lesson he has received. Take 
my advice, gentlemen : accept it with 
thanks, or you will have to deal with 

3—2 



36 THE BILLIARD-BOOM. 

me — ^with one who knows you all. Give 
them your ten pounds, and let us be off." 

Not a soul said a word — not an ob- 
servation was hazarded. Leslie's travel- 
ling companion had left the room imme- 
diately on the entrance of Wright. They 
all now slowly retired, but not until the 
youthfol sharper had picked up his ill- 
gotten gains. 

The major now turned to the marker. 
" Again let me catch you at these tricks, 
and the laws of Englajid shall be vindi- 
cated in your person, you worst of robbers ! 
But enough of this. Come down with 
me, my dear fiiend, to a social club I am 
about to visit, and try and forget this dis- 
gusting scene." 

" But teU me the meaning of all this," 
demanded Leslie, as his friend linked his 
arm under that of the major; "what 
does it all mean ?" 

" Simply this : — That apparent boy is 



THE BILLIARD-ROOM. 37 

a well made-Tip dwarf; he was nine years 
a marker in the North of England. The 
other respectable gentlemen were all well- 
known billiard-sharpers, who, becoming 
too notorious themselves, have hired 
Yorkshire Bobby, at a thumping salary, to 
visit London, where they have dressed 
him up as a boy, and, I hear, made a good 
speculation of him. Being informed that 
a victim was being plucked to-night, I 
entered the den to warn him. Imagine, 
then, my horror and surprise, when I re- 
cognised my old friend in the bird they 
were plucking. They know me well. 
This is not the first time I have frustrated 
their vile schemes. The marker is in 
league with them — of this, till to-night, 
I was not aware. I shall for the future 
have my eye on him. His master is a 
respectable man, and little knows who he 
has in his employ. Come along, Marks, 
for so I love to call you. Brighten up, 



38 THE BILLIARD-BOOM. 

my boy, for we are about to join a party 
of the choicest spirits in London — ^spirits 
who still keep up the convivial meetings 
once so warmly supported by Dr. Johnson 
and the wits of his day." 



39 



CHAPTEE III. 



A SOCIAL CLUB. 



After many twistings and turnings— up 
crooked passages and down devious lanes 
— ^they at length turned into Covent 
Garden. This well-known spot was 
passed without observation, and in a few 
moments more Wright suddenly stopped 
at the door of a public-house, or rather a 
respectable t^avem — a class of establish- 
ment which has nearly been done away 
with by the gin-palaces and the small 
hotels and eating-houses that now invite 
the traveller or other visitor to partake of 
their various luxuries. 

"This is the celebrated tavern yclept 
the Bussell Arms, " cried Major Wright, 



40 A SOCIAL CLUB. 

as he made a full stop, and throwing open 
the door, invited our hero to enter. 
" Follow me, my dear boy, and 1*11 intro- 
duce you to the pleasantest circle in 
London. They are styled the 'United 
Club.' As a member, I can introduce 
you. They hold their meetings on the 
first floor, where they still give warmth 
to the very chairs on which many of our 
wits of the past century sat, under the 
presidence of a Johnson, a Steele, or a 
Tickell. Come along — don't be shy." 

" But I almost fear to encounter such a 
phalanx of talent." 

" That is a gross mistake. The witling 
may sneer at you and try to put you 
down ; the ignoramus may endeavour to 
make you look foolish ; but the real man 
of education and genius will never en- 
deavour to triumph at your expense. He 
is kind and indulgent to his less gifted 
brethren. He feels he can afford to be so.*^ 



A SOCIAL CLUB. 41 

The drawing-room door opened, and 
they were at once introduced. It was truly 
a strange picture — one that no other coun- 
try in the world could present. Around 
a rather long table sat some twenty indi- 
viduals, smoking tobacco through long 
clay pipes, indulging at the same time in 
libations of ale and gin-and-water. Care- 
lessly dressed, lounging about in the 
most negligent and often ungraceful atti- 
tudes, sat the sons of genius whom Wright 
had described. For an instant or two 
Leslie was taken by surprise, and almost 
felt disappointed ; but when he had taken 
a longer glance, he read in the" confident 
air, the intelligent eye, the peculiar mouth 
— which is far more worthy of remark 
than other features more usually spoken 
of — ^the talent imprinted in each face, en- 
graved and stamped by the hand of 
Nature, bespeaking his high calling. All 
were not orators or writers, it is true, but 



42 A SOCIAL CLUB. 

amidst this social give-and-take society he 
soon discovered some of the first actors who 
graced the British stage — some of the 
first artists, who 

*^ Thro' the eyes are wont to wia the heart*' 

Yes; a more unpretending knot of real 
talent had never before blessed the vision 
of the young soldier. 

" And who is he ?" asked the latter of 
his friend; "who is he who sits on the 
high chair, apparently presiding over the 
meeting ?" 

"Which?" 

" The small man with grey hair — he 
whose dancing eyes seem brimful of talent, 
whose wit is evidently relished by all 
present, and whose hilarious laugh re- 
minds me of that fascinating creature 
Lady Boothby, of whom I have heard it 
said that she cotdd by a single laugh at- 
tract every member from a neighbouring 
dub-house.** 



A SOCIAL CLUB. 43 

"That gentleman, my dear Leslie, is 
Mr. Tomkins, one of the best-read men 
in England — one who has done much for 
this country, particularly in the educa- 
tional department. As a member of the 
press, he is alike a biting critic, an elegant 
essayist ; yet, with all these powers, he is 
still unspoiled. Though he has a crowd 
of admirers, he never suflfers himself to 
become inflated. He is modest when 
speaking of himself; he is all heart when 
speaking to a friend; he is the most 
amusing fellow in Great Britain when 
joining in general conversation; a fine 
writer, a first-rate colloquist, and a refined 
scholar, Tomkins is beloved by all who 
know him." 

" And those two, now warmly carrying 
on an argument on some abstruse sub- 
ject ?" 

" The elder is one of our most distin- 
guished analytical chemists. He has in 



44 A SOCIAL CLUB. 

his time (and he is still in the very prime 
of life) made some most valuable dis- 
coveries. He is now, however, discussing 
some historical difficulty, and I strongly 
suspect his young opponent will find him 
almost as well versed in ancient lore as he 
is in chemistry. There are few old papers 
in the British Museum which he has not 
looked into and studied. He is really 
and truly a learned man. The stout 
young man opposed to him in opinion is 
extremely talented and very deeply read. 
He is a first-rate linguist, and is as well 
acquainted with foreign literature as with 
his own. His deep reading has won for 
him a high literary appointment, and 
though the force of habit and an accus- 
tomed superiority in general society may 
have rendered him somewhat dogmatic, 
he is a good, honourable, and a clever 
fellow." 

*' And he at the end of the table ?" 



A SOCIAL CLUB. 45 

" Oh, that is our secretary. His talents 
do not stand out in bold relief as in some 
of our members, but his excellent and 
unobtrusive qualities have somehow or 
other managed to endear him to every 
member of this Club, of which truly he 
may be said to be the Alpha and the 
Omega. On his right sits one whose face, 
beaming with good feeling, tells even to 
the passing stranger that Batts is what 
may really be styled a jolly good fellow — 
kind, generous, and hospitable — ^not only 
a lover, but a patron of the arts." 

" And yonder, do I not see the talented 
Maria?" 

" Most true ; and, if you could only in- 
duce him to speak, you would soon admit 
that his oratorical powers are almost equal 
to those of his pen. Perhaps at this 
moment the most nervous and pure writer 
in England, he is no less a capital 
speaker — a double gift afforded to few of 



46 A SOCIAL CLUB. 

our literati. But really, my dear boy, you 
must finish your kidney and join the long 
table, where I will introduce you to many 
others who do honour to their country. 
Pear not the brilliancy of their talents or 
the sharpness of their wit ; they far prefer 
entering into the stirring and everyday 
jovialities and incidents of life to learned 
arguments or metaphysical discussions." 

Leslie followed his friend, and was soon 
at home in happy conversation with Lenton 
Blandard, the best and most excellent 
companion he could have chosen, and 
John Todd, the low comedian, whose racy 
anecdotes and engaging manner at once 
placed our hero at his ease. 

It was 2 A.M. by Covent Garden church 
clock as Leslie returned to his hotel. 
The major promised to call on him in the 
morning. 



47 



CHAPTER IV. 



DETECTIVES. 



Leslie, worn out with the fatigues of the 
day, threw himself on his bed and was 
soon buried in deep slumber. Soon after 
daybreak, however, he was disturbed by 
the noise of footsteps in his room. 

" Who is there ?" shouted he. 

"It's me r 

" And pray who is me ?** 

" Boots, sir r' repKed the other, in a 
gruff voice ; " I came to call you; it be 
past six, and first train to Manchester goes 
at seven sharp." 

" Hang you and the train too !" roared 
the young soldier ; " why do you disturb 
me? Tm not going by train." 



48 DETECTIVES. 

" Beg pardon, sir. It be the wrong 
gen'leman, then?" 

" Of course it is ! Be off, and shut the 
door after you !" 

" Shall I call you again ?" 

" Don't bother me — ^be off; and let me 
sleep all day if I choose !" 

The man muttered something, left the 
room, and closed the door ; our hero again 
fell asleep. 

The clock had struck ten when Leslie 
descended to breakfast. On this occasion 
he ordered broiled bones and other good 
things which at once announced to the 
experienced waiter that the gentleman be- 
fore him had gone to bed late, and required 
stimulants to revive his worn-out spirits. 
Leslie, accustomed to regular habits, felt 
completely upset by the fatigue he had 
undergone on his journey, 'the excite- 
ment he had felt in the billiard-room, and 
the very late hour at which he had retired 



DETECTIVES. 49 

to his couch. The review of such a day 
was by no means cheering. So, to break 
the thread of his thoughts, he asked after 
his fellow-traveller. 

" He left early this morning, sir. He 
has gone down to Liverpool. By-the-by, 
sir, I forgot to deliver you a note he desired 
me to give you." 

Puzzled by the strange statement that 
his new friend, who had only yesterday 
come up from that district, should now, 
and without notice, return there, and, 
above all, wondering what he could have 
written about, Leslie took the epistle 
and opened it. It contained only two 
lines — 

" My dear Sir, 

" Be good enough to pay the en- 
closed, and I will repay you on my 

return. 

" Yours truly, 

'^ Charles Johnston, E.N." 

VOL. II. 4 



50 DETECTIVES. 

Enclosed was a bill for the dinner for 
the evening before. 

"Do you know the contents of this 
note ?" asked Leslie. 

" Yes, sir," replied the waiter, with 
a smile ; " the captain said you was to 
pay the bill, so master has agreed to look 
to'you." 

"This captain appears a strange person." 

"Yes, sir. We don't know much 
about him ; missus says he's a rum 'un/' 

At this instant two shabby-genteel 
persons entered the coffee-room, and 
beckoned the waiter, who immediately 
went to them. In a few moments the 
trio were in earnest conversation. The 
strangers appeared to use menaxjing Ian- 
guage ; the waiter seemed as if he was 
endeavouring to excuse himself. More 
than once they looked direct at our hero, 
who, had he not been an utter stranger 
in London, would have thought that they 



DETECTIVES* 51 

were speaking of him. But this was im* 
possible, and, as he did not desire to over- 
hear them, he took up a newspaper and 
began to read one of the leading articles. 

Presently the two new-comers ap- 
proached Leslie ; they entered the box in 
which he was breakfasting, and sitting 
down opposite to him, without removing 
iheir hats, eyed him for several seconds. 
The senior of the two then abruptly 
addressed him— 

« What is your name, sir ?" 

Astounded by the cool impudence of 
his interrogator, and indignant at the 
manner in which he addressed him, the 
captain laid down his newspaper, and 
replied — 

*' Pray, sir, by what authority do you 
presume to ask ?" 

" Well, I suspects you knows very well ; 
but, as every chap has a right to a plain 
answer, 1*11 give you one — we are detec- 

4— » 



52 DETBCnVES. 

tives. I'm Sergeant Sankey. and this is 
my comrade, John Brown." 

Our hero sat petrified. For a moment, 
he really lost not only his presence of 
mind but also his power of speech. He 
sat in silent astonishment. 

" Well, you says nothing/' chimed in 
Brown. " You don't appear to like our 



names." 



" Again I ask you," demanded Detec- 
tive No. 1, " what's your name?" 

" LesKe." 

" And what are you ?" 

" A captain." 

"Oh yes. All the swell snobs are 
captains. But haven't you got no other 
name r 

" Yes, Marks." 

" Note that down. Jack. He says he 
is called Leslie, alias Marks. I wonder 
whether he be a son of our friend in the 
Jug ? But that ain't our business. Now, 



DETECTIVEfi. 53 

my brave captain, I am going to ask you 
a question or two." 

" And suppose I refiise to answer ?" 
"Well, it's not far from Vine-street, 
nor yet Bow-street, and, if you wont deal 
with us, we must take you before the 
beak, as you calls him, that's all/' 

Leslie saw that the best course was to 
submit ; the alternative would be attended 
with publicity and disgra.^. So, in- 
wardly vowing a future vengeance, he 
stiffly bowed, and said — " I am ready to 
reply to you." 

"Of course you be. When did you 
arrive in London ?" 
"Only last night." 
" Where did you come from?" 
- " From Lreland." 

" What were you doing there ?" 
" I was on a visit to Lord Urmstone." 
"Whew!"whistled John Brown; "that's 
a likely story.' 



»> 



54 DETECTIVES. 

" Be quiet/* said the other, and again 
turned to Leslie. 

" Did you come here alone ?" 

"I left Ireland by myself, but waa 
joined on my road by a fellow-traveller,, 
who came to this hotel with me." 

** What was his name ?" 

" Charles Johnston, a lieutenant in the 
Navy." 

" Charles Johnston — ^that's rare — ^then 
we kills two birds with one stone ; and 
where is he now ?" 

" The waiter tells me he has left." 

"Come, come, don't gammon, you'd 
better tell the truth ; you know all about 
him. If you tells us, it may be better 
for you." 

" All I know is that I have just re- 
ceived a letter from the gentleman. 

" Gentleman ! Come, that's good," 
roared John, and they both set up a 
hoarse laugh. 



}> 



DETECTIVES. 55 

" Can you produce the letter ?'* asked 
the sergeant. 

" Here it is/* repKed the other, handing 
it to them. 

The police officers read and re-read the 
letter and its enclosure several times, and 
then joined the waiter ; vainly endeavour- 
ing, it would seem, to learn somethiog 
about Johnston. But all in vain. Their 
manner, however, seemed somewhat soft- 
ened ere they resumed their seats. They 
evidently began to doubt the information 
they had received* 

"Well, sir, what youVe said maybe 
true. But we want to know how long 
you have known this Lieutenant John- 
ston?" 

" I never saw him till yesterday." 

" Humph ! that's odd. If you are, as 
ybu say, a gentleman, may I ask, do you 
usually dine with a perfect stranger and 
go out with hun afterwards ?" 



56 BETECnVES. 



" I own it was imprudent." 

" And where did you go to ?" 

"To some billiard-rooms in or near 
Leicester-square." 

" That will do ; you are one of them^ 
then, as we thought you was ; our infor- 
mation is all right. Come, young chap^ 
put on your tile and accompany us to the 
office ; you must be examined before the 
magistrate. At what hour did the major 
say he'd be at Bow-street ?" 

"At eleven," repUed John. "I few 
he'll be tired of waiting." 

" Grentlemen," cried the now annoyed 
Leslie, " of course you will allow me to 
call a carriage." 

" Oh, we wont trouble you. Captains 
is in the habit of walking. Besides, your 
friends might like to see you." 

They rose ; and our hero was about to 
do the same, when Major Wright entered. 



DETECTIVES. 57 

He went up to Leslie without perceiving 
the others. 

*'Marksy, my boy, I come to you 
to ask you to come with me as far as 
Bow-street, in order to give evidence 
against the rascally sharpers who fleeced 
you last night." 

" I was just going there, sorely against 
my wiU— dragged there by these exceUent 
gentlemen." 

" What !" screamed the Major ; ** what 
does this mean?" 

"I fear there is some mistake, sir,' 
replied the sergeant, in a subdued voice. 

" Please, sir, we come to take up this 
man, who we strongly suspects to belong 
to the gang.** 

" Silence, fellows ! How dare you thus 
speak of a gentleman ? One word from 
me would dismiss you both ! You well 
know my influence in Scotland Yard." 



• » 



58 DETECTIVES. 

" It's rather hard, major, to blame us. 
We did our best ; and appearances were 
very suspicious." 

"Were you not sent here to arrest 
Johnston, the swindler, and not my 
friend-my dear friend. Captain Marks 
Leslie ?" 

" Well, sir, we were told as they come 
up to London together, and the gentle- 
man hisself said as he had dined with 
him yesterday, and gone with him to play 
billiards/' 

" Well," chimed in Leslie, " I must con- 
fess appearances were strongly against me ; 
and, after all, you did your duiy, though 
perhaps in a somewhat rough manner." 

"Well, and where is this scoundrel, 
Johnston? Have you seized him?" 
asked the major. 

" No, sir ; that's the worst on it. He 
doubtlessly foresaw our visit, and bolted 
early this morning." 



DETBCTIVBS. 59 

"He has gone to Liverpool," said 
Leslie. 

" Not he. He is probably across the 
water before this. We have a warrant 
for his apprehension for a burglary, and 
another for inciting a poor lad to forge. 
Oh, he is a bad 'un ! Besides these, in- 
formation has been received from the rail- 
way authorities that he prigged a lady's 
watch in a first-class carriage, while travel- 
ling between Holyhead and Chester." 

Leslie groaned, but said nothing. 

■I 

^ We must find out what train he went 
by," observed the major. 

A sudden thought struck Leslie. 
" A man came into my bed-room this 
morning, and called me to go by the seven 
o'clock train to Manchester." 

Do you know who that man was ?'* 
Oh yes. He said he was the boots." 
Call the boots," said the sergeant. 
That functionary soon appeared. 



tc 



i€ 



\yy 



99 



60 BETECnVES* 

" Who did you call this morning at six 
o'clock ?" asked the detective. 

" No one," replied the other. 

"Did you not enter this gentleman's 
room by mistake ?' 

" Certainly not J 

The policemen exchanged looks. 

" Have you any objection to our visit- 
ing your chamber ?" 

" You are welcome to do so/' And up 
went the whole party. 

The room had not been arranged; 
everything stood as it had done when 
LesUe came down. 

"Is this your portmanteau, sir?" asked 
the police officer, as he lifted the lid. 

" It is. But really I am at a loss to 
understand its being open. I have not 
unlocked it since I arrived. I have only 
opened my carpet-bag." 

" Well, but ain't them your keys ?" 
pointing to a bunch lying on the table. 



DETECTIVES, 61 

Leslie nodded. "Well now, it's very- 
clear as Master Johnston took 'em up and 
opened your portmanteau when he came 
into your room this morning, and opened 
it with them." 

"I don't understand you," cried the 
puzzled captain ; " I am not aware that 
he came here. I never saw him." 

" Of course you didn't ; but you are 
not so simple, sir, as not to see as that's 
the fellow who came into your room this 
morning to rob you, and being discovered 
by your awakening, he shammed to be 
the boots, and so got away." 

" La, major ! it's quite clear, ain't it ?" 

" To you, it may be," replied Wright ; 
" but I cannot see his object." 

" No ; 'cause we haven't looked into the 
portmanteau yet. May we do so, sir ?" 

" By all means," repKed Leslie, again 
lifting the lid himself. 

His writing-desk, containing bank-notes 



62 DBTBCTIVES. 

and letters of credit to a lai^e amount, 
had been abstracted; his wateh, which 
he had hung on the looking-glass, was also 
gone, with some emerald shirt-studs and 
other trifles he had left on the table. 

" Well, I hope you are convinced now," 
demanded Sergeant Sankey. 

" Indeed I am," sighed Leslie ; for he 
was sorely annoyed at being thus fool- 
ishly made the dupe — the companion of a 
notorious thief. 

" Well, major, if you don't want us 
no more, we'll be off. We'll follow the 
dodger yet," said the sergeant. 

"Probably I shall hear, from you, 
then ?" said Leslie. 

" I may perhaps ask you to give evi- 
dence ; but as to recovering your property, 
there ain't no chance of it; it's pro- 
bably all off to Holland before this, so 
you had better make up your mind to the 
loss." 



DETECTIVES. 63 

" Can I not do something ?'* 

"Yes, sir, if you'll pardon me for 
saying so. Take care how you 'sociates 
with flashy strangers. Excuse my blunt- 
ness, sir/' And the detectives left the 
room. 

" This is a bad afiair," said Wright. 

" I fear Lord Urmstone will blame me 
for my silly confidence in this fellow." 

" I would not tell him, were I in your 
place." 

"Thank God, he knows my every 
thought." 

The pair descended to the coffee-room, 
where Leslie, having resumed his break- 
fast-eating, and the major having called 
for a glass of sherry-and-water, they had 
a long and animated conversation. 



64 



CHAPTEE V. 

A MYSTERIOUS FEMALE. 

Lord Urmstone was seated in his study 
— ^for he had taken a house at Blackrock 
since the departure of Leslie. He was 
in the act of reading a letter from his 
cherished prot^g^, transmitting to him a 
faithful account of the adventures which 
we have just recorded, and smiled at the 
guileless manner in which the self-accusing 
narrative was detailed. The pecuniary loss 
was of no consequence. The circumstance 
of his falling into the hands of a sharper 
was a fact to be deplored, but scarcely 
to be blamed. Not so, however, the readi- 
ness he had exhibited to play. Many and 
many an excellent and honourable friend 



A MTSTERIOUS FEMALE. 65 

of Lord Urmstone's had thus been ruined. 
On the one hand, he felt proudly certain 
that the boy he had reared was no gambler 
at heart ; on the other, he almost regretted 
that he had not earlier warned Leslie 
against the seductive charms of the metro- 
polis. 

At this instant the servant opened the 
door and announced Mr. Martin, the 
police-magistrate. 

The gentleman who now entered was 
considerably above six feet in height. 
His shoulders and his whole frame were 
in fiill proportion to his height ; his coun- 
tenance was open, and his laughing eye 
announced him as a jovial companion at the 
festive board. That he was an excellent and 
fair dispenser of justice, his lordship already 
knew ; but he was not prepared to hear 
an Lish magistrate — an Irishman bom 
and bred — speak broad Scotch. The fact, 
however, was so, and in the course of time 

VOL. II. 5 



66 A MTSTERIOUS FEMALE. 

the peer learnt the reason of this seemingly 
strange anomaly. The fact was, Mr. 
Martin was a Belfast man — a, regular 
Korthem — and consequently, both in 
tongue and religion, far more closely re- 
sembled a Scot than an Hibernian. Lord 
TJrmstone had only visited Connaught, 
Leinster, and Munster; of the manufac- 
turing division he had no idea. He was 
wholly unaware of the manner and strange 
language of an Ulsterman tiU the worthy 
justice stood before him, and having 
saluted him, sat down on the chair to 
which he was invited by his lordship. 

" I have sent for you, Mr. Martin, to 
ask your advice and assistance. The fact 
is, my daughter has lately been much 
annoyed by the constant presence of a 
female, who follows her every movement ; 
wherever she goes, she is sure to meet with 
her.'' 

" It's trewly strange, my lord ; but, ye 



A MYSTERIOUS FEMALE. 67 

ken, we'll endeavour to discover who the 
person is, and, if possible, put an end to 
her impairtinent intrusions." This was 
spoken in broad Scotch. 

" I am much obliged to you." 

** But perhaps yere lordship would jist 
give me a fuller detail, that I may be able 
to discover the person who thus fashes 
yere daughter ?" 

" It might be better to hear the account 
from my daughter's Kps." 

" Vera true," replied the Northern. 

The peer rang ; a servant entered. 

" Desire Lady Emily to come here." 

The servant bowed and retired. 

" I was in hopes we should have seen 
your worship yesterday," remarked the 
peer, with that tact which told well. By 
the mere fact of a man of his rank thus 
acknowledging that of the magistrate, he 
at once won his warmest friendship. 

" Weel, my lord, ye mun ken I was 

5—2 



68 A MYSTERIOUS FEMALE. 

beesy trpng several car cases. My pre- 
decessors in office have so increased the 
number of pubUc carriages, that they have 
from a convenience grown into a pairfect 
nuisance. My great object is to guard the 
public against the extortion and the inso- 
lence of these fellows ; and I think, to a cer- 
tain extent, I have succeeded. I am called 
the Terror of the Carmen — a title I en- 
deevour to desairve." 

As the J.P. concluded. Lady Emily 
entered. 

Since we last mentioned her, she was 
somewhat changed. Her rosy cheeks now 
bloomed less brilliantly ; her jocund smile 
had vanished. She was, however, still so 
lovely, so fascinating, that Mr. Martin 
was struck with deep admiration, and he 
muttered a well-meant compliment as he 
bowed to the introduction now vouchsafed 
him. 

" This, my dear Emily, is Mr. Martin, 




A MYSTERIOUS FEMALE. 69 

the magistrate for this district. He 
kindly came here at my invitation to 
assist us relative to the person who so 
continually persecutes you by following 
your footsteps. I have sent for you, to 
give all the ioformation in your power." 

"I presumed to suggest that your leddy- 
ship could give more ample details than 
your noble faither ?" 

" I am truly sorry, sir, that my father's 
anxiety for my safety and comfort has 
induced him to give you the trouble of 
coming out to Blackrock; bu,t, as you 
have done so, I shall be most happy to 
give you every information in my 
power/' 

" May I speer a few questions ?" 

« Certainly." 

The magistrate drew his chair to the 
table, and, producing a memorandum-book 
and a pencil, at once proceeded to inter- 
rogate the fair complainant. 



70 A MYSTERIOUS FEBIALE. 

"How long is it sin ye saw tliis 
person, who, as his lordship states, con- 
tinually dogs your movements ?" 

" Only a few days." 

" A female ? What may be her age ?'* 

"I cannot really say; she studiously 
avoids displaying her features ; but, from 
her general appearance, I should say she 
is between forty and fifty years old." 

" You have not caught a wee gUmpse 
of her face ?" 

" Yes, I have. Walking along the pier 
at Kingstown, the wind blew her veil 
aside, and I then beheld the wreck of one 
of the very handsomest faces I ever 



saw." 



" Can you describe it?" 

" Not in detail. Her hair was gray, 
but seemingly changed rather by grief 
than age ; her eyes were brilliant, as were 
her teeth; but her complexion did not 
display a streak of colour ; and her coun- 



A MYSTEBIOUS FEMALE* 71 

tenance bespoke deep grief, I may err, 
but I think I have seen a picture of 
Marie Antoinette being led to execution, 
which displays a physiognomy more closely 
resembling that of my pursuer than any- 
thing I can describe." 

" She is, then, above the lower class ?" 
" From every circumstance except her 
dress, which is very poor, though beauti- 
fully clean and neatly arranged, I should 
say she was bom and bred a lady. One 
day she by accident intercepted ray pro- 
gress; perceiving this, she apologized in 
the most graceful manner, and hurried 
away, apparently afflicted at having in- 
truded on me." 

" Does she ever speak to ye ?'* 
" She has never done so except on this 
occasion. As far as I can judge, she fixes 
her eyes constantly on me; indeed, in 
her intensity of gaze, there is not only 
something mysterious, but strangely dis- 



72 A MTSTEBIOUS FEMALE. 

tressing to me. So lost does she seem to 
every other object, that on the last oc- 
casion, poor creature (I call her so, for 
she is evidently a limatic), she stumbled 
over one of the rocks near the bathing- 
place at Monkstown, and was evidently 
much hurt. I was greatly alarmed at the 
accident, but the friend with whom I was 
walking, begged of me not to go near the 
wretched creature ; so I returned home, 
and sent a servant to inquire after her, but 
he could get no tidings. Since that time, 
now two days ago, I have not seen her, 
and fear she is seriously hurt." 

" You seem disposed, my leddy, to like 
this person ?" 

" Well, to confess the truth, I do. She 
seems kind-hearted and lady-like, and I 
would fain oflTer her assistance if she re- 
quires it; but my father is so alarmed 
for my safety, that he has strictly for- 
bidden me to address her." 



• » 



A BCTSTERIOUS FEBCALE. 73 

" I wull jist put a stop to this ; I will 
give directions to the police at once to tak 
her up, if she annoys yere leddyship 
again 

"Oh no, sir, pray, pray do not harm 
her. I know not why, but I should not 
like to see her injured. If you could find 
out her friends or relatives, and make 
them take care of her, I am sure papa 
would gladly pay any expense incurred.'* 

" WiUingly, my dear child," said Lord 

Urmstone ; " but this does not appear to 

be a case such as that which you have 

pictured. She is either a person pursuing 

you in ihe hope of extorting money from 

you, as, I fear, is not unfrequently the 

t 

case here '* 

"Oh, papa, do not say so; you libel 
this warm-hearted people. Besides, I am 
sure the person we seek to discover is an 
Englishwoman," cried Emily, interrupt- 
ing her father. 



74 A MYSTERIOUS FEMALE. 

"Then probably she is an escaped 
lunatic," went on the peer. "It is our 
duty to restore her, through the proper 
authorities, to her friends — ^this is not 
our task : it is that of the police." 

"Papa, papa, you now speak like a 
minister of state, and not like my adored 
father, who would himself sacrifice readily 
his own personal comfort to relieve the 
distress of the most humble individual 
alive, if they happened to be unfortunate/* 

" Emily, dearest, leave this affair with 
me, and be quit^ sure I wiU do no wrong. 
It is sufl&cient that you plead for her to 
make me already like her ; but really we 
must put an end to this strange fancy she 
has taken of following you about. Mr. 
Martin, will you do us the honour 
of sharing our family dinner? My 
daughter and myself have only a few 
letters to write, and then we shall prepare 



A :mysterious female. 75 

for that meal. It is now four. At six, 
sans ceremonieJ* 

"With pleasure," replied the magis- 
trate. " But, in the meantime, I will 
give directions to the poKce to ^" 

" Oh, not so !" cried Lady Emily. 

"Perhaps, Mr. Martin, you will post- 
pone any further proceeding in this 
matter till we have more fully discussed 
it after dinner ?" 

" Thank you, dear papa." 

"It shall be sae," replied the func- 
tionary, who, with a low bow, left the 
room. 



CHAPTEB YI. 



MASTER AKD MAX. 



Wk will not attempt to describe one of 
the most admirable meetings which ever 
graced or did honour to Exeter Hall. 
The subject which had elicited a continual 
flow of eloquence was one of deep theolo- 
gical importance. The soul-stirring appeals 
of our best divines had not been thrown 
away, the address of the noble chairman 
liad told with considerable effect, but no 
speaker during the whole evening had 
touched more effectively the best feel- 
ings of his hearers — so thoroughly, so 
profitably, by his warm and heaven.given 
eloquence, won the admiration of all, 
than George Sydney, who on this occa- 



MASTER AND MAN. 77 

sion might well challenge the proud title 
conferred on the Eighth Harry, for Sydney, 
far from shrinking from the task, had 
loudly and proudly claimed for himself 
this high honour ; feeling that he was, in 
the eyes of all, the true " Defender of the 
Faith." 

A crowd had assembled, desirous of 
catching a glimpse of. their favourite 
orator, and, as George Sydney stepped 
forth, a loud cheer welcomed his appear- 
ance. Nor were his triumphs to end 
here. A fire was raging in the Adelphi ; 
a house known to contain several living 
inmates was in flames. For want of a 
supply of water or some other cause, the 
conflagration raged, only partially checked 
by the few firemen who had as yet arrived. 
A stranger had already saved two persons 
at the imminent risk of his own life, and 
was in the act of bearing a senseless 
female in his arms down the escape-ladder 



78 MASTER AND MAN. 

as Sydney approached the crowd. Within 
ten feet of the ground the unfortunate 
woman recovered, and seeing herself still 
close to the flames, she sprang from the 
arms of her protector'; she, however, fell 
unhurt into those of a fireman. Her 
courageous rescuer was less fortunate. 
He was thrown by her sudden movement 
from the ladder, and fell just within the 
verge of the flames. George Sydney, who 
was standing close by, sprang forward, and 
seizing him, dragged him forth, and 
delivered him over (he being almost sense- 
less) to the care of one of the Brigade. 
Many of his partisans, who had followed 
him from Exeter Hall, saw this and in- 
stantly raised a deafening cheer. They 
would fain have addressed him, but, 
jumping into a Hansom cab, the Honour- 
able Greorge drove off at full speed to his 
lodgings. 

In making use of the term lodgings, 



MASTER AND MAN. 79 

we do SO advisedly, for the great and 
good man we have just pictured had 
only recently exchanged his aristo- 
cratic chambers in the Albany for apart- 
ments situated in the more retired and 
somewhat less fashionable neighbourhood 
of Dean-street, Soho. 

George entered his drawing-room, and 
having thrown off his coat, took do^vn a 
dressing-gown suspended from a peg, and 
put it on. 

This, we are aware, was the duty of 
Coleman, who kept busily stirring up 
the fire instead of waiting on his master. 
But none can be surprised at the fact. 
Altered circumstances in the master in- 
variably bring an equal alteration in the 
manner of the servant. Coleman was still 
attached to the staff and service of George 
Sydney; but he held his post on far 
different terms than those which once 
commanded respect and obedience. A 



80 MASTER AND MAN. 

spy on his every action, his confidant in 
most of his fearful projects, the possessor 
of his secrets, the ready sharer in his 
hypocritical delusions — Coleman, though 
outwardly respectful, despised and disliked 
the man who now sought, by familiarity 
with his menial, to secure his confederacy 
and his silence. 

" Bless me !" cried Coleman, in surprise, 
as he took up George's coat, " where have 
you been? what have you been about? 
I declare you have spoilt your very best 
coat ; the only Poole you have to your 
name. Why, it seems burnt," continued 
the man, as he more minutely examined 
it ; " it is wet right through in the back, 
and the sleeves are regularly singed ; what 
have you been about ?" 

" I have just come from a fire, where I 
was fortunate enough to save a stranger's 
life." 

" Who was he ?" 



MASTER AND MAN. 81 

" I don't know." 

" Did he not teU you ?" 

"Not he; he was insensible when I 
drew him out of the flames ; but, on my 
making some inquiry, a policeman or fire- 
man, I don't know which, took this card 
from his pocket, and, having directed the 
cabman where to drive, handed it to me. 
Here it is," added he, throwing it down ; 
" I have not looked at it." 

Coleman took it to the lamp, and read 
it aloud — "Captain Marks Leslie, St. 
Alban's-place." 

''Who?" screamed Sydney. 

Coleman again read it. 

" Curses on my luck, thus to save a 
beggar's brat who stands between me and 
the only girl I really ever admired. This 
is the nameless vagabond who I told you 
I believed stood high in the good graces 
of a certain lovely girl " 

"Well, but as you once was in love 

VOL. II. 6 



82 MASTEB AND MAN. 

with the mother, I don't suppose you can 
care much about the daughter." 

" It is true ; I have only seen her twice> 
but I confess she filled my breast with 
emotion/' 

" Pooh ! drop this folly as you would a 
hot potato." 

" Coleman ! you forget yourself" 

" Well, sir, if I do," replied the other, 
at once altering his tone, *' I only do so 
in your interest ; considering, more par- 
ticularly, how I've been engaged all the 
week." 

" What a fool I what an idiot I have 
been ! What business had I at a fire 
interfering with the duties of the offi- 
cials?" muttered Sydney, not heeding the 
remarks of Coleman ; " oh, if I had only 
known who it was, I would have thrust 
him still farther into the burning mass, 
and seen him expire with pleasure !" 

** Well, what^s done can't be undone. 



MASTER AND MAN. 83 

I suppose you did not know lie was in 
London ?*' 

" Of course I did not. How should I 
be able to say who is, or who is not, in 
this vast metropoUs?" 

" She is not in London — ^that's sm^e/* 

"Whor 

"Oh, you know who — she you sent 
me to look up. She's gone away ; the 
house in St. John's-wood is shut up, and 
no one knows where she is gone." 

" Upon my life, it's too bad. Pate seems 
to persecute me ; this woman was my last 
hope. Beales's bill becomes due on 
Monday, and I Ve nothing wherewith to 
meet it.'* 

" How much is it ?*' 
« Only £400." 

"Well, can't you get it from your 
brother? He's rather a stingy prig, but 
perhaps you might succeed in bleeding 
him." 

6—2 



84 MASTER AND MAN. 

" How dare you thus speak of my near 
relative ?" 

" Do you know, sir, I don't like that 
word dare. We're quite alone, so I may 
fairly tell you I wont stand it. Here am 
I lying — ay, and swearing to lies all day 
— and when we are tater-tate, as you 
calls it, you turns upon me, who not only 
knows all your schemes, but have assisted 
in most of them/* 

" Thank Heaven !" inwardly ejaculated 
the honourable master, " you do noty 

Then turning to Coleman, he calmly 
said, "You mistake me, Coleman. I 
merely wished to show you, that if you 
gave yourself an habitual familiarity of 
manner, you might by chance do so before 
strangers, and if so, it might ruin all our 
projects. I say our advisedly, for I look 
upon our interests as identical/' 

At this moment a single knock was 
heard, and Coleman, somewhat softened 



MASTER AND MAN. 85 

by this half apology of his master, went 
out to see who the visitor was. As he 
closed the door, Greorge muttered, with a 
fiend-like smile, "That fellow must be 
disposed of; he knows too much !" 



86 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE DISGUISED PEMALE. 

" A FEMALE wishes to see you, sir," said 
Coleman, retuming. 

"Who is she r 

"Can't say. I asked her name, and 
she replied, * Mrs. Thompson.' I asked 
her her business ; she said she 
would communicate that to my master 

only." 

"Is she a lady?" 

" Scarcely." 

" A mendicajit ?" 

" Oh lor', no ! quite respectable like." 

*'Youngorold?" 

"Bather elderly. But I only got a 
gUmpse of her face." 



THE DISGUISED FEMALE. 87 

" Tell her to call in the morning ; this 
is too late an hour to receive strangers." 

"So I told her, but it wouldn't do. 
She says you'll know her when you see 
her, and she'd rather see you to-night." 

" What can she want ?" 

" Well, 'twixt you aad I— I think- ^" 

"Who taught you to think?" said 
George, snappishly. " Let the woman 
in. 

Coleman went out, and returned usher- 
ing in a female attired in the most 
simple but careful manner. She dropped 
a respectful curtsey as she stepped across 
the threshold, at once announcing her 
station to be that of an inferior, and, 
casting down her eyelids, did not again 
raise them till Sydney spoke. 

" You wished to see me ?" .The female 
slightly inclined her head. " May I ask 
you your business ?" 

" I can only speak to you alone." 



88 THE DISGUISED FEMALE. 

George signalled to his servant to 
begone. Coleman most reluctantly with- 
drew. 

"And now, madam, may I learn the 
object which has brought you hither at 
this unseasonable hour? If you seek 
pecuniary assistance I fear you will be 
disappointed; not two hours ago I sent 
my last himdred pounds to a worthy 
curate in Monmouthshire whose house 
has just been burnt down." 

" I don t seek charity," mUdly repUed 
the other. 

"If it be to claim any liability, the 
statement I have just made will suffi- 
ciently prove to you the impossibility of 
satisfying your claims just now.' 

" You don't owe me nothing.' 

" Bless me ! this is very strange. You 
say you do not come for money ?" Again 
the visitor shook her head. " Do you 
seek any information — any advice ?" 



99 



» 



THE DISGUISED FEMALE. 89 



" Don't you know me ?" 

" I think I know your face ; as well as 
I recollect, I have seen it at Exeter Hall. 
Perhaps you come to offer some assistance 
to our distressed missionaries ?" 

" Why, Master George, don't you know 
me?" cried the female, bursting into a 
roar of laughter as she raised her veil. 

" Decidedly not ; I never saw you be- 
fore," replied George, beginning to think 
he was in close contact with a lunatic; 
" but," added he, soothingly, " I will do 
anything I can to serve you;" and he 
approached the bell-rope. 

" Don't be a fool. Master George ! I 
beg your pardon— don't you know me ?'* 
and her altered voice at once introduced 
her as Mrs. Marks. 

" Curse it ! — But no ! I am well 
pleased you can thus disguise yourself- 
Did Coleman recognise you ?" 

" Bah !" 



90 THE DISGUISED FEMALE. 

" And with what object did you seek 
me thus in masquerade ?" 

'*I go to Grantchester House to- 
morrow, and I wished to see what 
you thought of the confidential house- 
keeper as you recommended ; that's 
all." 

'' Still I would rather Coleman had not 
seen you here. He may recognise you 
there as a visitor of mine. And Cole- 
man is not quite as faithful as he used 
to be." 

" Eugh ! you've been quarrelling, have 
you ? if you have, it's very silly. You'd 
far better have put him out of the way at 
once. He's sure now to betray you when 
he finds it his interest." 

" My exact opinion, dear Mrs. Marks." 

" Mrs. Thompson, if you please.'* 

" You are right ; I forgot. I was just 
going to ask you — ^Don't you think your 
husband could put You understand?'* 



THE DISGUISED FEMALE. 91 

" Oh ! a wink is as good as a nod to a 
blind hoss. But Jim's getting queer 
like ; he pretends now to be scrupulous, 
and don't think as you behaved over- 
generously in the Hirish affair." 

" Hush !" 

" Well, there's no one to hear us." 

"So you think," muttered Coleman, 
whose ear was glued to the keyhole; 
"so you think. But you shall both 
swing before I die.' 

" Well, I'll go home and talk to Jim 
about this little job." 

" The old hag calls it * a little job.' 
Well, well, there's no gratitude in this 
world," growled Coleman. 

"And now, sir," continued Mrs. 
Marks, "about the powders as you 
promised to give me. Mind, they're not 
to kill ; I wouldn't kill no one for a thou- 
sand pounds." 

" No — ^no — ^nor would I." 



I* - >' 



92 THE DISGUISED FEMALE. 

" What a lie !" involuntarily ejaculated 
Coleman. 

" Did you speak, Mrs. Marks ? No ? 
I certainly heard a sound ;" and George, 
now fearfully alarmed, imlocked the door 
and threw it wide open. But he was too 
late. The momentary pause (the time 
occupied in drawing back the fastenings 
— ^for he had, unseen, slid round and saved 
himself from interruption, the instant he 
had discovered who his visitor was) had 
given Coleman time to dart away, and 
jump, clothed as he was, into his bed. 
Sydney followed him upstairs, and, open- 
ing the door, looked in. Here he saw his 
servant soundly slumbering in his bed. 
So, perfectly satisfied that the whole afiair 
was a false alarm, he descended on tip-toe 
lest he might wake his servitor, and re- 
joined Mrs. Marks. 

" It was nothing. 1 thought I heard 
a human voice; but I was wrong, no 



THE DISGUISED FEMALE. 93 

living soul is stirring. So pray continue/' 
added Greorge, again locking the door. 

" Well, I wants them powders, and I 
wants to know how they're to be given 
and what effect they'll have ?" 

" At first, only give one in three days ; 
you can dilute them in water, in milk, or 
in tea. These are better than gruel, or 
in other medicine. If their effect is 
slow, we can administer them more fre- 
quently." 

" And their effect ?" 

" Oh ! to do my dear brother good/' 

"Of course,'* chimed in the woman, 
with a sneer. 

**It is a mere' quack medicine, so I 
do not ask his medical attendants to 
give it. 

" I suspects it will stop his quacking 
pretty soon." 

"Don't be coarse, Mrs. Thompson. 
If they have not the desired effect, we 



94 THE DISGUISED FEMALE. 

will increase the dose. It may make the 
Earl grow weaker, but don't mind that ; 
OA the contrary, it will show the fever is 
abating." 

" Yes, I know." 

"And ril come and see him daily, 
when you can communicate privately 
with me. Indeed I shall almost always 
be there ; for his present illness is of such 
a serious nature that his sudden death, 
at any moment, would scarcely astonish 



me." 



" How very kind in you !" 

''Above all things, destroy all the 
paper-wrappers, and thoroughly — mind, I 
say thoroughly — wash every cup or glass 
you may use in administering it ; if you 
do not, you may get into trouble. I 
should be sorry to see you injured." 

"Me?" 

"Yes," continued the other, calmly, 
"the world is very censorious. Always 



THE DISGUISED FEMALE. 95 

remember, every vessel used by a deceased 
person is examined carefully, and reported 
upon, by our prying police ; and then our 
medical men might say you had poisoned 
him, to excuse their own ignorance." 

" Well ! I m blessed if that ain't good, 
coming from you." 

"Hark, Mrs. Thompson; believe mc 
that, whatever happens, I shall be your 
friend, and stand by you." 

" I should think so ; you had better. 
But suppose they suspects you ?" 

" Impossible ! No one would believe 
anything so monstrous. Am I not his 
lordship's brother, his attached and affec- 
tionate brother?" 

" Well, well, you is a out-and-outer," 
sighed the woman, overcome by his calm 
and deliberate villany. " Upon my word, 
do you know, I've half a mind to give 
this job up." 

"And lose one thousand pounds — a 



96 THE DISGUISED FEMALE. 

sum which will take you and Jim out to 
America, and make a lady of you ?" • 

" Umph, that's true ; so I'll stick to it. 
So come, give me the powders." 

" They are not ready yet. You'll 
find them by accident in a certain spot 
I'll point out to you in Grantchester 
House. Mind, I do not give them to 
you — ^you find them by accident, Mrs. 
Thompson !" 

"Well, as you like; but I wants a 
drain." 

" I have no wine or spirits, and Cole- 
man has retired to rest." 

" Well, it's rather hard, for I'm as dry 
as a new bung. All the respectable pub- 
lics is shut, and I'm dressed too well to 
go into a night-house." 

" Shall I call Coleman, then, to see you 
home ?" 

" No, not by no means. Besides, to 
tell you the truth, Pat Murphy is wait- 



THE DISGUISED FEMALE. 97 

ing for me at the corner of the street to 
accompany me." 

" Is he aware that you came here ?" 

" Not as I knows of." 

" It was highly imprudent. I would 
rather have gone with you myself." 

"What, the Honourable George Au- 
gustus Sydney, the pet of Hexeter 'All, 
a walking at two o'clock in the morning 
with a handsome female ! Lor', I declare 
it would be in the papers." 

" Well, as you will," replied the other. 
" Good night — God bless you !" 

" Don't say that. Master George I 
Swear at me, if you like ; but oh, don't 
bless me, it seems like mockery ;" and out 
passed Mrs. Marks, alias Thompson. 

" The number of my victims increases 
fearfully. Here's another fool whose 
mouth must be stopped." 

Sydney retired to his couch and dreamt 
of innocent delights and heavenly rewards 

VOL. II. 7 



98 THE DISGUISED FEMALE. 

—no thought of evil accompanied him to 
the flattering world of sleep. The monster 
in his slumber was little short of an angel : 
it was only when he awoke to ftdl con- 
sciousness that the fiend re-assumed his 
throne within George Sydney's heart. 



99 



CHAPTER VIII. 

A STRANGK INVITATION. 

* 

Lady Emily had driven into Dublin with 
Lord Urmstone. He had been especially 
summoned by the Lord-Lieutenant to 
attend and assist by his advice a general 
meeting of the magistrates and officers of 
the Government in Ireland. The das- 
tardly and cruel spirit of Murder had 
again raised its head, and the worthy 
Earl, though not in the commission of the 
peace, (and consequently not, strictly 
speaking, coming within the wording of 
the circular), was yet solicited, as an ex- 
minister, and one whose opinion was 
universally esteemed, to come down to 
Tipperary, where the meeting was held, 

7— :j 



100 A STRANGE INVITATION. 

there to assist, by his able counsels, the 
officials and other administrators of justice 
in Ireland. 

His lordship could scarcely refuse such 
an appeal, and he now drove in with his 
daughter, and having entered a reserved 
compartment in the South- West railway- 
train, his fond child, who shed more than 
one tear, even at this short separation 
from her beloved parent, returned in the 
open carriage to Blackrock. . . . 

She was passing through a somewhat 
dull spot, near Merrion, when a poor 
woman suddenly darted up to the side of 
the carriage, and, with a frantic gesture, 
threw in a small crumpled note, and in 
the next instant bounded over a wall and 
fled across the fields. 

The coachman instantly stopped, and 
the servant requested her ladyship's per- 
mission to follow the fugitive. Emily 
paused a moment, then turned round, and 
desired that the carriage might drive on. 



A STRANGE INVITATION. 101 

In that brief space she had scanned the 
probable results. If the letter thus un- 
ceremoniously delivered was a mere ordi- 
nary appeal for cliarity, she felt unwilling 
to injure the wretched creature now trying 
to escape ; if, on the other hand, it bore 
any affinity to her late pursuer, she would 
not for worlds mar the free delivery, as 
the missive doubtlessly would explain 
some portion of the strange mystery — ^the 
more strange, as the police had utterly 
failed in tracking the supposed lunatic, 
who had now completely disappeared. 
Fifteen days had elapsed since the worthy 
magistrate had dined with Lord Urmstone, 
during which period the strange intruder 
had not made her appearance. 

Lady Emily's next doubt was whether 
she should at once open and read the note, 
or retain it and deliver it to her father, on 
his return, unopened. 

Our fair heroine was a good — an excel- 
lent child. She had never dreamt of a 



102 A STBANGE INVITATION. 

secret from her father — she had never 
attempted to intrude on his private 
thoughts. Even touching the fate of her 
mother, she had never ventured to question 
him. He had forbidden the subject — ^it 
was evidently a painful one. Probably 
she had died in early life under painftil 
circumstances; she therefore respected 
his will, and never alluded to her lost 
parent. 

Still, Emily had a slight touch of 
Mother Eve, and, after a short mental 
struggle, curiosity overcame every other 
feeling, and she tore open the note. 

The commimication was without address 
— it was written in a feigned hand ; it was 
evidently penned during a moment of 
strong excitement. It ran thus : — 

"As you value your future peace of 
mind — as you would save and chase away 
the agonies of one in her hour of death — 



A STEANGE INVITATION. 103 

come to me — ^to me, who have so often 
crossed your path. Your own happiness, 
perhaps, depends on it — mine hangs on 
your decision; oh, hesitate not, my 
beloved. But no ! I will not reveal the 
past ; I will only say that my every hope, 
both here and hereafter, depends on your 
instant visit to Bock Lodge, North Dalkey. 
In the name of Heaven, I beseech you. 
Fear nothing. My whole life is centred 
in you. A few hours' delay, and I shall 
be-no more." 

Lady Emily read and re-read the 
strange note. It was clear in its mean- 
ing and, though somewhat incoherent 
in its language, was quite plain in 
its object. She bitterly repented the 
absence of her beloved parent — without 
his counsel, what could she do? Her 
tender heart yearned to see, and, if possible, 
solace the unhappy writer. On the other 



104 A STRANGE INVITATION. 

hand, she felt that it would be imprudent. 
Suddenly an idea struck her ; in accord- 
ance with it, she desired the coachman 
to drive straight to the Court-house at 
Kingstown. 

Arrived here, she fortunately found that 
Mr. Martin was there ; so aUghting, she 
entered the magistrate's private room, and 
expressed a wish to see the clever func- 
tionary. . 

Mr. Martin at once obeyed her summons, 
and seemed more than ordinarily de- 
lighted at thus obtaining, as she laid the 
case before him, some clue through which 
he might trace out the mysterious female. 

" Ah ! then, my leddy, yere course is 
vera clear; ye ken ye need only gang 
there at once." 

" But is there no danger ? It is true I 
fear none ; but my father might blame 
me if I incurred any risk." 

."Vera true; but we'll just put that 
cot of the question.'* 



A STRANGE INVITATION. 105 

He rang the bell — a policeman came 
in. 

" Tell Sergeant MacMahon to put on 
plain clothes and accompany this leddy to 
Dalkey; but, if ye'U excuse me/' added 
he, turning to Emily, " I'll jist gang and 
give the instructions mysel'. We will not 
keep you long. There's the Irish Times 
and the Freeman to read, if yere leddyship 
is dull. The other twa journals are from 
Limerick and Belfast ; they are sent me 
to show the law officers, jist to see 
whether their blasphemy and treason can 
nae be laid hold on. The low rebel press 
in this country are the curse of tlfe nation, 
and these are aboot the twa worst of 
them ;'* and away went the functionary. 

In less than a quarter of an hour Mr. 
Martin came back, and he now invited 
Lady Emily to return to her carriage. 

" Ye may gang safely. I've sent on a 
mounted man to be near the hoose ; and 



106 A STRANGE INVITATION. 

Sergeant MacMahon — our best detective- 



is on yere leddyslip's coacli-box; so ye 
have naething to fear. Ye have only to 
express a wish, and he will soon settle the 
matter." 

The servants having received their 
directions. Lady Emily — ^not altogether 
free from agitation — ^re-entered the car- 
riage, which quickly passed along George- 
street, and soon arrived at its destination 
— a handsome but somewhat dilapidated 
mansion, standing in its own grounds. 
AU the blinds were closed, and for a 
moment it struck our heroine that the 
place wsBs uninhabited; but, determined 
in any case to go through with the 
strange adventure she had entered on, 
she, without remark, permitted the vehicle 
to proceed, and allowed her English foot- 
man to arouse the echoes of the rocks 
around by a regular London peal on the 
brazen knocker. 



107 



CHAPTER IX. 



THE VISIT. 



In the front parlour of a handsome but 
retired mansion, between the village of 
Dalkey and the town of Bray, sat two old 
Irish crones, discussing a bottle of the 
"raal cratur." Although the shades of 
evening had not yet obscured the horizon, 
yet the blinds were down, rather to ex- 
clude observation than anything else ; a 
very few cinders of lighted turf burnt in 
the fender of a handsome stove ; the furni- 
ture was scattered about in the most 
eccentric disorder, whilst the general un- 
tidiness and want of cleanliness of the 
room clearly showed that the eye of the 
master or mistress of the house had not 



108 THE VISIT. 

lately surveyed tlie apartment. In a word, 
the spot we would describe is not unfre- 
quently seen in Ireland — a scene at once 
of dirt and disarrangement, two of the 
most prized luxuries in which a certain 
class in the sister isle delight to revel. 
Neither of the females were really old, 
but their tanned skins and unwashed 
faces gave that impression. Their jet- 
black locks, their fine white teeth, forbade 
the notion which their bent forms and 
ropy hands at first conjured up. They 
spoke in whispers, and in that confidential 
tone which at once announced them to 
the judge of Hibernian nature as sick 
nnrses, or something of the kind. They 
had finished more than half the bottle 
before them, and they enlivened their 
little carouse by a cheery conversation. 

"Ah, thin, Biddy, asthore, how was 
she while I was away ?*' 

" Well, thin, Mrs. Malone, it's in great 



THE VISIT. 109 

throuble she was ; faix, I do raally think 
his riverence ought to be consulted. Oh ! 
thin, if ye'd a-heard her groan, it would 
have done your heart good as a pious 
Christian, for it's sure she has committed 
some bad crime/' 

" Whisht !" replied the other ; " don't 
be afkher talking in that way, Biddy ; a 
loose tongue is a dangerous weapon in a 
strange corner ; sure, Corney O'Brien was 
hanged because he didn't lock the door, 
and an omadawn he was for that same." 
And Mrs. Malone got up and bolted the 
door. 

" Faix, ye're always right, I'm thinking, 
but sorrow has made me so dhry I'll 
venter to take another dhrop ; sure we 
should drink to the poor lady's health." 

'* Ah, thin, it's myself will jine ye in 
that holy wish;" and the grieving pair 
tossed off a wineglassful of the strongest 
whisky the nearest village could afford. 



110 THE VISIT. 

With their eyeballs cast up to the ceiling, 
they evidently muttered a short mental 
prayer, and crossed themselves as they 
set down their glasses. 

"Mrs. Malone, may I make so bould 
as to spake my mind ?" 

« Ah, thin, Biddy, is it myself you'd 
ask ?" 

" You were here before me ?" 

" Sure I was ; I've been five weeks 
here to-day. I was sint here by James 
Plannegan the grocer, and he tould me 
that the poor cratur above was a raal 
lady ; but though she wor rich, and evi- 
dently come of the ould stock, she wasn't 
quite in her lunatic mind. Do I make 
myself sinsible?" 

"Ah, Mrs. Malone, that's what ye 
always do. But tell me, asthore, how is 
it she only employs us two and the bit 
of a maid that's gone for the 'poticary 
stuff?" 



THE VISIT. Ill 

" Well, she had a furriner, an English 
sarvant, when I corned ; but she sent her 
to England, and that's why I got ye in, 
Biddy agrath !" 

"It's myself sees it; but IVe been 
here now tree weeks, and divil a mortal 
except the doctor has been near the house. 
Eaith, she may not be a lady after all ?'' 

"Biddy — Biddy, is it Mary Malone 
that would be tuck in ? Haven't I looked 
over her boxes, and seen all her fine 
dresses ? Oh, thin, Biddy, they are awful 
fine! sure the Lord-Leeftenant himself 
hasn't such petticoats, and cloaks, and 
bonnets. Bedad, I am after thinking she 
has skinned all the monkeys in the In- 
gees to supply her with furs ; and they're 
all as good as new, for she goes about 
dressed quite poor like, and always comes 
in a-crjdng." 

" And does no one come near her ?" 

"Haven't I tould yer — no? Paddy 



yy 



112 THE VISIT. 

Eyan, the postman, is the only one who 
ever comes out here, and he brings huge 
big letters, and when she gets 'em, it's 
herself almost faints ; and thin she locks 
'em up in a desk, wid a sort of round 
hole for a lock that would bother Marcus 
the tinker himself to pick." 

" And where does she keep her money?" 

" Ah, thin, Providence be good to me, 
it's strange ideas ye'd put into my head ! 
But I'm an honest woman, and she can't 
live long, and thin " 

" Is the box large ?" 

" Divil a bit." 

" Well, now, it's myself would be sorry 
— oh, it would grieve me ; but if it hap- 
pened to disappear, sure it would be no 
fault of ours." And the old crone, old in 
sin and debauchery, gave a peculiar arch 
look at her companion, and threw down 
her throat, rather than drank, another 
glass of whisky. 



THE VISIT. 113 

" Has she had the clargy wid her ?'* 
at length murmured Biddy. 

" Not she." 

" Does the doctor know anything about 
the little box?" The other shook her head. 

" Well, thin, there's no sin in taking 
what no one claims, so I propose to go 
halves — ^fair halves." 

"Well, thin, if you'll swear on the 
book you'll be true, I'll agree." 

"Clothes and all, Mother Malone?" 
added her partner in crime. 

" It's myself agrees — and what's 
more " 

What she would have added we shall 
probably never know, for at that instant 
a loud double knock alarmed and half 
sobered the drunken pair. 

" Oh, be good to us. Mother of Heaven 
— what's that ?" screamed Mrs. Malone. 

Biddy had run to the window and 
peeped through the blinds. 

VOL. II. 8 



114 THE VISIT. 

" Ah, thin, it's the same carriage — ^bad 
scran to it — ^into which I threw the note 
the poor lady give me. Arrah, thin, 
what can it mane ?" 

" It manes, ye bom omadawn, that 
ye've ruined ns. Ah, thin, why did ye 
do the crack'd thing's bidding? Why 
didn't ye bring it to me ? — sure I'd have 
burnt it. Here's a pretty affair, indeed : 
ochone, thin, we're spoilt intirely. Ye've 
brought the fine people down to fitch 
away our lawful earnings. Oh, thin, it's 
my heart that's sore." 

" Ah, thin, who would have thought ? 
She tould me she'd give a raal golden 
guinea if I'd throw a dirty scrap of a 
note into that carriage outside, which she 
described to me ; and how was it, I'd be 
after thinking, the likes of these grand 
folks would come to bring the answer? 
Faix, Mrs. Malone, don't I lose as much 
as you ?" 



THE VISIT. 115 

A still louder peal threatened the 
panel of the outer door with destruc- 
tion. 

" Ah, thin, Biddy, go and finish the fine 
business yeVe begun ; I'll go up and sit 
by the cratur above. Bedad, she may 
live or die for what I care now;" and 
giving Biddy a furious look, she stepped 
quickly upstairs. 

The other, in the meantime having 
secured the door of the parlour against 
intruders, rushed to open the door. 

Not a word was spoken — ^the smart 
footman lowered the carriage steps — the 
next instant a lovely young girl sprang 
jfrom the vehicle and quickly entered th^ 
hall, expressing a desire instantly to see 
the lady of the house. 

" Ah, thin, the lady is very sick, and 
she can't be seen." 

" Biddy Smith, show this young lady 
up instantly, and make no observations," 

8—2. 



116 THE VISIT. 

uttered a gruff voice: "I shall remain 
here." 

Biddy looked up and turned pale on 
recognising a policeman in plain clothes. 
He evidently knew her well. She made 
no reply, hut instantly ascended the stairs 
and ushered Lady Emily (for it was in- 
deed she) into the chamber of the invalid. 



117 



CHAPTEE X. 



THE DKATH-BED. 



The room into which, the somewhat 
alarmed girl bow entered showed no sign 
of poverty, no reflex of the crude disorder 
displayed in the chamber we have just 
described; everything bespoke comfort, 
care, and independence ; the curtains of 
the bed were drawn closely around it, 
while a chair beside it was occupied by 
our friend Mrs. Malone, now transformed 
into a staid and respectable-looking garde 
rrudade. Though the day was far from 
cold, a good fire burned in the grate ; the 
thick blinds excluding the broad glare of 
daylight, only permitted a dull light to 
penetrate them, giving to the apartment 



118 THE DEATH-BED. 

an air of propriety seldom seen in the 
bed-rooms of the sister isle. 

Mrs. Malone arose and bobbed a low 
curtsey, as she eyed with greedy curiosity 
the appearance of the visitor: finding 
herself confronted, as it were, with a 
mere child, she gave a ghastly smile and 
muttered what she meant to sound as a 
welcome. 

The noise of Emily's entrance had 
reached the quick ears of the invalid. 
The curtains were suddenly thrown aside, 
and our heroine beheld, as she antici- 
pated, her long-dreaded pursuer; not, 
however, as she anticipated, in the garb 
of poverty, but dressed with all the 
taste and elegance which a night-suit 
admits of. 

*'You are come! may Heaven bless 
you!" loudly exclaimed the sufferer, as 
with clasped hands she looked her thanks- 
giving to Providence for the fact. 



THE DEATH-BED. 119 

" I came because you desired me ; cau 
I be of any service ?" 

" Of every service. Oh ! you know 
not what joy you confer on a dying 
sinner ! You seem alarmed — ^you think 
I rave ; not so : to die, cheered by your 
presence, is my only hope." 

Mrs. Malone made a gesture indicative 
of her belief that the invalid was delirious; 
the sharp eye of the dying woman caught 
the look, and, suddenly starting up, she 
was about to correct her, when, overcome 
by weakness, she again fell back, and, 
motioning with her hand, murmured— 
" Go away — go away ; I would be alone 
with this young lady." 

The nurse shrugged her shoulders and 
left the room, indulging in the fallacious 
hope that she was about to return to her 
whisky-bottle, a project unhappily inter- 
rupted by the presence of Detective-Ser- 
geant MacMahon. 



120 THE DEATH-BED. 

" Emily, dearest, you know me not ?" 
uttered the invalid, as the door closed. 

" Noi, madam, I confess I do not, but 
still I should be glad to be of service 
to you." 

The formal reply of the young girl 
seemed to recal the other to her situation, 
and she changed her manner. 

" I am aware. Lady Emily, it is impos- 
sible you can recollect me. Does Lord 
Urmstone ever speak of me ?*' 

"How can he? I am not aware that 
he is acquainted with you." 

"True; I forgot — my mind is wan- 
dering. Was he at home when you left 
the house ?" 

" No, madam ; he has gone to a meet- 
ing of magistrates at Tipperary. He will 
be absent for two days." 

" It is as well," murmured the sick 
woman, "it is as well;" and she sank 
back for a few moments on her pillow. 



THE DEATH-BED. 121 

exhausted. Suddenly an idea seemed to 
strike her, and she eagerly demanded — 
" Tell me — ^tell me truly before Heaven ! 
does he ever speak of his unhappy wife ?" 

" You allude to my dear mother ?" 

" I do — I do ! speak quickly — ^life is 
ebbing fast." 

" He never mentions her ; some fearful 
circumstances probably attended her death, 
which occurred when I was a mere baby, 
and he has, therefore, forbidden the 
subject." 

" She is dead, then ?" 

" I believe so." 

" And he never blamed her ?" 

"Never!" 

*' May God bless him, and have mercy 
upon me, a wretched sinner !" 

''Do you know my father?" asked 
Emily, now becoming deeply interested 
in the conversation. 

" WeU." 



122 THE DEATH-BED. 

"And perhaps you knew my poor 
mother ?" 

" She was undeserving of your love." 

" Madam," cried Emily, turning almost 
fiercely on her, and drawing herself up 
to her full height — " madam, I will not 
hear one word against my beloved parent 
now in heaven." 

"Eight — aright," hurriedly replied the 
other. " May He who alone can bless, 
prosper and preserve you ! Do not mind 
my incoherence ; question me not, but 
reply. Supposing, dear girl, your parent 
had behaved ill ; had tarnished her good 
name; had done all that was wrong; 
would you not have thrown her off 
indignantly ?" 

" You speak in riddles ; such a thing I 
look upon as impossible." 

** But suppose it were so !" 

" Then I should have mourned — I 
should have grieved, but I would not 



THE DEATH-BED. 123 

have forsaken the author of my birth ; 
I would have clung to her and shielded 
her ; I would have given her that support 
which her unhappy case needed/' 

"And you would have forgiven her?'* 

"As I hope to be forgiven." 

" Hear that ! hear that ! ye powers 

above ! Forgiven ! forgiven by my 

But no — she shall never know it. Come 
here, dear girl ; come nearer, for my eyes 
are growing dull, and my cold extremities 
tell me that this excitement has hurried 
on the last stroke of Death's arrow. Come 
closer and listen." 

Lady Emily bent down her head, for 
the dying woman's voice became almost 
inaudible. 

"Give this parcel," whispered she, as 
she drew a small packet from beneath her 
pillow — " give this parcel to the Earl on 
his return ; tell him what you have seen, 
and say I died blessing his name, and 



124 THE DEATH-BED. 

praying for his pardon. This other letter 
forward to Dublin ; it is addressed to my 
solicitor ; he will instantly come out, and 
see every arrangement made. He receives 
in that communication a record of my last 
wishes, both as respects my interment and 
the disposal of my property. And now, 
dearest girl, go away with a light heart, 
for you have smoothed the path of a deep 
sinner to her grave, and enabled her to 
meet death without fear. But, before you 
go, solemnly promise never again to visit 
this spot, and seek to know nothing but 
that which your father may think fit 
to tell you. And now, quick, begone ! 
My last agonies rack me — but I smile at 
them. Bless thee — bless thee, Emily ! 
Quick — ^help — I am dying!" and she 
screamed loudly with agony. 

The two Irishwomen rushed in. The 
dying woman imperiously waved her hand 
to Lady Emily to be gone ; and, overcome 



THE DEATH-BED. 125 

by pain, fell back. The horrified girl, 
grasping the letter in her hand, rushed 
forth, and was just stepping into her 
carriage in a state of most fearful excite- 
ment, when Mrs. Malone touched her 
arm. 

" Faith, Miss, the poor cratur's gone I 
Ah, thin, who's to pay ?" 

" Silence ! Come to me if you want 
anything," gruffly put in the detective; 
" I'll see to it." 

"What does she mean?" asked the 
bewildered Emily. 

" The individual above is dead !" 

" Pray Heaven receive her soul !" mur- 
mured Emily, as she sank back overcome 
in the comer of the curricle, which pro- 
ceeded rapidly to Blackrock. 



126 



CHAPTER XI. 

AN UNEXPECTED LEGACY. 

Shocked and agitated by the strange 
scene she had just witnessed, Lady Emily 
retired early to her room ; not, however, 
until she had despatched a letter to her 
father, requesting him to return at his 
earliest convenience ; assuring him, how- 
ever, that the recal did not spring from 
illness or any sudden alarm. She there- 
fore pointed out to him, in the calmest 
terms she was master of, that she wished 
him to return only when his presence was 
no longer absolutely necessary in Tip- 
perary, as she had much to say to him. 

The messenger who had conveyed the 
parcel to the solicitor at Dublin had 



AN UNEXPECTED LEGACY. 127 

returned with a note, dryly stating that 
Messrs. Smith, of Lower Gardener-street, 
had received the parcel forwarded hy 
Lady Emily Urmstone, and would duly 
attend to its contents. 

Mr. Martin called ; but, as it was evi- 
dently only a visit on business. Lady Emily 
pleaded indisposition as an excuse for not 
receiving him for a couple of days, deter- 
mined to seek counsel from her father ere 
she entered into any details of the strange 
scene in which she had been an involun- 
tary actor. 

Harassed alike in body and mind, she 
sought her couch early ; but her slumbers 
were far from happy. Nightmare of the 
most strange description continually dis- 
turbed her sleep, and unconnected horrors 
oppressed her mind whenever she ven- 
tured to close her eyes. It was daybreak 
before she really might be said to have 
tasted rest ; but youth and a conscience 



128 AN UNEXPECTED LEGACY. 

devoid of reproach at length brought that 
gentle yet overpowering slumber which 
purity and innocence alone can know. 

It was later than usual when she de- 
scended to breakfast the next morning, 
and her pale cheeks too clearly indicated 
the fearful agitation she had undergone. 

On sitting down to table, Emily w;as 
told that a lady had already called twice 
that morning, and that she would return, 
probably within half an hour. Our 
heroine therefore abridged her meal — a 
circumstance which gave her little annoy- 
ance, as she felt but scant appetite, her 
mind stiU dwelling on the painful scene 
she had witnessed the previous day. 

The hour mentioned as that at which 
the lady had promised to return had 
scarcely ^struck, when the servant an- 
nounced Mrs. Colonel O'Cormac. 

Lady Emily rose, and, having invited 
her strange visitor to be seated, at once 



AN UNEXPECTED LEGACY. 129 

inquired what circumstance had induced 
the lady to honour her with a visit. 

" I have to apologize for the very early 
hour at which I have intruded ; but the 
fact is, we are early risers in Ireland, and 
transact the greater part of our business, 
probably before the inhabitants of London 

have left their beds ; and I must confess 

« 

that this habit of taking advantage of the 
morning air gives us a more healthy look, 
and most decidedly a stronger constitu- 
tion, than our friends in England can 
boast. I trust. Lady Emily, that you 
agree with me ?" 

" I have no doubt of it.'' 

" Ah, I am glad of that ; you, a sen- 
sible person, my lady, you give us credit 
for some superiority. You cannot indeed 
have looked upon this lovely country and 
her highly-gifted race, without indulging 
in those reflections which must redound to 
our credit." 

VOL. II. 9 



130 AN UNEXPECTED LEGACY. 

" I beg your pardon, but you said you 
had a business object in visiting me." 

" True, true ; I never waste time in 
idle talk. I at once come to the point ; 
I would rather seem abrupt than loqua- 
cious. I can assure your ladyship that 
when we are better acquainted, you will 
find that I never throw away my time (as 
many of my friends do) in idle conversa- 
tion — a fact I dare say you remarked at 
the flower-show last week. Of course you 
were there ?" 

" I was not." 

"Well, perhaps you were right; parti« 
cularly if, like myself, you were better 
employed. I was listening to a lovely 
lecture delivered by the Eeverend Mr. 
Popjoy, a third cousin of Lord Smalltrip, 
and great-grandson to the celebrated 
Dr. O'Blaney, the rector of Fethard. 
If your ladyship would like to hear 
him, I shall be delighted to accom- 



AN UNEXPECTED LEGACT. 131 

pany you to his *Eefage for Poor 
Sinners/ " 

" What a strange name for an institu- 
tion !" 

" Ah, it is one that touches the heart. 
It was once a barn — ^it is now a church. 
It once heard the outpourings of sin and 
merriment — ^it now echoes the sighs of 
despairing sinners. Oh, my lady, I wish 
you had only heard him yesterday. He 
proved to us in the most satisfactory 
manner that not one of us could be saved. 
Oh, it was delightful to hear the dear 
man as he boldly set before us the miseries 
that awaited us, and which we could alone 
escape by rebuilding and endowing his 
church. By-the-by, I had forgotten 
the object of my visit. I came to ask 
your ladyship to subscribe to this heavenly 
purpose, and, as much is expected from 
those who have much, I have ventured to 
assure the * Charitable Missionaries for the 

9—2 



132 AN UNEXPECTED LEGACY. 

Eefuge of Despairing Sinners/ that your 
ladyship would freely and largely contri- 
bute. I also came to ask you if, with six 
other pious ladies, you would like to see 
the great and good man off by the steam- 
packet this evening." 

" He is, then, leaving this ?" 

" Only for a week. Indeed, he goes to 
benefit us. We hear that there is an es- 
caped slave preaching in the most eloquent 
manner at a chapel in Bethnal Green, 
and he has undertaken to bring this 
poor heathen — a heathen no longer, but 
a good Christian, and consequently a 
staunch dissenter — to Kingstown, where 
we have agreed (and I hope your lady- 
ship will aid us in the work of charity) 
to collect one hundred pounds for him, 
provided he will show how cruelly the 
Church of Eome have treated him, and 
how infinitely more happy he now feels 
(he only changed last week) in the selec- 



AN UNEXPECTED LEGACY, 133 

tion he has made of our congregation, 
and how truly he desires to become a 
despairing sinner. The Eev. Mr. Popjoy- 
half promises to make him his curate." 

" It strikes me that I have heard the 
name of Mr. Popjoy before in Kingstown." 

" Very likely ; our dear minister em- 
ploys those hours not given to heavenly 
reflections, in the manufacture of ladies' 
shoes. He is, however, far too moral to 
have anything to say to the opposite sex. 
But I am intruding too long. For how 
much may I put down your ladyship's 
name? 

" I regret, madam, that, in the absence 
of my father, I do not feel justified in doing 
anything." 

" But charity, charity, my lady !" ap- 
pealed Mrs. Colonel O'Cormac. 

" I would not willingly refuse it, but 
I must repeat my resolve not to aflSx my 
name to any subscription during my 



134 AN UNEXPECTED LEGACY. 

parent's absence. He will, however, be 
back to-morrow, and then I have little 

doubt " 

" Well, my lady, just as you like ; you 
know best. But I don t think Lord 
Urmstone will do much for us, for he has 
already subscribed five pounds each for 
the two ' Birdsf-Nests,' and five more for 
' Dublin by Lamp-light/ Now, none of 
these are worthy charities. Our congre- 
gation looks down upon them. We are 
spiritual — they are worldly. What good 
does the reclamation of an erring female, 
or mere bodily relief to the corporeal 
wants of the aged and infirm do ? No, 
my lady, we give our charity to him 
whose tea<5hing may save our immortal 
souls ; we don't throw away our money 
on doubtful characters and mere paupers. 
Good-bye, my lady, good-bye ! I wish I 
could have persuaded you to subscribe ;" 
and out flounced the colonel's widow, 



AN UNEXPECTED LEGACY. 135 

murmuring within herself, "She might 
have offered me a glass of wine. But 
these English are all alike." 

Lady Emily having ordered her carriage, 
feeling that the fresh air would do her 
good, was about to go upstairs for the 
purpose of putting on her bonnet, when 
her servant re-entered the room, and 
stated that a gentleman desired to 
see her ladyship on business, at the same 
time handing her a card, on which was 
engraved " Mr. John Smith." 

Surprised at the fact, and firmly be- 
lieving that some mistake must exist, as 
she had never been called on to transact 
any business matters, she desired that the 
visitor might be shown up, determined to 
point out to him that she was not the 
individual he sought. 

A few minutes later the servant ushered 
in " Mr. John Smith," a small, dried-up 
little man, wearing spectacles through 



136 AN UNEXPECTED LEGACY. 

which shot glances of the most searching 
nature. He bowed low to Lady Emily, 
and, having seated himself, began in a 
short and abrupt manner — 

" Lady Emily Urmstone, I believe ?'* 

Emily bowed. 

" I have come by the desire of the de- 
ceased to inform your ladyship that her 
whole fortune reverts to you, and to 
request your instructions thereon. You 
are sole executrix, as well as sole legatee." 

" I really don't understand you.*' 

" Sorry, very sorry. By the desire of 
our late client, strangely enough, I am 
not allowed to mention to you her name ; 
unless, indeed, you have been made ac- 
quainted with it by the Earl of Urm- 
stone." 

" I really am at a loss to comprehend 
you." 

"Possibly; I might almost say pro- 
bably. Suffice it, however, for me to 



AN UNEXPECTED LEGACY. 137 

carry out my instructions. I am there- 
fore bound to say that this lady " 

" What lady ? I am really puzzled." 

" The lady who gave you the parcel 
you were good enough to forward to our 
firm [Emily sighed deeply] has left you 
a sum now lodged in the Three per Cent. 
Consols, which produces an annual in- 
come of £2105, less income-tax; the 
said sum to be handed to you on your 
coming of age, and until that period, his 
lordship your noble father is to act as 
your guardian." 

"Oh, sir, this is too strange. The 
poor invalid must have been out of her 
senses !" 

" Not so ; it's natural, very natural. I 
wish I could say more. As it is, I beg to 
congratulate your ladyship, and request 
your instructions." 

Lady Emily was sorely puzzled. One 
of these three facts she firmly believed. 



138 AN UNEXPECTED LEGACY. 

The woman whose death-bed she had 
attended had been a maniac; the man 
before her was an escaped madman ; or 
she herself was dreaming. After a panse 
she replied, 

" Since I can get no information from 
you, I will again visit the house of mourn- 
ing, and try to obtain some clue by 
which I may discover the fidends of the 
deceased." 

" It would be waste of time. Lady 
Emily. The corpse was sent to England 
this morning by the express wish in- 
dicated in her last will ; the servants, who 
are complete strangers, have been paid 
and sent away. I have myself burnt 
every stray paper that could be found, 
and only half an hour ago I gave up the 
key to the landlord, Mr. Postelthwaite, of 
Kingstown. So your ladyship's journey 
would be without results. And now, 
Lady Emily, your orders, if you please/' 



AN UNEXPECTED LEGACY. 139 

" I have none to give. I have never 
acted for myself in my life, and must con- 
sequently await the return of my father. 
I will on his arrival communicate the 
fects to him, and I have little doubt he 
will at once call upon you." 

" Very right, very right ; quite in good 
order. Good-bye, my lady, good-bye I 
There is also some ready money which 
you can have on application through your 
guardian. Good-bye, Lady Emily;" and 
away trotted the little lawyer. When he 
got out of the house, he involuntarily ex- 
daimed, " Well, upon my life she takes 
it coolly. She seems to care no more for 
£2000 a year than I do for six-and-eight- 
pence." 



140 



CHAPTER XIT. 

A PEARFUL DI8CL0SURK. 

LoET) Urmstone and his daughter sat 
together at breakfast on the following 
morning. He had related to her all that 
had passed during the meeting of the 
magisteates, and explained the measures 
proposed to be taken to check the pro- 
gress of crime in the South of Ireland. 
He had narrated every incident of his 
journey. Lady Emily, however, had not 
yet attended to the subject that was 
uppermost in her mind, nor had his lord- 
ship endeavoured (though most anxious 
to do so) to elicit from his daughter the 
cause of her anxiety for his return. They 
tacitly seemed mutually to avoid a subject 



^ 



A FEARFUL DISCLOSURE. 141 

which it might be improper to discuss in 
the presence of servants, and therefore, 
during breakfast, only spoke on indif- 
ferent subjects. But as soon as that 
meal was over, Lord Urmstone rose and 
beckoned to his daughter to follow him 
to a room which he now used as a tempo- 
rary study and library. 

Seated, and the door closed, Lady 
Emily detailed every circumstance re- 
lating to her interview with the female 
stranger, her death, and the subsequent 
visit of the Dublin lawyer. Lord Urm- 
stone made no remark, and when at the 
close Emily looked up, she was horrified 
to see her father rocking to and fro in 
his seat, in uncontrollable agitation. She 
started up, and rushed towards him. He 
had fallen back on the sofa he occupied. 
He was pale as death, and half uncon- 
scious. Emily rang the bell and a 
servant appeared. She ordered a glass 



142 A FEARFXJL DISCLOSURE. 

of water, which was instantly brought. 
After placing it to his lips the nobleman 
slightly revived, and, supported by his 
daughter's arm, prepared to continue the 
discourse. 

^' Bring a medical man as soon as 
possible,'* cried Lady Emily; and the 
servant was about to depart, when Lord 
Urmstone, rallying all the strength he 
could, sternly forbade the man to do so, 
and motioned to him to leave the room. 

His lordship now let his head (which 
Emily had quitted, on a sign from her 
father, and resumed her seat) fall back, 
and closing his eyes, his lips moved as 
though he was pouring forth a long tale. 
Emily knelt beside him and endeavoured 
to soothe his seeming sorrow. 

After a short time Lord Urmstone sud- 
denly recovered, and in an earnest yet 
subdued tone whispered rather than 
spoke to his daughter — 



A PEARFUL DISCLOSURE. 143 

" She — that is, your — ^no — ^the person, 
the sick person you saw : she who con- 
fided to you a packet for me — give it me, 
quick ; do not delay — give it me/' 

Lady Emily produced the small parcel 
given to her by the dying stranger. 

With frantic eagerness the Earl tore it 
open. A miniature, evidently of himself 
(taken in his youth) and a lock of dark 
hair fell from it. He attempted to open 
a letter enclosed, but agitation deprived 
him of the power. He threw his head 
upon his hands, which rested on the 
table, and uttering in a voice of prayer — 
" May Heaven have mercy on her soul !" 
he burst into a flood of tears. Yes, those 
features which for years had been brought 
under the most perfect control, were now 
convulsed by irresistible agony ; and the 
minister whose iron nerves had elicited 
the wonder of his brother senators, now 
wept in sobbing agony. 



144 A FEARFUL DISCLOSURE. 

At length he conquered his emotion — 
ashamed, by constant habit of command, 
of this display of natural feeling. He 
calmed his agitated countenance, and 
restraining his emotion, he solemnly 
addressed his daughter— 

" Emily, my loved child, my every joy 
in this world, prepare to receive a dreadful 
disclosure — one I have hitherto, from 
fond affection, perhaps foolishly with- 
held." 

" Good Heaven, papa ! what do you 
mean? what would you say? Nay, 
do not look thus sternly; your manner 
awes me ! Speak — speak, I beseech you. 
Dearest, dearest father, you are ill !" 

"Not so. Alas! I am too surely — 
too clearly in my senses. Approach ; I 
would not that any one overheard me, 
although the sad truth must, alas ! be 
known too soon. Bear up, my angel 
child ; bear up, and hear the truth.'* 



A FEARFUL DISCLOSURE. 145 

" Oh, papa, speak ! I am quite prepared 
for the worst." 

" Look at that letter," added his lord- 
ship, pointing to the communication 
which Lady Emily had just given him. 
" The writer of that letter (and his 
voice became sepulchrally deep) -^ the 
writer of that letter was — yes — I 
must utter it — she was — she was your 
mother !" 

Lady Emily dropped down ; the shock 
was too much for her. The servants 
whom Lord TJrmstone summoned in- 
stantly bore her to her couch. 

That evening, when her nerves were 
strong enough to bear it, her father told 
her the unfortunate tale of her mother's 
guilt. The name of the seducer was even 
yet a mystery to the injured husband. 
The recital was indeed harrowing — it was 
painful, it was startling ; but at its close 
the husband and the child knelt down 

VOL. II. 10 



146 A FEARFUL DISCLOSURE, 

and prayed a pitying Creator to have 
mercy on an erring wife — a sinful parent. 
They prayed fervently and devoutly, and 
sincerely hoped their intercessions might 
avail. 



U7 



CHAPTEE XIIL 



AN ABDUCTION, 



In a small room in one of the numerous 
public-houses situated in Fleet-street, sat 
Coleman, in a state of semi-inebriation* 
A bottle of gin, from which he had drawn 
long draughts, stood before him- He had 
twice put out the wretched tallow candle 
which iU-lit the chamber in which he was 
sitting, in his endeavour to snuff the un- 
fortunate luminary ; his hand ^^ far too 
unsteady for the task, and, in utter dark- 
ness, he now pulled at the bell till the 
time-worn rope broke; all the while utter- 
ing the most dreadful oaths, consigning 
every object around him, the landlord 
and the waiter, but above all, his master, 

10— JJ 



148 AN ABDUCTION. 

for whom he was waiting, to a place 
wholly unmentionable to ears polite. 
Coleman was no longer the respectable 
and confidential servant of a gentleman 
of position in society ; by degrees he had 
fallen into sottish habits, in which he 
had been encouraged by a master, who, 
finding him of a prying and dangerous 
nature, had with great acuteness first 
made him a drunkard, and then plunged 
him into every sort of crime. In a word, 
he had so completely got him into his 
toils, that although the former menial had 
lost all respect for his late superior, yet 
that menial felt he was at once the victim 
and the tool of a master mind. 

The waiter answered the summons, 
and after a short skirmish of words — ^for 
in this sort of establishment there is 
little distinction drawn between the 
server and the served — a fresh candle 
was brought in, another "go" of gin. 



AN ABDUCTION. 149 

and Coleman was left to liis ruminations. 
These lasted unpleasantly long, for George 
Sydney did not arrive for at least an hour 
after Coleman's explosion of ill-temper. 

Before he spoke, he took some pains to 
get rid of his cloak, his mufflers, and his 
broad-brimmed hat. These might have 
been assumed to protect the wearer from 
the cold rain which was now falling — 
they might have been donned to conceal 
his person. Wliatever was the motive, 
they had been carefully put on, and they 
were now as carefully laid aside. 

The half-intoxicated servant at last lost 
all patience, and in a somewhat dictatorial 
tone, demanded — 

" Where have you been all the evening, 
Mr. Sydney?*' 

" Hush ! I don't wish my name ut- 
tered in such places as this." 

"Well then, George, if you like it 
better ; where have you been ?'* 



150 AN ABDUCTION. 

" Eascal ! if you thus address me" 
again, I shall feel tempted to strike 

you." 

" Pooh \ you dare not ; if you tried,. 
I'd punch your head to a jelly, and as to 
being a rascal, I fear there's more nor one 
in the room. But what's the use of 
chaflSng ? I don't care where you've been 
so long as you've brought the tin." 

" Not one shilling." 

" What !" screamed Coleman, " brought 
no money? The bill was due to-day; 
it was doubtlessly noted by five o'clock, 
and unless we can take it up before it's^ 
returned to Hingston, we shall be lagged. 
Not brought the money ? By Heaven !: 
you must find it; if not, across the 
herring-pond we go." 

"Be good enough to drop the pro- 
noun plural, and speak for yourself 
only." 

" I don't know or care nothing about 



AN ABDUCTION. 151 

pronouns. Find the money before nine 
o'clock to-morrow morning, or we're 
blown." 

" My good friend, yon forget that Fve 
nothing to do with this affair, / have 
signed no bm." 

" No, but you got the money.** 

" Can you prove it ?'* 

"What! do you deny it?" roared 
Coleman. 

" I neither deny nor admit it ; if I have 
wronged you, you can bring an action in 
law. Take my advice, my good friend, 
speak lower and be calm. It appears 
you have unfortunately accepted a bill 
drawn in your own name on a highly 
respectable firm in the City. This I de- 
plore — ^Heaven knows I do — yes, deeply 
do I regret it, and came here to see you 
out of the scrape." 

" Why, you king of villains ! Did not 
you make me write the name, did you 



152 AN ABDUCTION. 

not tell me where to get the money 
for it, and did not you swear you'd pay 
it when it became due?*' 

" Possibly, Coleman, possibly/' calmly 
replied his master; "but these facts re- 
quire proving, and you have no proofs. 
Nay, be calm, and listen. I have in vain 
appealed to my brother for money ; he re- 
fuses further supplies." 

" I should think so ; why, he sent you 
three hundred only last week. But 
where's the money you won on the 
steeple-chase ?'* 

" I'll tell you ; I couldn't appear in the 
affair myself, so I got young Bill Sawyer 
to lay the money on." 

" Well, and you won ?" 

" I did, but Bill has bolted with the 
money." 

"And why don't you try and catch 
him ?" eagerly demanded the other. 

" Coleman, you are a fool ! you forget 
that it was he that made all sure." 



AN ABDUCTION. 153 

"Hem! — I forgot. But where's my 
lady in the Eegent's Park ?" 

"Apparently the earth has swallowed 
her ; I cannot, spite of all my endeavours, 
find her." 

"What, then, can we do ?" 

" Why, as far as you are concerned, take 
my advice, fly ; you have no ties in Eng- 
land, the Belgian boat sails at five in the 
morning, be off in her, and no one will 
trace you. Long before this little mis- 
take of yours is discovered, you will be 
beyond the reach of danger. Here is a 
five -pound note ; write to me under 
cover to A. B., Post-ofiice, Darlington- 
street, announce your arrival, and I'll 
send you five pounds more. I have only 
two sovereigns left just now." 

"Well, upon my life you are a cool 
chap ; yet I can't well see what else I 
can do — ^you've got me preciously in your 
claws ; but I'll have my turn yet," added 
the other in a growl. 



154 AN ABDUCTION. 

George Sydney gave the sardonic 
smile which invariably lights up the 
triumph of treachery. 

"But at all events you'll give me 
more than this; why, it wont pay a 
week's board." 

" Perhaps not ; but that's not my look- 
out; if that wont do, you must stay 
here, for, upon my honour, I have no 
more than the two sovereigns I mentioned ; 
and to show you how inclined I am to be 
generous, I'll give you one. So come, be 
off, go and fetch your traps, and go down 
to the wharf at once — you can sleep aboard; 
by-the-by, what name will you assume ? 
Here's your top-coat — now be off quickly 
— I'll pay your reckoning." 

Coleman sulkily seized his coat, and 
was in the act of putting it on, when two 
letters feU from the pocket; George 
eagerly seized them. 

" Oh ! I had forgotten them ; but I 



AN ABDUCTION. 155 

don t believe they are of any consequence. 
One's from your brother, and there's no 
enclosure in it, so you may safely burn 
it; the other is from the little surgeon 
in Bethnal Grreen as we employed in 
a certain affair, and the less you 
hear from him the better, I should 
think." 

" And pray who gave you the right to 
think ?" fiercely demanded Greorge, thrust- 
ing his brother's note into his pocket 
unread; and, quickly tearing open the 
other, he eagerly devoured its contents. 
His lips quivered with agitation; then 
suddenly springing forward, he attempted 
to seize Coleman, who avoided him, and 
in a savage tone roared — 

" Only touch me, George Sydney, and 
rU brain you !" 

" Egad ! I'd risk it to punish you. 
Say, villain, how long have you had this 
letter ?" 



156 AN ABDUCTION. 

" I shan't answer you. If you think 
to bully me you're preciously mistaken, I 
can tell you ;" and he began whistling an 
air in the most approved devil-me-care 
style. 

George knew his man. He well knew 
that nothing was to be had by threats ; 
so, lowering his tone, he once more ad- 
dressed himi — 

" Coleman, you annoy me — indeed you 
do ! Think for a moment, and you will 
see that I am your best friend." 

" I don't care a brass farthing whether 
you are or no." 

*' Coleman, you are too • passionate ; 



remember that violence can do no good. 



yy 



"Stop that! you ain't preaching in 
Exeter Hall. If you have anything to 
say about the letter, out with it. I suspect 
it has been forgotten in my great-coat 
pocket for above a week ; however, what's 
done is done. Is it about money ?" 



^ 



AN ABDUCTION. 157 

"No; I wish it were. No, Cole- 
man, it is worse than that. There — 
jead it yourself," and he threw down the 
note. 

Coleman took it up and read it — 

" Dear Sir, 

" Certain hawks have been menacing 
the pigeon-house. They find out that the 
bird sings well, and desire the cage door 
to be instantly opened. To prevent 
accident, I have by certain means re- 
moved her to my house ; and here she 
remains till you can find a stronger cage 
for her, farther from the prjdng hawks. 
The proper certificates are made out in 
due order, but you must come and take 
the sweet bird away directly, or she'll com- 
municate with the kingfisher. Your fate 
and mine depend upon it. 

" Thine ever, 

" The Dovekeeper.'* 



158 AN ABDUCTION. 

" Well, I'm hanged if ever I read such 
rubbish !" 

" What ! don't you understand it ?" 

" Not I." 

"I'U explain it. The visiting com- 
missioners have declared that a certain 
My " 



tt 



Oh ! lady- 



9> 



•i^ yy 



" Hush ! yes, it is she — ^is perfectly 
sane, and must be removed to her home. 
To prevent this, we must instantly go and 
fetch her, and send her down to some 
distant county. The certificates will be 
sufficient to get her in. This job will 
require tact — ^you must perform it.' 

" Not I ; I'm off to Ostend." 

" You must give up that scheme for the 
present." 

"I'll do no such thing. What, stop 
and be nabbed ! Thank ye. Master George ; 
I'm not a fool." 

" Stay, I have it !" suddenly replied the 



AN ABDUCTION. 159 

master. " Ay, a glorious thought ! You 
shall take her with you, and lodge her 
in a maison de sant4 there/' 

"We've no time/* 

" Oh, plenty. We'U start at once for 
our friend the doctor's;" and George 
began putting on his mufflers — "we'll 
do it." 

" Oh ! it's we now, is it ? but it wont 
do. Once for all, I'll not join you in this 
affidr unless you give me fifty pounds." 

" Pshaw ! the expenses wont be fifteen 
at the outside." 

" Then I don't stir," doggedly observed 
Coleman, sitting down. 

" You must ! if you don't, we are 
ruined." 

"Not this time, Georgy my beauty; 
not this time. I'm clear of it ! It is you 
who will suflfer." 

" Well, what does that signify ? Come, 
I'll give you twenty- five pounds." 



160 AN ABDUCTION. 

"Not one screw less than fifty, and 
that down." 

George paused ; he reflected for a 
moment, then taking out his pocket-book 
from his breast pocket, he threw down 
ten five-pound notes. 

"Well," said Coleman, as he eagerly- 
grasped them, " well now, if I wasn't the 

■ 

most good-natured fool on earth, I'd 
refuse to go, if it were only for telling me 
a lie about your having no money." 

" No, you would not ; for, if you did, 
I'd call in an oflScer and have you taken 
up for forgery. So don't provoke me 
again by making use of such coarse terms, 
or I may forget all else to obtain ven- 
geance.*' 

" Well, well, I wont quarrel ; but before 
we start, just pay the bill as you pro- 
mised." 

This was done, and the worthy couple 
salUed forth; and, having obtained the 



AN ABDUCTION. 161 

use of a four-wheel cab, were soon roll- 
ing slowly on their way to Betlmal 
Green, 

As they stopped in front of a coloured 
lamp, Sydney turned to Coleman — 

" We are only just in time. The Earl 
arrives in town to-morrow." 

" He'll be too late to find his pigeon. 
rU take care of that," said the late 
servant, as he burst out laughing. 



VOL. II. 11 



162 



CHAPTEE XIV. 



CRUSHED HOPES. 



Agitated by Lady Emily's letter describ- 
ing her interview with the female stranger^ 
her mysterioTis questions, and her sub- 
sequent death, Marks Leslie scarcely knew 
how to act. To quit London would be 
highly improper, as his noble patron was 
hourly expected, yet to leave the being he 
most loved on earth in a situation sO' 
strange was impossible. He weighed the 
duty he owed to his kind friend Lord 
Crrantchester ; he felt that he might justly 
be accused of ingratitude if he left London 
at the present moment; he was also 
aware that his sudden return to Ireland 
would be, as it were, breaking that pledge 



CRUSHED HOPES. 163 

of absence which he had voluntarily given. 
On the other hand, his heart told him 
how impossible it would be — ^how cruel it 
must seem to hety thus to remain appa- 
rently indifferent in London, while peril 
menaced the girl he fondly adored in 
Ireland. At least half-a-dozen times he 
began to pack up his portmanteau — once, 
indeed, he sent for a cab to convey him 
to Euston Station ; but honour and duty 
interfered, and the shades of evening 
closed in,and shut out thevaciUating inten- 
tions of the wretched Marks. One com- 
fort, however, still remained — ^he would 
again hear in the morning — ^he would 
then better know how to act. Besides, 
the bruises and pains which he owed to 
his conduct at the fire needed at least 
another day's care ; so, in a state of 
annoyance and indecision, he retired to 
his bed, there to await the coming 
post. 

11—2 



164 CRUSHED HOPES. 

It was nine o'clock when Leslie fully 
opened his eyes; a letter bearing the 
Dublin post-mark lay on the table. He 
jumped up and tore it open. 

" My dearest John, — ^My pen almost 
refuses to record the tale of shame and 
grief which I must now reveal to you. 
Dearly as I prize your love — fondly as I 
have lived in the hope of becoming, one 
day, your wife — the present narrative 
must still be told ; that fearful recital of 
guilt and dishonour which must crush my 
every joy, since it separates us for ever, 
widowing my heart, and blighting every 
hope." 

Leslie could read no more — ^for several 
seconds he felt as one stricken by sudden 
paralysis. Every object seemed to swim 
around him, the letter dropped from his 
hand, and he threw himself on the bed, 
covering his face with his hands, trying, 
if possible, to forget the words he had 



CRUSHED HOPES. 165 

read, to shut out the crushing truth. A 
flood of tears might have aflbrded relief 
to his overtaxed brain ; but alas ! his grief 
was far beyond this. No ; conscious, yet 
maddened, he earnestly desired that the 
earth would at once swallow him up, and 
so end the misery he was enduring. In 
this wretched state — a state which no pen 
can describe — he remained for several 
minutes, then starting up he again seized 
the letter, but his eyes at first refused to 
read. A knock came to his door. He 
remembered that as a man he was bound 
to calm his feelings. Long accustomed to 
self-discipline, he at once recovered his 
usual outward demeanour, and took in a 
note handed to him by the servant. This 
incident, trifling in itself, broke the chain 
of horroif, he threw the note aside, and 
with comparative calmness he resumed 
the letter from Emily — 



tc 



You are a man, and will doubtlessly 



166 CRUSHED HOPES. 

bear the shock better than I do; the 
fatal edict has gone forth — we never can 
be married. To wed me would tarnish 
your bright honour. Love me ever and 
constantly, as I do you, but never dream 
of uniting your fate with one like myself. 
But alas ! I am rambling. I will, how- 
ever, be brief, for every word I set down 
costs me a tear of agony. The person I 
saw die was — ^nay, I cannot write it, yet 
I must — that person was — ^my mother ! a 
mother who had fled her husband's roof, 
to seek that of some vile seducer. I am 
the child of that woman. To link your 
fate with mine would be to link it 
with dishonour. No, dearest John, I 
will never — never allow this. My father, 
who leaves within two days, proposes 
to visit the Continent, probably never to 
return. He forbids me even to commu- 
nicate our destination to you. You may, 
however, come over here, as soon as pos- 



CRUSHED HOPES. 167 

sible, and bid me an eternal farewell ere 
we start. Do this ; but, as a man of 
honour, I expect that you will not endea- 
vour to alter my determination, or seek 
ix) know where we are going. Heaven 
bless you, prays your afflicted and fondly- 
attached " Emily." 



Leslie threw down the letter, and pon- 
dered for awhile in deep grief. Yet, after 
all, circumstances might have been worse. 
Truth to tell, he had heard the unhappy 
tale before, and though not conversant 
with the circumstances — ^not aware that 
the mother of his Emily still lived — ^yet 
he well knew that Lady Urmstone had 
sloped from her husband. Who the partner 
of her flight was he had never heard, 
but of the facts now communicated to 
him he had been long cognizant. He read 
and re-read the letter several times. It 
only seemed to increase his love for the 



168 CRUSHED HOPES. 

dear girl, liis determination to win her 
cherished hand. Shall we confess it ? the 
letter rather pleased him on the whole. 
He was far from selfish ; Emily was the 
idol he worshipped as a superior being — 
a being placed so far above him as to 
shut out all hope of being allied to her. 
The present blot on her escutcheon brought 
her one step nearer to him. Yes, the un- 
known protege of her father might still live 
to win her, and proudly wear her in his 
heart. His arm should shield her from 
every shaffc of malice. Yes, there was a 
blot — di tainting blot — which, if necessary, 
with his life's blood he would wash away. 
Leslie was not of a romantic or an ego- 
tistical nature, but he smiled with exul- 
tation as he pictured to his mind the task 
of defending liis own adored Emily — 
there was a something to fight for — ^proud 
would he feel to do so. To this end he 
dedicated his future life. In a few hours 



CRUSHED HOPES, 169 

he would be with her suing to be heard, 
pleading before her, explaining the love 
he bore towards her ; ay, not a moment 
should be lost. 

In this mood he hastily dressed and 
descended to breakfast, A few moments 
later the servant came in and reminded 
him that a messenger waited to take back 
a reply to the note which he had delivered 
to him upstairs. 

Leslie now recollected the circumstance, 
and opened the missive, which ran thus : 

"Dear Sir, — ^Will you do me the 

favour of calHng on me at my office at 

your earliest convenience, as I have a 

message for you from the Earl of Grant- 

chester which requires your immediate 

attention ? 

" Yours faithfully, 

"Henry Scarsdale." 
This was a call not to be slighted; 



170 CRUSHED HOPES. 

Mr. Scarsdale was Lord Grrantchester's 
confidential agent, and consequently Leslie 
saw the necessity of obeying the summons. 
Nor did he foresee any inconvenience 
likely to arise from it, as he could not 
leave town before the evening express. So 
he instantly wrote an answer stating his 
intention of being with the lawyer within 
an hour. This he despatched, and then 
sat down to sip a cup of tea and ruminate 
— for to break his fast in the usual manner 
his agitation wholly forbade. 



171 



CHAPTEE XV. 

A CONTRETEMPS. 

J 

After a delay of at least half-an-hour 
(for Mr. Scarsdale held a daily lev^e of 
clients, all seeking a personal interview 
with him), our hero was ushered into the 
presence of the tried friend and adviser of 
his noble patron. The lawyer had scarcely 
uttered a dozen words when Leslie ceased 
to wonder at the influence he exercised 
over the Earl. Calm and determined in 
his manner, possessing the eye of an 
eagle, he seemed at once to read the 
thoughts and characters of those who 
addressed him. There was a degree of 
penetration in his look which would 
have inspired fear, had it not been more 



172 A CONTRETEMPS. 

than counterbalanced by a smile which, 
displaying a brilliant row of teeth, at once 
gained the confidence and friendship of 
those whom he addressed. Scarsdale was 
a man of few words, for those who sought 
his advice were so numerous he could 
spare but little time for circumlocution. 
This was the man that Leslie had come 
to see, and into whose presence he was 
admitted, after waiting nearly half-an-hour 
amidst a crowd of eager visitors, who were 
at length all dismissed, and Leslie ushered 
into the presence of the talented lawyer. 

" Captain Leslie, I sent to you believing 
from what I have heard from the Earl of 
Grantchester, that you are in the full con- 
fidence of that nobleman." 

" I cannot say that I am ; he has been 
most kind to me, and I am now about to 
join him as his secretary, when probably 
he will confide in me ; as yet, I have seen 
but little of his lordship." 



A CONTRETEMPS. 173 

" It is odd — ^very odd ; for in the letters 
I have received he speaks of you, not 
only in the highest terms, but as one in 
whom he places the greatest reliance." 
The lawyer paused for a moment, and 
then continued: — "You are perhaps 
aware that Lady Crrantchester has been 
long separated from the Earl ? " 

" Not so ; I was not even aware that 
he was married ; still less that he had a 
wife living." 

" Such, however, is the case. The ex- 
planation is painful, and our noble friend 
probably evaded the subject ; it becomes 
therefore my duty to relate to you the 
sad particulars. Upwards of twenty 
years ago, his wife, of whom he was pas- 
sionately fond, bore him an heir ; but the 
joy which would have heralded in the 
event was at once clouded by the an- 
nouncement that his lady had been deli- 
vered of a dead child. The shock had 



174 A CONTRETEMPS. 

such an effect upon the bereaved mother, 
that it at once robbed her of her in- 
tellects. In her delirium, she believed 
that her infant still existed, and even 
now I fear the monomania exists, but 
in such a modified form that, after being 
confined in a private asylum during a 
period of upwards of twenty years, her 
medical advisers have now recommended 
her immediate removal to her home/' 

" How very dreadful ! but how was it 
that Lord Grantchester consented to such 
a separation?" 

"In the hope that her reason might 
once more be restored — a hope which 
her medical attendants have ever held out, 
and which now seems happily realized, 
To communicate this information, and to 
ask you to act on it, I have sent for 
you." 

"Me?" 

" Yes ; who so fit ? Holding the 



A CONTBSTEMPS; 175 

most confidential post in his lordship's 
household — endeared to him by no ordi- 
nary ties — such are Lord Grantchester'» 
own words, who can be more fit to see 
the poor sufferer and bear to his lordship 
the joyftil tidings which will restore an 
adored wife to her much-loved home ?" 

" I reaUy do not understand you," re^. 
plied the now puzzled Leslie. 

" Oh — I forgot ; I have not shown you 
the letters I have received ; read them ;' < 
and he handed two epistles to the bewil- 
dered secretary, who at once perused 
them : — 



*' To Henry Scarsdale, Esq. 

" Sir, — As the confidential adviser 
and representative of the Right Honour- 
able the Earl of Grantchester, I beg to 
inform you that I have this day taken 
possession of the property hitherto known 
as Lion House, Camberwell, lately con- 



176 A CONTRETEMPS. 

ducted by Dr. James Dutton, and amongst 
the patients I find the Countess of Grant* 
Chester, suffering, as is alleged by the 
certificates on which she was here ad- 
mitted upwards of twenty years ago, 
from monomania arising firom unhappy 
femily circumstances and a predisposition 
to commit suicide. To guard against the 
latter, two extra nurses have been spe- 
cially engaged, who keep continual watch 
over her actions; I therefore lose no 
time in writing to you, to announce, 
for the information of the Earl, that 
I am now the sole proprietor of this 
establishment, and to solicit a continuance 
of his lordship^s trust and confidence. 
" Your obedient servant, 

" Jacob Aylward, M.R.C.S." 

The second bore date a week later. 

" Sir, — It is with great satisfaction I 
write to assure you, for the information 



A CONTRETEMPS. 177 

of the Earl of Grantchester, that his noble 
wife may be removed from this estab- 
lishment whenever he likes. She is 
now thoroughly cured, and from the 
date of this letter I look upon her as a 
visitor, not a patient. I am thus abrupt, 
as the visiting commissioner has pro- 
nounced her ladyship to be perfectly sane, 
and threatened me with a withdrawal 
of my licence should I longer detain her 
against her own wish. Pray therefore 
ask his lordship to call for her, or, in 
his absence, be good enough to send for 
her ladyship as soon as may be conve- 
nient. 

" Your obedient servant, 

'^ Jacob Aylward, M.E.C.S." 

Having read the letters through, Leslie 
turned to Mr. Scarsdale, who, during the 
short time the captain had been perusing 
the communications, had snatched the 

VOL. II. 12 



178 A CONTRETEMPS. 

opportunity to take a sandwich, and 
quietly remarked — 

" I cannot see how I am concerned in 
these letters/' 

" Pardon me ; I know no one so fitting 
to attend to them as yourself. Lord Grant- 
Chester wiU be here in a few days. As his 
lordship's secretary, who so fit instantly 
to visit this asylum, and take her lady- 
ship home, there to await the arrival of 
her husband ? I cannot do it personally, 
I am so fearfully busy, and the slightest 
delay would be cruel to the dear lady; 
to send one of my clerks would be both 
disrespectful and improper, since it would 
cause an exposure of circumstances quite 
unnecessary to publish. Who, then, better 
adapted to perform this task than your- 
self?" 

"I should be deUghted, but circum- 
stances over which I have no control com- 
pel me to leave London within an hour." 



A CONTBETEMPS. 179 

" I am sorry thus to press you, but I 
am still of opinion that this duty impe- 
ratively devolves on you; nor can I 
admit that any other can supersede this 
debt which you owe to one who has not 
only shown the greatest confidence in you, 
but has actually given you a place of con- 
siderable emolument. Nay, do not writhe 
or feel hurt by the remark ; you and I 
are alike interested in the fate of our 
common friend. We should equally be 
anxious respecting the welfare of a suffer- 
ing, and I suspect, a much-wronged 
female." 

" Sir, you put the matter in a strong 
light." 

" I do, and do so purposely, I have 
no time to waste on circumlocution, 
twenty persons at least eagerly wait 
outside to obtain an interview ; you will 
therefore excuse my abruptness. May I 
ask, cannot the affair to which you allude 



180 A CONTRETEMPS. 

be delayed for a few hours ?" said Scars- 
dale, raising his head and fixing his eagle 
glance on Leslie. 

" If I miss the evening mail for Holy- 
head, I may lose all I hold dear '* 

"At what hour does this mail leave 
London ?" 

" At half-past eight, I believe." 

The lawyer pulled out his watch, and 
looked at it. "You have at least six 
hours to execute the task which I really 
think it is your duty to perform. I have 
no more to say — I pause for your reply/* 

" I will do it ; but as it retards my de- 
parture for some hours, as I intended 
starting at two o'clock, you will perhaps 
explain to his lordship the cause of my 
delay, should I not return to London 
within eight-and-forty hours, during which 
period I understend he may axrive." 

" I should say from the letters that I 
have received that his health will not 



A CONTRETEMPS. 181 

allow him to do so; but in any case 
your absence will be excused. Now 
pardon me ; I am unable to prolong this 
interview. Here are the letters ; the 
address is attached to them. Do you 
want any money ? Excuse the question, 
but it might be possible, and, if so, I will 
supply it.^ 

Leslie declined the proffered kindness, 
took the papers, and calling a Hansom 
cab, at once started off on his mission. 



•X 99 



182 



CHAPTEE XVI. 



THE ASYLUM. 



"Lion House, Camberwell! cried our 
hero, throwing himself back in the vehicle, 
and at once giving himself up to those 
feelings of annoyance which this unfore- 
seen delay caused, not unmingled with 
surprise at the strange history which had 
just been given him of Lord Grant- 
chester's family. Hitherto Leslie had 
believed that the Earl was a bachelor, 
and that the Honourable George Sydney, 
whom he had met at Dublin Castle, was 
his undoubted heir. It now appeared 
that his patron had long been married; 
and, though the fact was improbable, it 
was stm possible his wife might yet per- 



THE ASYLUM. 183 

petuate the noble line of Grantchester. 
This was a new view of the subject. It 
was one that mattered but little to the 
secretary; yet, truth to tell, he felt un- 
accountably interested in the relation he 
had just heard ; and, after a short mental 
reasoning, admitted to himself that the 
acute lawyer was perfectly right in charg- 
ing him with the transaction of an affair 
requiring much tact and delicacy to carry 
out. From these thoughts he was roused 
by the sudden stoppage of the cab, and 
the gruff voice of the driver demanding 
through the trap in the roof — 

"Where be Lion House, sir? Here 
we are in Camberwell, and I don't see it 
nowhere.*' 

« 

" I really don t know." 

"WeU, then, I'm sure I don't. What's 
to be done ?" 

"Can't you inquire somewhere ia the 
neighbourhood ?" 



184 THE ASYLUM. 

"Well, sir, they beynt over sharp in 
these parts; besides, sir, there's no one 
a-passing, and I don't know none of the 
shops." 

" Can't you try the public-house ?" 

" Well, sir, that's true ; but if I goes in 
I must spend a sixpence, and I can't 
afford it." 

LesHe smiled at the cunning of the 
feUow; but, too much hurried to care 
about trifles, he at once handed liim a 
shilling. Cabby, well content with his 
diplomacy, threw the coin into his pocket, 
and in another minute drove up to the 
" Bold Dragoon ;" and dismounting from 
his dangerous perch, and begging of his 
fare to have an eye on the reins, entered 
the public-house. 

Fully five minutes had elapsed before 
the driver returned ; he then came out, ap- 
parently well pleased with his entertain- 
ment. He was about to mount his box. 



THE ASYLUM. 185 

when Leslie inquired whether he had 
ascertained the situation of Lion House. 

"In coorse I have. I knew it afore; 
only you didn't tell me as it was the * 'sylum 
for lunatics.' I knows it well ; but we've 
taken the wrong turn, and gone two miles 
out of our way." 

Here was another annoying delay for 
Leslie ; but determined, as far as possible, 
to put up with similar contretewpSy he 
only desired the driver to accelerate his 
pace if possible. 

In a quarter of an hour more the 
vehicle dashed through the iron gates of 
the asylum, and drove up to the principal 
entrance. Our hero had never before 
seen such an establishment, and he could 
scarcely repress a feeling of disgust whei;i 
he saw the useless grandeur — ^the orna- 
mented front of a mansion, whose highly- 
studied beauties seemed to mock the 
misery it hid within its bosom. He 



186 THE ASYLUM. 

turned with loathing from the sight of 
those iron bars which carefully guarded 
the highly-decorated windows of this 
palatial private madhouse. 

A liveried servant, dressed out in 
gaudy colours, answered the summons at 
the door ; and, in the mincing accents of 
a modem fop, informed the visitor that the 
doctor ** was at home/' 

Leslie naturally felt somewhat agitated, 
which cabby as quickly perceived; and, 
taking advantage of it, charged exactly 
double the amount of his proper fare, six- 
pence for delay (at the public-house), and 
hoped his honour would give him an 
extra shilling for driving so fast ! To all 
these extortions the captain silently sub- 
mitted, and entering the hall, followed 
the " red-plushed" footman into the study, 
which he was assured Dr. Aylward 
would soon enter. 

After allowing some ten minutes or a 



THE ASYLUM. 187 

quarter of an hour to elapse — 2l custom 
usually adopted by all the second-rate 
practitioners, in order to give time for 
the visitor to inspect the rich books 
strewed on the table, the cards of noble- 
men and other persons of consequence 
thrown carelessly into a china bowl, and 
the handsome testimonial given to the 
practitioner on some recent occasion, now 
standing proudly on the sideboard — ^the 
doctor entered the room, and, bowing 
low to his visitor, requested him to be 
seated; at the same time, in the most 
polite terms, demanding the cause which 
had thus given him the honour of a visit 
from Captain Marks Leslie ? 

" I am come here respecting the Coun- 
tess of Grantchester " 

"I trust her ladyship is well," inter- 
rupted the now obsequious keeper of the 
asylum, " and that she bore the fatigues 
of the journey without injury?" 



188 THE ASYLUM. 

The visitor started from his chair, and 
with difficulty uttered — 

"What is the meaning of this? I 
came to see Lady Grantchester. She is 
surely here ?" 

" Not so," replied the practitioner, rising 
also, and seemingly annoyed by the ques- 
tion ; " if you are a friend of her ladyship, 
you should have known she left this last 
night." 

"By whose authority?" severely de- 
manded Leslie. 

" May I ask, sir, why you thus seek to 
know?" 

" I am the private secretary to the Earl 
of Grantchester, and am sent here by Mr. 
Scarsdale, his lordship's confidential agent, 
in consequence of two communications 
you have addressed to him. Here they 
are," and he handed him the letters. 

The medical man read and re-read the 
epistles he had written to Scarsdale. He 



THE ASYLUM. 189 

dwelt over them, and evidently seemed 
puzzled what line to pursue. 

" Sir, I will request you to resume your 
9eat, and enter fully into this matter, 
which really seems most serious." 

Leslie again sat down. 

" You will excuse my asking you — Are 
you quite sure her ladyship has not 
returned to Grantchester House ?" 

"Perfectly so; Mr. Scarsdale would 
have known, had it been so." 

The doctor started, and seemed much 
disconcerted. 

"In my turn," hastily chimed in 
Leslie, " may I ask the meaning of this 
strange question ?" 

" It is indeed strange — most strange !" 

"Is her ladyship not beneath your 

roof?" 

" I regret to say she is not." 

"Has she fled?" 

For several seconds Dr. Aylward 



190 THE ASYLUM. 

paused ; he seemed fearful of committing 
himself. At length, as if he had sud- 
denly gained courage, he replied — 

"Far from it. Her ladyship was 
removed at a late hour last night from 
this establishment." 

" And how came you to permit this ?" 

" The messenger who represented him- 
self as having been sent to fetch her 
home, stated that he came from the Earl 
of Grantchester." 

" Surely you did not allow a patient to 
leave your asylum on the mere ipse dixit 
of a stranger ?" 

" Decidedly not. The individual who 
came had often been here before — so at 
least my assistant (who has been fifteen 
years in this establishment) informs me, 
had often accompanied his master, the 
Honourable George Sydney, the only 
brother of the Earl, when he came here." 
" Still I consider you were wrong to 



THE ASYLUM. 191 

give up SO lightly a lady thus carefully 
committed to your charge." 

" I admit that had I been thus in- 
cautious, I should indeed have been 
blameable; but you will acquit me 
when I tell you that this person was 
accompanied by the medical man who 
originally signed (with another since 
dead) the certificate of her ladyship's 
insanity." 

" This is indeed a mystery." 

" It did not seem so to me. The man, 
or messenger, or, still more properly 
speaking, the agent of Lord Grant- 
chester, came here and demanded that the 
Countess should be delivered up to him. 
This I might have hesitated about; but 
Doctor Compartz, who had signed the 
original certificate, insisted on her lady- 
ship being given up, and at once gave a 
satisfactory receipt for the return of his 
patient, who with joy jumped into a 



192 THE ASYLUM. 

carriage at the door and drove off, as she 
anticipated, to Grantchester House." 

" And did you think there was nothing 
irregular in this ?" 

" Scarcely so : parties frequently take 
strange means to conceal the mental 
maladies of their friends,- and above all 
the fact, that they have ever been 
the inmates of an asylum, however re- 
spectable. I confess to you, that as they 
drove off I felt a strange misgiving in 
seeing that a mere common hackney fly 
had been sent for her ladyship. But then 
it was too late ; besides, as I said before, I 
thought they might have done so to 
prevent exposure/' 

" What steps would you advise me to 
take in this affair? It is clear Lady 
Grantchester has been spirited away, and 
your own interest should point out to 
you that you are bound to assist me in my 
search." 



THE ASYLUM. 193 

" Putting aside all feelings such as you 
mention, I shall be delighted to do so. 
Her ladyship has endeared herself to all 
beneath this roof by her affability and 
uniform kindness. She is now (as I have 
stated in my letter to Mr. Scarsdale) per- 
fectly recovered; it is therefore plain 
she cannot long be detained against her 
will. Tou need not, however, go far to 
find her; your first task will be to see 
Dr. Compartz, - and doubtlessly he will 
point out her present whereabouts, and 
the reason for which she was conveyed 
there." 

" I'll go instantly," cried Leslie, start- 
ing up ; " tell me at once the address of 
the gentleman." 

The doctor rang the bell, and desired 
the servant to bring him his address- 
book. While waiting for it, he endeavoured 
to draw our hero into conversation on the 
common topics of the day, but in this he 

VOL. II. 13 



IM THE ASYLUM. 

did not succeed. Impatient to complete^ 
his task in time for the mail, sincerely 
desirous of recovering Trith as little delay 
as possible the wife of his kind patron, 
be declined colloquial intercourse save 
on the one subject he desired to dwell 
upon. 

At length the address-book was brought 
down, and Dr. Aylward referred to it. 

" ' Dr. Compartz, a Doctor of Medicine 
of the College at Bonn ; a Licentiate of 
the College of Surgeons in Seville; a 
Bachelor of Medicine in Louvain, &c. &c.,' 
lives now; let me see, he has really changed 
his address so often since he lived in 
Barlington-street, that it is somewhat 
difficult to follow his migrations. Water* 
loo-road ? — ^no, no, I mistake. His present 
address is No. 7, Cleavers'-row, Mile End. 
This is the address he left last night.*' 

" Is he a respectable practitioner ?"^ 

" I really cannot say ; hut I should 



THE ASYLUM. 195 

decidedly think so, as he more than once 
came here with the Honourable Mr. 
Sydney, with whom he appeared to be 
very intimate." 

" Well, doctor, I have but one course 
left : I will at once see this medical man, 
and through him discover the present 
abode of Lady Grantchester. Good-bye, 
sir. I hope and trust that my search may 
be successful. I ponfess I leave you with 
feelings of deep regret that you were in- 
duced to part so lightly with Lady Grant- 
chester." 

"I now regret it, too," replied the 
asylum-keeper, as he bowed Leslie out. 
*'XJpon my life,I fear it is a bad affair,"mut- 
tered he as he strode back into the study ; 
" I felt at the time that the fellows were 
rascals. I ought not to have let her go ; 
but I think I've guarded myself from all 
harm in the affair. I wish she had not 
been a countess ; but it is no use repining, 

13— a 



196 THE ASYLUM. 

this fellow Compartz must take the 
blame." 

In the meantime poor Leslie, sadly 
vexed at the detention, galloped along 
(having selected a good horse from the 
rank) towards Mile End. 



197 



CHAPTEE XVII. 



THE DOCTOR. 



"This is the door, I think, sir," said 
the driver, as he suddenly pnUed up his 
vehicle at a wretched-looking house in a 
street leading out of the Mile End-road ; 
"this is the place you meant, sir, is it 
not?" 

Leslie jumped out, and for a minute or 
two doubted the identity of the house, 
which appeared to be one of those 
numerous edifices which are, generally 
speaking, let out to a score of lodgers, 
abounding in the district to which our 
hero had been directed. 

Amidst the names of some half-dozen 
occupants, printed in large letters on the 



198 THE DOCTOB. 

lintel of the street door, Leslie at length 
discovered the following inviting an- 
nouncement : — 

First Floor. — Dr. Compartz, Surgeon and Accou- 
cheur, attends daily for consultation, from eleven till 
four, and from nine till eleven, p.m. — Poor children 
vaccinated gratuitously on Wednesdays and Fri- 
days. 

The matter was thus settled; and al- 
though Leslie was surprised in no small 
degree at finding a person so respectable 
as he deemed Dr. Compartz to be, so 
located, yet he unhesitatingly rang the 
surgery -bell, and entered the house, de- 
siring the cabman to wait for his return. 

Groping his way up a somewhat dilapi- 
dated staircase, he presently arrived at 
the first-floor and boldly knocked on a 
door emblazoned by a large and shining 
brass plate. 

A loud peal, twice repeated at the portal, 
brought an urchin of the most miserable 



THE DOCTOR. 19"9 

description to open it. The poor wretch 
had evidently slipped on a shabby fdstiaa 
jacket on hearing the bell ring at the street 
door ; he boasted no waistcoat, his face was 
miwashed and his hair uncombed, it would 
be ironical to call his two boots a pair, 
his voice bespoke poor feeding ; yes, such 
was the boy who now asked our hero 
what he wanted ? 

" Is Doctor Compartz at home ?" 
" I don't know ; but if you'll tell me 
your name, I'll ask." 

" My name is immaterial ; say a gentle- 
man wants to see him." 

" Well, then, he's not at home." 
'' Why tell me he is not ? I clearly see 
you are telling a falsehood." 

" Well, if I am, what of that ? the last 
<chap as came here this morning, and 
^^alled hisself a gentleman, sarved him 
vdth a writ. So I says he's out," and the 
boy shut the door in the captain's face. 



200 THE DOCTOR. 

Determ^ed to have an interview, Leslie 
again rang, and, finding his summons not 
attended to, fairly thundered at the door ; 
at length the boy cautiously opened it a 
few inches, and assured the impatient 
visitor that it was no use " making a row, 
the doctor was out, and no mistake." 

Leslie did not hesitate, but slipped his 
card, with a crown piece, into the hands 
of the young Cerberus, and awaited the 
result. 

For a moment the door was closed, and 
in another invitingly open, and our hero 
ushered by the now obsequious serving- 
boy into the sanctum of the M.D. 

" Captain Leslie ! how can I be of any 
service to you, sir ? I regret you did not 
send for me, rather than thus surprise me 
en des/iadille. Excuse me, sir, while I put 
my coat on. The fact is, these are my East- 
end consulting rooms ; I am about to quit 
them, as you may see by the preparations 



THE DOCTOR. 201 

for departure which surround you. Ex- 
cuse me, sir, but from your appearance I 
venture to anticipate some organic com- 
plaint ; gout ? — -and yet you are young for 
it ; catarrh — perhaps influenza ? — in rheu- 
matism I am peculiarly fortunate ^" 

Anxious to stop this flow of words, 
Leslie coldly bowed and said — "You 
mistake, doctor, I am perfectly well." 

"Oh, it is then as I thought — ^an 
accouchement ? • No ? Perhaps the illness 
of some beloved sister ; the scarlet fever 
is unhappily prevalent in these parts, 
and " 

"My family are perfectly well, and I 
seek no medical advice." 

"Then may I ask," calmly demanded 
the quack, now beginning to suspect he 
was betrayed, "what the devil do you 
want?" 

"I came to speak to you relative to 
the Countess of Grantchester." 



202 THE DOCTOR. 

The practitioner jumped up and ut- 
tered, in a voice of mingled terror and 
anger — 

" Tou, then, are a detective ! I fore- 
saw it. 

"I really do not understand you. 
Why you should thus address me, I 
know not. My name is Marks Leslie, 
private secretary to the Earl of Grant- 
chester. I have been sent to bring the 
Countess to her own home, and have only 
just learnt that she quitted Lion House 
in your company last night. Indeed, 
Dr. Aylward referred me to you.'* 

"Curse the meddling fool!'* involun- 
tarily ejaculated the pseudo physi- 
cian. 

" Sir !" cried the other, in surprise. 

By this time Compaxtz had recovered 
his calmness, and in an oily tone he assured 
his visitor that he should be most happy 
to afford him every information.** 



THE DOCTOR. 203 

" You can then tell me where to find 
her ladyship ?" 

" Oh, decidedly — ^indeed I will accom- 
pany yon; but before I do so, I must 
really change my dress. I will not be 
five minutes." 

The doctor went to a trunk and took 
out several articles, amongst others a 
white pocket-handkerchief, which he, for 
some reason or other, seemed anxious to 
conceal. He kept on talking— speaking 
of the weather and other trifling subjects, 
much to the annoyance of Leslie, who, 
however, could scarcely object, as the doctor 
had thus readily promised to place Lady 
Grantchester imder his care, and thus 
freeing him, enable him to proceed to 
Ireland. 

" I shall not be five minutes," added 
the worthy practitioner; "but while I 
change my habiliments (I have no other 
room, I regret to say) will you kindly 



204 THE DOCTOR. 

look over this newspaper?" and he pre- 
sented him with a copy of the morning 
journal. 

He now got behind Leslie, apparently 
with a desire to change his clothes without 
observation, but ere he did so, he poured 
some sort of perfume, which he took from 
a phial on the shelf, on his handkerchief, 
and with the expertness of an experienced 
conjuror picked the pocket of our hero of 
a white handkerchief, and dexterously 
substituted the one he had scented for it ; 
he then changed his habiliments, and in a 
few minutes reappeared before his visitor. 

" Well, captain, I was not long, was I?*' 
cried he. laughing heartily. 

" I never saw a quicker dresser." 

"Well, then, come along. I am all 
impatience to introduce you to my inte- 
resting patient." 

" I am perfectly ready," replied the 
other, starting up with delight. 



THE DOCTOR. 205 

They liad only moved two paces to- 
wards the door when the doctor suddenly 
halted. 

"Excuse me, Captain Leslie — excuse 
me, but you can scarcely go out so/' 

"How?" 

"You have a spot of black on your 
upper lip, immediately under your nose.'* 

" Thank you. Have you a basin ?" 

" Oh, it does not require that ; give me 
your handkerchief and I will instantly 
remove it. Thank you. I shall not be a 
minute — ^it is a mere black which has 
fallen." 

The captain gave his handkerchief, 
Dr. Compartz took it, and, requesting 
him to sit down, began to rub the upper 
lip ; a moment more, and he pressed the 
nostrils. Leslie felt unable to resist the 
movement ; an instant more and he began 
to feel drowsy-pleasingly so, his Umbs 
became useless, and he fell back senseless 



206 THE DOCTOR. 

in his chair. Chloroform had done its 
work— Leslie was its victim. 

The doctor instantly rushed out into 
the ante-room and sent his errand-boy on 
a distant message — returned, and havings 
first secured his card, he hoisted in his 
arms his now helpless visitor, and bore 
him downstairs. 

" Here, cabby," cried the doctor to the 
coachman, " here is your fare : he is ill , 
and you must at once take him home. 
Here is his card." 

"I don't like this job," growled 
jarvey. 

"Pooh, man!— did you never take a 
drdnken man home before? You know 
my address ; if there's anything wrong 
come back here and I'll soon square it. 
There's half-a-crown for you ; and as the 
gentleman is what the police call in- 
capable,' you can charge what you like to 
the waiters. If they are mean, return to 



THE DOCTOR. 207 

me, for I'd rather give five sovereigns 
than it should be known the gentleman 
got intoxicated in my house. He only 
took two glasses of brandy and water." 

"He was a spooney," ejaculated the 
coachman, lifting our hero into his ve- 
hicle. " This ain't the first job of the kind 
I've had — I don't lose much by 'em;" 
and with a knowing wink the modem 
Jehu drove off for Leslie's hotel. 

When he arrived there his fare had so 
far recovered that he had opened his eyes, 
and although incapable of moving with- 
out help, he seemed conscious of passing 
events. 

Cabby told his story in confidence to 
the waiters, who instantly repeated it to 
the landlord. Two stalwart servants were 
sent out to bear him in. The vehicle 
was paid off and dismissed; the un- 
fortunate captain was straightway borne 
to bed. The tale was told with a thou- 



208 THE DOCTOR. 

sand pleasing exaggerations, and the last 
sentence uttered on the subject proceeded 
from the mouth of the head chambermaid, 
who added, with a sigh : " Well, indeed 
I am astonished! — such a nice, moral- 
speaking young gentleman — so correct 
and so generous. Well, who would have 
thought it ? To drink two bottles of gin 
in a common public-house — I shan't wait 
on him no more. I don't like drunken 
chaps — not I, indeed !'' 



209 



CHAPTEE XVIII. 



THE VICTIM. 



It was on one of those bright clear 
mornings which seem to put our foggy 
skies to shame — ^it was on one of those 
halcyon days which raise the spirits and 
forbid depression, that Lady Grantchester 
sat in the window of a drawing-room in 
the Hotel du Pare, in Brussels, eagerly 
gazing, with apparent interest, on the 
gay and smiling scene which the park 
presented to her. The stiff avenues of 
closely-clipped trees, the wide and well- 
tended walks, over which smart officers 
and well-dressed soubrettes were hurrying, 
seemed to engage her attention. But 
such was not the case ; her thoughts were 

VOL. II. 14 



210 THE VICTIM. 

far away ; her mind, still bleeding from a 
wound inflicted on it years before, was 
busily endeavouring, as far as possible to 
recover its proper equilibrium, in order 
to fit it for the coming interview. Yes, 
»he was wholly and solely absorbed by 
the cheering idea of once again behold- 
ing and joining the adored husband whose 
absence she had painfully mourned during* 
twenty years. To meet him, she had been 
induced to come to Brussels, and she 
now sat in joyful expectation of again 
being clasped in the arms of her beloved 
lord. 

At this moment Coleman entered, but 
not the ruflSan sot he appeared to be in the 
last chapter dedicated to his appearance 
and doings. He was now habited as a 
gentleman, and, with his superior clothes, 
he had donned the most quiet and gen- 
tlemanly manner. 

"Where have you been, Mr. Cole- 



THE VICTIM. 211 

man ?" eagerly demanded the lady as he 
entered. 

" I have been to the post-office, and in 
consequence of a communication I received, 
I called on Monsieur Vanderplanc, one of 
the Earl's most confidential agents — ^in- 
deed, I may safely say, his most confi- 
dential—and from him I learnt that his 
lordship was unhappily defined by indis- 
position at Frankfort, and would not con- 
sequently arrive here for at least ten 
days/' 

" Good Heavens ! Is his iUness serious ? 
Here I cannot remain. Kindly make 
preparations for our immediate departure. 
I will join him." 

" Not so, my lady ; Monsieur Vander- 
planc has received a letter from Lord 
Grantchester particularly requesting him 
to prevent this. He fears the fatigue of 
travelling might be injurious to your 
ladyship." 

14— a 



212 THE VICTIM. 

" Ah, he was ever kind and self-sacri- 
ficing ; but I have a duty to perform and 
I wOl fulfil it. My place is clearly beside 
the pillow of my sick husband. I shall 
insist on going.'* 

" Of course your ladyship can do as 
you like, but I fear it would sadly annoy 
your noble husband. Would it not. 
Monsieur Vanderplanc?" added he, ap. 
pealing to a gentleman who now entered 
and bowed low to the countess. 

Monsieur Vanderplanc was evidently a 
Belgian of rank. He spoke English im- 
perfectly, but still well enough to make 
himself understood. His voice was of 
that oily, quiet tone which generally be- 
speaks a person of high breeding. His 
coimtenance was decidedly bad. He was 
slightly lame, and during the ensuing 
interview many expressions dropped fi'om 
him which Lady Grantchester might pos- 
sibly have found fault with, but emanat- 



THE VICTIM. 213 

ing as they did from a foreigner and an 
intimate friend of her dear husband's, she 
readily overlooked them. 

" I moch grieve, miladi, zat milor can- 
not here come for one, perhaps two week. 
He not weU. But miladi stay here — wait 
— he come.*' 

"No; my intention is instantly to 
join him." 

" Sorry, moch sorry, it make me grieve, 
but milor he say no. You stay wid a 
lady — a friend of milor ; she great take 
care of you, and show you all politesse till 
milor come." 

" If such be the case I have only to obey, 
though it is indeed most painfiil to me." 

" It more equal so to me, since it mpch 
annoy your ladyship. 

" Will you kindly give me Lord Grant- 
chester's address?" 

" If miladi she write aletter, give it me, I 
send it through the English ambassadeur." 



•_ »> 



214 TBDB VICTIM. 

" By-the-bye, I ought to call on 
him/* 

"Oh, yes, ceertainly; but he not h 
Bruxelles ]xist a now, he at Ostende/' 

"That's provoking, his Excellency 
being a relative of my husband's." 

" And have you ze letter for milor ?*' 

" Yes, here it is,'* and she produced a 
note from her pocket, already sealed and 
completed, which she handed to the aris- 
tocratic Belgian; "and now, you will 
perhaps excuse me. The shock of hearing 
of Lord Grantchester's illness has some- 
what overcome me. I will retire for an 
hour. After that, at any time I shall be 
most happy to see Monsieur Yanderplanc; 
my husband's friends are ever most dear 
to me. Mr. Coleman, I may yet trouble 
you to proceed to Frankfort to see the 
Earl, while I remain here with the lady to 
whom Monsieur Yanderplanc has made 
allusion. For the present, good morning ;" 



THE VICTIM* 215 

and with these words, Lady Grantehester 
xetired. 

The door was scarcely closed, when 
Vanderplanc turned fiercely on Coleman. 
'*' "What an infernal fool you are to allow 
the woman to write letters ! You'll take 
her to the ambassador's next." 

" WeU, speak easy and civilly, if you 
please." 

"And if I don t?" 

" I'll expose you. The police would be 
■delighted to show you every attention, 
. Monsieur Vanderplanc. '^ 

" What do they know about me ?" 

" Oh, a man of your many professions, 
your many talents, can be no stranger to 
them. Depend upon it Dr. Compartz would 
be immediately requested to take up his 
residence with them." 

" If you persevere in sneering, you will 
repent of it.' 

" Shall I, Dr. Compaxtz ?" 



•J- >f 



216 THE VICTIM. 

" You have twice uttered my name — 
the third time you do so take the conse- 
quences. I am no lacquey at command — 
I am no hound to be kicked by a capricious 
master/' 

" Once more I say hold, or I split/* 

" Ay, I understand your threat ; you 
would expose me to Lady Grantchester, 
who would seek to punish the man who 
has thus carried her off. Poor fool ! a 
man who assumes so many letters after 
Ids name should scarcely be thus silly. 
Supposing you did this. Sir Charles Mon- 
tagu, alias Major Brown, alias Dr. Com- 
partz, do you think I'd be idle ? No, I 
would declare the woman I brought over 
to be a lunatic, and produce your own 
certificate, which is even now in my pocket- 
book, to prove the fact. 

" Yes ; and, as retaliation is the first law 
of nature, I should produce a most excel- 
lent copy of a mutual friend's signature. 



THE VICTIM. 217 

You understand me ? and if this was not 
clearly understood, what do you think of 
the ten pounds you received from old 
Slokesman for betraying your honourable 
master into his clutches? The fact of 
your father having been hung for sheep- 
stealing would form a pleasant episode. 
Lord ! how we should laugh to learn 
that the first sovereign you ever earned 
was by telling the Bow-street runners 
where to find him. And now for a little 
more " 

" Man or devil, cease !" 

" I was only going to mention Mary 
Forbes, who died '" 

" Silence ! or by Heaven you shall join 
her !" screamed the infuriated ruffian, as 
he sprang towards his colleague, who, 
starting back, and throwing down a 
chair, avoided the grasp of the furious 
man. Then, with a withering smile^ 
he turned cooUy to the other, as he rang 



218 THE YICTDC 

the bell, and demanded, in a most calm 
manner — 

" Peace or war ?** 

"Carses on it, peace, since it must 
be I" and he muttered to himself, " till I 
can repay the debt." 

The next moment the waiter entered. 
The two men were in the act of shaking 
hands. 

''Mon cher Monsieur Coleman, you 
have say you go to Waterloo, Mid dines 
at Boitsfort on to-morrow ?" 

"Yes. if you can be spared from tiie 
embassy." 

" Oh yes, I manage he." 

" Waiter, let us have a carriage and a 
good pair of horses for Waterloo to- 



morrow." 



<( 



Oui, monsieur," replied the obse- 
quious waiter. 

"And so, for the moment we part," 
said Coleman. 



THE VICTIM. 219 

"Helas, oui, I must go to joiu his 
Excellency. Adieu !" and Compartz shook 
the other's hand, and left the room 
accompanied by the waiter. 

" Oh that my breath were pestilential, 
that I might breathe upon that wretch !— 
But I'll not be precipitate. Let me only 
succoed in my present project, and the 
future Earl of Grantchester — ^my pal 

George — ^must pension me off — or . 

But enough of these dull thoughts; I 
came here to be amused, so begone dull 
care, Coleman and talents for ever !" 



220 



CHAPTER XIX. 

THE MAISON DE SANTE. 

It was nine o'clock as Mr. Coleman and 
his friend Monsieur Vanderplanc passed 
throngh the gate which leads from the 
Boulevard d'Etterbeck. The morning 
was a strong link in the chain of bright 
weather, which for several weeks had 
shone upon and blessed the Belgian 
capital. The lazy charioteer who drove 
his cart into the city, now stood 
wiping his forehead, while he paid the 
necessary "entrance fees," eagerly drew 
oflf the blue-and- white nightcap from his 
brow, and threw away the contents of his 
clay-pipe, previous to entering one of the 
most beautiful cities in Europe. But the 



THE MAISON DE SANTE. 221 

laughing morning seemed to communicate 
but little of its gaiety to the serious-look- 
ing pair, who, without a glance at the 
surrounding scenery, hastily quitted the 
barrier and began to descend the hill 
at the foot of which stands St. Josse ten 
noode, a small but pretty suburb of Brus- 
sels. Here is situated one of those most 
blessed establishments called a maison 
de sant^, resembling in its purpose our 
private lunatic asylums, but as far from 
the latter — as far superior^ — as the palace 
from the prison. Had the pair of gentle- 
men we have spoken of known the exact 
truth, they might have hesitated ere they 
sought this institution — an institution in 
which skill and humanity are so beauti- 
fully blended, that many and many an 
unhappy mind, overturned or wounded by 
sorrow or shock, was here again restored 
to its pristine vigour and serenity by a 
system of unvarying kindness and con- 



222 THE MAISON DE SANTE. 

stant vigilance and attention unequ^bd 
in any other part of the world. The 
Belgians are by nature a kind-hearted 
race ; they are the best of parents ; they 
are models as children. A Belgian would 
always rather soothe than irritate ; they 
are fond of dumb animals; they are 
tender-hearted nurses, and strongly im- 
bued with religious feeling; they are, 
generally speaking, a kind-hearted and 
amiable race. 

Their national lunatic asylum is a 
free town, open on all sides, having 
no moats or barriers, but abutting in 
every direction on a large bruyere or 
common. Here the Government send 
some 1500 unliappy lunatics, many of 
whom are of the most violent class. 
These wretched patients are boarded and 
lodged with the different families in the 
^ town, who have for several centuries past 
devoted themselves and educated their 



THB MAISON D£ SAKTE. 223 

children to care for these poor sufferers. 
The inhabitants of the place scarcely 
double in point of numbers that of their 
patients. No rough usage or corporal 
punishment is permitted; .yet have the 
most ferocious maniacs been soothed into 
calm and rational behaviour, and in many 
cases have been (thanks to this blessed 
system) restored to their former reason 
and their home. The flight of a patient 
is a rare occurrence. Only one murder 
has disgraced this town during the pre- 
sent century. Each lunatic costs the 
Government about twenty-four pounds per 
annum; and so little has this estabKsh- 
ment been obtruded on public notice, 
that few of our countrymen who have 
travelled through Belgium have even 
heard of its existence. 

Of these characteristic points in the 
Belgians, Coleman and Dr. Compartz 
were equally ignorant ; had they known 



224 THE MAISON D£ SANTE. 

them, they wotdd not have sought out a 
maison de sante as a place suitable to their 
views. The couple seemed somewhat shy 
of each other, they indulged in no unneces- 
sary conversation; neither of them had for- 
gotten the scene of the previous evening, 

" This is the house/' said Coleman ; 
" yes, this is the place they showed me. 
Have you your cert,ificate in your pocket 
as well as George Sydney's letter ?" 

" I have." 

" Well, then, we may as well knock. 
I've got Dr. Hardy's name so well 
executed that no one could prosecute us, 
since no one could swear to the name. 
By jingo ! it's a magnificent dufier." 

'* My dear friend, do drop this slang — 
excuse me, I pray you, but we are now 
two English gentlemen — I am the family 
physician, you are a distant relative of 
Lady Grantchester." 

"Queen Anne's dead. Don't I know 



THE MAISON DE SANTE. '225 



all this as well as you, or any quack that 



ever 



"Be more civil; remember, for your 
own sake if not for mine, you had better 
stand well with me/' 

" Well, with all my heart ; at all events, 
till one or both of us return to Eng- 
land." 

" Only one !" inwardly muttered Com- 
partz ; " kindly raise the knocker/* The 
other did so, and a portion of the j[)orte 
cocJthre was immediately opened by a tidy 
maid-servant, dressed in the coquettish 
jacket and coloured skirt so universally 
disported by this class throughout Bel- 
gium. 

Their cards were sent in, and the two 
strangers at once ushered into the pro- 
prietor's study. 

" Sir," began Compartz, addressing a 
middle-aged man, evidently the master of 
the establishment — "sir, we have been 

VOL. ir. 15 



226' THE MAISON DE SANTB. 

recommended to call on you by one of the 
secretaries in the office of the Minister of 
Finance. We have an unfortunate and a 
most delicate mission to execute." 

" May I ask the name of the gentleman 
who referred you to me ?" 

Compartz took no notice of the ques- 
tion, but went on — 

. " Lord Grantchester, a member of the 
British House of Peers, is about to enter 
into the ministry ; his wife is unhappily 
afflicted with a monomania which not 
only grieves his lordship, but which might 
miUtate against his interest and mar his 
prospects. In England, matters of this 
kind are, I regret to say, too frequently 
subjects of ill-natured observation." 

"What is the lady's monomania?" 

"Alas! her delusions are not always con- 
fined to one subject, so perhaps it is wrong 
to make use of the term monomania. Some- 
times she will positively declare that she 



THE MAISON DE SANTE. 227 

tad a child, and that it was murdered ; ' at 
other times she fancies she is imprisoned 
and ill-treated without the concurrence of 
her husband. To her brother-in-law, a 
anan of rank and a pious Christian, she 
has taken an unconquerable and unjustifi- 
able dislike. Occasionally she is quite 
<5alm and reasonable, and it takes strict 
attention to her case, and sometimes a 
<jonsiderable portion of time, to discover 
her ladyship's malady." 

"And you would place this lady 
here ?" 
• " Such is our wish." 

" Have you undoubted proofs of her 
malady ?" 

" Decidedly. I am her ladyship^s per- 
sonal physician, and here produce my 
solemn certificate. Mr. Coleman, a near 
relation of her ladyship, will hand you 
a similar document signed by Dr. Hardy, 
for many years resident in this city." 

15—2 



228 THE MAISON DB SANTE. 

** I remember this worthy doctor well." 

"And he desired his best respects to 
you and to your children/' chimed in 
Coleman, handing in the forged certi- 
ficate. 

" It's strange ! I'm married, but the 
doctor well knows that I have no 
children." 

Coleman saw he had made a mistake, 
and retreated again into silence — a 
retreat which Dr. Compartz endeavoured 
to cover by an immediate rejoinder — 

"I believe, sir, your usual terms are 
two hundred pounds a month. We are 
instructed by the Earl to hand you four 
hundred, with an assurance that his agents 
in Brussels will regularly hand you a 
similar sum." 

"His lordship is most generous; but 
you have not yet fully explained his 
wishes." 

"He anxiously desires that you will 



THE MAISON DE SANTE. 229 

take charge of this sorely-afficted lady 
for a month or two, when he hopes to 
make arrangements for her return to 
England." 

"Ajid where is the lady?" 

" In Brussels. We will bring her here 
to-day." 

" And does she come willingly ?" 

"Well, that is a strange question to 
ask. I should say yes and no : yes, as 
she will herself tell you ; no, because we 
have lufed her hither in the hope of meet- 
ing her lord." 

" And what further warrant have I for 
thus receiving a perfect stranger ?" 

" This letter," eagerly interrupted Cole- 
man, "written at his lordship's request, 
by his lordship's only brother and heir.' 

After perusing the missive, the keeper 
of the establislmient turned to Com- 
partz — 

" This letter merely asks me to receive 



• . j> 



230 THE MAISON DE SANTE. 

the lady as a visitor. If this be the only 
object, surely she might better have been 
placed elsewhere." 

" Not so ; one of her hallucinations i» 
that she is unjustly imprisoned ; another 
and more serious one, is a predisposition 
to suicide. Were she not closely watched,, 
she might make her escape and put an 
end to her existence. To your care alone 
may we confide her. If you refuse to 
receive her, we must take her back to* 
England." 

" Grentlemen, I will receive her andt 
judge for myself." 

" Pray do so ; Heaven grant you may 
adjudge her sane ! But you must not rush 
at conclusions ; for several weeks she may 
be rational, perfectly rational, as indeed 
she is just now. But alas ! these calms 
are generally the preludes of some violent 
outbreak." 

" Gentlemen, I will see to this. Bring; 



THE MAISON DE SANTE. 231 

the poor sufferer as soon as you will. It 
is my hour for going my rounds ; so pray 
excuse me," and with a low bow he dis- 
missed his visitors, when the outer door 
again was shut. 

"Come, I think we have done it 
weU !" 

"Eight well; but I must confess I 
think you need not have taken the wind 
out of my sails so completely." 

" My dear friend, it's aU for the best. 
Let's hurry back — ^the carriage will be 
abeady there.'' 



232 



CHAPTER XX. 

THE VICTIM CAGED. 

At the door of the Hotel de France stood 
a carriage, to which a pair of those round- 
bodied sleek-looking nags were attached, 
animals equally celebrated for their long 
endurance and their slow pace, so gene- 
rally used in Belgium. Their long tails 
had been carefully plaited and tucked up, 
thus guarding them from being soiled in 
winter by mud, or by dust in summer. 
The rope harness, the coachman and his 
shabby whip, stood ready for the two 
gentlemen who, having visited the maison 
de sant^, were now entering the hotel for 
the purpose of inducing Lady Grant- 
chester to accompany them to the insti- 



THE VICTIM CAGED. 233 

tution to which they proposed to consign 
her. 

Lady Grantchester at once fell into the 
trap so treacherously set for her. She 
instantly consented to accompany the 
artful pair, fully believing that in so 
doing she was complying with the wishes 
of her lord. Without hesitation she 
entered the vehicle with the supposed 
doctor, while Coleman in a fiacre followed 
with the few articles of luggage which 
her ladyship had brought from England 
with her. 

Directed to do so by Dr. Compartz, the 
carriage drove straight to the asylum, 
where the proprietor and his wife both 
welcomed her ladyship in the most cordial 
manner. 

Nothing around her bespoke the object 
of the establishment. No iron bars dis- 
graced the windows — ^no peculiar fasten- 
ings disfigured the doors ; the furniture 



234 THE VICTIM CAGED. 

of the room was elegant and light, the 
manner of the host and hostess polite and 
cordial ; speaking English slightly, they 
warmly welcomed her whom they believed 
to be an unfortunate sufferer. 

After a few sentences exchanged between 
the lady of the house and the nobleman's 
wife, the former endeavouring to please 
her guest by using the English language, 
unaware of her ladyship's thorough know- 
ledge of French, acquired at a school in 
Paris where she had been brought up^ 
and a more earnest conversation carried 
on by Dr. Compartz with the keeper of the 
establishment, which Coleman vainly en- 
deavoured to interrupt by his bad French, 
the latter, losing patience, at length ex- 
claimed — 

" Allez, monseer, it's time pour aller — 
moi beaucoup to do-^mon ami and moi ; 
aller a Waterloo, pour vor le field of 
action." 



THE VICTIM CAGED. 235 

'* Do not let me detain you, Mr. Cole- 
man. This lady will kindly take charge 
of her ladyship; so I need no longer 
trouble you or Monsieur le Docteur.'* 
Coleman at this moment made some loud 
remark to cover the sound of the latter 
word, and thanking her ladyship, led his 
confederate away, and with him re-entered 
the carriage. 

"AUez a Waterloo, et fait es votre 
cheval galope tres vite ; nous dans un 
hurry " 

" A Mont St. Jean" quietly interpreted 
Compartz to the puzzled coachman ; and 
away drove the ricketty carriage, jolting 
along over the paved road at the rate of 
some four miles an hour. 

The road from Brussels to the village 
after which we have named the celebrated 
battle fought on the adjacent fields, is so 
well known that it needs but little de- 
scription. There are few, if any, objects 



236 THB VICTIM CAGED. 

of remark which strike the traveller. A 
large portion of the wood of Soignies 
through which the tourist passes, belongs 
to the Duke of Wellington. His grace 
(it is said) has cut down a considerable 
portion of the trees. This is the spot 
which Sir Walter Scott, by a strange mis- 
take, designates in his Letters on Water- 
loo, as the " Wood of the Ardennes," a 
strange error for one generally so well 
read. 

After being shaken about for three 
hours, the pair arrived at the Hotel de la 
Poste, where they descended, and rambled 
across, guided by a local cicerone, to the 
interesting little chapel, where a hundred 
handsome tombstones record the gallant 
end of as many brave British officers. 
They next looked at the strange monu- 
ment erected over the limb of the late 
Marquis of Anglesea, which was here 
cut off and buried — a circumstance which 



THE VICTIM CAOBD. 237 

gave rise to the witty remark, that 
"though his lordship seemed perfectly 
well, it was known to all that the gallant 
general had actually one leg in the grave/* 
Our travellers next glanced at the spot 
where it is said above one hundred of our 
soldiers lie together in one common 
tomb. 

The doctor and Coleman having given 
a cursory glance at all these objects re- 
turned to the inn, there to hire a fresh 
vehicle to convey them to the field, and 
a proper guide to describe to them the 
events of this celebrated battle. 

When they came back they found a 
carriage standing at the door, and on en- 
deavouring to procure another to take 
them on, they were told by the landlord 
of this hotel — ^the hotel in which the duke 
slept on the night before the engagement 
— ^that all his vehicles were out ; that the 
one before them was let to an EngHsh 



238 THE VICTIM CAGED/ 

" milor/' whio had also secured the services 
of the best guide (Sergeant C), and that 
he was about to start; but if the two 
gentlemen would wait for a couple of 
hours, he would endeavour to find another 
conveyance for them." 

" Perhaps," suggested the doctor, " his 
lordship would allow us to accompany 
him ; that is to say, if he seems affable ?'* 

"Oh, he seems extremely courteous. 
He has actually finished two bottles of 
wine with the sergeant within the last 
hour." 

" Take him my card," suggested Com- 
partz, " and assure him how grateful we 
should feel if he would give us a Hft as 
far as the field." The landlord bowed low, 
and instantly vanished with the card. 

The doctor now explained to Coleman 
in English what he had been saying ; the 
latter highly approved of the appeal he 
had made. ^ 



THE VICTIM CAGED. 239 

Presently the landlord returned and 
delivered a polite message from " milor," 
who requested the honour of the English 
travellers' company in the salle h manger. 

On entering, they found their country- 
man seated at a table with the military 
guide. Before them several bottles of 
wine stood haJf-emptied ; cheese, biscuits, 
and fruit were spread on the table. The 
pair rose on the entrance of the strangers. 

Dr. Compartz made a stiff inclination, 
and expressed himself much obliged for 
his lordship's courtesy. 

Coleman was about to do the same, 
when, narrowly scanning the features of 
the supposed nobleman, he recognised at 
once an old friend, and holding out his 
hand, loudly exclaimed — 

"What! Marks, Mr. Marks, is that 
you 

" It is, indeed, Mr. Coleman, and right 
glad I am to see you. Who would have 



P„ 



240 THE VICTIM CAGED. 

thought on it ? Why, I've only been in 
this here country about a week. I'm sent 
over to look after some English navvies, 
and here I finds you. Tip us your daddle, 
old chap ; I'm up and down glad to see 
you. How's the governor, eh? Is he 
dead, or have you two parted ?" 

" Neither ; I corned here to see an old 
friend about some property I am going to 
buy in Belgium. But I forgot ; I haven't 
introduced you to my friend Monsieur 
Vanderplanc, a gent who speaks English 
like an Englishman, although he is a 
Belgian. Allow me to introduce you to 
each other. Monsieur Vanderplanc — Mr. 
Marks, a civil engineer." 

" Proud to shake your hand, sir, whether 
you are a lord or a monseer. Please take 
a drop to our better acquaintance." 

They all filled their glasses and at once 
swallowed the contents. 

"Take another," urged Marks, "and 
we'll be off." 



THE VICTIM CAGED. 241 

Again they filled ^heir glasses with 
brandy, and again they emptied [them. 
As Coleman turned to put down his 
tumbler, Marks privately cast a look of 
recognition on Compartz. The latter 
returned it with a significant glance. In 
the next instant the momentary change 
had passed away from their faces. 

"It is time to proceed, gentlemen," 
observed the sergeant. " General Westlake 
will be out at two, and then I must leave 
you. 

" If that be the case," replied Marks, 
" the sooner we're off the better." Then 
calling for the bill, which he seemed to 
pay without hesitation, he jumped into 
the carriage, and drove off to the plains of 
Mont St. Jean, which were soon reached, 
and the inspection began. 



VOL. II. 16 



242 



CHAPTEE XXI. 

THE FIELD OF WATERLOO. 

Getting out at the farm of Mont "St. 
Jean (after which the French have 
named the battle), our travellers proceeded 
to the j&eld of action, while their guide 
amused them by relating the horrora 
he had witnessed in the farmhouse they 
were leaving, and which had been made 
use of as a hospital for the wounded. 
He had been sent there on the morn- 
ing of the 19th, and there beheld 
the dying and the dead mixed up to- 
gether. The screams of the wounded 
suffering from agonizing wounds, many 
awaiting their turn for amputation — the 
imploring appeals for water, which was 



THE FIELD OF WATERLOO. 243 

I 

SO scarce that tlie bfewers of Brussels 
were actually forced to send out beer to 
slake the thirst of our wounded soldiers, 
while the surgeons, almost dropping 
from fatigue and anxiety, hurried from 
one case to another, their wristbands 
tucked up, their hands reeking with 
human blood — no better, no stronger 
illustration of the horrors of war could 
possibly be found than that which the 
farm-house of Mont St. Jean presented on 
the morning after the battle. 

IncKning to the left, the group passed 
the hollow in which our national brigade 
of cavalry were stationed at the outbreak 
of the action. "It was in the valley slightly 
to the right of this point," remarked the 
sergeant, " and in full view of Sir Thomas 
Picton's briga4e, that they made their cele- 
brated charge, and saved the honour of the 
day. It was here that poor Ponsonby met 
his death. Overtaken by the Polish Lan- 

16— :j 



244 THE FIELD OF WATERLOO. 

cers in his attempt to joiu his brigade, 
he was run through by at least a dozen 
lances at the same moment. His aide-de- 
camp might have escaped, but refused to 
leave his loved general — preferring to 
fall by his side, to quitting him, even 
in death. His body was discovered 
next morning lying within ten yards of 
his chief, grasping in his hand the 
likeness of Lady Ponsonby, which her 
husband had torn from his neck and 
given his aide-de-camp to bear to her as a 
last token of affection. Unable to help 
the sujfferers, the whole of Picton's brigade 
beheld the scene which passed within one 
hundred and fifty paces from them. It 
was near the same spot that the eagle 
was taken by a soldier of the Scotch 
Greys. Sergeant Ewart, ^of that corps, 
claimed the honour ; but,'' added the ser- 
geant, "I have heard this disputed, and the 
honour of the capture given to others." 



THE FIELD OF WATEELOO. 245 

" The adjacent hedgerow was lined by 
riflemen. In going up to it Sir Thomas 
Picton, one of the best generals England 
ever boasted, was killed. The tree which 
marked the spot has been cut down and 
made into snuiff-boxes. One of these," 
said the sergeant, interrupting himself, 
" I have still for sale, should you like to 
purchase it; it is an interesting relic." 
As, however, no one proposed to buy it, 
their worthy guide went on. " After the 
general's death, it was discovered that 
he had been wounded on the 16th, but 
fearing he might be removed from his 
military duties in consequence of this, he 
jealously concealed the fact from everyone 
but his own servant. Though a strict 
disciplinarian, Sir Thomas was always 
just and careful of his men. Notwith- 
standing the stigma which was attached to 
his name for having tortured a female 
when governor in the West Indies, he 



246 THE FIELD OF WATERLOO. 

was one of the most popular as well as 
one of the most gallant and skilful leaders 
tliat ever graced the British army." 

In 1832, near the spot where this hero 
fell, was erected a monument, on which is 
inscribed : — 

PORCHET DE SIVRY 

Was here assassinated, at 4 p.m. on tlie 10th of 
June, 1832. Pray for bis soul, and that his mur- 
derers may be discovered. 

The murder took place close to the 
high road. The victim was a tutor at 
the Chateau de Fischermont — ^the cause 
jealousy. Many attempts have been 
made to destroy this monument during 
the night. 

The next point visited was the farm 
of La Belle Alliance, to arrive at which 
our party had to pass the monument 
erected to the memory of Sir Alexander 
Gordon, the chief aide-de-camp of the 
Duke of Wellington, and La Haye Sainte, 



THE FIELD OF WATERLOO. 247 

where some of the hardest fighting of the 
day took place, it being one of the two 
great points contested during the day. 
The sergeant pointed out to Marks the 
hook to which an unfortunate French 
rifleman was found hanging on the 
morning of the 1 9th. The unhappy man 
had climbed up and stationed himself 
here for the purpose of picking out the 
oflGlcers. Perceived by one of our men, 
he was instantly shot, but caught by a 
hook, he remained suspended like the 
■*' Grolden Fleece *' during eight-and-forty 
hours, and was at last buried amongst 
our dead. 

La Belle Alliance, a mere public-house, 
takes its name from an accidental meet- 
ing between Wellington and Blucher, 
while the Prussians were pursuing the 
common enemy. Some doubt this cir- 
<5umstance, and ascribe the name to the 
fact that the innkeeper had some years 



248 THE FIELD OF WATERLOO. 

before married a somewhat notoriously in- 
famous female, in consequence of which 
their marriage became the subject of a 
sneer, their neighbours, as they pointed 
to the house, always observing, " Vbila, 
une belle alliance r 

It was now one o'clock, and Coleman, 
considering he had seen quite enough, 
proposed to return. Dr. Compartz and 
Marks violently opposed the motion until 
they had seen everything and acquired 
some of the relics which were hawked 
about in thousands by boys and girls 
who made a little fortune by thus im- 
posing upon the gullibility of the British 
traveller. So Coleman felt compelled 
to remain or return alone. The party 
looked in at the farmhouse where Napo- 
leon passed the night previous to the 
battle, in a state of the greatest anxiety 
and watchfulness, receiving reports and 
giving out orders. How different from 



THE FIELD OF WATERLOO. 249 

OTir great duke, who slept so soundly at 
the Hotel de la Poste, that it is said Sir 
Colin Campbell had to burst open his 
door to awaken him. Yet each general 
had the world's fate depending on their 
relative success. 

Hougoumont was next visited. Here 
the still charred ruins are carefully pre- 
served, thanks to the orders of Count 
Eobiano, their proprietor. It was here 
that the most severe fighting took place. 
This chateau, with the adjoining orchard, 
was taken and retaken several times. 
The sergeant, however, was in a hurry, 
and omitted half his usual string of 
anecdotes in his history of this half-acre, 
on which more gallant soldiers sighed 
their last than any spot which the world 
presents. 

Finally, Marks, Compartz, and their 
guide ascended the Lion mound — ^built 
np to commemorate the action. Coleman 



/ 



250 THE FIELD OP WATERLOO. 

was too tired to ascend, so he waited at 
the foot. The view from the top is won- 
derfully fine, but the fields around it are 
much changed in their appearance, this 
immense mountain of earth having been 
scraped up from the adjoining fields. 
From this elevation, it is said that the 
present Duke of Wellington, in company 
with Colonel Churchill (a descendant of 
the great Duke of Marlborough), viewed 
the scene of their ancestors' glory. 

The descent is most dangerous and 
fatiguing. Our travellers, however, ac- 
complished it with safety, and having 
remunerated their military guide, once 
more returned to their carriage, which 
by their orders had followed them from 
Waterloo. 

" Back to the hotel !" cried Coleman, 
delighted once more to be seated — " back 
to the hotel ! I am dying with hunger 
and thirst.'* 



THE FIELD OF WATERLOO. 251 

" No, don't let's go there ; I've ordered 
some dinner at a snug cottage only four 
miles off, on the road to Brussels, where 
there's a nice garden. I'd asked two of 
our chaps to come, but as they are not 
here, why, first come first served, say I, 
80 hanged if you shan't have their grub !" 

" With all my heart," said Compartz, 
politely bowing ; " although a comparative 
stranger, I shall gladly partake of your 
hospitality." 

" Well, I wont say no," added Cole- 
man, in a discontented tone, "but we 
must stop somewhere to get a drain, for 
I'm blessed if I ain't dying with thirst." 

"Well, by good luck I happened to 
bring out a flask of tip-top brandy, 
some of the real sort, as I brought from 
England. So, if you're thirsty, dip your 
nib into it, old boy," said Marks. 

"I looks at ye," replied Coleman. 
" Your health, monseer ;" and he took a 



252 THE FIELD OF WATERLOO. 

deep draught, smacking his Kps. He 
exclaimed as he recovered his breath, 
" Well, that is of the right sort, and no 
mistake. I*m blessed if I don't have 
another puU;" and with this assurance 
he again raised the flask to his lips. 

A smile unseen by Coleman passed be- 
tween the doctor and Marks. 

" En route !" cried Compartz, as they 
started on their return to Brussels. 



253 



CHAPTEE XXII. 



A DARK DEED. 



As they travelled along, Coleman repeated 
his applications to the brandy-flask so 
often that he was far from sober when the 
vehicle drove up to the door of a roadside 
cabaret. Had the worthy valet not been 
slightly confused by the liquor he had 
imbibed, he would probably have been 
startled at finding a dinner-table prepared 
for three persons, and a certain intimacy 
between the landlord and Marks, which 
decidedly boded no good. His brains, 
however, being somewhat obfuscated 
from the draughts he had swallowed, 
Coleman sat down without making any 
remark on the objects or persons aroimd 



254 A DARK DEED. 

him, and began vociferously to call for 
his dinner. 

The meal was soon served ; a very good 
one it proved to be, and the trio did 
ample justice to it. The highly-spiced 
dishes — ^the principal one of which (a 
civet de liivre) Marks declared to be a 
hashed cat — ^together with the light wine 
which he imbibed, somewhat sobered 
Coleman and quieted him ; his mind was, 
however, not cleared, a heavy cloud hung 
over his brain, and made him so amiable, 
in despite of himself, that he was ready to 
acquiesce in any scheme which his com- 
panions might propose. 

" I vote,*' said Compartz, as the meal 
ended, "that we adopt your English 
fashion of continuing our libations after 
dinner. I remember when I was in 
England we always enjoyed ourself in 
drinking when the dinner was over." 
Compartz spoke in broken English, but 



A DAEK DEED. 255 

made himself perfectly plain. "Now 
this is a beautiful day ; what say you to 
taking our liquor alfresco ?'* 

"Where?" asked Marks. 

" Ay, where ?" demanded Coleman. 

" In the open air." 

" Oh, oh, that's your little game, is it ? 
Well now, I likes that, it seems so rural 
like ; why, theyVe a reg'lar swell garden 
here, and I ordered the mounseer of this 
house to have all sorts of good things 
ready there as I comed out." 

"Ah, sare, that was wise/' exclaimed 
Compartz. 

"I'm blessed if you ain't a stunner, 
just to foresee what I wanted; I says 
done, and as *done and done' is enough 
between two gentlemen, let's toddle 
into the garden. I say, old boys, if you 
two chaps only knew one another as well 
as I does, we'd have some jolly fan, I 
guess — eh? Come — come along. By- 



256 A DARK DEED. 

the-by," added he, stopping himself sud- 
denly, " I say, Marks, how's Mother 
Rearden ?" 

"Mrs. Marks — she's my lawful wife/' 

" Come, none of that ; you don't have 
no more to do with the law than you can 
help." 

" What ?" roared Marks, angrily ; " FU 

tell you what, Mr. Lickplate " A 

look from Compartz checked him, and, 
aflfecting to laugh, he added, "I was 
rather jealous of you.'* 

" Well," chuckled the tipsy man, " she 
might have done worse." 

The servant-girl now came in-r-for the 
cabaret did not boast the services of a 
waiter — and having announced that " all 
was prepared," the strange trio arose and 
followed her footsteps. 

She led them into one of those conve- 
nient but stiff-looking arbours which 
decorate almost every large garden on 



A DARK DEED. 257 

the continent. Guarded from the view, 
shaded from the sun's rays, and equally 
sheltered from the north blast and the 
cutting easterly wind, the arbour or sum- 
mer-house, which they now reached, and 
where a table stood covered with wines 
and spirits, as well as biscuits and cheese, 
offered to the tired travellers a haven of 
rest till sunset, when they proposed to 
start for Brussels. It was now little 
more than four o'clock, and the day 
was unusually sultry for the season. 
Everything seemed to invite our travellers 
to drink; a double allowance of each 
article was easily accounted for by the 
fact of the house being far beyond ear- 
shot, and consequently the little girl 
would not be able to hear their calls for 
fresh supplies; so, to remedy this diflB- 
culty, she had laid in for them a more 
than plentiful supply. 

" Donnez-moi tine " and here Cole- 

VOL. II. 17 



258 A DARK DEED. 

man's French came to a full stop, as lie 
rose to embrace tlie young girl, but 
failing in this he fell upon a bench, his 
back supported by a heap of faggots ; 
Compartz and Marks sat down on either 
side of him. 

" Your health, old chap !" cried Marks, 
raising a glass of brandy and water which 
he had just filled; "your health, old 
chap !" 

Coleman, scarcely admiring the ex- 
treme intimacy of his once humble friend, 
omitted to reply. 

"What, wont you pledge me? have 
you so soon forgotten an old pal?" and 
Marks filled out a second tumbler and 
handed it to Coleman, who, raising it to 
his lips, returned the good wish, and 
swallowed the contents at a single 
draught. 

" Mon ami, is it because I am worth- 
less you not drink my health? oh. 



A DARE DEED. 259 

that is not polite, in this country it is an 
insult." 

"Well, hang it! you needn't be so 
uncommon nasty with me. I never 
flinches from my liquor ; I'll drink a cask 
with you, if you says as you wish it. 
Here's your health, mounseer — mounseer 
— doctor — eh?" and, as he swallowed a 
small glass of raw brandy, he fell back 
perfectly senseless. 

After a moment, Compartz arose, and 
placing his ear to the sleeper's mouth, 
listened for a few moments ; then, turning 
round, he addressed Marks in perfectly 
good English — 

" It's all right, Jim, he's dead asleep ; 
it's our fault if he ever wakes again." 
(Marks chuckled.) " And what's more, I 
think we may do it without shedding any 
blood; George Sydney was a fool to 
dictate to us." 

" In coorse he was ; every man to his 

17— a 



260 A DARK DEED. 

trade ; his trade is a-preaching, oum to 
earn our livelihood. I'll do whatever 
yoa like, doctor." 

"Hush! don't speak so loud; come 
here and hold him up, while I untie his 
cravat;" the other did so. "Now lay 
him down — ^that's right ; ah, you needn't 
be afraid, he wont awake ; now jump up 
and kneel upon his chest ; there, now 
dig your two big thumbs into his throat, 
just so ;" and the doctor so placed them 
that they eiFectually stopped the drunk- 
ard's breath; then taking out a large 
handkerchief, he thrust it into the sleeper's 
mouth, and so eflTectually gagged him. 
The unhappy wretch struggled for a few 
seconds, then heaved strongly in a last 
convulsion and ceased to move ; neither 
of the men, however, relaxed their mur- 
derous exertions. At length, withdrawing 
the handkerchief from Coleman's mouth, 
and once more listening to ascertain if he 



A DARK DEED. 261 

breathed, Compartz turned round, and said 
— " You may come off him now ; it's all 
right, he'll never betray Master George 
as he threatened." 

"Yes, that's all mighty fine, but 
what the deuce are we to do with the 
body ?" 

" Don't be an ass." 

"What the ?" 

" Stop ! no violence, particularly just 
now; you know I could not mean to 
offend you, so come here like a good 
fellow and help me." 

" An ass, indeed," muttered Marks, as 
he helped his companion in crime to prop 
up the body. " There now, that will do ; 
where's the cravat? let us put it on 
neatly; there, that will do, our dear 
friend looks as if he had died of drinking ; 
upon my life we've done it well. Now 
shout away as loud as you can ;" and they 
both began roaring for help. 



262 A DARE DEED. 

Presently the landlord and the young 
girl rushed in. 

" What's the matter ?" 

The doctor eagerly explained something 
to the landlord in French, who hurriedly 
returned to the house. 

" I say," chimed in Marks, " what the 
blazes are you saying in that gibberish ?"" 

"I am explaining to our worthy host 
how unfortunately our cousin has been 
seized with an apoplectic fit, and desiring 
him instantly to get the carriage ready, 
that we may go off* and find a surgeon.'^ 

At that instant the gu-1 cried out— 
" Oh, gentlemen, gentlemen, monsieur is 
dead !" 

" Not so, I trust," cried Compartz, with 
strong emotion ; " not so bad as that ; but 
I ear without instant medical aid he will 
perish ; run quick and see if the carriage 
is ready." So away went the waitress. 

"I say, doctor, just handle his pulse 



A DARK DEED. 263 

once more, and be sure we don't leave 
him alive to pursue us." 

"Dont fear, we've done the trick," 
replied the other, winking; "give me 
that bottle of brandy." He emptied it 
amidst the flowers, and then threw the 
empty bottle at the foot of the corpse. 

At this instant the landlord appeared, 
and announced that the vehicle was at 
the door. 

" Send some person to take care of our 
poor relative till we return, though I 
much fear our aid will come too late ; he 
drank off a whole bottle of brandy, then 
fell back, and I fear will expire from the 
effects. Here is a napoleon, we will take 
the change on our return ;" and the pair, 
in seeming agitation, entered the carriage. 

" Shall we remove him to a bed ?" 

"Perhaps you had better not till our 
return. Now, coachman, drive as quickly 
as you can to Doctor Delauny's. Do not 



264 A DARK DEED. 

spare your horses — a life depends on your 
speed. Take care of your patient ; you 
had better not disturb him, landlord. 
Off, coachman !" And away they drove. 

"Well," cried Marks, with a deep- 
drawn sigh, "it's all over, and, to tell you 
the truth, I don't feel altogether so com- 
fortable." 

" I thought you had more pluck ; re- 
collect now, fifty pounds down and fifty 
pounds when we see Mr. Sydney, is worth 
earning ; besides, I heard you undertook 
a similar job in Ireland.'^ 

"So I did, but I missed him, and I 
refused to try it again ; but there ain't no 
use in jawing now ; the deed's done, and 
we must make ourselves scarce. You 
don't mean really to return, do you?" 

" Of course not. I'm off by the next 
train to Paris ; I've all ready. Will you 
come with me ?" 

" Not I ; I'll return to London by 



A DARK DEED. 265 

Calais, and I*m blessed if they can trace 
me ; once in London, I'll give *em leave 
to catch me if they can ; besides, I must 
get the cash from the Honourable George. 
But stay — Heavens ! here they come ! I 
thought so." 

These exclamations were called forth 
by the appearance of two gens d'armes^ 
who suddenly appeared. Marks hid him- 
self in a comer of the carriage, in an 
agony of fear ; Compartz sat calmly 
looking out. The police soldiers reached 
the carriage, into which they scarcely 
glanced; they were evidently on im- 
portant and pressing business ; they gal- 
loped past, and dashed on at a rate 
which soon carried them out of sight. 

Soon after, they reached the gates of 
Brussels; here the doctor stopped the 
carriage and alighted. Marks followed 
him. 

"Here is a napoleon, coachman; go 



266 A DARK DEED. 

home, change your horses, and then come 
back to the H6tel de France and take ns 
back to the anberge ; we will hnrry on 
to the doctor s/' 

The man drove off. 

" And now, Marks, we must separate ; 
it wont do to be seen together. I'll 
send my address to Mr. Sydney. I hope 
the thing wont be discovered, but you 
keep just as close as if the bobbies were 
after you." 

" I'm blessed if I don't. Good-bye ! 
You couldn't spare me a couple of sovs, 
could you?" 

" Not I — ^I've none to spare." 

"The refusal of them two sovs shall hang 
you some day," muttered Marks ; and the 
ruflSians rushed oflf in different directions. 



267 



CHAPTEE XXIII. 

THE SURGEON AND HIS PATIENT. 

It was past twelve o'clock before Leslie 
recovered from his fevered sleep, and even 
then was only partially restored to con- 
sciousness by the officious eflTorts of the 
boots to awaken him. Half stupefied, he 
received the information that Major 
Wright had called, and that a note had 
arrived from Mr. ScarsdaJe requiring an 
immediate answer. To the end of this 
message the man tagged a request to 
know whether the captain would get up 
to breakfast ? 

" Yes — that is, no ! I feel too unwell ; 
I cannot rise. Bring my breakfast here ;'* 
and our hero again fell back upon his 



268 THE SURGEON AND 

pillow; while the now satisfied boots, 
taking up the clothes in his arms, pro- 
ceeded down to the kitchen, there to com- 
municate the gentleman's wishes, mut- 
tering as he went along, " Well, I never j 
I av been tight more nor once, but I'm 
blowed if ever I was so bad as the capting ; 
I'm blessed if I don't think them gentry- 
is the wust of all, when they goes at it." 

About a quarter of an hour later the 
breakfast-tray was brought up by the 
head-waiter. Leslie raised himself with 
diflSiculty, and, though evidently suffering 
from nausea, endeavoured to take some- 
thing. The effort was too much for him ; 
with a low groan he fell back senseless. 

The startled waiter instantly rang the 
bell for the chambermaid, and leaving her 
in charge of the invalid, whom he really 
believed to be dying, rushed down to the 
landlord, and, by his directions, ran as 
fast as his legs would carry him, to fetch 



HIS PATIENT. 269 

the nearest medical man. Fortunately, 
the person so situated was a retired 
surgeon of the navy, one admitted to be 
most skilful in his profession. The waiter 
found the practitioner at home and at once 
secured his services. 

In the meantime the idea of a gentle- 
man requiring the assistance of a surgeon 
to restore him from a fit of inebriety, so 
amused the servants that more than one 
had, as if by accident, assembled on the 
staircase to hear the result, from which 
they imagined much fun would arise, 
before the doctor arrived. At length he 
did so, and having been met by the land- 
lord in the hall, he proceeded with him to 
the patient's room. 

If there might possibly have arisen the 
slightest inclination to giggle, or even 
smile, the doctor's serious manner as he 
approached the bed and took the sufferer's 
hand, at once checked it. 



270 THE SUBGBON AND 

He held it for more than a minute, as 
a deep frown settled on his countenance ; 
he turned the sufferer's head to the light 
and examined the eyes, the lips, and the 
countenance with serious attention. Then 
turning to the landlord, he demanded — 

" Mr. Cross, what do you know of this 
affair?" 

" Very little, very little. This gentle- 
tmsi, who has been spying here for some 
time, and is a friend of Mr. Scarsdale's — 
and consequently must be a gentleman — 
has always behaved very steadily and 
well till this unfortunate occurrence yes- 
terday." 

"To what occurrence do you allude? 
state it." 

" Well, sir, as you're a medical man, 
I suppose there is no harm in telling 
you. 

" I insist upon it. This is a serious 



case." 



HIS PATIENT. 271 

" Indeed, Tm very sorry for it. But 
yoTing men will be young men, even lords 
sometimes." 

" Speak to the purpose." 

" I will. Well, then. Captain Leslie 
went out yesterday as sober and brisk as 
a bee, about eleven o'clock in the morn- 
ing, to caU on Mr. Scarsdale, and he 
ordered his bill, as he said he thought he 
should be going to Ireland, and he seemed 
a good deal cut up by a letter he had 
received." 

" Well, do hurry on." 

" Well, I'm coming to it. About three 
(or perhaps a little more) my porter came 
to me and told me that our lodger in No. 
13 (this is 13), had been brought home 
in a cab dead drunk " 

" Idiot !" muttered the doctor. 

"So of course I had nothing to do 
but to order him to be put to bed, and 
the chambermaid looked in every now and 



272 THE SURGEON AND 

then, in case he might want something; for 
of course I was sorry for him, although I 
felt, as a respectable married man, he was 
scandalizing our establishment." 

" Did you ask where he was brought 
from ?" 

" No ; I gave the money to the boots, 
who is here, and he can tell. He paid 
eight shillings for the fare." 

" Well, so I did, master ; I did ask the 
cabby where he comed from, and says he, 
* We drove in town and out of town, and 
then to a house near Bethnal Green, or 
Commercial Eoad (I forget which), and 
then the gent went in, and in about half- 
an-hour came out in the state you see him 
in.' The man asked ten bob ; I only 
gave him eight." 

The surgeon again and more minutely 
examined his patient; then crossing to 
a small table, he wrote a note to his 
assistant, and handing it to the land- 



HIS PATIENT. 273 

lord, requested him to send his most in- 
telligent and active servant in a cab to 
his residence to bring round his man with 
the remedies he required. 

" I'll get a Hansom directly," eagerly- 
responded the head waiter, his curiosity 
strongly roused. 

" No ; take a four-wheeler, and be as 
quick as you can. My assistant will 
probably bring the stomach-pump with 
him." 

" The stomach-pump ! Is not that 
rather violent for a drunken man, 
doctor ?" 

• " Silence. The man is poisoned !" 

A general cry of horror ran round the 
circle, and more than one person slipped 
away. 

" God bless me !" groaned the landlord, 
"what will Mrs. Cross say?" and he in- 
stantly started off to inform her. 

" Leave me," added the doctor ; " I will 

VOL. II. IS 



274 THE SURGEON AND 

wait here till my assistant arrives. In the 
meantime I will ring the bell if I require 
your services /' and he dismissed them all 
by a significant wave of his hand. He 
then sat down and watched his patient. 

In the back parlour of the same build- 
ing sits on an ample couch the female 
head of the establishment. The apart- 
ment in which we first behold her is 
ornamentally and fashionably furnished, 
the walls covered with rich flock paper, 
the splendid curtains tasselled in bright 
spun silk. The French pendule, the 
velvet-covered tabarets, would at once 
announce an aristocratic boudoir, were it 
not for the one speaking fact, that while 
surveying with pride her handsome apart- 
ment, she is enabled to watch through a 
small window every proceeding in the 
bar. She now lounges gracefully on her 
velvet seat, before her lies a gold-mounted 
srfielling bottle, a diamond edition of 



HIS PATIENT. 275 

" Parisina/' and a splendid but nnfinislied 
specimen of silk embroidery. But to these 
she is not attending; her pen is in her 
right hand, and she closely calculates, 
with all the skill of a well-trained ac- 
countant, the amount of the various 
biUs only just paid into her hands by 
the head waiter. 

Engaged in this arduous task, we will 
take a hasty glance at the fair landlady. 
Considerably above the average height of 
females, Madame St. Croix (as she wishes 
to be called) is decidedly a good-looking 
woman. She has dark hair and eyes, is 
well though somewhat robustly made. She 
has always endeavoured, for some strange 
whim or other, to affect the most delicate 
nervousness. Mr. Cross had first seen 
her at a fete in Boulogne. She was 
then the widow of an old man of con- 
siderable position, who had met her in 
some dancing-rooms, and wedded her in 

18— a 



276 THE SURGEON AND 

haste. He died the following year, and 
left his " Beauty" a very handsome sum 
of money. 

Now Mr. Cross, at the time we speak 
of, was a well-dressed, somewhat gay 
bachelor. He had once held a com- 
mission for a few months in the army. 
He took care that every one should know 
this. He had scarcely a ten-pound note 
in the world. This fact he kept to him- 
self. He passed as an aristocratic beau 
at the public balls. His name had never 
appeared as an insolvent, a bankrupt, or 
an outlaw. It was not every one, then, 
in Boulogne that could compete with him 
in this respect. It is true his uncle kept 
an hotel, but no one knew this ; and as 
the said uncle was about to retire from 
business, why publish it ? On the other 
hand, the lady looked upon it as a matter 
of supererogation to communicate to him 
more than was necessary. The rich 



HIS PATIENT. 277 

widow of a man of status was quite suf- 
ficient, why go beyond it, and admit that 
her early education had sprung from the 
"black mail" infamously collected by 
the editor of a filthy penny publication 
— scurrilous and untrue? or how her 
nearest rrfatives had earned their bread ? 
Suffice it to say, the wealthy widow of 
the Honourable Captain Muggadore, a 
member of the Assembly in some distant 
portion of our colonies, espoused tTohn 
Cross, Esq., late of the 4th battalion of 
the West African Eifle Eangers. The 
bells of Dover almost cracked themselves 
to peal forth a carillon of congratula- 
tion as the happy couple dashed off for 
London. They only arrived in the me- 
tropolis to find the uncle dying of an 
attack of gout. The lady fainted when 
she was informed that she was the niece 
of an hotel-keeper. When she recovered 
her dear John soothed her, and showed 



278 THE SURGEON AND HIS PATIENT. 

her how lucrative the establishment had 
proved. Avarice suddenly spmag up in 
the heart of the not unworldly bride: 
in three months she sat, as we have de- 
scribed, in the room we have portrayed, 
the wife of the landlord. 



279 



CHAPTER XXIV. 



AN ALARM. 



*'0h, my dear Theodosia," cried Mr, 
Cross, rusliing in, " such an event ! who 
could ever have believed it ?'* 

"Why this unseemly agitation?" de- 
manded his wife, looking up from her 
accounts ; " pray be more decorous before 
your servants." 

"Oh, my dear, I can't help it! Oh, 
Popsy, had you been there !" 

" I have often told you not to indulge 
in vulgar terms of endearment." 

"Well— well, I can't help it. No. 13 
is poisoned !" 
What?" 
Ah, and I do believe dead before this." 



n 



• 



280 AN ALARM. 

The lady of the house gave a piercing 
shriek, and fell back fainting. 

Mr. Cross seemed perfectly bewildered. 
The lady seemed suddenly to recover, 
and darted a look of intense anger on her 
cara sposa, 

"I believe, Mr. Cross, you would ac- 
tually see me expire without proffering 
me the slightest assistance. Jane, give 
me my smelling-bottle — I am better now ; 
bring me a glass of water, and mingle 
three drops of eau-de-lme in it ; you will 
find the bottle on my dressing-table ;" 
and the lady resumed her equanimity. 
Truth to tell, the worthy landlord did not 
display as much interest in his wife's 
swooning as he ought to have done ; but 
the real fact was, these scenes were so 
often enacted that he had become some- 
what cruelly accustomed to them. 

" Well, John, and what's to be done ? 
I trust the poor deceased has not run 



AN ALARM. 281 

considerably into our debt ; not that I 
fear losing the money, but really relatives 
and friends " 

" What are you talking about, Mrs. C? 
why, the man's alive, though very bad. 
The doctor has just sent oflf for the 
stomach-pump." 

"What? I hope you did not permit 
such a thing; if the man happened to 
die, we should have an inquest and a 
trial, and all that sort of thing ; it would 
kill me; my nerves are really so sensi- 
tive that my first husband the Honour- 
able Captain Muggadore " 

"Oh, hang the Honourable Captain 
Muggadore — ^he was a fool !'* 

" And so was his widow for marrying 
you — ^you wretched innkeeper !" 

" Keep a civil tongue in your head, or 
I'U " 



t'> 



"What?' 

" I'll expose more tlian you will Uke." 



282 AN ALARM. 

" Take that !" cried the enraged fair 
one, and she threw her account-book at the 
head of Mr. Cross, who, bobbing down, 
allowed the ponderous volume to pass 
over him, and striking a looking-glass, 
shivered it to atoms with a loud crash. 

At this instant the door opened, and 
the doctor stood before them. 

In a moment Mr. Cross reassumed a 
calmer manner, and the fair landlady fell 
back fainting on the couch. The practi- 
tioner, however, seemed to disregard all 
parties, and in a solemn and measured 
tone addressed them — 

" The gentleman above '^ 

" Is he dead ?" cried Mrs. Cross, sud- 
denly recovering. 

" Far from it, but his life now hangs 
on a thread. I have given him an opiate ; 
if it brings on sleep, and that sleep con- 
tinues some hours, he may probably awake 
as well as ever he was in his life; if 



AN ALARM. 283 

he is disturbed by any unseemly com- 
motion," and lie gave them a look which 
they could not mistake, " he will probably 
not survive ; need I then caution you and 
request you to keep the house as quiet as 
possible ?" 

The pair promised this, and the sur- 
geon left, desiring that he might instantly 
be sent for if the patient awoke and ex- 
hibited any bad symptoms. 

"No. 13 must be somebody, or the 
doctor wouldn't be so monstrous atten- 
tive," remarked Cross, winking at his 
wife, the past quarrel quite forgotten. 

" And how should he know who he is. 
Master Wiseacre ?" asked the wife. 

" Oh, he looked over all the papers in 
his pockets ; as he said, to find out some- 
thing about the case." 

" And did not you take a glance ?" 

" Well, I couldn't well do so before the 
doctor." 



284 AN ALARM. 

"I only wish I had been there — ^but 
you are not half a man." 

The quarrel would probably have been 
renewed, but Major Wright, entering at 
the moment to ask after the sufferer's 
health, interrupted the tete-a-t^te. Mr^ 
Cross left the room to resume his duties ; 
the fair lady retired to her room to take 
a glass of cherry-brandy, an undoubted 
specific in many female ailments. 



285 



CHAPTER XXV. 



THE lawyer's office. 



Two days subsequent to the events recorded 
in the last chapter, Leslie again sat at 
his breakfast-table, completely recovered 
from the eflfects of the chloroform. A 
pile of letters was placed beside his plate ; 
these he now ventured to open. The first 
was from Mr. Scarsdale, expressing that 
gentleman's great surprise that Leslie 
had not returned to him to report the 
success, or otherwise, of his inquiries re- 
lative to Lady Grantchester ; another 
from Lady Emily expressed no slight dis- 
appointment at the strange silence of him 
to whom she had written ; whUe a third 
was addressed to our hero by a celebrated 



286 THE lawyer's office. 

artist, asking him to sit for his portrait, 
as he wished to add it to those of the 
other Victoria Crosses whose likenesses 
were to fill a prominent position in the 
Palace ; a note from Major Wright 
asking him to visit the Crystal Palace, 
an application for charity, with two or 
three circulars, made up the number 
of letters which Leslie now in turn 
scanned. 

The note of the lawyer gave him much 
pain, as it displayed him in an odious 
light, more particularly as that gentleman 
had sent more than once for an answer, 
and as he could have little doubt that the 
waiters had hinted to the messenger that 
the captain's inability to send one arose 
from continued inebriety. This was in- 
deed vexatious ; but our hero felt that he 
could fully and satisfactorily explain away 
the charge, and give such information to 
Mr. Scarsdale as would fully repay him 



THE lawyer's office. 287 

for thus waiting a few days. Not so the 
note of Emily : it is true it breathed that 
female tenderness which women can so 
well depict, even in writing. It was 
less fixed — less determined than the last, 
but it gave no address ; it spoke of no 
locality where she might be found; it 
asked for no reply. The very blessings 
it prayed for on the head of him she 
loved seemed as if poured forth in part- 
ing; all foreshadowed an eternal adieu. 
Lord TJrmstone had enclosed a short note ; 
it merely assured Leslie of the nobleman's 
continued affection, and expressed a warm 
hope that they might soon meet again — 
indeed, to Leslie it appeared as if the Earl 
was profoundly ignorant of the contents 
of his daughter's letter, since it spoke of 
a future and a happy meeting. But here 
again, by accident or design, no date 
was appended — no hint of future move- 
ments. Perhaps he might have been led 



288 THE lawyer's office. 

to suppose by Lady Emily, that she 
had told all there. That it might be 80 
the lover fondly hoped ; for if the Earl 

# 

did not reject his suit, one link of sorrow 
hung less heavy on his heart. Yes, 
Leslie was, notwithstanding every dis- 
couraging circumstance, still ftdl of hope. 
He was young, bold, and energetic. His 
every thought was of her so well wor- 
thy of his love, and with that proper con- 
fidence which belongs to youth, he in- 
wardly vowed that nothing but death 
should rob him of his heart's treasure. 
He was strong and active, he would travel 
all round the world but he would find 
her; no obstacle should daunt him, no 
danger cause him to turn aside. He could 
well afford to wait for her ; he would serve 
for her as for a second Eachel ; but pos- 
sess her he would, even though his future 
life be one of toil and trouble. To pur- 
chase the love of such a being, even at 



THE lawyer's office. 289 

the cost of life, Leslie was ready, willing, 
and determined. 

The application to take the portrait of 
our Victoria Cross was civilly declined. 
To Major Wright he wrote a short note, 
saying he would meet him at the concert 
to be given at the Crystal Palace at two 
o'clock ; then hurrying up to his room, 
he donned his hat and great-coat (for he 
stilled feared cold), and sallied forth to 
call on Mr. Scarsdale. 

On this occasion he was shown in im- 
mediately that he was announced. The 
lawyer at first received him somewhat 
coldly, but, as he proceeded in his narra- 
tive, not only thawed — not only displayed 
the deepest interest, but brought from his 
hearer excuses and apologies innumerable 
for the harsh note he had written. 

It so happened by chance (at least, so 
Mr. Scarsdale assured his visitor) that a 
detective was waiting in the outer office. 

VOL. II. 19 



290 THE lawyeb's office. 

By mutual consent^ that functionary was 
called in and taken into counsel. To him 
our hero again repeated the events which 
in effect had ultimately sent him home 
senseless and in danger. 

" I know the man you mean ; he has 
gone by several names. Our people were 
on the look-out for him for assisting to 
destroy a hahby the very day after you 
saw him; hut the bird was flown, and 
left no clue behind him by which he might 
be traced. I'll send two of my best 
hands to the asylum, and then to this 
doctor's late lodgings ; but I fear we shall 
have but little chance. This Compartz 
is decidedly the downiest cove that has 
hitherto escaped our clutches." 

At this instant a boy came in and 
announced the Honourable George Syd- 
ney. Scarsdale exchanged a look with 
Leslie, and desired that he might be 
shown in. 



THE lawyer's office. 291 

In a minute more the Earl of Grant- 
Chester's brother stood before them. Mark 
Leslie had only seen him when in Ire- 
land, but he was struck by the much 
altered appearance of the once handsome 
pet of Exeter Hall. Care had evidently 
laid her finger on his pallid cheek, and 
added many years to him who, only a few 
months before, had seemed to be in the 
very prime of life. He no longer boasted 
the upright carriage he once prided him- 
self upon, but still there was enough left 
in his appearance and manner to win con- 
fidence and affection ; and his fine deep 
voice and well-set teeth, his cordial 
maimer and his aristocratic bearing, still 
remained to gain the hearts of those whom 
he condescended to address. 

Our hero bowed a slight recognition ; 
the lawyer shook him heartily by the 
hand, and, having requested him to be 
seated, at once addressed him. 



292 THE lawyer's office. 

"Well, Mr. Sydney, have you heard 
anything of Lady Grantchester ?" 

" Alas ! nothing. I have caused every 
inquiry to be made without eflfect ; and I 
grieve sorely to confess that I have come 
to the conclusion that her ladyship has 
destroyed herself. Heaven, I trust, will 
pardon the deed, since it was committed 
in an irresponsible state. I have ordered 
all the ponds around Lion House to be 
dragged, and I hourly expect to hear of 
the recovery of the body. How my poor 
dear brother will bear the shock, when her 
unhappy fate is communicated to him, I 
dread to contemplate." 

" It is a strange coincidence that at the 
very moment of your entrance we were 
discussing the subject to which you allude. 
Information received through our ex- 
cellent friend Captain Leslie, and subse- 
quently confirmed by Mr. Thompson, our 
confidential detective, leads us to believe 



THE lawyer's office. 293 

that the absence of Lady Grantchester is 
not voluntary on her part — she has been 
forcibly abducted." 

"By whom?" eagerly demanded George, 
forgetting for an instant his more staid 
manner. 

" I am sorry to say we know not ; nor 
have our best endeavours been able to 
discover a trace of her." 

George Sydney was again calm; he 
spoke in tones of deep feeling : — 

" I still fear that you are wrong ; my 
noble sister-in-law throughout her un- 
happy malady has ever shown a predis- 
position to commit suicide. * Though 
highly educated, the Divine light had 
never visited her. She was, alas ! though 
I am indeed loth to admit it, violent and 
impulsive." 

" I can positively say that Lady Grant- 
chester was carried away," said Leslie. 

"And I'll undertake to say I'll find 



294 THE lawyer's office. 

her if she's on the face of the earth. IVe 
sent hand-bills all over the Continent," 
said Thompson. 

" What ! who ordered you to do 
this ?" fiercely demanded the Honourable 
George ; then calming himself, and turn- 
ing to Scarsdale, he added, " Excuse my 
warmth, sir ; but this public exposure of 
a noble family is unwarrantable." 

"Mister Sydney, I know my business; 
excuse me for saying so ; you know yours. 
IVe reason to believe this lady was 
carried off by a certain Dr. Compartz — o, 
gentleman whom I believe you used to 
visit, and therefore I was going to ask 
you if you know anything of his move- 
ments ?" inquired the detective. 

" That person used, I believe, to visit 
Lady Grantchester at Lion House; I 
have, therefore, called on him occasionally 
to inquire after her ladyship's health. Of 
the man, beyond this, I know nothing ; 
but I believe him to be respectable." 



THE lawyer's office. 295 

" WeU, I don't/* 

" Enough of this, Thompson," interposed 
Scarsdale ; " follow out your own way of 
discovering her ladyship's retreat. Cannot 
you see that Mr. Sydney is all anxiety to 
discover it?" 

"So much so, that I will give one 
hundred pounds to him who discovers 
her, alive or dead. Heaven knows how 
anxious I feel !" ejaculated Greorge. 

"I hope to claim the reward, sir; but 
to do so I must lose no time. Grood 
morning to you, gentlemen ;" and the de- 
tective left the room. 

"You have doubtlessly written to my 
brother ?" asked Sydney. " Did you men- 
tion the cases of extreme destitution I 
wished to bring under his notice ?" 

" Not so ; I heard from his lordship 
yesterday morning. He was then en 
route from Ely, about to visit his estates 
near Grantchester ; having done this, he 
returns to town immediately." 



296 THE LAWYERS OFFICE. 

" Does he know of Lady Grantchester's 
disappearance ?" 

"No; it will be quite time enough 
to communicate the sad news when he 



arrives.'* 



" And when will that be ?" 

" The day after to-morrow. Of this, 
Captain Leslie, I was about to make you 
aware, as you will doubtless wish to be 
on the spot to meet him." 

" Would it not be better that I should 
be there to break the sad intelligence ?" 
demanded Sydney. 

"Pardon me, but he desires that 
Captain Leslie should alone receive him." 

George cast a glance of ill-concealed 
dislike on Leslie; and, taking his hat, 
with a deep sigh left the room, exclaim- 
ing— 

"I must again return to my melan- 
choly task, even though it break my 
heart !" 



THE lawyer's office. 297 

In a few minutes more Leslie rose, and 
having made the necessary arrangements 
with the lawyer relative to the return of 
his noble patron, directed his footsteps 
towards the South-Eastern Station, where 
he was to meet his friend Major Wright, 
and thence proceed with him to the 
Crystal Palace. 



298 



CHAPTEE XXVI. 

^HE CRYSTAL PALACE. 

To him or her who visits the Crystal 
Palace for the first time, that wonderful 
edifice and its fairy-like grounds must, 
indeed, be matters of wonder and admira- 
tion. Leslie had never visited the spot 
before, and he ahnost refused to enter 
the building, with his friend Wright, so 
attracted was he by the lovely gardens, 
the splendid views, which seemed rather 
the embodiment of one of the gorgeous 
scenes in the " Arabian Nights," than the 
bond-fide enclosure of a favoured spot 
within six miles of the British metropolis 
— snatched by Sir Joseph Paxton fi-om its 
surrounding meadows, and converted into 



THE CRYSTAL PALACE. 299 

the most beautiful parterre in the 
world; so at least it seemed to the 
delighted imagination of our hero, who, 
after driving through that most frightful 
of all cities — ^the city of London — and 
thence proceeding by an uninteresting 
line of railway, suddenly found himself 
thrust into an earthly elysium. Yes, 
indeed, here would he have lingered, 
dehghted and pleased, for hours, but 
Major Wright, accustomed to the scene, 
and seeing others hurrying towards the 
Palace, reminded the entranced youth 
that the concert was about to commence, 
and consequently they must hurry on, or 
they would not obtain seats. 

On arriving at the principal transept, 
Leslie paused to recover himself. To the 
Londoner, to the constant visitor to 
Sydenham, this may seem exaggerated ; 
but it was not so. Surprise, bewilder- 
ment, and admiration had fairly taken 



300 THE CRYSTAL PALACE. 

away the breath of one who had never 
seen or even dreamt of such a scene before. 
The crowd, consisting of several thousand 
well-dressed persons, the gigantic propor- 
tions of the building, the light roof, sus- 
pended (as it seemed to Leslie) high in 
the air, the statues, flowers, and fountains, 
the gigantic Egyptian figures, the loud 
pealing of the organ— one and all com- 
bined— struck him, who had never seen 
similar magnificence, with wondeiment 
almost amounting to terror, and he 
beheld with surprise the apparent apathy 
of his companion, who, without the 
slightest seeming admiration of surround- 
ing objects, jostled through the crowd, 
desirous of finding a seat. Two chairs 
were at length procured, and our friends 
sat down to listen. In the finished tones 
of that most finished of all vocalists. 
Mademoiselle Titiens, all other thoughts 
were lost, and our hero soon forgot even 



THE CRYSTAL PALACE. 301 

the wonders by which he was encircled, 
rapt as he became in the enchanting 
strains which now greeted his ears. Leslie 
adored music ; could one so full of passion 
do otherwise ? Impossible ; love and 
melody are the twin offspring of a generous 
heart. To sow these in the human breast; 
and even to bring them to maturity, was 
the task of an all-bountiful Providence 
rather than the work of study or of art. 

After the performance, Major Wright 
and Leslie lounged through the Palace 
and had a good opportunity of viewing 
and admiring the beauty of our female 
aristocracy, who had, on the present occa- 
sion (it being a first-rate concert), assem- 
bled in great numbers. In Ireland our 
hero had beheld faces perhaps as fair as 
those he now looked upon, but they 
lacked that easy grace, that conscious 
look of superiority, which stamp our 
noble fair as models of dignity and 



302 THE CRYSTAL PALACE. 

beauty. Englishmen iu general are not 

fl 

good dressers; careless of outwaxd ap- 
pearance, they rather trust to the charms 
of their conversation, the fascination of 
their manner, than to those outward 
trappings which the Parisian heaux so 
deeply study. 

" Who are those ?" asked LesUe of his 
companion, as a group of three persons 
approached. 

" They are foreigners. The gentleman 
on the right is an author of no mean 
talent ; he belongs to one of the embassies, 
and has brought out several works in our 
language — works wherein he has proved 
himself to be a man of deep reading and 
research. The lady leaning on his arm 
is his wife, quoted, even in our Court 
circles, as a model of grace ; she is not 
less amiable in her disposition than 
superior in her looks, and at this moment 
seems evidently pleased at some witty 



THE CRYSTAL PALACE. 303 

remark made by the small but well-pro- 
portioned gentleman on her left ; a fact 
not to be wondered at when I tell you that 
the individual referred to — after swaying, 
and almost deciding, the fate of one of the 
largest and most influential nations in 
Europe, after writing a history said to be 
unequalled in truth and language — has 
quietly taken up his abode in England, 
and now amuses himself by uttering light 
pleasantries and enchanting the oppo- 
site sex with his small talk. Though 
limited in stature, the talented historian, 
like the gigantic elephant, at present 
amuses himself by turns, in tearing up 
the mighty oak, or plucking the tiny 
flowret which ornaments his path." 

**And about whom is yonder group 
coUected?" 

"Oh, you are indeed ignorant of 
English society. The tall and rather 
good-looking individual leaning on the arm 



J 



304 THE CRYSTAL PALACE. 

of a pecuKarly well-countenanced friend 
(indeed, the fair sex vote him a beauty), is 
no less a personage than a royal duke. 
He is chatting with one of our most 
celebrated belles — the Duchess of Por- 
chester — ^who on her part seems well 
pleased with the attentions of the great 
man." 

They now passed through the several 
courts, which elicited fresh marks of 
wonder and admiration from Leslie, who, 
had he only worn his Victoria Cross, 
would probably himself have been the lion 
of the assemblage. 

A particularly handsome man at that 
moment approached them, bowing low as 
he passed a tall and finely-formed female. 
The peculiar style of the former could do 
no otherwise than arrest the attention of 
our hero. His black eyes, his fine teeth, 
his youthful form and well-shaped head, 
crowned by locks seemingly of pure silver. 



THE CRYSTAL PALACE. 305 

could scarcely be passed without remark, 
while the open and intelligent counte- 
nance, the well-shaped mouth, and, 
above all, the bright and speaking eye 
of the lady, at once bespoke a soul of 
talent. No wonder, then, that Major 
Wright was called upon to state who 
they were. 

"The gentleman is a well-known 
preacher, no less eloquent in the pulpit 
than fascinating in the ball-room. He is 
a lecturer, an orator, and an author. You 
may readily, then, believe that he is the 
pet of all the opposite sex. The lady to 
whom he bowed is an authoress, an 
admired and highly-lauded authoress, yet, 
strange to say, that talented creature has 
less vanity than the merest tyro in litera- 
ture. Astonishing the whole town by 
her graphic productions, she really seems 
unconscious of her great powers, and 

VOL. II. 20 



306 THE CRYSTAL PALACE. 

wholly ignorant of the world-wide admi- 
ration which has greeted her every new 
work/* 

'' And yonder elderly lady ?" 

" Oh, she is going with a large party 
to the refreshment-room, where her 
ladyship finds it an economical mode 
of returning the hospitalities of her 
friends to give them all a five-shil- 
ling dinner, allowing them each (in a 
playful manner) to pay for their respect- 
ive libations/* 

It was now announced that the great 
fountains were about to play, and a most 
ungenteel rush was made to get out by 
the centre doors. 

So great, indeed, was the crush, that 
our military friends were nearly carried 
off their legs; but young and active, 
they struggled successfully on, and had 
safely gained the middle of the flight of 
steps when a sudden and still more fearful 



THE CRYSTAL PALACE. 307 

impulsion absolutely threw several indi- 
viduals down. The cries of these suf- 
ferers for help were most distressing; 
unable to aid themselves, yet fore- 
seeing the chance of being trampled 
to death, they loudly besought the aid 
of those around them. Their friends 
joined in the general cry, and for 
some moments the scene was most dis- 
tressing. 

Immediately in front of Leslie, an old 
gentleman had been borne down, and our 
heroes next footstep would have been 
upon the prostrate man's body. But 
linking his arm within that of his friend 
he pressed back, and called on those 
behind him to give way. The great 
pressure had only been momentary, and 
the crowd surging back, allowed of 
Leslie raising the fallen sufferer. Words 
are unable to depict his joy when he 



308 THE CBTSTAL PALACE. 

recognised in the person he had sared. 
his more than £&ther^ his kind bene&ctor 
the Earl of Urmstone ! 

Once more saved by his loved prot^je, 
his thanks were almost incoherent as he 
poured forth his affection and his grati- 
tude. 

Having by this time arrived in a less 
crowded spot, Leslie ventured to ask for 
Lady Emily. 

" Oh, she is, I am happy to say, safe in 
the carriage. Tired, heated, and dis- 
pirited, she left me nearly half-an-hour 
ago. A cousin of hers. Sir Martyn 
Stapleton, conducted her to my carriage, 
where we shall find her safely ensconced. 
We need have no difficulty in getting 
away, as I came with a special pass, 
which permits my vehicle to come within 
the enclosure." 

Major Wright, seeing how matters 
stood, with proper delicacy withdrew, 



THE CRYSTAL iPALACE. 309 

under a plea of desiring to see the 
fountains play. 

After a quarter of an hour's walking, 
the pair arrived at the carriage-door. 
Lady Emily looked up alarmed at 
seeing, as she supposed, a stranger sup- 
porting her father. In a moment she 
recognised her loved companion, the 
companion of her youth, her every hope. 
She uttered an ill-suppressed cry and 
fell back, but not before she had cast 
one look of pure and unmingled devotion 
on our hero. 

The peer, considerably shaken by his 
fall, entered the vehicle with some diffi- 
culty. His protege paused ere he fol- 
lowed. 

" Come, jump in, Leslie. Oh, my dear 
Emily, I have another tale " 

" Nay, sir," cried the captain, trying to 
interrupt his noble benefactor, "perhaps 
I inconvenience you." 



310 THE CRYSTAL PALACE. 

** What, do you hesitate ? Have you 
so forgotten your father and your 
home ?" 

A tear of gratitude or joy, which, we 
cannot say, sprang to our hero's eyes as 
he jumped in and seated himself beside 
his loved Emily. 



END OP VOL. II. 




BEHIND THE CURTAIN 



CHAPTEE I. 

A T^TE-A-T^TE. t 

Little was said by Leslie as ihej drove 
along. The peer, however, described 
again and again the manner in which our 
hero had saved his lite, accompanying his 
narration with the warmest acknowledg- 
ments to his preserver. Lady Emily 
kept her handkerchief to her eyes, evi- 
dently for the purpose of concealing her 
tears. This might have been unsatisfac- 
tory to her lover, but it was more than 
compensated by the warm squeeze she 
gave his hand as her father showered 

VOL. III. 1 



1 



2 A t:&te-a-tete. 

down blessings on his head, and plainly 
told the depth of that attachment, which 
on receipt of her letter Leslie had almost 
doubted. To assert that a more happy 
trio returned from the Crystal Palace on 
the day to which we allude, would be to 
risk a falsehood. True, their joy was not 
vociferous, but it was profound. The 
loud babble of ordinary happiness may 
be deemed by the light thinker the 
supreme expression of contentment, but 
there is a luxury in silent enjoyment far 
beyond the luxury of mere expression, 
and this our party felt. 

Arrived at length in Berkeley-square, 
the carriage drove up to Thomas's Hotel. 
Here the party alighted, and after a full 
half hour spent in getting rid of their 
dusty habiliments and in making the 
necessary change of dress, they sat down 
to one of those luxurious meals for which 
this hotel is so justly celebrated. 



A t£te-1-t£te. 3 

The presence of tlie waiters during 
dinner was naturally a restraint on con- 
versation, and it was not until dessert 
had been placed on table and the servants 
had left the room, that confidential inter- 
course could take place between them; 
nor even then did the words of the peer 
and his lovely daughter flow in that easy 
and unrestrained manner that Leslie had 
been accustomed to. An evident reserve, 
not arising from any want of affection, 
but rather from some untold circum- 
stance, checked their words, and our hero 
felt almost afraid of awakening some un- 
pleasant memory if he asked what had 
passed since he last saw them. 

After a short time thus spent. Lady 
Emily rose and left the room, but not 
before her father had made her promise 
to return very soon. 

The door closed on the fair girl. The 
peer took a bumper of sherry, and after 

1— a 



4 A t]&te-a-t:I&te. 

sundry hums and haws addressed Leslie, 
who sat dreading the coming disclosure 
of circumstances with which he was 
already thoroughly acquainted. 

*' John, you have heard of the painful 
occurrence which has taken place since 
you left Dublin ?" 

" I have, indeed, my lord." 

"Drop that formal mode of address, 
and speak to me as I wish you to do — 
speak to me as a father.^* 

" I wish that there were a term stronger 
— a thousand times stronger — that I 
might address you in it.* 

" Never mind — never mind, John ; but 
listen, for I have but a short time to tell 
you a long tale." 

" I am all attention." 

" I was long past my fortieth year 
when I married a lovely young girl with 
a large fortune. The world blamed me, 
and made unpleasant remarks on the dis- 



•l^ 99 



A T:l&TE-l-T:feTE. 5 

parity of our age^. I was, however, in- 
fatuated with, the girl's beauty, and 
thought myself the happiest of men when 
I led her to the altar. Had I been wise 
I should have paused, for in wedding 
me I have every reason to believe she 
jilted Mr. Sydney, a brother of Lord 
Grantchester, a model of piety and 
talent. I should have remembered that 
the woman who can heartlessly throw off 
a sincere and warm admirer is capable of 
doing the same thing a second time; but 
I was blinded by passion, and married 
her. 

" For twelve months after our nuptials 
we travelled in Italy, and, to my great 
joy, she gave birth to a daughter 
in Florence. Yes, my beloved Emily 
was bom on the very banks of the 
Amo. 

"My happiness thus crowned I has- 
tened back to England, where I had been 



6 A t:&te-1-t:&te. 

offered a post in tlie Ministry. Fond of 
politics, I at once accepted it; and, as 
I said before, quickly returned to fulfil 
my now arduous duties. These occupied 
much, of my time, but my wife never 
reproached me with the consequent neg- 
lect ; indeed, there had never been what 
may be styled ' an obtruding love,' it was 
rather a calm and silent affection — some 
might have ranked it as esteem, but as I 
was at least twenty years her senior I 
was content to feel grateful for it. 

" One night I had been detained later 
than usual by my legislative duties, and 
at once proceeded to my room. Here I 
met my valet, who asked me whether I 
had seen her ladyship. 

" ' Seen her !' replied I. ' How could 
that be? I have only just quitted the 
House of Lords.' 

" ' My lady went out upwards of an 
hour ago. She left the house on foot, so 



A TJ&TE-A-TJ&TE. 7 

probably your lordship knows where she 
is gone.' 

" ' This is strange — most strange ! Did 
she take Lady Emily and her nurse with 
her?' 

*' ' Oh no, my lord ; they are, I believe, 
both fast asleep in the nursery.' 

" At this moment I saw a small note 
lying on my dressing-table. It was ad- 
dressed to me in Lady Urmstone's hand- 
writing. It ran, as well as I can recol- 
lect, thus : — 

" ' Seek not to discover my abode — ^I 
leave you for ever. Any attempt to 
follow me . will only cause exposure and 
disappointment. Think on me as one 
who is dead. God bless you for all your 
kindness! May the child I leave you 
more than replace 

" ^ Tour infatuated 

" ' Emily.' 



8 A T]&TE-1'T£tE. 

" Years rolled on, and I strictly fiilfilled 
the last wish of her who was now dead to 
me for ever. I refrained from making 
any inquiries whether she who was once 
so dear to me still lived or not ; I never 
sought to know. I resigned my official 
position and retired to my country seat, 
where I brought up my darling Emily, 
wholly unconscious of her mother's fate. 
She believed herself an - orphan, and I 
encouraged her in that belief; but oh! 
my dear boy, she is, alas! no longer 
ignorant of her . parentage ; a dread- 
ful — a fearful revelation has shattered 
her young nerves, and it is there- 
fore with double joy that I meet you 
again, since I am convinced you alone 
can overcome her sorrow — her deep 
and poignant affliction. But ere I 
ask you to undertake this painfiil 
task, I will relate to you all that has 
occurred." 

He then, after a few moments' pause, 



A t:6te-1-t]&te. 9 

related to Leslie all that had taken place 
at Kingstown. 

" I have heard of this, and I grieve 
from my heart to say, that Lady Emily 
feels so deeply the wound inflicted, that 
she has determined never to marry," ob- 
served Leslie. 

"What — what? Surely this is some 
foolish lover s quarrel ?" 

" Not so ; she has expressed her unal- 
terable determination, and I am a miser- 
able man for life." 

" John ! John ! this must not be. 
Although I thought her fuU young 
to marry, and I had hoped that, with 
my help, you might have acquired a 
higher raak and station, yet never for a 
moment did I waver in my desire to see 
you wedded to my darling child, and this 
before I died." 

*' May Heaven bless you for your kind- 
ness!" cried Leslie, seizing the peer's 
hand, and kissing it. 



10 A T:^TE-i-T]&TE. 

At this moment Emily entered, and tea 
was ordered to be brought in. A sign 
from the peer made his adopted son aware 
of his desire that the present theme might 
not be continued. The conversation then 
turned on the ordinary topics of the day. 

Lady Emily carefully avoided address- 
ing Leslie ; she never allowed her eyes to 
rest upon him, she seemed wholly en- 
gaged with her father. This was so pal- 
pable that our hero could not help 
observing it; he sighed as he saw her 
estrangement, and wept within his in- 
nermost soul. Had he been a man of the 
world, had he successfully read the human 
heart,he would have exulted and triumphed 
in the seeming coldness of her he loved. 
He would then have known that her con- 
duct arose from a passion she feared 
might be too plainly shown, if she ad- 
dressed him. She equally dreaded that her 
eyes might betray her secret ; it was for 



A T:feTE-A-T£TE. 11 

this reason that she did not dare to look 
upon him. 

Suddenly the peer arose, and pleading 
as an excuse that he had some letters of 
importance to write, he left the room, in- 
sisting, however, as he did so, that his 
adopted son and his dear child should re- 
main together till his return. This pro- 
ceeding seemed most strange to the 
young couple ; to the reader it will 
scarcely require explanation. 

Tor a few moments they remained 
perfectly silent — each seemed buried 
in a profound reverie ; at last Leslie 
could contain himself no longer, but 
jumping up, he fell on one knee be- 
fore Emily, and seizing her hand, im- 
printed a thousand kisses on it. 

''Emily! dearest Emily! how have I 
offended you ?'' 

" Tou have not offended me, but do go 
back to your seat." 



12 A T:l^TE-i-T]^TE. 

Still she did not withdraw her hand. 

" No ! I will not rise until you have 
forgiven me ;" and he still persisted in 
kissing her passive hand. 

" Do, do believe me, dear John ; I have 
nothing to forgive." 

" Dear John ! then I am indeed blest. 
Oh ! repeat those words again !" and sud- 
denly arising, he imprinted a kiss upon a 
pair of coral lips that did not shrink from 
the embrace. "Thank Heaven!" cried 
he, as he resumed his seat. 

Emily now assumed a graver tone — 
" John, this is very wrong ; I had deter- 
mined to receive you with coldness and 
indifference, but alas ! I cannot ;" and the 
lovely girl burst into a flood of tears, 
which gave our hero a delicious oppor- 
tunity of drying them. 

" But why ? tell me, sweet girl — why 
receive me with coldness ? Have I done 
anything " 



A tI^te-I-tI^tb. 13 

" Again I repeat no ! You have never 
acted otherwise than I could wish you." 

" You speak in enigmas/' 

" Not so ; I had hoped you would not 
have compelled me again to allude to the 
painful subject/' 

" Oh ! if it be only that, Lord Urm- 
stone has explained to me everything, and 
the only disclosure which wounded me in 
the narrative, was to fiiid that a fresh ob- 
stacle has arisen in the fact of your being 
now a wealthy and independent heiress, 
and consequently farther than ever re- 
moved from the low-born creature of your 
father's bounty/' 

" Oh ! John, speak not thus ; you are a 
thousand times worthy of me, the. daugh- 
ter of " 

"Stay! not another word; am I 
not " 

" I will not hear another word ; you are 
my preserver — my brother — a, model for all 



14 A t£te-1-t6te. 

your sex. What would the world say, to 
see a being, the very soul of honour, Knk 
himself with one who dare not name her 
mother ? No ! no ! I will never thus de- 
grade you, although I love you — ^yes ! I 
proudly admit that I love you more than 
life itself, yet " 

" Blessed confession ! 'tis all I ask. I 
will re-enter the army — ^I will carve my 
way to honours and distinction, and these 
gained return, and then, possessor of a 
real name, will proudly claim your 
hand ;" and again he folded Emily in his 
arms. 

"I desire no further proofs of your 
courage or devotion to win my heart ; you 
possess it already ; but alas ! I cannot 
give my hand. Do estimate properly the 
feeling which dictates to me this line of 
conduct. Silent and grief-stricken, I will 
retire to the country, and thence watch 
your brilliant career." 



A tete-A-t:^te. 15 

"Would you like to see me many 
another ?" 

Emily started. She had never even 
thought of this; the question was put 
lightly, but the fond gitl did not like it. 

" No ! — not exactly — there is no 
necessity that you should do so; but if 
you did, I'd still bless you." 

" And my wife ?" added Leslie, who 
now began to see he had conquered. 

" Oh ! don't say that hideous word — 
I can't bear it — don't, John, it breaks my 
heart !" 

John jumped up and would again have 
embraced her, but at this moment the 
waiter entered, and stated that Lord 
TJrmstone felt so fatigued and shaken by 
his fall, that he would not appear again ; 
he would, however, be glad to see her 
ladyship before she retired to sleep. The 
man then left the room. 

" Gto, dearest Emily/' said Leslie, as 



16 A TJ^TE-l-T^TE. 

he grasped her hand, having risen to bid 
her adieu ; " go, my loved girl, and see 
your father, who, thank Heaven, approves 
of our union." 

" Are you sure ?'' 

" He told me so himself." 

" Indeed !" 

" And you ? will you not forego those 
cruel scruples ?" 

" I am no heartless coquette. I will be 
candid with you. I will consult my 

« 

beloved father, and, if he wishes it, 
then " 

" Oh ! speak — speak on !" 

" Why, then, perhaps — ^perhaps I may 



say yes!' and, before her lover could 
snatch even a single embrace, the lovely 
girl had fled from the room. 

As Captain LesKe walked home, he 
appeared to tread an elastic pavement; 
to him the whole world seemed couleur de 
rose. 



17 



CHAPTER n. 



WELL-MATCHED. 



Mr. Scarsdale sat in his easy-chair en- 
joying with all the gusto of a high-bred 
Englishman his half-hour after dinner — 
that half-hour generally devoted to happy 
and proud reflection by many successfal 
professional men — ^when the thread of his 
mental review was suddenly cut short by 
the entrance of his usually well-trained 
butler. 

" There is a person anxious to see you, 
sir, on business.*' 

" What is the meaning of this ? Have 
I not given you the strictest orders never 
to disturb me after dinner ? If the person 
wishes to see me, as you say, on business, 

VOL. III. 2 



18 WELL-MATCHED. 

desire him to call at my office in the 
morning." 

" I told him so, sir, but he said he must 
see you." 

" Where is the person ?" 

" I left him outside ; he was so pressing 
I did not like to let him into the hall, 
lest he might force his way in." 

"Is he any one who visits here?" 

" Oh, la ! no, sir ; he^s a sort of 
shabby-genteel man, who may be coming 
— ^in my mind, leastways — to ask for 
charity." 

" Tell the man to go away, and if he 
refuses, send for a policeman to remove 
him ; 111 not see him. If he has any 
letter or petition, let him leave it." 

" I will, sir ; but he says if you knew 
who he was, and the business he came 
on, you wouldn't refuse him admission, 
and he also said " 

" Did he say what that business was ?" 



WELL-MATCHED. 19 

" No, he only said I was to say it con- 
cerned Lady Grantchester, or some such 
name/* 

"Idiot! why did you not say this at 
first ? Show him in instantly/* 

The servant left the room, and the now 
roused lawyer threw himself back in his 
chair; in a few minutes the butler re- 
turned, ushering in a man of ordinary 
stature, closely muflBied up. Scarsdale 
waved the new-comer to a chair, and 
desired the butler, who officiously kept 
moving about the sideboard, to quit the 
room. 

The door closed, the lawyer quietly 
waited to be addressed, but, as his visitor 
seemed disinclined to begin, he at once 
addressed him — 

'' May I ask to whom I am indebted 
for this intrusion on my privacy ?'* 

"Certainly you can; but it's not a 
matter of course that I should reply ; we 

2—0. 



20 WELL-MATCHED. 

must come to a fuller understanding be- 
fore I opens my mind." 

" If you are only come in disguise to 
talk in enigmas, I must at once put an 
end to this interview; I thought you 
came to give me some information relative 
to the late strange abduction of Lady 
Grantchester." 

" And perhaps I do. I don't want no 
mysteries; but I must first make my 
terms, afore I opens my mouth." 

" Name those terms." 

"You must pledge yourself — ^and Til 
take your word for it, as I hear you are a 
highly honourable chap — ^that you wont 
attempt to discover who I am, and if you 
find I've not always acted on the square, 
you wont try and punish me." 

" Well, and if I decline those terms ?" 

" Then I don't open my mouth, and a 
certain lady, about whom I wish to talk 
with you, is lost for ever. Besides, jou 



WELL-MATCHED. 21 

must promise to help me to revenge myself 
on the man — a high snob, I promise you 
— who has injured the lady I came about 
and done all he could to destroy me." 

"And what pecuniary reward do you 
expect ?" 

" Whatever you think proper ; it ain't 
money I care about." 

"Well then, I agree to your terms, 
and pledge myself as you desire. Now 
state all you know, freely and without 
alarm;" and Scarsdale pulled from his 
pocket a small memorandum-book and 
prepared to take notes. 

"Not so, I'll have nothing written 
down; if you want me to be candid, 
listen, and I'U tell you all, but no writing." 

" Well, as you like — go on." 

" I took my lady abroad," muttered the 
stranger, as he began to undo the woollen 
wrapper that hid his features, and divested 
himself of his great coat. "Ah, you 



22 WELL-MATCHED. 

seem surprised — ^but it's gospel truth. ; I 
took her abroad." 

Mr. Scarsdale saw that he must act 
gently in this affair, or he would frighten 
and probably spoil the evidence, so, 
in a careless voice, he asked — " And 
why?" 

" To please a bigger villain than my- 
self; he doubtlessly meant to destroy 
her, as he afterwards tried to destroy 
me ; but I'U be quits !" 

" Was it the doctor who tried to poison 
Captain Leslie ?" 

"No — no, it was a far greater man 
than that common ruflSan, but I shan't 
tell you his name just now, so it's no use 
asking; I tell you I took my lady to 
Brussels." 

" And is she there now ?" 

" Gently, gently ; it ain't no use cross- 
examining me. I'll tell my story my 
own way, and no other. May I take a 



WELL-MATCHED. 23 



glass of wine ? you Ve forgotten to offer 



me one." 



« 



Oh, by all means," cried the now 
interested lawyer, affecting the utmost 
calmness ; then pouring out a bumper, he 
handed it to his visitor, who sipped it 
slowly down, occasionally holding it up 
to the light and examining its colour, 
thereby showing that he had been accus- 
tomed to similar libations. 

At length Mr. Scarsdale addressed him. 

" Lady Grantchester is then at Brus- 
sels ?" 

" I don t say she is not ; but I'll tell 
you a fact, no one in the world could find 
her there. Besides, if I thought any one 
was going to disturb her, I'm blest if 
ever she'd be found again ; so it's no use 
pumping." 

" Candidly tell me then, what do you 
propose ?" 

" I proposes to go over and fetch her. 



24 WELL-MATCHED. 

and I expects a handsome reward on de- 
livering her up to my lord. No questions 
asked; and all your efforts to prosecute 
the rascal that robbed my lord of a wife 
and tried to rob me of my life." 

" I don't exactly see my way." 

"Oh! I understand — I twigs ! you don't 
like to trust me. Well, it's very natural, 
and I don't blame you ; it's quite commey 
fOy as the Trench say. I admits to you 
I've not always done the high moral, so 
you've a right to doubt me; but I'll 
square it in a minute. Let one of your 
clerks go over with me; mind, he's to 
bring plenty of rowdy for our expenses, 
and to bring back the poor lady. I wont 
ask a single cooter for myself till I've 
lodged my lady in Grantchester House." 

" Well, that seems fair enough. But 
how am I to be sure you are not mislead- 
ing me — what proofs can you give me ?" 

"Why, now, you didn't think I was 



WELL-MATCHED. 25 

such a fool as to come here on this 
matter without proper vouchers. No ; 
je conny mew que sa. Here — will these 
satisfy you?" and he pulled out and 
handed to the astonished solicitor several 
letters addressed by Lady Grrantchester 
to her lord. A mere glance at these 
convinced the lawyer of their authen- 
ticity. 

"And how came you possessed of 
these ?" 

"They were given to me by the 
writer." 

" For what purpose ?" 

" To forward to their destination." 

" And you " 

" Oui ; I intercepted them — ^that's all. 
Nay, don't stare ; I've done worse than 
that in my day." 

" But such an act was ^" • 

" Criminal, very likely. But you pro- 
mised not to take notice of such matters ; 



26 WELL-MATCHED. 

SO don't let us talk about them, they may 
irritate us." 

"Well then, to come back. When 
will you start, and what additional infor- 
mation are you likely to give me ?" 

" Well, I haven't much more to say ; 
but I feel uncommon dry, I suppose it's 
the effect of your fire. Tell me, have you 
a drop of brandy you could let me have 
before I venture out in the cold — I've a 
long way to go ?" 

" How far ?" eagerly asked the other. 

" It wont do !" replied the stranger, 
playing off a knowing gesture ; " old birds 
are not to be caught by chaff! Will 
you let me have the brandy or no ?" 

" Of course I will. Eing the bell, and 
your wishes shall be gratified." The man 
did so, and the butler entered. 

" Grive me some brandy !" 

The servant approached the sideboard 
and took out from the cellaret a green 



WELL-MATCHED. 27 

bottle, from wMcli lie endeavoured to 
draw the cork. After one or two inef- 
fectual efforts, the visitor suddenly started 
up, and, seizing the bottle, at once drew 
forth the cork. 

" There, you Johnny, that's the way. 
Why, I'm blowed if I thinks you ever 
drawed a cork before." 

Before the butler could utter a rejoinder 
his master had ordered him to quit the 
room, and the stranger returning to the 
table poured out nearly a tumblerful of 
brandy, and drank it off. 

" Mr. Scarsdale, I congratulate you on 
your liquor — ^it is real cognac ; none of 
Brett's cheap and nasty." 

"Aud now, my friend, having slaked 
your thirst " 

" I understand ; I may as well be off. 
Yes, I don't think I've any more to say," 
and the man began muffling himself up 
again. 



28 WELL-MATCHED. 

"You will then call at my office to- 
morrow ?" 

"Not if I knows it. No, no, that 
would never do. I'm not going to draw 
back ; no, far from it. Let your clerk be 
on the platform at the Croydon Station 
to-morrow evening at seven o'clock, and 
I'll join him, and go with him to 
Brussels." ' 

" But how is he to know you ?" 

" I'll wear a red comforter round my 
neck, and if he sees this, let him come up 
to me and ask me 'how far it is to 
Grrantchester,' and I'll reply, ' not so far as 
Brussels,' and then he'll know me. And 
mind he's got plenty of cash, for her lady- 
ship's return depends upon it." 

" All this shall be done. Now, before 
you go, will you not give me your name ? 
It cannot injure you." 

" That's true. "Well, on two conditions 
you shall have it. Promise me that no 



WELL-MATCHED. 29 

one shall dog my footsteps, and give me a 
sov. to take me to Croydon/' 

" I pledge you my word you shall 
not be followed. Here is a sovereign." 

" All right ; and now let me out. I 
don't want to be seen again by your 
flunkey." 

The shrewd lawyer rose, and, opening 
the hall door himself, let the intruder 
out, who, as he passed through, uttered 
in a hoarse whisper — 

"My name is Coleman." 

Mr. Scarsdale, highly pleased at the 
important information he had received, 
closed the door, and, with a smile of 
triumph, entered the room where tea was 
prepared, and joined the ladies of his 
family in unwonted good humour. 



30 



CHAPTEE III. 

THE PEER AND HIS PR0T:^G:^. 

The train which should have brought 
Lord Grantchester to London was late in 
its arrival — a circumstance not altogether 
without parallel on the Grreat Eastern 
line, and when it arrived it did not bring 
the long looked-for nobleman. Leslie, 
who had been on the platform for at 
least an hour, felt • somewhat chagrined 
at the occurrence, as he knew how inva- 
riably punctual the Earl was in all his 
appointments, and began to fear some 
sudden illness or accident might be the 
cause of his lordship's non-appearance. 
Had business or pleasure detained him, 
he would doubtlessly have telegraphed to 



THE PEEK AND HIS PEOTl^G^. 31 

say SO. Nor was it likely tliat this 
should be the case, as, in a note addressed 
to our hero the evening before, he stated 
that he had arranged all his affairs, and 
should be glad to start early on the fol- 
lowing morning ; to this he added a 
request that his valued secretary would 
meet him, with his lordship's carriage, at 
the station. Whether it would be better 
to remain and await anoijier train or no, 
Leslie felt uncertain ; but at length recol- 
lecting that a telegram might await him at 
home, he jumped into the carriage, and 
drove off direct to Grantchester House. 

Anxious as our Victoria Cross was 
again to see his noble patron, yet, 
truth to tell, his thoughts did not con- 
tinually dwell on him. As he threw him- 
self back in the corner of the well-stuffed 
chariot (for Lord Grantchester had 
the good taste still to cling to these 
superior equipages), his thoughts reverted 



32 THE PEEB AND HIS PROT^lfi. 

to the fortunate rencontre at the Crystal 
Palace, and the subsequent evening of 
delight he had passed with Lady Emily. 
Each fond word she had uttered, each 
kind glance she had cast upon him, were 
reviewed with ecstasy, and none of these 
were omitted. The memory of true love 
is tenacious ; it treasures up every trifle 
that may serve to feed a hope, it dwells 
almost on each breath which comes from 
the heart it clings to. That Emily's 
noble resolution to allow pride to domi- 
nate over aflfection, had given way before 
Leslie's earnest appeals, was evident ; and 
our hero now lolled back, his eyes shut, 
his hands clasped, dreaming of love, ma- 
trimony, and a hearth blessed and cheered 
by the smile of her he loved. 

Indulging in these happy day-dreams, 
Leslie scarcely noticed the distance he tra- 
velled over, and was not a little surprised 
on the vehicle stopping at the door of 



THE PEER AND ms PROTEG^. 33 

Grantchester House, a distance of some 
seven or eight miles, which our lover, 
wrapped in his elysium, seemed to have 
traversed in a few seconds. 

"I am sorry to say his lordship 
has not arrived," said Leslie, as he 
alighted. 

" Pardon me, sir," replied the servitor, 
" he has been here nearly two hours. His 
lordship is now in his study, and ex- 
pressed a hope that you would join him 
on your return." 

The surprised secretary hastened to the 
chamber designated. 

As he threw open the door he per- 
ceived the Earl busily engaged in reading. 
His attention was so engrossed by the book 
before him, that he did not look up till 
the noise of the closing door aroused him 
from his studies ; then, perceiving Leslie, 
he threw aside the volume he had been 
reading, and advanced and warmly wel- 

VOL. III. 3 



34 THE PEER AND HIS PBOTl^Gl^. 

coined the young prot^g^. Heartily he 
shook Leslie by the hand ; then, holding 
him at arm's length, scanned him from 
head to foot. A strange reminiscence 
seemed to strike him, and, bursting into 
a flood of tears, the peer abruptly left the 
room. 

Captain Leslie would have felt more 
surprise had he not been aware of the 
delicate state of his lordship's health. He 
ascribed his present agitation to illness, 
and quietly sat down to await his return. 
Having nothing else to do, he picked up 
and examined the work on which his 
patron had been engaged. It bore the 
beautiful and, to Lord Grrantchester, the 
apposite title of Wait and Hope. No 
wonder, then, that this charming tome 
—written by that highly-gifted poet, 
Edmund Reade — ^had absorbed all the 
peer's attention. It was in prose, and 
professed to be a novel ; but it 



THB PEEB AND HIS PBOT^Gl^. 35 

breathed all the warm fervour of the poet's 
mind. 

In a few minutes Lord Grantchester 
returned. 

" Excuse me, my dear friend, but I was 
suddenly overcome by the strong likeness 
you bear to my adored wife. An old 
soldier, it is true, should not shed a tear ; 
but alas ! I cannot help it. Mine, though 
apparently a happy lot, has indeed been 
a life of care." 

Leslie, anxious to turn the subject, now 
asked his patron how he came to miss him 
at the station P 

" I missed the direct train, and conse- 
quently came round by Hitchin. Indeed, 
were it not for the number of tunnels I 
had to pass through, I think I should 
have preferred that Hue. Arrived at the 
terminus at King's Cross, I called a 
hackney-carriage and hastened hither. I 
sent a groom to Shoreditch to tell you 

3— a 



36 THE PEEB AND HIS PBOT^lS. 

this, but he has evidently made some 
mistake. I really felt considerable alarm 
at your non-arrival. And now, my dear 
boy, tell me all about yourself and your 
friends. When did you hear from Lord 
Urmstone ?" 

" I am happy to say that he is in town, 
and proposes, with his daughter, to call 
on your lordship the day after to- 



morrow." 



(( 



I shall be delighted to see them. 
And tell me, have you seen anything of 
my brother George ? I must write off to 
him at once, and let him know that I am 
here." 

" I believe he is already aware of it. 
I met him at Mr. Scarsdale's two days 
ago, when your expected arrival was an- 
nounced to him." 

" Dear — dear George, how rejoiced he 
will be to see me ; nor am I less anxious to 
behold him; for from his lips I shall 



THE PEEK AND HIS PROTjfio^. 37 

hear news of her I love dearer than life 
itself." 

At this moment a note was brought 
in and presented to Lord Grrantchester. 
It came from George, and ran thus : — 

"My dearest Brother, 

" Circumstances over which I have 
no control compel me to go down to 
Yorkshire. In three days, however, I 
shall be back, and will then hasten to see 
you, and assure you how sincerely I am 
" Tour affectionate Brother, 

"George Sidney." 



Leslie at once saw the motive which 
thus urged Sydney to absent himself ; nor 
could he wonder at it. The Earl would 
be sure to inquire after his wife, and 
George would as surely have to break the 
afflicting news of her abduction, as he 
(George) believed, her suicide. That an 



38 THE FEEB AND HIS YROT^Qt. 

attached brother should avoid such a task 
was scarcely a matter of surprise. 

"I am disappointed at not seeing 
George, and feel somewhat fatigued with 
my journey. I will lie down for an hour 
before dinner ; in the meantime, you will 
doubtlessly be glad to take a stroll 
through the grounds; but first I must 
know that you are located in your future 
home." 

The Earl rang the bell and desired 
that the housekeeper should attend. In 
a few minutes Mrs. Eearden (now trans- 
formed into Mrs. Thompson) made her 
appearance. 

"Have you caused a proper set of 
apartments to be prepared for Captain 
Leslie, my secretary ?" 

" I have, my lord," replied the amiable 
lady, dropping a curtsey. 

" Show him to them." 

" I will, my lord," and she bobbed again. 



THE PEEB AND HIS PBOT]SgE« 39 

" And so, good-bye till dinner. Always 
take care to command as if tHs house 
were your own; and adieu for the 
present. Don't forget, my dear Marks, 
we dine exactly at six/' 

" Marks, Marks !" muttered the old 
woman.to herself; " and so like my lady ! 
Drat me if I don't think there's sum- 
mut in it. I don't like it ; but I'll ferret 
it out. Here's your room, sir. Pull the 
bell once, sir, if you wants a man-servant ; 
ring twice, and one of the maids will wait 
on you. This is the sitting-room, this 
the bed-room, and this the dressing-room. 
Captain Marks, I think my lord called 
you 

" Marks Leslie.' 

" Oh ! well, I once had a relation who 
was called Marks, and I was a-going to 
ask " 

" You had better not linger here ; his 
lordship may want you." 



P" 



>> 



40 THE PEER AND HIS PROT^Gl^. 

" True, sir, true ; I go. Might I 
ask " 

" No, no ; another time. I have an 
important letter to write just now," and 
he held the door open. 

# 

" If I can be of any use, at any time, 
command me, sir. Good morning !" and 
quickly passing out, she muttered to her- 
self, " I must watch that young chap ; I 
don't like him." 

" There's something about that cring- 
ing old woman that makes me shudder. 
I shall have my eye upon her," and 
Leslie threw himself into a chair, and 
began scribbling a long note to Lady 
Emily. 



41 



CHAPTEE IV. 



AGAIN UNITED. 



It was late at night when Lady Grant- 
chester embarked on board the steam- 
vessel which plies between Ostend and 
London. Her companion, Mr. Coleman, 
sent (as he stated) by her noble hnsband 
to fetch her, assiduously attended on her, 
and, with Mr. Scarsdale's clerk, paid her 
every attention. For reasons best known 
to himself, the former had begged of her 
ladyship not to converse more than was 
absolutely necessary with the latter. He 
assured her that such was Lord Grant- 
chester's wish, and this was sufficient to 
secure his fond wife's obedience. The 
passage was rather a rough one, and, as 



42 AGAIN UNITED. 

she suffered mucli at sea, Lady Grant- 
Chester remained quiet in her cot till 
nearly noon on the following day, when 
she was aroused by the stewardess, who 
informed her that in another hour she 
would arrive at London Bridge. She 
then arose and prepared to land. 

As soon as the vessed touched the shore 
Coleman despatched Mr. Scarsdale's clerk 
to his employer s ofl&ce to announce their 
arrival. The young man, unaware that 
his duty was rather to remain and watch 
the other's movements, hurried off. 

A carriage was called, and Lady 
Grantchester with Coleman stepped into 
it. After receiving some directions from 
the latter, the coachman drove on. 

For the first few minutes her ladyship 
did not look up. Deeply engaged in 
offering up a prayer of thanksgiving to 
Providence for thus restoring her once 
more to her husband, she scarcely noticed 



AGAIN UNITED. 43 

the streets through which she passed, till 
Coleman, starting up, desired the driver 
to pull up at the door of a miserable- 
looking tavern, situated in a lone and 
gloomy situation. 

"Why do you stop?" inquired her 
ladyship; "oh, do not delay. I am all 
anxiety to reach home/' 

" And so you shall, presently ; but you 
must first descend here. I have a few 
words to say to you ere we proceed 
farther." 

Lady Grantchester felt considerably 
alarmed ; but as she was wholly in her 
companion's power, and she saw no help 
at hand, she thought it better to obey 
without a murmur, and got out of the 
vehicle as she was desired, and followed 
her conductor up to a shabby room, be- 
speaking the utmost poverty. Here 
Coleman handed her ladyship a seat, 
and, after locking the door, took a large 



44 AGAIN UNITED. 

book from a drawer and approached her. 
Lady Grantchester trembled from head to 
foot. 

" This is a Bible," said Coleman, offer- 
ing the volume to the affrighted lady, 
who was so agitated she nearly let the 
sacred record drop from her hands — " this 
is a Bible ; kiss it and swear to tell the 
truth, or you never leave this room alive," 
and he took from his pocket a life-pre- 
server, and laid it upon the table. 

" Good heavens ! what do you mean ? 
I beseech you " 

"It is needless to talk," interrupted 
the ruffian ; " listen, and repeat after me, 
as you value your life." 

He now took out a piece of paper, 
which he read aloud. He insisted on 
Lady Grantchester echoing — 

" * I hereby swear, by all I hold dear, 
that I will never, directly or indirectly, 
make known to any one alive any suspi- 



9 >f 



AGAIN UNITED. 45 

cion I entertain as regards my removal to 
Lion House, my detention there, or my 
removal to Brussels ; nor will I accuse 
or implicate any individual alive, or 
charge any one with being an accomplice 
in the crime of my removal. And this I 
solemnly declare and swearJ 

"And now kiss the book," added Cole- 
man. 

His victim did so. The man's manner 
at once altered to familiar joviality ; he 
felt himself to be safe, and he cared for 
little else. 

" And now, my lady, all is square. I 
am certain you will not break your oath, 
not that I think you would willingly be- 
tray me ; and as to the rascally doctor and 
George Sydney " 



" My brother-in-law ?" 

" Most true ; but of this more another 
time. Some day or other I'll tell you all 
about it, and free you from that part of 



46 AGAIN UNITED. 

the oath that relates to Master George, 
the rascal ! But I'll be revenged/' mut- 
tered the villain. 

Lady Grantchester now timidly ven- 
tured to ask whether he wished to detain 
her longer, or whether he would proceed 
to Grantchester House. 

" Oh, by all means ; we'll start imme- 
diately; the cab is waiting. We now 
understand one another, so there is 
nothing to detain us. Allonge aUong^^ and 
he opened the door and escorted Lady 
Grantchester to the vehicle. 

At length they arrived at the gates of 
Grantchester House. Here Coleman 
jumped out, and directed the driver to 
proceed to the main entrance. At the 
door Mr. Scarsdale stood ready to receive 
the injured lady, whom he conducted to a 
distant saloon, as prearranged. Coleman 
went away. The Earl had been prepared 
by Mr. Scarsdale for his wife's arrival, 



AGAIN UNITED. 47 

but the clever lawyer thought it better to 
give him a second warning, a further pre- 
paration, before he brought them together. 
For this purpose the solicitor, having 
first seen Lady Grantchester comfortably 
settled, left the room to seek the expectant 
nobleman. 

To say how the sufferer's heart beat 
with joy and pleasurable anticipation 
as she looked around her and recognised 
many objects she had known in her 
youth, and above all, as she now knew, 
that she would within a few minutes be 
reunited to him in whom her every hope 
and joy centred — ^to describe such emotions 
would be impossible. They were pleasur- 
able beyond portraying ; yet, joyous as 
they were, they were painful to dwell upon. 

Presently footsteps were heard, the 
door opened, and the next moment Lady 
Grantchester was clasped in the arms of 
her adoring husband. 



48 AGAIN UNITED. 

The lawyer withdrew. It was not 
a scene for a third party to witness. 

The fond endearments, the vows of 
long-cherished and long-enduring love, the 
reader may imagine and sympathize with, 
but they are too sacred, too holy for the 
pen of a stranger to reveal. 

In a short time Mr. Scarsdale returned, 
and, after receiving the warm and heart- 
felt expression of the Earl's gratitude, 
and having promised to dine and spend 
the evening with the happy pair, he re- 
turned to his office, where a dozen cla- 
morous clients loudly expressed their dis- 
content at his absence. 

Lord Grantchester now sent for his 
secretary, who instantly obeyed the sum- 

• 

mons. No sooner, however, did her lady- 
ship cast her eyes on him, than she 
screamed rather than uttered " It is he !" 
and after a few incoherent expressions, fell 
fainting into her husband's arms. Leslie 



AGAIN UNITED. 49 

was at a loss to understand the scene ; on 
the other hand, the now distracted Earl 
naturally believed it was a relapse, and 
motioning our hero to leave the room, he 
himself undertook the task of recovering 
his loved partner. 

Presently her senses returned. Her 
first anxious glance was cast around the 
room, as if in search of some one ; then 
she uttered in broken sentences, " Where 
is he ? — I never saw such a likeness — ^tell 
me who is he ? — whence does he come ?" 

" If you mean my secretary, whom you 
saw just now, I was fortunate enough to 
meet with him at Lord XJrmstone*s.*' 

" Indeed 1 I'm afraid I'm very silly; 
long confinement has probably weakened 
my nerves. It was foohsh on my part ; 
but when I saw the youth, I was struck 
with his extraordinary likeness to you, 
and I could not help thinking of our dear 
boy; nay, it almost made me recur to 

VOL. III. 4 



50 AGAIN UNITED. 

that belief for which I have been called 
mad — a belief which, after a long and 
painftd struggle, I have banished from 
my mind. Come, dear Charles, smile 
again ; it was only a passing cloud, such 
another shall not occur again;" and she 
fondly kissed his hand. 

The Earl was again reassured ; but as 
he led Lady Grantchester to her apart-* 
ment, he could not help mentally revert- 
ing to his own strange feelings when he 
himself first saw Leslie. 



51 



CHAPTER V. 

THE TEA-MEETING. 

Behold the usually quiet town of Leeds 
in a state of feverisli excitement. The 
Bull-ring rings with voices. Boar-lane is 
bored by crowds of operatives ; the pass- 
ing stranger gathering from the murmur 
that a distinguished visitor is about to 
arrive in the old manufacturing town. 
Many, indeed, supposed that a scion of 
royalty was about to inspect the Cloth 
Hall, and pass in review a regiment of 
local volunteers. How egregiously would 
the poor stranger be mistaken ! Let him 
read the large poster which graees 
every vacant wall, and he will perceive 
that — 

4 — 2 



52 THE TEA-MEETING. 

" The Honourable George Sydney will 
in a few hours arrive in Leeds, and proposes 
(D.V.) to preside at the great meeting on 
Bramhill-moor, where the errors of Catho- 
licism are to be discussed, and a collec- 
tion made for the purpose of adding an 
additional wing to the new Bethesda 
Chapel/' 

That an " Honourable " falls far short 
of a royal Duke it must be confessed, but 
if a community cannot command the 
presence of one, why the said community 
must be content to put up with the other, 
upon the admitted principle, that when 
the moon is out of sight, a star in the 
heavens is most welcome. Manufac- 
turing people, having no titular rank 
amongst themselves, warmly welcome 
evevj visitor of title, and when (as in the 
present case) the distinction of aristo- 
cratic birth is further supported by the 



THE TEA-MEETING. 53 

prized stamp of theological distinction 
and oratorical powers, how doubly pre- 
cious does it seem in a locality where 
sectarianism takes the place of politics, 
and where a theatre is an abomination ! 

At about three o'clock George Sydney 
arrived at the White Horse Hotel, where 
a deputation awaited him, all dressed in 
suits of black with white neckcloths, to 
distinguish them from the surrounding 
crowd, to welcome the pet of Exeter HaU, 
and to solicit the honour of conducting 
the great man to the proposed banquet, 
as soon as might be convenient. Fortu- 
nately, our London orator had frequently 
attended similar feasts, and as he well 
knew from past experience, that nothing 
beyond tea and cakes was ever offered, 
even to their most favoured guest, he de- 
termined to satisfy the cravings of hunger 
before he plunged into this sea of hot 
water and light food, and in the most 



54 THE TEA-MEETING. 

serious tone assured the deputation tliat 
he had important letters to write, and 
consequently could not place himself at 
their disposal for a full hour. The gen- 
tlemen who had thus waited on him 
looked somewhat disappointed, and half 
incKned to remonstrate, but George, 
calling up his most bland smile, held 
out his hand, and warmly grasped the 
rough paw of each person present, and 
by an occasional good-natured obser- 
vation dismissed for a while the 
white-neckclothed group in high good- 
humour. 

Sydney now retired to another room, 
where he ordered some paper and a pen 
and ink to be brought ; not that he really 
wanted them, but to carry out his assertion 
made to the deputation. He also ordered 
a light dinner and a bottle of Clicquot's 
champagne to raise his somewhat droop- 
ing spirits, for, to confess the truth, he 



THE TEA-MEETING. 55 

felt no triumph in his present ovation. 
He had suddenly quitted town to avoid 
an immediate meeting with his brother; 
he feared an explanation relative to his 
wronged sister-in-law, and therefore (as he 
expressed it in his note to the peer), he 
had left town on important business, that 
is to say, he had gladly accepted the 
invitation of the pious tea-drinkers of 
Leeds, and, in accordance with that 
acceptance, now sat in the principal inn 
of the second town in Yorkshire. 

To appear engaged in epistolary affairs, 
he sat down and wrote three or four 
notes — ^notes of no consequence — which 
he addressed to some of his numerous 
friends, on indifferent matters. At last, 
an idea seemed suddenly to strike him ; 
he seized a sheet of note-paper, and 
wrote thus : — 



"Let me know all by return of post. 



56 THE TEA-MEETING. 

addressed to me here ; I shall await your 
reply. Mind tell me, but in ambiguous 
terms. — ^Yours, " Q-eorge." 

He then carefully placed it in an en- 
velope, and addressed it to " Mrs. Thomp- 
son, Housekeeper, Ghrantchester House, 
Fulham.*' This done, he called for the 
boots, and desired him to take an especial 
trip to the post-office with his letters. 
He next partook of a hasty meal, and, 
liaving adapted his dress to the feelings 
of those whom he was about to join, he 
returned to the principal saloon, there to 
await the return of the deputation. In 
less than a quarter of an hour, 
the undertakerlike-looking group re- 
turned, each bearing a long white wand ; 
but few words were exchanged; they 
formed a sort of procession, preceding 
and following Sydney, and in this order 
conducted him to a large hired vehicle, 



THE TEA-MEETING. 57 

into whicli he entered with the leaders of 
the band. To his great horror and dis- 
gust, a temperance band, with several 
appropriate banners, marched in front of 
the carriage ; at least a dozen hackney- 
coaches, containing members of the so- 
ciety and their wives, followed. The 
usual crowd on such occasions was not 
wanting, and the elegant and fastidious 
George was more than once called upon 
to thrust out his hand to shake that of 
some greasy butcher or dirty fish-fag. 
Sydney was, however, far too accomplished 
an actor to show outwardly the disgust 
he inwardly felt. 

Never in his life did George Sydney 
more thoroughly entrance his audience. 
When he spoke of the idolatry (as he 
called it) of the Eomish Church, every 
man in the company became an iconoclast ; 
not an individual among them but would 
have risen and joined in a general de- 



58 THE TEA-MEETING. 

struction of images, fonts, and even the 
crucifix itself, so madly did he raise their 
ire against their Papist brethren. When 
he spoke of the primeval Presbyterian 
simplicity, and their abhorrence of our 
sacred instruments, half the assemblage 
would gladly have thrust organs firom 
their churches, and insisted on their 
keeping Christmas-day as a day of prayer. 
The unbelieving few, they cried aloud, 
should be compelled to acknowledge our 
common Eedeemer or they should be 
hunted from our shores. Calming at one 
moment their angry passions, at another 
he would raise them to the very height 
of fury. He played with their feelings 
as though they were children; he com- 
manded their creed and their belief as a 
talented mob orator would command the 
opinions of a political assembly ; he felt 
liis power, and, as their excitement in- 
creased, so did his eloquence. When he 



THE TEA-MEETING. 59 

touched on their modest yet happy state, 
every male present blessed himself and 
glorified his liigh position as a Leeds 
dothworker; when ho spoke of their 
homes and hearths, the females cried, and 
laughed, and waved their dingy pocket- 
handkerchiefs ; when, adverting to their 
religious state, he emphatically assured 
them they were all lost past redemption, 
the old ladies gloried in it — ^many of the 
younger ones were carried out fainting ; 
and when he finally called on them to 
subscribe, every pocket was emptied into 
the begging-box, and already it might be 
said Bethesda's additional wing was al- 
ready expanded. 

After such an orator, no man present 
dared to address the meeting ; it would be 
like sipping spring-water after drinking 
generous port ; it is true an old lady tried 
to make a speech, but she was coughed 
down. The principal churchwarden of 



60 THE TEA-MEETING. 

Bethesda proposed a vote of thanks to 
aeo'rge Sydney in a neat a^d appropriate 
speech — a proposal seconded by the whole 
company, and the proceedings closed by 
one of the ministers of the favoured 
chapel calling on the company to sing a 
hymn, rendered peculiarly appropriate to 
the present occasion, as it had been para- 
phrased in order to introduce the hea- 
venly advantages of temperance, tea, and 
charity. 

The hymn was sung; George was 
reconducted to his hotel in torchlight 
triumph. The temperance band, however, 
were far too inebriated to lead the way ; 
they had waited at a neighbouring public- 
house during the banquet, the smell of 
beer and spirits had probably affected 
their heads, accustomed only to water ; at 
least, so said the gentlemen who rode in 
the same carriage with the orator. 

On arriving at the " White Horse," the 



THE TEA-MEETING. 61 

lion of the day bade his companions good 
night, and retired to his room. The 
greater number of those whom he thus 
left turned into the smoking-room, and 
there painted in glowing terms the 
powers of the orator who had come down 
from London. So earnest were they — so 
absorbed in the theme of praise, that 
most of them forgot the potentiality (as 
Dr. Johnson would say) of the liquor they 
were imbibing, and unconsciously became 
so tipsy, that the boots and the two 
ostlers were compelled to escort them, one 
by one, to their respective homes. 

George was too excited — for, though he 
did not feel or believe a word he had 
uttered, the energy he had displayed being 
rather the offspring of will than the spon- 
taneous effusion of the heart — to re- 
tire at once to his couch, so he gradually 
calmed himself by reviewing the past 
(positive) — the future (uncertain). Con- 



62 THE TEA-MEETIKG. 

science — reproving conscience — ^had long 
forsaken the sonl of Q-eorge Sydney, so 
he smiled as he laid his head on the 
pillow and dreamt of that innocence he 
had bartered for a life of hypocrisy and 
crime. 



63 



CHAPTEE VI. 

LEEDS AND THE NEIGHBOURHOOD. 

George rose early and strolled through 
the town before breakfast — a less inter- 
esting one had seldom met his view. Not 
a public building worth gazing at — ^not 
a handsome square, nor the shadow of a 
park. To breathe freely, the inhabitants 
of this overgrown village must seek the 
suburbs, for throughout the town itself 
nothing of the kind was to be found. Its 
inhabitants, employed in their various 
factories and mills, left the streets bare 
of passengers. To George's eye, used to 
the crowd which continually throngs the 
British metropolis, it seemed like a vast 
desert, without a solitary oasis to enliven 



64 LEEDS AND THE NEIGHBOURHOOD. 

the view. After about an hour thus 
spent, the great orator returned to his 
inn and partook of an ample meal; for 
be it well understood, talking is a great 
provocative of appetite, and consequently- 
great orators are generally great eaters. 
They may not, it is true, be gourmets, 
but they are almost invariably gourmands. 

His meal over, the waiter announced 
that three gentlemen, representing the 
whole of the deputation of the day before, 
wished to see Mr. Sydney in the great 
saloon. George at once arose and fol- 
lowed the servitor, who led him into the 
presence of the official visitors. 

After a cordial shaking of hands — ^for 
the plebeian order do most sincerely love 
on all occasions to grasp the paw of an 
aristocrat — the spokesman at once ad- 
dressed his brother orator, as he delighted 
to call him when speaking of him : — 

" Eloquent Sir, I represent the deputa- 



LEEDS Airo ITS NEIGHBOURHOOD. 65 

tion who had the honour of calling on 
you yesterday. Our numbers would have 
been greater, but the fact is, some of our 
members are indisposed, others so over- 
come by your wonderful powers of speak- 
ing, that they are unable to attend this 
morning." 

Here one of the trio winked at the 
waiter — an intimate friend of his — and in 
a side whisper muttered — " They haven't 
recovered their booze : it was a smasher !'' 
The chairman proceeded : 

" Yes, sir, your powerful oratory has 
had an effect which will be long remem- 
bered in this respectable and populous 
town. I have much pleasure in announc- 
ing to you that, through your Hercu- 
lean efforts, we last night collected the 
sum of three hundred and nine pounds, 
four shillings, and threepence ; leaving a 
clear profit of one hundred and fifty 
pounds, after paying the expenses of 

VOL. III. 5 



66 LEEDS AND ITS NEIGHBOURHOOD. 

the procession, the delightful temperance 
band, and the refreshments so necessarily 
required by the deputation, the standard- 
bearers, and others. And we now come, 
sir, to offer to you a small sum to cover 
your travelling expenses, which we pray 
of you graciously to accept, with this 
letter of thanks, written on parchment 
and engrossed by the Mayor's chief 
clerk ;" and he handed a large letter and 
a small purse containing twenty pounds 
to George Sydney. 

Our pious friend received with due 
humility and a slight show of reluctance 
the cash thus offered ; but as his funds 
were low, and he could not ask for a fresh 
supply till he saw his brother, he coolly 
pocketed the offering, and returned his 
thanks in a seemingly warm but really 
cautious manner, for he sorely dreaded he 
might again be called upon to amuse the 
greasy multitude of the evening before. 



IJBEDS AND ITS NEIGHBOURHOOD. 67 

The representatives of the representa- 
tives still lingered, although Sydney had 
bid them adieu. The hero of the preced- 
ing day felt puzzled at this, and could not 
divine why they thus lingered ; the waiter, 
however, sidled round, and in a whisper 
solved the riddle. Our orator at once 
adopted the hint, glad to get rid of these 
bores at any price. 

" Waiter !" cried he aloud, " serve re- 
freshments to these gentlemen ; let them 
have everything they desire ;" and with 
a bow which would have done honour 
to George the Fourth, he quitted the 
saloon. 

" Bring us some beefsteaks, some cold 
roast-beef and some beef sausages, with 
potatoes and some cabbage, if you've got 
any boiled ; some of the old ale as you 
serve on rent-days ; a bottle of gin and 
one of brandy ; and ask Mr. Eobson, the 
manager, if he'll come and join us." 

5-2 ' 



68 LEEDS AND ITS NEIGHBOURHOOD. 

"And I say," chimed in a second, 
" don't uncork the bottles afore you bring 
them up — ^we likes to water our liquor 
ourselves." 

*'A thimble of rum," squeaked the 
third, who was a tailor by trade, " wont 
hurt us ; and don't forget the cab- 
bage." 

" Can we have it in the bar parlour ?" 
asked the first speaker. 

" Not exactly," replied the man. 

" Well, then, serve it here ; and if you 
only gets Eobson to give us the old ale — 
you know which I mean — ^we'll give you 
a shilling. So cut, Jemmy, and let's have 
our dinner — it's nearly twelve o'clock, and 
I'm precious hungry." 

The waiter disappeared to obey the 
orders given him. 

The deputation, uow dropping their 
courteous manner, began talking their 
future plans over, but not without squab- 



LEEDS AND ITS NEIGHBOURHOOD. 69 

bling who should build the projected wing 
of the chapel, since each was bribed by 
diflTerent builders to give him the contract. 
Harmony, however, was restored by a 
general agreement to share the proceeds 
equally among them ; and now they de- 
cided not to employ their most talented 
friend, but he that would give them the 
largest discount ; the facts to be confined 
to the knowledge of the trio present. 

In the meantime Sydney had returned 
to his room. Here a groom awaited him. 
He brought a note from Sir William 
Putnam, of Besborough Priory ; he was 
desired to bring a reply. George at once 
opened the missive ; it contained a press- 
ing invitation to dine that day with the 
worthy baronet, as well as the ofier of a 
bed, should he determine on sleeping 
there. There was also a proposal for a 
day's shooting. 

The pet of Exeter Hall did not reflect 



70 LEEDS AND ITS NEIGHBOURHOOD. 

long. Sir William was a distant cousin 
of his own ; lie was a man of large pro- 
pertj^, and possessed an only daughter, 
said to be extremely pretty, who would 
inherit his great wealth. He gave good 
dinners, and might assist Sydney, should 
the latter now determine on following 
a political career. " Besides," mentally 
argued he, " if I don't get away from this 
abominable inn, I shall be again tormented 
by these horrible admirers of mine ; and 
yet I cannot leave Leeds before to-morrow, 
as I must await the reply of Mrs. Eearden. 
It is just possible London maybe rather too 
hot to hold me just now ; or, on the other 
hand, I may be wanted there ; hence I 
can't budge till I receive the old hag's 
letter. There can be no hesitation — ^no 
doubt on the subject; I'll accept Sir 
William's invitation." So desiring the 
groom to be well treated while he wrote 
a reply, he sat down and penned a 



LEEDS AND ITS NEIGHBOURHOOD. 71 

civil acceptance, taking care to commence 
his letter witli " Dear Cousin," and end- 
ing it by an assurance that he was his 
" attached relative and friend." 

The note sealed — for George was far 
too gentlemanlike to make use of saliva 
in closing his epistle — ^the groom was suifi- 
moned, and the reply despatched. 

Scarcely had Sir William's messenger 
departed, when a lady who declined 
sending in her name was ushered in. 
She was closely veiled and muffled up in 
a large cloak, but the manner in which 
she entered the room and took a chair 
plainly betrayed to Sydney that his visitor 
was a lady ; her language proved her to 
be a person of education, but her cold and 
distant maimer forbade him to indulge 
in the hope which had at first sprung 
up in his breast, namely, that it was 
a personal conquest he had made, and 
that in the female before him he saw 



72 LEEDS AND ITS NEIGHBOURHOOD. 

an additional triumph, flatteringly to 
swell the long catalogue of fair creatures 
willingly transformed into " stricken 
deer" by the magic of his glance. 

The servant having left the room, the 
lady, without hesitation, at once addressed 
hihi— 

'' You may think it strange that I, as 
a stranger, should thus visit you, and 
perhaps that astonishment may be in- 
creased when I assure you that I intend to 
leave you in a few minutes without stating 
my name or revealing my features." 

" Oh, madam !" 

" Don't interrupt me ; only allow me 
to utter a few words and I will leave 
you, nor further interrupt your more 
important affairs. Suffice it to say, for 
reasons of my own, I am anxious to do 
good. Perhaps I have sinned and wish 
to purchase my pardon; perhaps I am 



LEEDS AND ITS NEIGHBOURHOOD. 73^ 

rich and charitably incKned, but have no 
good opportuniiy of dispensing my alms. 

Perhaps but stay/' added she, inter-- 

rupting herself, *'all this is nothing to 
do with you: it is the act, not the 
motive, I desire you to approve. I have 
heard you continually visit the poor and 
relieve the distressed; I therefore con- 
stitute you my almoner. Will you accept 
the office for once ?" 

" Yes." 

" Well then, here are fifty sovereigns," 
and she handed him a small purse filled 
with gold — " yes, here are fifty sovereigns; 
distribute them amongst the deserving 
poor, and when they are gone write and 
tell me so, addressed to Z. Z., Post Office, 
Hunslet, Leeds, and you shall have a 
forther supply. Nay, no thanks ; I give 
them to the poor and needy, not to you. 
Don't move — don't ring the bell, I know 



74 LEEDS AND ITS NEIGHBOURHOOD. 

my way well; I would rather not be 
observed ;" and the next moment she had 
disappeared. 

"Well, that's just what I wanted; 
it will stop Marham and Jameson s 
mouths. IVe not made such a bad 
trip, after aJl. If I happen to win the 
heiress I'm a made man. I'll make 
my peace with Heaven and become a saint 
in reality ;" and our Tartuflfe chuckled at 
the bare idea. 

Another female was now announced, 
and George already fancied he grasped 
within his palm a second purse, when a 
wretched woman, leading a sickly-looking 
child, tottered rather than walked into 
the room. 

The unfortunate creature was evidently 
in the last stage of consumption. Her 
dress was clean, though denoting the 
most fearftd poverty. Her pale cheeks 
and sunken eyes revealed a tale of woe in 



LEEDS AND ITS NEIGHBOURHOOD. 75 

more forcible terms than the most fearful 
words could express. George for a moment 
was reaUy shocked, and rose from his 
seat as the poor sufferer dropped into 
the nearest chair and burst into a flood 
of tears. When she recovered her com- 
posure and her speech she turned to 
Sydney and faintly exclaimed — 
" Oh, sir, have mercy on me !" 
The astonished scion of nobility seemed 
for a moment lost in wonderment ; then, 
resuming his seat, and at once reading 
the mission and object of the poor woman's 
visit, calmlv demanded what he could do 
for her. 

The distracted female threw herself on 
her knees and implored the good man's 
assistance. Her history was short; it 
was one of every-day occurrence. Her 
husband had been killed in a mill ; her 
eldest child was now lying ill of a dan- 
gerous fever. To support the poor infant 



76 LEEDS AND ITS KEIGHBOUBHOOD. 

she had sold every object she possessed. 
She was now starving. Alas ! the curate 
of her parish had given her five shillings, 
but that was spent and gone. The 
charitable doctor, who had visited the 
sufferer gratuitously, had told her that her 
darling must die unless it had cerfeun 
comforts — certain luxuries. He had left 
her wretched lodging teUing her tins, 
yet offering no aid to procure them. Yes, 
her child was dying, certainly dying, un- 
less she could get a few shillings. She 
had heard that a great and good man 
from London was in the town, and she* 
now visited him to implore his aid. A 
few shillings would save the life of the 
child ; without them the poor little crea- 
ture must die." 

George Sydney seemed greatly moved 
at her recital. At the close of it he 
arose and addressed her — 

"My good woman, my heart bleeds 



LEEDS AND ITS NEIGHBOURHOOD. 77 

for you — ^but alas ! I have no means of 
assisting you. My constant donations 
given in charity — ^the frequent calls on 
my purse — Cleave me really penniless. I 
can only recommend you to appeal to the 
parish authorities, and to those kind 
friends who live in Leeds. Do this to- 
morrow.'^ 

"Oh, sir, good sir, charitable sir, my 
child will be dead ere that, if no relief 
arrives." 

" I am indeed afficted. I would fain 
stay the stroke of fate which hovers over 
your dear child. I will do all I can do, 
and I truly regret the offering is so small ; 
but it is all I can spare/' 

" Heaven bless you ! Oh, dear, dear 
sir, the child you save shall be taught to 
bless your name and nightly pray for you." 

George Sydney rang the bell. 

" Show this poor woman out,'' said he 
to the waiter, and turning to the wretched 



78 LEEDS AND ITS NEIGHBOURHOOD. 

applicant he handed her a shilling. Then, 
turning on his heel, he sought his dress- 
ing-room, there to attire himself in the 
most becoming manner previous to start- 
ing for Besborough Hall. 



79 



CHAPTER VII. 

BESBOEOUGH HALL. 

The residence of Sir William Putnam 
was one of those fine baronial halls which 
may yet be found in their original form 
in Yorkshire. Like Temple Newcome 
and other old castles in the neighbour- 
hood of Leeds, it had been little altered 
since its original construction. At the 
back of one of the towers a gaudy con- 
servatory and a lady's dressing-room, it 
is true, had been added by a widow, who 
held it during the minority of her son, 
and a billiard-room had been further 
appended by the baronet's father. But 
with these exceptions Besborough Hall 
remained intact, escaping the hands of 



80 BESBOROUGH HALL. 

the present Goths, who, like the men of 
taste in Bruges, would fain cover stone 
walls with stucco, and whitewash marble 
figures. 

A stately avenue of trees (probably 
planted when the old hall was built) led 
from the porter's lodge to the principal 
entrance ; this shady approach was backed 
by a thick screen of oaks, in which an 
occasional gap gave the visitor a momen- 
tary glimpse of a most lovely and well- 
cultivated garden beyond it. A sudden 
«weep in the road (made purposely 
or not it was impossible to say) gave 
a momentary view of the fine park at 
the back of the mansion, well stocked 
with deer. 

Some individuals might have admired 
the charms of nature for nature's sake. 
Not so George Sydney. He only reflected 
that all the property he now surveyed 
would one day belong to Miss Putnam ; 



BESBOKOUGH HALL. 81 

that Miss Putnam was not only single 
but well looking, and that he (George 
Sydney) was a bachelor with a winning 
tongue. Yes, Besborough Hall would 
make a fine addition to the Crrantchester 
estates. 

Arrived at the entrance, our traveller was 
received by two servitors in old-fashioned 
livery, and by them passed over to the 
major-domo, who conducted him across 
the old banqueting-hall. Here were fixed 
the old oaken tables and forms which 
had borne the meals of the household for 
a couple of centuries at least. Eaised 
by three steps stood the cross table 
where the old lords of this ancient 
castle and their immediate family and 
favoured guests had sat and enjoyed the 
heavy (and to modem taste coarse) food 
in which our ancestors indulged. A 
large window filled with stained glass, 
displaying the armorial bearings of the 

VOL. III. 6 



82 BESBOROUGH HALL. 

proud race, shed a chequered light on the 
dais. Many of the shields which hung 
on the walls had heen home by gallant 
knights in tournaments and in combats ; 
many of the wide antlers that graced the 
walls had been the trophies of the healthy 
chase in which our ancestors so warmly 
delighted. Not a single alteration seemed 
to have desecrated the old hall since those 
days when gentlemen alternated in their 
style of dress between steel armour and 
satin puffs ; since ladies wore ruffs and 
hoops — a curse they have unfortunately 
handed down to their female posterity. 

George almost expected to see some 
warrior or some queen of the lists arise 
to welcome him. He turned to the groom 
of the chambers — or rather he who might 
in such a building be designated the 
seneschal — and asked — 

" Does Sir William dine here ?" 

" Occasionally," replied the other, with 



BESBOBOUGH HALL. 83 

a stiff bow, " on rent-days, harvest homes, 
and high festivals, his worship with his 
family dine on the dais. He usually, 
however, partakes of his evening meal in 
the dining-room, adapted to th,e modem 
fashion as recently as 1719." Sydney 
smiled at the quaint manner of the old 
servitor. 

The visitor was at length ushered into 
the presence of his host. He was seated 
in his study, busily engaged in deci- 
phering some black-letter lore. The 
library itself was a perfect model, fitted 
up in dark oak and black marble. The 
volimies, bearing the stamp of age and 
respectability, were as different from a 
modem collection as light from dark- 
ness. The light which shone was sub- 
dued by one or two panes of coloured 
glass ; a deep silence inclined to reflection, 
unbroken by the rude noise of a footfall, 
which was here swallowed up in deep 

6—2 



84 BESBOBOUGH HALL. 

Turkey carpeting. At a single glance 
Sydney saw all its perfections. 

Sir William at once arose, and after 
warmly welcoming his guest, put by his 
book, and conducted him to the drawing- 
room. Here, except the old ceiling, of 
which the baronet was justly proud, and 
a splendidly-carved mantelpiece, every- 
thing was modem. The windows were 
filled by large sheets of plate- glass ; the 
walls were papered and decorated by 
Grace ; the furniture came from Gillow*s. 
There could therefore be no second opinion 
respecting the beauty of the principal 
drawing-room at Besborough. 

But George cared little for the orna- 
mentation around him; Lady Putnam 
and her daughter, who at once came 
forward to receive him, were the sole ob- 
jects of his gaze. Nothing could exceed 
the cordiality of their reception. 

Lady Putnam was a tall, stiff-looking 



BESBOROUGH HALL. 85 

personage, whose haughty manner bespoke 
a pride of family inherent in several of the 
old Yorkshire famiUes, many of whom 
look down with contempt on our nobi- 
lity, pointing out how dukedoms have 
sprung from pinmakers and woolstaplers, 
and earldoms from wealthy butchers. 
Indeed, they seem to have studied the 
Peerage for the sole purpose of finding 
out the commercial origin of many a titled 
race ; while not a few have sprung (as they 
truly allege) from the unbridled passions 
of our early sovereigns, and thus handed 
down the right of carrying the royal 
arms on the carriages of those who owe 
their first ennoblement to the charms of 
fascinating actresses. 

It is said the French family of the De 
Eohans were so proud that they adopted 
the motto — 

" Diea je ne peut, 
Roi je ne veut, 
Bohan je suis." 



86 BESBOBOUOH HALL. 

There are at least a dozen families in 
Yorkshire who would, with slight altera- 
tion, gladly adopt — feeling themselves 
fully entitled to it — the above proud 
legend. 

Miss Putnam was the very reverse 
of her mother. Equally divested of mau^ 
vatse honte and pride, she advanced, and 
with a smUe which at once entranced 
him, shook hands with Sydney. 

A lovelier girl it is difficult to con- 
ceive. A dark, flashing eye — ^reflecting 
a happy mind — ^a glance redolent (if I 
may so apply the term) of sparkling 
wit: an evebrow which, like her wrists 
and ankles, bespoke pure blood; a pale 
cheek, and a pearly row of teeth, won 
the heart — or rather the affections (for 
he had no heart) — of the entranced guest, 
who involuntarily clasped the sweet girFs 
proffered hand with more fervour than 
strict etiquette would have warranted. 



BESBOROUGH HALL. 87 

To his delight, no frown checked the 
bold action. George already looked upon 
her as won. 

The guest happening to express his 
admiration of the "old mansion/* the 
ladies proposed to show him over the 
building, while the baronet went to 
inspect a troop of yeomanry, of which he 
was the commander. 

Had Sydney been less enamoured of 
his lovely companion, he would have 
entered warmly into the many historical 
legends repeated to him by the proud 
lady of the castle ; he would have dwelt 
with rapture on the views the old Gothic 
windows afforded; he would have reve- 
rentially examined the armour of heroes 
belonging to the Putnam family — heroes 
who had fought at Cressy and Agincourt ; 
he would have properly estimated the 
value of the quilt beneath which Queen 
Elizabeth had been graciously pleased to 



88 BESBOROUGH HALL. 

sleep when she condescended to visit 
Besborough. In a word, he wonld have 
shown a proper interest in all he saw, 
and which, to win Lady Putnam, he 
should have loudly expressed; but, 
wholly engrossed by the charms of her 
daughter, he forgot to offer a proper 
homage to antiquity, lost in his desire to 
win the smiles of the clever and seem- 
ingly unsophisticated Mary Putnam. 
At length the inspection came to a close, 
but not before the sound of a gigantic 
gong announced that the hour had 
arrived when every one was called upon 
to retire to his room and dress for 
dinner. 

"Good-bye, fair coz!'' whispered George. 
^' I sincerely hope I may sit next to you 
at dinner." 

" I will take care that you shall,'' 
replied the maiden. 

Here was encouragement with -a 



BESBOROUGH HALL. 89 

vengeance. The idol of Exeter Hall felt 
a sense of triumph arise in his breast as 
he retired to his chamber. 

George was proverbially a quick dresser ; 
so, ere he began the task of adornment, 
he threw himself into an easy-chair, and 
indulged for at least ten minutes in 
pleasing reflections. 

" What a lovely creature !" He had 
never seen her equal in beauty : and then 
her manner — so open, so warm, so 
candid, and unlike the rigid belles of 
Belgravia. It is true he had only known 
her a couple of hours, but a life of hap- 
piness seemed to have passed in that 
short period. He had ventured darkly 
to hint his admiration; he had poured 
forth compliments bordering on love- 
making; yet no repulse — no chilling reply 
had crushed the sanguine ardour of his 
hopes; so far from it, she had shown 
the greatest interest in his welfare. She 



90 BESBOROUGH HALL. 

had asked him if he was married; she 
had quizzed him about some ideal lady- 
love; she had shown him those little 
attentions which, nothing in themselves, 
may well be construed into affection, 
when coupled with a look and manner 
most encouraging. Her promise to be 
his next neighbour at the coming meaJ, 
all — ^yes, all — ^raised his vanity and flat- 
tered him into the fond belief that he 
had only to ask the lovely Mary's hand 
to obtain it. 

But stay; the time was passing — ^he 
must at once dress for dinner. He rose, 
and using more than usual celerity, he 
completed his toilet just as the gong 
again pealed through the wide hall, and 
summoned the family as well as their 
guests to the drawing-room. 



91 



CHAPTEE Vni. 



THE DINNER. 



The guests assembled, doubtlessly invited 
to do honour to Sydney's visit, were not 
far above the usual average of country 
society. They sat in a semicircle, evi- 
dently awaiting an announcement of the 
order in which they were to go down- 
stairs. The visitor was duly introduced 
within the distinguished crescent, and 
presented to each as "our cousin, the 
Honourable Greorge Sydney,'' — an an- 
nouncement which elicited sundry low 
bows from the gentlemen and profound 
curtseys from the ladies; for be it well 
understood that the latter genuflexion 



92 THE DINNER. 

has not yet entirely disappeared, as it has 
in the metropolis. 

Lady Putnam addressed a few words 
in an under-tone to her lord, who nod- 
dingly approved of her arrangement, 
which, in simple truth, consisted in the 
selection of proper couples, and the prece- 
dence each should take. 

"You will hand me down, if you 
please, cousin," said she, approaching and 
taking the arm of George ; " you, as the 
son of a peer, will take me down. Sir 
John Manners, will you hand Mrs. 
Kamsay ? Mr. Eamsay, kindly take Miss 
Penton — Charles, take Mary — and Sir 
William will give his arm to Lady 
Deckett.'* 

The arrangement made, the old senes- 
chal or groom of the chambers threw 
open the wide doors,, and preceded the 
party to the small dining-room. 

" You will excuse us taking our meal 



THE DINNER. 93 

in the lesser hall. The fact is, we only 
yesterday heard of your arrival in Leeds, 
and had consequently no time to fill the 
dais tables to do you honour/' 

"My dear Lady Putnam, you really 
overwhelm me with kindness. Surely 
this magnificent apartment, hung with 
splendid portraits of your ancestors, is 
handsome enough.'' 

" Handsome, I admit," replied the lady, 
" but not the place in which we should 
introduce to our county friends a cousin 
who has done honour to his lineage !" 

George bowed, highly gratified. The 
mother's consent was doubtlessly secured; 
he had now only to vdn the daughter. 

Having safely deposited the lady of the 
house in her proper position at the head 
of the table, Sydney stood for a moment, 
anxiously waiting to see who would be 
placed next to him. To his great delight 
Mary Putnam threw herself into the 



94 THE DINNER. 

chair, and with a winning smile called on 
her cousin to "sit down," — a challenge 
he instantly accepted, delighted to find 
himself thus placed between love and 
honour. 

Next to the fair girl, the young 
gentleman whom Lady Putnam had de- 
signated as Charles was seated ; and on 
his right sat Miss Penton. Sir William 
sat at the foot of the table, facing his 
proud wife; on his right sat Lady 
Deckett; then came Mr. Bamsay; a 
female dependent, or distant cousin, 
modestly filled the next chair. Mrs. 
Ramsay was thus compelled to sit next to 
one of her own sex ; Sir John Manners 
divided her from the mistress of the 
house. 

" Our twelfth seat remains unoccupied 
in consequence of the absence of Sir 
Creorge Deckett," apologized Lady 
Putnam, slowly using her fan. 



THE DINNER. 95 

"He begged of me to assure your 
ladyship how extremely sorry he was that 
pressing business prevented him from 
being here," said Lady Deckett. 

"What can't be cured must be en- 
dured," chimed in Mrs. Ramsay. 

Sydney at once saw that his opposite 
neighbour, who was a remarkably fine 
woman, was a vulgarian ; and in a glance 
read the truth that Mr. Eamsay, one of 
the first men in the West Riding, 
had, attracted by her beauty, married 
a person far beneath him in social 

Lady Putnam saw the effect, and, 
somewhat ashamed of her guest, her fan 
moved more rapidly ; for, like most ladies 
who use this weapon of coquetry, their 
exact mood may generally be discovered 
by the motion of it. Calm, dignified, and 
weU pleased, it moves to and fro at a 
steady pace; anger or extreme pleasure 



96 THE DINNER. 

accelerates its movements in no common 
degree. 

" Cousin George, do try this vol au vent ; 
you will find it excellent. Our country 
neighbours scarcely estimate these cocks- 
combs, which we receive direct from 
Paris." 

"WeVe coxcombs enough already, 
without importing them," loudly chimed 
in Miss Penton, at the same time bursting 
out laughing at her own wit. 

"Who is that?" whispered George to 
his fair neighbour. 

" A witty spinster — fat, fair, and forty. 
She wont suit you," replied the other, in 
an equally confidential whisper. 

" What are you whispering about, 
Mary ?" asked Charles. 

" Confidential matters," answered the 
lovely girl. " Pray don't interfere with 
our flirtation." 

" Don't mind her, Mr. Hastings. If 



THE DINNER. 97 

she has the bad taste to snub you, I wont ; 
so let us chat together, and leave them 
to cozen each other;*' and again she 
chuckled at her own sally. 

George scarcely saw any sense in a 
young man calling the girl he admired by 
her Christian name. He had heard of 
Charles Hastings — he was one of the 
richest proprietors in that part of the 
country ; but, after all, he was only a fox- 
hunting squire, and perhaps it was the 
custom of this class to address familiarly 
young ladies whom they had long known. 
On the whole,, however, he was most 
grateful to Miss Penton for monopolizing 
Master Charley's attentions. 

" May I take a glass of wine with you, 
Miss Putnam, if the good old habit 
is not banished from this part of the 
world ?" 

" Oh ! by no means ; we are quite 
primitive in Yorkshire. Besides which, 

VOL. III. 7 



98 THE DINNER. 

it will give me great pleasure to drink 
your health ; but it must be on one con- 
dition \^ and the charming creature threw 
a glance on George calculated to entrance 
him. 

" And that condition ? — ^I could refuse 
you nothing.'* 

" Oh ! the condition is very simple — 
that you would drop the formal Miss 
Putnam, and call me Mary !" 

** Dear Mary, then, I pledge you in a 
glass of champagne !" and he swallowed 
the draught to the dregs. 

Charles Hastings suddenly turned from 
his garrulous neighbour and addressed 
Sydney — 

"I thought you presided at a grand 
temperance meeting yesterday ?" 

"Most true," replied George, in a 
somewhat cold and formal tone. 

"Then you appear to have forgotten 
devilish soon the cause you so eloquently 



THE DINNER. 99 

advocated. Always remember, as Shake- 
speare says, that — 

" * He who the sword of Heaven will bear, 
Shall be as holy as severe; 
Twice treble shame on Angelo, 
To weed my vice, and let his grow.' " 

Sydney blushed and turned away, curs- 
ing in his heart the " officious bumpkin," 
but felt more than repaid for the annoy- 
ance when Mary, taking up the cudgels, 
turned sharply on Charles, and said, in a 
tone of tmdisguised pique, — 

" My cousin did it to oblige me. He 
gave up his own wishes to meet mine — it 
is more than everybody would do.'* 

" Thank you, dear coz ; I would gladly 
again offend, to find so charming an advo- 
cate.'' And warranted as he felt by her 
frank kindness, he plunged into a regular 
flirtation with his cousin, who seemed 
nothing loth to reciprocate his kind feeling. 

"Well, if you'll be so gallant, Mr. 

1—2 



100 THE DINNER. 

Hastings, I shall feel very proud of your 
escort; but I hope it will cause no 
jealousy/' said Miss Penton, with a some- 
what malicious smile. 

" I don't care if it does," loudly replied 
Charles; "besides, I mean to hunt all 
this week, and the hounds meet close to 
York to-morrow. They throw off at 
Ascham Bog/* 

" You must, however, forego your dig- 
nity, and travel second class — ^I always 
do so." 

" Oh, of course. I'll travel tenth class • 
to secure so delightful a companion." 

" Second class !" almost shrieked Mrs. 
Eamsay; "you cannot surely mean it. 
Miss Penton ! I would not enter such a 
conveyance for the world. Oh, it's hor- 
rible, ain't it, Mr. E. ?" added she, ad- 
dressing her husband. 

" For ladies, my dear, it may be dis- 
agreeable; but many of our most re- 



THE DINNER. 101 

spectable country gentlemen travel by 
it." 

" Oh, that is horrible ! I don't think 
I could do so if I was whipped for it. I 
really don't think I'd like to associate 
with any one who did so." 

" My dear Mrs. Ramsay, you are severe. 
Not only do I often travel second class," 
said Sir John Manners, "but my wife 
occasionally does the same. It was only 
last week we did so, accompanied by 
Lord Middlemas." 

"Well, well, I am surprised! Why 
didn't you go first class, where you are 
sure of meeting first-class people ?" 

" By no means. If you wish it, I will 
relate to you the incidents of that jour- 
ney, in order to prove that my assertion 
is correct." 

" Oh, do, do — do so by all means ; your 
ijtories are always so amusing," put in 
Lady Putnam. 



102 THE DINNER. 

" Well, there's not mucli in it, but as 
you wish it, and Mrs. Bamsay desires to 
know why I say the second class is equal 
to the first, I will give it you." 

" Miss Penton, leave off your flirting 
and listen," laughingly chimed in Sir 
William. " Come, Manners, go on." 

The baronet cleared his throat, and 
went on : — 

" I had been staying for some days at 
the hospitable mansion of Colonel Mark- 
ham, near Norton Bridge, and was re- 
turning thence, accompanied by Lord 
Middlemas (a very wealthy but particu- 
larly quiet nobleman), to my own cottage 
near Ferrybridge, where his lordship had 
determined on sleeping en route to Don- 
caster. In his household there had re- 
cently been a petty Smeute^ so he had 
advertised in the London papers for a 
superior housekeeper. A person dating 
from Acomb had answered the advertise- 



THE DINNER. 103 

ment, and by my advice Lord Middlemas 
was now on his way to meet her and inquire 
into her qualifications. This he preferred 
doing at my house, as it was far nearer 
than his own, and he anxiously desired 
to see her without the intervention of his 
other servants. 

" My wife was of the party, and, from 
some freak or other, expressed her wish 
to travel second class. We took our 
tickets accordingly, and patiently awaited 
the arrival of the train. 

" Presently it came in, when my better 
half, unconscious of the difierence, stepped 
up to the door of a first-class carriage. 
The porter, to whom she exhibited her 
ticket as she requested the door to be 
opened, in a civil manner pointed out 
to her her mistake, and showed her where 
she might find the proper conveyance. 
At this moment Lord Middlemas and I 
came up, and, to our intense amusement 



104 THE DINNER. 

(for we are both lovers of the grotesque), 
saw a fat, red-faced, vulgar-looking woman 
thrust her head out of the window, and 
imperiously command the porter ' not to 
allow her to be troubled again with them 
there second-class people — ^it wam't for 
this she paid her money/ Then pulling 
up the glass in the most indignant man- 
ner, she rolled over to the other side of 
the vehicle, in order to show her elegant 
proportions to the travellers standing on 
the other side of the station. 

"At Leeds we found we should be 
detained some short time, so we left our 
seats and wandered about the platform, 
alternately reading the amusing handbills 
and looking over the thousand-and-one 
two-shilling volumes here sold by Mr. 
Smith, the indefatigable railway vendor 
of books and newspapers. 

" Tired of walking up and down, we 
entered one of the waiting-rooms. Here 



THE DINNER. 105 

was seated, in all the pride of Eastern 
dignity, our friend the first-class pas- 
senger. She was scolding a boy who had 
brought her a cotton umbrella instead of 
a silk one : — ' John, youVe lived as my 
servant for two years ; I should have ex- 
pected better manners from you. What 
do you mean by bringing me this here 
two-and-sixpenny thing ? It ain't to lose 
my best umbereUa that I paid for your 
third-class return ticket. Go directly, sir, 
and get it. Find it at your peril. Here, 
take this here trumpery — ^it belongs to 
some of the lower orders;' and with a 
look of disdain she threw it at the poor 
boy, who, looking slyly over his shoulder, 
picked it up and sneaked off. 

" I confess we could not help smiling. 
This the lady in the bright red roses 
perceived, and she evidently boiled over 
with rage, but with a look of malig- 
nant satisfaction she turned to the 



106 THE DINNER. 

window and beckoned in a railway- 
porter. 

" ' Ain't this the first-class passengers- 
room ?' 

" ' Yes, ma'am/ 

" ' Then I'll trouble you to tell them 
people they've no right here — ^they come 
in the second class.' 

" * Can't do that, ma'am ; this waiting- 
room is meant as much for them as it 
is for yon ;' and the porter bolted. 

" * InsujBferable imperdence !' muttered 
the indignant fair one as she sailed out to 
take her place in a first-class carriage, con- 
tinuing to roar directions to her hapless 
footboy, in order to attract attention to 
her aristocratic position. We were all 
heartily amused. 

" After awhile, we safely arrived at our 
cottage, and while enjoying our luncheon 
indulged in a hearty laugh at the expense 
of our late fellow-traveller, whose aira 



THE DINNER. 107 

afforded us a subject of amusement during 
several minutes. 

"The servant now came in, and 
announced that the expected candidate 
for his lordship's housekeepership had 
arrived, and that she had been shown 
into the drawing-room, 

"Lord Middlemas begged us to ac- 
company him and assist in his investi- 
gation of the fair damsel's qualifications. 
We all went upstairs; we entered the 
modest saloon — ^when whom should we 
behold but the first-class passenger, 
radiant in feathers and flowers. As we 
entered she looked up; she read in a 
glance her probable fate; so without 
uttering a word she jumped up, more 
wonder-stricken than any individual I 
ever beheld, and expressing her feelings 
of annoyance by a low chuckle of dis- 
content, she rushed down the stairs, call- 
ing out as she reached the haU— 



108 THE DINNER. 

" ' Boy, quick ! — ^bring my umberella !* 

" So you see, my dear madam, a second- 
class passenger may be respectable, and a 
first-class traveller not belong to the first 
class of society." 

" Bravo ! bravo !" cried Sir William 
Manners, " you have got me out of a sad 
scrape. When Mrs. Eamsay first de- 
nounced the second class I began to 
feel uncomfortable, for, truth to tell, I 
often travel by it." 

"Well, everybody to their taste, as 
the old woman said when she kissed her 
cow; I know I never shall " 

At this moment Mr. Hastings rose, 
and apologizing for leaving the table, 
whispered a few words in the ear of 
Mary, and quitted the room. 

" Hem ! — my love, had you not better 
speak to Charley before he goes ?" appealed 
Lady Putnam to her daughter. 

" Not I ; he has probably a headache, 



THE DINNER. 109 

and wishes to nurse it; or perhaps he 
wishes to get ready for his hunt to- 
morrow. I really am too well contented 
here/* 

Mamma's fan went'to and fro in a hand 
gallop — she was evidently annoyed ; but 
calming her feelings, she made a bow 
to Lady Deckett. 

The company rose and returned to the 
drawing-room. 



110 



CHAPTEE IX. 



AN ASSIGNATION. 



On re-entering the splendid saloon, they 
found two or three gentlemen, who had 
arrived by the train, too late for dinner. 
There was an Irish M.P., a Manchester 
millionaire, and a neighbouring divine 
whose rubicund proboscis announced him 
as a thorough judge of port wine. The 
new comers each in his turn saluted their 
host and hostess, and then mingled with 
the others, who appeared to be acquainted 
with them. Tea and coflfee were served, 
and the usual formalities gone through ; 
these over, the party divided into 
knots, and began eagerly discussing 
their favourite topics. Sir William was 



AN ASSIGNATION. Ill 

delighted to have a political chat with the 
M.P. ; Lady Deckett, as a banker's wife, 
was singled out by the cotton lord; 
the clergyman listened eagerly to the 
account of a sale of wines Mr. Eamsay 
had been present at ; Sir John Manners 
kept up a brisk fire of wit with Miss 
Penton ; Lady Putnam sat near the fire 
in evident ill humour; Mrs. Ramsay 
obtruded herself on each group by turns ; 
George, in high good humour, led his 
" stricken deer" (as he believed her to be) 
to the centre table, on which splendidly- 
bound books, photograph albums, and 
portfolios of statistics were scattered with 
well-arranged carelessness. 

"Who is your favourite poet, Miss 
Putnam ?" asked Sydney. " Longfellow, 
I should say, from the array of his works 
here displayed." This he asked to dis- 
cover whether his intended bride was 
well educated. 



112 AN ASSIGNATION. 

" By no means — ^the volumes on this 
table are placed here to amuse our visitors. 
I have a little library in my dressing- 
room, where I keep the works of my 
favourite authors." 

" Whom do you, then, prefer ?" 

" Tennyson. I look upon him as the 
greatest poet since the days of Byron. 
Sir Walter Scott has been considered by 
many to be a smoother, a more pleasing 
poet, than even Lord Byron himself; 
but the Laureate, in his 'Idyls of the 
King,' unites, I think, the grandeur of 
the former with the flowing verse of the 
latter." 

"Ah, now. Miss Putnam, sure ye're 
mistaken. Have you forgotten Tom 
Moore, the poet of poets ?" chimed in the 
Msh M.P. 

George in his heart wished the in- 
truder back amongst his constituency for 
thus interrupting his delightful t^te-a-t^te. 



AN ASSIGNATION. 113 

"None can admire the Bard of Erin 
more than myself, but I confess a re- 
mark I once unfortunately read in one of 
the Eeviews destroyed my high appre- 
ciation of his works/' 

" And what was it, if I may be bold 
enough to ask ?** 

** The critic averred that if the sweet 
flowers and bright gems were taken out 
of Moore's works they would be little 
more than nonsense." 

The Irish member shrugged his 
shoulders, and returned to finish his chat 
with the host. 

George Sydney was delighted. She 
whose personal charms he had so warmly 
admired had a mind equally attractive; 
she seemingly loved poetry, and Q-eorge 
loved her for doing so. 

He now took up the photographic 
album. It was filled with theatrical cele- 
brities; and here again the fair girl 

VOL. III. 8 



114 AN ASSIGNATION. 

astonished her admirer by criticising in 
most minute manner, showing that the 
wolds of her native county were not more 
familiar to her than the Italian opera- 
house, and the various places of aristo- 
cratic amusement in London. She could 
recollect Jenny Lind, and defined her 
most correctly as the sweetest warbler of. 
the human race. Like every female in 
Great Britain, she spoke rapturously of 
Mario ; Grrisi had each year deteriorated, 
but was still grand ; Piccolomini, a most 
fascinating and delightful actress, was 
never as a singer entitled to the rank of 
prima donna; Titiens was certainly the 
finest musician that had graced Her 
Majesty's Theatre for many years ; Paul 
Bedford was her delight, and Toole kept 
her in a continual roar of laughter; 
Phelps took the most correct reading of 
his parts, but his acting was hard; 
Charles Mathews was one of the finest 



AN ASSIGNATION. 115 

and best actors that ever trod the stage. 
In a word, she astonished her auditor, 
who did not think it prudent to confess 
that he was wholly ignorant of the sub- 
ject she was dilating on, having never 
publicly entered a theatre, nor enjoyed 
those theatrical entertainments he had so 
loudly denounced as a stern and uncom- 
promising Churchman. 

Anxious to turn the subject, Greorge 
took up a beautiful sketch, coloured in 
most artistic style, representing the 
Temple of Vesta and the Falls of the 
Anio, at Tivoli. 

" How very beautiful — how exquisitely 
drawn !" 

"You are surely jesting. It is not 
finished ; but, as you seem to think highly 
of it, I wiU finish it as soon as I have 
time." 

*' What ! is this your work ?" 

" Yes." 

S—2 



116 AN ASSIQNATIOK. 

" Did you copy it from any particular 
picture ? the colouring is so artistic." 

''Not so; I sketched it on the spot, 
and completed it, as far as it is complete, 
in Eome." 

Sir John Manners, attracted by the 
loud admiration of Sydney, now ap- 
proached, and looking at the sketeh, 
turned to Miss Putnam and said — 

"Do you know that the temple you 
have so ably portrayed is English pro- 
perty?" 

" Indeed ! How so ?" 
" I'll tell you an anecdote about it." 
"I believe you have a story about 
everjrthing in creation," put in Miss 
Penton, piqued at the baronet leaving 
her ; " but go on." 

" I will. Several years ago, an Eng- 
lishman of rank was most desirous of col- 
lecting the finest gems which were to be 
procured on the Continent. As well as I 



AN ASSIGNATION. 117 

can recollect, the personage in question, a 
Marquis of Bristol, or a Bishop of Bristol 
(but I may be mistaken), visited Tivoli, 
and, enchanted with the pure architecture 
of the Temple of Vesta, after considerable 
negotiation managed to become purchaser 
of the splendid ruin in question. The 
. nobleman or churchman, whichever he 
was, returned to England, and in a few 
months after his arrival sent proper per- 
sons over to take down the architectural 
gem he had acquired, and transport it to 
this country, where he had already chosen 
a site on which the beautiful temple was 
to be erected. In his contract of pur- 
chase he had, however, forgotten to re- 
serve to himself the right of removal ; so 
when the persons deputed came over, they 
were unceremoniously told by the repre- 
sentatives of Q-overnment, that though 
the ruin had been sold, that although 
they fully recognised it as the property 



!• yy 



118 AN ASSIGNATION. 

of 'Milor/ there it must remain. It 
.graced the spot on which it stood; 
none but a Vandal could think of re- 
moving it from a spot where alone it 
called up recollections of the past ; in a 
word, his Holiness the Pope (Pius VII.) 
refused to sanction the . demolition, 
which would destroy the interest felt *. 
hj every traveller in visiting Tivoli.' 

*'And who's the Pope, Td like to 
Iknow," said Mrs. Eamsay, "who could 
thus give orders to a British nobleman ?" 

" He was a pious monarch," loudly 
chimed in Miss Penton, heartily enjoying 
her own joke. 

Mr. Eamsay called the attention of the 
party to some other subject. Greorge and 
Mary were alone left at the table. 

"Have you any more drawings to 
show me ?" 

"Oh, as many as you like. I was 
always sketching when I was in Italy." 



ccn 



AN ASSIGNATION. 119 

" Were you there long ?" 

"Three years" 
Then you are well acquainted with 
the country which produced a Tasso and 
a Dante ? If so, you doubtlessly speak 
the language — ^the Lingua d'amorey 

"Son quasi Italiana io, e lei, parlate 
Italiano ?" 

Sydney had pronounced the only 
words he knew in the language; he 
hastened to turn the subject. 

"You doubtless, dear coz, ar^ a pro- 
ficient in music ?" 

" I play and sing. Indeed, I believe 
all unhappy spinsters do so." 

" Oh, do — do favour me !" And 
George gave an expressive glance, which 
he believed to be irresistible. 

" Oh, if you wish it, rU do so with all 
my heart, though I must tell you before- 
hand I am but an average performer. 
Say what shall I sing ?" 



120 AN ASSIGNATION. 

"Oh, anytliing you like. Whatever 
comes from your lips must be delightful/' 

" Well then, TU try a German ballad 
sent me from an old schoolfellow at 
Mannheim. It is strange, and conse- 
quently I like it. Do you know my long 
residence in Grermany strongly prepos- 
sessed my mind in favour of the mar- 
vellous ?" 

'* Oh, do — do sing it. I shall truly en- 
joy it." And George hugged himself in a 
transport of delight as he reflected that 
his future wife was a linguist and a 
musician. 

The song was entitled " The Page and 
the Enchantress," and not only aflforded 
an opportunity to Mary of proving herself 
a first-rate pianist, but an equally fine 
singer. At its conclusion the pet of 
Exeter Hall stood really entranced. 

" How beautiful ! — ^how touching ! — 
how sweetly touching ! " cried he. " What 



AN ASSIGNATION. 121 

would I not give to understand the 
words !" 

"It is founded on an old legend — 
one of the many marvellous tales told, 
and devoutly believed in, by the dwellers 
on the Ehine." 

"Do you think you could relate it?'* 
asked Sir John ; " and if so, would you 
do so?" 

" I believe I could ; and really, after the 
example you have set me this evening I 
cannot — dare not refuse. So now, ladies 
and gentlemen, attend. But no— I may 
forget some part of it ; so, if you will 
allow me, I will read to you the Grerman 
legend communicated to me by my dear 
correspondent;" and taking out a letter 
she thus read : — 

" Once upon a time, a young page of 
the Count Eberstein, named Hugo, was 
desirous of penetrating into a subter- 
ranean passage of the castle of his lord. 



122 AN ASSIGNATION. 

which had not been visited for a century, 
and which was regarded as haunted. 
After much hesitation, he determined to 
explore the mysterious spot. Having 
said his prayers before an altar in the 
castle, and taken a taper which had been 
blest by a priest, and had even burnt for 
some time on the altar, he proceeded to 
the mouth of the cavern. There he re- 
commended his soul to all the saints he 
could recollect, and courageously entered 
the subterranean passage. He had walked 
a whole hour in this awful place and met 
nothing but deathlike solitude and silence, 
when he suddenly found himself in a 
lofty and spacious apartment. He could 
not see from whence the light came, but 
it was so vivid he was forced to cover his 
eyes with his hands, supposing that he 
had found the outlet of the passage. He 
soon, however, perceived that there was 
no outlet to this vast apartment ; and he 



AN ASSIGNATION. 123 

began to inspect everything he saw with 
a silence mingled with some apprehension. 
The light which had dazzled him pro- 
ceeded from a crown encrusted with 
enormous sapphires and placed upon a 
cushion, supported by a pedestal of white 
marble ; near it was an iron chest about 
five feet high, and long in proportion ; and 
behind appeared the curtains of a tent or 
bed. The youth conjectured that treasures 
had been deposited there in former times 
by some forgotten people or sovereign, 
and advanced towards the chest, when 
a large black dog sprang from behind it, 
and rushed upon him, barking hideously. 
Hugo gave himself up for lost, when a 
gentle voice was heard. The dog re- 
turned to the place from whence he had 
darted, and a lady made her appearance. 
She seemed to be in the flower of youth, 
and of the most exquisite beauty; no 
Greek statue could equal her superb bust, 



124 AN ASSIGNATION. 

and her delicate waist was surrounded by 
a girdle of polished gold, on which were 
traced some cabalistic characters. Hugo 
was contemplating her with admiration, 
when, by a motion of her dress, he per- 
ceived that this beauty, whose shape was 
like that of a goddess, had a serpent's 
tail. His eyes were clouded, and he 
would have fallen senseless had he not 
been recalled to himself by the voice of 
the mysterious lady. 

** *I perceive your terror,' said she, 
with a gentle accent, and in as pure Latin 
as was spoken in the time of Augustus, 
^and I feel my poor heart failing from 
shame and agony. Know, young stranger, 
that I am an unfortunate princess, and 
am condemned by the arts of a magician 
to remain, in this dungeon for as many 
centuries as I have lived years, unless set 
free by a brave and pious youth. I see 
that you are the individual who is to dis- 



AN ASSIGNATION. 125 

solve the cliarm that confines me here, 
for you are brave and pious in mind and 
body. My deliverer, if he has the 
courage to surmount the horror that my 
person inspires, must kiss me three times, 
I shall then recover my natural form ; 
and to reward his generosity I shall accord 
him my hand, with a portion that will 
make him the richest and the happiest 
man in the world/ 

" When the princess had thus spoken, 
she fixed her beautiful eyes on Hugo 
with such an expression of tender sup- 
plication that the youth, attracted by an 
irresistible charm, was going to throw 
himself into her arms, but the hideous 
scales met his view, and he felt his limbs 
paralysed with horror. 

" * Do you love money ?' exclaimed the 
lady, with vivacity; 'do you wish for 
power?' and opening a chest, she showed 
him it was filled with gold pieces. 



126 AN ASSIGNATION. 

" The sight of the coin encouraged 
Hugo. He sprang (not without shud- 
dering) into the arms of the princess, and 
imprinted a kiss upon her lips. At the 
same moment a great noise resounded 
through the cavern, confused v»pices filled 
the air, and a dismal groan, repeated in 
echoes through the passage, made his 
heart palpitate with terror. His audacity, 
however, was attended by no fatal con- 
sequences; and though much discon- 
certed, he was preparing to give the 
second kiss, when the scales of the tail 
again met his view. 

" Almost sick with horror and disgust 
he would have fled, had not the unfortu- 
nate princess, with a cry of despair, im- 
plored him to have pity on her. The 
tears which filled her eyes seemed to add 
to her beauty; the page was unable to 
resist them, and kissed her for the second 
time. Thunders again shook the c.i vem ; 



AN ASSIGNATION. 127 

on every side were heard fresh groans 
mingled with horrible laughter ; the black 
dog renewed his barking, and the serpent's 
tail struck the ground with such violence 
that it trembled as with an earthquake. 
Hugo could not muster courage to re- 
main, but taking a last look at the prin- 
cess, he turned and fled. 

" ' Oh, do not leave me !' cried the lady, 
in accents of despair. But the youth fled 
as if he was pursued by all the demons of 
the Hartz mountains. ' Have pity on 
me, for the love of all you hold dear !' 
But Hugo stopped his ears with his 
hands and continued his flight. ' Mercy — 
mercy — mercy V The voice then became 
weaker, and at length died away. 

" When the page regained the mouth 
of the passage and again emerged into 
dayUght, he sank with exhaustion and 
fell asleep ; after which he arose and re- 
turned to the castle of Eberstein. His 



128 AN ASSIGNATION. 

adventure of the morning appeared to 
him as a dream ; but the gold pieces with 
which the lady had filled his pockets 
proved to him its reality, and a burning 
thirst reminded him that he had neither 
eaten nor drank the whole day. * Wine, 
wine !' were the first words he uttered ; 
and when his astonished companions had 
presented him several glasses, he con- 
ceived such a sudden fondness for the 
liquor that a part of his money was soon 
spent in copious libations. This taste 
soon led to every sort of extravagant plea- 
sures ; these excesses quickly enervated 
his strength and depressed his spirits ; 
a malediction seemed to attend on the 
fatal treasures he had obtained, and when 
the last coin was spent he fell into 
poverty and disgrace. He again and 
again attempted to find the awful passage ; 
but he has ever failed, and he is said even 
now, as a spirit, to haunt the spot with 
vain lamentations." 



AN ASSIGNATION. 129 

" Such is the subject of the strange 
song and the wild melody I have just 
given you. Translating it, as I read, 
from the Grerman language, it has perhaps 
lost some of the force of the original, but 
this you must pardon," added Mary, with 
one of her sweetest smiles. 

"Well, I don't believe a word of it,'' 
cried Mrs. Eamsay. "I went up the 
Ehine as you call it, and I never saw 
anything of the kind." 

Conversation now became general. 

The clergyman earnestly invited George 
to attend his church on the following 
Sunday, but the latter declined the invi- 
tation, pleading the necessity of leaving 
Yorkshire on the following day on urgent 
business, as an excuse for not accepting 
the otherwise welcome engagement. 

^' Oh, I hope you are not going to leave 
us so soon. Cousin Greorge," said Miss 
Putnam. 

VOL. III. 9 



130 AN ASSIGNATION. 

" I regret to say business compels me." 

"And can you come back soon — say 
in a fortnight r 

" If you invite me to do so, certainly." 

" Well then, expect my summons. He 
must come, must he not, mamma ?" 

" Oh, decidedly," graciously replied 
Lady Putnam. 

George now felt he had nothing to do 
but to propose, to secure the charming 
girl's hand. The mother s consent was 
abeady certain; Sir William would pro- 
bably not object. Emboldened by this 
belief he whispered to Mary, as they sepa- 
rated for thp night, " Dear coz, will you 
meet me in the garden after breakfast in 
the morning ?" 

" With the greatest pleasure. In the 
lower garden, if you please." And away 
went the entrancing girl. 

Sydney, for the first time in his life, 
felt something like real love. 



131 



CHAPTER X. 



PBIDE HUMBLED. 



If the reader has ever been a successful 
wooer, he may possibly understand the 
feelings of George Sydney as he laid his 
head on his pillow for the first time in 
Besborough Hall. On reviewing the 
events of the day, he was bound to be 
content. Every scene of that period was 
pictured couieur de rosCy and the great 
man's pride and self-love were flattered, 
and he began in earnest to think of re- 
forming his ways, and becoming in reality 
that which he had hitherto been only 
in appearance. Blessed with fortune, 
wedded to the loveliest, the most in- 
genuous of her sex, he would proudly 



132 PRIDJ3 HUMBLED. 

enter Grantchester House, and astonish 
by his splendour and magnificence the 
worthy peer. Hitherto he had been his 
brother's dependent, and he cordially 
hated that brother for his liberality; 
every fresh gift was a fresh grievance. 
Yes, he would yet live to tell him he 
was no mere pensioner. He calculated, 
from an old knowledge of Sir William's 
afl^irs, that his spare timber was worth 
at least £40,000. This would more than 
pay his son-in-law's debts ; and if he re- 
fused this supply, Mrs. Eearden might 
be introduced into Besborough Hall, and 
the baronet's early death — which of 
course he would deeply regret — would 
leave him the undisputed master of 
estates worth £15,000 a year. Mary, 
though lovely and accomplished, was 
perhaps a very little — ^the shadow of a 
shade — too fast. He would correct her, 
and bend her to his will. Yes, a man 



PRIDE HUMBLED. 133 

who, like Caesar, had but to " come, to 
see, and to conquer," could do all he 
liked; and the delighted lover fell into 
dreams which some might expect would 
be the reflex of his waking feelings. But 
it was not so. He was arrested and 
carried off to some dreadful cell, to await 
his trial for murder ! Here, after a time, 
he was discovered by dear Mary, who, 
touching the prison-bars, at once released 
him, and bore him to the well-known 
cottage in St. John's Wood, where, sud- 
denly raising the veil which hid her face, 
she disclosed the features of Lady Urm- 
stone, who, after pouring foyth a torrent 
of reproaches, touched him with her icy 
hand, and he at once felt himself in the 
agonies of death. Placed in a coffin, he 
was borne to the church in which he had 
been christened— angels were about to 
claim him as their own — ^when suddenly 
the sacred edifice became pitch dark — 



« 



134 PRIDE HUMBLED. 

a thousand horrible creatures danced 
around his bier, while a voice loudly 
demanded — " "What hast thou to do here, 
thou wicked hypocrite?" The demons 
then approached, and would have dragged 
him forth, but George struggled lustily, 
and in that struggle awoke. 

The morning was far advanced when 
Sydney opened his eyes. His watch showed 
him that it was half-past seven, and it 
had been formally announced to him that 
the family breakfasted at nine. He had 
a long, an important, and a pleasing page 
to write in his diary — a diary in which 
he carefully inserted not only every event 
that occurred, but also his every feeling 
on the various occasions. He also wished 
to be very particular in his toilet, so he 
at once left his bed, well knowing he had 
no time to lose. 

Three white neckcloths were sacrificed 
before George was thoroughly content 



PRIDE HUMBLED. 135 

with his tie; at least ten minutes were 
bestowed on shaping his nails ; his hair 
was brushed till it shone like black 
polished marble. Mrs. Madden's tooth 
paste rendered his teeth brilliantly white ; 
a soupgon of eau-de-cologne was rubbed 
on his chin after shaving. In a word, he 
set off his handsome face and j&ne person 
to the best advantage ere he left the 
room. 

Thus armed for conquest, he entered 
the breakfast-room — a beautiful apart- 
ment, filled with exotics, and opening on 
the lawn. Here sat, evidently awaiting 
his arrival, the host and hostess, with 
their fair daughter, Sir John Manners, 
Miss Penton, and Mr. Charles Hastings. 
As soon as George entered, Sir William 
requested him to read prayers, which he 
did in a sonorous voice, and in that em- 
phatic manner which at once accounted 
for the estimation in which he was held 



136 ' PRIDE HUMBLED. 

by what is called the Low Church 
party. 

After this proper introduction to the 
business of the day, the letter-bag was 
opened and the contents distributed, and 
then they at once sat down to breakfast. 

Little or nothing new was brought 
forward ; nothing worth recording passed. 
The only thing which puzzled and an- 
noyed Sydney was the intimate terms 
on which Charles Hastings appeared to 
be with Mary Putnam, who, instead of 
showing the utter indiflTerence and cold- 
ness she had exhibited towards him at 
dinner on the previous day, now seemed 
to have transferred all that open kindness 
to him which she had bestowed on 
Sydney the day before. The consequence 
was that Greorge set her down as a regular 
coquette, and determined on telling her 
so, and threatening not to seek her as 
a wife. 



PRIDE HUMBLED. ' 137 

Everything must come to an end — 
even a country breakfast must arrive at a 
conclusion. This period arrived, and each 
party strolled away, to follow their various 
amusements or vocations. 

Having put on his hat and given an 
extra j&nish to his toilet, George Sydney 
strolled forth; and having ascertained 
the way from one of the gardeners, he at 
once directed his footsteps to the lower 
garden. 

It was empty ; not a soul was percep- 
tible within its high walls, which were 
admirably calculated to screen its occu- 
pants from observation. George remarked 
this with pleasure, and mentally thanked 
his fair syren for having cunningly 
selected such a place of meeting. For 
some time he walked up and down, in 
anxious fear lest Mary might not keep 
her appointment, when, joy ! — joy ! — she 
suddenly came in by a side door which he 



138 PRIDE HUMBLED. 

had not observed^ Need we add that 
Sydney, in ecstasy, rushed to meet her ? 

" Dearest girl ! a thousand thanks for 
thus coming to meet me. You know not 
what hopes — what presumptuous hopes — 
it encourages." 

" Upon my honour, beyond the hope of 
a pleasant walk, I am unaware of any." 

"Oh! do not play with my feelings; 
do not jest on a subject so serious." 

" You speak in enigmas. To what 
serious matter do you allude? You 
asked me to walk here, and here I am, — 
I did not know you wished me to speak 
on serious matters. If, however, it is any 
distress I can alleviate — any charity 
within my power — ^I will." 

" Oh ! it is both. It is a case of deep 
distress, which your charity can alpne 
relieve." 

" Cousin, cousin ! speak in plain Eng- 
lish, and I'll as plainly answer you." 



PRIDE HUMBLED. 139 

" Can any one overbear ns ?" 

"None but the robins. But why 
this mystery?" 

" Well then, I will at once unbosom 
myself to you ;" and be led the puzzled 
girl to a seat in an ornamental summer- 
house. "Yes, I will be candid — ^I will 
be frank/' 

"Do, Cousin Greorge. I like frank- 
ness." 

" Well, then, dear girl !" cried Sydney, 
carried away by the violence of his passion, 
and dropping on one knee, " I love you — 
I adore you. I, who never bowed before 
a mortal yet, beseech you on my bended 
knees to accept my hand and heart !" 

Mary burst out laughing. 

"Cousin George, you'll make me die 
with laughing !" cried she, as soon as she 
could speak. " Bravo ! bravo ! — you would 
make an excellent actor.*' 

George started up. 



140 PRIDE HUMBLED. 

''Miss Putnam, I do not understand 
this merriment. Do you mean to insult 
mer 

"Do you mean to say that you are 
serious ? 

" On my soul I am !" 

" What ! Love at first sight ? — ^fallen 
in love with your country cousin's charms 
at dinner, and in twenty-four hours fast 
dying of love !" 

" You are pleased to be satirical/* 

" Not so ; I wish only to be rational ; 
and I had hoped, from what they told me 
of you, that you would have been the 



same/' 



"I am rational — I am perfectly so, 
although the ardour of my pas- 



• 39 

sion 



cc 



Now, do — do drop this inflated style 
and descend to common sense. Tell me 
if you have utterly lost your senses. 
What part of my conduct justified you in 



PRIDE HUMBLED. 141 

believing that I was thus lightly to be 

"Did you not encourage me? Did 
you not receive with apparent pleasure 
and reciprocate every feeling I expressed, 
last evening ?" 

"Yes; I admit it," 

" You acknowledge it. Tell me why, 
then, this sudden change." 

" For the simplest reason possible. 
Charley and I had a difference — a 
lover's quarrel — and I flirted with you to 
annoy him." 

" Thank you for your preference." 

"Oh! there's no gratitude due. I 
should have shown as much to any one 
else who had happened to drop in." 

"Then you made me a mere butt-r-a 
stalking-horse; you considered me a 
fitting person to be fooled ?" 

" Exactly." 

" Miss Putnam, such heartless conduct 



142 PRIDE HUMBLED. 

I have never met before, nor am I in the 
habit of being treated so lightly/' 

" And do you mean to say you were 
vain enough to think you had won my 
heart in a single interview ? For shame, 
Mr. Sydney ! — you have really too high 
an opinion of yourself." 

" It is more than I can be accused of 
respecting " 

" Your country cousin," interrupted 
Mary. " Oh yes, I know aU this— I'm 
used to be found fault with. Charley often 
chides me." 

"And who is this Mr. Charles Hast- 
ings, for whom you so unblushingly 
express a preference ?" 

" Charley ! "What, did you not know 
it? How very odd! I really thought 
I had told you. I am to be married to 
him next month." 

" What a fool I have made of myself!" 
groaned Sydney. 



PRIDE HUMBLED. 143 

"Bather," laughingly put in Miss 
Putnam. 

" To be thus led on and tricked by a 
mere country coquette. I know not what 

could have induced me " continued he 

in an undertone. 

" But I do," cried Mary, catching his 
words. "It was vanity — pure vanity. 
You are a spoiled pet of the world — one 
who thinks himself the cleverest and the 
most irresistible man in creation — one 
who looks down upon poor, unsophis- 
ticated Yorkshire girls. Now, I am a 
plain, simple, and straightforward person, 
free in my manners, and no adept in dis- 
simulation. You mistook open-hearted 
candour and the aflfectionate manner of a 
relative for love and admiration. For 
shame. Cousin George! I fear you are 
very vain," 

" Mary, listen to me. By Heaven " 

"Stay, stay — here's dear Charley;" 



144 FBIDB HUMBLED. 

and with a light bound she started from 
the summer-house, and the next moment 
stood smilingly linked under the arm of 
her intended. "Ta-ta, cousin!" cried 
she. " I wont tell — ^honour bright, I 
wont. But don't forget what I said. I'll 
send you a formal invitation to our wed- 
ding. Charley dear, George Sydney has 
half promised to be present." 

" If not inconvenient to him, my dearest 
Mary, we shall be most happy to see him," 
and Charles gave a stiff and somewhat 
haughty bow. 

"Once more, ta-ta," cried Mary, and 
dragging Charles Hastings away, she 
quickly left the garden. 

" May every ill befal them ! To be 
foiled and humiliated by a heartless co- 
quette — a bumpkin squire ! Oh, it is too 
degrading. Here am I, Greorge Sydney, 
the idol of the opposite sex, the envy of 
my own — ^the man who never yet suffered 




PRIDE HUMBLED. 145 

mortal creature to cross his path un- 
crushed — am I to stand here and tamely 
put up with such an insult ? No, no — 
they shall not be married; they shall 
rue the day they offended me. Yes, I 
solemnly swear I'll be revenged. The 
proud girl shall yet upon her knees sue 
for pardon, and I will spurn her — ay, the 
thought is sweet !" And with this con- 
cluding reflection Sydney again sought 
the house. 

Too much vexed to encounter the 
family, unable to account for his sudden 
flight, anxious to be guilty of some in- 
civility which would alienate him from 
their future acquaintance, Sydney rang 
the bell, and desiring the servant to bring 
him a post-chaise from the neighbouring 
village, he at once packed up his things, 
without asking the usual aid of a valet. 
He threw into his portmanteau his diary, 
determining not to sully its pages by re- 

VOL. III. 10 



146 PRIDE HUMBLED. 

lating the scene whicli had just occurred ; 
and leaving a very brief note, stating that 
he was compelled to leave Besborough 
Hall by important business, adding no 
civil line of thanks or explanation, he 
jumped into the vehicle and instantly 
started for Leeds — ^if not a better, at least 
a wiser man. 



147 



CHAPTEE XI. 

THE LETTER OF RECAL. 

There are few situations more unpleasant 
than that of travelling in a wretched post- 
chaise in these days, when railroads offer 
us comfort, celerity, and punctuality- 
more particularly when one is flying from 
scenes rendered hateful by some crushing 
event. Yet in this identical predicament 
did Sydney now find himself, as he slowly 
rolled over the ten miles which lay be- 
tween Besborough Hall and the town of 
Leeds. It is true he had traversed the 
same distance only twenty-four hours be- 
fore without feeUng himself weary or the 
distance great; but now it seemed in- 
terminable — so wide is the distinction 

10— ii 



148 THE LETTER OF REGAL. 

between seeking happiness and flying 
from disappointment. 

Change in his fortune may wound the 
millionaire; reverses in political aspira- 
tions may be deeply felt, and love re- 
jected (as in the present case) may agonize 
a sensitive bosom; but none of these 
could come up to the annoyance which 
George felt — ^the envenomed pains he now 
endured. To a proud, man — ^to one who 
has never yet been checked in his wild 
career — ^a sudden and unexpected humilia- 
tion is worse than death itself. Poverty, 
pain, and even bereavement might be 
borne; but in the very moment of 
triumph to be scorned — ^to be scorned 
by a mere girl of eighteen or twenty — to 
be laughed at and lectured by such a 
being, was more than Sydney could well 
endure — ^yet endure it he must. 

And then, again — who could say — 
might not Miss Putnam, in the pride of 



THE LETTER OF REGAL. 149 

her heart, reveal what had passed? 
ALready she had probably told it to her 
lover, who would long ere this have re- 
peated it to all his friends, even adding 
exaggeration to the already painful pic- 
ture. Sydney began to regret that he 
had not stood his ground, and, if the 
subject had been broached, boldly denied 
the whole affair, or declared it to be a 
joke. It was now, however, too late to 
* return, so he had only to make the best 
of it. 

In about two hours the crazy vehicle 
reached Leeds, and deposited the angered 
orator in his former quarters, where all the 
household — including waiters, chamber- 
maids, and boots — declared that the 
London gentleman's visit to Besborough 
Hall had done no good to his temper. 

Three letters only awaited Sydney on 
his arrival. The first — a large and im- 
portant-looking missive — ^informed him 



150 THE LETTER OF BECAL. 

that a deputation would wait on him 
immediately on his return, and conduct 
him in due form to the chapel, where, 
after proper service, his opinion would be 
taken relative to the various plans pro- 
posed for building the new wing. 

George threw the letter aside with an 
angry ejaculation. In a moment his 
mind was made up. He would not let 
them know of his arrival, and thus elude 
their unwelcome civility. 

The second wa« a note, only just 
brought to the house by a groom from 
Besborough Hall. The man still waited 
for an answer. 

This rather pleased the aflTronted wooer. 
It soothed his angry feelings, since it 
doubtless came from Mary, apologizing 
for her conduct in the garden, or from 
Sir William, pressing him to return — ^an 
invitation, truth to tell, he felt half in- 
clined to accept. Even if he lost the 



THE LETTER OF REGAL. 151 

daughter, he still might turn the riches of 
the father to a profitable account. His 
pride would be satisfied by the baronet's 
explanation — ^his avarice gratified by ex- 
torting some of his wealth. All these 
ideas flashed a<;ross Sydney's mind as he 
tore open the note. It ran thus : — 

"Sir, — ^As I have reason to believe 
that you feel yourself aggrieved by the 
behaviour of Miss Mary Putnam — ^who 
tells me you had the egregious presump- 
tion to mistake the artless aflfection of a 
near relative for a feeling which none but 
a senseless egotist could have mistaken 
for anything more tender — I hasten to 
assure you, as the intended husband of 
your dear cousin, that I am ready, when 
and where you like, to afibrd you every 
satisfaction a gentleman can demand. 

" Tour obedient Servant, 

" Charles Hastings. 



152 THE LETTER OF RECAL. 

"P.S. — Though Miss Putnam looks 
upon the whole affair as a mere folly to 
be laughed at, Sir William views it in a 
more serious Hght, and expresses a hope 
that you will never attempt to approach 
or to address him again." 

George Sydney turned pale, and abso- 
lutely shook with rage. He was not a 
coward by nature, but he had schooled 
himself to a certain line of conduct conso- 
nant with his professed " pious principles/' 
He had in his lectures over and over again 
denounced duelling. If he now accepted 
a challenge, he would be for ever dis- 
carded by his religious friends. Besides, 
after all, he had latterly so taken his 
revenge by means of vile agents and 
desperate means, that he almost shrank 
from seeking it now at the risk of that 
life he had hitherto so tenderly preserved. 
But, on the other hand, to be stigmatized 



THE LETTER OF BECAL. 153 

as a coward — ^to be laughed at as a vain 
fool — ^to be turned out of a relation's 
mansion for not knowing how to behave 
himself — oh ! it was hard to bear. It 
was a bitter pill, even for the idol of 
Exeter Hall to swallow. 

After a short pause and a few moments' 
reflection, which brought him no consola- 
tion, he opened the third letter,^ which 
he well knew came from Mrs. Marks 
(alias Mrs. Thompson). It was thus 
worded : — 



"Deer Marster Gorge, — i rite in 
ansur to your letter jist cum — a many 
things as happened. The Duv as got 
out of er cage and cum home, i rites as 
you dezire in something turms — ^i don't 
no the word — butt i understands it. The 
companion ad better be sent a way. i 
newer ears your name. Butt i thinks the 
suner as you cums the better. Jem is in 



154 THE LETTER OF RECAL. 

Lundon, and groan a grate drunkerd. 
Cum kwick. " Tours, 

" Sarah. 



" P.S. — I give'd one dose yesterday. 



99 



After a careful perusal of this strange 
epistle, George discovered the meaning. 
That Lady Grantchester was meant by 
the Dove was clear to him; yet how. she 
had escaped — ^how she had returned to 
her lord — he was sorely puzzled to dis- 
cover. The intelligence that Marks had 
returned (having promised him not to do 
so for three months) was annoying, and 
his wife's significant notification of the 
fact was far from pleasing. Yes — ^for this 
and for every reason — ^he determined on 
instantly returning to the metropolis, 
where he could again see Lord Grant- 
chester or lie perdu, just as he thought 
proper. 

He hastily rang the bell, and desired 



THE LETTER OF RECAL. 155 

the waiter to bring him a printed te- 
legraph form. This was brought, and 
he hastily scribbled a telegram to Mrs* 
Thompson, of G-rantchester House, to 
secure instantly his old apartments in 
Halfmoon-street, and have all prepared 
for his reception by the train which 
arrives in London at 9 a.m. This mes- 
sage despatched, he ordered some refresh- 
ment; and just as he was about to sit 
down to it, the waiter stated that some 
person wished to see him. Vexed, 
alarmed, and disgusted, George felt dis- 
inclined to see any one. 

"Why did you not say that I was 
out ?" 

" Because you did not tell me to do so, 

• }} 
sir. 

" Is it too late ? I really wish to be 
alone.'' 

"WeU, I don't think I could well 
stop 'em now." 



156 THE LETTER OF REGAL. 

*^Tell me, then, how long it will be 
before the London train starts ?" 

" About half-an-hour/' 

" Only half-an-hour ? I shall scarcely 
have time to put up my things and take 
my luncheon. Eun down quick, and say 
I can t see any one." 

" It's too late, sir," replied the waiter, 
as the door was thrown open, and four 
or five persons, decked out with ribbons, 
and bows, and sashes, suddenly appeared, 
.and drew up in a row. 

The spokesman took one step to the 
front — 

" Honoured sir !" 

Sydney expressed his annoyance by 
B, peevish " Pshaw ! but go on." 

"Honoured sir ! We, the representatives 
of the numerous temperance societies in 
the borough of Leeds and the adjoining 
suburbs, two of us being deacons of 



THE LETTER OF RECAL. 157 

the New Bethlehem and Anti- Jerusalem 
chapels " 

" Do go on faster," impatiently inter- 
rupted Sydney. 

The orator seemed surprised; but re- 
freshing his memory from a paper which 
he carried^ he continued — 

" We, sir, well knowing the stamp 
which the presence of one so good, so 
temperate, and so pious as yourself would 
impress upon the building, are come to 
escort you in procession to the chapel." 

" Oh, hang the chapel! don't you see I'm 
busy ? — I have a thousand things to do." 

The deputation stood amazed. But the 
leader, seeing the humour of the great 
man, thought it better to remonstrate in 
gentle terms — 

" Oh, sir, do not disappoint us. At 
least two hundred persons are assembled 
waiting your arrival at the sacred edifice^ 



158 THE LETTER OP REGAL. 

the greater number of wliom have paid 
for their seats/' 

" Give them back their sixpences" — for 
by this time George was exasperated by- 
being made a public show — " give them 
back their money, if you are honest 
men." 

"How, then, shall we support the 
chapel?" 

" Pull it down if you like, and spend 
the cash in grog." 

" What, sir ? — ^you insult us. Do you 
not know we are sworn to temperance ? 
"We will repeat your words to our friends, 

and '^ 

Sydney saw he had gone too far; the 
story might reach London. It was cer- 
tain to become a good joke at Besborough ; 
so he iat once lowered his voice, and 
added in his blandest tones — 

"Gentlemen, believe me I was only 
jesting; I wished to try you. I thank 



THE LETTER OP REGAL. 159 

you much for the kind forbearance with 
which you have received my silly joke. 
It is true I am now busy, but in an hour 
I will be entirely at your service. In the 
meantime be pleased to take some re- 
freshment below; order what you like, 
and I will pay for it as I did yesterday. 
Waiter, you have heard what I said ; re- 
peat my words to the landlord." 

The delighted deputation assured 
George that they had seen through his 
quiz the whole time, and really esti- 
mated it as capital ftin. They would 
return in an hour, and accompany Mr. 
Sydney to the Anti- Jerusalem Temple in 
proper order; and with smiles and low 
bows the men left the room. 

George rang the bell, and taking a 
light meal, paid his bill, and sending for 
a fly, instantly started for the railway. 
As he was stepping into the carriage, a 
smart groom came up to him, and 



160 THE LETTER OF REGAL. 

toTiching his hat, asked for an answer to 
the note he had brought from Bes- 
borough Hall. 

" There's no reply. Tell them all to 
go to the devil," cried the maddened 
Sydney ; " that's my only reply." . 

The disappointed servitor turned away. 
He had come up with the hope of 
obtaining a handsome tip, he merely 
received an insulting message. 

George arrived only about three 
minutes before the hour of starting. 
He took a first-class ticket and was hur- 
rying to his carriage, when a rude hand 
was laid on his shoulder. He turned 
round. It was the spokesman of the de- 
putation. 

" Good sir, you doubtless forgot ; we 
are all waiting for you." 

" Say I can't come." 

" But how account for this sudden 
desertion?" 



THE LETTER OF RECAL. 161 

"Say Tin all for Jerusalem, and am 
opposed to Bethlehem ; so I cannot sanc- 
tion by my presence a chapel opposed to 
the City of the Temple/' 

" WeU, well— but " 

"Oh, no buts — youVe heard my de- 
termination; and jumping into a car- 
riage, he pulled up the glass. The disap- 
pointed deputation then turned away. It 
now only wanted one minute to four, in 
sixty seconds he would be clear of Leeds. 
The door was suddenly opened, and lo ! a 
greasy-looking man thrust in his hand, 
and presented a piece of crumpled paper, 
and in a voice of triumph exclaimed to 
some one behind him— 

"I hae cotched him, danged if I 
am't ! Come, ben, no shuffling wi' me. 
Stump up, or I'm blowed if I doant drag 
thee from coach." 

" What do you mean, ruffian ?" almost 
screamed Sydney. 

VOL. III. 11 



162 THE LETTER OF REGAL. 

" Pay for the liquor you ordered. I 
zay, friend, I'm Yorkshire ; I'm not to be 
bilked by a Lunnoner." 

" How ! What do you mean?" 

" Look at bill/' 

Sydney glanced at the paper in his 
hand ; it ran thus : — 

" To ales, brandies, and sherries to 
thirteen members of the Leeds New Tem- 
perance Society, four pounds ten." - 

" May temperance be " 

" Well, ben, there bain't no use in 
z wearing loike. Pay cash, or come along 

•9 >> 

wi me. 

" There's a five-pound note," said 
George, offering the fellow a Bank of 
England note. 

" I don't loike taking them Lun- 
non notes. Ham't ye gotten a Leeds 

"Not I." 

The whistle sounded. 



THE LETTER OF REGAL. 163 

" Give me the change/' demanded 
Sydney. 

" Next toime,MaisterPulpit-thoomper/' 
roared the rufl&an, laughing, as he placed 
his finger to his nose in a significant 
manner. 

The train was in motion : it was too 
late to seize him. 

The darling of his party leant back, and 
almost wept with annoyance. 



11- 



164 



CHAPTEE Xn. 

THE NOBLE STRUGGLE. 

Lord TJrmstonb sat with Lord Grant- 
cliester in the study of the latter noble- 
man, who did not feel himself well. The 
doctor, indeed, had been called in ; but as 
he found no indications of any particular 
illness, he had suggested that the sudden 
agitation caused by the return of Lady 
Grantchester might probably have de- 
ranged his lordship's system, and brought 
on the present unpleasant symptoms; — 
and to this opinion Lord Grantchester had 
bowed. 

The conversation of the two noble- 
men related to the late abduction of Lady 



THE NOBLE STRUGGLE. 165 

Grantchester, and her equally strange re- 
storation to her home, 

"But how does her ladyship account 
for it ? What does she say on the sub- 
ject ?" asked Lord Urmstone. 

"Nothing, my dear Mend; on that 
subject she is completely silent. It is in 
vain I urge her; she refuses to reply." 

"Are her lips sealed by any rash 
vow ?" 

" Indeed I know not. Prom her I can 
elicit nothing; and Scarsdale, who seems 
to know a great deal about it, is also 
taciturn when questioned.'* 

At that moment the lawyer about 
whom they were speaking entered, accom- 
panied by Leslie, whose countenance 
bespoke the gladness of his heart. 

"Scarsdale, my friend," said Lord 
Grantchester, " Lord Urmstone and my- 
self were forming conjectures relative to 
the removal — ^forcible, no doubt — of Lady 



166 THE NOBLE STRUGGLE, 

Grantchester from the asylum in which 
she was placed, and her subsequent escape 
and return." 

" It is a painful subject. Take my 
advice : seek to know no more. The wife 
you loved is restored to you ; why, then, 
elicit by an unnecessary inquiry, circum- 
stances which might- annoy and distress 
you? 

" I only wish candidly to ask you, Do 
you know anything about it ?'^ 

" Everything, my lord." 

" And do you refuse all information to 
your old friend ?" 

"I do — not in any spirit of unkind- 
ness. There is no other demand in the 
whole world that I would refuse you; 
but here I am bound by the most solemn 
ties, I cannot, will not satisfy you; 
if I must tell the whole truth, I 
am not certain, were I free and un- 
shackled, that I would communicate to 



THE NOBLE STRUGGLE. 167 

you a tale which, without making you 
one iota happier, might call forth bad 
feelings — might even render you mise- 
rable for life." 

" Good Heaven ! what do you mean ?" 
"The mystery thickens," observed 
Lord TJrmstone ; then, turning to Leslie, 
he addressed him : " And you, John, — do 
you understand this ?" 
" Partly." 

" Then I suppose you may speak ?" 
" Pardon me ; I know not all. Con- 
cerning that portion, however, which I do 
know, my lips are sealed." 

" You are too well acquainted with me, 
Lord Grantchester," said Scarsdale, in a 
serious tone, "to believe for an instant 
that I would willingly play with your 
excited feelings. Lord TJrmstone, too, 
should know me better than to believe 
that I would maintain an obstinate silence, 
unless compelled to do so." 



168 THE NOBLE STRUGGLE. 

Lord Grantchester held out his hand 
and grasped that of the lawyer. 

"I feel that you are right. Excuse 
my having thus pressed you; let us 
change the subject. Well, Leslie, my 
good friend, what brings you and the 
lawyer here?" 

" The most lucky chance in the worid, 
since it finds you and Lord Urmstone 
here together," replied the captain. 

Lord Urmstone looked surprised, and 
said — 

" Well, it is strange ; and still more so 
since I came to talk to Grantchester 
about you, and to tell him of your ap- 
proa.3hing marriage with Emily." 

" Bless my heart, my young friend, is 
it so ? Oh, you sly dog, you never told 
me one word about it,*' said Lord Grant- 
chester. 

" I could not, my lord," replied Leslie, 
« since it was only last evening that my 



THE NOBLE STRUGGLE. 169 

happiness was crowned by the lady's 
consent and the approval of her noble 
father/' 

" Well, well," said Lord Grantchester, 
" I suppose I must offer my congratula- 
tions on the event, and I do so cordially, 
although it will rob me of the company 
of one whose constant society I had hoped 
would have cheered my few remaining 
days." 

" Not so," quickly put in Leslie ; " I 
will never so far forget your kindness as 
to abandon you. I will daily call on 
your lordship, to see if I may be made 
useful." 

" Can I venture, without offending, to 
offer pecuniaiy " 

" Not so — not so. Lord TJrmstone has 
already made me independent, and I now 
come, accompanied by Mr. Scarsdale, to 
ask his lordship to allow me to settle not 
only her own fortune on Lady Emily, but 



170 THE NOBLE STRUGGLE. 

also the property I possess, since it all 
springs from the generosity of my early 
benefactor." 

" Noble boy ! I cannot hear of this/* 

" Pardon me, my more than father, if I 
say I insist. Yes, he whom you took from 
compassion now ventures to oppose you.'* 

" If you really feel the gratitude which 
I truly believe beats in your bosom, my 
dear boy," replied Lord Urmstone, " you 
will no longer do so; on this occasion 
you must drop your pride." 

" Pride — ^the pride of a beggar's brat 
towards his benefactor, would indeed be 
preposterous," murmured Leslie. 

Lord Urmstone continued — " I came to 
my old friend Grantchester this morn- 
ing for the express purpose of communi- 
cating to him the news of your ap- 
proaching marriage with my daughter, 
of your promise never to quit me again, 
but to live under my roof; and lastly, as 



THE NOBLE STRUGGLE. 171 

it might seem Kke dependence thus to re- 
side under my roof, to settle £2000 a year 
on you now, and as much as I can alienate 
from my title at my death. Come, Grant- 
chester, say, am I not right ? Would you 
not do the same ?" 

" Were I blessed with a child, indeed 
I would," replied the other, with a sigh. 

" Come, then, Mr. Scarsdale, will you 
undertake to draw up the deeds ?" 

" My lord, I shall be delighted to do so; 
but really I must tell you I had already 
promised Captain Leslie to " 

" Pooh, pooh ! Tou have heard him 
acknowledge me as his adopted father ; as 
my adopted son he cannot disobey me, 
nor thwart the devout wish of my 
heart.'' 

*' My lord — my good lord " 

"Drop this empty — this formal ad- 
^ess." 

" I submit, then, dear father, since you 



172 THE NOBLE STRUGGLE. 

bid me call you so. Never, never can I 
forget your kindness." 

How far this affectionate strife would 
have proceeded it is impossible to say, but 
at this instant the doctor was announced^ 
and all, save the Earl of Grantchester, 
quitted the room. 



173 



CHAPTEE Xni. 



THE EXECUTION. 



Hal, a small town situated some nine 
miles from Brussels, was the scene of a 
fearful murder; a good and charitable 
old lady had been the victim. The as- 
sassin, who had fortunately been taken, 
was a foreigner. The history of the sad 
event may be told in a few words: — - 
Madame Van Borsel, an old lady said 
to be very rich, and much beloved, 
had, on the death of her husband (who 
had once been the Burgomaster of Has- 
selt), taken a small house in Hal, and 
had here resided, dispensing Kberal chari- 
ties, regularly attending church, and 
visiting the sick and the bedridden. No 



174 THE EXECUTION. 

wonder she was, then, generally desig- 
nated by her neighbours, " the good lady 
of Hal." About three weeks before the 
event to which we have alluded took 
place, a foreigner, in great apparent dis- 
tress, arrived in the little town, and called 
on Madame Van Borsel, and told her 
such a moving tale of want and distress, 
that she instantly invited him to become 
an inmate of her house till he heard from 
England, where he assured the good lady 
he had considerable landed property — 
property which would be sold during the 
following week — when in return he would 
gladly make a handsome offering at the 
celebrated shrine of Notre Dame de 
Hal. Madame Van Borsel was a pious 
woman — a good Catholic ; so she felt 
pleased at the offer of tlie foreigner, 
whom she believed to be a German. A 
confidence thus established soon ripened 
into friendship, and the German doctor — 



THE EXECUTION. 175 

as the people called him — soon assumed a 
better appearance and a happier look. 

One morning, about a week after the 
stranger s arrival, Madame Van Borsel 
did not come down as usual to attend 
early mass. This astonished her servant 
girl — she had but one ; but when break- 
fast hour arrived, and her mistress did 
not make her appearance, the servitor 
began to be alarmed, and bursting open 
her mistress's door, which, to her great 
surprise, she found locked and the key 
removed, she found her mistress lying 
dead in an arm-chair near her bed, which 
had not been slept in. The girl^ 
horror-stricken, rushed to the stranger's 
room, but it was empty. No one was 
there. The man had evidently gone 
away. With trembling steps she ran 
out, and meeting a sergent de ville, com- 
municated to him the startling facts. 

The proper authorities were assembled. 



176 THE EXECUTION. 

and immediately proceeded to the good 
lady's house. Here they examined the 
corpse, but found nothing to arouse their 
suspicions ; a garde de ville, however, 
more sharp than the rest, searched about 
till he found the old lady's desk. It had 
been broken open and rifled of its con- 
tents. This raised immediate suspicion, 
and caused a further inquiry. The 
medical man arrived ; he made a proper 
examination. Their friend and benefactor 
had been poisoned — she had been mur- 
dered ! Yet who could have done it ? 
Suspicion immediately fell on her foreign 
guest, whom they now ascertained had 
fled some hours before. Retributive 
justice quickly trod in his footsteps; 
before the sun set he was taken by the 
police in a low cabaret in the outskirts of 
Brussels, and at once conveyed to prison. 
Within a week he was tried, and the 
crime brought clearly home to him. 



THE EXECUTION. 177 

Several papers belonging to the murdered 
woman were found upon him; a phial 
which had contained the poison was in 
his waistcoat pocket. He pleaded that 
he was a British subject, and should only 
be convicted (as in England) by a jury 
partly made up of his countrymen ; but 
this plea was overruled. He appealed to 
the British minister, but was unable to 
prove the fact of his being a native of 
Great Britain. He refused to teU his 
name. He equally resisted all attempts to 
learn his antecedents. He, however, had 
always said he was a German; so as a 
German (name unknown) he was tried, 
convicted on the clearest evidence, and 
condenmed to be guillotined on the 
foUowing day. 

This was a startling sentence. Had 
the crime been less, doubtlessly it would 
have been commuted, for the sovereign 
of Belgium is an enemy to shedding blood. 

VOL. in. 12 



178 THE EXECUTION. 

But very few capital executions have 
taken place during his long reign ; nor, 
indeed, have many been necessary, for in 
honest candour it must be confessed the 
Belgians are about the most well-behaved 
and harmless people upon earth, and well 
deserve the talented and merciful king 
who rules them. 

At an early hour on the following morn- 
ing the regular functionaries began to 
erect the fatal scaffold in the Grande 
Place, that picturesque square which 
witnessed the executions of Comtes 
d'Egmont and Horn, in 1568. From 
the windows of the Broodt Huys it is 
said that Alva looked forth on the legal 
murder of these two patriots. But it is 
not our province to portray this strangely 
interesting spot ; suflfice it to say, that 
the extraordinary gables which many of 
the surrounding edifices present are ob- 
jects as curious to the inquiring traveller 



THE EXECUTION. 179 

as any monmnents he may meet with in 
the course of his travels in Europe. 

Eight o'clock was fixed for the execu- 
tion, and long ere that period arrived a 
considerable crowd had collected anxious 
to behold the rare sight of a decapitation. 
As usual on such occasions, there was a 
fair average of the female sex; but no 
rude conduct, no disgusting levity was 
displayed, as on similar occasions in 
England. The assemblage were quiet 
and serious, and as the prisoner ap- 
proached they seemed to withhold their 
breath, awe-struck by the solemnity of 
the occasion. A procession escorted the 
culprit, and two judges were said to 
be amongst the functionaries who accom- 
panied the unhappy man. These high 
legal dignitaries beheld the last sentence 
of the law carried into execution from a 
window prepared for them. Such a rule, 
if it be so, must have a most salutary 

12—2 



180 THE EXECUTION. 

effect, rendering capital punishments less 
frequent, and restraining the mob from 
all indecent outbreak. 

The wretched prisoner ascended the 
platform accompanied by the executioner 
and his aids— a priest also attended him 
—while within the line of horse gens- 
d'armerie who surrounded the scaffold, 
stood an officer of the Church, holding 
aloft exactly opposite, and in view of 
the culprit, a large crucifix, to which 
the figure of our dying Saviour was 
affixed. 

We will not enter into details — ^we 
will not dwell on the horrors of the 
scene ; the unfortunate murderer was, 
however, recognised by a female in the 
crowd. She screamed loudly to him. 
He for a moment seemed to feel a pang, 
a strange pang, for hitherto he had shown 
the greatest indifference; then turning 
to the executioner he cried, as he saw the 



THE EXECUTION. 181 

female approacliing — " Quick ! quick ! 
despatch me before she arrives!" In a 
moment more he was strapped to the 
fatal plank — ^the plank was tilted down and 
pushed forward till the head was grasped 
within the fatal circle — the executioner 
touched the spring — a duU sound was 
heard as the unflinching axe fell, and 
the head rolled into the basket prepared 
for it. 

Thus ended the career of Dr. Compartz, 
the base assassin. 



182 



CHAPTEE XIV. 

A PRECIOUS PAIR. 

In a small room on the first floor of the 
" Goat and Trumpet," sat an iU-looking 
nawie. He had been waiimg some time 
for the arrival of a friend and companion. 
The time he thus spent had not been 
wasted in idleness. He had arrived soon 
after ten ; it was scarcely now eleven, yet 
two pewter pots drained to the bottom, a 
bottle of gin half empty, and a smoking 
glass of grog, stood on the table before 
him, still in good truth the feUow could 
scarcely be said to be intoxicated. He 
was warmed (as he called it) and that 
was all. He came to keep an appoint- 
ment ; he had important business to trans- 



A PRECIOUS PAIR. 183 

act, and he delayed the intended pleasure 
of getting thoroughly drunk till he 
should have carried out the mission on 
which he had been despatched. 

" Well, I'm blowed if I likes waiting, 
my thoughts haint over-pleasant; I al- 
most feels, when I am all alone, as if my 
thumb and fingers was still pressing the 
flunkey's throat. And this here last little 
afiair. It hain't cosey, is it ? Here I'm 
a-done out of all the swag, and am in 
hourly fear of being nabbed and sent 
across the herring-pond. I shan't stay 
here arter twelve. The old man must be 
in his bunk afore this. I suspects old 
Sal can't or wont come ; if she don't, I'm 
blessed if I don't go up and unkennel 
her. I'm very thirsty ." And he raised his 
glass to his lips, and at one draught 
swallowed the whole of its contents. 

While he was enjoying himself a female 
slipped quietly in. She undid her cloak. 



184 A PRECIOUS PAIR. 

took off her hood, and as Marks (for it 
was indeed he) put down the emptied 
measure on the table, he saw before him 
the hard features of his wife. 

" Why, Sal, what has kept you so long, 
andbed-dtoyou? I've been waiting 
here these two hours." 

" That's a lie, Jem," replied his affec- 
tionate wife, " for Maister George only 
arrived at nine. You had to see him, 
you had to come 'ere, and it ain't eleven 
yet. Well, Jem, you seems to 'ave for- 
gotten your manners." 

" How so ?" 

"You han't so much as said — Sal, 
take a drain." 

" What will you have ? I'm ready to 
stand whatsomdever you likes best; so 
tinkle the rattler, and choose what you 
likes. This here Old Tom aint so 
snu%." 

" Well, rU try it, Jem ; for I doesn't 



A PRECIOUS PAIR. 185 

want nobody to see me without my 
Thompson toggs. Mix ns a drop, wiU 
ye — ^hot, sweet, and strong ?" 

" Tliere it is, Mother Marks," said the 
hnsband, handing her a smoking glass 
of strong grog, "and while you dips 
your beak into it Til tell you all as 
passed." 

" I looks at ye, Jem," replied the wife, 
and began drinking her Kquor. 

" Well, I got to Arf-moon-street as 
quick as I could; I arrived just in time 
to meet our pal. * What the 'ell do you 
do 'ere !' says he." 

" That's a crammer ; my Greorgy never 



swears." 



" If you calls him your Greorgy again, 
I'll punch your nob." 

Mrs. Marks felt pleased at the jealousy 
Jem evinced, and gently said — 

"Go on, Jem. Tou knows I loves 
yer. 



186 A PRECIOUS PAIR. 

Jem grinned at the assurance, and con- 
tinued — 

"My dear Sal, you doesn't think as 
George ever swears. Before you I don't 
suppose as he does ; but when two gent- 
lemen like he and I is together, you 
see we hain't partiklar." 

"Perhaps so, Jem; you is always 
right. But as I said afore, go on." 

" ' Well,' says I, ' the missus couldn't 
get away till the hearl was a bed.' So 
says she to me, * Go to George, and ax 
him what he wants.' *Well, Jem,' 
says he, shaking my daddle, *run along 
and ax your wife if she's a given a sartain 
person any of the wine I gived to her.' 
Says I, ' She's guv him three doses.' 
' And ow is he ?' says George. * He's 
baddish,' says I, 'and the doctor can't 
understand it,' and then I guv a reg'lar 
knowing laugh. After a while says he 
again, ** Jemmy, my boy, can I trust 



A PBECIOUS PAIB. 187 

you ?' * In coorse/ says I. * Well, then/ 
says he, * take this little packet to the old 
woman ' " 

"Old woman?" interrupted Mrs. 
Marks. " Are you sure as he said old 
woman ? — ^a brute !" 

" Well, that don*t sinify much. ' Take 
this here parcel, and give it to your wife,* 
says he, * and tell her to give this and 
finish the job." *Hulloa,' says I, 'that 
'ere wont do, that's a scragging matter.* 
* Well, ain't you got your own 'ead in the 
'alter ? you needn't be so cussed partiklar 
about your old partner.' " 

" Jem, don't be so owdacious ; hand us 
the bottle." 

'* ' Well,' says I — ^for you sees I never 
loses sight of the main chance — *and if 
my Sal does, and you becomes a nobby 
lord, what do you mean to do for us?' 
' I'll teU you what I'U do— I'U set you 
and the old girl up in a public-'ouse, and 



€ T» 



i< '■ 



188 A PRECIOUS PAIR. 

stock it. And what's more/ says he, 
I'll give you fifty pounds a year fortin', 
and then you can live as a real genleman, 
and I'll introduce you to the first of 
company/ " 

"Well, that 'ere's tempting. Tip us 
the packet." 

Ere it is; but mind as you don't 
meddle with it or smell it, or I'm 
beggared if it wont stop your breathing. 
It's a werry dreadful pison, so take care 
'ow you 'andles it.' 

Mrs. Marks took the very small paper 
package which Jem handed to her, and 
placed it in a sort of reticule she always 
carried. Such an appendage was old- 
fashioned, and many would have scorned 
it ; but Sarah had found it profitable on 
more than one occasion, when loose 
trinkets and plate had been carelessly left 
about. Like a soldier's haversack, it was 



• J >y 



A PRECIOUS PAIR. 189 

most convenient when on a foraging ex- 
pedition. 

"He shall 'ave it to-morrow. I say, 
Jem, wont it be jolly when you and I is 
genlefolks ? Pass the bottle ; how slow 
you is to-night !" 

"Well, I thinks it's almost time for 
you to go back, ain't it ?" 

"I shan't go no more 'ome to-night. 
I told the doctor arter my lord had agone 
to bed, says I, *I wants to go and see 
my newy, who is the hunder-cook at the 
Palace, and I shan't come back till late.' 
* Oh !! says he, ' you'd a better stay hout 
if you are a-going to be so late ; that is to 
say, if you 'appen to 'ave any place to 
sleep in.' ' Oh !' says I, ' I can sleep at 
the Palace ; there's allays a spare bed for 
me there.' And so he makes a low bow, 
and here I am. But tell me, Jem, do you 
really loves me as you says ?" 



190 A PRECIOUS PAIR. 

" Don't I !" replied her husband. 

" Well, then, take me to Creemome ; I 
wants something cheerful. This 'ere job 
will be a melancholic sort of affair; I 
shall 'ear nothing but owls for a week." 

" I hain't no stumpy." 

" Don't tarry-diddle ; don't ' you be 
hartfiil; I knows as Q-eorge tipped 

you." 

" Well, he only gived me a cooter." 

" I'll put another to it, and we'll 'ave a 
reg'lar spree." 

" I say, Sal, I s'pose there hain't no 
harm in borrowing a ticker there ? I left 
mine at home, and it's werry distressing 
not to know the hower." And they 
joined in a hearty laugh. " But afore I 
goes, I've summut of consequence to tell 
you," said Mr. Marks. 

"Well, then, make 'aste; I'm in a 
'urry to be horf." 

" Do you know, I suspects the writing 



A PRECIOUS PAIR. 191 

chap as my lord 'as *ired is our boy 
John?" 

" We never 'ad no boy. You're drunk, 
Sal." 

"I only wish I was. No, indeed I 
ain't, though I'm blessed if I wont be 
afore I sleeps. But you is worse than 
drunk — ^you're as stupid as a hass. John 
was the boy as I ought to have — ^you 
know what?" 

" Oh, I twigs ! — 'im as we sold to the 
Lord Mayor, or some such a nob ?" 

" Just so. Well, first of all I finds out 
as he was called Marks, afore he was 
changed to Leslie. So on this I watches. 
Now, do you recollect the scar as you 
made on 'is left harm with your pocket- 
knife when you was in a passion ?" 

" I does ; but what of that ?" 

"Well, I watched this young chap, 
and I'm blessed if he hadn't got this 'ere 
hidentical scar; and then he's as like 'is 



192 A PRECIOUS PAIR. 

mother as two peas. So there hain't no 
doubt/' 

" You didn't say nothink ?" 

" In coorse not." 

" And what do you mean to do ?" 

" Settle the hearl ; and when Q-eorge is 
made a lord, threaten 'im with bringing 
forraxd this here hair to the title, unless 
he pays us uncommon well. We bought 
to 'ave 'arf the hestates at least." 

" You're a hangel ! — ^you 'as a 'ed !" 
screamed the delighted Marks, rushing 
towards her and folding her in his bear- 
like embrace. 

" Leave orf this, and let's be a toddling," 
replied his wife. 

"I'll pay the biU 'ere," said Jem, 
" and you'll pay in the gardens. You've 
got your thingumbob, haven't you ? It 
may be useful." 

" Here it is," cried the woman, holdmg 
up her reticule. 



A PRECIOUS PAIR. 193 

'''Coine on, then;" and away they 
started for Cremome. 

To those who have never been at this 
popular place of amusement, the first 
glance of the gay scene is perfectly en- 
trancing. The myriads of coloured lamps, 
casting a peculiar yet strong light over 
the gardens ; the well-kept walks, the 
lovely flowers, the brilliantly-illuminated 
temples, each dedicated to some delightful 
exhibition; the splendid conservatories, 
the unrivalled ballets, and, above all, the 
well- lit platform, with its thousand 
mirrors and its magic orchestra, may well 
recal to the cultured mind the early im- 
pressions made on that mind by the 
glowing pages of the " Arabian Nights/* 
Neither Marks nor his wife had ever heard 
of these tales, so they only expressed their 
satisfaction by an occasional ejaculation 
of " Oh vny /" as some new wonder met 
their view. 

VOL. III. 13 



194 A PRECIOUS PAIR. 

Jem was enjoying the scene — a gold 
watch and chain had already found their 
way into the female^s reticule — ^when 
suddenly the good-looking proprietor 
came up to him^ and pointing out Marks 
to a detective in plain clothes who ac- 
companied him, quietly said — 

" That is the man ; I saw him take it." 

The functionary stepped forward and 
gave a low whistle. In another moment 
a policeman in uniform seemed to spring 
from the ground. 

" So we've got you at last, have we ?'' 
said the first official. " Why, sir," added 
he, turning to the proprietor, " this is a 
bird that weVe been seeking to cage for 
above two months. I say," addressing 
Marks, " you were not in the burglary at 
Homsey, were you ?" 

" You ain't no beak ; I'm not bound 
to answer a mere bobby," replied the 
captive. 



A PRECIOUS PAIR, 195 

" Come along, my tulip ; and mind, if 
you attempt any nonsense we'll put on 
the bracelets/* 

" Fm as quiet as a lamb, Mr. Eobert,*' 
replied the hardened offender. 

Mrs. Marks had cleverly slipped away 
during this colloquy, and after taking 
two or three turns in the Garden to elude 
capture, in case the gates were watched, 
slipped out, and having slept for a few 
hours in a neighbouring tavern, returned 
to Grantchester House as soon as she 
calculated that the housemaids had left 
their beds. 

Did she mourn the untoward recogni- 
tion which would probably remove her 
dear husband during the remaining term 
of her natural life ? Far jfrom it ; he had 
long been a drain upon her purse — a, 
dangerous repository of her most perilous 
secrets. 



13- 



196 



CHAPTER XV. 



THE REVIEW. 



Nothing could exceed the loveliness of 
the morning as Lord Urmstone and 
his fair daughter, attended by Leslie and 
a cousin of her ladyship^s, a commodore 
in the navy, lately returned from India, 
started in the carriage for Hyde Park, 
their object being to witness the inspec- 
tion of our finest regiment of Volunteers 
—a corps consisting almost entirely of 
lawyers. Perfect in their drill, assiduous 
in their attendance, and connected by 
ties of relationship with many of the first 
famiUes in London, his Satanic Majesty's 
own Volunteers (as they are popularly 



THE REVIEW. 197 

called) are decidedly the most, popular 
body of men in the British metropolis. 

Arrived on the ground, Leslie, who 
was in uniform, though no longer in the 
army, left the equipage to speak to a 
friend he beheld at a distance, and allowed 
the rest of the pariy to go on and select 
their places. From half-a-dozen chosen 
spots they were driven away by the 
soldiers who kept the ground, in spite of 
the loud remonstrances of the naval 
veteran and the declaration of his rank 
by Lord Urmstone, and at length be- 
came so annoyed by being thrust away 
from the chance of any good yiew, that 
they had serious thoughts of returning to 
Berkeley-square, when our hero came up 
to them, and being made acquainted with 
the subject of their anger, instantly 
jumped into the carriage, and desired the 
coachman to take up one of the best posts 
near the saluting-flag. The instant this 



198 THE EBVIBW. 

movement was perceived by the men on 
duty they rushed to the heads of the 
horses and would have stopped them, 
but Leslie, putting his head out, desired 
them to desist. His mere ujiiform, his 
subordinate rank, would have scarcely 
warmnted this; but when they saw his 
Victoria Cross dangling in front of a 
heart that knew no fear, they at once 
fell back and saluted the brave young man 
who at the peril of his hfe had so glo- 
riously earned it. 

For the first time Emily publicly learnt 
the value of that copper decoration which 
commands the respect and admiration of 
the whole of the English army. The 
Bath may be conferred for long service- 
it may, perhaps, be obtained by family 
influence — ^the GKielphic order has been 
almost thrown at the heads of generals 
who have seen no service— it has been 
conferred as compensation for slow pro. 



THE REVIEW. 199 

motion ; but the Victoria Cross, the proud 
object of every brave soldier's ambition, 
like the Legion of Honour in France, 
knows no distinction in rank ; it is 
equally open to be won by the private 
as by his general. No Court favour, no 
Horse Guards* influence can obtain it; 
the most exalted heroism can alone earn 
it ; the most daring deeds of valour alone 
can account for its possession. No wonder, 
then, that a Victoria Cross commands 
the homage of every brother soldier. 

Far more proud of the honours paid 
him than any that could be accorded to 
herself, or even the exalted rank of her 
father, she proposed to leave the carriage 
under the escort of her intended husband. 
Lord Urmstone was too feeble to accom- 
pany them ; the commodore volunteered 
to do so. His accession to the party, 
though not solicited, was thoroughly 
welcome, and away they started. Leslie, 



200 THE REVIEW. 

with his lovely companion, quickly passed 
the first line, and the naval officer was 
following him, when a lynx-eyed sentinel 
stopped him. Leslie had to go back to 
pass him through, which was easily done, 
not altogether to the satisfaction of the old 
fellow, who grumbled in an undertone — 

" Well, may I be broke if I understand 
these new-fangled ways ! Times are sadly 
changed since the days when England 
ruled the seas. A commodore in the 
navy now is turned back and offended, 
unless he is protected by a youngster 
with a copper cross on his breast. But 
hang me if I ought to grumble ; bravery 
should be respected in whatever service it 
is displayed." 

Leslie now stopped to speak to his 
friend Q-eneral Smite, whose gaze of 
admiration, as he beheld Lady Emily, 
was not to be mistaken. Our hero 
proudly introduced her as his intended 



THE REVIEW. 201 

bride, and a flattering speech was thus 
drawn from the lips of the handsomest 
man, and certainly one of the best officers 
in her Majesty's cavahy service. 

" I can now well account, my fiiend,*' 
said the gallant officer, "for your quit- 
ting the army" — ^looking with a smile 
towards Emily. " If you will allow me, I 
will place you where you can see the 
troops march past." 

The offer was accepted, and Lady 
Emily soon found herself " the observed 
of all observers," standing as she did in 
the very midst of the 6Ute of the British 
army. Of this well-looking group Emily 
instantly became the cynosure. 

"TeU me," asked Emily, "who is the 
handsome-looking person who has just 
left me?" 

" He is a general officer, equally cele- 
brated for his distinguished services and 
the very high status of his family. His 



202 THE REVIEW. 

tall and fine figure, when he commanded 
one of our most distinguished Lancer 
regiments, has been the admiring theme 
of many a female tongue. His breast is 
covered with orders, yet it would be diffi- 
cult to find out that he had ever been in 
action, were it left to himself to proclaim 
his own deeds." 

" And who is that elderly gentleman 
yonder ?" 

" Oh, that is Lord Boromere — the 
oldest man in the British army. He is a 
field^marshal, and if there had been any 
higher honours, probably he would have 
obtained them for his long and efficient 
services. He won his title with his own 
good right arm, which, although he looks 
just now very well, can scarcely be very 
powerful, since I believe he is at least 
ninety-two or ninety-three years old. 
The officer now speaking to him is Lord 
Madigan, the pet of the Horse Guards, 



THE BBVIEW. 203 

the victim of the public. Whether he be 
the best or most ill-treated man in the 
world it is impossible to say — ^whether 
a good oflS.cer, a kind and munificent 
friend, or a bully and shirker, it is diflSi- 
cult to discover, since opinion appears 
pretty equally divided. But stay, here 
comes the Duke and his popular aide-de- 
camp. See, the gallant colonel gallops to 
the front to receive him. The review is 
about to commence." 

The usual forms took place. The 
Volunteers, called to attention, opened 
their ranks, and performed a general 
salute, while the band played the National 
Anthem. The Inspector and staff, at- 
tended by other mounted officers, passed 
down the ranks, while the astute lawyers 
stood as firmly and as stiffly as statues. 
"Bravo! three cheers for Old Nick's 
Own !" cried an urchin in the crowd, 
"What will they do next, I wonder?" 



204 THE REVIEW. 

asked a country girl of her London bean. 
" They will probably charge — lawyers do 
nothing without that !" and the witling 
laughed at his own sally. 

The Commander-in-Chief, highly satis- 
fied with the appearance of the corps, 
galloped back to the saluting-point. 
The Volunteers closed their ranks, broke 
into open column, and marched past in 
slow and quick time with a smartness 
and precision which would have done 
honour to any regiment of the line. 

Several evolutions were now gone 
tlu'ough. But Lady Emily, feeling 
alarmed lest her father might be weary, 
returned to the carriage, and, highly 
gratified by what they had seen, they 
drove back to Thomas's, where an early 
dinner awaited them. Lord Urmstone 
having secured a large private box at 
Her Majesty's Theatre. 

" Theatricals are now in the ascendant," 



THE BBVIEW. 205 

observed the commodore, as the subject 
of their proposed evening's entertainment 
was broached — "theatricals never were 
so flourishing, although I must confess I 
don't approve of the present system of 
running pieces two or three hundred 
nights. It may be profitable to the 
managers, but may I be shipwrecked if 
I like it at all ! Were I to buy a 
season-ticket now, it would be to see some 
one harrowing drama, or some one grand 
scenic play, performed a hundred times 
consecutively. I call it a regular do^ 
. " Commodore, you speak as if you were 
a sufferer," said Lord Urmstone. 

"Then you truly read my feelings,'* 
replied the naval officer. " I'm a renter at 
Drury Lane, and have purchased a season- 
ticket on two occasions." 

"From what you say, I presume the 
entertainments you speak of are of a 
second-rate order," 



206 THE REVIEW. 

" On the contrary, they are so deucedly 
good, the theatres are now nightly 
crowded." 

" There must be some merit in them, 
then," chimed in LesUe, 

"Oh, as to that, the performances I 
speak of are fiill of merit, and, as I said 
before, prove most attractive ; while some 
pieces of less pretension than * Colleen 
Bawn,' * Peep o' Day,' and the ' Ticket-of- 
Leave Man,' have been so wonderftdly 
forced down the throats of the public 
by the extraordinary talents of such stars 
as Miss Bateman and Mr. Sothem, that 
the theatres have been crammed to the 
ceiling." 

" Upon my word, commodore," observed 
Lady Emily, " I should suppose you had 
been a dramatic author yourself, you 
speak so warmly on the subject." 

" Beauteous cousin ! you have guessed 



THE REVIEW. 207 

it. In early life I tried my hand as a 
dramatist." 

"And failed r 

" Not so. I wrote a tragedy, and was 
lucky enough, to get it accepted and per- 
formed at one of our (then) patent 
theatres. The house was crowded, and 
my friends mustered in great force. The 
fourth act had ended, like all the preced- 
ing ones, with great ^clat ; many of my 
acquaintances met me in the lobby, shook 
hands with me, and congratulated me on 
my success. The stage manager came 
round while the act-drop was down to ask 
me some question; from his smiling 
manner, his particular civility, I saw that 
I was looked upon as a triumphant author 
by the authorities behind the curtain.'' 
Go on, go on !'* urged Lady Emily, 
Well, I wiU, though I fear I am 
somewhat prolix. The fifth act came on ; 



€€ 



it 



208 THE KBVIEW. 

the grand feature of the tragedy arrived ; 
the house was silently attentive; my 
head was averted from the scene only for 
a moment ; my heart was beating, for I 
should soon be called upon to come 
forward for the first time and bow my 
thanks, when suddenly an unnatural cry 
struck my attentive ear, followed by a 
general burst of laughter. A cachinnatory 
sound at such a moment was indeed mis- 
placed, for my heroine was in the act of 
dying. I looked up; astonished and 
angered, I cast an eagle's glance towards 
the actors. In a moment I read the 
dreadAil truth. An enormous cat — ^to 
me it seemed as large and as fierce as 
a tiger — stood exactly in the front of 
the stage ; her jaws were wide open, her 
thick tail stood erect ; firmly she kept her 
position, mewing loudly and continuously. 
The hero king, who should have been 
supporting the unfortunate queen, stepped 



THE REVIEW. 209 

forward and kicked the feline intruder; 
but the brute, instead of budging, only- 
roared the louder. Some of the audience 
began (meaning it kindly) to hiss the cat 
off the stage ; the laughter became louder 
and louder, and noises of every description 
began to mingle with the fun. Her 
majesty, finding herself deserted, marched 
in great dudgeon off the stage ; a servant 
came with a large broom and drove 
grimalkin from her position. The stage- 
manager came forward to explain, but the 
gods were uproarious and wouldn't hear 
him. The curtain fell, the piece was 
damned — for never, never again did I 
allow it to be tried. I have not since 
put pen to paper as a dramatist. The 
British public have probably lost a 
second Shakespeare, and all through a 
cat !" 

The party laughed heartily at the com- 

VOL. III. 14 



210 THE REVIEW. 

modore's anecdote, and as soon as the 
carriage was announced started for the 
Opera House. 

On their arrival they found the curtain 
still down, and thus had an opportunity 
of glancing around the house. 

A fashionable and brilliant group oc- 
cupied Her Majesty's box. Alas! she 
whose presence could alone have attracted 
the aristocracy of England to her side 
was absent, mourning in deep solitude 
the bereavement which has deprived this 
country of the cheering aspect of a be- 
loved monarch, and that monarch of a 
wise and prudent counsellor. 

Italian opera had given place to Eng- 
lish versions, and thus a good excuse was 
afforded to the higher ranks for tempo- 
rarily abandoning their usually favourite 
place of resort. 

Lord Urmstone knew very few of the 
present audience, and learnt from the 



THE REVIEW. 211 

commodore the names of many he had 
never seen before. 

" Who are those I see yonder ?" asked 
the peer. 

"They are a party of Kterary and 
theatrical celebrities. He on the right, 
talking to our most celebrated popular 
novelist, is John Dannford, the theatrical 
critic, attached to the most powerful 
journal of the day. His veto can make or 
mar the future prospects of the young 
dramatist. Luckily, this power has fallen 
to the hands of one who, lenient and 
kind hearted, has withheld that biting 
criticism which would in early days have 
crushed many who now rank as our most 
popular dramatists. He has never been 
known to be unkind or unjust. Behind 
him, the tall, good-looking man is one of 
our largest publishers; one who boasts 
the rare virtue of bringing out works for 
their merit, and not for the mere rank 

14—2 



212 THE REVIEW. 

or fame of their authors. The lady be- 
side him is Madame de TAnge, the most 
classical, the most graceful actress that 

ever trod the stage — and ^but stay, the 

overture begins. This was well played^ 
was rapturously applauded, and the cur- 
tain rose. To speak of the manner in 
which the opera was performed, would be 
to speak most approvingly. The singing 
was really very good; but the piece 
itself (' Faust') was so extremely improper 
(not to make use of a stronger term), that 
Lord Urmstone withdrew his daughter 
long before it was finished, regretting 
that an establishment bearing Her Ma- 
jesty's name, and frequented by the 
pure and lovely daughters of our aris- 
tocracy, should be desecrated by the 
representation of such pieces as ' Faust,' 
' Lucrezia Borgia,' and the ' Traviata.' " 

"But of course," as the commodore 
observed to his noble relative, when he 



THE REVIEW. 213 

mentioned the subject to him, " the ap- 
proval or disapproval of such entertain- 
ments is entirely a matter of taste. There 
are, I fear, some people who prefer music 
to morals." 



214 



CHAPTEE XVI. 

THE CURTAIN RAISED. 

The Earl reclined in an easy-chair propped 
up by cushions. He seemed extremely 
weak, and his hand trembled. The pallor 
of his cheek and his sunken eye would 
have plainly indicated to the uninitiated 
that the worthy peer was already a prey 
to that most distressing, that most fatal 
disease — consumption. But such was not 
the case ; the two talented medical men 
denied the existence of the dreadful 
malady. His lungs were in the most 
healthy state; he seldom expectorated; 
indeed, many of the most prominent in- 
dications of this fearful disorder were 
wanting. The attack seemed rather to 
be atrophy ; yet here, again, the leading 



THE CURTAIN RAISED. 215 

features did not appear. The doctors 
were sorely puzzled. That Lord G-rant- 
chester was ill — seriously ill — was certain ; 
that each day he became worse and worse, 
was evident ; but of the exact nature of 
his illness the sons of iEsculapius were 
wholly ignorant. For once in their lives 
they confessed themselves at fault, and 
called in further advice, but without elicit- 
ing any fresh information. 

It was now ten o'clock, and Lady Grant- 
chester retired to her room. Mrs. Thomp- 
son, who had undertaken the office of 
nurse to his lordship, sat nodding in her 
chair; Leslie was looking over some 
accounts sent up by his lordship's tenants 
at Grrantchester. 

The Earl suddenly awoke from an un- 
easy slumber, called Leslie to him, and 
desired him to write to Mr. Scarsdale, 
and request that gentleman to call on 
him on the following day in order to draw 
up his will. 



216 THE CURTAIN RAISED. 

Our hero instantly crossed the room, 
and sat down at a writing-desk, which 
had been brought in by the peer's desire, 
and, as there was no other place for it, it 
had been placed against a large mirror — 
an arrangement Leslie scarcely approved, 
as it seemed like vanity, since every time 
he raised his head he saw himself in the 
looking-glass. 

''Make his will!" muttered Mrs. 
Thompson to herself, "that will never 
do. I must no longer delay, or I lose 
my reward," and fumbling in her pocket 
she pulled out a small paper carefully 
folded up, then going to the table she 
took up a glass, and emptying a bottle of 
medicine prescribed by the doctors into 
it, she next, with a Satanic smile, mingled 
with it a white powder, which the packet 
had contained. 

Nothing now could frustrate her 
designs. Lord Grantchester was lying 



THE CURTAIN RAISED, 217 

ba<!k in a doze, his eyeUds closed; the 
secretary was busy writing, intent on his 
task, his back turned towards the nurse. 
None, then, could have seen her. In 
safety she might administer the draught, 
and, if any suspicion should hereafter 
arise, she could throw that suspicion on 
the secretary, who, as a spoiled dependent, 
might readily be supposed to feel an 
interest in the death of his patron. 

As stealthily as a cat, after taking a 
careful survey around, did Mrs. Thompson 
approach the peer, and gently touching 
him, exclaim in her softest tone — 

"My lord, it is time to take your 
draught,'' and handed to him the glass 
she had prepared. 

The old nobleman was in the act of 
raising it to his lips, when suddenly the 
vessel was dashed from his hand, and at 
the same moment the wretched hag found 
herself grasped by the throat. She would 



218 THE CURTAIN RAISED. 

have freed herself, but she was in the iron 
clutch of Marks Leslie. 

" My lord, my good lord, pardon me 
if I err ; but I fear not," and turning to 
Mrs. Thompson, and, at the same time, 
using his disengaged hand violently to 
ring the bell, he loudly exclaimed, " If I 
accuse you wrongfully, may Heaven for- 
give me!" 

Lord Grantchester, who had not risen 
from his seat unassisted for three days, 
suddenly started up ; Lady Q-rantchester 
and several servants rushed in ; a young 
surgeon who had slept in the house ever 
since the peer's illness, also hurried to 
the room, and there beheld, to their un- 
disguised astonishment, the Earl standing 
upright, looking like a resuscitated corpse, 
and the ordinarily mild secretary hold- 
ing in his tight grasp the suspected Mrs. 
Thompson. 

LesUe saw their astonishment, and at 
once cried — 



THE CURTAIN RAISED. 219 

" I accuse this wretch of an attempt to 
poison her master the Earl." 

" Oh, gracious me ! that there poor 
young man's gone mad. He has by 
some haccident seen me give my lord 
the medicine, what was made up accord- 
ing to the proscription of his doctors, 
and all of a moment he's gone crazy, and 
thinks I was a-going to murder the dear 
Hearl, Lord bless him ! But I pardons 
him, as it was all out of love for our 
master." 

"Not so; I saw you mingle some 
powder which you took from your 
pocket with the draught." 

" Well, that 'ere is a good 'un. Why, 
you was setting with your back turned 
to me a- writing; so how could you 
see?" 

"That's true," lowly murmured Lord 
Grantchester ; "I saw him so placed and 
so employed. Do you not mistake, my 
dear boy ?" 



•^>> 



220 THE CURTAIN RAISED. 

"No, my lord; although I confess 
your lordship is right in asserting that 
my back was turned." 

" Then how could you have seen her ? 

"Look at the desk, and you will be 
convinced. It stands before a large 
mirror. Reflecting for a moment on the 
subject of my letter, I happened to look 
into that glass. I saw the cautious mo- 
tions of the nurse. This aroused my 
curiosity. I watched her, and saw her 
first mingle the potion and then offer 
it to your lordship. You know the 
rest." 

" Lor', what a crammer I I only 
gave him what them doctors ordered 
him." 

" Oh, that's seen in a moment," chimed 
in the surgeon ; and, taking up the broken 
wine-glass, he approached the light, and 
closely examining some sediment at the 
bottom of it, tried some chemical test ; he 



THE CURTAIN RAISED. 221 

gravely turned round and uttered in a loud 
voice — 

" In this glass lurks the most subtle — 
the most deadly of poisons !" He beck- 
oned to a servant and ordered him in- 
stantly to go and bring in the police. 

Mrs. Thompson now began to cry, 
and, after vainly endeavouring to obtain 
mercy at their hands, she began to 
throw out hints respecting Leslie. These 
falsehoods were at once discovered and 
denied. 

In a few moments the police were an- 
nounced. 

" Oh, do not let them in," screamed the 
now alarmed culprit, '' do not let them in ; 
they will swear to anything. I shall pro- 
bably be hanged." 

'* Very likely," observed the surgeon. 

" And as innocent as a sucking babby." 

" Enough of this," said the Earl ; " call 
the officers in. 



• if 



222 THE CURTAIN RAISED. 

" No, no ; not so. I will confess all. 
It was a mistake." 

" Do you hear my orders ?" asked the 
Earl of his retainers. 

" Stay, stay ; you will bitterly repent 
this. Clear the room, and I will make a 
confession as will make you the 'appiest 
of the 'appy. Promise to let me go, and 
I'U warrant as you shall never repent 
it." 

"Not so," said the Earl; "you will 
repeat publicly all you have to say, or the 
law must take its course." 

" Well, then, listen. My lady, do you 
recollect 'aving a babby considerably 
above twenty years ago, as you swore was 
alive when it was bom ?" 

" Oh, torture me not," exclaimed Lady 
Grrantchester, " of course I do." 

" Well, you wam't far wrong — it was 
alive /" 

Both Lord and Lady Grrantchester were 



THE CURTAIN RAISED. 22S 

SO overcome that the nurse had to pause 
for some minutes in her revelations. 

"And what's more, that 'ere babby's 
aKve now !" 

Lady Grrantchester dropped into a chair, 
but urged the woman to go on. 

" I didn't murder it, as I was ordered ; 
no — no ! I kept him snug, and though he 
don't know me again, he's in this 
room! 

To describe the agitation which now 
arose is beyond the power of words. 

At length the Earl was enabled to 
speak — "Where is he? As there's a 
Heaven above, your life depends on your 



answer." 



" Well, it's rummy to me as you didn't 
find it out afore. There he stands !" and 
she pointed to Leslie, who stood wonder- 
struck. 

" I had always a presentiment," and he 
rushed up to Leslie, and warmly em- 



224 THE CURTAIN RAISED. 

braced him ; but suddenly starting back, 
he sharply demanded — 

" And how can you prove this ?" 

"Do you recollect the name of my 
lady's monthly nurse ?" 

" I think it was Marks." 

"And ain't that chap called Marks 
too ?" 

"True, such was his name ere he as- 
sumed that of Leslie ; but that is a mere 
coincidence ; how can you prove that our 
child is not dead ?" 

" 'Cause I saved it, and brought it 
up." 

"You?" 

"Oh no!" cried Lady Grrantchester, 
"you do not in the least resemble the 
nurse that attended me." 

" Would you know her again ?" asked 
Mrs. Thompson. 

" I would, amidst a thousand," replied 
the lady. 



THE CURTAIN BAISED. 225 

" Then here I be !" screamed the nurse, 
throwing ofF her wig and spectacles, 
wiping her face, and assuming, as it were, 
an altered form — "here I be; do you 
know me now ?" 

Mrs. Marks stood undisguised before 
them ! 

Lady Grrantchester screamed, and would 
have fallen back fainting, but she was 
caught in the arms of him who, from 
henceforth, we must recognise as her 
loved son. 

" If that ain't enough, why you may 
ax Lord Urmstone or some sich name 
who took him from me," added the 



woman. 



And what thus tempted you to try 
to poison me ?" 

" A bribe, as you calls it." 

"And who offered it?" 

" That ain't no part of our bargain ; 
IVe sworn not to tell and I wont ; all I 

VOL. ni. 15 



226 THE CURTAIN RAISED. 

says is, take care, youVe gotten a precious 
sharp enemy/' 

"And will nothing tempt you to re- 
veal his name ?" 

" Why should I ? Perhaps I may get 
out of some other scrape hereafter by tell- 
ing that. Tou promised faithfiilly as you 
would let me go if I told you my secret ; 
now see as I does so safely/* 

" Even to a murderess I will not break 
my plighted word. James (added the 
peer, turning to a servant) send away the 
police-officer, and then convey this woman 
in safety to any part of London she 
chooses; leave her there, and return at 



once/' 



The man bowed and left the room. 

"I will lose no time in establishing 
my son's identity ; and this I can easily 
do. Now, however, let all except my 
immediate family leave the room. My 
wife, myself, and my long-lost but 



THE CURTAIN RAISED. 227 

now recovered son will return thanks 
on our bended knees to that beneficent 
Creator who removes the sorrows of those 
he has afflicted and blesses the declining 
days of those who trust in him/' 



15- 



228 



CHAPTER XVII. 

THE POLICE MAGISTRATE. 

At an eaxly hour on the following morn- 
ing Mrs. Thompson, alias Eearden, alias 
Marks, came to Grantchester House, and 
solicited an immediate interview with the 
Earl. The appearance of the old woman, 
now denuded of her disguise, astonished 
all the servants, as she had expressed her 
strong determination to vanish from their 
sight for ever. She was now, however, 
so clamorous in her application, that her 
request was conveyed to Lord Grantches- 
ter, and by his desire she was shown into 
the breakfast-room, where the family were 
already assembled. 

" Well, woman, what do you want with 



THE POLICE MAGISTRATE. 229 

me? After what has passed — after the 
way in which you have foully wronged 
me, I am astonished at seeing you thus 
voluntarily seek my presence/' 

" Oh, my lord, I really does think as 
your lordship ought to do me a turn, 
letting bygones be bygones, considering 
as I restored to you your son and heir as 
sits there, and a fine young feller he is, 
and that's my opinion." 

"Well, speak out. Once more, what 
do you want ?" 

" My Jem is in trouble, and he is to 
be brought afore the beak for the last 
time to-day ; now, if your lordship would 
only put in a good word, or even his 
young lordship, as Jem, as it were, 
brought up (Leslie, or, as we must now 
call him. Lord Sydney, winced), it would 
do bim a deal of good." 

" But I don't know the fellow, and I 
could not speak in his favour." 



230 THE POLICE MAGISTBATE. 

" Well, don't speak, but only come into 
court ; and I feels that the beak will be 
so pleased with the honner of your com- 
pany as to make him let Jem off." 

After a short pause, the Earl replied — 

" I will comply with your request on 
one condition." 

" Shall I go for you, my dear father ? 
you are still weak," asked his new- 
found son. 

"No, I must go; Lady Grantchester 
and yourself will both accompany me, 
as well as this woman." 

" What ! to a police court ?'' demanded 
the lady. 

" Listen," replied the Earl ; then turn- 
ing to Mrs. Marks, he addressed her — 
"WeU, will you go?" 

"You haven't yet told me what the 
condition is ?" 

" That you accompany me into London, 
and at once go before a magistrate and 



THE POLICE MA6ISTBATE. 231 

make an affidavit confirming the truth of 
your statement to myself and Lady 
Grantchester. We believe you : certain 
corroborating circumstances convince us 
that yonder gentleman is our son; but 
we must take your evidence on oath, in 
order to give weight to the legal pro- 
ceedings which must be gone through to 
establish the real birth of Lord Sydney.'* 

" Well, I hain't much objection ; if you 
thinks I'm obligated to do this, I'll do it J 

"My good woman, it is to your in- 
terest, for on the completion of the forms 
to which I aUude, I will give you one 
hundred pounds, provided you wiU un- 
dertake to leave this country." 

" Wont I ? that's aU !" 

"Sydney," added Lord Grantchester, 
"ring the bell, and order the carriage 
and a brougham." 

Leslie started up—it was the first time 
he had been called by his new title — ^he 



•j_ *> 



232 THE POLICE MAGISTRATE. 

did as lie was desired, and gave the 
necessary orders. 

Lord and Lady Grantchester, with 
their son, proceeded in the carriage ; Mrs. 
Marks followed in the brougham. 

Arrived at the police office, the Earl 
was received by the magistrate in his 
private room. He was an old friend of 
his lordship, and greeted him most cor- 
dially, expressing surprise, however, at 
seeing him thus, with his friends, within 
the precincts of the court. 

Lord Gh-antchester explained his er- 
rand. As his narrative disclosed the 
wonderful recovery of a son long supposed 
to be dead, Mr. Maxwell became lost in 
astonishment; no case had ever come 
before him so strange, and, puzzled what 
to do, he acted as metropolitan police 
magistrates often do— he left the room to 
consult for a few moments with his 
clerk. 



THB POLICE MAGISTRATE. 233 

On his return, he asked the nobleman 
the name of his soKcitor ? 

" Mr. Henry Scarsdale." 

" A very clever fellow — b, safe lawyer ; 
you could not be in better hands/* 

" But why ask the question ?" 

" Because your legal adviser had better 
draw up the evidence of this woman 
— ^who, by-the-by, is better away, as I 
believe her husband is to be brought be- 
fore me this morning — so I should sug- 
gest that it would be as well if she went 
down to Mr. Scarsdale's office — one of 
my officers can accompany her — ^he could 
then draw up the necessary deed and 
return with it here, when TU at once 
take this woman's affidavit. I've no 
doubt the whole transaction will not take 
more than an hour." 

" I will do as you like ; I have fortu- 
nately a brougham at the door." 

" Well, then, give your instructions to 



234 THE POLICE MA6I8TBATE. 

this officer;" and lie rang for a policeman, 
who entered. 

Lord Grantcliester wrote a hurried line 
to his friend, and despatched it by the 
man, who now quitted the room with the 
old woman. 

"If you will wait here," said the 
functionary, "I will send you a news- 
paper to amuse you; you cannot expect 
the appearance of your lawyer for some 
time. I regret I cannot stay with you ; 
I trust her ladyship will excuse me, but 
my time is up. I am due in court." 

*' Am I asking too great a favour ? but 
really, if Lord Grantchester has no ob- 
jection, I would ask your permission to 
enter your court," said Lady Grantchester, 
" it must be a curious scene." 

"Sometimes. I cannot positively pro- 
mise you any amusement; but if you 
will honour me with your presence, you 
can have places on the bench." 



THB POUCE MAGISTRATE. 235 

" Oh ! by all means ; my wife's sugges- 
tion is an excellent one ; come along/' 

And in the next minute they 
were both seated beside the magistrate, 
listening to the cases which came before 
him. 

A gentleman, found " drunk and inca- 
pable" in one of our most fashionable 
streets, was lectured and fined five shH- 
Ungs. A poor man discovered in a state 
of intoxication, which was proved to be 
the result of a glass of spirits given him 
by a friend, was frowned at and dis- 
charged; for, in good truth, Mr. Max- 
well took no delight in favouring the rich 
or in oppressing the poor. 

The next prisoner brought forward 
was a regular Jack Tar, who stroked 
down his hair, and making a sailor s 
shuffling bow, hoped "his honour was 
quite well/' 

" And what are you brought up for ?" 



236 THE POLICE MAGISTRATE. 

asked the magistrate, refraining from 
laughter with some difficulty. 

" Please your honour, I don't know ; 
but that respectable gentleman in blue, 
with the glazed hat on, knows all about 
it." 

" This here man," said Z 1104, "is ac- 
cused by a young woman of deserting 
her and disowning her, your worship.'' 

"And what claim has she on him?" 
asked the functionary. 

"She says he is her lawful husband. 
He married her yesterday, and the parish 
officers are most anxious to hestablish it, 
your worship, because she threatens to 
come upon them." 

The sailor, who had been twisting his 
straw hat round and round, and appeared 
completely astonished by the accusation, 
here audibly uttered " Well, if that ain't 
a good 'un, shiver my timbers !" 

" What do you say to this, my good 



THE POLICE MAGISTRATE. 237 

man?" asked the magistrate of the 
prisoner. 

"Well, your honour, I knows little 
about it. Last night, just as I come up 
from Woolwich to spend a trifle I got for a 
little affair we had in the West Hinges, I 
meets the lady, as the gentleman in blue 
talks about, and says she to me, quite gen- 
teelly, ' Jack, will you give us a glass of 
gin?' *Well,' says I, *I don't care/ So she 
takes me into a gentleman's house called 
the ' Pig and Potato,' and I'm blowed if 
she didn't drink more grog than our 
captain's steward and the black cook put 
together. 'Well, then,' says she, * we'll take 
a walk ;' and I was so faddled as I'd a done 
anything she asked. *Come,' says she, 'and 
see my uncle, a most first-rate gentleman, 
a^ keeps a shop in Wapping.' So away we 
goes ; and then says she, * Jack, would you 
like to marry me ?' * Well, I don't care,* 
says I, ' but I must be aboard our ship 



238 THE POLICE MAGISTRATE. 

early in the morning, or our sHpper'U be 
after stopping my allowance/ * And how 
much money have you?' says she. 'Twenty- 
three pounds and a silver watch/ says I. 
* Oh, give me the watch,' says she, ' I want 
to lend it my uncle ;' and with that I gave 
it her, and she went into the shop her 
uncle kept, and when she came out 
she said, says she, 'He's gone to dine 
with the Lord Mayor, so I have left it 
with his son, as is an officer in the 
army. 

" Yes, but about this marriage ?" 

" Well, I don't know much about it ; 
but she took me to the Blackymoor's 
Head, and made me jolly drunk. I fell 
asleep, your honour, and may I be rolled 
in the lee scupper if I found more than 
two pound in my pocket Y 

"But are you married?' 

" Well, I leave it all to you, captain ; 
if you says I am, I suppose I am ; if not, 



\99 



k" 



THE POLICE MAGISTRATE, 239 

1*11 go back again as an A.B. to the old 
Arethusa." 

"Where's the prosecutrix?'* asked 
Mr. Maxwell. 

" Yes — ^yes," chimed in the tar, " tell 
her to come for'ard and show her figure- 
head." 

'*She has not appeared as she pro- 
mised.'' 

" Then I at once dismiss this case. 
I am astonished how you could bring such 
a case before me. How could the woman 
be married during the night ? That this 
poor fellow has been robbed there is no 
doubt, and she evidently fears it may be 
so proved. You ought to have brought 
her before me for the theft, not this simple 
man. Prisoner, you are discharged; you 
can return to your ship as soon as you 
like." 

"Thank ye, captain; I knew you'd 
know better than me ;" and as he stepped 



240 THE POLICE MAGISTRATE. 

from the dock he muttered, "These 
skippers are rare judges, after all ;" when 
again jumping back, he made a low bow, 
and said, "I beg pardon, captain, but if 
I understands you right, I'm not spliced, 
am I ?" 

"You may, as I said before, go on 
board a happier and, I think, a wiser 
bachelor than when you left your ship." 

Jack left the court dancing a naval 
hornpipe, scattering, the few shillings he 
had left amongst the spectators. 

The next case that came on was that 
of Marks. The evidence was clear, and 
brought the robbery home to him in a 
most distinct manner. Jem, like most 
rascals, was an arrant coward ; he whim- 
pered, and almost wept in the dock. 

He was fuUy committed for trial. 

His examination was scarcely over 
when a messenger came in to say that 
the lawyer awaited them. They retired 



THE POLICE MAGISTRATE. 241 

to the private room, where Scarsdale and 
Mrs. Marks awaited them. Her affidavit 
was taken and the business was con- 
cluded. Mr. Maxwell turned to her: — 
" I have been compelled, my good woman, 
to commit your husband for trial.*' 

" Well, I feared so." 

" Would you like to see him ?" 

" Thank your worship, I*d rayther not — 
I don't like sociating with dis'onest people. 
My lord, if you don't want me no more 
ril be orf, for I'd rayther not see Jem. 
Grood-bye, ladies and gen'lemen," added 
she ; and with a low curtsey she left the 
room. 

Lord Grantchester, with his wife and 
son, returned home, much amused with 
what they had seen and heard. 



VOL, ra. 16 



242 



CHAPTEE XVin. 

THE DEAD ALIVE. 

An individual wrapped in a large cloak, 
and so concealed by what is called a 
muffler that neither his face nor form 
could be recognised, had walked once or 
twice up and down Halfmoon-street, 
when he suddenly perceived a paper in 
the window of a house on the opposite 
side. He crossed over and read — "A 
room on the second floor to be let/' He 
without hesitation knocked at the door 
and inquired relative to the apartment so 
advertised. The landlady told him that 
it was merely a bed-room — ^but certainly 
a most excellent one ; that she had no- 
thing else to spare, as she lived in the 



THE DEAD ALIVE, 243 

parlours herself, and her first floor was 
occupied by the Honourable George 
Sydney, the brother of an earl; Lord 
William Branson had only just left her, 
and that her house was solely frequented 
by persons of the highest distinction. 
The stranger, without inquiring the 
terms, or making any further inspection, 
at once took the room, giving as a refer- 
ence the card of Mr. Scarsdale, who was 
fortunately known to her. The new 
tenant made but one proviso, namely, 
that he should instantly occupy the apart- 
ment ; and, in order to secure that favour, 
he paid a week's rent in advance to the 
now obsequious landlady. 

He went away, and in less tlian half an 
hour returned in a cab, bringing with 
him a smaU portmanteau. His room was 
ready, and he at once took possession 
of it. 

Left to himself, he undid his luggage, 

16— a 



244 THE DEAD ALIVE. 

and took from thence a pistol and a life- 
preserver ; he next rendered his already- 
pallid face still more ghastly by the ap- 
plication of some strange cosmetic; and 
having ascertained that no one was stir- 
ring, he stole down to the first floor, and 
after making sure that it was empty, 
he stealthily entered the drawing-room. 
Here a paraffin lamp burned, apparently 
awaiting the return of the aristocratic 
lodger. Some other objects indicated 
that he had not yet come in. The 
stranger carefully looked axound the 
room. There was a closet beside the 
fire-pla^e, and in it the intruder ensconced 
himself just as the outer door was heard 
to open and shut, and then the steps of 
some one coming upstairs were audible. 

The proposed robber, murderer, or 
practical joker, whichever he might be, 
closely drew the door to, and with a 
palpitating heart Ustened to the very 
breathings of the new arrival. 



THE DEAD ALIVE. 245 

George Sydney (for it was indeed he) 
threw himself into a chair and gave vent 
to certain ejaculations which at once an- 
nounced disappointment and annoyance. 

He partook of some light refreshment 
and then sat down to vnite. He was soon 
so deeply engaged in his task, that he did 
not hear the stranger slip out of the cup- 
board and approach him. He looked over 
the writer's shoulder, and found that he 
was looking over, correcting, and adding 
to his voluminous diary; he then stole 
round the table, and exactly confronting 
the vniter, he uttered a low groan. 

George Sydney looked — he gave but 
one glance — ^then covering his face with 
his hands, began quickly to utter some 
exorcism or prayer. 

The figure remained perfectly mute. 
George looked up again, and for a moment 
shuddered with fear; then starting up, 
he exclaimed — " Hence, fiend, I fear you 




246 THE DEAD ALIVE. 

not ! — even though you assume the form 
of the dead, I fear you not ! I defy you — 
you cannot harm me V* 

"Beware, George Sydney, thou mur- 
derer !" uttered the seeming apparition, 
in a sepulchral tone. 

"Ah, you speak! — ^fool that I am — 
what puzzle is this? The dead speak 
not, nor do they assume the form of 
mortal mould ! Say, then, who art thou ?'* 

" Colemau !" 

" What ! real ? living ? here ? impos- 
sible !" 

" Escaped from the murderers you paid 
to finish me." 

Sydney rushed towards the door; he 
would have fled, but Coleman (for he it 
was) was too quick for him. Ere he 
could reach it, the now active visitor had 
doubfy locked the door, and placed the 
key in his pocket. 

" What means this, ruffian ! do you 



>y 



\99 



THE DEAD ALIVE. 247 

wish to murder me? If such be your 
intent, know that I am armed." 

" And so am I," replied Coleman, show- 
ing his pistol. "When I keeps com- 
pany with the likes of you, I never goes 
without the proper tools. 

" What do you want ? 

" Sit down and Til tell you ; and if 
you've a drop of liquor, place it on the 
table. It wont be the first time as I've 
drank with a mankiUer, Master aeorge.'' 

" Be less familiar, fellow ! teU your tale 
quickly and begone," said his late master, 
bringing out some bottles and glasses 
from a cellaret; for although he spoke 
fearlessly he was far from easy in his 
mind. 

" Lor' bless you ! do you think I only 
come in to go away again directly ? Not 
II We've a long reckoning to settle, 
and I promise you I shan't hurry myself; 
so here's to you," added Coleman, as he 



248 THE DEAD ALIVE. 

sat down and began drinking. "Come, 
Master George, bring yourself to anchor 
and listen." 

" Clearly understand me : I will not 

■ 

allow any impertinent familiarity ; that I 
thus permit you to address me, be good 
enough to recollect is a condescension ; 
you are a servant, or have been so ; I am 
a gentleman." 

" Ha ! ha ! ha !" roared Coleman ; " a 
pretty sort of a genleman-I likes 
that !" 

"Try me not too far, lest I forget 
myself and lay my hands on you !" 

" No, you wont, Georgy," replied the 
late valet with a grin, as he placed his 
life preserver on the table beside him. 

" Unlock the door I" 

" Not as I knows of ! You mustn't play 
no tricks with me ; before this, you should 
have known well as I wam't so easily got 
rid of." 



€€ 



<C 



THE DEAD ALIVE. 249 

" But if you'll only go home to-night 
I'll see you at any hour to-morrow — ^I 
don't like keeping the lodging-house 
people up so late." 

'*Lor' lov'ee, they're all a-bed long 
ago!" 

Then how can you get out ?" 
Bless me ! I forgot to tell you. I 
sleeps immediately above you; so take 
care what you says in your dreams." 
Coleman by this time was slightly affected 
by the wine he had drunk, and was there- 
fore somewhat facetious. 

" And how have you obtained a foot- 
ing in this house ?" 

IVe Lord George Somebody's bed- 
room, and paid for it in advance. I'm 
your fellow-lodger, and I means never to 
leave you." 

" Fiend ! I'd prefer death to such com- 
pauy;" and he suddenly seized a pistol 
from the mantelpiece and fired direct at 



ee T\ 



250 THE DEAD ALIVE. 

the intruder. The weapon missed fire ; 
George threw it indignantly away. 

"Well, well, George, you does under- 
vally my talents. What ! set down with 
you and talk about dangerous matters 
with a loaded pistol within your reach ! 
Tou surely didn't think as I was such a 
bom fool ? Not I ! Afore you came in 
I took the caps off both your pocket pets 
and put your favourite stiletto (as you 
calls it) into my pocket. Here it is," and 
he showed it. 

"Double distilled villain!" muttered 
Sydney. 

" Well, you is a good one to talk of 
villains, you is !" continued Coleman, who 
was rendered suddenly sober and alert by 
the unexpected attack made on him; 
" you is a nice one to talk. But tell me, 
and tell me truly, if you had shot me, how 
would you have accounted for the act ?" 

" As a thief you stole into my apart- 



^ 



THE DEAD ALIVE, 251 

ments, and believing you to be a com- 
mon robber, I despatched you. It would 
have been justifiable homicide ; and even 
had I been slightly punished by fine or 
imprisonment, it would have been worth 
it to get rid of one who seems to possess 
a second life only to worry me and render 
me miserable." 

" Well, that's candid. Now, you see, 
if I chose to retaliate, I don't want the 
means — ^you are in my power ; but I ain't 
come for that, far from it ; I intends that 
you shall live long to share your fortune 
with me." 

" Monster ! what mean you ?" 
"Sit down quietly and listen." 



252 



CHAPTEE XIX. 



RETEIBUTIVE JUSTICE. 



"And now, Mr. Greorge Sydney — ^Hon- 
ourable G-eorge Sydney, if you likes — 
first listen to me, as I said before, and 
then answer some of my questions,*^ re- 
sumed Coleman. 

" I will attend to you, and make such 
replies as I think proper.*' 

*"You had better!*' said the other, 
playing with the life-preserver ; " perhaps 
you will have the goodness to recollect 
that I am a desperate man, and, thanks 
to you, a criminal." 

" Me ! how so ?" 

" Did you not teach me to forge ? did 
you not tempt me to run away with a 



BBTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE. 253 

mad lady ; and then, by way of compen- 
sation, as you calls it, did you not hire 
two villains to murder me ? Now don't 
deny it ; if you do, I shall lose my tem- 
per, and then I can't answer for myself/* 

"WeUr 

" But it ain't well, I means, my sweet 
tulip, to make you pay for all this ; but 
afore I settles down as your pal, I intends 
to find out your tools. Jem Marks — ^by- 
the-by, I am astonished at your employ- 
ing such a low cad — ^and your intimate 
friend, Dr. Compartz; I means to hang 
them chaps if I can, and when this is 
done rU come and join you; in the 
meantime, you mustn't move from this." 
Who wiU prevent me ?" 
I will; you knows I means what I 
says, so don't you be a-kicking against 
the bricks." 

" Well, suppose I consent to this, will 
you leave me now ?" 



ct 



« 



254 BETBIBUTIVB JUSTICE. 

" Not by no means ; do you think 
as I lives on air P I wants some 
money/* 

" There — ^there's a five-pound note for 
you, and now be off/* 

" rive devils ! you is a niggard, George, 

and no mistake/' 

" Don't call me George ; I wont allow 
it. 

" Shall I call you murderer — forger — 
seducer — ^hypocrite, or what does you 
like to be called ?" 

"Wretch!" roared Sydney, "I shall 
lose my patience/' 

"Take my advice," coolly answered 
Coleman, " take my advice, and don't be 
making a noise, or I'll crack your cocoa- 
nut; remember, you ain't speaking to 
your servant now/' 

" Well then, don't provoke me/' 

" Tou said just now you liked a clear 
understanding; well then, partner— for 



EETRIBUTIVE JUSTICE, 255 

you know as an accomplice is a partner — 
you must know I don't allow no one 
to blow me up a-cause I ask for money as 
is owing to me in a civil way." 

"Owing to you! I owe you nothing. 
If I give you anything, it is in charity." 

"That's a lie! charity be whipped! 
I don't ask no charity, I insists on my 
rights; to-night FU be content with a 
pony, perhaps to-morrow I may require 
more." 

"Suppose IVe not as much about 
me?" 

" Oh, a cheque will do." 

" And if I stop the payment ?" 

" You dare not." 

" And why, my good friend ?" 

" Because you'd repent it all your life, 
and I'd make, money by it." 

"How?" 

" I'd only tell Lord TJrmstone as you 
was the seducer of his wife." 



256 BBTBIBUTITB JUSTICE. 

" Tou could not dare V 

" Don't think that ; I dare a great deal. 
What do you think of telling your bro- 
ther how you detained his wife in the 
madhouse; would you like that any 
better?" 

" Demon from hell ! why thus torture 
me?" 

"Well, that's pretty words for what 
you calls a pious Christian." 

" Taunt me not ! or by the heavens 
above me I will strike you, though it 
cost me my life !" 

Don t talk so siUy." 
Suppose in the conflict I could man- 
age to destroy you ?" 

" It wouldn't do you no good ; I left a 
parcel all ready directed to the Earl of 
Grantchester, and I Ve left it with a very 
near friend as I've got to despatch it un- 
less he sees me afore twelve to-morrow." 

" And what does the parcel contain ?" 



cc 



cc 



BETRIBUTIVE JUSTICE. 257 

" WeU, as you asks me, Til tell you. 
First, there's a letter from me, telling him 
all about Lady TJrmstone, and about Lady 
Grrantchester, and about the Irish attempt, 
and all that sort of thing ; and in order to 
make him know as my story is true, IVe 
enclosed an old diary of yours, as I took 
from you soon after you left the Albany, 
written in your own handwriting, and tell- 
ing a lot of these tales." 

Impossible ! it is written in cypher." 
I knows that ; so I prigged what you 
calls the key — I calls it the explanation 
of these here pothooks and hangers, and 
I enclosed it in the parcel." 

" Swear this is true !" 

" Not I ; you wouldn't believe my 
oath a bit more nor I should believe 
yours. Why, you forgets ; you ain't hum- 
bugging in Exeter Hall; je voo conny, 
Monseer TartoofT 

"Call me again by that name, and 

VOL. III. 17 



<t 



a 



258 RETRIBUTIVE JUSTICE. 

by the heavens above me I'll strike 
youl 

*'Try it on — you said so twice — so 
come on if you ain't a^coward/' 

*' Don't goad me beyond endurance/' 

"Oh, you're afraid, are you? mur- 
derers and hippocrites ain't no courage, 
that's flat." 

Sydney had managed, unseen by Cole- 
man, to get hold of the poker, and now 
with a sudden movement he aimed a 
deadly blow at the ruffian's head. 

In his attempt, however, he was foiled ; 
the valet springing up averted the falling 
weapon with his arm, and changing its 
direction it struck the table-lamp, and 
dashed it into a thousand pieces. 

The paraffin instantly ignited, and flam- 
ing about set fire to every object. In 
less time than we have taken to record it, 
the curtains, the table-cloth, and every 
object of furniture were on fire. The floor 



RETRIBUTIVE JUSTICE. 259 

resembled a flood of burmng lava. Greorge 
now screamed to Coleman to open the 
door ; the latter, in his alarm and confd- 
sion, vainly endeavoured to take the key 
from his great-coat pocket, which he had 
laid aside ; and panic-struck by the sudden 
danger, he loudly and piteously called for 
help. 

Some of the parafl&n had fallen on 
Greorge ; he was now in a perfect blaze. 
He well knew that there was no hope'; he 
must be destroyed by the devouring 
element long before succour could arrive. 
He uttered not a single cry — ^he uttered 
not a single prayer ; he knew his fate, and 
with loud execrations he rushed on Cole- 
man, who was trying to escape by the 
window, and clasping him in his arms, 
hissed in his ear as well as his agony 
would permit, "Wretch! we die together!'* 
and drawing him closely to his chest they 
were soon both wrapped in one flame. 

17~a 



260 RETKIBUTIVE JUSTICE; 

The piercing cries of the dying, men; 
their, last blasphemous curses, their last 
thoughts, we will not endeavour: to. de-r 
scribe ; they were far too horrible to be 
recordedl .. 

When the door was burst open and thei 
fire extinguished; two charred bodies alone 
represented Greorge Sydney and his. once 
faithful valet. 

. From their papers, which WjBre now exr 
amined, their names and status were dis- 
covered, and the miaster of the house pro- 
ceeded without delay to communicate the 
sad news to the Earl of Grantchester. . 



261 



CHAPTEE XX. 

FEATEKNAL GKIBF. 

On the foUowing morning the party 
at Grantchester House had assembled for 
breakfast ; the Earl was ' in high good 
humour, and the meal was just over, when 
the servant brought in the Times news- 
paper. Lord Grrantchester took it, and, 
as he generally did, sat down to read it, 
before he retired to his study. Lady 
Grrantchester and her son were chatting 
on a couch immediately opposite, when 
Lord Sydney observed his father turn 
deadly pale and fall back in his chair 
insensible, attacked, as Sydney believed, 
by apoplexy. He instantly requested 
Lady Grrantchester to send for medical 



262 FRATERlJAL GRIEF. 

assistance, assuring her, however, in order 
to quiet her fears, that the Earl had 
only fainted through weakness. On the 
arrival of the surgeon — who happened 
luckily to be in the house — ^the usual 
remedies were applied, and his lordship 
opening his eyes, and recovering his con- 
sciousness, uttered " Poor George V at the 
same time pointing to the journal which 
had fallen on the floor. 

The captain snatched up the newspaper, 
and, examining its contents, his eyes 
suddenly rested on the following para- 
graph : — 

"Serious Fire and Loss of Life. — 
Last night, shortly after midnight, a fire 
burst out in Mr. Smith's lodging-house 
in Halfmoon-street. The engines arrived 
in a very short time, and in less than an 
hour the flames were got under ; but not 
before everything on the first and second 
floors was destroyed. As soon as the fire- 



FJEULTEBNAL GBIEE. 263 

men were able to enter — ^which they did 
at the risk of their lives — they were 
horrified on discovering the bodies of two 
hun;an beings lying close to each other, 
so charred it was impossible to recognise 
their features or their persons. The loss 
is estimated at £4000. The property 
was insured." 

"FuETHER Details. 

" The cause of the fire is supposed to be 
the sudden ignition of the curtains, while 
the gentlemen who occupied the apart- 
ments were asleep. We much regret to 
add, that one of the victims has been 
recognised as the Honourable Gleorge 
Sydney, LL.D., a brother of the Earl of 
Gxantchester, and one of the most gifted 
theologians in this country. The other 
body has not been recognised." 

Lord Sydney was greatly shocked on 
.reading this announcement, which fully 



264 FRATERNAL GRIEF, 

accounted for his father's agitation. He 
was now, however, restored to consciousness 
and, with the help of his son, retired to his 
study. Fondly attached as he had teen 
to his only hrother, he now mourned in 
deep sorrow that brother's fate, though 

« 

his grief was mingled with no small share 
of surprise at his " dear Greorge" being in 
London without visiting him. 

A letter soon after came in announcing 
the event, which he had just seen recorded 
in the newspaper. The present com- 
munication was signed by the proprietor 
of the house in Halfmoon-street. After 
detailing the circumstances of the fearftd 
occasion, the correspondent went on to 
express a hope that his lordship might be 
able to discover the name of the second 
sufferer. A letter had been found in a 
portmanteau belonging to the . lodger on 
the second floor addressedto a Mr. Coleman, 
and as the said lodger had not been found 



FRATERNAL GRIEF. 265 

nor had made his appearance since the fire, ' 
it was supposed to be him ; but how he 
came into the room with Mr. Sydney it 
was impossible to say; unless, . indeed, he 
was. some; clergyman who had visited the 
honourable gentleman on business of the 
Church. The letter went on to say that 
no. property had been recovered, and that 
a coroner's inquest was about to be held, 
&c., &c. 

The Earl's grief scarcely permitted him 
to decipher this letter ; and he certainly 
gave a sigh to the memory of tiie faithful 
Coleman who had thus died with his 
master — a pattern of fidelity even to the 
last hour of his life. ' ; r 

Lord Grantchester gave orders that no 
visitor was to be admitted excepting 
Mr. Scarsdale, who would come by ap- 
pointment about the establishment of the 
claims of Captain Leslie to the title of 






266 S^ATEKNAL GRIEF. 

Sydney, and the Grantchester estates 
when the Earl should be called away. 

Haymg made these arrangements Lord 
Grantchester closed the door, and in soli- 
tude gave way to his feelings of sorrow, 
not forgetting, however, to offer up a 
prayer to Heaven for his deceased brotiier. 
The Earl was a Protestant — a rigid Pro- 
testant ; but, in the hour of bereavement, 
he felt as every Christian must feel — ^a 
desire to offer up his humble mediation to 
the throne of mercy in favour of the loved 
one who had passed away. 

It was nearly one o'clock when a ser- 
vant came in and stated that a person at 
the gate wished most particularly to see 
his lordship. 

" I told you I would see no one." 

" It is in vain, my lord, to teU him 
this ; I have even threatened to send for 
the police, but he kept ringing the bell 
and insisting on seeing you. He says 



FBATEBNAL GBIEF. 267 

he fears something dreadM has happened 
to a friend of his; and he has brought 
you a letter from him, which he is bound 
to put into your lordship's own hands." 

"EeaUy, at such a moment^^it is very 
distressing to be thus intruded upon. 
Does he know that I am ** 

" Oh Lor', yes, my lord ; I ex- 
plained to him that, but he said it was 
something about this business as he was 
come." 

" Did he name any one ?" 

''He said he came, my lord, from a 
Mr. Coleman, or some such name." 

" Indeed ! Axe you sure he said Cole- 
man?" 

" I think so, my lord." 

" Well then, show him in." 

The servant went out, and returned 
showing in a well-dressed person, ap- 
parently a footman out of place, or some 
such individual. 



268 FBATEBNAL GRIEF. 

/ " Tou have demanded, I understand — '- 
rather than asked — ^to see me?" sternly 
observed Lord GFrantchester. "Did not the 
servant state to you that I was in deep 
afflictionr 

"He did, my lord; but my business 
could not be delayed. I swore, my lord, 
to deliver you myself this packet, and 
to say it comes from your brother's former 
valet/' 

" Former ! Was he not in his service 
to the last ? Why, I have reason to be- 
lieve he died with my poor dear brother ;" 
and Lord Qrantchester wiped a tear from 
his eye. 

" No, he left him some time ago ; but 
as to his being dead, that's very likely, 
for he swore to me if he was alive at 
twelve o'clock to-day, he'd take back this 
big packet;" and the stranger pulled 
out a very large letter, tied with a string 
and sealed, and presented it to the peer. 



FBATERNAL GRIEF. 269 

" Had I not better open it, and 
then perhaps you can explain its 
contents ?" . 

** Oh, my lord, I'd be very sorry you'd 
do so. . I am a brother-in-law. of Cole- 
man's, my lord, but I don't know any of 
his secrets." 

"What secrets can he have with 
me?" 

"Eeally I can't pretend to say, my 
lord; but having delivered his parcel to 
your lordship, I am now all impatience 
to go and see whether my brother-in-law 
is dead or not. Was it by accident he 
died?" 

" He was burnt." 

" Indeed ! Would you, my lord, give 
me the address, and I'll go there di- 
rectly?" 

"Mr. Smith's lodging-house. Half- 
moon-street. I shall probably myself be 
there in an hour or two, to hear 






270 FRATEBNAL GRIEF. 

the case explained before the coroner's 
inquest/' 

" Good-bye, my lord ; I was really sorry 
to be forced to intrude on your lordship^ 
good-bye!" and the man left the 
room. 



271 



CHAPTEE XXI. 

THE MYSTERIOUS COMMUNICATION. 

Lord Grantchester tore open the packet. 
It appeared to consist of a long letter and 
several other papers bonnd up together. 
His tears rose so quickly to his eyes, he 
found it a difl&cult task to read; but 
wiping them away, he made an effort, and 
at length made out the letter. It ran 
thus : — 

"Earl of Gtrantchester. 

" I, William Coleman, late the Vallet 
of your Bruther Grorge, will most likely 
be ded or gone away before you reads 
these lines; For I am goin too see my 
late marster, and tell him my mind ; and 



272 THE MYSTERIOUS COMMUNICATION. 

if he duzziint satisfye me He kil im or he 
shall kil me, as he has a-tried to doo 
before. If so be ime ded my Bruther will 
giv you this. If so be he is ded, Then 
He has gone to Amerrycur. 

" Now, i write nott promiskisley, Butt 
on Bisyness as far as tellin you the rele 
truth about your bruther : — 

" 1 . It was Mister Grorge that tuk orf — 
rewinned and deseerted Lady XJm- 
ston. 

" 2. I was he as pade the assassin too 
fyre at you in Ireland. 

'' 3. It was the Honoorable Grorge as pade 
Mother Marks to destry your brat. 
Butt I thinks as the Chylde is livin, 
at leest so Jem Marks told me. 

" 4. He maid me carry orf My Lady to 
Brusuls, and told me to finish her 
thare, as he mite be nearer the 
property. • 



THE MYSTEBIOUS COMMUNICATION. 273 

'* 5. He tryed too get me murdered, and 

for that He kil him. 
"6. He gav muther Marks pisin to pisin 
you, and then he'd be a Lord. 
" I could tel you more butt I wont — 
But as you'll think these lyes, I encloses 
letturs and doguments as will prove them 
all too be treu — Good bye. Be ware of 
Gorge. 

"William Coleman." 



The reading of this strange epistle had 
so shocked the Earl that he now fell back 
in his chair, and remained nearly a quarter 
of an hour in deep reflection ; then, start- 
ing up, he cried — " No — ^no, I'll not be- 
lieve the foul jargon ! George was noble, 
generous, and pious. Am I to take the 
word of a disgraced menial against my 
own brother ? I feel ashamed of having 
attended to the vile scrawl of this fellow. 
No, thus perish such falsehood !" and the 

VOL. III. 18 



274 THE MYSTERIOUS COMMUNICATION. 

Earl rushed to the table, determined 
on destroying the papers, as Mr. Scars- 
dale entered. 

"I regret to learn the fatal news; I 
much fear it will deeply affict your lord- 
ship. But why this dreadful — ^this un- 
usual agitation? your grief should be 
restrained/' said Scarsdale. 

" It is not grief alone that now moves 
me." 

" What is it, then, my lord ?" 

"I have just received a letter con- 
taining the most vile calumnies respecting 
my late brother; it comes from a dis- 
charged servant." 

" Coleman ?" quickly asked the lawyer. 

" How do you know the name of poor 
George's valet ?" 

" Never mind how I learnt it ; I repeat 
the question — was Coleman the writer of 
the letter you allude to ?" 

" He was ; though how you divined it 
I cannot comprehend." 



THE MYSTERIOUS COMMUNICATION. 275 

" May I be permitted to see the com- 
iminication ?" 

"Oh, decidedly; though Vm half 
ashamed that I did not destroy it before 
I read it through ; there it is." And he 
handed Coleman's epistle to his friend. 

Mr. Scarsdale read the letter, and then 
re-read it, without uttering a word. 

" Did you ever read such falsehoods ?" 

Instead of replying, the man of law 
demanded — "Have you got the proofs 
alluded to, and have you examined 
them ?" • 

"Yes, here they are; forgeries, no 
doubt. I would not wrong dear George's 
memory by looking at them." 

Scarsdale closely inspected them one 
by one ; he held some of them up to the 
light, and perused them all with the 
greatest attention. He then solemnly 
addressed the Earl : 

"I wish Coleman had not thus ad- 

18—2 



276 THE MYSTERIOUS COMMUNICATION. 

dressed you ; after all, perhaps you were 
right in wishing to bum them/' 

" What do you mean ? Surely you do 
not believe these charges against my 
brother P* 

" I did not say so, my lord." 

" No, but your tone and manner show 
me they have made some impression on 

you/' 

" They have/' 

"You cannot surely put faith in the 
preposterous allegations of an ignorant 
and wicked menial ?" 

"My lord, you forget that they are 
supported by documentary proofs/' 

" They may be, as I said before, for- 
geries/' 

"Not so, they are genuine; I have 
closely examined them; besides, an ig- 
norant man like Coleman could scarcely 
thus simulate various handwritings/' 

"You then believe the a<5Cusations ? 



THE MYSTERIOUS COMMUNICATION. 277 

Say — before Heaven — do you believe 
them?" 

" I do/' solemnly replied the lawyer. 

" And why ?" 

"The greater part of them I have 
long been aware of." 

"Oh, do not say so! could such a 
monster exist? and yet I know you 
would not lightly say this." 

" Alas ! my dear lord, your late bro- 
ther " 

" Call him not my brother ! rather call 
him a monster. Never — never, after this 
day shall his name pass these lips. Give 
me — but no, take the damning proofs 
with you, and keep them safely as a 
record — a justification of my conduct. I 
will not see his remains; I will mourn 
but in outward appearance. Come here, 
Lady Grantchester," added he, turning to 
his wife, who now entered ; " I know all ; 
it was my brother who detained you a 
prisoner in an asylum." 



278 THE MYSTERIOUS COMMUNICATION. 

" So I believe/' replied she, in a low 
voice. 

''And who took you abroad, and 
brought you back ?" 

Lady Grrantchester remained silent. 

" You may speak freely now," chimed 
in Scarsdale ; '' the man is dead by whom 
you were bound to silence." 

She looked up and uttered — ''Mr. 
Coleman." 

^^ Fool — fool! blind idiot that I've 
been !" cried the Earl, striking his fore- 
head. " But let this cease ; let no signs 
of grief or mourning be shown in this 
house. Let none under my roof attend 
the funeral of the arch villain that died 
last night ; and never — ^never again let my 
ears be polluted by the hated name of 
George Sydney." 

"My excellent friend — ^my dear lord, 
do be less excited." 

"I am perfectly cool; I speak ad- 



THE MYSTERIOUS COMMUNICATION. 279 

visedly ; I am determined. If you think 
I should not do so, I will not give the 
order myself; but in this case, my dear 
Scarsdale, I trust to you and to my son 
to let my wishes be known throughout 
my household." 

" It shall be done. I ask you but one 
favour — let friendship seal your lips 
respecting Lady TJrmstone; the inform- 
ation would kill the old statesman; it 
would render your son miserable for 
life, and perhaps break off his 
match/' 

"I will not say a word. I equally, 
from this moment, banish from my mind 
the memory of the man whom I once 
looked upon as a brother — ^the contents 
of the despatch I have received. Louisa, 
my love, I truly estimate your fond 
affection in thus concealing from me cir- 
cumstances which would have deeply em- 
bittered my life. Scarsdale, I thank 



280 THE MYSTERIOUS COMMUNICATION. 

you sincerely, for I suspect you knew 
aU." 

"Lady Grantchester," said Scarsdale, 
parrying the question, "let us for the 
present leave the Earl." 



281 



CHAPTEE XXII. 



SURPRISES. 



" This is certainly a very beautiful place, 
papa," said Lady Emily to her father as 
she looked out of the window at Grrant- 
chester House. 

" Yes ; it's extremely well laid out, and 
quite wonderful, considering its near 
proximity to the metropolis ; but it is 
nothing in comparison to my old friend's 
mansion in Cambridgeshire, or his magni- 
ficent — I might almost say palatial — 
residence in Ireland. Why, the lake 
there is at least twenty times as large 
as this place — ^house, park, and ornamental 
grounds aU put together." 

"And Mr. George Sydney would 



282 SURPKISES. 

have inherited all this splendid pro- 
perty ?" 

" Had he lived, decidedly they would 
all have been his. The estates of Grant- 
ehester go with the title/' 

" And now that the poor man is dead, 
who is the heir ?" 

" A distant cousin, I believe — one who 
is scarcely known to my frieild; and I 
truly fear he will soon possess them, for 
this sudden loss of his loved brother wiH, 
I fear, have a fatal effect on the Earl." 

" Is it not rather soon, dear papa, to 
come and intrude on his sorrow ?" 

" Not so ; I am his most intimate 
friend. Besides, I wish to know if it is 
to be a public funeral, and when it is to 
take place." 

"Lord Sydney will be here directly, 
his lordship desired me to say," said a 
servant opening the door, delivering his 
message, and then closing it quickly. 



SUBPRISES. 283 

" Who is Lord Sydney ?" asked Lady 
Emily. 

" I really cannot say, my dear child ; 
probably some member of the family, 
though I never heard of the title before." 

"That^s strange, dear papa; for I 
always looked upon you as a walking 
peerage. I wonder what can induce Lord 
Grantchester thus to send a stranger to 
receive us !" 

"Very probably the old peer is so 
stricken by grief he is unable to leave his 
chamber, and has deputed this relation to 
receive his guests and direct the neces- 
sary melancholy arrangements required on 
these sad occasions." 

" May it not be possible, darling papa, 
that this may be the next heir ?" 

" I should say that it was highly im- 
probable that the next heir would intrude 
at such a moment — ^it would be most 
indelicate ; besides, even were he the next 




284 SURPRISES. 

in succession, he could have no possible 
right to assume the title, which can only 
be assumed by the son of a peer entitled 
to confer this distinction (by courtesy) on 
his heir-apparent/' 

" Well, papa, we shall soon solve the 
mystery, for I hear footsteps approach- 
mg. 

The door opened, and their old favourite, 
John Leslie, stood before them. 

" Oh ! my dearest dear John, I am so 
glad to see you ; the servant said a Lord 
Sydney was coming to receive us. And 
now do tell us, how does Lord Grant- 
chester bear his bereavement — ^very sadly, 
I fear ?" 

" Far from it. At first he was almost 
struck down with grief; but a few hours 
afterwards he seemed suddenly to recover 
from the blow, and is now almost 
cheerful." 

" How very strange !" murmured Lord 
tJrmstone ; " I did not like him myself. 



SUBPRISES. 285 

but Grantchester appeared to idolize 
him/' 

" I only tell you the fact ; he even talks 
of leaving London as if he were going on 
a pleasure trip." 

"I am much afraid, my dear John/' 
said the peer, "it will postpone your 
nuptials for at least twelve months, and I 
sometimes feel a dread that I shall never 
Kve to behold the fruition of my every 
wish thus matured/' 

" Ah ! indeed, my lord, that would be 
a sad postponement ; but I cannot help 
thinking my father might be induced 
to shorten the period/' 

" Your father !" 

" I mean the Earl of Grantchester ; he 
has desired me so to call him/' 

"Ay, and I love you as well, dear 
John, as if you were the son of the 
proudest peer in the realm. Do you 
know Lord Grantchester's heir ?" enquired 
Lady Emily. 



286 SURPRISES. 

"I cannot say that I ever met him, 
though by character I am thoroughly 
acquainted with him." 

" And do you like him ?" 

" Decidedly." 

"Well, there we differ for the first 
time," cried the spoiled child, pouting ; 
"I hate him!" 

" And why ?" 

" Because papa says he will inherit aU 
the fortune and estates of Lord Grant- 
chester." 

" Very true. But tell me, dear girl, 
would you hereafter like to be the mis- 
tress of these lovely spots ?" 

" And share them with you ?^' 

" Of course." 

" Oh ! then, indeed, I should be happy.'* 

"Then, loved girl, they shall all be 
yours !" 

Lord Urmstone stated; Emily was 
truly surprised. 



SURPRISES. 287 

" And what would the future Earl say- 
to this ?" 

" He has consented/' 

" Oh ! then I shaU love him." 

" You already do so." 

*'How?" 

" All this must helong to " 

" Lord Sydney," quickly interrupted 
the agitated girl. 

"Allow me to present him to you, 
my sweet girl, with all due formaUty; 
permit me to introduce John Marks 
Leslie, Viscount Sydney !" and he bowed 
low. 

" What can all this mean ?" demanded ' 
Lord Urmstone. 

" Papa ! papa ! do say, am I dream- 
mg? 

" Excuse me, my dearest boy, for not 
following you quicker," cried the Earl of 
Grantchester, who now entered the room, 
addressing Lord Sydney. " Pardon me, 



288 SUKPRISES. 

my dear Urmstone, and you, my fair 
daughter-in-law, for thus detaining you." 

The visitors exchanged looks of as- 
tonishment. 

" What can all this mean ?" solemnly 
said Lord Urmstone. "My adopted 
son calls himself Lord Sydney, and now 
my noble friend calls my child his daugh- 
ter ! Do — do speak, some one, and ex- 
plain all this. Has the loss of your 
valued relative, George Sydney " 

"Never let me hear that name 
breathed V interrupted the Earl of Grant- 
chester. " If you are my friend, never 
utter that hated name again !" 

Lady Emily and her father began to 
think they had got into a lunatic asylum. 

At this moment Lady Grantchester en- 
tered. After saluting her guests, she 
turned to Lord Sydney : — " The weather 
is so fine, I came to propose a walk in the 
garden ; I am anxious to see if some im- 



SURPBISBS. 289 

provements I suggested have been carried 
out. Lady Emily, will you come? my 
son will accompany us/' 

As well as her astonishment would 
allow her, Emily cheerfully assented, and 
they at once passed out to the terrace, 
from which they descended to the 
grounds. 

As soon as the two noblemen were left 
alone. Lord Grantchester fully explained 
to his wondering friend all that had oc 
curred, concluding by blessing that mer- 
ciful Providence which had restored to 
him a son — and such a son, one of whom 
he might well be proud. 

" And George '' 

" Hush ! name him not. You may be- 
lieve that I would not be thus moved by 
resentment, had I not bitter cause. God 
forgive him, as I do. I will to-morrow 
pay any debts he may have left, and carry 
out any obligations he may have entered 

VOL. ni. ] 9 



290 SURPRISES. 

into. He will have a proper but a quiet 
funeral; Sydney, my beloved boy, shall 
see him laid in the earth, for I will not 
allow him to be placed in the family 
vault, and this done, I will wipe him 
from my memory for ever. But hush ! 
the ladies are returning." 

"Well, Lady Grantchester, I think 
you found all your wishes carried out.'' 

" Some of them," repUed his wife; " but 
others I shall not see for a fortnight/* 

" Say rather for some months, for IVe 
formed a plan which I trust none of you 
wiU oppose. Lord Urmstone has never 
yet denied me any favour, and as it will 
hasten the marriage of my son, I do hope 
Lady Emily will not object to it. The 
real fact is this — after the occurrences of 
the last forty-eight hours, my son could 
not approach the hymeneal altar for at 
least twelve months." 

" So I feared," said Lord Urmstone. 



SURPRISES. 291 

"But as I would not willingly pain 
two loving hearts, I have ordered prepara- 
tions to be made to start for Ireland the 
day after to-morrow. We will all go 
direct to Shannon Castle, and spend three 
months there as happily as we can ; at the 
end of that period we will return to Eng- 
land, and the marriage shall take place 
in our village church at Grantchester. I 
was married there myself, and so was my 
father ; I therefore hope no objections will 
be urged." 

" God bless you for that !" uttered Lord 
Sydney. 

Emily's eyes bespoke her gratitude. 

Lady Grantchester saw with the intui- 
tive perception of a woman, that the ar- 
rangement had been made in a spirit of 
delicacy to remove her from the scene of 
her late suflTerings. 

Lord TJrmstone began to hope he 

19— a 



292 SURPRISES, 

would yet lead his darling child to the altar 
and bless her before he left this world. 

"And now for luncheon," cried Lord 
Grantchester, in a gay tone. "Mr. 
Scarsdale is waiting in the library for us. 
I am happy to say all the mairiage settle- 
ments must be altered now. Come, my 
Lord Sydney, lead the way with your 
fature bride /* and away they all went. 



293 



CHAPTEE XXIII. 



A SHORT SUMMARY. 

Three montlis is a long period to look 
forward to ; it, however, soon slips away. 
Look back, good reader, on the last 
quarter of a year, and say, although that 
period may have been crowded with 
strange and important events, has it not 
passed as a short dream ? Three months 
probation seemed a long period to the 
engaged couple, yet it at last came to an 
end; and really it slipped away so 
quickly, so quietly, that it only ap- 
peared as one short scene of uninter- 
rupted happiness. 

It is true that during this period many 
events had passed — ^interesting, perhaps. 



294 A SHORT SUMMARY. 

to the world around them, but scarcely 
noticed by the joyous pair. 

An inquest had been held on the body 
of George Sydney, and a verdict of 
" Accidental death" returned. 

Coleman had not been positively iden- 
tified, so the same verdict was given on 
him as " A person unknown." 

The former had been buried in a quiet 
manner in Brompton Cemetery. 

Notwithstanding his many viUanies, 
Lord Grantchester (at the suggestion of 
Mr. Scarsdale) caused Coleman to be 
decently interred at his lordship's ex- 
pense since he felt grateful to him 
as having been the instrument, under 
Heaven, of his dear wife's restoration to 
her home. 

Lieutenant Johnston, E.N. (as he 
called himself), was caught in the act 
of picking an old lady's pocket; in 
return for which, her Majesty was pleased 



A SHORT SUMMARY. 295 

to give him board and lodging during 
twelve months in one of her numerous 
castles, where he amused himself in beating 
hemp and forming new plans of retalia- 
tion on the ungrateful public, as soon as 
he should get out. 

Jem Marks went out to one of our 
maiiy colonies; his lordship the pre- 
siding judge, on the day of his trial, 
having determined that he should, for the 
benefit of his health and the safety of his 
fellow-subjects, pass the remainder of his 
natural life far from the shores of Old 
England. 

Mrs. Eearden, alias Mrs. Marks, alias 
Mrs. Thompson, suffered not a little from 
the attacks of delirium tremens brought 
on by her const>ant attachment to the 
bottle. She, however, married again (be- 
lieving, as she said, that poor Jem was 
legally dead), and seemed to enjoy all the 
good things of life. Unhappily, however, 



296 A SHOBT SUMMARY. 

one Bight, as she attempted to come 
do WD stairs in the dark to get another 
glass of her favourite liquor, indulging in 
the hope that it would make her sleep, 
her foot unfortimately slipped and she fell 
down. In the morning she wa« found 
dead and cold on the rug in the passage, to 
which she had managed to crawl. Eu- 
mour, with her usually scandalous tongue, 
whispered that she had been foully mur- 
dered by her last husband. "Whether this 
be true or not we cannot say ; but certam it 
is, the man was never seen again. Not 
one sixpence of money belonging to the 
late housekeeper ever was found. 

But enough of these vile doings ; let 
us turn from the painful picture to that 
of true happiness — ^let us turn to Lord 
Sydney and his intended bride. The 
three months had passed away ; the days 
of probation were over. They were now 
starting for Cambridgeshire; in forty- 



A SHORT SUMMARY. 297 

eight hours they would be man and 
wife ; before Heaven and the world their 
fates would be indissolubly linked. For 
weal or woe, their future lives would be 
passed together. 



298 



CHAPTEE XXIV. 

SUNSHINE AFTER CLOUDS. 

The village of Grantchester is prover- 
bially one of the very neatest, cleanest, 
and quietest villages in England. We 
must, however, admit that it is one of 
the dullest. The quiet labourer who 
returns from his work for an hour, to 
partake of his comfortably-prepared meal, 
goes straight to his home, and without 
calhng at the public-house, or intruding 
on his neighbours, eats his dinner and 
again as quickly returns to his duties. 
The post-office scarcely exhibits a sign- 
board to announce its whereabouts. The 
pretty little inn, a pattern for such estab- 
lishments, scarcely boasts a gallon of 



SUNSHINE AFTER CLOUDS. 299 

spirits; it seldom resounds with the 
noise of riotous guests : here the peasant 
or shopkeeper drops in, and takes his 
pint of ale in the bar or the tap, and 
then proceeds on his journey. The 
smithy boasts no loungers, and the very 
children of the national school seem 
brought up to habits of quietude. Grant- 
chester is proved by certain old deeds to 
have once been a bustling town; it is 
now a noiseless village. 

How, then, must this peaceful spot 
have been frightened out of its propriety 
as the joy-bells from the fine old church 
poured forth a merry peal ! The sacred 
edifice stood with its gates widely thrown 
open, and the excellent and hard-working 
viUage clergyman stood ready robed to 
receive some wedding-party of rank, since 
everything bespoke the coming of some 
high personages. Presently the inhabi- 
tants of the little hamlet were attracted 



300 SUNSHINE AFTER CLOUDS. 

to their cottage doors by the loud noise 
of wheels, and, to their great delight, 
four or five carriages — carriages embla- 
zoned with noble arms — dashed up to the 
church-door. In a few minutes it is 
known that the lord of the soil in an 
adjoining parish is the leader of the 
cortege — ^he whose title is identical with 
that of their homes. In an mstant, a 
lovely girl descends from one of the equi- 
pages, while a handsome youth, one on 
whom Nature has stamped her impress of 
true nobility, having preceded them, now 
comes to the old porch to receive her, and 
hands her along the aisle of the holy 
building. The Earl and Countess of 
Grantchester come next; the Earl of 
XJrmstone and the two bridesmaids follow ; 
then come some half dozen private 
friends, and a swarm of curious villagers 
close the train. 

The merry chimes cease, the solemn 



SUNSHINE AFTER CLOUDS. 301 

hour has arrived; the lovely bride ap- 
proaches trembling with apparent fear 
yet true joy the altar, where the priest 
stands with his book open; beside her, 
the object of her fond love kneels, and 
though she feels that she now nominally 
leaves her home and severs the ties of 
nearest kindred, yet she is proudly con- 
fident that she is about to give her hand 
to one who will well repay her love and 
be a son to her fond parent. And he — 
what were his feelings on the solemn 
occasion? those of unmitigated delight. 
He felt no speculative hope of happiness 
within his manly breast; he had been 
brought up from infancy with the lovely 
being he was about to call his own ; he 
felt certain — ^he knew — he must be the 
happiest of men. 

There was no parade of aristocratic 
prelates ; the excellent pastor of Grant- 
chester managed without the assistance 



302 SUNSHINE AFTER CLOUDS. 

of even a single bishop to join their hands 
in holy matrimony; two bridesmaids, only, 
performed the whole duty of the usual 
bevy now so preposterously numerous. 
The whole affair was carried through 
with that holy humility which alone 
should be displayed in the house of 
aod. 

The bells again began pealing, and the 
voices of the crowd rent the air. 

Lord and Lady Sydney alone entered 
their own carriage, which had been driven 
down unoccupied. The Earl of Grrant- 
chester left a splendid donation for the 
poor, and a rich bounty to enable every 
honest heart in the village to share in his 
own happiness. 

On their return to the Earl's noble 
mansion they found everything was pre- 
pared which a quiet marriage justified; 
and although there was no public break- 
fast, no dancing, no fireworks, yet every 



SUNSHINE AFTER CLOUDS. 303 

tenant on the estates of Lord Grrant- 
chester and Lord TJrmstone had a soM 
reason for rejoicing in the union of the 
two noble houses. 

Shall we say moye — shall we add how 
happy the deserving couple became — 
how happy they are? No; we think 
we have abe^y .ufflcienfly aaxnitted ou. 
readers Behind the Curtain. 



THE END. 


