IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 



CHAPTER I. 



In one of the fairest districts of England^ on the 
borders of Devon and Somerset, and hard by the 
sea, lies the noble estate of Mortlands. It is noble, 
bnt gloomier than words can paint. In the winter 
the sun does not rise upon the narrow valley over- 
shadowed by dark wooded hills till near noon, and 
leaves it before three o*clock. The sea-winds rush up 
this narrow gully from a rocky shore, and whistle 
among the chimneys of the great house, built of hard 
grey stone . an uninteresting, uncompromising struc- 
ture, which has scarcely submitted to take a lichen 
unto itself in the course of fifty years. The chief 
windows face the north, and within view of them is 
no flower or fountain, or other sight than a great sea 

1 



2 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

of shayen lawn, with a broad, flat shore of gravel, 
unbroken by balustrade or yase. The yast gardens 
are half a mile away : there are orchid-houses, and 
femries, and acres of glass devoted to all sorts of 
rare plants, in which the head-gardener feels a just 
pride, and which visitors at Mortlands are taken to 
see ; but for any living delight to the eyes of its 
inmates, these things might as well be in the tropics. 
To right and left, upon the hills for many a mile, 
stretch broad oak-woods and rich fiEbrm-lands. Sir 
Andrew Herriesson owns the property here, far as 
the eye can reach ; and his ancestors, for some hun- 
dred years, have owned it before him. They are 
well-known in the county as a wealthy race, and 
proud . not too proud to have added to their original 
wealth by intermarriage with heiresses of a plebeian 
stock . ^but too proud ever to have permitted such 
marriages, minus money plus love ; too proud ever 
to associate on terms of equality with their poorer 
neighbours ; too proud to be popular with any sort or 
condition of people. 

Sir Andrew, however, as every one knows, married 
for love, or for something which, in his nature, was 
understood to represent that sentiment; in other 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFB. 3 

words, he married a poor woman. But then, though 
poor, she was well bom, and well widowed, her late 
hnsband being a scion of the noble honse of Pomeroy, 
and her own fSunilj '' cnriooslj old," as they say of 
wine. Instead of money, Mrs. Pomeroy bronght for 

r 

her portion good looks, gracefdl manners, a weak 
brain, a weaker will, and a stepdaughter. This step- 
daughter. Hand, at the time of Mrs. Pomeroy's 
second marriage, was fifteen. The little money 
which Mrs. Pomeroy had was her own. This child 
of her husband's, by an early and imprudent mar- 
riage, had not a ferthing. Mr. Pomeroy had origi- 
nally the small property of a younger son, but this he 
ran through very soon, living upon his second wife's 
fortune (fortunately settled upon herself), which just 
enabled them to subsist. The life of the stepmother 
an^ daughter, for four years after the link between 
them had snapped, was uncomfortable in all ways. 
Mrs. Pomeroy was not unkind to her stepdaughter. 
On the contrary, she wished and tried to do her duty 
by the girl. But there was no point of sympathy 
between them. The woman was pliant, vain, and 
childish ; the girl was wilful, outspoken, and intole- 
rant of all the shams and subterfuges which straitened 



4 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

circnmstances entailed on a lady of Mrs. Pomeroy's 
turn of mind. Then came the change. The widow 
married; and^ notwithstanding the pleasant relief 
from all anxiety abont butchers' and bakers' bills, 
which the child had shared with her stepmother, 
Hand found that^ in the splendid monotony of Mort- 
lands, she looked back with bitter regret to the old 
shifty days of poverty and freedom which she liad 
hitherto known. 

Maud had not received a good education in any 
sense of the word. She had not even had a fashion- 
able one ; the widow^s means having been unable to 
compass anything beyond some dancing lessons, and 
an old French daily governess, with whom Maud read 
aloud . an accomplishment which, curious to say, 
materially affected her after life. In other respects 
she was ignorant^ and she knew her ignorance ; but 
with that energy which the self-taught always possess, 
she set herself to work, when about sixteen, to repair 
the omissions of her childhood, and whatever she 
applied herself to she mastered by sheer force of wiU. 
Yet she was not what the world considers very clever. 
She had read comparatively few books, and she never 
talked of any she had not read. She never expressed 



- IN THAJ STATE OF LIFE. 6 

the cream out of Edinburgh and Quarterly Beviews, 
and whipped it into trifle for conyersation. She had 
a strange fearlessness in saying what she thought; 
but her thoughts were often too unconventional to be 
available coin in society, where the smallest change 
passes the most readily. Therefore it often came to 
pass that she was silent, and looked upon as stupid 
or morose. Her pride was as great as Sir Andrew's, 
but it was pride of another kind . pride in which he 
could have no part or sympathy* A rejection of all 
the world's doctrines and ways of thought, an into- 
lerance of opinions that would not stand the test of 
clear and honest argument, but took refuge behind 
expediency and the like ; such was the girFs pride, 
dauntless and scornful, and growing more so every 
day by reason of her surroundings. She did not love 
her stepmother much ; Sir Andrew not at all. A 
child may feel the intellectual inferiority of its mother, 
and no great harm ensues. When the inferiority is 
mora], there can be but one result. Maud had never 
known her own mother, but Lady Herriesson had 
stood in this light towards her since she was four 
years old, and Maud despised her . despised her for 
her marriage, and yet more for her adoption, without 



6 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

scruple, of all Sir Andrew's worldly views. And 
although Lady Herriesson was really fond of her 
stepdaughter in her feeble weak-backed way, she had 
grown to regard her a little with the eyes of Sir 
Andrew, as a sadly headstrong girl, who had imbibed 
all sorts of dangerous notions, Heaven only knew 
where ! and whose future was a very present source 
of anxiety. She sighed much when she thought of 
Maud, and yet more when she talked of her, which 
she did with great candour to some of her friends, 
who afterwards dilated to the world at large on Sir 

Andrew's forbearance towards " that headstrong, 
unmanageable girl," and on that sweet Lady Her? 

riesson's cross, in being burdened with such a step- 
daughter. 

They were right: Sir Andrew's forbearance was 
great. Seen from his point of view . considering all 
he had done . it was almost apostolic, this forbear- 
ance. He had married Mrs. Pomeroy from her 
lodgings at Torquay, where she had nothing but her 
miserable four hundred a year ; he had not sent 
her daughter to school, as many a man would have 
insisted on doing, but had taken her to live at Mort- 
lands with them ; he had given her a horse to ride. 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 7 

and had sent her to London in the season^ and had 
even had a ball in honour of her introduction to 
society. Sir Andrew could not forget these things. 
And therefore did his forbearance appear apostolic 
in his own eyes when he spoke to Lady Herriesson 
of his stepdaughter's opposition to all his wishes and 
opinions* Two natures, indeed, more diametrically 
adverse to each other could not be found. All, that 
was established by usage, all that the world accepted 
as right and fitting, found favour in the eyes of Sir 
Andrew Herriesson. A hard, just man, a magistrate, 
an active visitor of gaols and reformatories, a sub- 
scriber to numberless charities, schools, and insti- 
tutes, this couiity Pharisee thanked Heaven, every 
morning, that he was not as other men were ; but 
that in him all might behold Justice, Virtue, and 
Munificence personified. He could lose his temper, 
like better men, at times, and, under provocation, 
could, use strong language. The provocation, how- 
ever, must be very great. In this instance, the 
humiliating spectacle of a great and good man, 
mastered by his passion, was not offcen afforded to 
the world. He was dull and pompous, but then he 
relished dulness and pomposity, A joke was a very 



8 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

terrible thing in his hands. He talked after dinner 
to the three or four neighbours who were occasionaUy 
invited to his table, of subsoiling, and prison disci- 
pline, the disease in the potatoes, and the prospects 
of the coming election. He read The Times, and 
the reports of select committees; and he rode once 
or twice a week into the county town of Scomton, 
nine or ten miles off, on a small, powerful grey cob, 
followed by a stately groom, mounted upon a horse 
seventeen hands high. Four great parties were 
assembled at Mortlands in the course of the year, in 
the formation of which the social importance of the 
guests was the only consideration, and very grand 
cheerless assemblages they were. The rest of the 
year, except two months in London, was passed in 
almost complete solitude by the family at Mortlands. 
One or two neighbours . men who laughed at Sir 
Andrew behind his back, but who never failed to 
accept his invitations . ^were occasionally asked to 
dinner: never when the four great festivals were 
being held, but at odd seasons, when Sir Andrew 
chanced to meet his humbler brother-magistrates on 
the bench, or at some public meeting in the county 
town. The rector of the parish (who had another 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 9 

living some four miles distant, where he resided) and 
the curate, Mr. Miles, who liyed in a cottage at the 
park gates, over against the church, weie likewise 
bidden to the great man's table from time to time. 
Miles rather more frequently than the others ; per- 
haps by reason of his proximity, and that it was 
conyenient to send to him when there was an odd 
number at table ; partly, no doubt, because he was 
unmarried. Not yery often were the rector's wife 
and daughters included in the reyerend gentleman's 
invitation, but once a year, at least, that ceremony 
was gone through. Why did any of them . ^they, or 
poor old Squire Hepworth's family at the Orange, or 
the Dykes, who were as good a race as the Herries- 
sons, only impoyerished by, two generations of spend- 
thrifts . ^why did any of them endure an ordeal which 
they regarded with nervous apprehension for days 
beforehand, and which was productive of neither 
profit nor pleasure ? Because, like Nebuchadnezzar, 
we set up a golden idol, and call upon all men to bow 
down and worship it. 

Maud had not one friend among all these neigh- 
bours. Perhaps this was her fault ; no doubt, some, 
of them were better girls than herself, but she won- 



10 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

dered why they ever came to Mortlands, and, with 
her independent habits of thought, she found nothing 
in any of Jihem to encourage intimacy. Hers was a 
quick, strong nature, loving life, and all real human 
interests in a hearty way. She felt a slow fire con- 
suming her, under the snow of those altitudes in 
which her lot was now cast. She would have worked 
her fingers to the bone in any cause which she felt 
keenly ; and Fate had ordained that she was to sit 
with her hands before her, and consume the feverish 
restlessness of youth in inaction. One of her few 
pleasores was riding. Hunting would have been 
good for her, by letting oflf some of the steam in her 
nature, which was always threatening to explode ; but 
Sir Andrew objected to this, so she took long solitary 
gallops on the downs, followed by her groom, and her 
deer-hound Oscar. 

. As to her looks, some pronounced her beautiful, 
others could find nothing to admire but her figure. 
She was straight as an arrow, her limbs well hung, 
her carriage very erect, a bust like that of the Venus 
of Milo, and smaller ankles thjan the Greeks ever 
recognised as admirable. She had, moreover, to 
complete the picture of her person, finely-shaped, 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 11 

capable hands, that looked better out of gloves than 
in them, a clear complexion, a swift, keen glance ; 
and a charming mouth when she smiled. 

She was now twenty-two, and it was just seven 
years since she first came to Mortlands, a raw girl, 
emerging from childhood, sanguine, joyous, and im- 
patient of control. Those seven years had formed 
her character, not altogether to its advantage. They 
had nipped it, as cold winds and an uncongenial soil 
nip the tender shoots of a flower transplanted from a 
warmer climate. 

The village of Mortlands is very small ; it begins 
just outside the park-gates (the curate, Mr. Miles's, 
being the first cottage), and straggles up a steep hill 
which closes in the valley at the end, some two miles 
from the great house. It is inhabited chiefly by the 
families of the farm-labourers on th^ Herriesson 
estate, and these labourers, with few exceptions, are 
well ofi". The aspect of their cottages shows it, and 
not less so the cleanly, well-ordered aspect of their 
children, as you see them trooping into the village 
school. Maud went occasionally to the village, and 
would gladly have gone every morning if she could 
have thought that her going did any good. But 



12 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

what was there for her to do ? Temporal wants there 
were none ; spiritnal ones were folly and ably sup- 
plied by the Beverend John Miles. Some young 
ladies, for lack of other sustenance, would have 
gathered the village gossip, from cottage to cottage, 
and gone home heavy laden with it, fondly imagin- 
ing all the time that they were performing deeds of 
charity and usefulness. But of such was not Maud 
Pomeroy. For some of these wives and mothers 
she had a strong personal respect and liking, and 
when she went to see them she felt that she gained, 
or ought to gain, far more than she was capable of 
giving. She listened to their small troubles and 
trials, and saw how bravely they bore them, and 
knew that she ought to bear hers as bravely, and that 
she did not. She murmured at Providence, which 
had placed her in idleness and luxury when she 
would have preferred the lot of one of these anxious, 
hard-working women. She visited them, therefore, 
because she liked it ; the sight of their honest toil 
was as a tonic to her ; she would never permit them 
to leave off scrubbing or cooking when she came in, 
and in the cottages which she thus visited it need 
hardly be said Miss Pomeroy was adored. She and 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 18 

Mr. Miles often came across each other on these 
occasions^ and he stndied her character very closely. 
With what results it remains to he seen. 

John Miles was eight -and -twenty. A more 
earnest, zealous man in his vocation it would be 
hard to find, or one better adapted to win his way 
to the hearts of a country parish. There was nothing 
dictatorial or interfering in his manner of dealing 
with the poor. His clear good sense, both in the 
pulpit, where he had it all his own way, and out of 
the pulpit, where he was open to argument, recom- 
mended him especially to the men^ who often came 
to consult him upon some mundane question. His 
ready sympathy, and the absence of perpetual fault- 
finding (that snare of zealous parish priests which, 
more than anything, wearies out the patience and 
neutralises the effect of an occasional well-merited 
reproof), caused him to be a welcome visitor among 
the women. It was more than respect ; they had a 
positive love for John Miles. And, while in matters 
spiritual they looked up to him, in matters temporal 
they felt a kind of protecting pity for his lorn con- 
dition. He was '^ such a nice gen'leman, it's a pity 
as he hasn't a good missus." But he was not likely 



14 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

to marry, for reasons that will appear presently. He 
was looked after by a dumpling-faced little maid, 
popularly called 'Liza, who worshipped her master, 
and drew a piteous picture of his loneliness in the 
long winter evenings, when the night school was 
over, and he had " never a soul to Speak to." ( But 
he did not complain ; if he had any secret troubles 
they were hid from every mortal eye ; in his dealings 
with his parish he always seemed cheerful, and 
encouraged a cheerful view of all human affairs. 
But he was a shy man, especially so in the society 
of young ladies. His nose was large and red, his 
hands and feet were clumsy. He was painfully con- 
scious of these physical defects when he found him- 
self in the society of refined women. It was a 
weakness against which he fought, but which, even 
in the pulpit, conquered him at times, when he knew 
that his nose was redder than usual, and felt that 
the eyes of his congregation were rivetted on it. 
Self-consciousness is a misfortune against which 
religion and philosophy alike struggle vainly. But 
as soon as John Miles became thoroughly interested, 
whether in the delivery of his message or in any 
earnest conversation, he lost all shyness, forgot his 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 15 

offending extremities, and threw himself, with the 
force of a strong character, into the discussion in 
hand. 

Maud had a great respect and a sincere liking for 
the young curate. No one knew better how con- 
scientious, how liberal-minded, and how thoroughly 
to be trusted he was. The poor were never weary 
of singing his praises ; and she envied the poor their 
friend. She wished often that she could speak 
openly to him about herself, and of many difSculties 
that beset her. But this she had grown to feel would 
be dangerous. 

*' I hate my life, and would do anything to escape 
from it," she had once said, when writhing under 
some petty tyranny of Sir Andrew's. "I am of no 
use in the world . ^I wish I were dead." 

They were walking from a poor woman's cottage 
together. The young man stopped short, and sighed, 

and shook his head, and grew scarlet, as he said 

 

abruptly, " No one has the right to say that. Every 
one can be of some use in the world if he chooses." 

"J can't. What can I do? Mamma doesn't 
want me. If I were her own child it would be dif- 
ferent. I am a burden to Sir Andrew, and she feels 



16 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

it. Their only idea now is to get rid of me. If I 
conld only get my own liYelihood somehow . if I 
could only be independent, I shouldn't be so miser- 
able. It is this inaction, this utter stagnation, day 
after day, which kills me." 

John tried to stammer out some good advice ; he 
strove hard to pour oil upon the bruised and irritated 
spirit of the girl, but after that day she spoke to him 
but little about herself. How a knowledge of the 
truth came to her she could not tell : it was nothing 
that he said or did, but a conviction came upon her 
that it would be unwise, and unkind towards John, 
to renew such conversations. 

The truth is that this shy, shamefaced curate 
had been guilty of as great an act of presumption as 
any man in the counties of Somerset or Devon. He 
had dared to fall in love with Lady Herriesson's step- 
daughter. He had been curate here for four or five 
years : he had watched Miss Pomeroy expand from 
girl into woman ; he knew all her faults, her pride, 
her impatience, her scorn and intolerance of things 
around her . pricks which it was worse than useless 
to kick against. And he loved her for her very faults. 
He saw how they were the shadows, so to speak, cast 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 17 

by what was large and noble in her character. '^ Wo 
viel licht ist, ist starker schatten/' as Schiller says. 
Under different circumstances she might have been, 
might yet become, an incomparable woman, he 
thought. Unwise John ! with Hiy sterling sense in 
the affairs of others, not to crush at once the germs 
of such folly as this ! It was madness, he said so 
constantly to himself; no one could have a more 
thorough conviction of that fact. In the first place 
his person, was it not an insurmountable obstacle 
against any woman loving him ? It was all very well 
to preach that beauty is as the grass of the field. 
In the summer time, at all events, most of us prefer 
verdure to an unlovely barrenness. Then there was 
his worldly position and prospects; a curacy with 
two hundred a year ; no chance of preferment ; no 
chance of any addition to his income from any source 
whatever ; unless a possible legacy from an old aunt 
(John's only near relation) might be so regarded. 
Miss Ppmeroy had niothing of her own. Even sup- 
posing, therefore, that she could ever have been 
induced to accept him, it would have been culpable, 
after the life to which she was used, to drag her down 
to such poverty as his wife's must be. He knew 



18 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

this, but he was not the less miserable. He treasoied 
up every word of hers on the days when they met ; 
and when evening was come, and he sat with The 
Times before him in his chair by the fire, too often 
there rose up between him and the leading article 
two proud passionate eyes. At snch times the fate of 
nations was as dost in the balance against the fate of 
a certain unhappy young lady in the great house two 
miles distant. 

All this gave additional restraint and hesitation 
to his manner towards Maud at times, additional 
abruptness to it at others. But however vigilant a 
guard he might set upon his looks and words, no 
woman can ever be long deceived in such cases. 

Maud Pomeroy was no coquette. To play with 
the feelings of any man was not sport to her taste, 
least of all with a man whom she regarded as she 
did John Miles. She, too, was . not without her 
dream of what love might be ; of some possible man 
to whom she could be devoted, body and soul, and 
for whom she would sacrifice the whole world ; but it 
was not the curate. She reverenced his charactei^, 
and honoured his opinions, even when they were 
diametrically . opposed to her own. In discussion 



IN THAT STATE OF LITE. 19 

with Sir Andrew, Miles's manly independence of 
spirit always delighted Mand. She was too mach 
accustomed to see every one bow down before Sir 
Andrew, not to valne the firmness with which a shy 
and awkward yonng man opposed many of the 
arrogant old baronet's pet theories. John Miles's 
was often a difficult position, sitting at Sir Andrew's 
table, and hearing opinions broached which he held 
to be pernicious. The manner in which, without 
forgetting the respect due to Sir Andrew's age and 
position, the curate never shrank from pointing out 
what was fallacious in the baronet's statements, gave 
Miss Pomeroy a high opinion of his honesty and 
moral fearlessness. She had talked to him, ther'e- 
fore, with less reserve than she had ever done to an'y 
other human being ; and it was with sorrow that she 
found herself compelled to renounce this privilege. 
She very rarely, now, spoke to him with the same 
openness as of old. They met in the village and' 
discussed the temporal wants of some old woman, 
during which interviews poor Miles always appeared 
to the worst advantage, in the eager desire not to 
betray his feelings, and to mete out to Miss Pomeroy 
the same measure he would have accorded to any 



20 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

other young lady. Or he dined np at the great house, 
and shuffled uncomfoftahly with his large feet (in 
boots to which a good deal of grayel had adhered in 
his walk) upon the polished oak floors, and crumbled 
the bread incessantly while he was talking at dinner, 
which little tricks distressed Maud almost as much as 
they did Lady Herriesson. At such times he and 
Miss Pomeroy had seldom much conyersation. 

One day, however, a circumstance happened which 
made Maud, in her anger, resolye on applying to the 
curate for help. Her maid, to whom she was really 
attached, and who had been a girl out of John Miles's 
school, had just been dismissed by Sir Andrew for a 
grave dereliction of duty. She had, contrary to strict 
orders, which forbade any villagers from entering the 
park, brought in a party of boys and girls there, 
surreptitiously, one Sunday afternoon, and had there 
been discovered by Sir Andrew. He was of those 
men who pride themselves upon never forgiving a 
fault in a servant. In vain Maud interceded^ sup^ 
plicated : Mary Hind went away that day month. A 
few days afterwards Miss Pomeroy met John Miles 
in the village. She stopped him. 

*'Poor Mary is gone, Mr. Miles. I did all I 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 21 

could, but it was no use. My object now is to get 
her a good place, and you, who knew her in the. 
school, who know what a thoroughly good girl she is, 
must help me" 

" Certainly, Miss Pomeroy. Where is she gone ?*' 

'* To an aunt in Bristol. Since her mother's 
death, you know, she has no home here." 

" What is it I can do. Miss Pomeroy ? Lady 
Herriesson giyes her a character, I suppose ? *' 

*' Not such a one as I think Mary deserves ; not 
one that I think must ensure her getting a good place. 
Mamma, of course, is guided by Sir Andrew. They 
both talk about that innocent Sunday walk as if it 
were the greatest crime ! " 

John Miles coloured to the roots of his hair, but 
said, boldly : " The walk in itself was innocent 
enough, but we must be just. Miss Pomeroy. Dis- 
obedience to * a direct order, if not the ' greatest 
crime,' is certainly a yery graye offence in a 
servant." 

" I know you think disobedience a very grave 
offence in any one" she said, quickly*. " We all 
ought to do exactly what we are told by those whom 
chance has placed in authority over us. Only when 



22 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

there is injastice and tyranny, it is not so easy always 
to bow down one's head to the yoke." 

John paused, and then quietly replied, after some 
effort: "I don't know about injustice and tyranny, 
Miss Pomeroy, but the whole condition of servitude 
, Seems to me to consist in doing what you are told. It 
is not chancOi but free will that elects that condition, 
and the servant who takes wages without obeying his 
master is guilty of a fraud . is not strictly honest." 

" Then you will not give Mary a certificate . such 
a one as I want her to have, Mr. Miles ? I can only 
say your school produces miracles of probity if it 
turns out many such girls, and I. am disappointed." 

He saw that she was annoyed, and it distressed 
him. She was about to pass on, but he stopped her. 

''One instant: pardon me. Miss Pomeroy; you 
misunderstood me. I shall be too glad, as clergy- 
man of this parish, to giye Mary Hind an excellent 
certificate, having known her, first in school, and 
then in service, for the last four years, and having 
always bad a high opinion of her. Of the fault 
which has caused her discharge I only know by hear- 
say, and therefore can say nothing ; moreover, it is 
not in my province, but in that of her employers, to 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 23 

state the cause of her leaving them. It was only/' 
he added, colouring again, and with some hesitation, 
''because I thought, in defiuiding your prot6g4e, you 
were not quite just to Sir Andrew, that I said what 
I did." 

''I do him full justice," she replied, with a bitter 
smile. ''After I had exhausted my eloquence in 
trying to induce him to forgive Mary's first misde- 
meanor. ;/ir, remember, in three whole years . Sir 
Andrew reminded me that she was not my servant, 
but his, that he paid her wages and her board, which 
argument was, of course, unanswerable. I could 
only rejoin that he should not be at the expense of 
another maid for me. I preferred henceforward doing 
without one. Mamma has been for the last month 
trying to make me give in, but I won't." 

" Do you think there is any merit in that ? *' 
asked John, in a low voice. 

" I don't know about merit, but I know I was 
attached to Mary; and I'd rather be independent 
than have a woman I don't like about me, or, if I 
shovid like her, to be subject to her being sent off by 
Sir Andrew. Do you know that he has now forbidden 
my poor old Oscar to come into the bouse because 



24 IN THAT STATE OF IFE. 

his paws were dirty the other day ? Jt seems to be 
enough that I should be fond of any creature for it to 
be banished." 

It wrung John's heart to hear her speak thus, but 
he had to give utterance to other words than those 
his inmost soul was crying out. 

''You must remember that Sir Andrew is not 
fond of dogs " 

" Nor men either." 

** And one ought to try and put one's self^ not 
only in the position, but in the mind, temper, and 
education of those we judge. Miss Pomeroy." 

" What, into their worldliness and narrow-minded- 
ness ? It's no use, Mr. Miles, it's no use. I know 
all you would say, and I suppose you are right, only 
I can't see things as I ought. I am one of the stiff- 
necked. Good-by. I am ashamed to have kept you 
standing here so long. Send me that certificate for 
Mary, will you ? " 

She held out her hand, and he took it in silence. 
Then they went their several ways. 

The certificate was sent to Miss Pomeroy, who 
put it by in her desk until she could hear of a situa- 
tion for her discharged maid. 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 25 



CHAPTER n. 

When Maud Pomeroy said, *' Their only idea now is 
to get rid of me," a very distinct and growing canse 
of annoyance was present in her mind. Among those 
important guests who were at least once a year bidden 
to the great battues of Mortlands, was Mr. Durborough, 
of Durborough, one of the richest men in the county. 
He was a widower, of nearly two years' standing, 
without children, rapidly approaching fifty-five, and 
resolved to lose no time in replacing the late Mrs. 
Durborough, who had been of a sickly habit, by 
some strong healthy young woman, whose appear- 
ance should justify the reasonable hope that the 
direct line of Durboroughs might yet not become 
extinct. This selection of a spouse upon hygienic 
principles, akin to. those which determine the choice 
of a wet nurse, and uninfluenced by any other con- 



26 IN THAT STATB OF LIFE. 

sideration than that of birth . ^for Mrs. Dnrboroogh 
mast be well-born . was, it so happened, easy enoagh. 
In very early days after his '' bereavement/' as it was 
called, when on a visit to Mortlands, where he had 
not been since Maud had come to woman's estate, he 
cast the eye of speculation upon her fine well-grown 
. figure, and determined that she was the article he 
wanted. She was highly connected, and there was a 
certain fitness of things in the fact that she was the 
stepdaughter of even a greater man in the county 
than Mr. Durborough, which clinched the matter in 
his mind. As to her character, or mental qualifica- 
tions, he knew nothing, nor did it occur to him to 
inquire. Neither did the fiedntest idea obtrude itself 
upon him that his suit might not be successful. He' 
was Durborough, of Durborough : that was the ruling 
idea in his mind, which was of the narrowest dimen-i 
don. and she, though a healthy young woman of high 
family, was poor and dependent. Did the question 
admit of a doubt ? 

After this, it is perhaps unnecessary to say that 
years did not deal with him as they deal with most 
of us, sprinkling our hair with that salt whic^b is 
without savour, and bowing our backs to bear their 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 27 

increasiiig borden. Age only dried him up by slow 
degrees ; he was as spare and upright as at thirty ; 
his hair still brown, and his teeth sound ; there was 
no sign of decay in the wiry man of fifty-five. 

On this first visit, Mr. Durborough had done no 
more than cast an eye of speculation, as I have said, 
on Miss Pomeroy; and then drop a hint to Lady 
flerriesson, which he left for six months to germi- 
nate. And when fifteen months had decently elapsed 
since his '' bereavement," he came again to Mort- 
lands. By this time the hint had borne seed, and 
multiplied, and many little hints had left their ma- 
ternal nest, and fiown towards Maud. She was 
therefore prepared as much as possible to avoid the 
stiff silent man, whom pity for his loss had drawn 
her to notice occasionally six months before. He 
took her in to dinner every day : that she could not 
help ; but so speechless was he upon these occasions, 
that she made up her mind that Lady Herrieson's 
hopes had led her entirely to misapprehend the 
worthy widower. Then, again, she relaxed from her 
severity, and talked to him, and grew easy when she 
found how little impression her amenities made. 
So it came like a thunder-clap upon her when Sir 



28 IN THAT BTATE OF LIFE. 

Andrew Bent for her to his study, the day on which 
Mr. Durhorongh was to leave, and informed her that 
that gentleman had made a formal proposal for her 
hand. Amazed as she was, Maud couM hardly h^ 
laughing at this business-like method of tendering a 
contract. for life; but she simply replied that she 
must decline the honour Mr. Dnrborough had done 
her. Then the baronet asked her why ; and conde- 
scended to argue with her, as he rarely did wiiSi a 
woman, and when he found his arguments of no 
avail in changing her resolve, he dismissed her in 
great anger. But to Durborough, of Durborough, 
he softened the refusal in such terms as left it to be 
understood by that ardent suitor that a little maid- 
enly coyness alone rendered Miss Pomeroy unwiUing 
to accept him on so slight an acquaintance. 

" Come to us again in February or March," Sir 
Andrew had said (it was then November). ** G:irls 
like a little pressing, you know . a deuced deal of 
romance and nonsense about them . ^high-flown ideas, 
and all that They never like giving in all at once ; 
but come again in three or four months' time, and 
you'll find, Durborough, it will be all right." 

Then Mr. Durborough had gone away, if not 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 29 

satisfied, at least no more than mildly snrprised that 
any girl should be found not to snatch eagerly, even 
at the expense of maidenly coyness . at the allaring 
prospect of becoming Mrs. Dorborough, of Dnr- 
borough. 

Sir Andrew, from that day forward, trusting to 
the old Latin adage, that dropping water will wear 
away a stone, began a system towards his step- 
daughter, in which he was ably seconded by her 
mother. WeH might Maud declare, "Their only 
idea is to get rid of me/' Durborough's merits as a 
man "universally respected," Durborough's lineage, 
Durborough's rent-roll, the excellence of Durborough's 
Tenison, the high esteem in which Durborough's 
shorfhoms were held . almost every subject of dis- 
cussion at Mortlands was a well from which some 
drop of water was drawn to let ML upon the stone of 
Maud's heart. It is astonishing, when you are so 
minded, how every topic under the sun may be inge- 
niously made to serve a particular purpose. Maud 
grew positively to loathe the very name of Dur- 
borough. She said nothing ; but she felt all the more 
bitterly how they were trying to force her into this 
contract, against which body and soul alike rebelled. 



80 IN THAT STATE QF LIFE. 

And now February had come, and with it, Mr. 
Dnrborongh in person, by no means anxious as to 
the result of his visit, but rather with the quiet con- 
fidence of a GaBsar. Then Maud knew that a crisis 
was at hand, when she and her father-in-law would 
have a pitched battle, compared with which all former 
encounters were as mere skirmishes. But she was 
so dead-sick of her life, so weary of the monotony of, 
her days, and of the absence of any strong vital 
interests, that there were moments when she asked 
herself whether, after all, it might not be better to 
go away with this man, and have a home of her own, 
with a round of active duties, and be independent. 
Ay, but would she be independent, bound to such a 
man ? She knew that she would not ; and it was 
only for an instant that such an alternative suggested 
itself. Her nobler nature scornfully rejected the 
idea. If they wanted to get rid of her, let them do 
so ; she would gladly go out as a governess . earn 
her bread in any honest way, nay, beg it rather than 
sell herself, and commit perjury by swearing to love, 
honour, and obey a man whom she despised. 

It was Lady Herriesson who opened the trenches. 

In the dusk of the same evening on which 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 81 

Mr. Dnrborongh aniyed, Maud's stepmother called 
her into her boudoir, on some pretence, and shutting 
the door, drew her to a sofa near the fire. Lady 
Herriesson leaned back, and looked away from her 
daughter, straight into the burning embers. She 
had a paper-knife in her hand, and she balanced it 
between her delicate fingers, emphasising what she 
said occasionally by a weak upraising of the bit of 
ivory. Maud, on the contrary, sat erect, looking her 
mother foil in the fisuse, with her hands folded on her 
knees. 

** My dear, I hope you have made up your mind 
to be more reasonable. I hope you have thought 
seriously, and are prepared to listen to Mr. Dur- 
borough, now that he has returned . which, indeed, 
I am sure is more than any one had right to expect 
he would do, under " 

" I neither expected nor wished it," said Maud, 
quickly. 

" It really seems, my dear, like flying in the face 
of Providence, when everything that we could pos- 
sibly wish for ofiers, that you should set yourself 
against it in this . this shocking way. As Sir 
Andrew says, what do you expect ? Very few girls 



32 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

have such a chance of settling, and I really must say 
I think it ungratefhly after all Sir Andrew has done 
for you, to be so . so obstinate and headstrong." 

'' I don't wish to be ungratefal/' said Maud, with 
unnsoal gentleness. ^'I am very sorry to be a 
burden to Sir Andrew, and were there any other 
escape from the position in which I am, but by a 
majTiage which I know would be a sin, depend upon 
it, mamma, I would too gladly embrace it." 

'^ A sin, my dear ? That is such an exaggerated 
way of talking .... you are so very high-flown, as 
Sir Andrew skys. I am sure I am the last person 
who would urge you to do anything sinful ; and if 
Mr. Durborough wasn't highly principled, and all 
that, I wouldn't press you . I wouldn't, indeed. A 
man of that age, as Sir Andrew says, is just what 
you want to quell your impetuosity ; and as to love, 
love-matches, as a rule, turn out unhappily, there is 
no denying it. A marriage founded upon respect 
and esteem " 

" I have no particular respect or esteem for 
Mr. Durborough. Mamma, let us understand each 
other. You want to get rid of me ; it is very natural. 
I don't the least complain. I am in Sir Andrew's 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 33 

way, and he makes you feel it, as he does me. It is* 
much better that I should stay here no longer. Send 
me away, anywhere. Let me go and earn my bread 
somehow, and be no longer a burden upon your 
husband; but do not try and force me into this 
marriage, for I cannot and I will not do it ! " 

" Eeally, I don't know what to do, you are so 
violent, Maud ! Who wants you to * earn your 
bread ? ' Such an expression ! We only want to 
see you comfortably settled. It is a great anxiety . 
of course it is, and I am sure Sir Andrew has done 
everything for you, you could possibly expect, and it 
is very ungrateful of you talking in that way." 

'^ I am only saying the truth, mamma, and you 
know it. . . As to marrying for love, is it expecting 
too much that there should be some, on one side or 
the other ? Mr. Durborough has chosen me like a 
cow or a horse. For any ardent affection, I might 
as well marry my grandfather. If I can't love the 
man I marry, at least he can love me, and I won't 
marry one who chooses me like a cow or a horse." 

She spoke with raillery, but Lady Herriesson 
knew that the substance of her daughter's words 
were said in sober earnest. She tried, in a weak 

3 



34 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

way, to prove that the strength of Mr. Durborough's 
affection was shown in his return to the charge after 
a first rebuff, but Maud was not to be taken in. 

" He comes back because Sir Andrew did not tell 
him all I said the first time, and assured him of 
success, perhaps, if he tried again. He had much 
better know at once that it is of no use. Will you 
tell Sir Andrew, mamma, or shall I ? " 

*' Oh, I wash my hands of it," murmured Lady 
Herriesson, with a helpless, deprecatory movement 
of the paper-knife. "You must talk to Sir Andrew 
yourself. I see that I have no influence over you ; 
you pay no attention to me. And, after all I have 

done for you, too, as Sir Andrew says " Here 

Lady Herriesson put her handkerchief to her eyes. 

" You are right, mamma. We had better not 
speak again upon this subject, you and I. It is use- 
less ; and I am only tempted to say a great many 
things I had better not say.*' With which speech 
Maud left her mother's boudoir. 

But the following morning, after breakfast, in 
Sir Andrew's study, that battle was fought in good 
earnest, which was to determine Maud's whole future 
career. 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 85 

Sir Andrew stood with his back to the fire, his 
coat-tails tamed up, his face very red, his eyes burn- 
ing angrily as he looked at Maud, who stood before 
him. He had placed a chair for her, when she had 
come in, but she had chosen to stand, and had been 
standing for the last quarter of an hour. All the 
veteran force of argument had been brought up, and had 
charged again and again,, and had been repulsed with 
loss. And now the enemy, inflamed with the rage 
and shame consequent on defeat, was preparing for a 
last attack, in which no quarter should be shown. 

" Pray, may I ask what you intend to do ? Per- 
haps you mean to marry the red-nosed parson, and 
live at my park-gates with a swarm of children, and 
expect me to support you?'* (Maud coloured, in 
spite of herself, as she thought of poor Miles.) " If 
you do, you're confoundedly mistaken. If you choose 
to make some disgraceful marriage, which I suppose 
you call romantiCf remember I have nothing further 
to say to you. I have already done a great deal 
more for you, and borne your airs with more patience 
than most men would have done, but I tell you fairly 
pay patience is exhausted . there ! Do you know 
what your position is, young lady ? You haven't a 



36 IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 

farthing in the world yon can call yonr own ! If it 
wasn't for me yon would be almost starving in a 
lodging in Torquay ! For seven years yon have lived 
in my house, and I defy any one to say I haven't 
behaved well to you. You've had a couple of horses 
of your own ; I have sent you to London, and paid 
your milliners' bills; you have never been denied 
anything you wanted, and this is the return you make 

me. You won't take a home of your own when it 
is offered you . a most unexceptionable offer in every 
respect, with settlements such as you may wait 
a long time before you get again. Pray, do you 
think I am going to keep you here, and indulge your 
confounded romantic rubbish, until some penniless 
blackguard takes your fancy ? " ' 

" Not if I can help it," said Maud, in a voice 
tremulous with indignation. ** I am conscious 
enough, Sir Andrew, of the obligations under which 
it has been my fate to be placed towards you, with- 
out being so delicately reminded of them . conscious 
enough to be most anxious to relieve you of the 
burden of my presence in your house as soon as 
possible. It cannot be too soon. But I will not 
relieve you, and myself too, of this burden by marry- 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 87 

ing an old man becanse he is rich, and holds out 
the indacement of leaving me a rich widow some day. 
I suppose that is what a large settlement means. 
When I marry, whether it be a ' penniless blackguard ' 
or not, I shall not look forward to widowhood as the 
consummation of earthly felicity. And, therefore, 
once for all, I do not choose to marry Mr. Dur- 
borough. I will not sell myself . no, not even to be 
independent of you. But for all that. Sir Andrew," . 
here the girl strove in vain to speak calmly, but angry 
sobs almost choked her, . ''depend on it, I shall 
not continue to trouble you here much longer. After 
what you have said . and I am glad you have spoken 
plainly at last . ^the sooner I leave your roof the 
better." 

She turned quickly to the door, and had left the 
study before her astonished adversary could find any 
fitting rejoinder. She ran upstairs and locked her- 
self into her room. Then she flung herself upon 
the bed, and the storm, like a* great wave, broke 
over her : the long-pent tears . tears of passion, and 
humiliation, and anguish . burst forth, until the 
bed shook under her as she lay and sobbed there with 
uncontrolled violence. 



38 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

It had come, then, at last. The crisis which she 
had long felt was imminent, which latterly, in her 
restless longing to he free, she had at times almost 
impatiently hoped for, had come. Words had been 
spoken which could never be forgotten, and the only 
thing left for her was to go. No matter how, no 
matter where, the main point now for her was, as 
soon as might be, to get out of this man's house, who 
had reproached her in the coarsest terms with her 
dependence upon him, and to shake the dust from off 
her feet in going. 

Then, after awhile, the tempest of outraged 
feelings subsided, leaving the sky, indeed, black and 
starless, but succeeded by that dead, cold calm in 
which alone permanent resolves are made. She 
would write to London by that day's post ; she would 
advertise for a situation of some sort ; but what ? 
What was she fit for ? Had she the patience and 
temper to be a nursery governess? Had she the 
education fitting her to be a schoolroom teacher? 
In these days of sewing-machines, could she support 
herself by her needle ? She asked herself these and 
similar questions, turning over in her mind twenty 
different schemes, and seeing the difficulties that 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 39 

beset each of them as she sat there, leaning her two 
elbows on the table, her*hot cheek resting on her 
hands, her keen bright eye fixed npon the wall 
opposite. 

Small accidents determine almost all the serious 
events of life. The Times was a paper Mand never 
read ; but the supplement of The Times several days 
ago had been brought up to Maud's room with some 
large photographs which she was going to mount; 
and there it still lay on the table. She had sat 
nearly an hour, immoveable, opposite this paper, 
when her eye fell on one of the columns of advertise- 
ments. ** Wanted," in conspicuous letters, ran all 
down this column. She drew it towards her, and 
began wearily spelling down the list of housekeepers, 
cooks, butlers, gardeners, whose remarkable merits, 
in their various ways, had hitherto been overlooked 
by an undiscriminating public. Then came an 
advertisement of another sort : a single gentleman 
who wanted a housekeeper ; his requirements seemed 
to be small, only he wished for ''a personal inter- 
view," and, upon the whole, Maud thought she would 
not answer this advertisement. She passed on to 
the next and the next; whatever the advertiser 



40 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

sought, whether goyerness, companion, or house- 
keeper, the necessary qualifications were such as 
Maud felt she had not. At last she came to the 
^llowing : . 

" Wanted immediatelji by a lady resident in the 
country, a young woman as second lady's maid, who 
is a good reader and writes a clear hand. Must make 
herself generally useful. High testimonials will be 
required. Address A. C, Post Office, Salisbury." 

She read this twice over. Why should she not 
answer it ? What was it to her whether she were 
called a servant or not? This sounded like the 
very thing for her. She could read aloud, and was 
quick at her needle. And as to making herself 
*' generally useful," in her present frame of mind she 
would hail any hard manual labour; had she not 
often longed for it at Mortlands? She was fit for 
nothing better than this ; she was not gifted or 
skilled in anything whereby she could earn her bread ; 
but this she felt she might conscientiously undertake^ 
And with all- her pride, she had none of that parti- 
cular kind which would have made her hesitate to 
take this step. Of course, it entailed an entire seve-* 
ranee from everything else in her past life. Under 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 41 

another name, unknown, she would begin a new 
existence ; her mother should hear from her occa- 
sionally, but the secret of her hiding should be care- 
fully kept, or she would be prevented from carrying 
out her intentions ; and she was now resolved that 
she would leave no stone unturned to cany them out, 
if it were possible. 

The chief difficulty that struck her at the outset 
was the matter of testimonials. How was she to 
procure such a one as would be satisfactory to the 
advertiser? Chance came to the aid of her quick 
intelligence, sharpened as it was by the craving to 
accomplish this thing. The afternoon's post brought 
her the following letter : . 

" Bristol, Feb. 14th. 

" Dear and Honor'd Miss. . This leaves Me well, 
as it hopes to find You. I have got, Dear Miss, a 
situwation^ but not such as you think, and was 
looking after, for Me. Mr. Joseph Hart, that is a 
carpinter in this city, and a good business, has been 
visiting at Aunt's of Sunday evenings, and him and 
me is engaged to be married. Dear Miss. He is a 
little fellow, but he is very Respectable, if You 



42 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

please, Miss, and he can keep me comfortable, which, 
and he says I shan't have to do no work, but mind 
the honse. So this, dear Miss, is a better situwation 
then ever I expected to get, and our Bands is to be 
called next Sunday. And knowing you will like to 
hear it, Miss, I write this, and please to tell Mr. 
Miles with my duty. And I am with afifecte respect, 
Dear Miss, 

" Your obedt. Servt, 

" Maby Hind." 

This letter gave Maud real pleasure. She was 
not so engrossed by her own selfish troubles as to 
be unable to smpathise with her little maid, in whose 
future she had taken so keen an interest, and she sat 
down and answered that letter on the spot. Then, 
after a while, an idea struck her, an idea which she 
at first rejected as unjustifiable, but which, on second 
thoughts (they are anything but " the best " very 
often) she deliberately took up again, argued its 
claims to consideration, and finally adopted. This 
was the making use of that testimonial which Mr. 
Miles had written for Mary Hind, now that it could 
be of no use to the girl, and adopting that name as 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 43 

her own. That this was a very grave offence, and 
one punishahle by law, certainly never clearly pre- 
sented itself to Hand's mind. In her eagerness to 
solve a difficulty which seemed absolutely insur- 
mountable, she caught at an expedient which, if not 
strictly right, could at least do no harm to any one. 
All the virtues wherewith Mr. Miles had accredited 
the little school-girl in his certificate, would he not 
have amplified upon them largely, had he been 
writing of Maud ? In the character given there was 
no deception, only in the name of its bearer. And 
what was in a name ? It was thus she argued with 
her conscience, until she had persuaded it to allow 
her to make use of the writing in her desk. 

She had time to write her letter, and walk with 
it to the village post . she would not trust to the 
prying eyes of servants over the post-bag . and 
back again in the dusk, before the first dinner-bell 
had rung. But John Miles caught sight of her 
from a cottage-window, and wondered what could 

bring Miss Pomeroy to the village post-office at that 
hour in the evening. 



44 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 



CHAPTER in. 

Maud had no compunction, no doubt or misgiving ai^ 
to what she had done, when she got home. Her only 
thought was, "If this fail, what can I do ? I must 
quit Mortlands : but where am I to go ? " 

Lady Herriesson had been to her daughter's room, 
but had not found her there. No one had seen her 
since the morning, for even Maud's courage had not 
enabled her to come down to luncheon : and her 
mother, knowing the result of Sir Andrew's attempt 
to bring Maud to reason, was seriously disquieted* 
She would be so headstrong ! And Sir Andrew's 
wrath was so justly kindled against her ! It was 
really most distressing. Two ladies who were stay- 
ing in the house, and who, of course, knew all about 
it, condoled with Lady Herriesson, and informed the 
county afterwards how beautifully she had behaved, 
und how she had succeeded in smoothing matters 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 45 

oyer, to all appearance, at least. For, at dinner, 
Hand came down, looking very mnch as usual, and 
though she did not speak to Sir Andrew, she did to 
Mr. Durhorough, and seemed anxious that the even- 
ing ^ould pass ofif as little disagreeably as possible. 
Of course, every one, down to the footmen behind 
their chairs, knew that there had been *^ a jolly row 
between Sir Andrew and the young missis," and that 
Mr. Durborough and his acres had been ignomi- 
niously rejected by the young lady. The knowledge 
of this did not tend to make any one feel very com- 
fortable, and Lady Herriesson's preternatural efforts 
to appear as if nothing particular were the matter, 
while she furtively glanced at Sir Andrew's scowling 
face between the flowers of the epergne, could deceive 
no one. But Maud acted the part she had deter* 
mined to play, courageously, as she did most things ; 
for the short time she should remain under this roof, 
let there be, at least, peace ; she would set a guard 
upon her tongue, and upon her eyes, both too apt to 
be delinquents as she well knew ; and she would 
resolutely- decline all further discussion with either 
Sir Andrew, or her mother. 

Mr. Durborough ate, as his own servant observed, 



46 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

'^ uncommon hearty, for one who's had the sack 
given him.'* He was silent ; but that he always 
was; and it transpired that he meant to return to 
Durborough the following morning ; this was the 
only evidence that Sir Andrew had annihilated his 
hopes, by at last telling him the unvarnished truth. 
And the next day, he did, after an excellent break- 
fast, shake hands with the ladies all round, and step 
into his barouche, rigid and unmoved as ever ; and 
having recovered from his astonishment at Maud's 
conduct, and grown to regard her with the com- 
miseration due to a fitting candidate for Bedlam, he 
thought of his crops, during at least half of his twenty 
miles' drive home. 

Lady Herriesson had made one more feeble effort 
to appeal to her daughter's feelings that last night, 
by asking her to come to her room and talk to her, 
as they were going up to bed. Maud kissed her step- 
mother. 

" Now if it is about Mr. Durborough or Sir 
Andrew, mamma. . . . More than enough has been 
said. I had rather not, if you please, discuss the 
matter any more. Anything else you have to say to 
me, I will listen to." 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 47 

Then had Lady Herriesson sighed, and shaken 
her head very sadly . as was distinctly witnessed by 
the two visitors at the top of the stairs ; and she and 
her daughter had parted, and passed onwards. 

The following day, the one on which Mr. Dur- 
borongh took his departure . was without incident 
worth record. Sir Andrew did not speak to Maud 
when she came down to breakfast (which, as the 
visitors agreed afterwards, she fully deserved), and as 
soon as Mr. Durborough's barouche had driven away, 
he ordered his horse, and rode into the petty sessions 
at Scomton. The sharp administration of justice 
was a wholesome vent to the baronet's irritability, no 
doubt, for when he appeared at dinner that night, he 
was very much as usual, and perpetrated two dreary 
jokes, at which the lady- visitors and their husbands 
laughed, as in duty bound. These men, being distant 
connections of Sir Andrew's, must, by all the conven- 
tional laws of what is right, stay at Mortlands once a 
year ; but, being persons of no particular considera- 
tion, were bidden at what might be called odd times. 
Their presence now was an inestimable relief to 
Maud } . they were all toadies of the lowest description, 
who acted as chorus to Sir Andrew or her mother, in 



48 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

a way that made Mand sick ; but she felt grateful to 
them now, for they broke that terrible trio. 

Immediately after breakfast next morning, Maud 
harried down to the village post-office. She had not 
slept all night; she was in a fever of excitement. 
There, sure enough, lay the letter directed, as Maud 
had requested, to M. H., in a cramped foreign-looking 
hand, with the Salisbury post-mark, and " Beckworth 
House " stamped in blue on the reverse side of the 
envelope. The post-mistress stared as, in reply to 
Maud's inquiry, she delivered this letter to her, and 

the young lady walked rapidly away. She tore open 
the cover ; she could not wait even until she got into 
the park, but began reading the letter as she went 
down the street. 

*' Mrs. Cartaret has received Mary Hind's letter. 
It is satisfactory ; and so is the testimonial, as far as 
it goes ; but it says nothing, whether she has been in 
service already. Mrs. Cartaret desires to see Mary 
Hind, in order to judge for herself. She is not easy 
to please. Her place is not an easy one. She will 
pay M. H.'s travelling expenses to Beckworth House 
(and back, should she not keep her), and give her a 
month's wages, at the rate of twenty pounds a year 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE, 49 

for a few days' trial. Mrs. Gartaret allows no fol- 
lowerSy nor any light conduct. She will haye no 
flowers nor tails. Mary Hind will be under the 
housekeeper, whom she must obey and treat with 
respect. She must not quarrel with her fellow-ser- 
vants, or give herself airs. Many maids have left on 
this account. Mary Hind had better start at once. 
Beckworth House is eight miles from Salisbury, and 
the train will drop her at the park-gate." 

Perhaps Maud had hardly realised what her posi- 
tion was to be until sha read this ; for the colour 
mounted into her cheeks when she came to the '* fol- 
lowers " and the ** light conduct." , . . Well, never 
mind. The main thing was that she was to be tried ; 
that a door was opened to her (though only ajar, as it 
were) by which she might escape, and no longer eat 
her stepmother's husband's bread, but earn it for 
herself. This was everything. " Thank God ! " 
she said, almost aloud. '* Farewell to fine-ladyism, 
and all the hollowness of a wretched life, without 
anything to do, and in dependence on a man I des- 
pise. Welcome honest servitude and hard work ! " 
She liked decision and plain-speaking, qualities which 
certainly distinguished this letter, written tb what 

4 



50 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

was believed to be a village girl, who had won golden 
opinions from the carate. There was nothing in it 
that onght to annoy her ; but she began to see, for 
the first time clearly, what it was she was undertaking. 
She, who knew herself to be singularly impatient of 
control, was about to enter upon a life the first condi* 
tion of which was implicit obedieilce. Mary's delin* 
quency on that score crossed her mind, and all that 
Mr. Miles had said about it. And just as she had 
reached this point in her reflections, she heard behind 
her a long swinging step, and the very voice she was 
at that moment thinking of called out : . '^ I beg your 
pardon. Miss Pomeroy, but I think you have just 
dropped this letter." 

She felt that she changed colour as she held out 
her hand for it, and she looked up into his ace, in 
her quick, keen way, as if trying to read his thoughts. 

'^ How did you know that it was mine ? ... as 
the . . . address . . .'' 

'^ I saw you drop it as I was leaving the school, 
but you walked at such a pace. Miss Pomeroy, I had 
some difficulty in catching you up without taking to 
running." 

She hesitated for a moment. He had, of course, 



IN THAT STATE OF LIPB. 51 

seen the address, and she felt she must offer some 
explanation of this, or his suspicions might be 
aroused. 

''I suppose you guessed whose initials these 
are ? " she said, pointing to the address ; but, her 
manner, as Miles afterwards remembered, had not its 
usual directness : it was troubled, and she turned her 
eyes away from him as she spoke. *' I have written 
to a lady about Mary Hind. I hope to get her a 
place, but ... for many reasons . . . I desired this 
lady not to write to me . . . that is, at the house. 
Indeed, the letter is addressed to Mary herself.'* 

" I hope she will get the place. Miss Pomeroy. 
Have you sent my testimonial ? '* 

" I have.'' 

" And do you know anything of the lady ? What 
is her name ? " 

"I know nothing of her. She is a stranger," 
replied Maud, rapidly, gliding over the other question. 
** If Mary gets the place, she will owe it entirely to 
you, Mr. Miles. . . . I hope she will be happy. . . . 
Do you think if people do their duty . ^in any state of 
life . ^they must be happy, Mr. Miles ? " 

He paused before answering her question. It 



52 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

was the village gossip that she Tvas to be married to 
Mr. Dnrborough, and he thought, with a pang, thai 
her question had reference to this. At last he said^ 
slowly : . '^ It depends upon whether the state of- life 
is one to which we are called, or whether we choose it 
for ourselves, having our eyes open to the knowledge 
of good aiid evil. When Providence places us in a 
certain position, without our own free will having 
anything to do with it, I believe - that the faithful 
discharge of duty does ensure a certain measure of 
happiness. When we deliberately leave that state of 

life for another " 

He broke off; but, incomplete as the sentence 
was, its meaning was clear to Maud ; and, inter* 
preting it as she did, its immediate application to her 
own case startled her so much that she looked into 
John Miles's face once more, with anxious scrutiny. 
His eyes were bent upon the ground, his lips trembled, 
and there was a slight contraction of the brow which 
told Maud that the man was suffering keenly. She 
could not see, indeed, all that was passing in his 
mind ; but something of it she guessed, and she felt 
sare that no suspicion of her resolve was there. Sir 
Andrew's sarcasm crossed her mind. Alas ! how 



IK THAT STATE OF LIFS. 53 

much better fi)r her, perhaps^ would it have been bad 
fihe retnmed this fisdtbfaly upright man's love, and 
found a refuge by his cottage fire, instead of seeking 
it on the wide world ! It had fallen to her lot to 
meet with so little love in life^ that she could not but 
feel gratitude and compassion, and a certain tender 
zegretfulnesSy as she looked up at that honest red- 
nosed face, and thought that this might be the last 
time she should ever see it. 

Perhaps the feminine desire that he should not 
think too ill of her when she had disappeared, no one 
could say whither, prompted her to say at last: . 
*' Mr. Miles. I think I am going to leave Mortlands 
before long. The world will abuse me very much, 
but you are not of the world, and know something of 
what I have suffered here . something of what has 
led to detennine me on taking this step. You will 
not be too harsh in your judgment, will you ? You 
have always been very kind, and have given me good 
advice, which, unfortunately, it was not in my nature 
to follow. Well, you will have one stubborn sheep 
the less in your fold ! But do not think I have been 
ungrateful. I wanted to tell you so before I go, and 
I may not have another opportunity: I shall never 



54 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

forget your kindness to me as long as I live, Mr. 
Miles." 

Poor John ! It was with great difiSculty that he 
managed to say calmly, . "Pardon me. Perhaps I 
have no right to ask it, hat have you well weighed the 
solemn, irrevocahle nature of the step you are about 
to take ? " 

Quick as lightning the truth of what he helicTed 
flashed upon her; but she dared not undeceive him. 
She could only reply, " I have." 

" Oh ! Mi^s Pomeroy, before it is too late, pause, 
pause, I beseech you, and if " 

" It i too late. My decision is made." 

" Then I can only say, God prosper you ! and 
may He so order your life that you never have cause 
to regret it ! " 

** If a good man's prayers avail anything, I know 
I have them," said Maud, tremulously, for John 
Miles's emotion, which he could not quite control, 
had infected her. " Good-by, Mr. Miles." 

They had reached the park-gate. He wrung her 
han* in silence, and passed iiito his cottage. And I 
believe, in the solitude of his own closet, where he 
sat with his face buried in his hands, motionless, for 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 56 

an honr or more, ihat those prayers, the fervent out- 
pourings of the young man's heart, rose, as Maud 
predicted that they would. And who shall say that 
they availed nothing in the end ? 

The next morning, when Maud appeared neither 
at prayers, nor at the hreakfast-table, Lady Herriesson 
desired that her own maid should go up to Miss 
Pomeroy's room, and see if she was unwell. Presently 
Lady Herriesson was called out of the breakfast- 
room, and found her. maid looking rather pale. Miss 
Pomeroy's door was locked. The housemaid had 
left some hot water therq at eight o'clock, according 
to Miss Pomeroy's general orders (for since Mary 
Hind's departure she would allow no one into her 
room until she was dressed), and there the jug still 
stood. They had knocked, and knocked, but there 
was no reply. Lady Herriesson, in much trepi- 
dation, now went up herself . but with no better 
results ; Sir Andrew followed, to see what was the 
matter, and found his wife in hysterics, and the farm- 
carpenter taking off the lock of the door. In a 
couple of minutes it swung back, and Sir Andrew 
walked into the room. It was empty. He glanced 
at the bed ; it had not been, slept in. Upon the table 



56 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

lay a letter directed to Lady Herriesson : he thrast it 
into his wife's hand, and stood over her while the 
poor lady,' in her bewilderment and terror, read as 
follows : . 

^'Deab Mamdia, . ^I am afraid yon will be angry 
when you find that I have left Mortlands without 
telling yon where I was going ; but, at all events, do 
not be alarmed about me, as I am qaite safe. I am 
going to try and earn my bread : I can no longer be 
a burden upon Sir Andrew, and, having disappointed 
him and you as to this marriage, I feel doubly that it 
is my duty to try and provide for myself in some 
other way. Do not be the least uneasy about me : I 
am strong, and have plenty of courage, and havings 
I think, no false pride, prefer work to a life of in- 
action and dependence. Pray do not attempt to trace 
me; it would do no good, even if you succeeded* 
You shall hear from me soon, when I hope to be able 
to tell you that I am happy . which I have not been 
for a long, long time Accept my sincere thanks for 
all your kindness and care of me for eighteen years, 
and believe me to be 

'* Yours affectionately, Maud.'! 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 57 

It is needless to say that Lady Herriesson relapsed 
into hysterics on reading this, and Sir Andrew raged 
in a very terrible manner. Was there eyer anything 
so monstronSy so utterly inconceivable as such 
conduct? That any one belonging to him should 
disgrace herself thus . should make herself the talk 
of the whole country-side, and run off in this shameful 
way, and then, to crown the enormity, proclaim that 
she was gone to earn her bread ! Good God ! such a 
thing as this he had never even heard of in the whole 
coarse of his experience ! The girl, if caught, must 
be treated as a lunatic ; and to shut her up would save 
her, perhaps, from a worse fate ; for what could one 
expect such a creature, who set all laws, all authority 
at defiance, to come to ? 

Of course, messengers were sent in all directions 
to the nearest railway-stations, and all the neighbour'^ 
ing villages, but nothing could be heard of the 
missing young lady. The news reached John Miles, 
on the swift wing of rumour brought from the great 
house, very early in the day. 'Liza rushed in, heavily 
laden, and discharged the intelligence,* much as she 
was wont to empty the coal-box upon the fire . fall at 
him. And, strange to say, he was less horrified than 



58 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

any one. He was grieved that she had taken such a 
step (he knew nothing of its object, of course) ; but 
he felt that even this, reprehensible as it was, was 
better than her emancipating herself from her detested 
life by marriage with a man like Mr. Durborough. 
He tried to assure himself that his own hopeless love 
had nothing to say to this sense of relief in finding 
that she had not consented to be another's ; but that 
it was purely because that other was unworthy of her, 
and that, knowing Maud's character, he knew that 
had she so consented to perjure herself, she would 
have been an utterly miserable woman. At all events 
there was the thankfulness at his heart that she had 
not done this thing ; and however the world . especi- 
ally the world of Mortlands-^might view the extra- 
ordinary step she had taken, it was only with sorrow 
he thought of it, as complicating the difficulties of her 
position with regard to Sir Andrew. He had very 
little doubt that she had gone to some friend in 
London, and would be heard of in the course of a day 
or two. And on the morning of the fifth day a letter 
did come ; but so short, bald, and vague in its con- 
tents, that Lady Herriesson's disquietude could by 
no means be allayed. Maud wrote, indeed, that she 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 59 

was well, and happy ; bat that was all. There was 
no cine to where, or in what capacity, she was liying. 
The post-mark on the letter was '^ Bristol." The 
poHce in that city were communicated with : they 
could obtain no clue to the mystery. 

Sir Andrew would have inserted an advertisement 
in The Times, but for his dread of increasing the 
publicity of this disgraceful scandal. All attempts to 
hush up, or explain away, the young lady's disappear- 
ance were, of course, useless. It was very soon 
generally known ; but it was also known that no 
allusion was to be made to it before Sir Andrew. 
She was supposed to be '' on a visit.'* And in this 
uncomfortable state matters remained for three weeks, 
durmg which John Miles's anxiety to learn what had 
really become of. Maud, became naturally greater 
every day. It was then that a trifling incident 
occurred which aroused all the active energy of the 
man's nature; for it seemed to him to have some 
possible bearing upon Miss Pomeroy's fate. 



60 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 



CHAPTER IV. 

It was a still, mild night in February. There were 
a few stars, and but for them it was quite dark, 
when Maud unbolted the side door, and let herself 
out upon the terrace. It was then past two o'clock, 
and the household had been in bed at least an hour 
and a half. She had calculated that it would take 
her nearly two hours to walk into Scomton, where 
the train passed about four o'clock. There were two 
stations nearer to Mortlands, but at each of these 
the porters were familiar with her face, whereas at 
Scomton she was comparatively unknown. The 
darkest and shabbiest clothes she could find, and a 
double veil tied over her face, the little money she 
possessed in her purse, and an umbrella in her hand 
. thus was she equipped. She had to pass the gate* 
way of the stable-yard, just inside which was Oscar's 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 61 

kennel, and, at the sound of a footstep on the gravel, 
the dog began' barking fdriously. Bat she had only 
to call to him, and he was instantly silent, wagging 
his long shaggy tail in friendly recognition, as she 
approached him. " My poor Oscar . no ! poor old 
boy, I am not come to unchain you. You and I 
shall take no more walks together, no more solitary 
rambles over happy hunting-grounds. Good-by, dear 
old dog, who have been such a faithful friend and 
companion to me ; no one will miss me here but 
you." She stooped down and kissed his rough grey 
head, and it seemed almost as though Oscar under- 
stood her meaning. He placed his two paws upon 
her shoulders, and whined. Maud felt more in 
parting from her dog, I believe, than in parting from 
her stepmother. 

She was an excellent walker ; the night was fine, 
the road was good, and she was not troubled with 
nervousness. Twice when she heard the hob-nailed 
tread of countrymen upon the road, she thought it 
as well to stand aside under the shadow of the hedge 
till they were passed; but she had small fear of 
being molested; her only fear was that of being 
recognised. At the station, she had a quarter of an 



1 



62 IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 

i 

hour, which seemed like three, to wait for the train. 
In the waiting-room there was a poor woman with a 
baby, and a bag-man with a black leather case, which 
he never let ont of his hand ; and both were so 
oceapied with their separate charges, that they 
scarcely looked at the qniet woman in the comer, 
with an impenetrable veil on. She waited to take 
her ticket till the train was actually alongside the 
platform : she then stepped, nnobserved , into an 
empty second-class compartment, and felt that she 
was safe. 

It was so early when she reached Salisbury that 
none of the shops were open ; and the train for 
Beckworth did not leave till ten o'clock. She had a 
cup of coffee and a crust of bread, and then, acting 
upon the plan she had arranged, she set out to 
wander about the quaint old town, until she could 
see the shutters being taken down from some ^* slop 
shop," or ready-made clothes warehouse, Yrhere she 
might procure what she required. She threaded the 
still sileiit streets, lit by the pale Hght of the winter 
daybreak, until she came to the Close, and found 
herself standing before that perfect old building, the 
cathedral. Presently a decrepit old man made his 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE, 63 

way across the green, and unlocked a side-door. 
There was to be an early service, and he was come 
to put all in order : Maud followed him. Hers was 
not what may be called a religious temperament. 
She had not found, perhaps she had not looked for, 
much comfort in church services ; and when she bent 
her knees each morning, it was to confess, indeed, 
that she was unworthy of the least of all God's gifts, 
but not that she sought for strength to meet the 
trials of the day. Those trials were not of a kind 
that most readily lead such natures to look for help 
beyond this world; Devastating sorrows, great shocks 
of fortune, and the like, may bring even the proudest 
and least dependent souls to turn their eyes to '^ the 
hills whence cometh our salvation : " but the irrita- 
tions of daily life rarely kindle a great faith. 

She had decided, in her impetuous way, that this 
strange and hazardous enterprise was a right thing 
for her to undertake; and, having so decided, she 
had acted without doubt or misgiving as to her own 
conduct. But the feverish excitement under which 
she had been living for the last few days had now 
somewhat abated; fpr the first decisive step from 
which there was no drawing back was taken ; and 



64 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

now after her night's journey as she slowly paced the 
sacred aisle, from which the shadows were being 
driyen in the strengthening daylight, the reaction 
began: a sense of her own solitnde, of her ntter 
friendlessness in the world npon which she had 
chosen to cast herself, came over her like a great 
wave. Sorely she had done well ? Was not inde- 
pendence the noblest state after which any of God's 
creatures could strive ? And, on the other hand, was 
it not a Tile thing for any human being, capable of 
earning her own bread, to live upon the charity of 
one whom she despised, and who did not conceal his 
desire to be rid of the incumbrance ? Surely it was 
true that Ood helps those who help themselves? 
And then some desire to ask that help came upon 
her, and, half -unconsciously, she slid down upon her 
knees beside a pillar, and prayed as she had never 
done before. 

*' Come, mum, you must be a-movin' on. No 
prayers allowed 'ere, in the nave. Beg'lar prayers, 
if you wants 'em, at momin' service, in a quarter of 
a hour." 

Maud started to her feet, and with a look of 
indignation at the doorkeeper of the House of God, 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFH. 65 

walked quickly away. Bat those few minutes left 
their mark npon her throaghoat that day. 

After wandering about the streets for some time, 
she came to a shop which provided all that she 
required. Her black silk she exchanged for a grey 
alpaca ; her bonnet for one which had no remnant of 
young-ladyhood about it; and a carpet-bag, full of 
such articles as were absolutely necessary, but all 
of the plainest and coarsest description, was hoisted 
upon the back of a boy, and carried for her to th6 
station. 

Maud got into an empty second-class ; but this 
time she was not to be alone : just as the train was 
starting, a florid patent-polished man of forty, or 
thereabout, bustled into the carriage, with two large 
hampers, and took his seat upon the bench opposite 
Maud, but not directly in front of her, by reason of 
her carpet-bag, which, being on the floor beside her, 
formed a barricade. The man, no doubt, in his own 
class of life, was reckoned eminently well-looking. 
There was a good-humoured smirking self-satisfaction 
in his face which told of bodily comfort, mental ease, 
and general social success. The glossy blackness of 
his whiskers, which depended low over his waistcoat, 

5 



66 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

the oily undulations of his hair, the beady blackness 
of his eyes, resembled a portrait done on glazed 
card-board with a B B pencil. By the time it had 
reached the nose and mouth the point of the pencil 
had become somewhat coarse and blunted. But the 
artist had been eminently successful in the clothes. 
How beautifully black and smooth they were ! What 
attention he had paid to that satin stock, transfixed 
with two pins connected by a chain, to the glittering 
watch-guard and seals, to the cornelian ring upon 
the finger ! How one felt that, if exhibited in a 
shop window, and ticketed, '^ In this styl^, seven and 
sixpence," the admiration of a discerning public 
would lead them to go and be "done" likewise!. 

Maud did not take in all these details at a glance, 
and it was no more than a glance she gave to her 
fellow-traveller ; then she turned her head, and 
looked resolutely out of window. But the train was 
scarcely in motion when he began, with an oily brisk- 
iiess of voice and manner : . " Fine morning for the 
time of year, miss ? " 

" Yes." 

" Going far on the rail ? What station ? " 

"Beckworth." 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 67 



f( 



Beally ? Indeed ! That's enrioos now. I don't 
know yonr bee. You're a stranger in these parts, 
eh?" 

^' Yes, I am/' said Maud, shortly : she did not 
fancy this interrogatory, and looked out of window 
again. 

** I know most of the feuses about Beckworth." A 
pause : then, seeing that this drew forth no reply, be 
added, with a captivating smile, *' And yours is too 
'andsome a one to be forgot." 

She turned round, and looked at him steadily, 
without a word. Nothing daunted, he continued, 
with a laugh: **No oflFence, I 'ope. It ain't the 
first time you've been told so, I'm sure. Going out 
to service, eh?" 

This time Maud only nodded her head . and it 
was half out of vmidow. How she wished her short 
journey at an end ! The man's familiarity was very 
offensive, and she made up her mind that sHe would 
answer no more of his questions. 

" Who are you going to ? Squire Bamby, or the 
Rectory ? Both close to us . can tell you all about 
'em." Still no reply. 

A full minute's pause. Then the same melli- 



68 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

fluons accents : ''No cause to cut up rusty, my dear, 
because I called you 'andsome* We shall be neigh- 
bours, and may as well make friends . eh ? Allow 
me to oflFer you a orange ? " 

He plunged his hand into one of the hampers and 
produced the fruit, which he held out with the seduc- 
tive air of a Satan tempting Eve. She thanked him, 
dryly, and shook her head, without looking at him. 

" In the kitchen, or the nursery, is it ? ** he pur- 
sued. " I *ope it ain't at the Eectory, that's all . 
they're regularly starved there, and such a fuss about 
broken victuals ! every crust and scrap used up, they 
tell me. Such mean ways wouldn't suit me, nor you, 
neither, I should say ? You look as if you'd bin used 
to good food, and plenty of it : ha, ha ! " 

Finding, at last, that he could get neither a word 
nor a smile from his fair travelUng companion, he 
made up his mind that she was, as he afterwards ex- 
pressed it, '' half-savage, and no ways used to good 
society ; a fine gal, . sir, very fine, but not genteel ; 
scowls at a compliment,. and snaps off your nose if 
you ask her a civil question." And so he left her 
in peace. 

And now the porters called out " Beckworth : " 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 69 

the man and his hampers bnstled oat ; there were 
greetings of a semi-respectfal, semi-familiar kind, 
offered to him by more than one person on the plat- 
form; the gaard blew his whistle, the train moved 
off, and Maud found herself standing alone, un- 
heeded, with her bag beside her, both porters being 
in attendance upon the hampers and their owner. 
She walked up to a little man with his hands in his 
pockets, whom she had seen talking with her fellow- 
traveiler a moment before, and whom she rightly 
guessed was the station-master. 

" In which direction is Beckworth House ? Can 
I get any one to carry my bag ? " 

" Is it the big house you want ? Mrs. Cartaret's ? 
Why there's Mr. Dapper just going up in the dog- 
cart.*' 

" Who is Mr. Dapper ? Not that man " 

" There, with thQ hampers, at the gate. He's 
Mrs. Cartaret's butler. Hello! Jem, you tell Mr. 
Dapper that this here young woman and her bag is 
going up to the house." 

It was a disagreeable little coincidence : Maud 
would have given a great deal not to perform that 
mile in the dogcart alongside a man against whom 



70 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

she felt such a repulsion ; but there was no help for 
it. What excuse could she give for avoiding so 
obvious a mode of transit? And would it not be 
the height of folly to enter upon her new career by 
what might reasonably be said to be "giving her- 
self airs?" Mr. Dapper and his hampers were 
already in the cart when she reached the gate. He 
looked at her with an amused smile. 

" So we*re not to part so soon after all? Ha! 
ha ! You're the new maid, I s'pose, that Mrs. C. 
has been advertising for ? Stupid of me not to have 
guessed it, only I didn't know the right article 'ad 
been found yet. There, settle yourself comfortable . 
wrap my plaid round you. Now, Tom, all right, let 
go her head ; the bag's in, ain't it ? OflF we go ; 
good-by, Mr. Tuckett. Well, to be sure ! only to 
think of our travelling together, and you never telling 
me you was coming to our 'ouse ! 'ore's the lodge-gate 
. easy, mare, easy ! Don't bolt now, you'll get back 
to your stable fast enough. There's the Eectory, out 
there in\ the trees, d'ye see ? That's where I made 
sure you was going ; but I'm glad it's us that is to 
have the good fortune " He concluded his sen- 
tence with an insinuating smile, and an expressive 



' IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 71 

flourish of his whip, which excited the mare more 
than he intended. But it was clear that Mr. Dapper 
was accustomed to handle the ribbons, and he rose 
just one degree above the freezing point of Maud's 
esteem, as she saw how skilfully he managed the hot- 
tempered mare, who would have fairly run away with 
a less expert driver. 

*' And now, you know my name . what's yours ? " 
he asked. 

" Hind." 

" Oh ; Miss 'ind ? Well, you see, I wasn't so 
far wrong in calling you a dear . Ha ! ha ! excuse me 
. no offence. It's only my way . ^you'll get accus- 
tomed to me in time I 'ope. . . . It's curious, now 
my going into Salisbury this morning, I who don't 
go, not once in six months. But fish and things 
was wanted in a 'urry, for company come unexpected 
.some of Mr. Lowndes's friends-and no time to 
get 'em from London: so Mrs. Cartaret and me 
arranged last night that I was to go in by the first 
train . which I'm not fond of getting up quite so 
early, to tell you the truth-^ha I ha ! " 

" Who is Mr. Lowndes ? " asked Maud, for the 
Bake of Baying something. 



72 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE* 

"Mrs. Gartaret's only son . Mr. Lowndes Gar- 
taret . a fine, wild young gentleman . runs down 'ere 
promiscuous, bringing company with 'im, without 
ever writing a word before 'and . just like *em ! . * . 
but she don't mind, bless you ! She wouldn't mind 
if he was to bring the' 'ole 'orse guards down with 
him . though she's a queer woman, and 'as her tan- 
trums, betimes  .  'Im and 'er 'as fine blows up 
now and then, but she just worships 'im, and lets 'im 
do mostly what 'e likes . and 'e knows all 'er little 
fads, and 'ow to manage 'er. She's 'alf French, you 
see, and foreigners 'ave queer ways. I'll put you up 
to a wrinkle. Miss 'ind. Don't you give way to 'er in 
everything, or you won't be able to call your life your 
own. You try and get round Mrs. Bouse. That's 
the woman. She's awful jealous of the new maids 
at fbst. Don't you let butter melt in your month 
when you're talking to 'er. But you stick up to 
Mrs. Gartaret. She likes to believe that she. orders 
everything . but, Lor' bless you, she'd never get on 
without a little 'olesome contradiction. 'Dapper,' 
says she to me last night, ' we'll 'ave that white 
Dresden service at dinner,' says she. I bow, and say 
nothing, and put on the old Indian. ' Dapper, 'ow'^ 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 78 

this ? * says she ; * I told you the \diit6 Dresden.' So 
then I says, says I, ^ Begging your pardon, ma'am, I 
found the white looked too cold for the season. Does 
yery well in the summer, ma'am ; but with your good 
taste you wouldn't 'ave liked it now . you wouldn't, 
indeed.' That's 'ow I manage 'er, Miss 'ind. 'Ave 
an opinion of your own. Now to Mrs. Bouse, on 
the contrary, you must knock under in everything. 
That's why she sends all the maids packing . they 
don't knock under enough. Miss 'ind. There's bin 
ever so many of 'em in my time, and none of 'em 
stay six months." 

This was not very reassuring ; but the man's im- 
pudence made Maud attach but little weight to his 
words ; and if it was true that '^ having opinions of 
one's own" was so essential in any relations with 
Mrs. Cartaret, certainly Maud felt herself to be 
eminently fitted, in this respect, for the position. 
The prospect, however, of having to live in close 
association with the propounder of these theories, 
whose vulgar familiarity made the. girl's blood tingle, 
was so distasteful to her that it seriously crossed her 
mind whether she should ask to be put down in the 
park, and make her way back to the station, with her 



74 IN THAT STATE OF LITE. 

bag. But Bhe felt it would be weak to be thus tamed 
aside from her purpose at the very outset. After all, 
aDytbing could be borne for a day ; and her ordeal , 
might last no longer : Mrs. Cartaret would pcobably 
find her wanting, or if she did not, assuredly Mrs. 
Bouse would, and dismiss her eveo more summarily 
than her predeeeBsora. 

The park was quite flat, with httle trees, like chil- 
dren's toys, stuck about it ; and just as Mr. Dapper 
oeased speaking, a turn in the carriage-drive brought 
them within sight of a party of sportamen, with game- 
keepers, dogs and beaters, approaching from the house. 

" That's Mr. Lowndes," said Dapper, " and Lord 
Kenchester, and Mr. Bobert Marbory." Maud could 
just see that there were three young men : one tall, in' 
a Norfolk blouse, with leather gaiters, and one very- 
short and fair; as the dogcart whisked ronnd the 
corner to the right towards the stables, the mare, in' 
her impetuosity, nearly capsiKing tliem ; and the 
ahxabbery Lid the sportsmen from her siglit. She 
was thankful fur it. It would bavo been intolerablu 
to her to run tho gauntlet of these young i 
observations on her iirst arrival, seated on  d" ^;' 
beside the seductive Mr. Dapper. T 




IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 75 



CHAPTER V. 

Matjd alighted in a wide courtyard, having the stables 
on one side, a wii^g of the house in which were the 
offices opposite, and some kennels with a poultry-yard 
on the third side facing the gateway through which 
they drove. It was upon a much smaller scale than 
anything at Mortlands, but far more cheerful. There 
was a crowing of cocks, and cackling of hens, and the 
backing of innumerable dogs, all which sounds were 
kept decently out of ear-shot at Sir Andrew's. A 
groom was washing a pony-carriage, and another was 
cleaning his bits, and both were whistling merrily at 
their work. - Maud had never heard any one whistle 
at Mortlands. It was puerile, but this little circum- 
stance revived her spirits. 

'' Take care and rub that mare well down," said 
Mr. Dapper. " She's very 'ot . 'ard work to 'old 'er 



76 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

in, she was that fidgety. Now, miss, if you please . 
this way. This is the 'ousekeeper's room, where we 
retire after meals to wine and dessert (no second 
table, I am sorry to tell you). Mrs. Bouse ! she's 
upstairs . never mind . you take that chair by the 

fire, and make yourself comfortable, and . stay " 

He unlocked a cupboard, and took from it a decanter 
of sherry. " Thomas, you bring in a tray with the 
cold beef and chutney sauce, and " 

" Thank you, but I want nothing ; I am not 
hungry. Only if you would let Mrs. Cartaret know 
as soon as possible that I am here." 

" Oh ! there's no 'urry about that, but I'll tell 
Mrs. Bouse. She'll come to you directly.** 

" But it is Mrs. Cartaret I want to see, not 
Mrs. Bouse." 

" I think it'll be better to see Mrs. Bouse first," 
and Mr. Dapper winked in a knowing manner, as he 
left the room. 

Presently the housekeeper entered. She was a 
large, but very active woman of about fifty, with a 
red face, and chinchilla-coloured hair ; clearly accus- 
tomed to rule, and that with an iron hand ; not an 
ill-tempered face, but a choleric one, impatient of 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 77 

contradiction, and intolerant of any interference in 
her own domain. She eyed Maad saspiciously from 
head to foot; then she said, somewhat sharply: . 
** So you're the young woman as is come after the 
place of second lady's maid ? and has never been in 
service before, eh? Well, it's right as you should 
know what you've got to look to here. / am Mrs- 
Gartaret's maici, as well as housekeeper, and the 
second maid is under me, as has got to do every 
blessed thing as I tell her, without asking questions. 
D ye understand that ? Very well. Then, mind this 
now : I don't allow no skylarking with the men ; 
they'll be all talking a pack of nonsense to you, 
because you're a fine-grown young woman; but if 
you want that sort of fun, as is hkely enough, you'd 
better pack and be oflF, because " 

Maud rose, with a heightened colour, and faced 
Mrs. Bouse. 

'^ Ma'am, I had better be off at once. I have not 
been used to be suspected, and I think you might 
have waited till you saw something in my conduct to 
justify your suspicions, before speaking in this way." 
She moved towards the . door. " You will be good 
enough to tell Mrs. Gartaret^ " 



78 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

Mrs. Rouse laid no gentle hand upon her wrist. 

.* Don't be a fool, but sit down there, and listen 
to me. What are you crying out for, afore you're 
hurt ? Who's accusing you ? It's only a wholesome 

* 

warning, as you mayn't run again' a stone wall with 
your eyes shut. There's a lot of men in this house, 

and some on 'em wildish, beginning with Well, 

never mind, but you look here : don't let any on 'em 
get familiar with you, that's all. There's Mr. Dapper; 
now, you treat him respectful, as is his doo, but don't 
you let him be familiar J^ 

'^ I am not likely," said Maud, with ineffable 
disdain* 

" Hoighty-toighty ! That's your style, is it ? But 
let me tell you I don't approve of no airs, neither, 
young woman. Servants can keep theirselves respect- 
able without that. And them as carry theirselves too 
high can't always see where they're walking, and 
tumble, maybe : I've known it afore now. You ain't 
given to sauce, I hope? Because, if there's that 
thing I can't stand, it's sauce. The last gurl as went 
away o' Toosday week 'd never let you have the last 
word, if you tried ever so. She wasn't here long* 
Now, you come up with me to Mrs. Cartaret." 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 79 

And, with that, she opened the door wide, and 
marched on ahead, down a long passage, and up a 
back staircase, and again along a passage, till she 
came to a door, which she opened, without knocking. 

"Here is the young woman, ma'am . shall she 
come in?" 

'* Yes, my good Rouse, by all means," replied a 
high voice, with a strong French accent, which sounded 
as if it came from under a feather-bed. 

Maud entered, and found herself in a spacious 
room, across one-half of which a leathern screen was 
drawn. Beyond this stood a vast four-post bed, and 
in this bed lay Mrs. Gartaret, having her breakfast, 
propped by pillows, and surrounded with books, news- 
papers, and letters, some upon the floor, some upon a 
table near the bed, some upon the bed itself. The 
same "admired confusion" reigned throughout the 
apartment, all the tables and drawers being piled 
with bills and papers, photographs, miniature-cases, 
and boxes of all sizes and materials, from the leather 
despatch-box and jewel-case down to the carton of 
ribands, among which Mrs. Bouse, no doubt, vainly 
did her best to introduce some order. 'An engraving 
of Marie Antoinette, in hoop and towering head-gear, 



80 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

hung over the mantelpiece, and opposite the bed: 
another qf the same unhappy queen, taken at the 
Conciergerie, in the attire of a citoyenne of the 
Republic, all the pride and power of the face crushed 
out of it, and in its place a saintly dignity, was a little 
farther on, A heavy-faced woman with a row of rigid 
curls and a turban, and a fat young man with a 
Bourbon physiognomy, were respectively labelled, 
in Mrs. Gartaret's hand. Son Altesse Boyale, La 
Duchesse d*Angoul^me, and Sa Majeste, Henri Cinq, 
Boi de France. Various other French ladies and. 
gentlemen graced the walls, among whom the de- 
ceased Gartaret, in the dress of an English country 
gentleman, looked rather out of place : as did also a 
very modern-looking boy of sixteen upon a pony, 
done in water-colours by a travelling artist some 
eight years since, and esteemed a very choice work 
of art. 

The owner of these miscellaneous treasures 
appeared to be a woman of sixty-five, inclining to 
stoutness, and, as far as Maud coulci judge, below 
the middle height. A black eye of extraordinary 
vivacity, a clear dark skin, grey hair tossed back 
from her face, and bright even teeth; which showed 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 81 

mnch when she spoke . ^these were the salient points 
a stranger would seize in describing her appearance. 
If a man sensitive to impressions, he would probably 
go on to say that the features, though not regular, 
possessed the charm of great mobility ; that the 
youthfulness of this old face, the way in which 
kindled with enthusiasm, softened and clouded over, 
with sorrow, or flushed with scorn and anger, was its 
chief attraction, and made it an object of interest 
when younger and more perfect faces were coldly 
admired and forgotten. 

This, at least, it was not easy to do ; Mrs. Gar- 
taret was not a woman to forget. Everything about 
her betrayed her foreign extraction : the inflections 
of her voice, the movement of her hands, the tasteful 
arrangement of her old French dress. She spoke 
tolerably idiomatic English (though always with an 
accent), except at times, when she was excited ; and 
then, in the heat of the moment, she would always 
break out into some Gallicism, or literal translation 
of the French thought which flamed uppermost in 
her mind. Her angers were very hot and strong, her 
prejudices insurmountable ; her vanity of a certain 
kind was great, and her belief in her paramount 

6 



82 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

opinion and authority unshaken by those two astute 
viceroys, who, in their own departments, ruled abso^ 
lutely as they liked . always keeping up the farce of 
implicit deference to the queen-regnant. 

**Well, Mary Hind, come and let me look at 
you," she began, as Maud stood at a certain distance, 
gazing in wonderment at the disordered room and its 
occupant. " Draw nearer . ^well ! you received my 
letter, and you are come, H'm ! . I wonder whether 
you vrill suit me? You're too go6d-looking, eh, 
Bouse? That's a drawback,, h'm ! Pray, how old 
are you ? " 

*' Two-and-twenty, ma'am." 

" And never been out to service yet ! How comes 
that ? " 

Maud did not know how to reply to this question. 
Fortunately Mrs. Cartaret, as was her wont when she 
was impatient, suggested an answer herselt 

*' Got sick of your life at home ? And the curate 
gave you a certificate to get you a situation, I sup- 
pose? Hein?" ' 

** Yes, ma'am, that is it." 

" Well . I don't know what to say . hem ! an 
inexperienced .girl. it is a trial, look you. Mine 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 88 

is a hard place; I warn yoQ of that. Got good 
lungs, eh?" 

" I believe so, ma'am." 

'* Hold out your hand . Dieu de Dieu ! Why, it 
doesn't look as if you had ever done a day's work. 
You're not a fine lady, eh ? " 

"No, ma'am. I want to work. That is why I 
go to service. I had too little to do at home." 

" Good ; and you can read ? Aloud, I mean . ^you 
have been taught that at school ? " 

" Yes, ma'am, and French too, though perhaps 
not very well." 

"Mon Dieu! you read French? This is unex- 
pected. Here, sit down ; take that, . and read me 
a page." 

Maud did as she was bidden. It was a volume 
of the Grand Cyrus of Mademoiselle de Scudery ; 
and Maud accomplished her task, threading the 
flowery involutions of the courtly old French more 
deftly than many English-bred young ladies could 
have done. 

" Eouse ! " cried Mrs. Cartaret, clapping her 
hands, " she's a treasure. Don't be jealous, my 
good creature, but she'll be worth her weight in gold 



84 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

to me. My eyes^ yoa see, Maiy Hind^ for all that 
they are still bright^ are very little nse to me. I 
cannot read long; and no one here reads French. 
ev^i my own son doesn't like it, h^las ! Is Mr 
Lowndes gone ont shooting, Bouse? Well, there is 
no nse, then, in my getting np yet awhile. Take the 
girl to her room, and then let her come back to me. 
I will have a chapter of that beautiful book before I 
leave my bed . ^I will." 

Mrs. Bouse, judging from the expression of her 
face, was not too well-pleased at the discovety of this 
unlooked-for accomplishment in her new assistant ; 
but she took Maude to her room, and gave her some 
instructions as to her duties, and the hours of the 
household meals. And while she is thus employed, 
w'e may as well take the opportunity of giving a brief 
sketch of Mrs. Gartaret's family history, the circum- 
stances of which Maud only learnt by degrees, but 
which, if here stated, will render it easier to under- 
stand the many antagonistic elements into which the 
girl now found herself suddenly cast. 

Mrs. Cartaret's fSather was an EngHsh officer, and 
a detenu during the war with France in the early 
years of this century. During his obligatoiy resi- 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 85 

dence in France he married Mademoiselle de B , 

a woman of high rank, no longer very young, whose 
early girlhood had been passed at Louis XYI/s 
court, where her fiftther held a high post, and who 
had been reduced to great poverty by the confiscation 
of the family estates. Her father had died in exile : 
then the daughter had returned to France, and had 
gone to Uve with an old cousin at Bordeaux, where 
she met and fascinated Captain Dallas. The fruit of 
this union was one child, the old lady with whom 
this story has now to do. Bom in France, she 
came oyer to England with her parents at the peace, 
and remained here until her father's death a few 
years later. But the language she first spoke was 
her mother's; all her tastes and sympathies were 
French, or, more properly speaking, Bourbon ; and 
in spite of the Dallas blood in her yeins, she never 
spoke or thought' of herself as an Englishwoman. 
She had inherited her mother's passionate attach- 
ment to the unhappy house whose misfortunes she 
had shared. At the Restoration, she had gone over 
with her mother to greet Louis XYIU. (Captain 
Dallas was now dead), and had returned to these 
shores indignant after the B.eYolution of 1830. 



86 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

Shortly after this it wad that she met Mr. Gar- 
taret, a plain English country squire^ who had no 
foreign predilections, no enthusiasms, no yery strong 
convictions of any sort, I believe, but who became 
enamoured of Miss Dallas's bright eyes, and laid 
himself and his handsome fortune at her feet. They 
were admirably suited to each other : she would not 
have been happy with any man who had not let hei* 
have her own way, and Mr. Cartaret indulged her 
every whim and fancy. The sayings and doings of 
the little lady often sorely tried her sober husband^ 
but his temper was excellent, and it is a question 
whether the blameless ways of more discreet matrons 
would have had the charm for him that the changing 
humours of his impulsive little wife possessed. She 
failed to inspire him with any ardour in the cause of 
Legitimacy; she could not get him to join her in 
vituperation of the house of Orleans . that race of 
** ingrats " . as long as it was in power, nor, when it 
had been ousted, to wage war against the second 
Empire, and express a desire to poison all the canaille 
who now desecrated the holy places of the Tuileries. 
He had not plotted and intrigued for " Henri Cinq,'* 
nor had he visited Frohsdorf, but he had allowed his 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 87 

wife to do these things ; he had been very tolerant 
of the visits of melancholy foreigners in straitened 
circomstances, with the politest manners and the 
slenderest stock of English at their command; he 
had even given his wife money for all sorts of par- 
poses, which, when he was not ignorant of them, he 
mildly disapproved : and for acting thus, daring his 
lifetime, Mrs. Gartaret was certainly bound to lament 
him at his death, as the best and most indulgent of 
husbands, which she duly did. To her was be- 
queathed for her lifetime, absolutely and entirely, 
the whole of the property; Lowndes, the only son 
of this strangely-assorted couple, being dependent 
on his mother, with the exception of a small estate 
which had been devised to him by an uncle. Mr. 
Gartaret's will caused great animadversion. That so 
flighty and passionate a woman should be left with 
unlimited power to do as she liked, during her life, 
with her son*s natural inheritance, was looked upon 
as a lamentable instance of uxorious folly. She could 
not alienate it, it is true, but might she not admi- 
nister the property in a manner most prejudicial to . 
her son's interests ? Nay, who oould tell but that 
she might cut down half the trees to subsidise troops 



83' IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 

for another French Bevolntion ? The event proved 
that Mr. Gartaret knew his wife better than the 
World did ; that its estimate, in this case, as in many 
others, was founded :apon a one-sided view of the 
truth. In the first place, the weft of her mental 
extravagance, on many points, was crossed by a woof 
of shrewdness and worldly knowledge which those 
who saw how she was indulged by her husband and 
ruled by her servants failed to perceive. Then all 
her convictions, all her hallucinations upon certain 
subjects, were independent of her principles in the 
conduct of every-day life, which, in the main, were 
sensible enough, as we shall see. Lastly, there was 
her paramount and intense devotion to her son, a 
devotion not always wise, perhaps ; short-sighted, 
passionate, ill-restrained; but one which made her 
ready at any moment to -sacrifice her own interests, 
her own peace, every consideration under the sun to 
the furtherance of his welfare. She had been and 
still was a conscientious steward of the property com- 
mitted to her charge. Lowndes, who was now five- 
and-twenty, would long since have made ^' ducks and 
drakes " of it. It was a perception of the boy's ten- 
dencies . he was sixteen when Mr. Cartaret died^ . 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 89 

which had no doubt led the &ther to make the will he 
did. His son was at that time at Eton, a pleasure- 
loving, impudent boy, with capital natural abilities, 
and no application or ambition ; but very popular, and 
utterly reckless of money. As it had been in the 
green tree, so was it now in the dry. Oxford had 
not improyed him : he had launched out into the 
wildest dissipation, and had come home upwards of 
two thousand pounds in debt. Then had Mrs. 
Gartaret wept and raved, and gnashed her teeth, and 
one of those violent " scenes " which were of pe- 
riodical occurrence between mother and son took 
place. Lowndes used to declare that they were as 
necessary to Mrs. Cartaret's well-being, from time to 
time, as are the storms which clear the atmosphere 
too heavily charged with electricity. 

Lowndes Gartaret was to be in diplomacy; he 
was to be in the Guards ; to have a clerkship in the 
Treasury, and be private secretary to a cousin of his 
fiither's who was in the cabinet; but Jie followed 
none of these lines, preferring to lead an utterly 
profitless existence, without one serious aim or in- 
terest in life. He would one day have eight thou- 
sand a year : he had now twelve hundred of his own ; 



90 IN THAT STATE OF LIFK 

it enabled him to keep a lodging in St. James's 
Street, and as many hunters (at his mother's ex-^ 
pense) as he chose ; to go to Scotland for grouse- 
shooting, and to Paris at least twice a year ; to have 
his stall at the Opera, and to spend considerable 
sums in other ways, which it is not necessary here 
to particularise . and what couM a man want more ? 
He had no ambition to become a general, or an 
ambassador, or even a minister of state; what was 
the use of tying a log to his feet, and becoming any 
man's slave ? He had few conyictions, and abso- 
lutely no veneration ; and was as aggravating a 
young man, with hid insolent scoffing nCianner of 
treating other people's beliefs and prejudices, as4t 
was easy to find. No one had ever obtained any 
abiding influence over him* He was extremely fpnd 
of his mother . in his own way; but, like the 
servants, he very early learnt how to " manage " her, 
and he did not scruple to laugh at her, to her very 
face, having no more respect for her opinions than he 
had for anybody else's. She had vainly endeavoured 
to inflame his young mind with a due ardour in the 
cause of Legitimacy ; she had laboured, but without 
result, to inspire him with a taste for Madame de 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 91 

S^vigne's courtly graces of style, and Racine's 
polished classicalities ; but Lowndes yawned OYet 
everything but Moli^re. The boy was thoroughly 
English, and as the boy was so the man became^ 
He had been taken to Frohsdorf ; he had received a 
gold watch from the hands of the gentleman who, his 
mother tried to impress upon him, was the real King 
of France ; but he remained perfectly indifferent as 
to who sat upon that throne* He used to say, '* If 
my mother should go mad, she will fancy herself one 
of Louis the Fourteenth's mistresses*" The good 
lady of whom this impudent speech was made asso- 
ciated very little with the county; their ways, and 
thoughts, and interests were not hers ; she was glad 
that her son should go to all the great houses; and 
she received with avidity any fiEtvourable report of th6 
impression he produced there ; but she herself kept 
aloof from such society. She seldom went to London, 
unless it was on her way to the Continent ; and now 
that Paris was in the hands of '^ that upstart," she 
declared it made her sick to go there, and see the 
beautiful old city being converted into a bad edition 
of New York. She had corresponded with the 
Duchesse d'AngoulSme as long as the royal lady was 



92 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

aliye, and still did so with certain old Legitimists of 
" the Faubourg." Occasionally a few withered men 
of extraordinarily polished manners, and speaking a 
purer and more measured language than is ever 
heard in the France of to-day, came over to pass 
a few weeks afc Beckworth. These, with the excep- 
tion of Lowndes's friends, who came for shooting or 
hunting, at all sorts of unexpected times, were the 
only guests they ever saw. The descents he some- 
times made with two or three men . as at this 
moment. without forewarning, were, indeed, strongly 
objected to by Mrs. Bouse and Mr. Dapper; but 
Mrs. Cartaret was never disturbed by these sudden 
irruptions. 

" There's no fish, nor no ice, nor nothing ! '* said 
Mrs. Bouse, in a high querulous key, the evening 
before our introduction to the establishment . *' and 
Mr. Lowndes bin and brought two gentlemen down 
from London ! " 

^^ Nor so much as a orange, by way of fruit," said 
Mr. Dapper, plaintively. 

"Never mind. Dapper, they must do without," 
cried Mrs. Cartaret. " There's enough for them to 
eat, isn't there ? And plenty of claret in the cellar ? 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 98 

What would the men have ? They come a Fimpro- 
viste. They must take what they can get, and if 
they don't like it, let them go walk ! " 

It ended, however, as usual, in the two ministers 
of state carrying the day, and in that early visit of 
Mr. Dapper's to Salisbury on the following morning, 
of which record has been already made. 



94 IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 



CHAPTER VI. 

Maud entered Mrs. Cartaret's room again, an hour 
later. That lady cried out, on seeing her : " Here, 
Mary, come and draw a chair close to the bed, and 
go on at the place you left oflF. Stay, though . you 
shall first answer this rascally letter for me. There 
is pen and ink." 

*' I can't write with that, ma'am. It has got 
no nib." 

'' Mon Dieu ! It does well enough for me. Did 
they giye you nibs at your school ? How they do 
spoil the children now-a-days ! Here, then, is a 
steel one, now . write quick. Do not be an hour 
over it. You spell correct, do you ? Here is a bit 
of paper." 

''It is only half a sheet, ma'am, and it has a 
blot." 

" Juste Ciel ! Who taught you to be so par- 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 95 

ticular ? The blot will pot blind the man, will it ? 
and he can read what I have to say on half a sheet 
as well as a whole one. Go on . * Sir, I have many 
impertinent applications from you. One answer for 
all. my son's debts contract when " * 

" Contracted ? " suggested Maud. 

" Well, yes, contracted . ah ! you are grammatical, 
are you ? . * when he was at college, were paid by me 
when he came of age. He entirely denies the justice 
of your claim. I have no more to do with his bills. 
He has his own fortune; and I desire no more vile 
letters.!." 

^' Vile ? Is not that rather strong, ma'am ? " 

"No, no, write it . ^I wish to be strong. 'vile 
letters may be addressed to me on the subject.' 
Here, give me the pen, and I sign it . mon Dieu ! 
Petite . what a good hand you write. Now, then, 
that is done. Here is the book, and here is where 
you left ofiF. * Artamene regarda le Boy d'Assirie 
avec une douleur inConcevable, et lo Boy d'Assirie 
regarda Artamene avec un desespoir que Ton ne 
sauroit exprimer.' Ah ! que c'est beau ! que c'est 
touchant ! Do you know who the Grand Cyrus was, 
child ? " 



96 IN THAT STATE OF LITE. 

" He was the King of Persia, wasn't he, ma*am ? " 

'* No, no, he was the great Conde ; the most 
hraye, the most charming prince of his time, and 
Mandane was the Duchesse de Longueville, his 
sister. Did they teach you French history at your 
school, eh ? " 

'' I have learnt a little of it, ma'am. I know that 
the great Gond6 was the hero of Bocroi." 

" Tiens ! Tiens ! So you know that, do you ? 
Well, then, this is all an allegory, you see. All the 
fine company, all the wit and intellect of the time 
that used to meet at the Hotel Bamhouillet, is here 
depicted. Ah ! what nohility ! what purity of senti- 
ment ! what a style ! " 

" Is it not rather lengthy, ma'am ? " 

" Lengthy ? hah ! not a hit ! In the Grand 
Monarque's time, look you, people were not in such 
a hurry to holt a hook. They have no time to taste 
it now, but gulp it down, like a pill ! Bah ! Every- 
thing is decaded together ; religion, literature, art : 
it is all gone . all I " 

Maud began reading, and she read for some time ; 
but, in spite of her best efforts, she found her 
thoughts wander from the lofty and long-winded 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 97 

conversatioiis of Gyrus and Mandane to subjects of 
strong personal interest : her own position in the 
house, and the strange character of the old lady 
whom she had undertaken to serve. She read with 
her eyes and with her voice, but not with her mind ; 
and Mrs. Cartaret stopped her at last with an impa- 
tient exclamation : 

" There ! that will do, shut up the book. You 
have never been in love yet, eh, Mary Hind, or you 
could not read that touching passage like a frog . 
so cold. Now, get me my bath. Ah ! but that 
miserable creature, Jane, has let out the fire ! " 

She clutched at the bell-rope, tore at it, hung on 
it, with an energy which brought the blood into her 
face, and which Maud expected would rouse the 
entire household. But some minutes elapsed before 
Jane answered the summons, in no way discomposed 
by its violence, and regarding it apparently as a 
matter of course. 

" Why do you not bring coal here, you wretched 
do-nothing ? " screamed Mrs. Cartaret, beating her 
little fat hands upon the bed. " Am I to be left to 
die of cold, with ten servants in the house? How 
often do I tell you to come and look at the fire once 

7 



98 IN THAT STATE OP LIFE, 

in the hour? He? Thought the new maid was 
with me? Well, and if she was, she can't make 
coal, I suppose? Hold your tongue, you lazy wretch, 
you are only good to eat . eat . eat . all day long. 
Come, don't stand staring there at me, but away 
with you, and fetch the wood. Now, Mary Hind, 
there is your dinner-bell. Go along. I shall not 
get up till you come back ; " and she flounced down 
again among her pillows, secretly by no means sorry 
of the excuse for indulging in another half-hour of 
her beloved bed. 

Leaving the inflammable little lady as she was 
desired, Maud descended with some hesitation, it 
must be confessed, to the servants' hall. It was her 
first really severe ordeal, but she would not flinch 
from it !^^r place was to the left of Mr. Dapper ; 
on his right, and presiding over the board, glared 
Mrs. Bouse. The eye of suspicion which the formid- 
able housekeeper directed towards Maud was far from 
reassuring ; but if Dapper would only have regarded 
her in like manner she would have been glad. His 
amenities, his jokes, his delicate attentions, in the 
way of tit-bits, and a constantly replenished tumbler, 
were peculiarly offensive ; all the more so, that she 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE, 99 

saw how they aggravated Mrs. Boase's hostility. It 
was in vain that Maud repelled the fascinating butler's 
advances ; he was one of those men who are never 
discouraged ; and, as all his good stories and smart 
sayings were received with rounds of applause and 
laughter by the appreciative audience ^' below the 
salt/' she only succeeded in producing an effect of 
extreme churlishness and ungeniality upon the table 
at large. She was aware of this, but how could it be 
otherwise ? She felt ill at ease, and out of place ; 
and yet she repeated over and over again to herself 
that she had no false pride, though she heard Jane 
confide to the kitchen-maid that the new maid was 
evidently "a awful stuck-up thing." They all seemed 
to get on very well together, and dealt chiefly in 
jokes and allusions which were incomprehensible to 
Maud ; showing in this respect a national similitude 
to the highest circles of our society, whose language 
is not understood out of their own set. Mrs. Bouse 
was treated with becoming deference, and Mrs. Bouse 
did not unbend much in laughter, like the yoimger 
members of the establishment. Perhaps, because she 
was vigilantly watching Maud, and was undoubtedly 
desirous of inspiring her with a wholesome awe ; for 



100 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

it was clear that she could, and did, enjoy the lively 
Dapper's sallies at a more convenient season; and 
that, while maintaining her authority, she was by no 
means unpopular with the servants under her. 

" But there's a time for everything, Mr. Dapper," 
as she observed to her colleague, that afternoon, 
" and I'm not rightly easy in my mind about that 
new young woman. She's a puzzle to me, Mr. 
Dapper, and I don't like puzzles, I likes plain sail- 
ing ; and I'm going to watch her pretty sharp, that's 
what I'm going to do. So you look out now, and 
don't be playin' the fool as you done with that " 

" Lor' ! Mrs. Bouse, 'ow you do rake up old 
scores, to be sure ! And there was nothing in it, 
after all, to make such a fuss about. It was only, as 
one may say, a pass-tong ; no 'arm, I'm sure." 

'' I don't know what a pass-tong is, Mr. Dapper ; 
but I know I packed off the jade in double-quick 
time, and I'U^o the same by this one, if I find she's 
up to any of her tricks, and so I tell ye. She looks 
mighty prim, but I always mistrust them mealy- 
mouthed ones ; and she's got a devil in her eye, if I 
don't mistake. The missis is fairly taken with her 
parlez-vousing. Well ! we shall see ! " 



IN THAT STATE OF MFB. 101 

And with this ominous declaration she left Dapper 
to his reflections. 

Conscious of the hostile feelings that met her on 
every side but one (where she would have preferred a 
mild hostility) y conscious that in her false position^ 
do what she would, her conduct was liable to be 
misunderstood, Maud's heart, usually so dauntless, 
sank within her. Should she exert herself to try and 
talk and laugh with the servants, and to interest her- 
self, as she believed she could do sooner or later, if 
she chose, in their concerns, she had a conviction 
that Mrs. Bouse would look upon her as a forward 
hussy, laying herself out to attract the men. Should 
she continue to shut herself up within herself, which 
her own state of feeling, aggravated by Mr. Dapper's 
sickening obsequiousness, inclined her to do, then, 
of course, she must make up her mind to be hated 
by the whole household. If she could only pass the 
entire day with the irascible but entertaining old 
lady upstairs, and take her meals in solitude, Maud 
felt that she could be comparatively happy ; the life 
would, at least, be endurable. But, constituted as 
she was, would it be endurable if she must be thrown 
into an hourly contact, which was close and yet could 



102 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

not be intimate, with Mr. Dapper and Mrs. Bouse ? 
She possessed strong human sympathies ; it was that 
marked characteristic which had led to her throwing 
herself heart and soul into the joys and troubles of 
certain among the poor of Mortlands ; it was that 
which Sir Andrew termed her " confounded low 
radical tendencies/' which had made her feel so 
intensely desolate when moving among the cold 
phantoms of polished life, and had made her yearn 
for more stirring interests, no matter in what sphere 
of society. To be no longer a drone, then, to find 
herself among the working bees, and to be in a state 
of antagonism with her fellow-workers, was a con- 
dition of things which Maud had never contemplated, 
and which she knew would be intolerable to her. 

The afternoon passed quickly ; Mrs. Cartaret was 
dressed, Mrs. Bouse officiating as the chief priest, 
and Maud performing such minor rites as her in- 
experience allowed her ; after which she was instructed 
in her various duties by Mrs. Bouse, who read her a 
running homily on the conduct of servants in general 
and under lady's-maids in particular, to which Mai:^^ 
listened with a kind of obstinate patience. Then, at 
half-past four o'clock, there was tea, and Maud had 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 103 

to undergo a modified repetition of what she had 
endured at dinner* Soon after that, Mrs. Cartaret 
sent for her. She was in her dressing-room, sitting 
over the fire, with an old-fiEishioned tambour-frame in 
her lap. But it was too dark to work, and Mr. Dapper 
had not yet thought fit to bring in the lamp. 

*' Is that you, Mary Hind ? " began the old lady 
in her high-pitched voice* " Come in, and shut the 
door* You shall read to me when the lights come 
. sit down now, and turn your face to the fire, so 
that I can see it . H'm ! I like it, and I like your 
voice . I think you may suit me, but I want to tell 
you one thing : I cannot have any girl who does not 
get on with Mrs. Bouse^ D'ye understand, eh? 
You must treat her with great respect . you must do 
all she tells you . or . . . or . . . it will never do . 
never ! " 

'' Have I treated her with disrespect, ma'am ? I 
hope not." 

" I don't say that you have . ^but ... in short, 
you must do all you can to make her like you . . . 
be very modest and humble, eh? She is a little 
jealous, my faithful Mrs. Bouse, of any new-comer, 
and we have had so many, eh ! so many ! If you 



101 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

could but stay, mon Dieu ! what a blessing ! but you 
must not be a fine lady, remember. No, no, or 
Bouse will never endure you. Now, here comfts 
Dapper with the lamp, and you can go on reading 
where you left off. at that description of the Siege 
de Cames (which means Dunkerque.) ... To think 
that people should find such a book heavy, and read 
the nasty rubbish they do, instead ! But what would 
you ? Ah ! * C'est un si^cle ennuye, dedaigneux des 
fines analyses, et insensible a la grace,' " she mur- 
mured to herself, quoting the words of a great living 
French author, whom, at least, she excepted from 
her general anathema. But the quotation was not 
meant for her new maid. 

Maud had scarcely read a page when a sound of 
laughter and loud voices in the courtyard below the 
window made her guess that the sportsmen were 
returned. Presently some one came whistling La 
Donna e mobile up the stairs, and a heavy pair of 
shooting-boots tramped loungingly along the corridor. 
Some fingers played the devil's tattoo upon the panel 
of the door ; it opened, and a tall young man, the 
same whom Maud had seen in the park in the 
Norfolk blouse, entered. 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 105 



CHAPTER Vn. 

The likeness to his mother at once told her that 
this was Mrs. Cartaret's son ; but he was less well* 
looking. His height and well-balanced figure, broad 
in the shoulder and thin in the flank, were, indeed, 
his chief claims to consideration on the score of 
personal appearance. The nose was slightly turned 
up ; the mouth, veiled by a small silky moustache, 
was large and mobile, wearing an habitual expression 
of mockery, but capable of denoting also strong 
passion. The eyes would have been the best feature 
in his face, but that he was short-sighted, and wore 
a glass, which dimmed the brilliant light that shines 
through the " window of the mind," while it added 
no doubt to the impudent, not to say defiant, air 
which characterized the whole man. It is hardly 
necessary, after that, to state that he was too often 



106 IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 

contemptuous and satirical ; but it is well to mention 
that his voice was low and musical, his smile veiy 
pleasant, and that his manner, where he had a wish 
to please, had a peculiar charm. 

He stared at Maud as he sauntered up the room, 

. 

with his hands in his pockets. 

" Well, mon en&nt, what sport ? Here you find 
me with my new maid, who is a treasure, reading 
French to me. Come and listen to a chapter of Le 
Orand Cyrus, before we dress for dinner, eh ? '* 

'* Thank you, but I shall get a nap without that. 
YouVe had a better day's sport than I have, mother. 
Few poachers on old Scudery's preserves, eh? It 
seems to me that all Salisbury must shoot over yours. 
It isn't worth bringing fellows down from town fwf 
such a day as we've had . not above a hundred head, 
and we shot your two best covers. I blew up Bogers, 
but it's the old story, toujours perdrix (not that we 
put up a single covey to-day . wish we had !), ' Missis 
won't go to the expense.' " 

" Well, you are only here for two or three days 
during the shooting season, look you, mon en&nt. 
It is not worth while. I can buy the pheasants 
much cheaper than I can keep them." 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 107 

 

** Yes, your own pheasants, shot by some con- 
founded poacher. Yoa can't understand that it is 
the sporty not the birds, I care about/' 

** Bah ! I understand sport on your Scotch moors, 
on the mountain-side, but to stand in an all6e, and 
have the birds driyen up to you to be knocked oyer, 
fi done ! It is not sport, mon fils. You like that 
they shall say, as. they said of David, ' Smith in his 
covert have slain his thousands, but Lowndes Car- 
taret his ten thousands ! ' Voila ! " and the old lady 
laughed immoderately at her own joke. 

"Well, at all events, my vanity is not to be 
gratified," said her son; and then continued with 
a malicious twinkle of the eye: "At Compiegne, I 
am told, the battues now are excellent. Kenchester 
was there in November, and says nothing could be 
better, which shows what good management will do. 
There used to be very little game, they say, in the 
old time, but the Emperor arranges everything so 
well." 

" Va-t-en ! oser me parler de ce coquin la ! '* cried 
Mrs. Cartaret, shaking her fist at her son, but laugh- ' 
ing the next minute. " You miserable boy ! " she 
continued, " so you think to get your pheasants by 



108 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

telling me what that brigand does, eh ? When you 
can find a nation to pay your debts, monsieur mon 
fils, you shall not be able to walk at Beckworth for 
the pheasants under your feet ! " 

She was delighted with her own sally, which was 
certainly paying her son's banter with interest, and 
jumping up, she caught hold of the lobe of his ear, 
and dragging down his face till it touched hers, she 
kissed him on both cheeks. She was entirely satis^ 
fied, as having come ofif in this little controversy with 
flying colours, and Lowndes could afford his mother 
such a small triumph, being resolved that, before 
next shooting season, this question of the pheasants 
should be settled as he wished. 

" I have heard from Marly-les-Bois, mon enfant;" 
This was said in what was intended for a whisper, 
but like all Mrs. Cartaret's asides, it penetrated 1;6 
the further corners of the room. Then she added 
aloud : '' Mary Hind, go and fetch to me a letter 
that you will find, I think, on the escritoire in my 
bedroom." 

There was a door between the two rooms, which 
stood open. Maud did as she was desired, but during 
her search for the letter, which did not at once come 



< . 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 109 

to hand, she could not avoid hearing the foUowing 
fragments of colloquy : 

*' Where does she come from ? Where did you 
get her?" 

" advertisement . village-school . curate's 

recommendation, gentile, tout-a-fait une lady, m^me 
trop, eh?" 

" A deuced good-looking girl ; hut, of course, 
that old she-wolf of yours won't let her stay more 
than a month . reads French, too? That's an 
unusual accompUshment for a village school-girl, 
but " 

Here Maud lost the rest ; and she would like to 
have heard it. She confessed this to herself with 
some shame. What could it signify to her what the 
young man said or thought? But she had now 
found the letter, and returned to the dressing-room 
with it. 

" There ! " said Mrs. Cartaret. " Read it, 
Lowndes ; and you, Mary, light the candles on the 
dressing-table. There is the first dinner-bell. In 
that drawer you will find a black-lace cap. Take 
care how you handle it ; it is very precious, child ! 
It belonged to Madame de Maintenon." 



110 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

'' And is almost as frail as its possessor was/' 
said Lowndes, looking up from the letter to which he 
was lending but a divided attention, for no movement 
of Maud's escaped him. 

" Frail ! Hold your tongue, sir ; she was a saint. 
Go on and read your letter. Juste Ciel! What 
would they say at Marly-les-Bois if they could hear 
you ! Such a pious woman ! but this is the age for 
m6disance? Is my hair smooth behind, child? 
Mon Dieu ! How yellow I look. Give me the rouge* 
It won't do to have those young men saying that 
Lowndes Cartaret's mother is a horrid old hag. 
There, just a soupgon, that will do. How do you 
find me now, Mary Hind ? Not so bad for a woman 
of sixty-four, eh ? " 

" I like you better without the rouge, ma'am." 

'^ Bah ! with your village-school ideas, I suppose 
you think it is wrong ? Why, in the last century, in 
the good old times, no lady was dressed . would have 
thought to appear without her rouge ! What is that 
you say ? They were a mass of deception, with their 
hoops and whalebone bodies, and powdered heads ! 
Go along with you ! They were true ladies, who had 
the great air. That is what few have now, with their 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. lit 

horrid laissez-aller ways. They are all like . well, 
never mind what they are like . everything is demo- 
cratic^ common, what they call ^ simple/ like their 
courts. Mon Dieu ! Defend me from simplicity ! " 

*^ Does * the great air ' depend upon rouge, 
ma'am ? " 

Lowndes burst out laughing. 

*' Do you mock yourself of me, Mary Hind ? " 
said the old lady, firing up. ''Hold your tongue. 
I tell you nobody has it now. Monsieur mon fils, 
when yon have done laughing, I shall be glad : you 
make^ my head to ache. You have read that letter ? 
Well, is it not particularly satisfactory, eh ? " 

He had certainly not read above half of it, but, 
by the process called " skipping," he had reached the 
end, and he now tossed it on the table. 

" Particularly . to those whom it may concern . 
not to me. I am a fool at figures, and millions of 
francs always puzzle me. But I'll pass on the mar- 
quis's offer to a friend of mine, if you like it, a 
fellow who is looking out for a good thing of the 
kind." 

" Imbecile ! Who cares about your friend ? 
And, pray, why should it not suit you to go, look, 



112 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE; 

and judge for yourself ? I say no more ; now that 
the marquis and I have arranged the preliminaries, 
eh ? It leaves nothing to be desired. Why should 
you set your face against it, pray ? " 

*' Because I object to that sort of bargain in the 
first place, and because I have no desire to become 
the proprietor of the article that is offered me, or any 
other such article, indeed, in the second." 

He stood behind her chair, and leaning over it^ 
with a tenderness which took Maud completely by 
surprise, he put his arms round his mother's neck, so 
that her head was pressed against his chest; then, 
when he had kissed her, he said, laughingly : '' You 
dear old woman, I wish you wouldn't trouble your 
head about me. I wish you would understand that I 
want nothing, and prefer remaining as I am." 

" Take care of my cap ! You are choking me, 
polisson que tu es ! Want for nothing ? But I say 
you do want for somet^ng. Are you never going to 
range yourself ? Is it not time that you sowed your 
. how do you say ? . wild com ? " 

Here she sunk her voice to the level which she 
appeared always to consider inaudible ; but Maud, 
who was purposely busying herself at the very 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 118 

farthest end of the room, lost no syllable of what 
followed. 

" A charming girl . a great heiress . one of the 
oldest families in France . what would you more, 
Lowndes? Ah! mon enfant, do me this pleasure. 
Go, present yourself: visit them. Ca ne vous engage 
a rien. If you knew . if you knew how much I 
desire to see you with a nice little wife and a child . an 
heir to this property . ^before I die ! It is the first 
wish of my heart. I would give up Beckworth to- 
morrow. I would leave her mistress here, and go 
away, and trouble no one no more, if I once saw you 
settled, willing to live quietly here, and look after 
your terres." 

"Give up Beckworth ! why, what would Beck- 
worth do without you ? May you reign here many a 
year yet, you dear old incorrigible match-maker. I 
shouldn't manage the estate half as well as you, and 
I feel no vocation yet for living quietly, and looking 
after my tares, which flourish enough of themselves 
. what you are pleased to call ' my wild com.' As 
to paying a visit to Marly-les-Bois, it would bore me 
to death, and you would not have my early demise 
upon your conscience, mother ? * At the Chateau de 

8 



114 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

Marly-les-Bois, of exhaustion produced by ennui, in 
the flower of his youth : ' it wouldn't read badly, eh ? 
But I've no wish to invest my name with the posthu- 
mous interest attaching to such an epitaph just at 
present, at all events. I dare say the young lady is 
all you say, and a great deal more, but I am case- 
hardened agjainst female charms, and " 

" Va-t-en, farceur ! As if I did not know . . - .- 
daring to talk to me like that ! . . . . Est ce que tu 
me prends pour une imbecile ? . . . . You will get 
caught by some vile baggage or other, and then . and 
then . it will kill me . ^that will be the end of it. If 
I saw you marry beneath you, to any low creature, 
you might as well stick a knife into me at once. I 
am serious. I will not have you laugh, sir. You 
laugh at everything : it is a stupid habit . any fool 
can do that. Nothing is sacred for you . nothing ! " 

'' Certainly not the question of my marriage either 
with the daughter of your marquis, or with the vile 
baggage you imagine is to captivate me. Your wishes 
are among the few things that are sacred to me, and 
anything I can do to oblige you, short of marry- 
mg 

" There, hold your tongue ! You put me in a 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. ^ 115 

rage, and. that spoils my digestion. My stomach 
turns when you speak like that. ' Short of marrying,' 
indeed ! .... go and dress, it is no use talking to 
you . ^go and dress . ^you make me sick. My wishes 
sacred to you ? Like other sacred things, sir, you 
neglect them very much. I have no patience with 
you . none . ^go and dress." 

He stooped down his impudent, smiling face till 
it touched hers. In vain the old lady, in her irrita- 
tion, tried to shake him off; like some obstinate 
Newfoundland puppy, which, the more it is repulsed, 
the closer it thrusts its muzzle into your hand, this 
incorrigible young man insisted upon extracting some 
caress in token of forgiveness before he would depart. 
Of course the old lady gave in, after a feeble resist- 
ance, and the young man laughed, and stretched 
himself, and lounged out of the room, staring at 
Maud as lie did so, but failing to attract that young 
person's attention, who was busying herself at a 
wardrobe, and did not turn round. It is true that 
the wardrobe had a mirror. 

Mrs. Cartaret was at last dressed, and Maud could 
not but acknowledge that, in spite of her low stature, 
in spite of her size, in spite of unfashionable, not to 



116 IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 

say somewhat shabby, clothes, she had an "air" . 
whether it was " the grand air " Maud could not 
determine . which was neither grace nor dignity^ but 
which, nevertheless, gave a distinction to her appear- 
ance. She was not a common-looking old woman, 
just as her son, for all his ugliness, was not a com- 
mon-looking young man. 

She went down into the library, and the little 
downy- faced lord took her in to dinner ; and up-stairs, 
with the door open, Maud could hear bursts of merri- 
ment, blown out of the dining-room in gusts, as the 
servants went in and out. 'She was not quite sure 
that she liked it. She wondered whether she should 
like better being seated at that table as a guest. 
But why should she ? "Were not these just the sort 
of men she had been declaring to herself all her life, 
thai/ she despised ? Had it not been to escape from 
such society as this . the faineants with whom she 
felt she had no lot or inheritance . that she had fled 
from her stepfather's house, resolving henceforward 
to maintain herself by the labour of her own hands ? 
It could not be that she was weak enough already to 
regret what she had cast from her but a few hours 
previously. No ! a hundred times, no ! She would 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 117 

not find herself back at Mortlands for all the world ; 
and how it came to pass that she felt any curiosity, 
any sort of .desire, to know what was passing inside 
that dining-room, puzzled and annoyed her. 

By-and-by, Mrs. Cartaret left the men to their 
wine and cigars. for Lowndes had induced her to 
permit the malpractice of smoking in the dining- 
room . ^and then the servants' supper-bell rang, and 
when Maud did not obey the summons, Jane appeared 
with a message from Mrs Bouse. But Maud sent 
back to say she was not hungry, and wanted nothing; 
a step which was viewed by Mrs. Bouse as unprece- 
dented and presumptuous, an unwarrantable infringe- 
ment of the etiquette of the servants' hall, and by 
mpst of the others as a proof that she was '^ an 
uppish, young 'oman, as requires to be took down a 
peg or two." 

' Mrs. Cartaret had left her fan in her room, and 
presently Maud, knowing that the old lady was alone, 
ventured downstairs with it, and knocked at the 
library door. She heard what she took to be " coifle 
in," and entered. Mrs. Cartaret was on the sofa, 
fast asleep, with a handkerchief over her face, from 
beneath which there issued fitful but sonorous sounds 



118 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

not wholly unlike the growling remonstrances of a 
human voice. Her new maid, of course, did not 
disturb the old lady; she laid the fan on. the cushion 
beside her, and left the room noiselessly, but not 
before she had glanced round it, and contrasted the 
faded yet comfortable aspect of the old book-room 
with the cold grandeur of Mortlands; 

It was nearly an hour later . she was up in her 
own little garret, but the door was open . ^when she 
heard a few chords struck upon the piano, and being 
fond bf music she stole down to the first landing to 
listen. A rich, strong man's voice was liffced up, and 
began Hatton's pretty ballad of "Good-by, Sweet- 
heart." She sat down on the top step of the stair ; it 
was very pleasant there, in the dark, and alone, 
knowing the servants to be at supper, to sit and 
enjoy what had something in it of forbidden fruit. 
For she would not like to have been detected : so 
much she acknowledged to herself. The singer sang 
three or four songs, and she was confident she knew 
who he was. Finally, he broke into a negro melody, 
in the chorus of which his friends joined, and at the 
same minute Maud heard a clatter of feet up the 
back-stairs, with guffaws of female laughter. She 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 119 

got up qnickly, and returned to her room. But as 
she did so, she caught the words of one speaker: 
"Victuals? Lor' bless you, the like o' she don't 
need it. She lives upon hair, depend on't, she do ; " 
which brilliant sally provoked renewed merriment. 

When she went to bed that night, after undressing 
Mrs. Cartaret, she lay awake a long time, pondering 
upon many things. And through all her thoughts, 
charged heavily with disquietude, that tiresome tune 
kept worrying her, and pursued her even into the 
land of dreams, Good-by, Sweetheart, Good-by ! 



120 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 



CHAPTEE Vin. 

Thbee days went by, Maud saw Lowndes Cartaret 
but seldom : he was out shooting all day ; when they 
did meet, however, he never failed to stare at her in 
a way which made Maud very angry. 

Her relations with the establishment, in general, 
remained pretty much as they were on the first day. 
Mrs. Cartaret had her new maid to spend the greater 
part of the day with her : Maud even worked in her 
mistress's room, for the old lady liked a companion 
of some sort, and her prime minister had never been 
very available in this capacity. Now, with company 
in the house, her important avocations obliged Mrs. 
Eouse to cede to Maud almost entirely the duties of 
personal attendance on her mistress. Her demeanour 
towards the new comer was suspicious and anta- 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 121 

gonistic as ever ; Mr. Dapper's^ oily and seductive ; 
the other servants avoiding the "stuck-up thing" 
as much as possible. This isolation was, perhaps, 
not enviable, and yet, could it have been more com- 
plete, she would have been glad. As it was, strange 
to say, she found herself getting to endure this Ufe 
better than she could have thought possible at first. 
The idea of giving it up, of going to London, and 
seeking for work in some other form, which she had 
seriously entertained during the first twenty-four 
hours of her residence under this roof, presented 
itself less and less frequently to her. It was then 
that she wrote the letter we know of to her mother. 
But, after writing, the question came, how to send 
it ? The Salisbury post-mark might lead to detec- 
tion. There was no servant in the house she would 
trust with it for transmission elsewhere. Nor had 
she a single friend in whom she could confide. But 
at last an expedient occurred to her. She enclosed 
it to the true Mary Hind at Bristol, with these 
words : . " Be kind enough, Mary, to post this letter 
to Lady Herriesson. You must not ask any ques- 
tions. Some day or other you will know alL In the 
meantime, whatever you may hear about me, say 



122 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE/ 

nothing of my having written to you . even to your 
future husband." This letter she placed in the bag 
with her own hands. 

On the third "afternoon, Mrs. Cartaret went forth 
in state to return some neighbours' visits, and Maud 
was left alone in her mistress's room to complete a 
piece of work which the old lady was particular in 
her injunctions should not be removed from the 
apartment. The girl sat by the open window, it 
was so mild, and looking up from time to time, over 
the bare tops of the elms, and the troops of crows 
cawing round the house, to the blue line of distance 
which she knew to be Salisbury Plain, and the 
streaky straw-coloured sky above it, she stitched 
away ; and, as she stitched, she broke out every now 
and then into little snatches of Good-by, Sweetheart, 
Good-by. 

" Are you fond of that song ? " said a voice close 
to her. 

She half started up, and let drop her work. 
Lowndes Cartaret . for it was he who had entered 
the room without her hearing him . picked up the 
reels of cotton, which had rolled out of her reach, 
and threw himself down on a sofa near her. 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 123 

" So you sing, Mary, in addition to your other 
accomplishments ? '* he continued j smiling. 

" No, I don't, sir." 

"But you do. Don't deny it. I should have 
thought you above that weakness, you have such a 
frank face and manner. I am sorry I interrupted 
you now." 

*' And I am sorry you have nothing better to do, 
sir," she said, rather sharply ; for his manner, no 
less than the accusation, annoyed her. 

"No, we have done shooting for to-day. If I 
wasn't here, I should be playing at billiards. I don't 
think that is much better employment, do you ? " 

" At least you would ^e entertaining your friends, 

which I suppose is your business, sir and you 

have none here." 

" I wasn't wrong in thinking you were frank," he 
said, laughing. "But why haven't I any business 
here ? This is my mamma's room, and I suppose I 
may talk to her maid, mayn't I ? " 

" I doubt whether Mrs. Eouse would think so. 
You had better go and find her . ^if you must talk to 
one of your mother's maids." 

" Mrs. Bouse be No. I beg your pardon. 



124 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

But we haven't quite got to snch a pass yet that I 
can't come and sit in my mother's room without that 
old devil's permission. How do you and madame 
get on, Mary ? Do you think you shall stay ? " 

" If Mrs. Cartaret likes me well enough to wish 

to keep me, I hope to stay . I only wish " Here 

she stopped dead short. 

" What is it you' wish, eh ? " 

" Nothing, sir. I have thought better of it." 

" That is a decided snub. So you won't place 
any confidence in me ? " 

"Why should I, sir? I am your mother's 
servant, and if I want anything, I can apply to her." 

" Well, I have a knack of guessing. Shall I tell 
you what it is you want ? To be taken away from 
the dominion of Bouse, to have no other mistress 
but madame." 

Maud went on stitching, without reply. 

" Is that it ? Come, tell note." 

" No, that is not it ; only a very small part 
of it." 

He looked puzzled for a moment ; then cried 
out: . "I have it; Dapper has already begun to 
make love to you ; he always does. He is a deuce of 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE, 125 

a fellow with the ladies, and I believe they generally 
find there is no resisting him ; but you " 

" . Do not appreciate Mr. Dapper's civilities," 
said Maud, quickly, with a flushed cheek, " and the 
fewer I have, in my position, from any one, the 
better." 

" As to that," said Lowndes, laughing, " why, 
* in your position,' you are to enjoy an immunity 
from the common lot of humanity, I don't know. 
Love is the universal law, isn't it ? Every one must 
come to it sooner or later." 

" I thought that you " she began, with her 

usual impulsiveness. Then she felt as if she could 
have bitten out her tongue. She knew she had 
committed an irreparable blunder; and sat silent, 
growing scarlet. But the young man was not going 
to lot her/oflf so easily. With an expression of amused 
interest and curiosity he said : . ** Well ? I am 
waiting.. What is it you thought that I did, or did 
not do, eh ? " 

" I thought the other day you said . ^I heard you 
say to Mrs. Cartaret . ^that you were * case-hardened ' 
against such weakness." She blurted it out, without 
looking up from her work, and felt absolutely relieved 



126 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

when she heard him langh. He attached no serious 
importance, then, to her indiscretion. 

" A statement of that sort is good for the pui*pose 
it serves, and it was really true enough to a certain 
extent. I liave been ' case-hardened ' hitherto. How 
long it will last I can't say. Who knows when his 
hour is come?" 

Maud felt sorely tempted to say that this was not 
the language of self-confidence in which he had pro- 
claimed it to be useless for him to visit Marly-les-Bois, 
so impossible was it that he should be enthralled ; 
but she refrained, feeling that it was wiser not to 
prolong this discussion. Lowndes, with provoking 
pertinacity, would not quite abandon it, however. He 
continued : . ** Why do you say the fewer attentions 
you have, the better, Mary ? Have you left some 
disconsolate swain behind you that makes you so 
obdurate ? most girls at your age think it a very 
nice thing to have an admirer, particularly a fellow 
like Dapper, with silky whiskers, and manners* to 
match. Jove ! when he hands round the champagne, 
I always feel as if / ought to be waiting upon him. 
There is an affability, a condescension about him ! 
It is as though he said, ' I know I am demeaning 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 127 

myself, bat do not be afraid ; I will go through it, I 
will show you how one of Nature's noblemen can 
play the flunky.' Is it possible that this is lost upon 
you, Mary ? " 

She saw he was trying to draw her out ; and the sati- 
rical play about the comers of his mouth nettled her. 

'^ I suppose, like some other lords of the creation, 
sir, you think all women are fools ? " 

" Not at all. On the contrary, I think in many 
ways they are a vast deal sharper than we are. But, 
as I said before, girls in your position " 

'' Cannot possibly have a grain of common sense ? 
Your experience, if varied, sir, has been unfortunate, 
I should say. Servants, though you might not think 
it, are really not always more vain and foolish than 
their betters." 

" That's right ; hit hard, Mary. I have a broad 
back, and can bear it. So you think me vain and 
foolish, eh ? " 

" I didn't say so, sir." 

" No ; but that is what you meant. Now, I 
return evil for good, Mary, for I think you are 
neither one nor the other. From the fii^t moment 
I saw you, I " 



128 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

" This conTersation^ at all events, is very foolish, 
sir ; there can be no doubt about that. If you are 
going to talk nonsense, I shall leave the room. 
Mrs. Rouse " 

" The devil take Mrs. Bouse ! Who cares for her ? 
If she ventures to poke in her nose where she is not 
wanted, I shall send her packing." . 

Maud was saved from the necessity of making any 
rejoinder by the sound of carriage-wheels, the barking 
of dogs, and the ringing of the hall-door bell, which 
told of Mrs. Cartaret's return. Lowndes at once 
rose, and, with a few laughing words, strolled towards 
the door. The act needed no comment. Maud 
would have been seriously annoyed had he remained, 
and his mother found him here. Had Maud not dis- 
couraged his staying so long by every means in her 
power ? Therefore she could not but feel relieved at 
his departure. And yet it hurt her pride to think 
that she should be submitted to this . that any man 
should make her the amusement of half an hour, and 
then leave her at the first indication of his mother's 
approach. 

From that day forwards Lowndes Cartaret lost no 
opportunity of seeing and, whenever he could, of 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 129 

talking to his mother's new maid. It was in vain to 
try and avoid him. Her place was in Mrs. Cartaret's 
room, and when the young man was not out shooting 
or hunting, he was in that room the greater part of 
the time. When visitors came, and Mrs. Cartaret 
was necessarily kept in the drawing-room, if Lowndes 
was in the house, it invariably happened that he 
strolled up into the boudoir. His friends were gone ; 
he himself was due at one or two country-houses ; 
and yet, to Mrs. Gartaret's pleasure and surprise, he 
lingered on at Beckworth from day to day. He dined 
with his neighbours, and occasionally one or other of 
them dined with him : this was the only society he 
had ; and yet a whole fortnight went by, and he did 
not seem bored, or in a hurry to get away. No one, 
I believe, up to this time, suspected the real reason 
of this ; and yet that reason was not far to seek. 
One of those violent passions, the growth of a few 
days only, which are sometimes lasting in such men, 
but are far more often transient, had taken possession 
of his whole being. To use his own expression, 
" his hour had come ; " but he did not recognise the 
fact^at first. He was young, he had strong passions, 
and he was but little accustomed to self-restraint ; he 

9 



180 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

looked upon this as one of those conquests which, if 
less facile than any he had ever undertaken, was not 
the less a pa3time for the hour. That this was no 
will-o'-the-wisp, hut a real fire, to which he was un- 
wittingly adding fuel day hy day, till it should hum 
his very heart out, till it should come to he at once 
an all absorbing thought and a terror unto himself . 
this was what he never foresaw in those early days. 
Attracted first by her handsome face and figure, and 
secondly by her peculiar manner, the bluntness of 
which excited him in the pursuit far more than the 
coquetries to which he was used, each time he talked 
to her he was more and more struck by her shrewd- 
ness, the unflinching truth of what she said, and her 
skill in parrying his attacks. He was used to the 
conversation of women (of whom society now has 
plenty, and an increasing stock of examples), with 
whom he could, say many things that would have 
been better left unsaid, perhaps ; and talking to any 
others, the wives and daughters of his quiet country 
neighbours, for instance, generally bored him horribly. 
But here was a' girl . only a maid-servant, too ! . to 
whom he very soon found he could not say anything 
he liked, and yet who did not bore him ; but very 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 131 

much the contrary. It was a new and strange expe 
rience ; he could not account for it ; he could only 
accept it as a fact which he felt to be asserting itself 
more strongly every day. 

How came it to pass that the lynx-eyed Bouse 
never suspected what was going on all this time ? 
Fate for some days favoured Lowndes ; but the 
jealousy of the disappointed Dapper at last revealed 
to him the truth ; and, through him, that truth 
reached his formidable colleague in office. 

'' She flies at 'igh game, she does, Mrs, Bouse. 
Her equals is not good enough for 'er. I come in 
with the coals, and there, sure enough, was Mr. 
Lowndes and 'er alone . 'er at 'er work, and 'im 
lolling on the sofa . chatting away like anything, she 
as won't so much as open 'er mouth to answer a civil 
thing when I speak. It's easy to understand now 
why she gives 'erself such hairs." 

" I'll soon put a stop to that ! " said Mrs. 
Bouse^ flaming up. " I won*t have nothing dis- 
respectable go on in this house . let it be master, 
or let it be man. You know that, Mr. Dapper. 
I won't have no skylarking and playing the fool 
as long as I'm here, and so I'll tell Mr. Lowndes 



182 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

-to his face. Only I'll make Bure that you're right 
first." 

And she left no stone unturned to make sure ; 
but was unable to detect a single act of encourage- 
ment or doubtful propriety in the girl's demeanour 
towards the son of her mistress ; though Mrs. Bouse 
bounced into the boudoir at all hours, now, on some 
pretext or other. Once only did she find them alone ; 
and then Maud was at one end of the room, busying 
herself at some shelyes, and the young man was at 
the other, with his back to her, looking out of 
window. This is what had happened. He had come 
in, as usual, to his mother's boudoir, on ascertaining 
that Maud was alone there ; and, after talking to her 
for some time, he said abruptly : . " I want to know, 
Mary, where you were educated ? " 

"At school, sir, of course. Why do you 
ask ? " 

"Because your education is a cut above your 
station. I never heard of a village-girl speaking 
French before." 

" It is my only accomplishment . I hope there is 
no harm in it ? A young lady" (she was thinking of 
herself who taught the real Mary Hind) " thought it 



H? THAT STATE OP LIFE. 138 

might be useful to me when I went out to service, 
and so gave me some lessons." 

" What prevision ! She must have had Beck- 
worth in her eye. As to me, I was always so 
bothered about French, that I hate it. And then its 

. 

history! Do you know I never have been able to 
master all those confounded kings my mother is so 
fond of, yet ! " 

'' So I should think. It needs some application 
and perseverance to master history, neither of which, 
I. imagine, you possess." 

" You are wrong, Mary. I have no application, 
but jjlenty of perseverance, when the object is one I 
care sufficiently about." 

" What a pity " Here she broke oflf. 

*' Dear me ! I have lost my needle ! " 

" Here it is. Well ? What is a pity ? Come, 
out with it." 

'*No, Mr. Cartaret, it was nothing. I was for- 
getting myself." 

" Nonsense ! Come, what was it ? " 

" Well, then, I was going to say, what a pity it is 
you don't care sufficiently about something that is 
useful in life. An independent young man like you 



134 IN THAT STATE OF LIFIl. 

can, of coarse, do what he chooses. To see him 
wasting his best years in idleness is deplorable, I 
think. But then I have a very strong feeling about 
idleness. I left my home because I could not 
stand it." 

" What you call usefulness is all humbug, Mary. 
Some fellows like fancying they do an enormous deal 
of work, and they make asses of themselves on the 
magistrates' bench, and preside at agricultural dinners, 
and spout some rubbish they have got up beforehand, 
and these are the men that are called ' useful in their 
generation.' It is all humbug." 

'* I don't think so. It is not humbug to the men 
themselyes. They are at least doing themselves less 
harm than passing their lives with a gun, a cigar, or 
a billiard-cue for ever in their hand." 

"You little utilitarian, that is a hit at me!" cried 
Lowndes, laughing ; and, as she stretched out her 
hand to reach the scissors, he tried to seize it. She 
drew it quickly back. " Never mind, I'd rather have 
that little hand in mine than all the guns, and cigars, 
and billiard-cues put together, Mary." 

" If I wanted to confirm the truth of what I was 
saying, Mr. Cartaret, your folly .would be enough. 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 135 

You have nothing in the world to do, so you try and 
kill time by talking nonsense here.^' 

" Wrong again, Mary. I have more than enough 
that I ought to be doing. I was due at Uplands on 
Monday, and at the Grange yesterday, and I preferred 
remaining here." 

" The more shame for you ! A mere pleasure-* 
seeker, who does no good to himself or any one else 
either, always seems to me to be a wretched creature. 
I have the greatest contempt for suph people." 

She got up, and walked to the other end of the 
room, and he, in his anger, turned to the window. 
"Wretched creature!" "Contempt!" He had 
never heard such words, ever so distantly, applied 
to himself before : he, the idol of mother, friends, 
society in general^ and women in particular ! She 
had certainly succeeded in making him very angry, 
if this was her object. He vowed, as he stood there, 
gnawing his lip at the window, that this insolent 
village-girl should be made to pay dearly for treat- 
ing him thus. And it was just then that Mrs. Bouse 
bounced in. 

"I thought missis was here," muttered the 

 

housekeeper. 



136 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

''How the deuce could you think that when she 
told you, half an hour ago, she was going down to 
see Bogers's sick child at the cottage ! " 

"Really, sir . . . I . . . well, I thought she 
had returned. . . . But really, Mr. Lowndes, I'm 
not accustomed, . no, sir, I*m not, . to be spoken to 
in that sort of way, Mr. Lowndes." 

*' Perhaps it is a pity you are not accustomed to 
it a little oftener,'' thundered out the young man. 
" Go downstairs, and desire James to bring my cob 
round to the door, and be good enough, in future, 
Mrs. Bouse, not to burst into the room in that sort of 
way when I am here." And having vented his rage 
thus upon the first object that came to hand, he strode 
off, without so much as looking in Maud's direction. 

As soon as the door had slammed behind him, 
Mrs. Bouse's indignation, which quivered through 
her mighty frame, burst forth : . " Very pretty, upon 
iny word ! Well ! a nice pass things is cpme to, 
when I mayn't come into my own missis's room 
without saying ' by your leave ' to him, indeed ! But 
I can tell him I'm not going to stand being spoke to 
in that way, and wouldn't, not if it was fifty Mr. 
Lowndeses. But I'll speak to Mrs. Cartaret, I will. 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 137 

I'll tell her that I don't know what Mr. Lowndes is 
after up here, when she is out, but I ain't going to be 
shut out of my own missis's room, as is my rightful 
place, not for him, nor for you either, Mary Hind. 
And I must say this, young woman ; that afore you 
came, I never knew Mr. Lowndes to misbehaye his- 
self, and use such language to me, as has been his 
mother's servant these sixteen years and more, and 
it's very strange, that's all I have to say, and I'd 
advise you to look sharp what you're about, Mary 
Hind, that's aU." 

Whereat the irate housekeeper also strode off, and 
slammed the door behind her. And Maud stood 
there, and said nothing. Her impetuosity would 
naturally have- led her to reply in strong language to 
Mrs. Bouse's innuendoes, but something at her heart, 
something which Mrs. Bouse's words did not, indeed, 
reach, but which lay there like a stone, seemed to 
choke her, to paralyse any power of self-justification. 
And yet Heaven knew how untrue it was that she 
had encouraged Lowndes Cartaret to seek her society. 
Had she not told him over and over again to leave 
her ? Had she ever given him reason to think that 
his presence was agreeable to her ? Had she not, on 



138 IN THAT STATK OF LIFE. 

the contrary, spoken so rudely to him more thail once 
that any other man than this would have considered 
her language ijinpardonable ? Nay, at that very 
minute, had it not been her words which had led 
to his venting his spleen upon Mrs. Bouse? And 
yet . and yet, there was that at her heart which 
leaped up, and seemed to impede her utterance 
when her pride urged her to repel the insinuations 
of the angry housekeeper. It was shamefully^ 
miserably weak . she would not acknowledge it to 
herself . it could not be that she should be unable 
boldly and truthfully to declare that this man's 
presence was less than nothing, was absolutely dis- 
tasteful to her. She didn't believe in falling in love. 
She believed in strong and passionate attachments, 
the result of time, and grounded upon bases solid 
enough to support such a structure ; she could not, 
would not admit the possibility of a sentiment where 
there was but little knowledge, and could be neither 
esteem nor admiration. It degraded her in her own 
eyes to think that she should submit to this young 
man's attentions with any tolerance, considering their 
relative positions, and the light in which he, of course, 
regarded her. And yet there was the fact; argue. 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 139 

deny it, as she might, it remained none the less a 
fact ; she took the keenest interest in all that con- 
cerned him ; the very sharpness with which she 
reproved his follies showed it ; had she been quite 
indifferent, she would have been less severe. 

In the meantime, Mrs. Bouse had got to think 
better of her heated resolution. To complain of her 
son's language to Mrs. Cartaret would be entirely 
useless, she knew; she would be pooh-poohed, and 
put off with some very unsatisfactory apology, which 
was far from the complete triumph she had made up 
her mind she would obtain. She would bide her 
time, until she obtained proof, which she felt certain 
would not be long wanting, of his designs, if not of 
his actual misconduct, towards this new intruder in 
the establishment, whom Mrs. Bouse had now deter- 
mined to evict. Mrs. Cartaret was getting a great 
deal too thick with her; all this parlez-vousing, and 
writing of her mistress's letters, inspired Mrs. Bouse 
with a mortal hatred and mistrust of the girl, who 
certainly did nothing to conciliate her. She must be 
got rid of; about that there was no sort of doubt; 
and if she could be caught tripping it would be a very 
short way of cutting the knot of this difficulty. So 



140 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

Mrs. Bouse said nothing to Mrs. Cartaret that 
evening. And before she laid her virtuous head 
upon its pillow, her reticence was rewarded in a way 
that surpassed her fondest hopes. 

Some hunting squires dined with Lowndes 
Cartaret that evening, and he drank more wine than 
usual. He had not seen Maud since he had walked 
out of the boudoir in rage, after venting some portion 
of it upon Mrs. Bouse. His passion for the girl, and 
his anger at her treatment of him, were both inflamed 
by the wine he had taken ; so that when his guests 
left him, he was in a restless, irritable frame of mind 
and body, walking up and down the library for nearly 
an hour, feeling unable to sleep, unable to resolve on 
any plan of action, while a thousand wild schemes 
presented themselves to his imagination. At last it 
occurred to him that he would not keep up the men- 
servants any longer, but go to his own room. He 
rang the bell, and without taking a candle (it was a 
fancy of his never to carry one about the house : he 
could find his way anywhere in the dark, and in his 
own room there was a fire), he went slowly and 
heavily upstairs. At the top of the landing ran a 
corridor, which he had to traverse, and half-way 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 141 

down which was the door of his mother's room. 
Just as he entered this corridor, the door opened, 
and Maud, with her candle, came out. He stood 
still, and she came quickly towards him . so quickly, 
that with the light held just before her eyes, she did 
not see him. He opened his arms, and she literally 
ran into them. Her candle fell clattering to the 
ground . there was a stifled cry, and before the 
indignant girl could free herself, and break away, 
her face was covered with burning kisses. 

And at the other end of the passage stood Mrs. 
Bouse, with a candle in her hand, looking on. 



142 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 



CHAPTER IX. 

The next morning was destined to be an eventful 
one at Beckworth. First of all, Mrs. Bouse entered 
her mistress's room at an unusually early hour, and 
dragging back the curtains with a violent jerk, as 
though resolved that, at length, full daylight should 
be thrown upon the iniquities she was about to unveil, 
she began, in a loud rousing voice : *' Well ! I should 
say as it was time you. was awake, ma'am, and had 
your eyes open to the pretty doin's as are goin* on in 
this house ! What did I tell you, ma'am ? Didn't 
I warn you, as you can't say I didn't, that she 
was a artful designing minx, and we should have 
trouble with her before she'd been in the house a 
month ? " 

"Mon Dieu, Bouse, what is the matter? What 
is it? Do not keep me in suspense in this way." 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 143 

" The matter is, ma'am, I'm sorry to have to say 
it, that she's been and got round Mr. Lowndes, till 
he's just mad after her . and that's all about it. He 
insulted me shameful yesterday when I ct)me into the 
room and found 'em together. Not that I'd ha' spoke 
to you about that, ma'am ; no, not if it wasn't for 
what I was witness to with my own eyes, last night. 
I couldn't have believed that he could ha' demeaned 
hisself to do such a thing . I couldn't, indeed . your 
own'maid, and all ! " 

"Why, what on earth did he do? Mon Dieu! 
woman, can't you speak ? " cried Mrs. Cartaret, sitting 
now bolt upright in her bed, and beating the coverlet 
in her impatience. 

" Do, ma'am ? " responded the housekeeper, who 
seemed to find a cruel satisfaction in prolonging her 
mistress's suspense. " It was doin's such as I never 
see in this house. You might ha' knocked me down 
with a feather, and I haven't slep' a wink all night, 
to think how you've been deceived . you as had such 
a high opinion of the young woman, ma'am, which 
you was nourishing a viper in your bosom, as I 
well foresaw." Then seeing that Mrs. Cartaret's 
impatience was passing all bounds, and that in 



144 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

another mintite she would he out of hed, and shaking 
Mrs. Bouse by the collar (as the choleric old lady had 
once been known to treat an obstinate housemaid), 
she continued : " I can hardly bring myself to say it, 
ma'am ; but they was a kissing and a hugging of each 
other in the passage, and she pretending to struggle 
. ^the artful hussy ! . till she saw me, and then she 
took to her heels fast enough, I'll warrant you ! 
After that, ma'am, I suppose you'll agree with me 
that the sooner the jade's packed off, out o' the 
house, the better." 

" Juste Ciel ! " cried Mrs. Cartaret, clasping her 
hands, "but it is impossible. My good Eouse, you 
must be mistaken. What ! that quiet girl ? Your 
eyes must have deceived you. My son, alas ! yes, he 
perhaps . foolish boy " 

"I tell you what it is, Mrs. Cartaret. I don't 
wish to say nothin' disrespectful against Mr. Lowndes, 
which it's my belief it's much more the gal's fault 
than his, but if you don't send her off, then and there, 
I won't answer for the consequences ; that's all. If 
Mr. Lowndes is ' foolish ' as you say, ma'am, so much 
the worse. he'll get took* in the easier; and there's 
Mr. Dapper. I don't know what it is the men see in 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 145 

the gal, but she'd ha' made a fool of him, too, only 
she flied at higher game. She's a regular crocodile . 
that's what she's, ma'am ; the house hasn't been like 
itself since she come; a-giving herself such airs, 
indeed ! To think that Mr. Lowndes should ha' 
spoke to me so, which have had him on my knee 
when he was eight year old . and all along of a good- 
for-nothing creature like that ! " 

" Oh, dear ! " moaned Mrs. Cartaret, dropping 
back into her pillows, and twisting round so that 
she turned her back upon Eouse, and drew the 
clothes half over her head, as though to shut out, 
if possible, a disagreeable subject. " Oh, dear ! It 
is veiy hard that I am never to have a maid for three 
months, but something or other happens. It is too 
bad of Lowndes, and the girl suited me so well. It 
is shameful ! If he would but range himself, now, 
and marry! But he shall. I will have it. Oh, 
dear! I am so tired.. I cannot talk any more. 
There, go away, my good Rouse, now, and leave 
me quiet for a little, and say nothing of this. I 
will speak to Mr. Lowndes by-and-by, and don't let 
the girl come to me till . till I have seen him. 

There ! " 

10 



146 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

Then she rolled herself up yet more tightly, and 
Bouse knew that her mistress had taken refuge in an 
old expedient against further discussion. She left 
the room. Two minutes afterwards Jane delivered a 
message to Maud to say that Mrs. Cartaret< would 
ring when she wanted her maid, and that the latter 
was not to go to her mistress until then. 

In the meantime, Lowndes, guessing accurately 
what would occur, resolved to take the bull by the 
horns. As soon as he was dressed, he entered his 
mother's bedroom. She pretended to be asleep : she 
felt a moral coward in approaching this subject with 
her son, and had not half made up her mind yet what 
she would say to him. But Lowndes was as ruthless 
as Mrs. Bquso in his way. 

" Come, mother, it's ten o'clock, and time you 
were awake. I want to talk to you." 

" Eh ? What's the matter ? How you disturb 
me!" 

" Have you seen Bouse this morning?" 

" Eh ? seen Bouse ? Well . ^yes, I have seen 
her." 

" Did she say anything to you about me ?" 

With a sudden jerk Mrs. Cartaret now unswathed 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. ^ 147 



herself, and sat erect in bod. It was no longer pos- 
sible to temporise : the moment for vigorous action 
was come. 

"Yes, she did, Lowndes, and I was shocked . 

shocked and grieved at what she told me. Such 

* 

conduct is to have no respect for me and my house. 
And what is the consequence? I must now send 
away a girl who suited me in all respects, who was a 
perfect treasure to me ; but she must go, for how can 
I keep about me any one whom you regard . whom 
you treat in this sort of way ?" 

'' Now, that is just the point, mother, just what I 
want to talk to you about. I knew very well that old 
cat would move heaven and earth to turn the girl out 
of the house : and I want you to understand that she 
is entirely blameless. What Bouse saw was my fault : 
the girl had given me no encouragement to behave as 
I did : I was an idiot. After all, there was no such 
great harm : I met her running down the passage, in 
the dark, and I kissed her. I was a confounded fool 
for my pains, I admit. I ought to have reflected 
that the girl, so proud and modest as she is, would 
resent this, and complain to you, as I feel sure she 
will, and, in all probability, tell you herself that 



148 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

she must go. Bat you must insist upon her 
staying.'* 

"Impossible! How can I, Lowndes? I shall 
seem to wink at you ! ... to encourage immorality ! 
Dapper, Bouse, what will they think? . . . Hein?/' 

" Who cares what they think ? Can't you decide, 
for once in your life, whether you will keep a servant 
or not, without asking their permission ?" 

" Permission ? " said his mother, bridling. *' No, 
it is not a question of permission, but one must 
consider the qu'en dira-t-on. They say, they imagine, 
Lowndes, that there is more than this folly of yours 
last night. They say you have been found sitting 
and talking with her. Enfin ! ... I am very sorry, 
it is a real trouble to me : I shall never find such a 
maid again . never ! But I see it must not be. No. 
I ought not to submit a young girl to temptation, and 
she must go." 

" I'll be hanged if she shall, then. I'll tell you 
what, mother : if you send her away, I'll leave 
Beckworth to-morrow, and won't return here this 
year." 

" Oh ! " cried the old lady, firing up. *' Vous le 
prenez sur ce ton la, monsieur mon fils ? Very well. 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 149 

then, go ! Do not let me keep you. If the girl is 
your maitresse, take her out of the house with you, 
but " 

" Stop, mother. The girl is as pure as any in 
the country : I'll swear it. You mustn't think be- 
cause I spoke as I did just now that there has been 
anything between us. . . . I was a fool for saying 
what I did, but the injustice of the thing struck me. 
It is such a confounded shame that she should be 
made to suflFer for my fault. . . . You see I am 
what you would call desoeuvr6 Here. ... I have 
nothing to do " 

" Whose fault is that, mon enfant ? What am 
I always telling you ? If you would but marry and 
range yourself, and take the management of the 
estate into your own hands ? " 

" Well, we won't enter upon that old discussion 
again now. ... I was going to say that, having 
nothing on earth to do here, and finding this Mary 
Hind a pleasant, well-spoken girl, I have chatted 
with her once or twice. That is the whole history 
out of which these miserable servants have concocted 
their scandalous lies. Now, it is too bad that the 
girl should lose her place, and you a maid who suits 



130 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

yOD, to gratify their spite. Yon'U never get another 
to read Le Grand Cyrus to yon," added the young man 
artfully. 

Mrs. Cartaret was in sad perplexity : between her 
son and Bonse, she was on the boms of a dilemma ; 
and then there was her own inclination and her sense 
of what was prudeot ander the circumstances gently 
pulling her in different directions. She cleared her 
throat loudly, and shook her head, and frowned, and 
muttered several times that it was " impossible ; " 
and then with a half-fierce, half-piteous expression 
of face looked np at her son and said : " Will you 
promise never to speak to her, if she remains . eh ? " 

" I will promise never to repeat my conduct of 
last night." 

" No, no, that is not enough, you tnuat not give 
the servants cause to talk by speaking with her, do 
you understand?" 

"How is it possible to promise that ? It is non* 
sense, mother. But look here. You see the ^I; 
and talk to her. Mind you say you're parfeetly K 
she is not to biarae, and apologize 
conduct. But do what you will, TttiA 
find .she is bo mortally offeadftftjj^^^^^^^ ^ 




IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 151 

will be uncommonly hard to get her to stay, and 
you'll then understand how absurdly groundless your 
fears are.*' 

After some further hesitation, Mrs. Cartaret 
consented to do this. Lowndes left the room ; but 
he was too deeply interested in the result of the inter- 
view between his mother and her niaid to go further 
than the adjoining boudoir : and he left the door 
a-jar. Mrs. Cartaret rang the bell. 

Maud obeyed the summons, looking pale and 
stem. Before her mistress could speak, the girl 
began proudly : " I will save you the trouble of giving 
me warning, ma'am. Mrs. Bouse has, of course, 
told you what occurred last night. Perhaps she has 
put her own construction on it . no matter. I am 
ready to go when you like . to-day, if you please . 
indeed, the sooner, the better." 

" Stay, Mary Hind, do not be in too great hurry 
. ^yes . I know what occurred . I know that my son 
strangely forgot himself . and he is much ashamed, 
of himself, my dear. That is true ; you may be- 
lieve it. I am very sorry . very sorry, indeed, 

Mary, and I " (here the old lady hesitated a 

moment, and insensibly lowered her voice, as though 



162 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

half-ashamed of her weiakness) . " and I hope you 
will not go on this account, eh ? It shall not occur 
again ; he promises it, foi de gentilhomme. I know 
it was not the least your fault, my dear. He is a 
wild boy, you see . jeunesse . but he has not a bad 
heart, no, and you must forgive him this once, eh ? 
voyons. Think no more about it, and I will take care 
that it does not trouble you again. Du reste, he will 
be going in a few days." 

A world of conflicting feelings were in Maud's^ 
breast. Ought the old lady's words, or anything 
else, to induce her to remain here after the insult to 
which she had been subjected? Her pride said 
*' no : ** but there was another voice, which pleaded 
loudly with her to yield. And as she stood there, 
silent, for some minutes, her back turned to the bed, 
her face towards the window, Mrs. Cartaret under- 
stauding something (not all) of what was passing in 
the girl's paind, exclaimed : " Tenez ! He shall tell 
Rouse himself . there! That shall make it all 
straight, hein ! She is . well a little . just a little 
jalouse, you see (what did I tell you ? why have you 
not made her your friend ?) but she shall believe the 
truth ; yes, and she shall not repeat the story : there 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 153 

shall be no scandale : I will not have it. I like you, 
Mary Hind. I cannot spare you . do you hear? 
You must not go, because this mauvais sujet of 
mine has behaved a little badly, hein ? Come, say 
you will stay, and forget it all." 

" Such things are not easily forgotten," said 
Maud, shaking her head. "Your son must think 
very lightly of me, to have treated me as he did ; 
and if I stay here, will he not think still worse of me, 
for not seeming to resent his conduct ? I am sorry 
to leave you, Mrs. Cartaret. I am homeless, and 
you have been very kind to me. But no girl who 
respects herself ought willingly to remain in a house 
where the master 

" He is not the master here. Mon Dieu ; Mary 
Hind, do you not see that he directs nothing, looks 
to nothing here ? I wish he would. I would give 
it all up to him, if he would marry and live here. 
But no, he will not . and he is not master. He 
spends here . what ? a few weeks, tout au plus, in 
the course of the year. When he goes, next week, 
I shall see him no more till who knows when ! 
Come, now, you will not leave mie on his account ? 
Soyez gentle, ma petite," she added, with a sort of 



154 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

little supplicating whine, to which she resorted in 
great emergencies, " and say that you will not leave 
me, Tenez ! I shall give you five pounds a year 
more, there ? That shall decide you, come ! " 

Maud could not help smiling in spite of her 
serious ground for annoyance, as she told Mrs. Car- 
taret that an increase of wages could in no way affect 
her decision. She consented, however, to stay . at 
all events for the present ; she would not incon- 
venience Mrs. Cartaret by a precipitate departure, 
she said : only it should be understood that this was 
not a definite, but a temporary arrangement, subject 
to circumstances, which meant of course, subject to 
Mr. Lowndes's good behaviour. 

That young gentleman, listening in the next 
room to all that passed, was in high spirits at the 
result of this interview. He felt as all men do 
who have just escaped paying the full penalty of 
their own folly, a sense of inexpressible, almost 
unhoped for relief. For the fact was that only now, 
when he was so near losing her for ever, did he 
awake to a fall consciousness of his real feeling for 
the girl. It was not to be accounted for, or argucjd 
about ; but he who had never so much as singed his 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 155 

wings at any of the gilded tapers round which he 
had fluttered, had flown into the heart of the flame 
of this domestic rushlight, and found himself lying 
there at its feet, hurnt, suflfering, incapable of flying 
away! It would have been humiliating, only that 
he had passed . or skipped over, as it were . that 
phase of feeling, and had reached the one where we 
try to justify to ourselves some extravagant act to- 
wards which passion impels us, and in judging which 
we should be so inexorable, if the delinquent were 
our dearest friend. He could no longer conceal 
from himself that he was madly in love : the idea of 
Maud's leaving the house, and leaving it in just 
wrath with him, had given him some hours of the 
only poignant suflfering he had ever known. In his 
wild, insane folly he had treated with disrespect a 
girl whom he knew, whom he had known all the 
time, ought to be as secure from insult at his hands 
as the highest lady in the land. Had he alienated 
her for ever ? The question, in some form or other, 
was for ever present to him. Yet, where did it 
lead ? To one of two ends. It was in vain to shut 
his eyes ; there was no escape from one of two ends ! 
And one of these, the one which no doubt he had 



156 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

more or less had in view all along, seemed now more 
unattainable, more hopeless than ever. 

How Mrs. Gartaret faced Bouse, and broke to 
that turbulent chief subject the fact that, in spite of 
everything, the new favourite was not to be dis- 
charged, this narrative need not recount ; for more 
important events, and having an immediate bearing 
on the matter in hand, now followed quickly. An- 
other interview, however, on that same day, must be 
detailed, in order fally to understand the position of 
the chief actors on this circumscribed stage towards 
each other. 

Maud had a bad headache ; she looked so ill in 
the afternoon that Mrs* Gartaret, who was not gene- 
rally very observant of aspects, made her leave off 
reading, and insisted upon her going out into the 
park. " You shall remain out, at the least, two 
hours ; do you hear ? My beloved Madame Boyale 
used to say there was nothing like fresh air for a 
migraine. There, go along with you, petite ; " and, 
nothing loth, Maud obeyed the mandate. She, who 
was so accustomed to her long walks and rides, felt 
the confinement of her new life more than she chose 
to acknowledge to herself. Women of resolute will 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 157 

are often slow to acknowledge facts which interfere 
with what they have arranged is to he the course of 
events. Maud was of this numher. 

She chose the quietest path, one whieh led to a 
distant shruhhery, where no one ever walked. She 
had not heen there ten minutes before she was joined 
by Lowndes Cartaret, who chose a circuitous route to 
the spot where he watched her directing her steps. 
It was no use trying to avoid him, unless she had 
taken to her heels, which was not Maud's way of 
escaping a diflSiculty which had to be met, sooner or 
later. It must come : she had foreseen that ; but 
her anger was still so hot, she felt so shaken, so 
unsettled in her mind as to what she should or 
should not say and do, that she would fain have 
deferred this meeting for a time, had it been 
possible. 

He came up straight to her, and said : " Mary, 
can you forgive me ? I think I must have been 
drunk last night, or your sharp words in the morn- 
ing had made me mad, I don't know which. I wasn't 
myself, or I shouldn't have acted like such a cursed 
fool as I did." 

" It is of very little consequence now, Mr. Car- 



158 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

taret, whether you were drunk or not, after making 
me. the common talk of the servants' hall. My 
remaining here will be diflBcult. perhaps impossible 
. owing to your unmanly conduct. Nothing that I 
could say, of course, would persuade Mrs. Bouse 
(even if I stooped to defend myself) that you had not 
very good ground for believing you might treat me 
as you did with impunity. ... If I stay here, it 
must be to feel that I am despised by the women, 
and subject to a similar insult from every groom in 
your stable.'* 

" By Jove ! I should just like to catch one, that's 
all ! Let me know the first one that dares to treat 
you with any disrespect, and " 

" Oh, sir ! you have yourself shown them the 
way. Any one of them is as much justified in 
behaving so as you were. Is it to be expected that 
men in their ... I mean, in my class of life, men 
who have not had the advantages of education, should 
treat a girl with more delicacy, more respect, than 
their master shows her?" 

" What you say is perfectly true, Mary. It only 
makes me more ashamed of myself, for there is that 
about you which I am sure would have prevented any 




IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. - 159 

groom from insulting you. ... The fact is, you are 
perfectly different from every other girl in your 

station I ever saw, and '* 

** And so you think no other girl in my station 
would resent your conduct?'* she interrupted vehe- 
mently. " Your standard of women must be even 
lower than I thought it, if you really believe that. 
But you do not believe it. Of course, I know per- 
fectly well that if I were a lady, if I were in your own 
rank of life, you would not have treated me so . . . 

it was only because I was a servant you thought you 

* 

might try the experiment." 

" You are quite mistaken," said Lowndes, with, 
for an instant, a touch of the careless sarcasm which 
was so common to him, except latterly in his inter- 
course with Maud. ''You are quite mistaken. I 
have treated more than one lady so, who has not 
taken it at all amiss. . . . But do not think I say 
this to exonerate myself, for I knew you were not 
one of this sort. . . . Mary, you must not leave my 
mother, and in the course of time you will get to 
think better of me, I hope." 

" I have promised Jier that I will stay . for the 
present ; and therefore, unless I am driven away* " 



160 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

"How should yoD be driven away? Not by 
those servants I should hope ; and certainly not by 
me. 

" I don't know that, unless you bear in mind our 
respective positions better than you have done. The 
gossips of the house are probably now full of the 
fact that you have met me here, and charitably con- 
clude that it is an appointment, no doubt. Hence- 
forwai'd it is absolutely necessary, after your conduct, 
Mr. Cartaret, that you should avoid me altogether. 
On these conditions only shall I be able to remain 
here." 

*' It is a hard penalty to pay for my folly, Mary." 
" Pray, do you consider what I have to pay for 
it ? To you the deprivation of the right to bestow 
your idle half-hours upon your mother's lady's-maid 
must be a severe trialjj^ no doubt ! To her, the cost 
of all this is simply loss of reputation, which is not 
worth speaking of ! It really maddens me to think 
what we have to suffer from the selfishness of men." 
" You'rd too hard upon me, Mary ; but I suppose 
I must yield, since you insist on it. But if I go 
away from home for a time, will you promise me two 
things ? " 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 161 

She paused for a moment. '' Name them." 

" One is that you will not be induced, by any 
means that may be tried, to leave my mother while I 
am absent. Of course, that old Bouse won't rest 
satisfied with her defeat ; but you stick to my mother 
like a leech, Mary ; don't you leave her, let them do 
what they will." 

" Very well," she replied, after an instant's reflec- 
tion, '^ I think I can promise that." 

"The other is " he turned towards a tree, 

and began hacking at it with his penknife. " How 
long have you been here, Mary." 

" Three weeks and four days." 

" Only that ? and for the first four days I never 
said a word to you ! And yet it seems as if I had 
known you three months, Mary. I have never met 
any girl towards whom I felt in the least as I feel 
towards you." 

 

She started, and turned red, and tried to mask 
her real emotion by a sarcastic inflection of voice. 
" So I should think, judging from the special 

* 

tribute you paid my exceptional merits last night ; a 
sort of refined compliment which the other girls you 
' have met ' are fortunate to have been spared." 

11 



162 IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 

" Don't be too hard on me, Mary. I want you 
to believe that I am in earnest in what I say, and 
this is not the passing whim of a moment. I have 
never seen any woman I could love as a wife but you. 
But to prove to you my sincerity, I only ask you to 
wait. I will go from home, yes, if you will remain 
here, and will promise to listen to me, and try and 
like me when I return. I know you would never 
marry me unless you did. I know, too, beforehand, 
all your scruples. all you will say about my mother, 
and her strong feelings as to caste. It is of no use 
entering upon that now. But, by-and-by, three 
months hence, when I come back, if you can bring 
yourself to care about me, all that shall be made 
straight : I swear it shall.'' 

When he had finished, Maud remained silent ; 
and yet she knew that every instant aggravated the 
necessity of her saying something. 

"I certainly can't promise what you wish, Mr. 
Cartaret. Putting my own feelings aside, and how 
recently you have outraged them, I should be dis- 
loyal towards your mother if I permitted you to use 
such language as this without . without . ^In short, 
if I am to believe that you are in earnest, of course 



mmm 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 16,3 

the sooner you go away and forget this nonsense, 
the better. Think how your smart friends would 
laugh if they could hear you ! I will remain with 
Mrs. Gartaret, for she has been most kipd to me ; 
but for that very reason it would be doubly ungrate- 
ful of me to encourage this mad idea of yours. 

When you come back -" (she wanted to say, " I 

hope,". but could not), "no doubt you will have 
forgotten it. And now, sir, it is getting dusk; I 
must return to the house." 

And without waiting for his rejoinder she turned 
away, and walked rapidly across the park. 

Lowndes Cartaret went up to London by the 
mail-train that night. His mother was always sorry 
when he left Beckworth ; but at this particular 
moment, perhaps, she felt less so than usual. It 
was just as well, after what it pleased her to style 
his " stupid " conduct of the previous night, that he 
and Mary Hind should not meet for a time. Might 
it not be regarded in some sort as a concession to 
Mrs. Bouse and public opinion in the servants' hall ? 

Her satisfaction was of short duration. Early 
on the following morning a shabby man in a great 
coat came to the back-door, and asked to see Mary 



164 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

Hind. Mrs. Bouse, being infonned of the fact, said 
it was just '^ like her impudence/' and sailed ont 
with an empurpled visage to tell the stranger to be 
oflF, as " no followers " were allowed here. But he 
said that in reply which caused her to change her 
tone. 

The next minute he and the housekeeper were 
seated in her own room, with closed doors. 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 165 



CHAPTEK X. 

We must now return to Mortlands and John Miles. 

Lady Herriesson had received no second letter 
from her daughter ; and Sir Andrew had at last felt it 
necessary to ^nsert an advertisement in The Times ; 
but of so vague a nature that it was difficult for even 
those who knew to whom it referred to recognize 
Maud in the description given of the '' missing 
young lady." 

One Saturday mornings as the curate was leaving 
the school, the mistress said to him : '^ I suppose, 
sir, you have heard the news about Mary Hind ? " 

"No. what?" 

" She is to be married to-day, sir. Mrs. Jones 
came from Bristol yesterday, and chanced to meet 
her, and Mary told her herself, and seemed surprised 
it wasn't known at Mortlands, for she said she had 



166 IH THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

written to MiBS Pomerof long ago ; bat I suppose the 
letter came after Miss Pomeroy went, or yoa would 

have heard it, leastways " 

The good wotaan went on to repeat sU that 
Mra. Jones had told her as to Mary's good fortune ; 
but the curate lent only half an ear to her discourse. 
His thoughts had shot suddenly into a side-groove, 
whereby this subject connected itself with the one 
which now mainly engrossed him. During the past 
fortnight, nearly everything to which he tried to 
turn his attention did so connect itself. 'Liza was 
seriously disquieted about her master. As she oh- 
' served to all her friends, his conduct was qnite 
unnatural. Whereas he was always wont to praise 
her broths and bread-and-butter puddings, he now 
never noticed what victuals she set before him. If 
the neighbourhood was still in a state of ferment 
about Miss Pomeroy's disappearance, it may be 
imagined what far deeper interest that subject had 
for the curate, whose love, though he felt it to be 
irrational and utterly hopeless, nothing could ever 
destroy. At first, as 1 have said, he tried to believe 
that she -had taten refuge viith somo friend. But 
why, then, this mystery ? this obstinate silence ? 




IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 167 

She was of age, and might insist upon choosing her 
own residence, if any one had offered her a home. 
She had not a farthing of her own : that he knew, 
for she had told him so* What course had she taken 
which necessitated such a scandal as this? Why 
should she be at such pains to baffle every effort to 
trace her hiding-place ? 

The schoolmistress's words, then, set John think- 
ing on the old subject, only, this time with new 
matter for speculation. The postmark on Maud's 
letter to Lady Herriesson had been Bristol . yet every 
inquiry instituted there had proved fruitless. Maud, 
he knew, had heard from Mary Hind . ^at least so she 
had told him . only three or four days before her 
flight. If so, if she had received a letter from the 
girl, it must have been the one notifying to her 
former mistress the girl's projected change of con- 
dition.- At all events one thing was clear : she had 
not taken service, as Miss Pomeroy had given him to 
understand Mary was about to do, having obtained a 
situation mainly through the instrumentality of his 
written recommendation. He went over, in his own 
mind, every little circumstance of that last morning's 
interview, when he had chanced to pick up the letter 



168 IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 

Maud had dropped. He recalled now the fact that 
the letter was directed to M. H., and remembered, 
too, the momentary look of vexation on Maud's face, 
when he gave her the letter, and the explanation 
which she had tendered, an explanation which then 
had seemed so perfectly satisfactory. Putting one 
thing with another, now, however, it seemed to afford 
some possible clue to this mystery, though so slight 
as probably to break in the unravelling. How should 
he follow it up ? He tried to remember the address, 
stamped in blue upon the back of the envelope, but 
he could not. The only thing he felt nearly sure 
of was that the post-town was Salisbury, Now, in 
Salisbury lived the old aunt of whom mention has 
been already made. 

Sitting in his little study that evening, with the 
notes of the morrow's sermon before him, he found his 
thoughts rebelliously wandering, do what he would, 
until he started up with a sudden resolution. 

"It is no use going on like this . I will go to 
Bristol on Monday. I have not been absent for more 
than a year. The vicar cannot refuse me three or 
four days. . . . See Mary, and learn from her exactly 
when, and what she wrote to Miss Pomeroy, also 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 169 

whether she knows anything of that letter which 
Miss Pomeroy said was from a lady engaging' Mary's 
services. . . . If I can gain no satisfactory in- 
formation, then I will go on to Salisbury, to my 
aunt's, and see what I can do there. Anyhow, I 
believe it is better for me than remaining here, doing 
nothing." 

After this, he was able to turn to his sermon, and 
to perform his duty the following day with more con- 
centration of mind. He said nothing, either to Lady 
Herriesson or to any one else of his object: he 
simply notified to the rector that he had urgent 
reasons for wishing to absent himself for some days i 
undertaking to be back, at latest, on the following 
Saturday. And early on Monday morning he set out. 

At Bristol^ he inet with a disappointment which 
might almost have been foreseen. The newly- 
married couple were away, at Weston-super-Mare : 
they would not be back till the Wednesday : so John 
made up his mind to follow them. He did not reach 
' Weston till so late, however, that he thought it best 
to delay seeing Mary till the next morning ; when 
he found her all smiles, and blushing red roses at 
the unexpected sight of the curate on the beach. 



170 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

In less than ten minates he had gained the informa-* 
tion he needed. Mary had never heard of a situation : 
there never had been any question of one between 
Miss Pomeroy and herself. She had written to the 
young lady to announce her engagement, and had 
received a kind letter in reply, which she was able 
to show John Miles . its date being of importance . 
and then she had heard no more, until the few lines 
came, enclosing the letter to Lady Herriesson. This 
Mary had posted, as she was desired, and would have 
preserved a strict silence on the subject but for the 
curate's urgent and searching inquiries. She could 
not resist them. The Reverend John Miles had been 
the girl's second conscience for the last four years. 
When she came to learn that her dear young mis- 
tress was missing, and the aniiety that prevailed on 
her account, she told him at once all she knew. It 
was little enough : and yet sufficient to strengthen 
the growing suspicion in John's mind. The cover 
of this letter (without date) Mary had not kept ; but 
she had had the curiosity to examine the postmark, 
and she felt very certain it waff' Salisbury. 

Here, then, were the facts John had elicited. 
First, that two days prior to the one on which she 



IN THAT STATE OF LITE. 171 

told him that Mary had found a situation, Maud bad 
received and answered the girl's letter which an- 
nounced her marriage* Consequently, there could 
not be a doubt that Maud had purposely deceived 
him. What had been her object? Secondly, the 
letter which came from Salisbury, and' was directed 
to M. H., was clearly not meant for Mary Hind. 
Thirdly, Miss Pomeroy's lines, enclosing the letter to 
her mother, which she had sent to Bristol, evidently 
to avoid being traced by the postmark, had come also 
from Salisbury. John Miles had no longer any 
doubt that somewhere in the neighbourhood of 
Salisbury she was to be found. And, moreover, a 
suspicion of the truth, or of something very like it, 
was now taking possession of his mind. He knew 
Maud's character : he knew that nothing was more 
likely than that, when she had fled from her step- 
father's house, it should have been with the deter- 
mination to work for her own bread, and no longer to 
eat the bread of idleness. And he began to perceive 
how his certificate to Mary Hind's character might 
have been turned to account. If resolved to support 
herself by entering service in any capacity whatsoever, 
Miss Pomeroy would certainly do so under an assumed 



172 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

name. It seemed very probable to Miles, as he 
thought the matter over in the 'train, that she should 
have adopted that of her former maid. At all events, 
having such very slight materials to guide his in- 
quiries, he made up his mind that they should, in 
the first instance, take this direction. 
. John's aunt lived in the Close at Salisbury. 
Mrs. Hicks was a widow of independent means, 
an excellent, charitable woman . charitable in the 
highest sense of the term . who, though she had 
lived out of the world all her life, possessed the rare 
virtue of indulgence to the weaknesses of those who 
have been otherwise tried than herself. The dangers 
that beset beauty, brilliant talents, rank and wealth 
. these had never been hers : she had had her share 
of difficulty and sorrow, no doubt ; but her troubles 
had not hardened the ground 'whereon they had 
fallen, like the frost, but had rather softened it, like 
the dew, to receive and nourish the good seed 
dropped there. She was now very infirm, and had 
had one or two serious attacks within the last few 
years, which had left her in a condition requiring 
the greatest care and watchfulness. Her old maid- 
^ervant, Martha, a good, kindly soul, was not much 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 173 

fitted for any service requiring prevision, suggestion, 
or indeed any departure from the narrow treadmiU of 
duties which she had faithfully performed lor years. 
She was a humble -minded woman, revering her 
mistress (as, indeed, did all the servants), and 
affording as great a contrast to Mrs. Bouse, in all 
ways, as could be met with in the county of Wilts. 
Mrs. Hicks was much attached to John, and had the 
highest opinion of him, and by many he was looked 
upon as her heir ; but, as the deceased Hicks had 
left several nephews, it was doubtful whether the 
widow's sense of justice would permit her to endow 
her own kith with the fortune left her by her hus- 
band. However this might be, she always bade 
John consider her house as his home ; and whenever 
he afforded himself a holiday it was hither he came. 

It had not been possible for him to announce his 
coming ; and when he drove up late on Tuesday 
evening to the little gabled house in the Close, his 
arrival was the pleasantest of surprises to the old 
lady. He had made up his mind to tell her every- 
thing, as, indeed, under the circumstances, he could 
hardly avoid doing. Besides, her long knowledge of 
the neighbourhood might materially assist his in- 



174 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

quiries. She heard^ of course, with astonishment a 
narration so far removed from all her experience, and 
she was shocked by it : but the feeling uppermost in 
her mind was one of pity for the unhappy girl who 
had been led to take this extraordinary step. 

" How much the poor young woman must have 
suffered, my dear John, before she could have 
brought herself to do, such a thing ! . . . And 
so you have no other clue than that the postmark 
was * Salisbury '? *' 

"None. I think, if I were to see the name of 
the place, I might know it. And, perhaps, I might 
recognise the writing. At least, I remember its 
striking me as peculiar . like what I imagine foreign 
hands to be . fine and cramped ; but then, no doubt, 
every foreign governess writes a hand of that sort, so 
that is not much clue. ... I will go to the post- 
office in the morning, lEind get them to give me a Hst 
of the places near this that send their letters into 
Salisbury. I will also speak to the police, and see if 
they can help me ; but it is rather working in the 
dark." 

' The inspector proved to be a remarkably intelli- 
gent man. The whole of the next day was occupied in 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 175 

prosecuting inquiries in different directions. John 
had obtained an accurate description of Maud's dress. 

^'You expect the young lady has gone into 
service, sir? If so, it is probable she will have 
got rid of her clothes. We'll go round to the 
slop-shops and find out if any things of the sort 
described here have been sold there within the last 
few weeks. , . . If we find them, we are sure we 
are on the right track, at all events. Then about 
the post, sir ; if they've any observation at all, they 
ought to know such a hand as you describe, coupled 
with the name on the cover. There ain't so many 
bags from the neighbouring houses and villages, 
after all." 

The inspector's efforts were crowned with success. 
John accompanied him to the shop where the woman 
distinctly remembered the circumstance of Maud's 
coming there early one morning about a month back, 
and selling the only costly garments upon her, while 
she bought others of a simple kind, together with a 
bag full of linen which had been carried for her to 
the station by the shop-boy. The lad, being ques- 
tioned, could not tell for what station the young 
woman had taken a ticket, nor were porters or 



176 IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 

station-master able to throw any light on the sub- 
ject ; but here the post-office stepped in. Out of all 
the houses whose bags were sent direct to the Salis- 
bury office, a certain number only were on this line 
of rail. Their names were submitted to John : he 
selected, after some hesitation, four or five, and 
among these Beckworth House happened to be the 
only one that sent out envelopes stamped in blue 
on the back. After this, the description of Mrs. 
Cartaret's handwriting, which was well known at 
the post, removed any further doubt ; and the infor- 
mation, furnished by those tradesmen who served 
her, as to the constant changes that took place in 
her maids, pointed at once to the direction which 
John's search must first take. Early the following 
morning be put himself into the train for Beckworth ; 
and, after an interview with the station-master, who 
not only remembered the fact of Maud's arrival, but, 
being a friend of Mr. Dapper's, had heard that 
gentleman's jealous Sneers touching his master's 
admiration for the young woman, and the '' pretty 
way " in which they " carried it on " together . after 
obtaining, in short, more information than he had 
bargained for, John Miles walked slowly up to the 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 177 

house, heavy at heart, awkward, and ill-at-ease. 
Now, that the difficnlties of his undertaking were 
apparently overcome, he felt that they were, in 
reality, only beginning. What should he say to ihe 
sheep who had wandered from his fold ? 



12 



178 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 



CHAPTER XI. 

** Come ! oflf with you, young man ! '* cried Mrs. 
Rouse, taking a rapid surrey of the stranger, from 
the crown of his soaked hat, over a well-splashed 
'* Inverness,'* down to the muddy boots that encased 
his huge feet. " Don't be a-bringing of your dirt in 
here. We don't allow no followers. We've trouble 
enough with Mary Hind, without that" 

*' May I speak with you a minute, ma'am ? I am 
the clergyman of her parish, through whose recom- 
mendation^I believe . she got this place." 

** Oh ! is that it ? Well, I beg your pardon, sir 
. I didn't . please to walk this way. I can't say as 
the young woman's much credit- to the parish. I'm 
just worried out o' my life by her. I wish to good- 
ness," she continued, as they reached the house- 
keeper's room, and she shut the door, ** I wish to 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 179 

goodness she had never set her foot here ; and . 
meaning no disrespect to you, sir . I can't say as 
she's a hit fit for service, though she may have done 
well enough in your school. But we don't want no 
schoUards here," added Mrs. Kouse, with a lively 
sense of the injury which Maud's accomplishments 
in this line had wrought. 

** I can quite understand . I am afraid that she 
made, a mistake in entering service," said Miles; 
(and had he heen the oldest diplomatist, he could 
have said nothing better calculated to mollify Mrs. 
Rouse). "It is to try and induce her to return to 
her friends that I am come here." 

" You'll find it precious hard work I expect, sir, 
but I only hope you'll succeed. The girl is an artful 
hussy, that's what she is, sir, who turns all the men's 
heads, and the sooner she's packed off, the better. 
If I'd had my way, she'd ha' been off before now, in 
double-quick time ; but Mrs. Cartaret is that taken 
with her parleyvousing, she can't see the plain truth, 
nor won't, till it's too late . that's my belief." 

" You are mistaken," said John, hurriedly, and 
he felt himself colouring, as she spoke, which made 
him worse. " The girl is not what you believe her 



180 IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 

to be. She is not artful : believe me . I know her 
well. But yon cannot be more anxious than I am 
that she should quit a situation for which . she is 
altogether unfit." 

"Then, may I be so bold as to ask why you 
recommended her, sir ? *' said Mrs. Rouse, sharply ; 
and she enjoyed the triuinph of witnessing the 
curate's inability to parry this home-thrust. He 
fidgeted about on the black horsehair chair, and 
looked uncomfortable. Then, with a sort of sublime 
pity, she continued : " But Lor* bless you, sir, I 
don't blame you. How was you to know ? I suppose, 
now, you thought in the school that butter wouldn't 
melt in her mouth ? She's not a young woman, now, 
as you'd expect to be encouraging a young gentleman, 
as his intentions can't, in course, be honourable . 
a-kissing in passages, and a-carrying on shameful . 
you wouldn't expect it? No: but you mark my 
words, she is up to a little game here, sir, as you'll 
find she'll not readily give up. If she do, I'll give 
you leave to say she is not artful, and call me a fool 
into the bargain." 

John Miles was certainly not a man to take on 
trust anything a woman like Mrs. Bouse might in- 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 181 

sinuate. He was indignant at the woman's vulgar 
malignity, which it was not difficult to surmise had 
its root in jealousy ; and he would ask for no expla- 
nation of her words. But, nevertheless, could such 
things as he had heard at the station, and now again 
from Mrs. Eouse, could such things be said without 
some foundation ? It was scandal ; but what could 
have given rise to such scandal ? He felt perplexed. 
Mrs. Bouse, in the meantime, was examining his 
nose, and speculating whether he drank. 

" Will you tell her that I am here ? ** he said, 
quietly, at last. ** I hope to prove to you that you 
Site wrong. I have very little doubt that, after a 
short conversation with me, Mary Hind will see the 
advisability of returning to her friends." 

> Ten minutes later Maud entered the room. She 
looked pale and worn ;. but there was a hard, set look 
about the mouth which told of struggle and resolu- 
tion. The first shock of finding herself tracked (and 
by Miles, too, of all men !) had unnerved her. She 
had sat down with her head between her hands, after 
Mrs. Bouse had left the room, and had thought how 
she should meet him ; what she should say ; above 
all, what she should do. And then, at last, she had 



182 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

risen, and like a hunted stag brought to bay, had 
turned to face her pursuer. 

Mrs. Bouse, in the meantime, resorted to one of 
those expedients for obtaining an exact knowledge of 
what passed in the interview between Mary Hind and 
the red-nosed parson, which she probably defended 
at the bar of her own conscience, upon the principle 
of "the end justifying the means.*' In the still- 
room, which adjoined the housekeeper's ropm, where 
Miles was now waiting, was a deep cupboard, the 
back of which had been a door, communicating be- 
tween the two rooms, across which shelves had been 
nailed. When the cupboard-door stood open, there- 
fore, everything that passed in the housekeeper's 
room could be most distinctly heard ; and Mrs. 
Rouse, cognisant of this fact, always jealously kept 
it locked. Upon this occasion, after locking herself 
into the still-room, she noiselessly applied a key 
from the bunch at her side to the cupboard lock, 
and having opened it, she posted herself so that no 
word of what followed escaped her. 

Miles came forward quickly, and took Maud's 
hand. He was more moved than she was, and could 
not speak for a moment or two ; it was she who began 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 188 

** How did you trace me ? And why ? It would 
have been kinder not to do so. What is the use of 
it ? I am resolved not to go back to the house of my 
stepmother's husband/* 

" Miss Pomeroy, I have no right to inquire what 
causes led to your leaving it , but " 

" But I wish you to know them. I left it because 
my life, which had long been miserable, became in- 
supportable when I refused to exchange it for a 
yet worse slavery. You know something of that, 
Mr. Miles. The taunts to which I was subjected, 
drove me to take the step I did, one which I don't 
in the least regret, one from which I will not go back. 
I prefer working for my bread, even as a menial, to 
being dependent on the charity of a man who was at 
no pains to conceal that I was a burden on him. 
Now, Mr. Miles, you know all." 

John had by this time completely recovered his 
self-possession. He spoke earnestly, almost sternly, 
and became ennobled, as he always did, when carried 
away by the sheer force of the ^ords he held himself 
bound to utter. 

" Who placed you in that position ? Was it your 
own act ? Do you remember our conversation on the 



184 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

subject of duty ? You have abandoned yours. You 
have left that state of life to which you were called^ 
to embrace one with other duties which were never 
meant for you. And the manner in which you have 
done this is utterly unjustifiable.*' 

* " What duties did I abandon ? Who wanted me ? 
Their sole object, as I told you long ago, was to get 
rid of me. They would have been too glad had I run 
away with any man of five thousand a year. But 
because I ran away to earn my own bread, and be- 
cause I am resolved to continue working, their pride 
will suffer. That is all.'' 

" Even admitting what you say to be true (though 
I believe Lady Herriesson has suffered ^uch on your 
account), it does not affect the question. We have a 
duty to our own conscience which can never depend' 
on the conduct of others." 

^'I have done nothing my conscience reproaches 
me with," she said, doggedly. 

" Then if you maintain that you are justified in 
taking this step," he continued, " why all this con- 
cealment? Why cause Lady Herriesson so much 
unnecessary anxiety?" 

'' Because it was useless to wound her pride, and 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 185 

create a disturbance by announcing my determination 
of earning my own bread, I wrote to let her know 
I was well and happy, which was more than I could 
have done had I been the wife of Mr. Durborough, as 
she wished.*' 

" And was it trud, Miss Pomeroy ? I doubt it. 
You look far from well, and I cannot believe that you 
are happy in a position, among a set of people so 
utterly unlike anything you have been used to, and 
who regard you with mistrust. Is not this true ? I 
gather it from what that vulgar woman said to me 
just now.*' 

"What did she say?'* asked Maud, quickly, 
looking up into his face. 

'* She seemed to be very anxious you should go." 

" I shall not go . I shall not go, if it depends upon 
me. I may be driven away, of course, if you insist 
on telling my stepmother where I am ; but " 

*'Be advised. Miss Pomeroy, and avoid all the 
pain and scandal of an explanation in this house, by 
quietly leaving at once. I will see Mrs. Cartaret, 
and take the odium of this upon myself.** 

''And where should I go ? For return to Mort- 
lands I never will.** 



186 IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 

** As a temporary measure^ I propose that you 
should take refuge with an old aunt of mine at Salis- 
bury, who will receive you as a mother. You can 
write to Lady Herriesson from there ; you can discuss 
your future plans, and nothing need ever be known of 
your having been in service. Believe me, this is the 
wisest course now to retrieve the past.'* 

She shook her head. " I do not wish to retrieve 
the past, as you call it. No, Mr. Miles, I am grateful 
to you for all your interest in me, and I daresay you 
are right. Perhaps it would be the wisest course, but 
I can't pursue it for all that. I cannot leave this 
house unless I am compelled." 

** But this is sheer madness. Why create an 
unnecessary scandal? Of course, I must let your 
mother know where you are. If Sir Andrew come 
down here, and has an interview with Mrs. Cartaret, 
a distressing, and to you most humiliating, scene 
must follow. Why not avoid this while there is yet 
time ? " 

'* Because, if you must know the truth, I have 
promised. I have given my word that, for a certain 
time, nothing shotdd induce me to leave Mrs. Car- 
taret of my own free will." 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 187 

He looked at her for a moment with a pained 
wonderment, and began fiddling with the pens on 
the table. 

" You mean that you made such a promise to 
Mrs. Cartaret ? Leave me to explain . . " 

" It is not to Mrs. Cartaret I made the promise." 

" To whom, then ? " Here he split a pen in two. 

" That you must excuse my saying. It is enough 
that, whether rightly or wrongly, I have made such a 
promise. I am sure you are the last person who 
would have me break it." 

Poor John felt as if a dagger had been driven into 
him, somewhere near his heart. To whom could the 
girl have made such a promise ? To whom but to 
the man Mrs. Bouse had alluded to, and whose 
name Miles had heard, as common gossip at the 
railway station, coupled with Maud's ? The station- 
master's words and the housekeeper's yet coarser 
insinuations, like horrid phantoms, which no force of 
reason will dismiss, had haunted him ever since, and 
now they rose up stronger and blacker, allying them- 
selves to Maud's vague avowal in his distressing per- 
plexity. He wiped the cold perspiration from his 
brow, as he stood there, leaning one clumsy hand on 



188 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

the green-baize cloth of the table in the centre of 
the room^ shuffling about with his feet^ and looking 
into her face with such piteous anxiety as must have 
touched her^ but that her eyes were turned towards 
the window. Throughout the interview, indeed, it 
was notable how Maud, unlike her old, fearless self, 
seemed to avoid meeting Miles^s gaze. Once or twice 
she turned suddenly towards him, and their eyes 
flashed, as it were : otherwise she kept hers doggedly 
fixed upon the laurels outside the window. She sat, 
with her arms folded, and never changed her position. 
Miles stood during the whole interview. 

'* Miss Pomeroy," he said, in a husky voice, at 
last, " does the person to whom you made such a 
promise know the truth ? Is it possible that he, or 
she, should hold you to it, if the simple facts of your 
false position here are made known ? No one with a 
grain of right feeling could wish you to remain here 
under the circumstances." 

" Listen to me, Mr. Miles. I have already told 
you I don't want to leave this place. You think it 
impossible I should be happy here, in what you call 
my 'false position.' You do not remember, how 
wretched I was before I came here. In spite of 



---] 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE, 189 

some drawbacks, I . I have been happier here than I 
have ever been before. The servants' jealousy and 
vulgarity are but small evils compared with the great 
kindness I have met with from Mrs. Cartaret. I feel 
that I am of real use to her. I never felt in the 
course of my life that 1 was of any use to any one 
before. I was very nearly going yesterday, but . ^but 
I consented to stay, and now I must stay. If it 
depends upon myself, Mr. Miles, I cannot leave her. 
And if you are kind, you will keep my secret, and 
let me fight my own way." 

He walked to the window and then to the mantel- 
piece : he took up his hat and set it down again : he 
could not remain still; and Maud's eyes, uncon- 
sciously, kept following the large islands which his 
muddy boots left upon Mrs. Eouse's carpet. Sud- 
denly he stopped oppgsite to her. 

" Miss Pomeroy, what you ask is quite impossible. 
Forgive me, but I must speak out. As clergyman of 
your parish, it would be sinful in me to let any false 
delicacy prevent my doing so. By pursuing the 
course you seem bent upon, you are incurring a great 
danger ; you are imperilling that which is a woman's 
most precious possession . ^your reputation." 



190 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

She started up, her cheeks suddenly a-flame, and 
looked at him indignantly, without speaking. He 
went on at once : " That woman knows my object in 
coming here, and she predicted that I should find ybu 
resolute. I will not insult you by a repetition of 
what she said. It is enough that your persistence in 
remaining will be misconstrued. If you wiU not save 
yourself, therefore, by leaving this at once, quietly 
and without explanation, as can easily be managed, I 
must save you in spite of yourself. I must tell 
Mrs. Cartaret all." 

"No,'* said Maud, passionately. "I will not 
have it. She will imagine . never mind what. If 
you choose to go and tell Sir Andrew, you can, it 
may be your duty, and by to-night's post I will write 
to him myself, and say that nothing will ever induce 
me to return to his house, and therefore he had better 
leave me in peace. That may be your duty, I repeat, 
but it certainly cannot be your duty to interfere with 
me, here, and I must insist upon your not speaking 
to Mrs. Cartaret.'* 

*.' I think you forget by what means you obtained 
this situation ? " said John, speaking very slowly. 
" I have clearly a right to tell Mrs. Cartaret that the 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 191 

certificate she received in my handwriting had no 
reference to the person who entered her service/' 

Maud covered her face with her hands, and burst 

into tears. At the same instant the door opened, 

and Mrs. Cartaret entered. The housekeeper, afraid 

that her clerical bird would escape without matters 

coming to a crisis, had only waited to hear Maud's 

reiterated declaration that she could not leave Beck- 

worth by reason of her promise to some one, and had 

then hastened up to her mistress, breathless, bursting 

with impatience to communicate as much as she 

could understand of what she had overheard, and 

almost incoherent in the attempt to do so. The girl 

turned out to be some sort of lady, who had done 

something dreadful somewhere, and had run away, 

and come here under a false name, and was clearly no 

better than she should be. What had Mrs. Bouse 

always said ? Now, it turned out that the creature 

couldn't and wouldn't leave the house because she 

had promised Mr. Lowndes to stay ! This last shaft 

carried home. What ? La miserable had said that ? 

Had confessed that she had made a promise to mon 

fils ? that she had a secret understanding with him ? 

Ah ! mais c'est un pen trop fort ! She must see to 



192 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

this. And, regardless of her dressing-gown and 
slippers, she threw a shawl over her grey hair, and 
ran down-stairs. As she turned the handle of the 
door she caught Miles's last words. 

" What does this mean ? " she cried, in her high 
treble, walking straight up to the speaker, and fixing 
her bright black eyes upon him. " What does all 
this mean, sir ? Who is this young woman ? She 
comes to me with a false character, does she ? Who 
is she, sir?" 

"She will tell you herself, madam," murmured 
the curate, feeling that the avowal would come better 
thus. 

" Mrs. Cartaret " . Maud brushed the hot tears 
away, and strove to speak calmly, as she turned 
towards the excited old lady . ** Mrs. Cartaret, I see 
you already know the worst, all that you can possibly 
care to know. It little matters who I am. I am not 
what you have believed me to be. I deceived you, 
for I had no other means of getting a situation ; but 
what Mr. Miles said of Mary Hind I believe he would 
say of me. He is our curate ; question him. I will 
not return home; nothing shall induce me. If I 
leave you it will be to go to London, and work 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 19S 

for a living there. Will you cast me oflf, Mrs. 
Cartaret ? You have been most kind ; I never can 
forget your kindness. Will you not forgive me, 
now ? '* 

" Forgive you ? Only hear her ! Listen to the 
impudence of the coquine ! A false character . une 
fiUe qui court les aventures . who tries to entrap my 
son . a regular intriguante . and she asks me to forgive 
her ! Kind ? I was kind, because I thought you to 
be an honest girl, above deception, and I find you 
are as rusee as an old actress. I see now our little 
affair of yesterday with wide-open eyes. What ! You 
promise monsieur mon fils not to go away, do you ? 
And you come, with a fine indignation, to declare to 
me you must leave the house at once. And I am 
such a sotte that I do not see through it all. I would 
not believe my good Rouse. But enough of this. I 
will not listen to another word. Come, pack up your 
clothes, and be off, and you, sir, let me have a few 
words with you in private. This way." And the old 
lady, trembling with anger, turned towards the door. 
Maud stood there motionless, as if turned to stone. 
The bitter humiliation of that moment may surely 
have atoned for many of the mistakes of her life, 

13 



194 IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 

poor girl ! To her proud natnre a sorer chastisement 
could hardly have been devised. 

*' I have a fly here. Be ready in a quarter of an 
hour if yon can, and we shall save the down train," 
said Miles, gently, as he followed Mrs. Gartaret from 
the room. 

What passed in that interview between the curate 
and the incensed old lady need not be recorded. It 
is sufficient to say that he sought in vain to mitigate 
the vehemence of her resentment against Maud. 
Mrs. Gartaret's suspicions being now not only aroused, 
but confirmed beyond the possibility of doubt, the 
sense of her son's danger made her pitiless to the 
girl, whose unhappiness had driven her to seek for 
an independence by means which John Miles could 
not attempt to justify. She would sooner have 
pardoned a peasant's daughter; but a young lady ! to 
run away from home and enter service, and by a false 
character, too ! It shocked all her fine old notions of 
a gentlewoman, in the first place ; in the second, she 
was far too sharp not to perceive that if Lowndes's 
infatuation should unhappily prove to be lasting, the 
girl's birth would prove a powerful weapon in his 
hands. She -was too much irritated to take a dis- 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 196 

passionate view of the case. She heard all that 
Miles had to say, but she shook her head incredu- 
lously when he tried to convince her that the estimate 
she had formed of Maud's character was utterly false^ 
and she declined seeing her again. 

" Look you, my good sir, it is of no use to say 
that I forgive her, because I do not. Take her home 
to her friends, and never let me hear of her again, if 
possible. Eeligion ? Christian forgiveness ? Ta-ta ! 
That is all very well, but forgiveness does not cast 
out devils ; and this one has made so much mischief 
here, and I had grown so fond of her, that I require 
all my force to cast her out. You see me in a rage, 
sir. Yes ; because she made me her dupe. There, 
say no more about it. Pour I'amour de Dieu, let us 
hear no more about her ! " 

And so, poor girl, she went her way, her proud 
spirit wounded, her heart full to bursting, and with a 
grievous sense of injustice, against which, neverthe- 
less, she had deprived herself of all right to complain. 
Not yet a month had passed since she first crossed 
the threshold of Beckworth, and how eventful had 
those weeks proved to her ! 

Their short journey to Salisbury was performed 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 197 



CHAPTER XII. 

There was not a more miserable man in London 
than Lowndes Gartaret in those days. It was on the 
Wednesday night that he got to town, trying vainly, 
for the first time in his life, to shake ofif a dead 
weight that lay at his heart, and to turn his thoughts 
from the one object upon which they were obstinately 
^xed. He went to Brookes's ; there had been a 
late debate going on, and all the men he met were 
eagerly discussing it: he could scarcely affect a 
languid interest in what they said. Then he turned 
into '' Pratt's," eat a morose sandwich, and smoked 
a gloomy cigar ; heard the various merits of Fili- 
buster and Merry Andrew canvassed, and their 
respective chances of winning the Derby; tried to 
play a game of billiards, and missed nearly every 
'^-^ ; listened with a cynical smile to that capital 



198 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE, 

(though scandalous) story about young A. and Lady 
B., which made every other man in the room roar ; 
and, finally, got to bed, but not to sleep, about four 
in the morning. 

The next day he played a set of melancholy varia- 
tions upon the same tune. He sat for an hour with 
one of the prettiest women in London, whose con- 
versation, moreover, possessed the spice and sparkle 
of champagne-cup. He came away^ declaring that 
she was as dull as ditch-water. He sauntered down 
to Tattersall's ; be took a turn in the Bow : and all 
the apples at which he bit were dust and ashes ! At 
night a friend who had a box at the Haymarket asked 
him to come there, and to join a supper with some 
actresses afterwards. Lowndes was so visibly bored 
during the play that he infected the man he was 
with, and said so many sarcastic and disagreeable 
things during supper, that the ladies were unanimous 
in wishing that he had not been of the party. After 
another sleepless night, a night during which he 
thought over all that Maud had ever said to him 
about his unprofitable existence, and the despicable 
folly of utter idleness, he rose with the resolution of 
seeking other and better means of occupying his 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE* 199 

thoughts^ if possible^ He walked to Chesham Place^ 
where his cousin, the Minister, lived ; a man who^ 
for certain reasons of gratitude, had shown the 
strongest desire to serve him, but whose good offices 
Lowndes had always declined. The great man had 
just finished breakfast, and was in his study, reading, 
with that- callousness which long use produces, an 
abusive article upon himself in one of the morning 
papers. He raised his eyebrows as he laid down the 
paper, and held out his hand 

" Why, what brings you out at this unusual hour, 
Lowndes ? I did not know you were in town* How 
is your mother ? ** 

" Very well, thank you. I wanted to talk to you, 
so I came early. You won't believe me, I daresay ; 
but I'm sick of doing nothing* Sudden change, isn't 
it ? Like the rest of my friends, you have always 
been at me for being so lazy. Well, at last I have 
begun to see, myself, that it's a mistake. I don't 
know that I am good for much, but I am come to tell 
you that if you can find me anything to do, I'll do it. 
It can't be harder work than trying to kill time when 
one feels confoundedly bored . that's certain." 

The Minister, whilst expressing his satisfaction at 



200 IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 

the change in his cousin's views, reminded Lowndes 
that appointments of any kind did *' not grow on 
gooseherry-bushes ; '* that the press and the public 
now exercised a sharp look-out for all such as were 
not justified by merit ; and, lastly, that he had no 
immediate prospect of anything falling into his gift. 
But he promised not to be unmindful of Lowndes's 
wishes, and he exhorted him, in the meanwhile, to 
employ his time in studying, with a solicitor, common 
saw, a knowledge of which must, in any calling, be a 
valuable acquisition. And then, a special messenger 
being announced, he shook Lowndes's hand and 
dismissed him. 

The important place that trivial accidents hold in 
life is a truth of which each man's experience must 
afford numberless examples. In leaving Beckworth 
suddenly, as he did, Lowndes had found it expedient 
to leave his valet behind him. That individual had 
received the order to " pack portmanteaux " instantly 
with consternation, consequent, as he explained, 
upon the fact that half his master's linen was at the 
wash ! He was ordered, therefore, to follow Lowndes 
as soon as this could be recovered ; and by the first 
train on Friday he appeared, charged not alone with 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFF, 201 

clean shirts, but with the strange tidings which had 
disturbed the whole Beckworth household on the 
previous day. But for this, it is very certain that 
Lowndes would not have heard of the discovery 
touching Maud, and of her departure, for some 
weeks. Mrs. Cartaret would naturally have abstained 
from all allusion to her in writing to her son ; and, 
not until his next visit (which he had resolved should 
not be for a month at loast) would he have known 
the truth. And then, if his mother had kept her 
own counsel, all clue by which to trace the girl would 
have been lost. 

Everything is known, everything discussed in the 
servants' hall, and Lowndes's valet, being perfectly 
aware of the particular interest which his master took 
in the young person, a garbled version of whose story 
had excited so much curiosity when it penetrated to 
the lower regions at Beckworth, lost no time in 
informing Mr. Cartaret of what had occurred twelve 
hours after the latter had left home. It was, as I 
have said, a garbled version; still, there was the 
main outline. Mary Hind was not Mary Hind, but a 
gentleman's daughter, who had run away from home ; 
and the parson of the parish had come after her, and 



202 IN THAT STATE OP LIFE, 

had carried her back with him. This was all that 
Lowndes retained ; he cleared the tale of its superin* 
cumhent rubbish, and held fast by these facts. He put 
himself into the five-o'clock train, and reached Beck- 
worth, just as his mother was going to bed, that night. 

She guessed at once why he was come, and looked 
somewhat aghast* 

" Tell me the truth of all this, mother. It is of 
no use any longer beating about the bush . where is 
Mary Hind gone ? " 

"What is that to you, Lowndes?*' said the old 
lady, taking courage " with both hands " as she 
would herself have said* 

" After what happened on Tuesday night, I have 
a right to know whether she left Beckworth of her 
own free will, or not," 

" Because she promised you to remain, hein ? 
La coquine ! Well, then ; she did not leave it of her 
own free will. She left it because I turned her out 
.there ! " 

" Where is she gone ? I ask you again." 

" Ca ne vous regarde pas." 

" It is so much my business that I won't rest till 
I have found out." 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 203 

" Allez au diable ! " cried the old lady, violently 
thumping the sofa with her little fist. "What do 
you mean by all this ? Do you think I am going to 
encourage your intrigues, sir ? Go, find out as you 
can. I will tell you nothing." 

" You have no right to use that word about the 
girl, and you know it as well as I do, mother. Look 
here. I will be quite open with you. I love this 
giri. For the first time in my Ufe I know what love 
is. I left Beckworth on Wednesday because Mary 
asked me to do so ; and because I resolved to give 
myself a fair trial, to see if absence would make any 
change in my feelings, and but for this discovery I 
should have remained away for some time. Now that 
I find she is gone, I am determined to learn who she 
is, and what has become of her Tell me all you 
know, and I wiU pledge you my word that, when I 
have discovered her, I .will wait . I will test my 
feelings by time before I speak to her again. She is 
a lady by birth ; so much I know. It is of very 
little consequence to me, but to you, with your ideas, 
of course it makes a great difference, and " 

*' It makes no difiference at all ! " interrupted 
Mrs. Cartaret, vehemently, "A lady! ma foi! a 



204 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

girl who rnns away from home, qui court les 
ayentures, who has no name; who has been adver- 
tised and made the gossip of the county, . don't talk 
to me of it, Lowndes ! Tenez, mon fils, 9a me porte 
le sang a la tete ! " 

"What county has she been made the gossip 
of ? " asked Lowndes, regardless of the rest of his 
mother's tirade. 

"What do I know?" replied the old lady, 
sharply. " I only know that she comes here with 
her false character, and that the cur6 finds her out, 
and follows her, and that she has gone away, and I 
hopei never to hear her name again . ^voila ! " 

" So they advertised for her, did they ? ** 

" Yes, in The Times . a pretty disgrace ! If I 
was her father I would lock her up, and horsewhip 
her . la coquine ! " 

" Who is her father ? , Come, mother, you may 
as well tell me, for I shall find out, somehow or 
other!" 

" I shall tell you nothing, miserable que tu es ! 
What ! you will follow this creature . ^this girl who 
introduces herself into houses under false names? 
You, who might marry the heiress of Marly-les- 



j 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 205 

Bois. a charming, innocent girl, who has never yet 
left the ' Sacr6 Coear ' . and you prefer to her this . 
this. aventuriere. this disreputable " 

'^ There, mother, that is enough. She is as 
straightforward and pure-minded a girl as ever lived ; 
she never encouraged my passion in the smallest 
degree; on the contrary, she has nothing of the 
adventuress about her . ^and I think I know the class 
pretty well. I am confident she had some very 
strong provocation -before she took the strange step 
which brought her here ; and I feel certain that you 
will one day be sorry for having spoken of her as you 
have done. As to your ' Sacre CoBur,' I have known 
one or two remarkably queer ladies who were educated 
there, and " 

'* Ah ! now he is going to talk against religion ! 
He is going to talk scandal of the convents! It 
wanted but that . ^ah ! " 

'* No, I mean no disrespect against the convents. 
I only mean this : that I prefer a woman I know, a. 
character that is formed, to the sheet of white paper 
upon which God knows what may be written by-and- 
by. And now, mother, good-night. As you are 
determined to tell me nothing, we had better say no 



206 IN THAT STATE OF LITE. 

more on the subject. It only irritates you, and it 
does me no good." 

He left the room ; and when Mrs. Bouse brought 
up her mistress's chocolate the next morning, she 
informed the unhappy old lady . who had lain awake 
half the night devising means (poor innocent soul ! ) 
by which she might divert her son from the right 
track . that Mr. Lowndes had been gone two 
hours. 

On leaving his mother's room the previous night, 
he had sent for the file of The Times, and had 
experienced no difficulty in finding the advertisement 
which had reference to Maud. In it, any person 
having information respecting the missing young 
lady, was requested to communicate with a certaiu 
solicitor in London. To London, therefore, Lowndes 
must return by the first train in the morning. It 
was Saturday, and if he did not see the solicitor 
e^rly, his office would be closed, and two whole days 
would be lost. First, however, sorely against his 
inclination, he thought it expedient to question 
Dapper, and all the men in the stables. He learnt 
very little : a fly from the station had brought .the 
clergyman and had taken him and the ^' young 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 207 

person" back; and the train they meant to catch 
was evidently the one-o'clock ^'down." At the 
station he gained one other fact: their tickets had 
been taken for Salisbury. Bat as there is a junction 
there^ and two distinct companies, this did not 
insure the travellers having gone no further. He 
thought it more prudent, therefore, to hold by his 
original plan of going to London, if only for a few 
hours. He could return to Salisbury by the evening 
mail, if he failed in obtaining the information he 
wanted. - 

This early train brought him to London by eleven 
o'clock, and before noon he was in the solicitor's 
office. He sent in his card, and was admitted at 
once. The lawyer rose, and advanced with extreme 
urbanity. 

'* I am delighted to make your acquainta;nce, 
Mr. Cartaret. I knew your uncle very well, and 
have often been at Beckworth, in former days. 
Pray take a chair. What is there I can do for 
you ? " 

It was a great piece of good luck : the way was 
thus unexpectedly smoothed for Lowndes. He drew 
the advertisement from his pocket. 



20ft IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 

'* I am come to speak to you aboat this. Have 
you yet received any information touching the person 
whom it concerns ? '* 

** Why, bless my soul ! " The lawyer stopped 

short, and looked sharply at the young man over his 
spectacles. '* No, Mr. Cartaret, we have not . what 
do you know about her ? " 

*^Wait a minute. I will tell you; but I must 
make it a condition that you first tell me who she is, 
and where her people live. I think, as you know 
something of us, you will trust to the honour of 
a Cartaret to keep this a profound secret, if you 
require it. But the circumstances of the case are 
so peculiar, that I do not choose to say anything 
unless I am made acquainted with the young lady's 
antecedents." 

''Well," said the solicitor, after a moment's 
pause. '' I see no reason why I should not tell 
you. The whole of the neighbourhood has been 
fall of the scandal for the last month, and, as you 
say, sir, I am sure I can trust to the honour of a 
Cartaret to turn this information to no ill purpose. 
The young lady is Miss Pomeroy. She is step- 
daughter to Sir Andrew Herriesson, and left Mort- 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 209 

lands, Sir Andrew's place, it is supposed, with some 
romantic idea of supporting herself, and being no 
longer a burden on her stepfather. At least it is 
tolerably certain that she went away alone, and that 
love, at all events, had nothing to say to this extra- 
ordinary step." 

" Pardon me an instant. Do you know anything 
of the curate of the parish ? " 

" No. Why ? He was questioned, I remember, 
as being almost the only person with whom Miss 
Pomeroy was on terms of any intimacy, and it is 
greatly in consequence of what he said, that we have 
been led to the conclusion that Miss Pomeroy had 
conceived a morbid repugnance to continuing to be 
dependent on Sir Andrew. It appears that she had 
refused a magnificent offer of marriage only a few 
days previously. She is a peculiar character, with 
unusual ideas upon most subjects, for a young lady, 
I apprehend." 

It was now Lowndes's turn to give the narrative 
of Mary Hind's entering his mother's service, and of 
her sojourn at Beckworth. He did this succinctly, 
making, of course, no allusion to his own feelings, 
nor to his conduct, which had so justly incensed her 

14 



210 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

as to have very nearly driven her from the honse the 
day prior to the curate's arrival. 

*' And now, look here. How comes it that if he 
took her home . that was on Thursday . you should 
not have had notice of the fact before this ? To say 
nothing of a telegram, which they would surely have 
sent, there have been two posts. Doesn't it strike 
you as very extraordinary?" 

" I doubt whether she would go home ; but I 
cannot make it out. This Mr. Miles would surely 
have communicated with them ." He reflected 
for a minute, and looked at his watch. ''I will tell 
you what : we close at two to-day, and to-morrow is 
Sunday. Do you care to prosecute this inquiry any 
further ? If so, we will start together by the three- 
o'clock train, Mr. Cartaret. We shall be at Scomton 
by nine, and might get on to Mortlands to-night. 
What say you, sir ? " 

The two men started by the three-o'clock train. 



IN THAT STATS 01' LIFE, 211 



CHAPTER Xin, 

In watching the course of very quiet lives one is 
sometimes struck by seeing how events crowd them- 
selves into a marvellously short space of time. John 
Miles's life had been one of as uninterrupted calm 
as any man's ; and now, suddenly, incidents of vital 
interest succeeded each other rapidly. During that 
silent half hour to Salisbury, he had resolved on his 
line of action. He would deliver up Miss Pomeroy 
into Mrs. Hicks's charge : he would then speak cer- 
tain words which he felt must get themselves said 
before he could leave her ; and, after that, he would 
start on his homeward journey, to inform Lady 
Herriesson of the discovery and safety of her errant 
stepdaughter. 

Fate willed it otherwise. On driving up to the 



212 IN THAT STATE OF UFS. 

door of the small gabled house in the Close, Martha 
ran out with a troubled face. 

*' I'm glad you're a-come back. Mister John. 
I've been a-watching for you. Missis has been took 
ill. We have all been fine and frightened. She had 
a seizure about an hour after you left. I thought it 
was all up with her, Mister John, but she rallied. 
The doctor . he has been with her ever since, and 
says that she'll do now, if she don't have another 
attack. Will you please to walk up-stairs, and see 
her, sir ? " 

The old lady was quite conscious, and her eyes 
smiled when she saw her nephew enter the room. 
She tried to speak, but was prevented by the doctor, 
who whispered to John that it was, above all things, 
essential that she should be kept quiet. *' Anything 
that excites her may be fatal. She must be most 
carefully watched for some days. You can remain 
with her, can you not?" 

John notified that he could. He need not be at 
Mortlands until Saturday night, for his Sunday's 
duty, and he might manage to return, perhaps, on 
Monday. In his aunt's condition, it seemed obvious 
that he ought to be here, if possible. As to Maud, 



IK THAT STATE OF LIFE. 213 

he must send off a telegram to Sir Andrew, and 
write by post a faller explanation of the circumstances 
in which Miss Pomeroy was now placed. 

Maud sat in the little parlour below stairs, list- 
less ; her hands lying impassive in her lap, her eyes 
fixed upon the fire. The violent emotions of the 
morning had left her stunned. She had a dim con- 
sciousness of humiliation and anguish, justly entailed 
by her own conduct; and felt utterly incapable of 
looking forward, or of laying out any plan of action 
for herself. Only one thing . ^not back to Mortlands ! 
Her mind kept repeating this with an obstinate des- 
peration. Nothing should drag her there. Martha, 
wondering " whoever the young lady can be as Mister 
John has brought *' to this quiet old house, where all 
goes on by clockwork from one year's end to the 
other, and young ladies have never come to stay 
before, brings in a luncheon-tray, and Maud eats 
something mechanically. She hears the doctor 
descend, and leave the house ; then, after that, for a 
long time, there is no other sound but th& heavy 
tick-tick of the clock in the hall. It is getting dusk 
when a shambling step upon the stair tells her that 
Miles' is coming down. 



214 IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 

**Miss Pomeroy," says he, awkwardly enough, 
and colouring, as he enters, " will you try and make 
yourself at home here, for a day or two ? My aunt's 
illness, I hope, will make no difference. Her last 
words, before I left her this morning, were, * Bring 
Miss Pomeroy, and she shall remain with me as long 
as she likes.' I should have returned to Mortlands 
myself this evening, but for this illness. I am now 
going to telegraph to Sir Andrew, and write to Lady 
Herriesson, to announce your safety under this 
roof." 

She did not think of resisting his proposal that 
she should remain here. Where, indeed, could she 
go ? She wanted time to collect her ideas ; and in 
what Miles said, there was one thing only which 
made much impression. To-morrow the Philistines 
would be upon her ! 

She went into the adjoining study; and she 
heard him say to Martha : '* I have plenty of time 
for the post? I shall have done my letter in a 
quarter of an hour, and whoever goes there,' will 
carry on this message to the telegraph- office. I will 
not ring, as the bell disturbs Mrs. Hicks, but I will 
leave both paper and letter in the hall." 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 215 

Mand saw him again two or three times that 
eyening, and his visits to the parlour, it mast be 
confessed, far from affording her any comfort, rather 
irritated her. She knew she ought to feel grateful 
to Miles, and she did not : she felt, on the contrary, 
something akin to resentment. He found her sitting 
under a lamp, a volume of Plutarch's Lives, which 
she had taken from a shelf, before her. She scarcely 
raised her eyes when he entered, and her tight-shut 
mouth seemed to unclose reluctantly to utter such 
words as were absolutely necessary. When she did 
glance up, and caught the light glistening upon the 
prominent feature of the curate's face, it annoyed 
her. He was wonderfully good with her : so patient 
and forbearing. But this, I think, only made it 
worse. She kept comparing his excellencies with 
the shortcomings of a man whom she certainly could 
not respect, and who would never be patient or for- 
bearing. Had poor John's character been a little 
less admirable, she would have liked him, just then, 
all the better. 

Miles was not to be envied : with his old aunt 
lying, in her precarious state, upstairs, and the girl 
he worshipped, below, freezing him by her manner 



216 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

when he approached her. But he said to himself 
that there were reasons for this ; she had been sab- 
jected to insult in his presence that day; her own 
conscience must now be accusing her ; lastly, she 
was in a delicate position in this house . the guest of 
his aunt, whom she did not even know. These 
causes, combined, were surely suflEicient to account 
for her manner, without attributing it to that most 
fatal one, which John tried to dismiss from his mind, 
as incredible. But he could not quite get rid of what 
he had heard ; no one ever can. 

The next day the doctor declared that all imme- 
diate anxiety about Mrs. Hicks was over. She was 
allowed to see Maud for a minute, as she wished it. 
The old lady held out her hand, and said gently : '' I 
am glad to see you, my dear." 

*' You are not to talk, remember," said John. 

" But I want to tell her that " 

" That the longer she stays the better you will be 
pleased. 1 have told her so. Sir Andrew will, no 
doubt, be here presently, and if " 

"We will talk over this by-and-by," said Maud, 
quickly. " I am very grateful to Mrs. Hicks for her 
kindness.' 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 217 

She stooped, and kissed the old lady's hand. 
Then, when she had left the room, Mrs. Hicks 
whispered: ''John, I like her face. I understand 
it all now, my dear. God prosper you! I hope 
she will stay here until . well, until she gets a better 
home." 

John's face grew purple ; and its distressed ex- 
pression struck the old lady. He said nothing, but 
sighed, and shook his head; then presently he fol- 
lowed Maud, and tried to get to speak to her. Im- 
possible. She shut herself into her own room, and, 
by-and-by, slipped out, and wandered about the 
cathedral and the Close, feeling restless and ill at 
ease. The crisis was at hand: there must be an 
explanation with John that night, and a definite reso- 
lution, in some shape or other. What could she do ? 

In the meantime, neither telegram nor messenger 
arrived from Mortlands. John was at his wit's end 
to account for this. When dinner-time came, he 
eat something in his aunt's room, feeling that a tete- 
a-Ute meal with Miss Pomeroy might not be agree- 
able to- her under the circumstances ; but as soon as 
it was over, he descended to the parlour. He found 
her demeanour very different to what it had been on 



218 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

the previons evening. She held ont her hand, and 
was the first to speak. 

'' Yon are going back to Mortlands to-morrow, are 
you not?" 

'' Yes, I am ; bat I cannot anderstand not having 
a telegram . ^nor any notice having been taken of my 
message. The early post, however, rmist bring you a 
letter from Lady Herriesson." 

" No, it will not. Neither letter nor telegram 
were sent. I destroyed both." 

John looked surprised and annoyed. After a 
moment's pause, he said abruptly : " What was 
your object. Miss Pomeroy ? You must have known 
that . r-" 

" To gain a few hours. I could decide on nothing 
yesterday. My brain was in a whirl. The prospect 
of Sir Andrew's arriving by the first train made me 
desperate. I went out, taking both letter and mesr 
sage, and told Martha I had done so, but instead of 
despatching, I destroyed them." 

" You forget that you are placing me in a very 
awkward position. Miss Pomeroy," said John, speak- 
ing thickly, and turning his face away from her, 
towards the fire. 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 219 

** Why SO ? You are going home to-morrow. It 
is much better you should tell them everything your- 
self. You can then explain to Sir Andrew how use- 
less it is to come here, and have a scene. I am 
resolved not to return to Mortlands.** 

" You will remain here, then, if they consent 
to it ? '' 

" No. I am going to London." 

" To London ? What ! Who are you going to 
there ? " 

'' I shall go and train for a hospital-nurse : it is 
what I am fitted for. I am strong, and haven't sen- 
sitive nerves . though I have a sensitive pride. I 
won't try service again, and subject myself to . well, 
no matter. But I believe I can bear a good deal in 
other ways, and, at all events, I mean to try." 

" Oh ! Miss Pomeroy," exclaimed John. " Pray 
think better of this. At all events, whatever you 
may do by-and-by, pray remain here a little time. 
Your presence here at this moment is valuable . it 
is, indeed. I cannot bear to leave my poor aunt 
solely to the charge of Martha. I must return to 
my parish work, and it is quite uncertain whether I 
may be able to come back here just at present. Will 



220 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

9 

you refuse to do a kind action, and take my place in 
the sick-room while I am away ? " 

'' I am a stranger to Mrs. Hicks. I should be 
no sort of comfort to her." 

" Indeed you would. She has expressed a great 
desire for it herself. Martha is an excellent old soul, 
but a younger face is cheering in a sick-room. K 
you are bent on hospital training, Miss Pomeroy, try 
and think it is beginning here." 

Maud hesitated. " If I can really be of use, why 
I will stay for a few days . until your return ; but, if 
so, you must keep Sir Andrew away. . . . When 
do you think you shall be back ? " 

He got up, and began nerrously poking at the 
fire, which was quite uncalled for, inasmuch as it 
was burning brightly ; but by this device he turned 
his back to Maud, and while he shivered a fine block 
of coal to atoms, he said, with a great effort : " It . 
it . shall depend upon you, Miss Pomeroy." 

" Upon me ? I don*t understand you. If your 
aunt remains ill, you will return as soon as you can, 
I suppose ? " 

" I could . I might . ^perhaps, be back on Monday 
. if you would say but one word . if you would say 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 221 

that my presence here is not . not nnwelcome to 
you." 

Did she understand aright? A flush of angry 
surprise suflEused her face. Had he brought her here 
for this ? She had resented his pursuit ; she had 
felt bitterly towards him for destroying her short- 
lived day-dream ; but she had all along looked up to 
him as the faithful, uncompromising man of God . 
the apostle of duty. Was he, after all, no better 
than other men ? Had he tracked her, and driven 
her from Beckworth for this ? No ; she discarded 
that unworthy doubt. But his words implied but 
too plainly that he wished to take advantage of her 
position, now, to urge a suit which he had never 
dared to urge before. It put all her woman's nature 
upon the defensive. She sat there in consternation, 
unable to utter a word, but feeling very angry. He 
turned, and took her hand : she withdrew it quickly. 
He saw the wrathful look in her eyes, and said, 
in a broken voice : " Forgive my presumption. Miss 
Pomeroy. But the gulf that has divided us hitherto 
no longer seemed so impassable. You have fled 
from a life of luxury, and have embraced a life of 
work. The drop to being the wife of a poor curate 



222 IN THAT STATE OF UFE. 

no longer seemed so great. . . . Listen to me," he 
continued, his courage rising as he spoke. ' " I know 
that there is nothing in me to attract any woman, 
and that I have nothing to offer you hut a deep . 
God only knows how deep ! . and devoted love. No 
one would ever have known it. It would have died 
with me, as it has lived in my inmost heart, for more 
than three years, unspoken, hut for this. But now, 
Maud, that you have cast yourself out upon the 
world, I cannot remain silent. I helieve, yes, I do 
believe, that I could, in time, make you happy. I 
do not expect you to love me now ; but if I am not 
utterly repugnant to you, do not cast my love abso- 
lutely from you. Believe me, the faithful attach- 
ment of even a man like myself is better than a 
lonely struggle with the world, such as you contem- 
plate. You need active duties, you want to feel your- 
self of use : yours would be the highest use that is 
given to woman." 

The emotion with which John uttered these 
words Maud found was infectious. She was moved, 
in spite of herself, and said, in a softened voice: 
'' I wish you had not spoken thus, Mr. Miles. . . . 
It was a great^ pity to disturb our friendly relations 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 228 

towards each other by . by saying all this. It is 
such nonsense to fancy that I am the least fit to be 

a clergyman's wife in the first place, even if 

But let us say no more about it, please. It never 
can be. This is a mistake from first to last. You 
pitied me at Mortlands, and now that you think I 
have compromised myself by running away, yon offer 
me a home. I am very grateful to you. ... I respect 
you beyond any man I know ; but this can't be." 

" Listen to me for one moment more," said 
John, very earnestly. " Is it for me or for yourself 
you speak ? If it be (oi me, God knows how little 
pity has to do with my love. I never thought you 
deserved all the pity you claimed. I thought you 
often to blame: I saw all your faults, and I loved 
you, Maud, in spite of them. ... I tried to crush 
my folly ; I thought I had crushed it till lately. But 
now, I ask myself, why should I be silent ? If you 
are resolved not to return to Mortlands, will you 
consent to come and be the light of my humble home 
. the joy of my life, Maud ? " 

'' I am not made to be ' a light ' to any one, 
certainly to no one so good as you are. . . . Pray, 
dear Mr. Miles, say no more about this. If you wish 



224 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

me to remain here, yoa must promise not to renew 
the subject. It is the only condition upon which 
I can stay under your aunt's roof." ' 

No man of the world would haye sought to satisfy 
the cruel doubts which crossed his mind at that 
moment, by asking a direct question . a question 
which he had no sort of right to demand. But John 
was not a man of the world. He buried his face in 
his hands, then he walked up and down the room, 
coughed, and stood by the mantelpiece, wiping his 
forehead, and fidgeting uneasily from one leg to the 
other. At last he blurted out : " Will you relieve 
my mind ? Did you, or did you not, while in that 
house, get entangled in any way ? . . . You spoke 
of a promise ? '* 

" I am entangled in no way," said Maud, quickly, 
and the blood mounted to her cheek. '' The promise 
I spoke of referred to Mrs. Cartaret . to my remain- 
ing in her service. Is that enough for you ? Pray 
ask any other question." Then, seeing that he 
remained silent, she rose, saying, " I think we had 
both better go to bed. I feel irritable. I suppose I 
shall see you in the morning? Please remember 
what I have said. Good-night ! " 



IK THAT STATB OF LIFE. 225 

Thus was poor John reduced to silence. 

He left the next morning, somewhat easier in his 
mind tonching the rumours which had disquieted 
him, and fondly hoping that time might soften 
Maud's heart, and that she might be brought to 
think the hayen of a curate's cottage better than 
drifting, rudderless, upon the troubled waters of the 
world. 



15 



226 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

When John Miles reached home on Satarday after- 
noon, he fonnd that a poor woman in a distant part 
of the parish lay dying, and had sent more than once 
to ask for him. 'Liza was much put out at her 
master's setting off without his dinner, which, as she 
said, was "just done to a turn," in expectation of his 
arrival, and would he "all spiled hy the time he 
come hack.** The joint, however, had time to get 
cold, and to accrue parsley unto itself before he 
returned. The poor woman begged him to remain 
and read to her, and he did so, until all was over. 
Saddened in spirit, and weary in body, at last he got 
home shortly before eight, and broke his fast. Then 
he washed and dressed himself, knowing that even in 
such an emergency as the present, it behoved him to 
regard appearances before seeking an interview with 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 227 

Sir Andrew and Lady Herriesson. After seeing to 
some necessary matters connected with his duties 
for the morrow, he started to walk up to the great 
house. 

Ten o'clock was striking as he reached it. 
At the hall-door stood a fly, with two reeking 
horses ; and John was informed that Sir Andrew was 
particularly engaged with some strangers, who had 
just arriyed. 

" Never mind," persisted John. " Let Sir An- 
drew or her ladyship know that I am here, and must 
see one or other of them on most urgent business.'' 
He was at once admitted. 

In the library, with his back to the fire, his arro- 
gant face purple with excitement, his short thick grey 
hair bristling, as it seemed, from the same cause, 
over his narrow little head, stood Sir Andrew. Oppo- 
site him were Lowndes Cartaret and Mr. Forbes. 
Lady Herriesson was in an arm-chair. She was 
more mildly affected than her lord by Lowndes's 
extraordinary statement, but she moaned and shook 
her head, and feebly echoed Sir Andrew from time to 
time. The young man had told his story as suc- 
cinctly as possible ; but his story was not the whole 



228 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

tmth. He had decided that it was uimeoessary to 
state in what capacity Miss Pomeroy had been, an 
inmate of Beckworth Honse. He glided over her 
introduction there^ stating that ** she was kind enough 
to make herself of use " to his mother in'reading, and 
various other ways. It was not his object to wound 
the Herriesson pride, and set them in antagonism to 
himself. Sir Andrew managed to contain himself, 
until Lowndes reached the climax of his narratiTe. 
Then he burst forth : 

'' Damnation, sir ! with the curate ? The curate of 
this parish ? It's impossible ! I say it's impossible ! " 

'' Quite impossible ! " murmured Lady Herriesson. 
^' And on Thursday morning ? And this is Saturday 
night ! . . . The man has been away, certainly, but 
. oh ! it's not possible ! " 

'^ All I know, Sir Andrew, is the fact that Miss 
Pomeroy left my mother's roof, under the protection 
of some one whom my mother believed to be the 
curate of this place, and who came with the avowed 
intention of restoring her to your care. When I 
learnt from Mr. Forbes that you had heard nothing 
of her, I resolved to lose no time in placing you in 
possession of these facts." 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 229 

" We are very much indebted to you for all the 
trouble you have taken in this painful business, Mr. 
Cartaret/' said Sir Andrew, pompously. 

" Impossible to say how much indebted we are," 
came from the folds of Lady Herriesson's handker- 
chief, which she held to her eyes. 

" I can't believe it yet," continued the baronet. 
" But by Heaven, if it turns out to be true, 1*11 strip 
his gown off his back. I'll set the bishop on him, as 
sure as his name is Miles. If her going off like this 
has been a blind of his to make Lady.Herriesson and 
me consent to a marriage " 

''Have you any reason to suspect that such 
was .... was Miss Pomeroy's wish ? that she 
fancied this fellow Miles at all ? " interrupted 
Lowndes. The question was not lost upon Mr. 
Forbes, who, in the journey down, had noted many 
indications of the real nature of the young man's 
interest in the case. 

"No . . . well, I'm fairly puzzled . . i I don't 
know what to say. She was always going to the 
village, pretending it was to visit the poor. I taxed 
her, one day that we had a discussion, with carrying 
on a flirtation with the curate, but she denied that 



280 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

she ever met him, except accidentally, for a minute 
or two, and, by Jove ! she would not have denied it if 
it had been true. She liked doing that sort of thing. 
The rascal must have got round her in some extra- 
ordinary way, if it is so . . . 1*11 send down to the 
viUage, and see if he is returned." 

His hand was on the bell, when the groom of the 
chambers entered, and announced that the Beverend 
Mr. Miles was below. 

" D . ^n it, Forbes," cried Sir Andrew, turning to 
the lawyer, " this looks as if it were true ! Show 
him in instantly." 

John had never yet felt at his ease in the great 
house. Less than ever did he do so as he crossed 
the threshold of the drawing-room that night. He 
met four antagonistic faces directed towards him, and 
two of them were unknown to him. John glanced 
at the lawyer, and felt that this stranger, whoever he 
might be, was scrutinising him keenly. He turned 
to the younger man, and, though by no means 
favourably impressed, experienced that kind of un- 
pleasant fascination which compels one to look again. 
Lowndes stuck his glass in his eye, and ^'took 
stock" of the curate, &om his rubicund face down 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 281 

to his large, well-rubbed hands (which Lowndes knew 
must be smelling of yellow soap), and thence to his 
capacious feet. John had walked fast, and was warm. 
Lowndes derived infinite satisfaction from a careful 
survey of the rival before him. The contrast between 
the two was curious. One might be likened to an 
impudent superciUous terrier, who regards the world 
disparagingly ; the other to an ungainly shepherd's 
dog, whose fidelity and watchfulness wear but a sorry 
coat. 

'' It isn't possible," said Lowndes to himself, as 
he curled the ends of his moustache, '' that she can 
care for a fellow like that." But before the interview 
was over, another voice had replied, '' He has that 
within him which you have not. She respects him : 
she cannot respect you. Therefore, to such an one 
as she even this is possible, that she should marry a 
fellow with a nose like a lobster, who doesn't know 
what the devil to do with his hands and his feet ! " 

The proceedings opened thus. The door had 
scarcely closed behind Miles before Sir Andrew 
shouted out, " Well, sir 1 what have you come here 
to say, eh ? " 

John glanced at the strangers. '' What I have to 



232 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

say. Sir Andrew, mast be said privately to you and 
Lady .' 

"Oh, never mind these gentlemen, sir. They 
are friends of mine, and you arrive very opportanely 
to confront them, and to meet their charge, if yon 
can. Shall I tell yon what they say, sir? That 
Miss Pomeroy's evasion from this house is yonr 
doing." 

" It is untrue," replied John, simply. 

" Pardon me. Sir Andrew ; there is no proof . ^we 
did not advance tAaf," said Forbes. 

" Well, then, that you induced her to leave Beck- 
worth House with you two days ago." 

" That is true. I am here to tell you so." 

'* Oh ! you are, are you ? You confess it, then ? 
And where the devil has she been ever since ? " 

" Under my aunt, Mrs. Hicks's, roof at Salis- 
bury." 

"And why were we not apprised of the fact 
before ? " 

"Well, the truth is. Miss Pomeroy destroyed 
both a telegram and a letter that I wrote to Lady 
Herriesson on Thursday. I only learnt this last 
night." 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE, 233 

" I don't believe it, I don't believe one word of 
it. Why the devil, sir, did you take her to any aunt 
of yours, instead of bringing her here? It is a 
plant I see the whole thing now. I believe you 
knew where she was all along. You thought, after 
all this scandal, that we sliould be only too glad to 
consent to her marrying any one . even a fellow like 
you. But you'll find yourself mistaken, sir. I look 
upon you as an unmitigated rascal, and I shall put 
the bishop in possession of all the facts of the case 
to-morrow." 

" You are disgracing yourself, Sir Andrew," said 
John, who grew more and more self-possessed as the 
baronet's rage increased." you are disgracing your- 
self far more than you can injure me by your unwar- 
rantable suspicions. When I left this, on Monday, I 
knew as little where Miss Pomeroy was as yourself. 
I followed up a slight clue till I found her, under cir- 
cumstances which made it very advisable that she 
should be removed at once to other keeping." 

" You own it ! Upon my life, sir, your coolness 
is amazing!' As if Mrs. Cartaret's, of Beckworth 
(whom I know well, by name), was not better than 
any Mrs. Hicks's ! Miss Pomeroy disgraced herself, 



234 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

and has caused Lady Herriesson great anxiety by her 
conduct; but the refuge she sought was at least 
respectable. At any rate, with Mrs. Cartaret she 
was under good protection." 

"I am afraid, very fer from it/* said John, 
quietly. 

Lowndes bit his lip. Before he could speak, 
Sir Andrew exclaimed, " What do you mean by that, 
sir ? Come, I insist upon your speaking. No pre- 
yarications." 

** I will tell you what I mean. Sir Andrew. I 
found Miss Pomeroy made the subject of coarse jokes 
from railway-guards and servants, owing to Mr. Car- 
taret' s attentions, a young man, apparently, of very 
lax principles, whom it is not good for any girl's 
name to be coupled with." 

" Oh ! indeed ? Well, this is Mr. Cartaret. If 
you have anything further to say about him, except 
what you have gathered from the low gossip of ser^ 
vants, perhaps you will be good enough to say it to 
his face." 

The two young men looked at each other fixedly 
for a moment. John would not have been human 
had not a pang of bitter jealousy shot across his 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 285 

heart as his eye fell upon the carelessly graceful lines 
of Lowndes's figure. He leaned against the mantel- 
piece, his hands in his pockets, his legs crossed. 
John sighed. It was but an instant. He recovered 
himself; and without betraying surprise at the 
announcement, said, calmly:^' No, I have nothing 
to add, except this, that Miss Pomeroy left Beck- 
worth, at last, by Mrs. Cartaret's desire. I had 
urged her returning here ; but in vain. When Mrs. 
Gartaret insisted upon her leaving, therefore, I in- 
duced her to accept my aunt's protection until some 
plan for her future can be decided on." 

*' And, on your oath, as a clergyman," said Sir 
Andrew, in his most magisterial voice, ** have you no 
hope that such a ' plan for the future '' may be her 
acceptance of beggary and a curate's cottage, eh ? ' 
On your oath, sir, have you or have you not tried to 
persuade Miss Pomeroy to marry you ? " 

His unfortunate trick of colouring up to the roots 
of his hair was never more distressing to John than 
at that moment. After an instant's hesitation he 
said : ^' Most men would decline to answer your 
question, Sir Andrew ; but I shall not do so. Yes, 
I have asked Miss Pomeroy to be my wife ; and, in 



286 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

spite of disconragement, the dearest hope of my life 
still is, that she may one day consent to be mine. I 
have done nothing nnderhand. Although I have 
loved her for years, I shonld never have dreamt of 
speaking to her, but for her leaving home as she did. 
That altered the case. I spoke to her for the first 
time last night, after she told me she was resolutely 
determined not to return here. I do not think 
myself called upon to repeat what passed. I have 
told you straightforwardly what my hopes are, that 
you may not accuse me of deception. She has a 
home with my aunt for as long as she likes to remain 
there," 

'^ Your candour is really refreshing, Mr. Miles. 
Well, at least now, we know what we are about, and 
whom we have got to deal with ! " Sir Andrew's 
rage was at white heat. He no longer flung his 
words about wildly, but spoke with a concentrated 
essence of venom. '' I am glad you have made this 
last admission, sir. It is the only word of truth you 
have spoken for the last quarter of an hour, I believe. 
I have no doubt that, under cover of your cloth, you 
have got an influence over this girl, until she has 
consented to complete her disgrace by marrying you. 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 237 

Now, look here : you think this will be a very fine 
thing for yon, I suppose; that, when the thing is 
done, I shall relent, and make a provision for any 
brats you may have : you will find yourself utterly 
mistaken. Miss Pomeroy has no claims of any sort 
upon me. If she chooses to marry you, or the 
groom, she may. She shall never have one farthing 
of my money, if I can help it." 

*' I am very sure she would not accept it," said 
John, at last warming. '' I shall not stoop to deny 
anything you please to say, Sir Andrew. It is use- 
less to argue with a man in your condition of mind, 
and who forgets himself, as a gentleman, so far as to 
use the language you do. There is Miss Pomeroy's 
address " (he laid a paper on the table). '' She 
desired me to beg that you would not go to her, as 
she was resolved not to return here ; but about that 
you will act as you think fit. Good evening. Lady 
Herriesson." 

And without waiting for another word from Sir 
Andrew, he strode to the door, passed through the 
vast dimly-lit hall, and out, down a flight of steps, 
into the darkness. Poor John Miles ! He was but 
meeting with that reward which so often attends the 



288 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

purest and noblest actions in life . misconstraction 
and ingratitude on all sides. 

What happened at Mortlands, after John had 
left, was this. Lady Herriesson, after feebly moan* 
ing that she always thought so, that she never had 
had a good opinion of Mr. Miles since that sermon 
of his about the Prodigal Son, which Maud admired, 
and which she thought so shocking and subversive ; 
Lady Herriesson roused herself to the exigence of 
things present, and ordered supper for her guests. 
Sir Andrew said of course Mr. Cartaret would not 
think of leaving Mortlands that night? and the 
common act of hospitality was gladly accepted. 
Lowndes had every desire to ingratiate himself with 
his hosts ; and when he so willed it, no one could 
be more agreeable. The groom of the chambers 
showed him his room; that he might wash his hands; 
but apparently, Mr. Forbes was not as particular 
about his (has not the law always clean hands ?) ; or 
else it was that he wished to say a word to Sir 
Andrew in private. I presume he gave the baronet 
the benefit of his guess as to the nature of Lowndes's 
interest in this matter, and that he pointed out what 
a golden solution to the difficult question, What was 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 239 

to become of the young lady now ? such a marriage 
as this would be. Sir Andrew's shrewdness, nn- 
assisted, would hardly have prepared him to receive 
without surprise the confidence that was made to 
him later in the evening. For Lowndes felt driven by 
John Miles's words to avow himself in a way that he 
had never dreamt of doing when he entered the house. 

*' After the things Mr. Miles thought fit to say, 
Sir Andrew, it is due to myself and to you, that I 
should speak." 

" My dear Mr. Cartaret,'* said Sir Andrew, 
blandly, ''I assure you I don't attach the smallest 
importance to the lies that fellow chose to utter." 

** They were not altogether lies. Sir Andrew. I 
daresay he heard that gossip, and I want to explain 
it to you. I am sorry to say, I have been a loose 
fish " 

" Oh, we all have . all have in our time ! what of 
that? Wild oats, eh?" but the baronet had gathered 
unto himself, in the course of years, such a harvest 
of respectability, that it was hard to believe in the 
crop to which he referred. 

** The fact is, I admire Miss Pomeroy more than 
any girl I have ever seen. I have never thought of 



210 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

marriage, to tell you the honest truth, till now. And 
I certainly should not have spoken to yon on the 
subject at present, feeling as I do, quite ignorant of 
what her sentiments towards me are, but that I have 
been in a measure forced into this, as you see. After 
what has been said, I wish you to understand. Sir 
Andrew, that my hope is, sooner or later, to persuade 
Miss Pomeroy to become my wife." 

Sir Andrew held out his hand. 

'' Spoken like a gentleman, Mr. Cartaret, I can 
only say that Lady Herriesson and I wish you every 
success with this very wilfiil girl. Her conduct, 
which has been the cause of such grief to Lady 
Herriesson, could hardly have justified us, I candidly 
own, in expecting her to make so excellent a match ; 
but she is so eccentric, one doesn't know what she 
may do. She refused one of the greatest matches in 
the county just before she went off. No arguing with 
her . as obstinate as a mule ! However, now, I 
should hope, in fact I have little doubt, she will see 
the necessity, in the position in which she has placed 
herself, of . of. accepting you." 

Lowndes could hardly help smiling, thoroughly in 
earnest though he was. 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 241 

" No, Sir Andrew. It is because I feel sure she 
will not accept me from necessity, that I mean to ask 
her. I propose to go to Salisbury to-morrow.'* 

Sir Andrew warmly approved of " striking the 
iron while it is hot," as he called it. The baronet 
was to follow him the next morning ; it being judged 
wiser that Lowndes should have his interview with 
Maud before her stepfather's arrival. None of the 
party from the great house were at church that morn- 
ing. In the afternoon the dogcart drove Lowndes 
to the station^ to meet the only Sunday up4rain. 



16 



242 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 



CHAPTER XV. 

It was one of those early spring mornings which 
belong peculiarly to England. A pale vapoor veiled 
the otherwise too keen blueness of the sky from 
British eyes. All nature seemed to be awaking with 
a sigh of refreshment from its winter sleep. The 
air was warm and filled with sound. Sparrows, chaf- 
finches, and other small birds were holding a parlia- 
ment under the eaves of the gabled house. There 
was the distant hum of the town ; the cries and 
whistles of children on the green ; the solemn, sweet 
bells of the cathedral hard by, chiming the quarters. 

Maud, leaving the old lady's bedside, where she 
had been reading aloud some pages of Jeremy Taylor, 
came downstairs, and passed out, through the par- 
lour-window, into the garden, impelled by a desire to 
breathe the fresh morning air, after being shut up in 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 243 

a close room for hoars. This small garden, which 
fronted the house, was protected from the road by a 
privet-hedge, having an iron gate in the centre. 
There was a gravel-walk running from end to end, 
bounded by lilac-bushes, the pale pink tips of whose 
branches were now swelling into tender green from 
day to day. And d.long it was a flower-border, where 
the crocuses had long been up and stirring; and 
now the hyacinths were beginning to push their 
gorgeous-coloured heads through the rich brown 
mould. 

Maud walked up and down, listening to the noisy 
chatter of the birds among the ivied gable^, and 
inhaling the wholesome incense of the early spring. 
She did not note much of what was around her, 
indeed, for her mind was pre-occupied ; but she felt 
the influence of the season. Something of the pro- 
found depression under which she had laboured for 
the last four days was lifted from her heart. 

There was a rapid step on the pavement outside 
the hedge, and the iron gate was opened. Maud's 
back was towards it at the moment. When she 
turned she found herself face to face with Lowndes. 
The blood rushed to her face ; no amount of self-^ 



244 U9 THAT dTATE OF LIFE. 

control could prevent that ; and she stood motionless, 
as he approached, undecided what to do. Somehow, 
she seemed to him, at this moment, a thousand times 
handsomer than he had ever thought her. Yet she 
wore the same stuff dress he had seen her in every 
day ; there was no difference in the outward woman, 
as she stood there, backed by the ivy, the April sun 
touching the edges of her hair : she was the same 
Mary, his mother's maid, from whom he had parted 
only a week before. Was the change in himself. or 
in her ? Was it that the conquest of his better over 
his worse nature irradiated the object of that struggle? 
Was it that Maud, no longer in a false position, had 
lost something of her defiant air, and that, do what 
she would, a tenderness shone out of her glad eyes 
. eyes which had turned on him mostly in reproof, 
not seldom in fiery indignation? Or, was it the 
jealous dread which, in spite of Miles's personal 
appearance, he could not yet dismiss, that this prize 
might be reft from him, after all ? Trace it to what 
cause one will, this was the result. He stood there, 
before her, feeling that this prize, concerning which 
he had hesitated, tind made many a mighty wise 
resolution, was worth more, far more, than he could 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 245 

possibly pay for it. He took her hand, and she 
allowed it to remain in his for a moment before she 
withdrew it. 

*'Miss Pomeroy, can you forget and forgiye the 
past ? " he began. " I am come here to put myself 
at your feet, and to tell you how ashamed I am of 
myself, and how grieved that my mother should have 
treated you as she has done. But, make allowances 
for her, will you? She did not understand your 
position. I understand it all now." 

" Do you ? " She shook her head. " It is hard 
to understand how a girl can wish to escape from 
luxury into servitude. There is no need to make 
allowances for Mrs. Gartaret. It was unjustifiable of 
me to enter her house as I did. I see that now. If 
I have something to forgive, I have much to be 
forgiven." 

" When she comes to know the real truth " 

" There is no more to be learnt than she knows," . 
said Maud, quickly. . 

"My mother is very prejudiced, and very im- 
petuous. I am afraid that she may have said . . . 
in short, you will forgive her, won't you?" 

" Yes, I forgive her. I have only myself to thank 



246 IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 

for the lesson it has tan^t me. I mnst look for 
work henceforward in other fields." 

''No, not so. ... In the same field, only in 
another capacity/' he said, taking her hand again. 
" There is a work which you've begun, and which 
you alone can accomplish." 

She looked at him for a moment steadily ; then 
turned away, and began plucking at the ivy on the 
wall. 

*' Will you not speak? Are you still angry with 
me on account of my conduct ? " 

Still no answer. 

** If your object is to do some good in the world, 
you can best do it to me. You wouldn't have taken so 
much pains to reclaim me, I think, if you hated me." 

'* I have forgiven you the personal oiBFence to 
myself," she said, quietly, at last. " I think of you 
in sorrow, Mr. Cartaret, not anger. You look at life 
as a comedy; nothing to you is' serious, nothing 
deep. The passing gratification of the hour . ^that 
is all you care for. It amused you to talk with me ; 
and after I had been in your mother's house three 
weeks, you could not resist behaving as you did. So 
much for my influence ! " 



IN THAT STATfi OP LIFE. 247 

" Pray don't refer to that again. To prove your 
influence, let me tell you that I've already taken the 
first step towards working seriously. No one but 
you could have got me to take it As to my future, 
if you only will, you shall direct it entirely." 

'' I cannot. You see how unable I am to direct 
myself. I know that life was not given us to wa^te, 
as you do. You have capital abilities, and, you say, 
perseverance. I can only beg you to turn your life 
to some better account than you have done." 

" Will you help me, Mary ? " 

" My name is not Mary." A smile just touched 
the comers of her mouth. " You must forget that 
name. I left it behind me at Beckworth. ... A 
man should not require 'help' to do what is 
right." 

" He does, though. And there is a help which 
only a woman can give him. Last week I meant to 
have waited before I spoke to you again. But all is 
changed now. I can't wait. You have left Beck- 
worth. They tell me you refuse to return to your 
home. What is the use of waiting ? In what I said 
to you last week I shall never change. I shall be 
the same a year . ^two years hence. Why wander 



248 IK THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

ftboat any longer in this way, when there is a home 
opening its arms to receiye yon?" 

'' It does not . it never will open its arms/' she 
replied. "Were I to marry you, your mother's 
worst suspicions would be confirmed. Say no more 
about it. It can neyer be." 

'^Is this the only obstacle? . . . Tell me one 
thing. Do you care in the least about me ? " 

" There is no use in talking thus, Mr. Gartaret. 
My pride is very great, and I shall certainly never 
marry you." 

" There is use. I implore you to answer me 
this one question. Do you . or can you ever . care 
for me ? " 

She turned almost angrily upon him, and then 
her brown eyes filled with tears. 

"You have no right to ask that questioiv when I 
tell you that I can never be your wife." 

" But, is my mother the only obstacle ? I would 
wait patiently, and work with twice the energy, if you 
would tell me that, and say that you trusted me." 

" Why should I trust you ? If you mean by 
trust a belief in the lastingness of your . . . your 
present state of feeling. No ; I should be sorry to 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 249 

trnst in that. Perhaps I have taught you not to 
think quite so lightly of women, that is all. Another 
woman will, some day, complete the work of which I 
have laid the small foundations." 

'* She never will. None will ever obtain the 
ascendancy over me you have done." 

" You think so now. If we meet years hence, 
you will thank me for not believing you " 

" May I, at least, write to you? " 

" No ; your mother shall never be able to reproach 
me with keeping this fancy of yours alive by any 
encouragement. Let it die out as quickly as you 
can .... And now, good-by ! " 

" Stay, one moment longer .... Where are you 
going ? What are your plans ? " 

*' I think of training for a hospital nurse.'* 

" Good Heavens, what an idea ! But your people 
.... Sir Andrew will never hear of such a thing. 
I assure you he and Lady Herriesson seem distressed 
beyond measure at *' 

" You have seen them, then ? You have been at 
Mortlands ? " 

" I came from there last night. Sir Andrew 
follows me here to-day. He will plead my cause, 



250 m THAT STATE OF LIFS. 

perhapSy from the worldly point of view ; but I told 
him I knew that would have no weight with yon." 

" Oh, he is coming heie, is he ? In spite of my 
letting him know it was absolutely useless ? I ain 
glad you do me the justice to think that I am not 
likely to yield to any of the arguments Sir Andrew is 
sure to use. Nothing that he could say upon any 
subject would have any weight with me. At present, 
I mean to remain here. I can be of use to this old 
lady, and, therefore, I may as well stay." 

" She's that curate's aunt, isn't she ? " asked 
Lowndes, sharply. 

'' Tes. He begged me to remain here, as he was 
obliged to go away." 

*^ I shouldn't think {hat was exactly the reason ; 
but of course he's anxious for you to stay. He'll be 
running backwards and forwards, no doubt. All 
parsons are 'cute after their own interests. I saw his 
game at once." 

'^ He is a most excellent man," said Maud, a 
little maliciously. " You don't know him." 

"I'ye seen him . ^that's quite enough. Surely 
it's impossible ; . ^but I suppose I have no right to 
ask the question. Only as he yeiy plainly told us 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 251 

that he meant to marry you, if he could, I venture to 
hope you will not throw yourself away on a fellow like 
that.*' 

" " I might go nearer and fare worse, perhaps* If 
Mr. Miles married me, it would be he who threw 
himself away. But there is no possibility of that. I 
shall not allow him to sacrifice himself so far," she 
added with a little smile. 

"Well, he means to persevere . and so. do I. 
Only promise to wait, will you ? See, in six months, 
if my feelings are changed. See if I haven't had the 
pluck to work all that time. And see, then, if my 
mother doesn't welcome you with open arms." 

A gig drove up to the door. 
' " There is the doctor," said Maud, glad of the 
subterfuge to avoid replying to this speech. She 
could not . she knew she ought not. to believe him ; 
but her head was in a tumult. She could scarcely 
master herself sufiSciently to continue calmly. "I 
must go, Mr. Cartaret. I hope my preachings may 
really have some eflfect in making you work. Good- 
ly." 

They shook hands, like ordinary acquaintances, 

while the old apothecary came shuffling along the 



252 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

gravel-walk. And the witness to this commonphoe 
parting little guessed the struggle and the conquest 
that it sealed. 

By one o'clock, Sir Andrew was in Salisbury. He 
found a note awaiting him at the inn. It ran thus z 

^' Deab Sir Andrew, . ^No luck at present. I am off 
to town by the next train, but I don't despair yet. 

" Yours truly, 

"Lowndes Cartarbt." 

When the baronet read that he was sore dis- 
pleased. And if he did not rend his clothes, after 
the manner of the wrathful kings of Judah, he rent 
his language, at least, with a vengeance, as he walked 
up and down the little inn-parloiir, scattering oaths 
broadcast. In this implacable frame of mind, he set 
off for the widow's house. 

Maud was prepared, by Lowndes's announcement, 
for this inevitable visit. She said to herself that she 
would be as conciliatory as possible ; she would set a 
guard upon her tongue ; but she would be firm as a 
rock. 

And as a rock, in truth, she received the white- 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 258 

crested breakers of Sir Andrew's tide of reproach and 
indignation, as wave after waye rolled in, and broke 
oyer her in a foam of vituperation. She was a dis- 
grace to the family . a byword in the county : she had 
broken her stepmother's heart : no young lady would 
ever associate with her again : her conduct could 
never be forgotten, as long as she remained unmarried. 
And yet . ^would it.be believed? In her degraded 
position, a young man of good connection and fortune 
offered her his hand . and, it seemed, she actually 
refused him ! This was the crowning act of all ! 
She was only fit for Bedlam. If it were printed in a 
book, no one would believe it. He went on thus for 
nearly an hour ; and Maud sat listening to him with 
wonderful patience, resolved to try and let the storm 
expend itself, before reaching the only point which 
could have any practical result. The curate's luck- 
less candour had exposed him to the baronet's attack; 
and he did not spare him. 

'^ And I suppose now you'll marry this scoundrel ! 
But the whole county shall hear what he is, you may 
depend on it. I'll go to the bishop this very day. 
We shall see whether a blackguard of this kind can 
decoy away " 



254 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

" I can't hear yoQ speak of Mr. Miles in this way, 
Sir Andrew. He knew as little about my leaving 
MortlandSy or where I went, as you did. If it appeases 
yon to know that I shall never many him, yon may 
rest assured I never shall. But I mean to remain 
here for the present, as he has asked me to do so, 
and his aunt is very ill." 

*^ It is very remarkable," said Sir Andrew, with a 
sneer, for her assurance had appeased him somewhat, 
'^ that you who are so sensitive about being dependent 
upon me, should not hesitate to be dependent upon 
ftn utter stranger." 

'^ I am of use. It was because I was of no use at 
Mortlands, but only a burden, that I could stand it 
no longer." 

Did Sir Andrew's conscience prick him with a 
remembrance of certain hard things he had said, in 
those days ? It is scarcely likely ; that instrument 
of self-torture being somewhat blunt in the baronet's 
case. But he repeated the words : '^ ' Of no use ! ' 
Stuff ! Of what use is a girl in your station ever 
expected to be ? But there's no arguing with you, I 
know of old. How long do you remain here ? You 
can't stay here with this old woman for ever." 



IN THAT STATB OF LIFE. 265 

" I have no very definite plans. Of course I 
shan't remain here for ever.'* 

^'Well, we go to town next month. There's 
your room, you know, in Eaton Square, if you choose 
to come. Of course I can't make you. You're your 
own mistress. But after all the anxiety you have 
caused your mother, if you have a spark of good^ 
feeling " . 

" No," interrupted Maud, in her quick way, " I 
can't go to Eaton Square, unless mamma is ill, and 
really wants me. I will go then, for it is a duty ; hut 
not otherwise. But I will write to her, and I promise 
not to leave this, without letting her know my plans. 
You see you have extracted two promises from me. 
Sir Andrew : let that suffice for the present." 

He stayed some time longer, and he talked a 
good deal more, chiefly ahout Lowndes: hut he 
gained no further advantage. The limits of con- 
cession which Maud had marked out, she adhered to. 

Sir Andrew returned to Mortlands that evening in 
a very had humour; and with hut one consolation. 
He had Maud's assurance that she would never marry 
the curate ; and, after this statement, he knew her 
too well to have any further uneasiness on that head. 



266 nr that state of life. 

Bat as to the Cartaret marriage, when he had urged 
it on her, she had refased to listen to him ; stating 
in ahnost the same words that she had used in refer- 
ence to Miles, that she should never be Lowndes's 
wife. It was too proYoking, just as a loophole was 
provided to escape creditably from this '' fix ! " 
Moreoveri there was the strait in which he had 
placed himself touching Miles. After the language 
S[ir Andrew had used, how was he to hold out the 
hand of condescending apology to the man who lived 
at his park-gates, and whom he had so grossly 
vilified? 

It is needless to say that he had not carried out 
his threatened visit to the bishop. 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 2.'?7 



CHAPTER XVI. 

Mes. Higes rallied very slowly. Weeks passed : 
and her condition was still one that required constant 
watching. Having undertaken this duty, Maud 
could not abandon it ; and she became daily fonder 
of the gentle, unselfish old lady, so that her labour 
grew to be one of love. On the other hand, as was 
only natural, Mrs. Hicks was now strongly attached 
to her young companion. 

'* I do not know what I should do now, my dear, 
if I were to lose you. You have spoilt me. We 
have never had anything young in the house before 
you came. As Martha says, you do us all good.'' 
For Maud's energy, which had often flagged at Beck- 
worth, and had always been in a chronic state of 
suppressed irritation at Mortlands, had now free play. 
She read aloud for hours, and answered all Mrs. 

17 



258 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

Hicks's Jetters ; she visited such poor people as the 
old lady wished^ and dispensed her charities; she 
paid all Mrs. Hicks's bills, and attended her bene- 
volent committees ; she took long walks, and returned 
home laden with wild hyacinths and primroses. 
The secret of this cheerfcd, untiring temper, I believe, 
was the well-spring of a strong hope within her. In 
vain she set a stone upon the mouth of that spring ; 
it bubbled up all the same at unexpected times and 
places. She had not heard Lowndes's name since 
thjB day they parted : she knew nothing of him, for 
good or evil : he was probably back again with his 
old companions and pursuits, and had forgotten her 
and her preachings. It was only natural ; it would 
be contrary to nearly all precedent if it were other- 
wise. So she said to herself, repeatedly; but she 
did not believe it. She declared that it would be 
sentimental folly to rely upon anything he had said ; 
but she did rely upon it. Love is, even now, some- 
times stronger than prudence and worldly wisdom. 
Then, as regarded Mrs. Cartaret, she felt a convic* 
tion that, even if Lowndes remained constant, his 
mother would never yield. She knew the old lady's 
pride and prejudice so well. After what had passed^ 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 259 

Mrs. Gartaret would never open her arms to receive 
Mandi and without such opening of arms Maud was 
still resolute that she would never become Lowndes's 
wife. But| in spite of all, Maud was not de- 
spondent. 

John Miles did not return to Salisbury for two 
or three weeks, the account of his aunt being better, 
and his own judgment pointing out that it was wiser 
to leave Maud at peace for a time, before renewing 
his suit. Then at last he did come, and stayed 
three days. During that time Maud kept out of his 
way as much as possible : and Mrs. Hicks was always 
devising innocent little stratagems (which she re- 
garded as Machiavelian in their diplomacy, but- 
which would not have deceived a child) in order to 
throw the young people together. But Maud's avoid- 
"Bnce was not to be misunderstood; eager as poor 
John was to catch at any straw, there was none held 
out ; he must drown . at all events for the present. 
She was cordial and friendly in her manner until 
they were tete-d-tete; if this was unavoidable, she 
froze up, as Maud had a special fsiculty for doing, 
making one feel that any nearer approach would be 
slippery, not to say dangerous. He went away 



260 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

without haTing said a word. But his annt was not 
BO perspicacious. 

''My dear," she said one day when they were 
alone, '' I have been hesitating for a long time 
whether I should say something to you. But I may 
not be here very long, and I do so wish to see two 
people whom I love dearly made happy before I go. 
No, my dear, don't interrupt me. Now I have begun, 
I must speak. You see how it is with John, don't 
you, my dear ? Depend upon it, the love of such a 
man ought not lightly to be put aside. I know your 
papa and mamma were very angry at the idea, be- 
cause John is a poor man, but . ^but . what I wanted 
to say is this. He will be well off at my death. 
For many years I have put by more than half my 
income to accumulate for him. He will have, at the 
least, eighteen hundred a year. And the knowledge 
of this, though it will not affect you, I am well 
aware, may influence your papa and mamma: and 
therefore " 

'* Dearest Mrs. Hicks, I must stop you. If this 
marriage were possible, what you say would influence 
Sir Andrew and Lady Herriesson; but it is not 
possible. I have the greatest regard and respect for 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 261 

your nephew^ bat I can never be his wife. Please 
say no more about it." 

" Ah, my dear, consider ! Where will you find 
such a character as John's again ? He is as nearly 
perfect as any human being can be, I think. It is 
not" . ^and the old lady hesitated a moment . '^ it is 
not his nose ? It is not his personal appearance, is 
it, my dear ? Beauty is a vain thing . ^it is as the 
grass of the field. I hope it isn't that." 

" It has nothing to do with personal appearance . 
I know his worth. He is the best man I have ever 
met ; but I 'm not made to be the wife of such a man. 
If I ever marry, it will be a far less perfect character . 
indeed, a very imperfect one ! " And then, wishing 
to set this question at rest, once and for ever, and 
driven by one of those sudden impulses, which are 
sometimes lyorth a year's deliberation, she confessed 
that her heart was not tree. 

" I know what you will say . that I am wasting 
my life in a delusion. Very likely. Understand 
that I have no hope, my dear old friend ; but for all 
that, I can't marry another, nor will you urge me to 
do so, now that you know the truth." 

It was thus that she concluded her confession ; 



262 IN THAT STATE OF UJFU. 

and Mrs. Hicks pressed the girl's hand and sighed. 
She never spoke upon the subject again. 

John Miles passed all the rest of the spring alone 
at Mortlands. There had been a hollow sort of 
reconciliation between him and Sir Andrew : a cold 
shaking of hands at the church-door ; and now the 
fi&mily at the great house was up in London, and 
John had the village all to himself, and more solitary 
hours than ever, wherein to dwell upon a passion 
which he knew was hopeless. For Mrs. Hicks, in 
compassion for her dear nephew, had not kept Maud's 
secret. 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 268 



CHAPTER XVn. 

On Lowndes's return from Salisbury after his inter- 
view with Maud, there had been some violent scenes 
between Mrs. Gartaret and her son. For the jSrst 
time in his life, Lowndes found it impossible, ven 
after repeated efforts, to make any impression on his 
mother. In all their differences, heretofore, he had 
ultimately " got round " her ; but now, the original 
wound in her mind having been kept in a constant 
state of irritation by the judicious application of 
blisters from Mrs. Rouse, every word Lowndes 
dropped only inflamed it more. Lowndes was not a 
patient young man ; not used to be thwarted, nor 
submissive under rebuke. He had departed for 
London at the end of the second day, and had not 
since been down to Beckworth. He wrote occa- 
sionally to his mother, inquiring briefly after her 



264 n THAT 8TATS OF LIFE. 

healthy bat nerer naming himgelfl From others, 
howerer, Mrs. Cartaret had aocoontB of her aon'a 
changed mode of life, which amazed her. She eould 
hardly beliere her ears when told of her dissipated 
vatuien's working eight hoars a day: of his being 
no longer seen in the Park, nor in any of the haonts 
of men. She inqaired anzioasly whether he had 
any liaison, as a natand solation to the mysteiy. 
Bat none of the Toltores who feed apon the canioii 
of society coold affirm as mach. And the idea of 
Hand's being the caose of this rerolation nerer 
crossed Mrs. Cartaret's mind. He had qoarreUed 
with her aboat the girl, it is trae; and being the 
proad, obstinate boy he was, he woald not come 
home properly ashamed and contrite, as he ought. 
That was his character. Bat that he had not for- 
gotten the object of their dissension long since, still 
less that the recollection of her was of saffident force 
to stimolate him to a new life, this was a saggestion 
which Mrs. Cartaret woald have regarded as wildly 
improbable. Why, he never even named Maud! 
He never renewed the sabject of their quarrel I It 
was, fortunately, quite clear that he had forgotten the 
cunning little aventuritoe. 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 265 

When, however, Easter and Whitsuntide . holi- 
day seasons which had never passed without Lowndes's 
running down to Beckworth for a day or two . when 
these came and went, and Mrs. Gartaret was still 
nngladdened hy the sight of her son, she began to 
feel very heavy at heart. Not even the satisfieustion 
of learning that his life was reformed could compen- 
sate for this : the cloud which had arisen as a man's 
hand was consolidating itself into a compapt mass, 
till it threatened to darken the whole sky overhead. 
For a while her pride kept her from asking him to 
come. At last, she could stand it no longer, and 
broke out thus in one of her letters : ** Your 
fevourite hautboys are now ripe, and will be all over 
if you do not pay them a visit soon." But the haut- 
boys passed ; and other fruits succeeded them ; and 
still he came not. '' If you should be ill, send for 
me. Otherwise I am not coming to Beckworth," he 
wrote ; and the old lady was furious. She indited a 
piebald letter, in which French and English exple- 
tives vied for predominance : declaring that a monster 
of ingratitude had been bom unto her, that she had 
nourished a viper in her bosom, that he was sans 
coBur, sans entrailles, and that he would come to no 



266 IK THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

good end, that was clear. After despatching' this, 
she had a comfortable fit of hysterics, and poured 
her woes into the Efympathising breast of Mrs. 
Boose. 

*' It's the nndatifdllest thing as ever I heerd of! " 
cries the artfdl prime-minister ; ** after Mr. Lowndes's 
conduct, his writing like that, instead of going down 
on his bended knees ! Can't say much for his 
reform, if this' is the fruits . he don't place much 
account by the fifth commandment. Them as prac- 
tises law forgets their religion, it seems to me. I 
never did hold much by law. He'll only come here, 
ma'am, if you're ill. Wants to see, I suppose, as 
your will is properly made ! " 

By which specimen it will be seen that Mrs. 
House's ascendancy, and the licence of tongue per- 
mitted to her, were increased rather than diminished. 
In short,, the episode of Maud's short career at 
Beckworth had, no doubt, strengthened the house- 
keeper's position. The vacant post had been filled 
by a dull girl who could in no way be a companion 
to the old lady. But then she was Mrs. Bouse's 
devoted slave; and if Mrs. Cartaret complained of 
the girl's stupidity, she was met by the retort, ** Per* 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 267 

haps you*d like to find a young lady again as has ran 
away from her home? A hussy as tries to entrap 
your son, ma'am ? " To which there was no reply ; 
but in the inmost recesses of her heart, I fear Mrs. 
Cartaret was at times almost tempted to wish for 
such another runaway* Of this particular one she 
could not, of course, think without some bitterness 
. she had wrought so much mischief. " The devil 
himself must have made the girl/' as she wrote to 
one of her old friends. '' Such a fitscination had she 
. such a power to impressing you with a sense of 
straightness ! And yet, my friend, she was a liar ! 
... I actually cried, old fool that I am, when I had 
to turn her out of the house, I had got to love the 
little wretch so, in the course of that month ! Ah, 
my friend, what a world ! Was there such deceit, 
such treachery in the old times ? I think not." 

The yoke of Bouse and Dapper grew more galling 
every day. Mrs. Cartaret's life was as solitary and 
cheerless as that of the Pope in the Vatican, without 
such consolations as may belong to supremacy. The 
shadow and insignia of royalty were still hers ; but 
the substance had passed from her. She grew more 
inert, and with less energy for discussion or command 



268 IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 

daily, for ]^er heart was sorely troubled. Heretofore 
Lowndes had exercised a certain restraint over the 
arrogant ministry which no opposition had ever 
been able to pat out of office. Now, they did 
absolutely as they liked. And thus the summer 
wore away. 

In August an unprecedented thing befel John 
Miles : he went to London for a month. A curate 
friend, who had been ill and required country air, 
asked if he would exchange duties with him, and he 
did so. John's journey up was marked by a snudl 
incident. Li a comer of the same carriage with 
himself sat a rigid-looking man, whose age' it waq 
impossible to tell, but whose creaseless face seemed 
not quite unfamiliar to Miles. The rigid man's 
memory was the better of the two. 

''Mr. Miles, I believe?" he said, without a 
smile, or the derangement of one unnecessary muscle : 
'' I think we met at diilner at Mortlands. You are 
the curate? My name is- Durborough." Then, 
after the exchange of a few words, he continued : . 
'' Sir Andrew and Lady Herriesson are at Wiesbaden, 
are they not ? ** 

'' Yes : they are gone for Sir Andrew's gout" 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 269 

"And where is that nnfortimate young lady. 
Miss Pomeroy?" 

'' I am not aware that she is nnfortnnate/' replied 
John, sternly. " She is at Salisbniy, where, I hear, 
she is well and happy." 

But Dnrborongh of Dnrborongh was too dense to 
take a hint. 

"I hope she will keep respectable. She was a 
fine-grown young woman. I don't mind telling yon, 
Mr. Miles . perhaps you may have heard it . ^I was very 
near making her Mrs. Dnrborongh. What an escape ! " 

" Whoever is lucky enough to get Miss Pomeroy's 
hand wins a great prize, sir," cries John, as red as a 
turkey-cock. After which Mr. Dnrborongh relapsed 
into silence, and sat up stiffer than ever during the 
rest of the journey. But thos^ few words gave John 
food for thought. They influenced him, perhaps, as 
much as anything towards a decision which he came 
to, on arriving in town. * 

Mr. Forbes was alone in his office when a card 
was brought him. He desired the gentleman to be 
admitted. 

" I am a stranger to you, Mr. Forbes,'' began 
John Miles, as he entered. 



270 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

" Not at all : I remember you perfectly, sir. I 
have often wished since for an opportunity of express- 
ing personally to you my regret at haying been the 
indirect cause of your being so roughly used that 
night by our friend Sir Andrew. Under an entire 
misapprehension, you see, his temper got the betteir 
of him : it does sometimes. But he knows now what 
an injustice he did you." 

'' I am glad of it," said John, calmly. *^ It was 
not to speak of Sir Andrew, however, that I came 
here." He paused for a moment. ** I have always 
heard your name mentioned with great respect, 
Mr.* Forbes, as a man of the highest prindpfe, 
as well as of very dear judgment. I am going 
to speak on a delicate subject, and must ask you 
to let what I shall say go no further. You know 
Mr. Lowndes Gartaret well ? I am told he is study* 
ing for the bar, and working hard. This is the result 
of some inquiries I have made since coming to town. 
Is this true?" 

" It is quite true, Mr, Miles." 

*' From your knowledge of his character, have you 
any idea what has wrought this change, and do you 
believe it will be a permanent one ? " 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 271 

''I have a very distinct idea what has wrought 
this change : indeed, I have a certainty, and I believe 
it will be permanent.** 

John paused a minute, as if hesitating how he 
fihould put his next question. 

" Do he and Sir Andrew meet now ? " 

''Yes; Mr. Cartaret sees both him and Lady 
Herriesson constantly." 

" Sir Andrew then is . ^is . favourable to him ? " 

" Entirely so.** 

Miles blew his nose vehemently, and fidgeted on 
his chair. '' Look here, Mr* Forbes : I don*t want 
you to commit any breach of confidence, but tell me 
one thing. If Mr. Cartaret is the man you take him 
to be, why shouldn't he . what impediment is there 
.to. to .* 

'' Mr. Miles, there is no use in beating about the 
bush. Let us talk plainly. What impediment is 
there to his marrying Miss Pomeroy at once ? His 
mother *' 

" Surely,*' replied John, with a sigh that came 
from the very bottom of his heart, '' surely Mrs. 
Cartaret cannot persist in misjudging a girl who is 
exercising such a saving influence upon her son ? It 



272 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

is hard enough, I think, that the world ^oold con- 
tinne to regard that one act of folly as though it were 
a deadly crime. A fool in the train talked to me of 
the escape he had had from her . God help him ! 
Mr: Forbes, it is just this brings me here to-day. 
Yon know how I love her ; yon heard me avow it to 
Sir Andrew, and the hopes I then had. Well, they 
are at an end* I have no more hope now, for I know 
that her heart is another's; but I loTe her still, 
Mr. Forbes, and if I can do anything towards making 
her really happy, I will do it, cost me what it 
may.'* 

The lawyer shook his visitor's hand, in silence, 
and John continued : *' I own I feared that Mr. 
Gartaret could never be worthy of her. But if it is 
true that he is reformed, then," he said, with an 
effort, ** the sooner this marriage can be, the better. 
Longer delay is only injurious to her good name. 
My aunt is nearly well ; in a few weeks I know that 
Miss Pomeroy will leave her, and seek a Uvingelse" 
where. For her sake, for every one's sake, this 
marriage must take place as soon as possible." 

"It is very easy to say that, my 'dear sir, and I 
cannot sufficiently admire your conduct, which, as fisur 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 273 

as I know, is quite unprecedented, under the circum- 
stances. But how about the old lady ? " 

John meditated for some minutes. At last he 
said, very slowly, and Mr. Forbes saw how much it 
cost him : " Would it be any use my going down to 
speak to her ? " 

'^ I hardly think so. She refuses to listen to her 
own son, I believe ; but you can try." 

"I will," replied John. And he walked away 
from the lawyer's office like one in a dream. 

" That fellow's of the stuff that heroes are made 
of, in spite of his face," said the lawyer, as the door 
closed behind his visitor. " Who ever heard of a 
man going to plead his rival's cause with that rival's 
own mother ? " 

The estrangement from her son had begun to tell 
upon Mrs. Cartaret's health. She passed most of 
her time in bed. It bored her to get up and receive 
the neighbours, who of course inquired for Lowndes. 
She could not see to read much ; she wrote volumir 

 

nous letters, and answers arrived, containing awful 
pictures of the state of France. Her tboaghts bad no 
other diversion torn the one topic which engrossed 

18 



274 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

them. And, at last, towards the middle of August, 
she really fell ill, not as ill as she herself fancied . 
not ill enough, perhaps, to justify her writing to 
Lowndes, " Are you going to let me die without 
seeing you again ? " 

That evening's train brought him to Beckworth. 
She revived at the very sight of him, like a drooping 
flower put into water ; her black eyes sparkled, and 
she sat up, talking so briskly, that Lowndes's anxiety 
was at once relieved. He had been called from town 
under false pretences ; but he did not regret it, for 
now that he was here, he made up his mind that he 
would not go back without seeing Maud. He came 
to this determination while he sat there by his 
mother's bed, answering her questions as to his 
changed life and pursuits in a manner so different 
from the cui bono raillery to which she was accus- 
tomed, that she asked herself with amazement if this 
was her indolent, sarcastic son. 

Before he left her for the night, he said : '' I 
.shall go to Salisbury for a few hours to-morrow, and 
the following day I must return to town." 

" Why go back so soon ?" cried the old lady, in 
a whining voice. " It is six months since you were 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 275 

here. Come, sois gentil, mon enfant, stay a few daj's 
with me . hein ? " 

" I shotdd only be unhappy, mother. When two 
people don't agree upon the subject which is nearest 
to the heart of one of them, they are better apart." 

" Comment ! Est-il possible ? You have not 
yet forgotten that miserable girl ? " 

" Have not forgotten, and never shall forget her. 
My life may be made wretched by your separating us, 
of course ; for without your consent she never will 
marry me, but " 

" That she never shall have ! ** burst in Mrs. 
Cartaret, punching the pillow violently with her little 
fist. 

" So you have already told me. And, therefore, 
I am better away from Beckworth." 

'' Are you not ashamed to tell me, sir, that a 
creature like this is to separate mother and son ? " 

'' That is not her fault. She has refused to let 
me write to her. I shall see her to-morrow for the 
first time in six months." 

" You shall see her ? Mon Dieu ! You shall 
see her?" 

'' I wish to tell her that though we are separated 



276 IN THAT STATE OP. LIFE. 

for a while; nothing will ever change me. And I 
wish to let her know that I have been trying, by my 
life, daring the last six months, to make myself a 
little less unworthy of her." 

"Unworthy of her? Mon Dieu! Listen to 
him ! Unworthy of her ! ** 

"Yes," said Lowndes, who was by this time 
roused, in spite of his determination to be calm. 
" The fact is, she is so different to those miserable 
samples of humanity you regard as correct young 
ladies, that you can't understand her. She has 
nothing in common with the cut-and-dried bread- 
and-butter that comes out of schools and convents 
(and turns rancid in one's mouth after marriage, ten 
to one). She is a real, honest girl . nothing sham 
about her *' 

" She came here under a sham name ! " cries 
Mrs. Cartaret. 

" . and noble, as uncommonly few aristocrats 
are, or ever were, in the days of your favourite 
' grand monarque,* " persists Lowndes, regardless of 
his mother's interruption. " However, it is no use 
talking about it, mother. It only makes us both 
angry* During the short time I am to be here, let 



IN THAT STATE OF LITE. 277 

there be peace. Only don't deceive yourself. No 
power on earth shall ever make me give the girl up, 
and I shall never come back to Beckworth, to remain, 
until you will receive her. And now . good-night." 

But it was far from a good night for poor Mrs. 
Cartaret. Bestless, and dissatisfied with herself, with 
her son, and with all the world, she passed the sleep- 
less hours, tossing feverishly among her pillows, and 
muttering, like the prince so pitilessly immortalised 
by Carlyle, "E-st-il possible? Mon Dieu! est-il 
possible ? " 

Maud was crossing the quaint little market-place, 
bringing home some fruit for Mrs. Hicks, when she 
started, and nearly let her basket fall. In front of 
her, barring her road, stood Lowndes ; and now he 
had hold of both her hands, and was looking into 
her eyes. A joy, which it was vain to conceal, 
danced there, and hovered round her lips. She 
reproQiChed herself afterwards for testifying thus her 
real feeling : it was weak, but she could not help it. 

*^ The six months are nearly past," he began, 
"and I have obeyed you in never writing. I 
shouldn't have been so patient if I hadn't seen 
Lady Herriesson constantly, and learnt two things ; 



278 IN THAT BTAT6 OP LIFE. 

first, that you had not left this, secondly, that . 
my jealousy of a certain person was unfounded. 
And now I'm come just to gladden my eyes by a 
glimpse of you, to tell you that I am unchanged in 
one thing, though changed, I hope, in many others. 
I've not been idle ; I have really worked hard all this 
time . keeping the fear of you before my eyes," he 
added, laughing. 

" I am so glad to hear it," she replied. " You 
could not tell me anything that would give me 
greater pleasure." 

" And now, will you trust me ? * Will you be 
patient yet a little while, Maud ? My mother is in 
the hands of those devils of servants. If there were 
only some unprejudiced person to argue the case 
with her! However, sooner or later she will come 
round, I am confident. She has too good a heart 
not to listen to its dictates." 

Maud shook her head. " She will never listen 
to them, in this case. Do not waste your life on a 
chimera." 

** I am not wasting my life. I am turning it 
now to some account, with one hope and object in 
view." 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 279 

" It makes me happy," said Maud, gently, " to 
think that any words of mine should have tended to 
work this change. I did' not expect it. We won't 
talk ahout the hope, we will put that aside. You 
will grow happier, I am sure, every year hy working ; 
you would have grown more dissatisfied, more miser- 
ahle, each year by dissipation." 

He stopped, as he walked along beside her, and 
whispered with a smile : " But as our friend the 
parson would say, 'Man doth not live by bread 
alone.' " 

"Perhaps in one sense, the happiest are those 
who ask for nothing else but their bread. By-the-by, 
I am going out to work for mine again. I leave this 
next week." 

" Good heavens ! I thought you would remain 
with this old lady until . in short, for the present." 

*' ' The present ' has lasted six months. She is 
the kindest, dearest old soul, but I have no excuse 
for remaining any longer. She is quite well again." 

He kicked viciously at a stone that lay in his 
path. " And where do you mean to go ? " 

" To my old nurse in London. There I can look 
about me, and see what there is to be done. 



280 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

He implored her to give up this idea. He hronght 
forward every argument against it ; hut in vain. 

" I had hut one excuse to plead for running away 
from Mortlands as I did. I would not be dependent 
on Sir Andrew any longer. Can I now he dependent 
on Mrs. Hicks ? I have heen of service during her 
illness and recovery, that I know. But the necessity 
for her having a companion is over, and with it I 
must go." 

To this resolve she held fast, in spite of all that 
Lowndes could urge. The utmost concession he 
could gain was that she promised to let him know 
when her course of life was decided. They walked 
for a long time under the broad-spreading trees of. the 
Close, so long, indeed, that the clock had fully chimed 
the hour of Mrs. Hicks's early dinner ere Maud had 
put her hand in his, and bade him godspeed. She 
had promised nothing ; she had repeated over and 
over again that it was folly to live on such hope as 
his ; she had told him that the wisest thing he could 
do was to go away and forget her ; but he left 
Salisbury, for all that, more resolute than ever to 
conquer the difficulties that lay in the way of his 
happiness, though still at a loss how to attack them. 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 281 



CHAPTER XVni. 

It was one of the few very hot days of that summer, 
and Mrs. Gartaret was up and dressed; not, as she 
declared, that she felt any better, but rather worse, 
after a sleepless night. It was in honour of her son, 
whom she expected back shortly, that she had had 
her fauteuil placed under the awning on the terrace, 
and now sat there clad in white raiment. a very 
pecuUar figure, with her silver hair brushed back, and 
a huge green fan wherewith she tried to coax a little 
breeze up from the sun-struck sheet of water in the 
park below. 

She was not alone. A visitor was with her, who 
had just come down by the London train. He sat in 
a garden-chair, which he had drawn close to hers . 
closer, I suppose, than any of her punctilious old 
French courtier friends would ever have done. But 



282 IN THAT STATE OF LITE. 

this man was neither punctilious nor a courtier . a 
shy man, on the. contrary, only so deeply interested 
in what he was saying as to forget all else. We will 
take up the conyersation at a point where the visitor, 
after pleading with all his eloquence the cause of 
a certain young lady, ended thus : " Believe me, 
ma'am, I should not he here to-day, to try and dis- 
abuse your mind of the prejudice it has contracted. 
I confess not without cause . about Miss Pomeroy, 
wer^ I not as sure of her purity and nobihty of soul, 
as I am that there is a Heaven above us ! " 

" Ah ! sir, I loved her. I really loved the girl 
in those few weeks she was here. But to find that 
she was deceiving me and decoying, my son all the 
time ! " 

" Decoying ? You know her, indeed, very little 
to use such a word in connection with her. It is 
evident that your mind has been poisoned on this 
subject." 

'' Bah ! Perhaps you defend her conduct alto- 
gether? Perhaps you find it comme il faut for a 
young lady to run away from home, and make herself 
to be talked of by the servants' hall ? " 

'^ I do not defend her conduct in leaving her 



IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 288 

home as she did. I think she was highly hlamahle. 
But there are allowances to he made. She was young, 
high-spirited, and had suffered much. She felt that 
she did not helong to any one ; that what was done 
for her was done more from a conventional necessity 
. more as an alms . than from loTe ; and her inde- 
pendent spirit, when they tried to force a hateful 
marriage on her, could brook it no longer. That is 
the history of her running away. I don't defend it, 
ma'am; but at least there is some excuse for her, 
and, after all, she injured no one but herself by her 
exceeding folly." 

'^ Sir, she has injured my son, and she has in- 
jured me. She has made us to quarrel . she has 
made Lowndes to say things, and to act in a 

way " the old lady brushed the tears from her 

eyes. " It's very hard. I, who would have sacrificed 
my life to him, to have a little coquine like this 
coming between us. When I begged him, when I 
prayed him to marry, why, out of all the world, must 
he go and choose this girl ? " 

" Because, out of all the world, she is the only 
one who has been able to inspire him with a real 
attachment." 



284 .IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

*' Bah ! He does not know his own mind." 
" It has not changed in six months* absence." 
" Ah ! so he says. He is obstinate, my dear sir, 
as a pig ; and if I give way I shall seem to be a sotte, 
a weak old fool, to all the world." 

" To the few whose judgments are worth anything, 
Mrs. Cartaret, you will seem a wise mother, who 
values the true interests of her son more than all the 
world's gossip. Is the world's opinion really worth 
so much that you put it for a moment in competition 
with your son's happiness ? " 

" Ah ! if it was really for his happiness ! If I 
thought that . if I could be sure of it ! Look you 
here, sir. Perhaps you think I am a selfish old 
woman who wants no belle fiUe to interfere with her 
authority? You are quite wrong* I am ready to 
make my paquet, and go board in a convent, and 
leave this clear for the wife of my son. But I will 
have that his wife shall be sans reproche, do you 
understand?" 

The young man looked at her almost sternly for 
a moment. Then he said very gravely : ** Who is 
without reproach in the eyes of God ? Do you think 
your son is ? Do you remember what his past has 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 285 

been . is there not much to be forgiven him ? God 
judges not as man judges. The world's code is not 
His. Do you remember who it was who said, when 
an unfaithful wife was brought before him, ' He that 
is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone 
at her ?' Shall that divine lesson of charity be 
thrown away upon us, Mrs. Cartaret ? If God were 
extreme to mark what has been amiss in our lives, 
which of us would escape ? In this case, consider, 
has not the good she has done been far greater than 
the evil? Will you cast a stone . tte stone that 
malicious people have put into your hand . at a girl 
who has wrought this blessed change in your son's 
life ? She has been, and is, the good angel standing 
in his path, and turning him aside from destruction. 
Oh ! Mrs. Cartaret, pause before it be too late. If 
you now withhold your consent, you are casting a 
stone at her which you will bitterly repent hereafter ! " 

He spoke with deep feeling, and the old lady's 
tears fell fast. 

" Do you really believe that this change in 
Lowndes is all her doing ? Ah, it is not possible ; a 
girl like that to iniSuence a man like Lowndes. No ; 
it is incredible." 



286 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

Miles looked at his watch. 

** I have hat five minutes more, Mrs. Cartaret. 
Excuse me for a moment, if I speak of myself. Do 
you know why I am come here to-day? Can you 
guess what feeling is strong enough to bring me 
from London simply for the purpose of having this 
conversatioli with you ? It is the result of a struggle 
with myself, and of a fervent prayer that she whom I 
have loved better than anything on earth . ^yet feeling 
that my love was hopeless . for more than four years, 
might be made happy. After this avowal, Mrs. 
Cartaret (an avowal which would be no news to your 
son), perhaps you will not expect me to doubt Miss 
Pomeroy's power. If it be so deep and lasting over 
a man whom she has never loved, what may it not 
be, under God's blessing, over your son ? She has 
done miich, she will do more, for she does love him. 
I have said all I can say. My small part is. played. 
I take my leave, feeling sure, Mrs. Cartaret, that you 
will not wither the happiness of two young lives." 

" Stay ! Holla, Dapper ! Who is there ? Bring 
some wine ; you cannot go without a glass, sir. Will 
you not stay and see my son? He will be home 
directly." 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 287 

" Thank you ; I should miss the train ; and Mr. 
Cartaret and I are not acquainted ; he would not care 
to see me. My visit was to you alone, Mrs. Car- 
taret. Good-by.'* 

*' You are a good man, a very good man. If all 
the cures were like you I would go to church oftener. 
I wish you would stay . ^I wish you would stay and 
see Lowndes. But, sir, you have eased my mind. I 
seem to see my way cleared. I did not know whom 
to believe, what to determine. After what you have 
said, I suppose there is no doubt, eh ? I must yield ; 
I must not throw stones. Well, my heart seems 
lighter, though my old eyes are full of tears. God 
bless you ! You are a good man." 

Lowndes, in his dogcart, passed Miles close to 
the station. The curate recognized the young squire, 
of course, and walked straight on. A Frenchman, 
after rendering another a signal service, would pro- 
bably have waived ceremony, and stopped to introduce 
himself; but Miles was an Englishman all over. 
Besides, he had no desire to speak to Lowndes ; it 
would have been a painful eifort to him. On the 
contrary, he had just done what he conceived to be 
his duty, and there was an end of it. Cartaret, on 



288 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

his side, stared, and wondered whether his eyes or 
his memory deceived him. He had a distinct recol- 
lection of Miles's face and figure. This conld not 
be he, for what could he possibly be doing at Beck- 
worth ? but was there ever such a likeness ? And so 
they passed each other, and went each his way, 
one to the hard crusts of life, the other to its cakes 
and ale. 

Mrs. Cartaret got up as her son approached, stood 
on tiptoe, and fell upon his neck. There were the 
traces of recent tears on her cheeks, and, through 
her smiles, it was easy to see that she was in a state 
of considerable excitement. Lowndes knew at once 
that something had happened. 

'' Well, mauvais garnement, and so you have 
seen her ? " 

'^ Yes, I have seen her. But what has come to 
you, mother ? What is the matter ? Has any one 
been here?" 

*' Yes, some one has been here ; an angel with a 
red face, mon enfant." 

" Nonsense ! You don't mean Then it 

was he, after all ! But what on earth did he come 
here for ? " 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 289 

"Ah, what, indeed* I What do angels generally 
come for ? " 

" I haven't an idea. I only know one* My 
acquaintance has heen more the other way,*'. 

" Fi done ! But you are ranged now, mon fils, 
n'est-ce pas ? You will have no more to do with 
naughtiness . hein ? " 

*' That depends. Not if I have an angel always 
with me." 

" Answer me one question, sir. Have you given 
up all your bad ways, for sake of your angel ? Foi 
de gentilhomme, is this truly her doing ? " 

" Solely hers. No other power on earth, I thiiik, 
could have made me work." 

" A pretty compliment to me, va-t-en ! But no 
matter, if it is true ; I will swallow the pill and not 
make a bad face. And now, sir, are you bent upon 
running away from your old mother, to-morrow ? " 

He would have said yes, but something in his 
mother's face made him hesitate. Could it be that 
this curate, in the course of a short visit, had wrought 
the miracle which Lowndes 'had been labouring for 
six months to accomplish and had failed ? 

" Perhaps it is the last request she will ever 

19 



290 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

make of yon/' continued Mrs. Cartaret, stretching up 
to part the hair from his hrow, and then holding his 
face tenderly, for a moment, between her fat little 
hands. "You, and Beckworth, and all will very soon 
pass away from her. The reins are slipping from 
her hands, and it is time that the old woman was un- 
seated, isn't it?" 

He said nothing, but caught her in his arms. 

As he leaned out of his window that night, 
smoking a cigar, he had but one regret. ** How I 
wish I hadn't passed him. That fellow is a trump. 
I would walk fifty miles to shake him by the hand. 
None of the fellows I know would ever have done 
such a thing. It's incomprehensible. Is it his 
religion, or is it his nature, that has made him what 
he is ? Ah, Maud, this red-faced parson is worth a 
dozen of me, if love went by merit. But, happily for 
me, it doesn't ! " 



\ 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 



291 



CHAPTER XIX. 



Maud was in the parlour, the following afternoon, 
entertaining a spinster friend of Mrs. Hicks*s, who 
had called. But Mrs. Hicks was out, and the bore of 
talking and listening to this maundering, though no 
doubt very amiable, lady, devolved on Maud. She 
was at her wit's end. They had talked about the 
Queen ; they had discussed whether her Majesty 
would come out more next year or not. The visitor 
had repeated with pride some anecdotes of the prin- 
cesses which she had captured, and which showed a 
sort of connection, however remote, with the highest 
circles. After which, they had deplored the unusual 
drought, and lamented over the approaching flower- 
show, which was sure to be a failure, in consequencOi 
and then they came to a dead stop. There is no 
knowing what subject the spinster, by her own un- 



292 IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 

asBiBted efforts, would next have pumped up, but that 
a carriage, at that moment, stopped at the gate. 
Maud rose and went to the window. Was it another 
of these inflictions? She could see nothing by reason 
of the privet hedge, and sat down again, feeling that 
another visitor of this sort would be almost more than 
she could bear. 

There was a minute's interval, and then the 
parlour-door was thrown open, and Mrs. Gartaret was 
announced. 

Maud started to her feet, but she was conscious 
of nothing for a few seconds. Then her heart seemed 
to be rising in her throat ; she stood there, she could 
not go forward, while the old lady advanced towards 
her, holding out her arms, and Maud fell into them. 
The spinster, fluttered at the entry of a county lady 
who had very seldom been seen in Salisbury, and, 
furthermore, by the demonstrative character of the 
greeting she witnessed, murmured some inaudible 
formula of farewell, and slid out of the room. 

** My dear," cries Mrs. Gartaret, as soon as the 
door is closed, '* I have done you horrible injustice. 
I have said all sorts of hard things of you ; will you 
forgive me? I have come out here all this way to 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 293 

ask you ; and if you will not, I shall go back and 
make my son miserable. I have been very angry . 
oh ! I tell you frankly . I have been very angry, and 
I would listen to nothing he said. We have had a 
desperate quarrel. But in the end, see, it is not he 
who has asked ; it is I who have proposed to come 
to you, and alone, too. I have left hiin at the inn. 

. 

What I do, I do by myself, of my own will. I am 
not dragged by the hairs of my head, hein ? Do you 
understand ? " 

'^ I do, dear Mrs. Cartaret, and I appreciate it." 
" I do not forget the past, Mary, If I lived to 
be a thousand years, I should still regret that we 
came to know each other as we did. But that does 
not prevent my seeing what you have done for 
Lowndes. It seems that love for you has ranged 
him at last. He will no longer dissipate his time 
upon nonsenses. He works steady, and sees no 
more bad company. Je vous en fais mes compli- 
mens. And I honour you for your proper pride. It 
seems that unless I come and say, ^Mademoiselle, 
do me the honour to become my son's wife,' you will 
not marry him ? Well, I applaud you. I did the 
same myself . moi qui vous parle. I refused the 



291 



IS THAT STATE OF LIFE. 



heir to an old title, becaase his fomily did not receive 
me cordially. Therefore, I am come, yon see, my 
dear, en personne, that you may be satisSed." 

" And I am Hatisfied, dear Mrs. Gartaret, if I 
only know that the doubts yon entertained about me 
are cleared. My conduct fully justified your eas- 
picionB, I admit. It was moBt natural that you 
should tesent your aon'e attachment to me. I had 
bat to bend my head and submit to your decree, 
whatever it was." 

" Well, up to yesterday, my dear, I was obdurate. 
I was miserable, for I saw that Lowndes would never 
be the same to me again, nntil I gave in. But I was 
firm ; for I thought it was fisr his future good, and I 
hated you. Then came one who talked to me for an 
hour, and to such good purpose, that all my fine 
resolutions melted away. There, can you guess who 
that was, petite ? The young curd with the coupe- 
rosd face. I could not resist the Church's eloquence ; 
Uo put thing's iu aiicb n wuy ! Ht; tiilkuil suub n 
beautiful religion, my dear. You have to thank J 
lor it all." 

" And I deseiTO so litU^, 
Maud, colouring. 



^ 



IN THAT STATE OF LIFE. 295 

" Ah ! que voulez-vous ? " cried the old lady, 
shrugging her shoulders. "C'est toujours comme 
9a! And now let us make short work of this. I 
chassed you from Beckworth as the maid: I invite 
you to return as its ,mistress. I am old, and horribly 
lazy. I lie in bed, and let things go . an diable ! 
vrai . n'est-ce pas ? My good Bouse and Dapper are 
treasures, petite . yes, treasures, but, somehow, I 
can't manage them any more. I shall be glad to 
give it all iip, and to cry, * La reine est morte . ^vive 
la reine ! " 

" The queen never will die for me ! '* exclaimed 
Maud, throwing her arms round Mrs. Cartaret's 
neck* As she spoke the door opened, and Lowndes's 
radiant 'face beamed joyously upon the group before 
him. The next moment there was a sort of triune 
embrace, in which it was impossible to determine 
whose arms were round whose neck, and with this 
tableau it may be as well to let the curtain drop. 



296 IN THAT STATE OP LIFE. 



EPILOGUE. 

Beadeb, one word at parting* Let no young lady 
follow our Maud's example, anticipating like results. 
Wo agree with the county at large in thinking that 
she was "an uncommonly lucky girl,** Starting 
from a false basis of principle, she had done her best 
to become an Ishmael, and, lo! Fate willed that 
the lot and inheritance of Isaac should be hers. 
Mrs. Cartaret still rules, in outward semblance, at 
Beckworth ; but the sceptre has really passed, as she 
desired, into younger and stronger hands. His wife's 
influence over Lowndes has never waned, and she has 
found, at last^ more peace and contentment than falls 
to the lot of most human beings, '* in that state of 
life into which it hath pleased God to call " her. 
