CHAPTER XLI. A PARTIAL Revelation.
THE excitement caused by the murder of Sir Everard Lestrange, the
arrest of the murderer, and the rumoured effect of the horrible occur-
rence upon Mrs. Hunter, was quite as great as the most ardent lovers of
the terrible could desire. Rumour had circulated a score of versions of
the Drury-lane catastrophe before the public investigation of the facts
disclosed the correct one. Invention was especially busy with poor
Margery, who was declared, on the best authority, first, to have been
desperately wounded by the assassin, who was said to have fired at her
immediately after his first fatal aim had taken effect; and, secondly, to
have died at her own lodgings in the course of the night. Some said
she was married to Mr. Johnson; others that her husband had returned
from abroad, and given credit to the lying boasts of Sir Everard Le-
strange, and that he had fired the fatal shot. Nothing could exceed
the silliness and extravagance of the stories put in circulation; and the
chief thing which caused me surprise was that I did not figure in any
of these inventions, as I might have expected I should do, as it was
known to many of my acquaintance that a tie, not very strictly defined,
but more than ordinarily strong, existed between myself and Mrs.
Hunter.
The proceedings of the coroner's inquest and the examination of
the prisoner engrossed the attention of the town, and disposed of many
of the current stories. With regard to the latter, I had had some anti-
cipations of disagreeable publicity, fearing I should be interrogated in
connection with the wild and threatening language which the unfor-
tunate man had used to his victim. Anything of the sort would have
been abhorrent to me for Dora's sake; but my fears were groundless.
The first appearance of Mr. Johnson before the magistrates set the
matter at rest. He was so evidently insane, that even in that time-
for I am happy to say I have lived to witness some mitigation of the
frightful severity of the criminal laws, which so painfully impressed me
on my return to England-there was no doubt about the sparing of his
life. I was present at the painful scene, and it is one of those, of which
I have witnessed not a few, never to be forgotten. I had heard from
Mr. Garrick that the prisoner was said to have entirely lost his senses

BOUND TO JOHN COMPANY
539
on the morning before he committed the murder, and that his sisters,
with natural weakness, had hesitated to acknowledge their fears, or to
secure assistance in order to restrain him. There was no difficulty
about his getting into the theatre, and no one there was likely to be
sufficiently at leisure to remark his manner, if even the very ordinary
circumstance of his being there had been observed.
I was careful to keep myself well out of sight, and succeeded, though
I do not think poor Mr. Johnson would have known me had I been
full in front of him. In a corner of the court I observed two women,
shabbily dressed, elderly, and sickly-looking, whose eyes were fixed
upon the prisoner with straining looks of keen anxiety, woe, and ten-
derness most pitiful to behold. I immediately conceived the idea that
these two poor creatures, who had an unspeakably forlorn and miser-
able appearance in that excited and inconsiderate crowd, were the
sisters of whom Margery had said that their brother was their sole
support, and I felt the deepest commiseration for them. Poverty and
endurance had set their mark deeply upon their worn faces, and were
to be read in their decent but threadbare dress. Their demeanour was
quite unobtrusive, but I could see that the agony of their brother's
situation was complicated by the terror they were experiencing lest
they should be called on to bear witness to his condition. But no tes-
timony beyond his own was necessary. A glance at his face, as he was
brought in between two constables, was sufficient for me who had seen
Omichund. Only a few days had elapsed since he had supped with me,
and by his manner had convinced me that he was not altogether in his
right mind; but in the interval, madness had made such havoc in his
features, that he was hardly to be recognised. A murmur ran round
the court, the inarticulate expression of the conviction which instantly
seized on all present. This was no deliberate intentional murderer, but
an afflicted being, outside the jurisdiction of human justice-the victim,
it might be, of his own vanity and obstinacy, of the absorbing sway of
one idea over a weak mind; but not to be punished by his fellow-man
beyond the limits of the necessary restraint which is in itself so cruel
and terrible. Would that I could say I had lived to see this, too, more
humane and less penal! But the age advances, and those for whom I
have written this story, which is soon coming to an end, will have
many wise and liberal public reforms to chronicle in their time, no
doubt.
The prisoner's replies to the interrogatories addressed to him were
direct and uncompromising. He had a grudge against Sir Everard
Lestrange, and he had threatened him, and shot him, and he gloried in
it. It was truly awful to hear him pouring forth, in a loud tuneless
voice, his incoherent delight and exultation, and taking to himself the
credit of a heroic deed, certain of general recognition. Of his motive
he had apparently no recollection whatever; it was there that the chain.
of continuity of thought was broken, and every effort to reunite it


failed. He gesticulated wildly, broke off his replies to wander into
scraps from his accustomed stage-characters, and, in short, was a raving
madman, with the pale face, distraught expression, and glittering ex-
cited eyes which the best, the most cunning imitation can never suc-
cessfully simulate. The worthy magistrates brought this pitiful scene
to a speedy conclusion; the prisoner was removed, being committed
for trial pro formâ; and the crowd dispersed, with a general conviction
that a very bad man, one who had grossly abused and misused station,
fortune, and influence, had met with a fate which, however terrible,
was not undeserved, and that the only punishment which must befall
his slayer had been meted to him by a divine and unerring hand.
He
It is as well that I should record in this place the termination of
poor Mr. Johnson's story-the end of the man of whom I knew so
little, with whom my intercourse was so trifling and so brief, but who
played so important a part in my history-whom I remember always
with somewhat of an awful feeling as the executor of the hidden inexor-
able decrees of Providence towards me, and the most convincing proof
my life has ever afforded me of our insufficiency to ourselves, our little
influence over our own destinies. This poor man's condition became
rapidly worse, and he died a few days before that fixed for his trial,
having given no evidence of sanity, and in the last days of his life
sunken into utter silence and apathy. Margery, who was then recover-
ing from the fever which had declared itself, was very desirous of being
admitted to see him, and had entreated me to use all the influence
within my reach in order to procure her admission to visit the prison.
This I was prepared to do, and Mr. Burke would have assisted me; but
before Margery would have been able to see Mr. Johnson, I was ad-
vised that his end was drawing near. It was much better so.
could have recovered, if at all, only to hopeless imprisonment and life-
long remorse. His death was in a strange way the means of the fulfil-
ment of one of his most ardent and anxious desires. The poor player
had a gentle and tender heart for all his cracked brain, and the future
fate of his sisters would have sorely troubled him. Here, as in the case
of that other eccentric man, with whom my odd destiny had thrown
me into strange and mischievous contact, the bond of family affection,
the pure and holy tie of fraternal love, dating from unsullied childhood,
had held good, unworn, unrelaxed in all the contact and conflict of a
rough and wicked world. The feeble women, who had clung to such
hazardous supports as Mr. Johnson the actor and Philip Hay the ad-
venturer, gained all they never had been able to secure in their life by
the death of each. Margery followed the bent of her bountiful nature
in the succour which she extended to the sisters of her poor frantic
admirer; and she was assisted later, and continuously, by one whose
hand I have never known to be withholden from doing good or extend-
ing consolation.
To return to the course of events in their order. Having seen my


foster-sister safe in the homely care of her mother, whose voice, full of
the old tones of home, whose reassuring touch, eloquent of the only
love which is absolutely indestructible, would, I knew, be her best and
most rapid cure, I allowed my thoughts to turn unrestrainedly to the
one subject underlying every occupation and preoccupation. The
dreadful event had changed the aspect of my life. I should be a hypo-
crite, a mere mean pretender to virtue which I neither possessed nor
admired, to greatness of soul which I could not have even desired to
attain, if I said that the full ecstatic possibilities of the future were not
present with me from the first. We cannot weigh conventionalities, or
measure time, or curb our thoughts in the great crises of life; and I
could not credit the man who should declare that, in my place, he would
not have remembered at once, with exultation, that the woman he loved
was free, and that the last words he had heard her speak contained an
avowal of her affection. I make no such pretence. I know I thought
of this; I know my whole life was suddenly changed-instantly irra-
diated with a bright and blessed hope which, but one moment before
the mad player fired the shot by which Sir Everard Lestrange fell,
was the most absolute impossibility.
While I was travelling up to town with Madge Hawker, who slept
soundly during all the time which she did not pass in open-mouthed
wonder at the rapidity with which the post-chaise flew past the mani-
fold objects by the road-side, my mind was dwelling on the vicissitudes
of fortune which had suddenly put a stop to all my proceedings-had
annihilated the purpose of my life. What mattered it now that Haute-
ville had been left to me-that Lady Barbara's will had been stolen,
and I had been treacherously, infamously wronged? I would have
revenged myself on my enemy if I could; I would have possessed my-
self of my rightful inheritance, if I could; and Dora, I knew, would
have let Hauteville go without a sigh of regret. But now! I knew
that by her marriage-settlements, in consideration of her income, which
Sir Everard had so scandalously wasted, she became the possessor of all
the property which was his at the time of his death. Hauteville was
now hers, and the purpose of my life had lost its meaning.
I had heard of Dorothea since the death of Sir Everard, though no
direct communication had taken place between us. I knew that she
had borne the shock well, and had acted with firmness and dignity, not
affecting an intensity of sorrow which it would have been unnatural,
indeed impossible, for her to feel, but behaving with collected serious-
ness. The dead man's body still lay in the old mansion in St. James's-
square, when the unhappy murderer's examination took place, with
the miserable, yet fortunate, result which I have recorded.
After the funeral, Lady Lestrange would retire to Hauteville, at-
tended by a friend who was also a widow, but much older than Dorothea,
there to pass the time conventionally assigned to seclusion. This in-
formation, which I acquired by interrogating the servants at second-hand


by means of my foster-mother, who was much gratified by the daily mes-
sages of inquiry for Margery despatched from St. James's-square, was
confirmed by Mrs. Winbolt.
In my restless state of mind, distracted by irrepressible hope, wound
up, by the extraordinary events which had come as a solution of my
position, to a degree of excitement which I could hardly conceal from
my associates, it was a relief to be with anyone to whom I could speak
of what had occurred in its bearing on myself. I was permitted to see
Margery daily, but not to speak to her on any agitating topic; and it
was pleasant to see the mother and daughter together. The homely
truth and kindliness, the practical, if somewhat rough-spun, worth of
Madge Hawker, shone forth in the sick-room of her beautiful and gifted
daughter, whose helplessness was perfectly efficient in removing the
awkwardness of their changed positions. Margery's surroundings puzzled
her mother mightily; but notwithstanding certain scruples, which owed
their origin partly to her entire ignorance, and partly to the infection
of religious notions of the pattern affected by Mrs. Grimshaw, I shrewdly
suspected that she was very proud of her daughter's fame and success,
and would mightily have liked to see her playing one of her great
parts.
"It's an unaccountable thing to me, Robin," she would say, "quite
unaccountable, where she ever got her notions of play-acting from, for
never did she see as much as a play in a barn, and I saw one once when
daddy and me was young; but there, there's things as I understand
easy, and things as I suppose I shall never understand."
Thinking, as I went, how little of her daughter's real history this
good and dutiful mother knew, or was destined ever to know, I betook
me to Mrs. Winbolt's, and was received with a friendly welcome, in
which no little curiosity mingled itself.
Our second interview took place in the same small oak parlour which
had witnessed our first; and Mrs. Winbolt required no pressing to in-
duce her to tell me all she knew, but not before she had had from my
lips an account of the scene in the theatre, concerning which she shared
the universal lively curiosity.
"And you were there!" she exclaimed; "you were there, sir, and
saw the vengeance of Heaven fall upon your enemy!" (The portly
milliner was a romantic as well as a good soul, and such fine rolling
phrases had a great charm for her.) "Well now, only to think of that!
And to think that the way is clear for you now! For though it's early
days, Mr. Ainsleigh, there is no harm in saying, just in a private way,
what one thinks. And it is easy to see what will come of this, to end
all your troubles, and hers too, poor lady. And for all she looks so pale
and subdued, there's more peace in her face than there has been there
for many a day, I'll be sworn."
"Then you've seen her, Mrs. Winbolt ?"
"Yes, I've seen her; and that she should have sent for me to take

her orders for her weeds makes me feel more proud than a little. You'll
excuse me, Mr. Ainsleigh, for speaking so freely to you, because Lady
Barbara condescended to call me her old friend when she was in trouble.
I have never worked for Lady Lestrange,-belike Sir Everard would not
permit her to give me her custom,—but her maid came and fetched me
and one of my work women to St. James's-square last Wednesday; and
I saw the poor young lady, and measured her for her weeds.
She was
very gentle and gracious, and spoke much to me of her aunt. I was
about taking my leave before she said anything which let me know that
she had seen you and heard the story of Lady Barbara's last visit here;
but she did mention it at the end, and then she was in great distress, and
besought me to tell her all that had occurred on that occasion."
"And you told her ?"
"I told her. She listened to me very thoughtfully, and there was
a look of pain in her sweet face,-you'll excuse me, Mr. Ainsleigh, if I
take a liberty; and when I had done, she said, 'Thank you, Mrs. Win-
bolt; I know now all I want to know; I shall know how to act now.'
I had no choice but to come away; but I would have dearly liked to
stay and hear more, and perhaps,-as people say, for all her grandeur
and her fortune, she is lonely, because Sir Everard had no friends, and
would allow her to have none,-she might have condescended to speak a
bit of her mind to me. The last of her gowns was finished to-day, and
I had a mind to take it home myself; but that is a thing I never do,
and it would have set the workroom talking."
Internally I treated the portly mantua-maker's scruples with much
disrespect; but I did not try to combat them. I turned the conversa-
tion upon Madame Adolphine, telling Mrs. Winbolt how I had gained
intelligence of my former enemy, and asking if she knew anything about
her.
"Anything-the viper! yes, I do; a good deal, at least if hearing
and believing scandal is knowledge. I wonder I did not tell you be-
fore, sir, that Adolphine gave out she had a legacy from Lady Barbara,
and was setting up in business. I suppose our talk about the dear
lady's melancholy end put it out of my remembrance. Perhaps Mrs.
Lestrange believed her, dear innocent young thing, she was not likely
to know or suspect there was so much wickedness in the world; but
if she believed it, other people didn't; nor I for one, but knew the
money was Mr. Lestrange's, and not too honestly earned. Anyhow, she
was set up in business, and has fine showrooms in Bond-street; but
they do say she has never really prospered. In our way of life, sir, we
mostly come to know something of the affairs of people in the same
trade; and I have heard that Adolphine is in difficulties, not succeed-
ing better than she deserves."
This piece of information was of value to me. It connected itself
with the mysterious conversation I had overheard, and with Margery's
conviction that in that conversation lay the clue I was then in search of.

BOUND TO JOHN COMPANY
Though everything was now changed, though the purpose I had then
been pursuing no longer existed, the desire for more knowledge still
remained; I still wished to discover the means by which the wrong, no
longer requiring to be set right, had been perpetrated.
And now time began to seem interminably long. The days dragged
themselves through I hardly knew how, and the period which I knew
must, for the sake of both, elapse before I could hope to see or hear from
Dora seemed to my apprehensive fancy interminable. Looking back
to this epoch, for the purpose of recording it, my mind falls into its old
train, reproducing only its weariness and vagueness. I really do not
know what I did, or whither I went; never was there a spirit more un-
quiet than mine.
The excitement caused by the murder was subsiding. Lady Le-
strange had removed to Hauteville, Margery was almost convalescent;
and her illness having practically terminated her engagement by render-
ing it indispensable to supply her place, she had it in contemplation to
return with her mother to her former home. I had again seen Mr.
Swinfen, who still had no letter from my father to give me, and had
discussed the recent events with him, but, of course, without referring
to my former feelings or present hopes, in which Dora had a share.
Whether he interpreted the alteration in my plans and desires, whether
he understood why I was content to be kept out of what I believed to
be my inheritance by Sir Everard's widow,-whereas I decidedly ob-
jected to having been kept out of it by Sir Everard himself,-I cannot
tell. If he understood, he certainly did not sympathise with me. Mr.
Swinfen was a practical, useful, business-like man, but his nature was
quite unattuned to the softer emotions.
I had returned to my chambers in the Temple one evening, after
my customary visit to Margery, during which I had learned with selfish
satisfaction that she had hopes of being pronounced equal to a speedy
removal to the country. Margery once at Hauteville, I must hear of
Dorothea she would doubtless see Lady Lestrange. This was very
good news for me, and I had taken its full satisfaction home with me.
Not straight home, however, but by the circuitous route of St. James's-
square, whither it was my custom to go tolerably often, and stroll past
the closely-shut-up mansion where the woman I loved had passed many
evil days, never, thank Heaven! to be repeated. I had returned in
better spirits than usual, and was indulging some hopeful reveries, when
an unfamiliar step upon the stairs, pausing now and then, as if unde-
cided, a slow step, not heavy: evidently a woman's,-caught my atten-
tion. Presently the step ceased outside my door, at which, after a full
minute's interval, there was a knock. I was alone, and answered the
summons. A woman was standing on the threshold-a woman in a
black dress, her face and head hidden by a black hood.
Instantly, upon my opening the door, she passed through it quickly
into my sitting-room; and when I followed her, she turned, and throw-

ing back her hood, showed me, to my unspeakable astonishment, the face
of Martha Grimshaw.
"Mrs. Grimshaw!" I exclaimed, recoiling from her, while a host of
apprehensions filled my mind, "you here! you in London, and here !
What does this mean?"
"You shall hear," she answered; and never had her face worn a
darker, a more malevolent expression.
I had mechanically placed a chair for her; but she pushed it away,
and leaned against the wall.
"Is anything wrong at Hauteville? Is your mistress well?"
"There is nothing wrong at Hauteville. Lady Lestrange, who is
no mistress of mine, is well, I believe. I am not come to this wicked
place to talk of her!"
The suppressed passion in her face and voice, the bitterness, the
rage striving with fatigue, were wonderful and painful to see.
"At least, sit down and rest, Mrs. Grimshaw," I said. "You and
I have never been friends, and it may be that you have come here
to-night with no friendly purpose towards me; but there is no reason
why you should refuse the commonest act of civility from me. Pray
sit down;" and again I pushed a chair towards her. This time she sat
down, her hand pressed to her side, her breath coming short in heavy
gasps, and her set and rigid face growing paler. In the few moments.
during which she remained silent, all the scenes of my sternly-ruled
cheerless years, under this woman's governance, flashed across my
memory.
"I have not come to this wicked place to talk of her," she repeated;
"I have come to ask you a question. That young woman, child of per-
dition that she is, thinking of another man while her noble husband is
hardly cold in his grave-ay, ay, you may start and stare, Robert
Ainsleigh, but I know her, and the like of her, and you, and the like of
you, though I have lived a dull and quiet life, with only a drivelling
old fool to keep in order all my best days-that young woman, moved,
as I believe, by the devil, who is her parent, and the parent of you all,
told me something, in a fit of her ungodly rage, because I restrained
her from troubling Anthony Grimshaw's deathbed, which I do not
believe, and will not believe, unless you tell it to me, and confirm it
with an oath! Soldiers take oaths, they say; and so I suppose they
believe in their sacredness; so I will trust your oath."
The vehemence of her speech had hitherto given me no chance of
arresting its flow; but I resolutely stopped her here, and replied in a
raised voice:
"You must take another tone, Mrs. Grimshaw, if you wish me to
answer any question of yours, and even then I shall entirely consult
my own discretion.
It is inconceivable to me that you can have any
question to put to me concerning your own affairs, and equally so that
you can have any pretence of a right to interrogate me about mine.


But let me assure you at once that you will only waste time by talking
as you are doing now. I should deeply regret being rude or unkind to
you; but you must remember, Mrs. Grimshaw, that, as I said just now,
we never were friends, and you come to me of favour, not of right.
Any question of my taking any kind of oath for your satisfaction, on
any subject, is simply ridiculous-contemptibly ridiculous. Put your
question to me. I will reply to it, or not, as I think proper."
"Is it true that Roderick Ainsleigh is still alive?" She spoke
through her set teeth, and squeezed her hard horny hands together
almost convulsively.
"It is quite true. I found my father in Bengal, and learned all the
truth from him. It was to him I alluded when I told you I had seen
one who was witness to my mother's wedding. Knowing, as I now
know, the motive of your ill-will to him and to her, I know that you
never in your heart believed the slander you repeated against her, that
you knew she was my father's wife, and I no bastard, when you called
me so!"
I could not restrain the bitterness of this address, but Mrs. Grim-
shaw appeared quite indifferent to it. The hard look with which she
had regarded me wandered from my face, and a musing expression re-
placed it.
"Roderick Ainsleigh living," she murmured; "really living! I
thought it had been a crafty device inspired by the father of lies, to
enable his pupil to take me off my guard. But it is true-it is true!"
She roused herself with a shake of her head and her skirts, which
I remembered in old days as foreboding hard times to luckless old
Anthony and my feeble self, and said in a collected purpose-like
voice:
"I wanted to know this-only this; and I have made up my mind
now. Roderick Ainsleigh being alive, and Sir Everard Lestrange dead,
nothing that I can do can keep him from the possession of Hauteville.
What I strove, and laboured, and restrained myself for, what I endured
the persecutions of the ungodly for, and the insolence of such as are
fat of heart for, is all over now. The widow, who mourns her husband
after so Christian a fashion, is ready to throw her wealth into your
lap. You should never have had a shilling of the fortune, or an acre
of the land, Robert Ainsleigh, if I could have kept them from you, for
I always hated you."
"In the name of Heaven, why?"
"Because you were your father's son, and had your mother's eyes.
It was she whom I hated, not the weak man who did not know his
own mind, but had it made up for him at the parsonage, forsooth,
where the wolves in sheep's clothing set, for their punishment, over
the Lord's people, taught him that faith to a waiting-woman need not
be kept, and how a parson's daughter was a fitting match for a disap-
pointed heir. A parson's daughter, truly! I remember when their

wives were mostly waiting-women, who had more of their master's
favour than their ladies' wages; and I doubt whether Roderick
Ainsleigh's wife had any better blood in her veins than mine. But
I hated her; and though, mayhap-unless your father boasted of me,
as was the fashion of the gallants then-she never knew of my exist-
ence, I doubt not she felt it, in poverty and desertion; and she de-
served to feel it. The Lord metes out His temporal judgments to such
as she.
If you want to hear any more, Robert Ainsleigh, spare me
your fine speeches. I don't care for your reverence for Mary Lester's
memory-I don't care for your anger; I care for nothing now but
to do this thing: and then neither you, nor any of the hateful race
whose prosperity I have been condemned to witness, shall ever see
or hear of me more. I firmly believed that Roderick Ainsleigh was
dead disinherited; and that want and obscurity must be the por-
tion of Mary Lester and her child. And when my lady sent you to
Hauteville, and ordered me to treat you as she did, I resolved that
my revenge should be carried out.
And it was.
As your father left
Hauteville, with a slur upon his name, and a beggar, so you left
Hauteville; and all the good fortune that may be coming to you in
the worldly future, for which you and those like you barter eternal
salvation, cannot blot out the years in which you suffered by my
contrivance, and for my wrongs. You may marry your first love, but
she has been another man's wife; you may have all that was your
father's birthright, but there is a taint upon you; and you have been
the companion of the scum of the earth, the lowest of the low, worse
than any servant,' who must, forsooth, be made to know her place, as
Lady Lestrange has taken it upon herself to teach me mine."
I began to doubt the woman's sanity. I began to believe that the
venomous hatred-the wicked concentrated spite of years-had under-
mined her intellect, had eaten into her nature like a disease, and that
the sudden failure of her evil wishes, brought about by Sir Everard's
death, had overthrown her reason. No otherwise could I explain
Martha Grimshaw's seeking me to pour out all this venom in a manner
so opposed to her customary stern reticence. She saw the suspicion on
my face, and went on with a sneer of indescribable malice:
"You think I am mad, Robert Ainsleigh, and that you are about
to owe the information you have striven to obtain to my ravings.
But you are mistaken; I am not mad. I am sane enough to know
when I am defeated, and to what extent. The day the news of Sir
Everard's death reached Hauteville, I knew I was beaten; and the day
Lady Lestrange humiliated me before the servants in the house where
I have ruled so long, I knew to what extent. And she thought she
knew that, too; but she did not-no, she did not!"
"I cannot even guess at your meaning, Mrs. Grimshaw," I said
impatiently, "and I am really weary of this tirade, and of your
presence. Any disagreement you may have had with Lady Lestrange


does not concern me, and I have no doubt you were in the wrong. She
would tolerate much for the sake of Lady Barbara's faithful old friend,
your husband."
"I have no such claim to her ladyship's toleration," she replied;
"my husband is dead, and gone to be judged for his subservience to
the wicked will of Lady Barbara and others of the accursed family of
Ainsleigh."
"My old friend-my dear old friend-dead?"
66
Ay, dead. And dead without being cajoled by you, or Lady
Lestrange, or anybody-dead, leaving the secret to my discretion, to
keep it, or to break it, as I choose; and I choose to break it, because I
shall upset some of my lady's fine fancies."
"What secret are you talking about?"
"The secret you came to Hauteville to find out; the secret you
tried to worm out of the decaying brain of the feeble old fool who
helped you to brave me in time past-the faithful servant whom Lady
Barbara trusted with her last wishes and plans. She would have done
better to trust me."
She paused to draw a deep breath, but I did not speak. I cannot
describe the effect it had on me to see the supreme empire of evil
in this self-deluding woman's soul-to see her discarding one bad
purpose, so long persisted in, only under the pressure of a new form
and object of vindictiveness. Dora must indeed have trodden heavily
upon that slumbering snake, Martha Grimshaw's pride!
"When my lady came down to Hauteville for the last time-only a
short time it was before she was so awfully and suddenly called, unpre-
pared, to her account-she treated me with distant coldness and sus-
picion, I suppose because I honoured my master, and held his interests
my chief care."
"You allude to Sir Marcus ?"
"Yes. I had heard the story of your doings, and your disap-
pearance; and Anthony's mind was full of it all, so that even before
the burglary I thought he was going crazy. Nothing would persuade
him but that you were kidnapped; and he would have it, too, that your
father was not dead. I never had the patience to endure his maunder-
ings; and when my lady came down, it vexed me to see how she
listened to him, and how she seemed impressed by his foolish talk.
I had reason to know how haughty and disdainful my lady could be,
but never had she treated me before as she treated me then. I had
had my revenge in my time for some of her former treatment, and
I very soon saw my way to having my revenge for this. My lady
took Anthony into quiet places in the house, and especially into her
own closet, to have private conferences with him, in which I was to
have no share, and which I guessed to be weighty by her troubled look
and manner.
But my lady did not take into account that Anthony's
deafness made it impossible to speak to him in a whisper, and that


I was better acquainted with the house than she was. She never
talked to him anywhere but I was near, and heard all she said."
"There is nothing in the doctrines of your faith to keep you from
prying and listening, then?"
"Meddle with things you understand, Robert Ainsleigh, not with
my faith, which is beyond your comprehension. My husband had no
right to exclude me from his confidence, nor I to permit a conspiracy
against my master."
Was this sheer audacity, or was it self-deception? I have never
been able to make up my mind.
"My lady's business at Hauteville was to confide to Anthony's
keeping a will which she had contrived to make with infinite trouble,
being closely watched by Sir Marcus and certain agents of his. The
watch had been somewhat relaxed since Miss Hemsley's marriage; but
she had had infinite difficulty notwithstanding, and had been forced to
such a condescension as availing herself of the house of her mantua-
maker for the drawing of the will, which I soon ascertained she had
come to hide in her own. She told Anthony about your letter; it had
reached her a week too late; and he, struck by the resemblance between
the truth of your history and what he had always believed it to be,
told her of his conviction, that at least there was no certainty of your
father's death. My lady was foolishly agitated by the notion-most
unreasonably agitated, for her time of life-and declared she was the
most wretched, the most unfortunate of women. Then Anthony, to
whom she read the paper she was giving into his charge, proposed
to her that she should add a codicil, stating that she desired that
you, Robert Ainsleigh, to whom she had left the entire of the Haute-
ville estates-for the name of Sir Marcus was not once mentioned—
should apply yourself to discover whether your father was really alive
or dead; and if, at the end of three years, you did not discover any
trace of him, you were to have absolute possession of the property; but
if he proved to be living, it was to be his for his life, and to come
to you on his death only. They talked over this-it seemed to me
the wildest and most foolish of notions-until my lady took to it as
strongly as Anthony himself; and the thing was done. It was not my
business to prevent that; my time was to come later. They managed
it; there was a chimney-stone loose in Lady Barbara's closet, and a
young man for whom Anthony had a fancy, because the lad cared
more for book-learning than became his station, was sent for to put it
right. I did not disturb them; and her ladyship took a liking to see
how the job was being done, and it was very well done. The young
man, Dick Trotman, and Anthony signed the paper which her ladyship
had written out; and the next day Anthony and she locked away the
will and the codicil in a Japan cabinet which you knew well once on a
time, and have not forgotten. There was a debate about the safety of
so small and portable an article; but my lady and her wise counsellor


agreed that the last place to be suspected would surely be a piece
of furniture before everyone's eyes, in a room commonly used. It had
a secret drawer; and there they put the will. Then my lady gave
Anthony the key, and he promised her never to lose sight of that
cabinet.
"Watch it day and night, my faithful old friend,' said her lady-
ship; and if I die before my boy knows how he has been righted-
before I can get him home to look after his own interests, and to
protect me-keep it until he comes-conceal it, and keep it until he
comes. He will learn by my letter that he is to apply to you; and
things will go on quietly until his arrival. You will never be sus-
pected, in the case of my death, of holding any trust from me; and my
boy will return to confound his enemies.' They talked again about
the possibility of Roderick Ainsleigh being still living; and though
my lady put it off, and seemed as if she had made the codicil to
humour a fancy of Anthony's, I saw very plainly that the hope had
taken hold of her own mind, though she would not confess it."
The horror, the amazement, with which I listened to this narrative
were extreme; but through them penetrated the liveliest curiosity and
wonder to learn why Mrs. Grimshaw had at length resolved on telling
a story which involved her in such disgrace.
"My lady," she continued, "was haughty and disdainful to me to
the last; and the affectionate leave she took of Anthony was only
another means of insulting me. But I cared little for her insults, and
could have laughed at the pertinacity with which the old man set
about guarding his trust-so fidgety and preoccupied was he, that
anyone must have suspected something-before the sound of the
carriage-wheels was out of the avenue. For in the rumble of Lady
Barbara's carriage went one up to London with her whom I could
trust; and he carried a letter to my master. Sir Marcus was a clever
gentleman, I have been told, and learned to keep his face and his
voice, his manners, his very thoughts, I daresay, in order, in foreign
parts; and I don't think Lady Barbara had any idea, when she sat
with him at the wedding-feast, that he knew all she had done. I need
not tell you how my lady died, and how the burglars came and broke
into the great house, and took away that identical Japanese cabinet.
Poor Anthony! his watch did not last long, but it was faithfully kept;
and his fidelity cost him his senses first, and then his life."
"Woman!" I exclaimed, "have you no remorse-no conscience, of
being involved in such a crime?"
"I am involved in no crime. I was faithful to my duty to my
master, when his wife designed to deprive him of her wealth, and leave
it to her lover and his son. My master recognised and rewarded my
fidelity."
"Is the will destroyed?
"How should I know?
What has become of the cabinet ?"
The burglars took it away. I know


nothing of them or their motives. I know that the burglary was
as opportune as my lady's death. That's all. Seek for further infor-
mation where you list, and find it if you can. I have come to tell you
this, because I hate your pale-faced mistress more even than I hate
you, and because I know the nature of the Ainsleighs-unjust, fickle,
ungrateful, cruel; and if indeed you are no bastard, but Roderick
Ainsleigh's lawful son, you are unjust, fickle, ungrateful, and cruel.
She had her fine romance, had she? Sir Everard's modest and faithful
widow of a few weeks! She would wed you, and dower you with all
the wealth of the Lestranges, she would compensate you nobly for
all you had suffered! But how about this project now? The money
is yours, the land is yours; she and her husband were usurpers-
robbers, defrauding you of your just rights. And if you are so
romantic, so generous, as to forgive and forget all this, then there's
your father-you know he is living; you have told her he is living-
and the money and the land are not even yours, but his will he feel
inclined to dower Lady Lestrange with them? Will he feel disposed
to pardon a robbery which has outlived two generations? Will he
choose his heir to mate with Lady Barbara's blood-Lady Barbara,
who jilted, who ruined him? I think not, Robert Ainsleigh-I think
not. The will is not found, indeed, but it existed; and you talked
a little while ago of faith and conscience, did you not? How do
you know your fine lady-love does not know all this as well as I do?
and when she offers you herself and her fortune-and they've both
been Sir Everard's, remember-I defy you not to suspect that she is
quite aware the only way she can keep this ill-gotten wealth is by
generously offering to share it with you .Ay, stamp and swear-
such are your manners; but you are no Ainsleigh if you forget my
words, or if the sting in them does not rankle in your heart some
day."
She rose, and put her hand upon the latch of the door, and I saw
in her rigid face that she had said her say. By whatever tremendous
and painful effort she had mastered her passion, it was mastered.
"Stay, Mrs. Grimshaw," I said; "you do not leave me like this.
I pay no heed to your latter words-mere vile wicked ravings of the
base passion of revenge, which has enslaved you all your life, to betray
you at last. But I may have to oblige you to prove this statement,
and I must know where to find you."
"That you shall never know, Robert Ainsleigh. I will prove
nothing, and you cannot force me. Find my lady's will, and it proves
itself; but do not dare to molest me. The town is not tired of the
Lestranges; I warrant me it would prick up its ears to listen to a tale
of how my lady's lover threatened Sir Everard's faithful servant."
The indescribably odious expression of her face, the demon-like
sneer, the horrible covert meaning in her voice, were too much
for me.
"In the name of
"Go, woman!" I said, throwing the door open.
the devil-for it is his faithful servant you are-go!
She passed before me with a triumphant grin, and the next
moment she was gone.
It was long after dawn before I finished the letter to Lady Le-
strange, in which I detailed the extraordinary occurrences of the night,
and requested her leave to visit her. I protest I had no intention that
this epistle should enter into the category of love-letters, nor did I
suspect that it could be so estimated. Nevertheless, Dora has since
averred that it lacked none of the qualities, and included all the per-
fections, of the love-letter.

CHAPTER XLII.
A COMPLETE REVELATION.
I SLEPT late that morning, and was at length awakened by my
servant, who brought me a letter, and a message that the bearer awaited
my reply. The letter was a brief note from Mrs. Winbolt, containing
somewhat surprising intelligence. The mantua-maker had had a visit
from Madame Adolphine, who had astonished her by a request to be
furnished with my address. She had been told of my existence and re-
turn to England by poor Lettice Hay, whose warm gratitude towards
the friend of her brother, by whose means a little light was shed upon
her poverty-stricken life, made her communicative. The poor soul had
mislaid the address which I had given her; but Madame Adolphine
pressing her feeble memory, she remembered that I had spoken of
knowing Mrs. Winbolt. Adolphine must have something more than
commonly important to say to me, or she would not have applied to any-
one connected in any way with her gross treachery to Lady Barbara ;
but Mrs. Winbolt had given her no satisfaction, had temporised, had
declared she could not give an address without permission; finally, had
sent me this letter, to ask what she should do.
I replied in one line, thanking my good old friend for her discretion,
and saying that I would call on Madame Adolphine. My letter to
Dora was not yet despatched, so I added this new item of strange in-
telligence to the long story I had already told her; and then, having
dressed, I sallied forth to a late breakfast at the Cocoa-tree, where
there was much conversation which failed to distract my attention;
and afterwards, early in the afternoon, took my way to Madame
Adolphine's, musing as I went upon the wonderful changes which
had befallen since I was there last, and had overheard the angry dia-
logue between her and my enemy-my enemy who was laid low in the
earth, dead, insensible to all love and grief, all wrath, fear, and passion
for evermore. What did I signify to him now, or he to me?
I was shown into the room whence the voices which I had overheard
issued, and after a short interval Madame Adolphine presented herself.
Time had not improved the promoted waiting-woman in appearance;


there was the same
but it had become
her brown face retained its keenness and pertness,
sly cunning in her small deep-set beady eyes,
wizened. Lying, scheming, and treachery had not made her happy, if
they had secured her fortune. There was a world of turmoil and
trouble in her aspect, and her affected ease did not impose on me. To
her mincing curtsey I returned a grave bow and a steady look, beneath
which the colour rose hotly in her dusky cheek.
"You wish to see me, I understand," I began. "I am at a loss to
understand why; but I have come here because I have been told so.
What is your business with me?"
While I spoke these few words she was looking at me with covert
but eager curiosity.
"My business with you, sir," her accent had not improved any
more than her appearance,-"is all for your good. I have been so
anxious-ah, but so anxious!-to see you, Mr. Ainsleigh, and to do
you a great good."
"You did me a very great evil the last time we met, and I believe
you confidently hoped your services on that occasion would dispose of
me for the future. What is the origin of so surprising a change ?"
"Ah, you are not noble, not chivalrous, or you would not think of
the offence of a poor woman-a poor servant, who had no choice but
to do as she was bid-after these years. And I did not know-how
should I?—that anything but the marriage was intended against you.
Why should Sir Everard,―ah, he was a bad man, as bad to me as to
others,-why should he have told me that? I was dreadfully fright-
ened when there was all that noise; and many time after I pray, I im-
plore Sir Everard to tell me where you were, and how you had been
treated. But he never tell me anything but to hold my tongue, and
not trouble him with questions; and so I know nothing, nothing at
all, and I think Mr. Ainsleigh must be dead."
Instructed by Mrs. Winbolt's narrative, I regarded Madame Adol-
phine with steady contemptuous incredulity, under which she raged and
winced.
"Have the goodness to tell me your business with me," I repeated.
"You are very sullen and revengeful, Mr. Ainsleigh, but I think it
would be worth your while to listen to me with a little less disdain.
Remember that I was with my Lady Barbara Lestrange until her death,
and can tell you what no one else knows all her mind about you, and
her intentions."
:
I had no inclination to decline the challenge conveyed by these last
words. The sooner Madame Adolphine was thoroughly convinced that
I was not to be cajoled the better.
"I know all about Lady Barbara's mind towards me, and not only
what she intended, but what she did."
The Frenchwoman tried to smile disdainfully, but she produced
only a frightened grin.


"Impossible! no one was near her but me."
"And you were paid to watch her night and day. Come, Madame
Adolphine, this kind of thing is very distasteful to me, and sheer waste
of time. Others besides yourself have been disconcerted by Sir Everard
Lestrange's death, and, finding the market open to another selling of
themselves, have come to me with so much information as to render
any you may choose to give, or to retain, entirely useless. I know all
about Lady Barbara's will; I know where she made it, and who helped
her; the attorney who drew it, and the witnesses who signed it. I
know all about the codicil she made at Hauteville, and the hiding-place
she put it in; and all about the burglary."
"Impossible! You cannot; it's only a guess, only a clever guess."
"It is only Mrs. Grimshaw's statement, made to me last night, full,
precise, and detailed in every particular. You can make no bargain
now, except it be for mercy concerning your share in this felony."
This was a chance shot, and it told. She looked at me, speechless,
with glaring eyes, and her hand at her throat, as though she were
choking.
"My share my share!"
"Yes, your share. The chances have been against you. I would
have paid you handsomely for the key to the secret which you and Sir
Everard discussed in this room just before his death."
She started up with a scream, and clapped her hands together with
hysterical violence. I thought of the imperturbable calm of Martha
Grimshaw-quite as bad a woman as this one, but how much stronger!
"Betrayed! betrayed!" she exclaimed.
"Betrayed indeed, but only by yourself. I came here that day to
speak with you,-not harshly, I protest, notwithstanding the cruel wrong
you did me; and being put into the adjoining room, I overheard your
conversation, your dispute with Sir Everard. It must be clear to you,
now that he is dead, and Mrs. Grimshaw has confessed, you have no-
thing to tell and everything to fear. And as I see clearly that your
business with me was connected with this vile transaction, and there is
nothing to be said about it, I take my leave of you. You shall hear of
me next through my lawyer, Mr. Swinfen."
During this brief interview I had been standing at the mantelpiece,
and I now moved towards the door; but Adolphine threw herself in my
way, and stopped me.
It has been always very painful to me to recall the remainder of that
scene. A woman's humiliation and despair are horrid to see, a woman's
entreaties dreadful to resist. The story is best told briefly.
The power which Adolphine possessed over Sir Everard consisted in
her holding Lady Barbara's will in her custody. This was the deposit
she refused to give up, by means of which she had intended to extract
great sums from his guilty fears. How much of Dora's money, I won-
dered, had gone to pay for this disgraceful comradeship? That Sir

Everard, in undertaking so hazardous a crime as the organisation of
the burglary, should not have secured the destruction of the will, was
explained by the not unusual incident of treachery being used against
a traitor. The chief agent in the villany was Sir Everard's valet, who
was Adolphine's lover; and when his master, exultant, triumphant, de-
manded of him the Japanese cabinet, Joseph Sutton calmly referred him
to Adolphine. From that hour commenced for Sir Everard a life whose
restless torment I found it in my heart to pity. The valet married the
waiting-woman, and so established a reign of terrorism above her and
his master, and mercilessly he used his advantage. He had drunk
himself to death but a short time before I reached England, having,
notwithstanding the large and constant subsidies extracted from Sir
Everard's terror, reduced Adolphine to the verge of bankruptcy. As
she told her piteous story, I felt as if she had been sufficiently punished;
and the haggard misery of her face, when all disguise was cast aside,
confirmed that impression.
I was too happy to be hard, too thankful to be strictly just. I as-
sured the wretched woman that she had no punishment to apprehend
from me, and told her I would extend to her in pity that aid which
she had proposed to extract from my ignorance and anxiety. I may
as well record here that this was done; and when the details of Adol-
phine's business were examined, it was found that, so great was the dis-
order into which the vicious courses of her husband had plunged them,
it would be impossible to restore them to any prospect of prosperity
without an outlay beyond what I should be justified in making. So
the business came to an end, and Adolphine retired to her own country
secured against want.*
I left the house in Bond-street, carrying with me Lady Barbara
Lestrange's will, which answered in every particular to the description.
given me by Martha Grimshaw, and feeling like one in a dream. Here
was the fulfilment of all that had seemed impossible, without any effort
on my part. I had stood still before the blank impenetrable curtain
of my destiny, and suddenly an unseen hand rolled it up, and a plea-
sant land of contentment and compensation lay smiling at my feet. I
could but wonder, and give praise where it was due.
The next day saw me on my way to Hauteville,—I had not patience
to wait for Dora's letter, and with me Margery and her mother; the
former divided between joy and anguish at the prospect of meeting her
father once more, the latter in a state of perfect satisfaction. I had
fears, considering Margery's now refined habits and still delicate health,
that she might not bear the scanty comfort of the warrener's lodge well,
*Note by Robert Ainsleigh jun., of Hauteville, October 2, 1802. A memo-
randum discovered among the private papers of my honoured and lamented father
informs us that this guilty and unfortunate person was among the victims of the
late terrible excesses in France. Being accused of lending money to emigrants, she
was imprisoned, and perished in the September massacre.


and I fearlessly offered her Lady Lestrange's hospitality. But she de-
clined, whispering to me, with tears and blushes :
"No, Robert, I could not come into the presence of Sir Everard's
widow, or dwell under her roof; nevertheless, I shall be a joyful guest
at Hauteville before long."
"How's that, Margery?" I asked, though I knew.
"Because I shall have no reason to shun your wife."
Why is it easy to describe grief, and impossible to describe joy?
have been garrulous and discursive enough in this record of the few
years of my life which were evil; but here my pen stops, my hand fal-
ters, and I feel I have no power to tell how blest and happy those which
have come since then have been. My children, for whom these pages
have been written, have witnessed many of those years, as they have
constituted much of their brightness and blessing. The old house, in
which my boyhood passed away, has seen my middle age and declining
years, and within its venerated walls my Dora has lived, a household
angel, ever more beautiful to my eyes and dearer to my heart.
My
father never came to England, never revisited his long-lost inheritance;
and there was a lapse of time during which Hauteville was still and
deserted, as in the days before Lady Barbara and her train came to
wake the old mansion from its repose and me from my dreams. A
lapse of time passed by Dora and me under the burning sun of Bengal.
For I returned thither, encouraged and accompanied by my brave wife,
no longer a timid girl, but a noble woman, to whom her husband's
honour and her own duty were far above all other considerations. I
need not tell the story of those years, my children have it by heart;
and in the records treasured by England they are glad and proud to
know my name has a place. For that place, as for all the other sources
of pride and happiness in my life, I am indebted to Dora, who said to
me on our wedding-day, when I was telling her hesitatingly of the
rumours then reaching England, of the war and glory imminent in
Bengal:
"Of course we will go, Robert. A brave soldier is faithful to his
flag in the time of his wealth, as a true husband is faithful to his wife
in the time of their poverty and misfortune. You are not more surely
bound to me, sir, than you are bound to John Company."


