CHAPTER I. MY FIRST HOME.

Y earliest recollections are of a scene which throughout an eventful life has been, and to the end of life will remain, in my esteem the brightest region of this various and beautiful world. From Indian forests, from the shores of mightier rivers, under the light of larger stars, my thoughts have flown back to the streams and woods of my early home, and taken shelter there, as young birds return to the nest they have been too eager to abandon.

I was born in London, in the year 1731, but of my birthplace or of those who watched my cradle I have no recollection. My first babyish steps trod the soft turf of a gentleman's park in the county of Bucksa domain so large, that in my childish ideas the world beyond its boundaries must needs be very narrow. Deep in the heart of this silvan scene there was a gamekeeper's cottage, and to the gamekeeper's honest wife I owed those maternal cares which transformed a sickly infant into a sturdy lad.

Until my tenth year the gamekeeper's cottage was my only home; the gamekeeper, his wife, and their one little girl my only friends. Nor did I sigh for other companionship or a more agreeable abode. The low white cottage, cross-barred with ponderous timbers painted black, the slanting thatched roof, pointed gables, and small casement windows, curtained with roses and honeysuckle, appeared to me the perfection of a dwelling-place. It had been called the warrener's lodge in the old times, when the skins of rabbits and conies were employed for the costume of English knights and squires, and the rabbitwarren was a feature of great importance in a gentleman's estate. It still stood on the border of a great warren, the safe-keeping whereof was one of my foster-father's duties.

VOL. VI.

B

This tranqnir home I loved with all my heart, and my little sister Margery for by that tender name I had learned to call her-I re...garded as the dearest of created beings. With her I spent my days, wandering hand-in-hand amongst the fern and underwood, knowing the progress of time only by the different wild-flowers which the changing seasons gave us.

Nor did we lack companions and playfellows in our childish sports. The silvan depths we inhabited were alive with wild creatures that had grown almost tame in this deep solitude. Mild-eyed fawns watched us gravely when we played; squirrels leaped and frisked before us, no more conscious than ourselves of life's realities; partridge and pheasant, blackbird and thrush, fluttered the young fern in the bright days of early summer; and in the shadow of a copse that was purple with hyacinths the rabbits swarmed thick as Virgil's famous bees.

This was my world from my first hours of infantine consciousness until my tenth birthday; and bitter was the stroke which ended this phase of my life. On the knees of the keeper's wife I had uttered my first prayer; in the brawny arms of the keeper I had been carried before I learned to walk. The first syllables which my lips had shaped were those that called these good creatures Mammy and Daddy. I was but just old enough to perceive the progress of events when little Margery's baby-face first beamed upon our family circle, and from that hour I had tenderly loved the fair-haired baby, who grew betimes into my sister and companion.

In those early years of my life I tasted perfect happiness; and not to the lips of many children is that cup offered. Over the fairest childhood there is generally some shadow-sickness or change of fortune, a cross nurse or a careless mother. But in the humble home where I was reared, there was no skeleton lurking in secret cupboard. The keeper and his wife were young, honest, and healthy. They loved each other fondly, and had affection to spare for the foster-child that came to them before their own. For these good creatures life was not to be all sunshine; for them, as for me, there were to be trial and tempest and gloom; but the halcyon days of their existence were these which I shared with them,-a period of calm and pure delight, which was destined to haunt me in many a scene of horror and death, in many an hour of heart-sickness and despondency.

My pleasures in these days were of the simplest. To trudge beside the keeper on his morning round; once, on a rare occasion of never-tobe-forgotten delight, to watch with him in the moonlit woods for midnight snarers of hare and pheasant; to ride to the market-town with Mammy in a lumbering cart, which the good soul sometimes drove; to hunt for mushrooms in the dewy mornings; to pick blackberries in September, and to roast chestnuts with Margery among the ashes at Christmas, these were the chief excitements of my childhood.

Neighbours we had none. The nearest village was seven miles

away from us. The nearest house was the great pile of building in the centre of the park; a grand old mansion of the Elizabethan era, encircled by a broad moat, and approached by a grim arched gateway that belonged to a much-earlier period.

The fairy tales which I had heard at this time must needs have been few; yet I never beheld this gloomy gateway, flanked by its twin gothic towers, nor did I ever peer into the dark still water of the moat, without some vague sense of the supernatural, some instinctive feeling of awe, which was stronger even than my curiosity.

The dreary quiet of the place, the long rows of blank shuttered casements, the absence of sound or movement on the terraces and in the courts, the massive towers, and the iron-clamped gates, which seemed no more likely to be opened than the black doors of the mausoleum in the park, were indeed calculated to inspire unwonted thoughts in the breast of childhood. When I was old enough to be curious, I questioned my good-humoured Daddy, and he freely imparted all he knew about the mansion which filled me with such wonder.

He told me that house and park and woods, and the little church within the park-walls, where there was service on alternate Sundays, all belonged alike to his mistress, Lady Barbara Lestrange, who lived in foreign parts, where her husband, Sir Marcus Lestrange, had been sent ambassador.

"Which be a kind o' king in its way," added the keeper, with the pride of a faithful servant, whose master's honours are in some sort his own.

"And does no one live at the great house now, daddy?" I asked.

"No one but old Anthony Grimshaw and his wife, and a couple of women-servants. A rare starched gentleman is Tony Grimshaw, and has been house-steward to my lady and my lady's father these thirty years. They do say as Mrs. Grimshaw's a brimstone; but she have always been kind to me and my wife, and 'twould come ill from me to say aught agen her. Madge was housemaid up at the great house before I married her, in the old earl's time; and she's owned to me that mother Grimshaw was a bit of a scold. She was Martha Peyton then, and own-maid to Lady Barbara, and they say as she must have frightened old Tony into marrying her. But she's been kind to us in the hard winters; and when Sissy was born, she sent us wine and tea, and such-like fal-lals; so we'll let bygones be bygones, Robin."

"And has Lady Barbara been kind to thee, daddy?" I asked. (We "thee'd" and "thou'd" each other in these parts; but I shall take no pains to reproduce the patois of the county, which I have indeed in some part forgotten, having heard and conversed in many strange languages since I first learned my native tongue from honest Jack Hawker, my foster-father.) "Has she been kind to thee, daddy?" I reiterated. "Ah, Robin, kind enough in the way of fine folks like her. She

brought thee to my wife to nurse, and has paid me handsome for thy

bite and sup."

This was not the first time I had heard that I was but an alien in the home I loved so dearly.

"She brought me, daddy! Where did she bring me from?"

"From London, Rob; where thou wouldst have starved, poor orphan, but for her. The Lord knows where my lady found thee; but she was ever charitable and kind to the poor. Thou wert the sickliest infant ever these eyes looked upon, and thou must thank my wife Madge that thou art here to-day."

"I wish thou wert my real father, daddy," I said. Whereon sturdy Jack Hawker snatched me up in his great arms and covered me with kisses.

"So do I, little one," he cried, with an oath; "but wishing won't make thee mine; and some day my lady will come and take thee away from daddy and mammy."

This set me blubbering, and the good fellow had hard work to comfort me. His forebodings were too quickly realised; for within a year of this time my pleasant childish life came to a sudden close, and I began the world.
CHAPTER II.

PASTORS AND MASTERS.

I HAD been gathering sticks in the woods with Margery one bright October afternoon, and came home loaded, with my little sister trotting merrily by my side, both of us happy in the consciousness of deserving mammy's praise for our labours. We came bounding into the cosy little kitchen; but finding no one there, threw down our burdens, and went in search of mammy. We paused, awe-struck, on the threshold of the parlour, that sacred Sabbath chamber, where portraits of King William and Queen Mary hung on each side of the chimney-piece, and where an earthenware pot of fresh flowers always adorned the somewhat cheerless hearth. In this room, so rarely used as to be in a manner a chamber of mystery, we beheld mammy seated in solemn converse with a stranger; a tall, thin, pale-faced woman, dressed in black, and of a severe aspect; a woman whose face had been ploughed and ravaged by that dire scourge of those days, the small-pox, and at sight of whom little Margery uttered a faint shriek of terror, and immediately turned and fled. Not so myself, who stood transfixed by the strange vision. "Is that the boy ?" demanded the stranger sternly.

My foster mother faltered an affirmative.

"Come hither, boy," said the stranger; and I obeyed with fear and trembling.

Upon this she began to question me.

"What is your name?" she asked.

"Robin," I mumbled.

"Robin what? Nothing but Robin, poor castaway!"

She shook her head in a dismal manner, and groaned aloud. I think it was the first groan I had ever heard, and the sound appalled me. "Robin is but a vulgar name for Robert," she said. read, Robert ?"

I stared on hearing myself addressed by this new name. 
"Is the boy an idiot?" cried the grim stranger. 

"Can you

"My name is Robin," I answered; "and I know nowt of reading." This was true. In the circle in which I had lived, reading and writing were unknown accomplishments.

The stranger shook her head again, more dismally than before.

"It is time you were taken in hand, Master Robert," she said; and I hated her forthwith for this persistent alteration of my name. "Would you like to live in a big house, and to learn to read and write?"

"I'd rather stay with daddy and mammy," I answered, sidling up to my foster-mother, who rewarded me with a silent hug.

"And grow up a very heathen in the darkness of ignorance," said the stranger. "Happily for you, Master Robert, Providence does not permit us to choose our own paths, or few among us would be snatched from the burning. I have had a letter from my lady bidding me take you to live at the great house, where my good husband will undertake your education."

The whole of this speech might have been spoken in a foreign language for any comprehension I had of its meaning, except so far as it conveyed to me the one direful fact that I was to be separated from those I loved. I began to cry, and little Margery, who had crept back to the doorway, curious to observe the stranger, came running into the room, and flung her arms round my neck. Her affection conquered her terror of the grim stranger, and she looked defiance at the dame as she clung to me.

"Naughty woman sha'n't take 'oo, Rob," she cried; but her mother interposed, and laid a firm hand on the dear innocent's lips.

"We shall be very sorry to lose him, madam,” she said gently; "he has been like our own child; and I wish my lady had given us longer notice before she took him away."

66

'Hoity toity!" cried the dame indignantly; "my lady thought she had to do with sensible people. You could not suppose you were to keep this boy all his life. He has to learn how to get an honest livelihood, that he mayn't be a burden on Lady Barbara to the end of the chapter, as some folks I would rather not mention were a burden upon my lady's father. He comes of a bad stock, Mistress Hawker; and running wild in the forest won't mend him."

On this the keeper's wife hugged me closer to her honest heart. "There is not a better child in the county of Bucks," cried the tender soul, with some warmth.

Margery, perceiving, as by instinct, that I had been maligned, clung about me the closer; and thus bound together by grief and affection, and encircled by the mother's fond arms, we defied the intruder.

"I don't come of a bad stock, and I ain't a burden upon anyone; and I don't want to live at the big house with the nasty black water round it; and I don't like you, because you're ugly; and I won't leave mammy and daddy."

"I wish you joy of your nurse-child, Margery Hawker," cried the stranger, getting up from her chair in a great passion, and stalking to the door. "His manners and his learning do you credit; and I'm sure my lady will be vastly pleased with you when she hears the good effects of your care."

My foster-mother pleaded pardon for my innocence and ignorance, in a great fright, for Mrs. Grimshaw held a sceptre of regal sway at Hauteville Hall, during the prolonged absence of Sir Marcus and my lady. Margery and I were sent from the room in disgrace, and retired to weep together in the kitchen, where I plighted my youthful troth to the sweet young damsel, and swore that none but she should be my wife. Better for one of us, God knows, better for us both, it may be, if I had never forgotten that childish vow, and had lived to fulfil it.

"I'll never go to the big ugly house, Sissy," said I; "but we'll be married, and live in the woods with the squirrels, and have nuts and berries for our dinner."

"Yes; but some night we should die of hunger, and the robins would cover us with leaves; and mammy and daddy would be sorry," cried Madge, who had heard the story of the Children in the Wood.

After this there came a few more careless days, during which Margery and I gathered wood in the forest, and hunted for nuts in the hazel-copses, and forgot that there was such a creature as black-robed Mrs. Grimshaw upon this world. Then came a bleak, bitter morning, when my foster-mother dressed me in my best clothes, and kissed and cried over me before she handed me to the executioner.

The executioner was a small sickly-looking man, dressed in a suit of chocolate-coloured cloth, and a carefully-powdered wig. This gentleman I was told was Mr. Grimshaw, and to him, as to his stately spouse, I was to pay all possible respect.

"You'll let him come to see us sometimes, won't you, sir?" asked the keeper's wife piteously. "He's been with us over nine years; and it's a sore trouble to lose him."

"So it be, wife, a sore trouble," growled the keeper.-"Thou'lt think on us sometimes, won't thee, Rob?"

"Ay, ay, he shall think of you, and come to see you too," replied the chocolate-coloured gentleman good-naturedly.

Even this little speech inclined me to prefer Mr. Grimshaw to his respectable consort.

"Thou'lt mind thy book, Robin, and do as thou art bid," urged

my foster-mother; "and thy new friends will love thee; and thou'lt come to see thy old friends sometimes."

"Every day, if they'll let me," I answered, sobbing.

After this there were many embraces and many tears, until Mr. Grimshaw grew impatient, and said we must begone. So I tore myself away from those dear souls, who had made my childhood happy, and put my hand into that of the house-steward.

The day was bleak and wintry, and we trudged off at a good rate among the crisp fallen leaves. I looked back at the keeper's cottage. Ah, dear home, mine no longer! How many years were to pass before I should inhabit any other dwelling which I could dare call by the fond name of home! Mansion and palace, tent and dungeon, were to be my habitation in the shifting scenes of life; but long and far were to be my wanderings before I rested again beside so cheery a hearth, or among friends so dear.

The walk from the keeper's cottage to the Hall was a long one, and I had ample leisure in which to observe the countenance of my new guardian as I tramped by his side among the drift of withered leaves and the fallen fir-cones which I had gathered so merrily but yesterday with little Margery. It was not a hard or sour face at which I looked; and with the quick instinct of childhood I divined that this gentleman in the chocolate-coloured coat would be my friend. I pushed my hand a little farther into his, and drew closer to him as we walked on. For a long time we walked in silence, but by and by the old gentleman looked down at me with a curious glance.

"You are but a little chap to begin your schooling," he said; "but I see you are no fool, and I think you and I may get on well enough together."

After this he questioned me for some time about my past life and its simple pleasures, and conversed with me kindly until we came to our destination. We did not pass beneath the shadow of the great gothic archway; that ponderous gateway had not been opened since Lady Barbara Lestrange's last residence at Hauteville. We crossed a narrow stone bridge of modern construction, which spanned the moat upon the inferior side of the Hall, and entered the house by a little door, the key whereof my companion took from his capacious pocket. Within, I saw shadowy stone passages that seemed endless, incalculable doors of darkest oak. The silence and gloom of the place were awful to my childish mind. I clung closer to Mr. Grimshaw, and shuddered at the echoing noise of our footsteps on the smooth stone flags. We crossed a great hall where tattered rags of many-coloured silks hung from the vaulted roof, and where shone upon me, for the first time in my life, the splendour of an old stained-glass window.

The floor of this chamber was of alternate squares of black and white marble. The effigy of a mailed knight, bestriding a plumed war-steed of painted wood, shone in the rainbow light from the great

window; and at the opposite end of the hall a staircase, with elaborately-carved balustrades in black oak, led to a gallery which made the circuit of the roof.

At this chamber I gazed with delight and wonder, and for the moment forgot my awe of the gloomy house. From the hall my companion led me into a long saloon, with ten windows, overlooking a small Italian flower-garden, within the moat and from this we passed to another long room, where I beheld more books than I could have supposed were contained in all the world, sceing that one volume—a clumsy leather-bound "breeches" Bible-comprised the keeper's entire library. From wall to ceiling this long and lofty room was lined with volumes, for the most part in handsome, though somewhat sombre, bindings. Wings had been constructed, abutting into the room, for the accommodation of more books; and these abutments divided the spacious apartment into pleasant nooks and retiring-places, where I thought it must needs be very agreeable to sit on a bright summer day, when the flowers in the pleasaunce were all in bloom.

"See, Master Robert," said my new friend. "You open your eyes wide at sight of so many books. What would you say if I told you that I had read them everyone, or, at any rate, know the contents of everyone from the big brown folios down yonder to the smart little duodecimos on those narrow shelves near the ceiling? I was my late lord's librarian as well as his house-steward, and all these books are still in my care, and are likely to be till I die: and then I know not how it will fare with them, for books are like children, and must be cared for by those that love them."

He hurried me from the library-where I would fain have stood gaping longer-by a small door almost hidden between two book-cases. This door led us away from the light and the sunshine into a dark and narrow passage, at the end of which Mr. Grimshaw opened another door, and pushed me into a square oak-panelled room, where I beheld the black-robed woman whom I had seen at the keeper's cottage.

She was sitting at a table working, with a great wicker-basket before her. She laid down her work as we entered, and gazed upon me with menacing eyes.

My heart sank as I encountered those searching glances.

66

'So, Master Robert, you have come at last. I began to think that you and my husband were lost in the woods."

I almost wished that this misfortune had befallen us, as I quailed beneath Mrs. Grimshaw's stern gaze. Surely the berries and the robins and the brief summer-day life of children abandoned in the forest would have been better than existence shared with Mrs. Grimshaw.

"Now, Master Robert," said that lady, "this is where you are to live until you go out into the world to earn your own bread, which will be as soon as you are old enough to turn to an honest trade, or sit upon a junior-clerk's stool in a merchant's office. You are to

live with me and my husband, and to learn what he teaches you, and to do as I bid you, or it will be the worse for you. And mark you, young gentleman; there is to be no gadding about the park, or sneaking down to John Hawker's cottage, to waste your time among vagabonds and idlers."

She spoke to me as if I had been fifteen years old instead of ten. But there was one part of her speech I understood well enough.

"My daddy is no vagabond," I cried indignantly; "and this gentleman said I should go and see him."

"Ay, ay, I promised as much as that," answered Mr. Grimshaw with an apologetic air. "Hawker and his wife seemed so sorry to lose the boy, and the boy cried at leaving them; and I could not well avoid promising "

"You're a fool, Anthony Grimshaw," cried his wife angrily.

She rang a bell, which was answered very promptly by a plump rosy-faced woman in a mob-cap and big white apron.

"This is the young gentleman, Betty," said Mrs. Grimshaw; "take him to his room, and see that he washes his face and hands before he comes back to dinner."

The maid led me off through the dark passage and up a narrow wooden staircase, into a small whitewashed chamber, neatly but poorly furnished. This room she told me was mine; and as it was superior to any chamber in Jack Hawker's cottage, I felt somewhat proud of the proprietorship.

"Has Mrs. Grim been unkind to you, boy?" asked Betty, as she scrubbed my face with a merciless prodigality in the matter of soap. "Mrs. Grim ?"

"Pshaw! Grimshaw, child. We call her Mrs. Grim for short. The name fits her to a T; but Mrs. Brimstone would be still better; for brimstone she is and brimstone she ever will be. Has she been scolding you?"

"She has not been very kind," I answered, whimpering.

"No, and it ain't in her nature; so don't expect it. She was turned sour close upon twelve years ago, when a fine gentleman that she'd have given her eyes for laughed and talked and made a fool of her with his pretty speeches and pretty looks, and then walked off and forgot all about her. I know! She took the small-pox after that, and lost her beauty, which was never much to my mind, and that didn't mend her temper. She hasn't had a civil word for anybody since then; and how old Grim could have been such a fool as to marry her, unless she frightened him into it, I can't think. But he did; and now she's turned methody, and is always going after preachings at all the towns round about, and leads us all the life of dogs."

Thus did Mrs. Betty give vent to her opinions while engaged with my toilet, and it is to be observed that from this time forth I became the habitual recipient of confidences ill adapted to my tender years.

People who have but few companions with whom to converse will find relief in opening their minds to a little child; and whether it was Anthony Grimshaw who dilated on the history of the house he served, or Mrs. Betty who reviled her mistress, I listened with equal patience, and with no small interest; and being henceforth cut off for the most part from intercourse with children, and denied all childish sports, I acquired a gravity and a curious spirit not common to my age.

When Betty had scrubbed and brushed me into a becoming state of redness and stiffness, she conducted me back to the oak parlour, where I dined in state with my new guardians, attended on by Betty in a clean white apron.

Mrs. Grimshaw found a great deal to say about my boorish demeanour, and the ill-use I made of knife and fork, the former of which I was indeed accustomed to use with a freedom and a dexterity unknown in polished circles. The dinner was of the plainest, but served with much neatness; and after the cloth had been removed Mrs. Grimshaw kept the obsequious Betty employed for a quarter of an hour in polishing the dark walnut-wood table on which we had dined.

Even after this operation Betty was not free to depart, for Mrs. Grimshaw bade her seat herself at a respectful distance, in order to hear the conclusion of a sermon, one half of which she had been edified by upon the previous day.

"And I hope you feel some inward benefit from Mr. Whitefield's precious eloquence, Betty," said Mrs. Grimshaw. "I grieve to say there are some rocky hearts upon which the blessed seed falls in vain; some heathenish minds that prefer to pore over any dusty rubbish in a foreign language, rather than to hear the voice of the mighty Judge calling sinners to judgment."

Her looks were directed at her husband during the latter part of this speech, and he, by his answer, acknowledged that it was levelled at him.

"Why, truth to tell, Martha," he said, "there may be some that are not inclined to stand before Mr. Whitefield for judgment. If I am to be brought to believe that one section of mankind is destined for grace, and the rest doomed to perdition unspeakable, and that our good works and gentle deeds in this world shall avail us nothing with Him who promised His blessing in exchange for a cup of cold water given to His disciple, I will be taught by Calvin at first hand, and not Mr. Whitefield at second hand. We have the Genevese edition of John Calvin's works, in twelve folio volumes, in the library yonder; and I can read the Institutes' for myself if needs be. But it has been my custom to smoke my pipe on the terrace after dinner for the last five-and-thirty years of my life; and with your leave, wife, I shall continue to do so, till pipe and I go out together." By this I perceived that old Anthony Grimshaw was not completely under his wife's dominion.

[ocr errors]
"Will you come with me, Master Bob?" he asked; and I sprang up, eager to follow him.

Mrs. Grimshaw groaned aloud.

"The boy will stop, for the profit of his sinful soul," she said, in a tone of command. "Sit down over against Betty, child."

I seated myself meekly, while Mr. Grimshaw lighted his pipe, and went out by a half-glass door that opened on the terrace-a noble promenade going all round the house, and bordered on this side by a bank close planted with evergreens sloping to the broad moat.

Then began the reading of Mr. Whitefield's sermon, which was performed in a hard, harsh voice by Mrs. Grimshaw. Of the sermon I know no more than that it was of appalling and threatening import, and that it seemed to my childish ears interminable. Betty yawned more than once; and on one occasion I saw her on the point of sinking into a peaceful slumber; but she caught herself up with an effort, and stared at her mistress with unblinking eyes when that lady turned her gaze towards the handmaiden. When the discourse was at last ended, Betty declared herself beyond measure edified, but seemed, nevertheless, somewhat glad to withdraw.

Mr. Grimshaw had passed the window several times during the pious lecture, and appeared at the glass door, still smoking, a few minutes after it was over.

"May I go to the gentleman, ma'am?" I asked; and Mrs. Grimshaw having nodded assent, I ran out and put my hand into that of her husband's, who received me with a kind smile.

"I like you so much," I said, "because you're kind, like daddy, though you don't speak like him."

From this time forth Anthony Grimshaw and I were fast friends; and the old man's gentle treatment enabled me to endure his wife's harsh usage with all due meekness. Her conduct never varied. Stern and sour in her bearing towards all her little world, her manner to me betrayed an aversion which she would fain have concealed. Hard, bitter, and implacable as my own evil fate, she cast her vengeful shadow across my boyhood; and if she could have prevented the sun from shining on me, or could have stunted my growth and wasted my flesh by the influence of her baleful gaze, I believe she would have exercised her evil power. It was not till later that I obtained the key to the mystery of her feelings with regard to me. She had happily little power to do me harm, for I was intrusted to her keeping by a mistress whom she feared, and whom self-interest compelled her to serve with submission and fidelity. She had, however, the power to make my life more or less uncomfortable by small cruelties and petty slights, by cold looks and bitter words; and this privilège she exercised without stint. Had it not been for her husband's kindness I might have fared ill in that splendid mansion, where I was a humble

and nameless dependent; but his goodness to me never wavered, nor did his protection ever fail me in the hour of need.

My first night in my lonely chamber was a very sad one. In my dreams I went back to the warrener's lodge and the dear souls I loved; but even in those dreams the bitter sense of separation clung to me, and I felt that I saw the familiar faces across an impassable gulf.

My studies began on the next day, in the parlour where Mrs. Grimshaw sat at work; and I felt her eyes upon me while I was being initiated into the mysteries of the alphabet by my friend Anthony. From this time my life became an unvarying routine. Early breakfast in the oak parlour, a walk with Mr. Grimshaw about the house and in the grand old stone quadrangle, where a Hercules and his club held guard over a great marble fountain which had once been the glory of the place. Then back to the oak parlour for lessons, which lasted till the early dinner. Then Mrs. Grimshaw's lecture from the last-published pamphlets of Whitefield or Wesley, or some minor lights of the new nonconforming church, and Betty's smothered yawns, and Anthony Grimshaw's figure passing to and fro before the windows, and my own weariness always in precisely the same measure. At six we drank tea; a solemn ceremony, from the gentility whereof Mrs. Grimshaw took much pride. At half-past eight she read prayers to her husband and myself, and to the three servants of the great melancholy house, Betty, a buxom girl called Martha, and a rheumatic old woman, who lived in some stony obscurity in the kitchens, and rarely quitted her lair except for this evening ceremonial.

After prayers I was hustled off to my chamber by Betty, while my guardians supped together in grim state. I should often have gone to bed hungry if it had not been for Betty, who brought me a crust of bread and a basin of milk, which I ate and drank seated on the edge of my bed with more enjoyment than I ever derived from the ceremonial meals in the oak parlour. On Sundays there were no lessons, but there was chapel-to my youthful mind a far greater trial. Mr. Grimshaw went on alternate Sundays to the little church in the wood, and to have gone thither with him would have been happiness unspeakable to me, for at this time-honoured tabernacle I should have met Jack Hawker and his wife, and dear little Margery. But here Mrs. Grimshaw had a convenient opportunity for exercising her tyranny, and avenging that unconscious sin which I had committed against her by coming into this bleak world. So she ordained that I should accompany herself and the two maids to the meeting-house at Warborough,-a stifling upper room, little better than a loft, in which the Rev. Simeon Noggers, an awakened tailor, held forth every Sunday to a select congregation of Wesleyans. In this airless chamber I underwent the tortures of a weekly suffocation while the Rev. Simeon pounded his deal readingdesk and exhorted his fellow-sinners, from the blackness of whose guilt

he appeared to derive a dismal satisfaction. From that respectable teacher I learned that it was rather advantageous for the soul to be dyed of the darkest hue, in order that its renovation might be the more astounding. There I heard no exhortations to the weak and wavering; no friendly counsel for the small debtor, whose payments were but a little in arrear, and who needed only a brave endeavour to set his affairs in order and regain his solvent condition. The Reverend Simeon addressed his flock as if convinced that they were so many fraudulent bankrupts, conscious that they could never pay a shilling in the pound, and rather to be congratulated than otherwise on their ignominious insolvency.

"Believe!" cried the awakened Noggers, "and prove your faith as I do, not as St. Paul did. Prove it by long prayers and reiterated invocations, in which the familiarity of affection verges on the blasphemy of presumptuous folly; prove it by howlings and beatings of the breast, by upturned eyeballs, and solemn shakings of the head, and arrogant condemnation of all mankind except the elect of Warborough."

This was the gist of Mr. Noggers's teaching, which I heard during the ten most impressionable years of my life, and which did much to make me in early manhood a disciple of Bolingbroke and Hobbes. It fell to my lot in after-years to hear both Wesley and Whitefield, and I then perceived the difference between a man of original mind and deeprooted convictions, and the ignorant imitators who assume his functions without one of the gifts that have qualified their master for his office. I know that to that good man John Wesley there came much trouble and perplexity from the ill-advised officiousness and spasmodic industry of some among his followers. Doubtless he found other labourers better fitted to work with him in the vineyard; and it must never be forgotten that the uprising of the sect which bears his name has done much to arouse the sluggards of the Established Church, who had sore need of some revolution to awaken them from slumber.

For nearly ten years my life at Hauteville was all of the same pattern; my studies laborious, my pleasures of the rarest. Indeed, the only holiday I knew in these days was an occasional visit to Jack Hawker's cottage, and Mrs. Grimshaw took care that I should not often enjoy this happiness. The distance was long, and my task-mistress contrived to find reasons for refusing me the leisure required for such a visit. It was only when Anthony Grimshaw interfered in my behalf that I was allowed the privilege of an afternoon's holiday. Dearly, then, did I love the long walk through the park, the cosy supper by Jack Hawker's hearth, and the return in the dewy moonlight to the great enchanted castle, which, even after years of residence within its ponderous walls, still retained for me something of its awful mystic charm.

Although to the last degree monotonous, my life during these years was not unhappy. In Anthony Grimshaw I had a true friend, and such

a tutor as few prosperous young noblemen of my day could have boasted. From the hour in which he first introduced me to the hieroglyphics of the English alphabet to the proud day in which he smiled upon my successful rendering of a love-ditty by Rochester into Anacreontics in pure Greek, he made the steeps of Parnassus easy, and the waters of Pieria sweet for me. It was a delight to him to have someone to whom to impart his ripe store of history and legend, and he found me a willing and enraptured listener to that cherished lore. I knew every biography in Plutarch, and every adventure of Ulysses, before I could read the easiest page in my spelling-book; and I was lured on through the slough of despond which the juvenile student must pass by the knowledge that the great brown-backed folios in the library contained innumerable stories delightful as those my master told me. The time came when very few of the brown-backed volumes contained any mystery for me, and when I could read alike easily in English, French, and Latin ; and from that time forth my chief pleasure was found in the long library, where I used to spend my leisure hours curled up in one of the deep-recessed windows with a folio on my knees.

The noble old Elizabethan mansion was a source of perpetual pleasure to me. The great empty rooms reverberated with the echo of my footsteps as I roamed at large, with my tutor's official bunch of keys in my pocket. The very poetry of ghostliness pervaded those spacious untenanted chambers. All was swept and garnished; there was no trace of dust, no token of neglect; but the emptiness was none the less dismal. The house had the unmistakable air of a long-deserted habitation. All the brightness had faded from curtains and carpets, the gilding was tarnished, the paint was worn and dull; an unchangeable odour of dead rose-leaves and mouldy lavender perfumed the atmosphere; the stillness of rooms that had once been noisy with the bustle and grandeur of state-reception and familiar assembly was more oppressive than the solemn calm of a churchyard. But to me there was a subtle delight in that dead calm, that utter stillness. My imagination ran riot in those empty chambers. At will I peopled them with the shades of the mighty dead. The Virgin Queen revisited the house where she had been entertained in wondrous state by the first Baron Hauteville; and I saw her in all her great littleness, the cynosure of statesmen and flatterers, philosophers and sycophants, lovers who never loved her, courtiers who dared not trust her, ambassadors who registered her every look and word for swift transmission to their masters, spies who watched in the Stuart interest, and hungered for the hour when this great queen should be dust. Swift passed that radiant vision of queenly grandeur and human weakness, and lo! the rush and terror of civil war. Buffets ransacked of their gold and silver store; plate melted, or sold to foreign Jews; trusty captains playing at hide. and seek in chimneys and secret closets; Cromwell's grim soldiers battering at the gates. A sudden cry of horror through the land; halls

hung with black; bells tolling slow and solemn in the wintry morning, and England kingless.

Again the scene changes, and it is the garish summer noontide of the Restoration.

"Room there for my Lord Rochester!" cried the lackeys by the great gilded doors of the white and gold banquet-hall; "way there, knaves, for his grace the Duke of Buckingham!" and athwart the slanting shaft of motes dancing in the sunshine came the shadows of Wilmot and Villiers, in their silken embroidered suits of French make, with long curling perukes and ribbon-befringed jerkins, stars and orders blazing on their breasts, and a languid light in their eyes. As I sat by the cold empty hearth, and mused, with dreamy eyes fixed on the opposite doorway, the room grew crowded with the notabilities of the Restoration; I could almost hear the fluttering fringes and sword-knots of those butterfly lordlings; but with a thought they vanished; and here was hook-nosed William, grave and silent as his mighty ancestor; and stately St. John, and courteous Harley, and anon all the wits and beaux, generals and statesmen, of dull Queen Anne.

Not alone with the great whom I had read of did I people those desolate rooms. At my bidding other shadows grew into life. From the canvas on the walls of picture-gallery and saloon, the images of the dead descended to walk again in the rooms they had inhabited living. Hautevilles of the Elizabethan age, and Hautevilles of the Restoration; Hautevilles who fought in the low countries with Marlborough, and sat in the senate with Harley: about these, of whose histories I then knew so little, I dreamed my dreams. This dark cavalier had loved and won that fair-haired maiden with tender blue eyes and simple pastoral dress; that smooth-faced boy-soldier had wooed and been. scorned by the haughty damsel with eagle glance and towering headgear.

For each of these pictured faces I wove my little romance, but was. not the less eager to extort some details of their actual lives from my kindly tutor.

I often plied him with questions about the dead-and-gone masters of that deserted house; but with varying success. He was no gossip or scandal-monger; and, indeed, was so complete a student, that he thought more of a rare edition of an original classic, or a noble translation of the sixteenth century, than of all the changes and chances of the age in which he lived. An occasional Postboy kept him apprised of the conquests our arms achieved abroad, and the difficulty our ministers found in agreeing at home. But he thought more of the Philippics of Cicero than of a smart attack from the opposition, or a scathing reply from the polished chief of the famous Broad-bottom Administration; and was far better acquainted with the politics of the Pompeian party than with the objects and opinions of the minority at Westminster. Sometimes I was happy enough to find him in a communicative mood; and then I took care to improve my opportunity.
C

CHAPTER III.

I AM CURIOUS ABOUT THE PAST.

THE time came when anxiety to know the story of my own birth grew keener than my interest in the day-dreams with which I was wont to beguile my hours of solitude. It was on this subject that I questioned Anthony Grimshaw as we sat together in the library one bleak March evening, when the wind blew hoarsely in the great oaks and beeches across the moat, and the wood-fire burning on the low hearth made a cheery glow in the spacious room, gleaming now on the brown and crimson bindings of the books, now on the stout beams and carved oak bosses of the ceiling.

I was nineteen years of age, and older and graver than my years by reason of the monotony of my life and the gravity of my companions. It was not the first time I had questioned Anthony Grimshaw upon the subject of my own history.

"I think you know more than you choose to tell," I said.

"Nay, Robert, I know nothing. I may have my suspicions. But what good would it do for me to talk of such fancies? It might be but to mislead you. All I know is that Lady Barbara brought you here one winter's night in the first year of her marriage. She travelled in a postchaise with only her maid-a Frenchwoman, whom she engaged on her marriage, my wife speaking no language but her own, and being therefore unadapted for residence abroad with an ambassador's lady, leaving Sir Marcus in London, where he was busy with public matters, she said. You were a baby of less than a year old, and as sickly an infant as ever survived infancy. She sent for Martha, who had then been married to me but a few months, and told her that she meant to adopt the child, having Sir Marcus's permission for so doing; which well she might, seeing that she was an heiress and a beauty, and might have married much higher if she had so chosen."

"And she gave your wife no account of my birth?" I asked.

"None that I ever heard. But Martha Grimshaw can keep a secret. I know she has her suspicions, which jump with mine; and that's why she has not been as kind to you as I should have wished. There was a gentleman once lived in this house whose fate it was to carry mischief and misfortune with him wherever he went."

"Who was that gentleman?"

"Roderick Ainsleigh, the only son of my late lord's only sister, Lady Susan Somerton, and Colonel Ainsleigh, a brave soldier and a dissipated spendthrift, whom she married against the earl's wish, and with whom her life was most miserable. She died young, while the colonel was abroad with his regiment, leaving one only child but just nine years old. This was the boy Roderick. Lord Hauteville brought

him here directly after the mother's death; and the next post from the low countries brought home news that the colonel had been killed at the head of his regiment. He had ever been as reckless of his life as of his fortune, and had been oftener under fire than any other man of his age and standing. Thus you see the boy Roderick was doubly an orphan."

"Poor child!"

""Tis natural you should pity him, lad; but that double bereavement was the most fortunate event in Roderick Ainsleigh's life. The earl, my late master, one of the noblest and best of men, had loved his only sister with extreme tenderness and devotion. Her death and the death of her husband threw the boy entirely into his uncle's hands. My lord loved the child at once for the mother's sake; and the boy's handsome face and winning manners did the rest. Those soft pleasing manners disguised as proud a heart as ever beat in human breast; but I think my lord loved the boy all the more for his daring spirit. It was only in after years that he found how hard it is to govern a stubborn will, even when self-interest is at stake."

"Was the boy happy here?"

"He had reason to be; for if he had been the earl's son and heir he could not have fared better, or been treated with greater honour by all who lived in the house and all who came to it. I was his first schoolmaster, and taught him just as I have taught you. Often when you and I have been sitting side by side in yonder window'twas on that very spot Roderick and I used to sit --I have fancied I was twenty years younger, and that 'twas Roderick Ainsleigh I was teaching. But he was neither so diligent nor so obedient a pupil as you, Robert. His mind was quick enough, and he would work hard enough sometimes, in his own impetuous way. But it was all by fits and starts-blow hot, blow cold. I had another pupil who very often shared Mr. Roderick's lessons, and that was Lady Barbara Somerton, my lord's only child; and it was not long before I discovered that the two young people loved each other with an affection that was something more than mere cousinship. Lord Hauteville liked to see them together, and was pleased to find his daughter desired to be wiser than most young women of her age. 'I would have thee as clever as Lady Mary Wortley, or Mde. de Sevigné, Bab,' he used to say. One day he broached the subject of the liking between his daughter and his nephew, and told me that nothing would please him better than to see his sister Susan's son master of Hauteville. 'I don't care to think of a stranger cutting down the old beeches, or clearing the plantations that you and I planned when we were boys together, Tony,' he said. 'And, tie up the estate as I may upon my daughter, I can't tie up every old tree and every footpath in the wood. And I like to think that the place will be the same for years to come, when my old bones are mouldering in the vault

yonder, which it might if one of my own flesh and blood was master. A stranger has no feeling for old timber. Roderick ought to love every tree, for he has almost grown up in the park and woods.""

"And was Mr. Roderick Ainsleigh very fond of his cousin?" I asked.

"He seemed to love her as dearly as she loved him; and I don't suppose it was all seeming. He went to Cambridge when he was nineteen, and I was proud to think that he knew more of the classics than most men of thirty, and would do wonders; but he got into a bad set at the University, and gave himself up to the wild pleasures of that place, which is within a ride of Newmarket, that infamous seminary of iniquity and ill-manners. Nothing but trouble ensued from Mr. Ainsleigh's residence at Cambridge. He incurred debts which would have been heavy had he been Lord Hauteville's sole heir; and my lord paid them, but not without protest, and some ill blood between the uncle and nephew. His visits here were few and brief, and it was evident to all of us that Lady Barbara resented the evil courses into which he had fallen. When he came he brought with him collegefriends, wild young fellows, who attended all the fairs and races round about, lamed my lords hacks and hunters, and turned the heads of half the servant-maids at Hauteville."

"He must have been a base ungrateful fellow," I cried indignantly, "Ungrateful he most assuredly was. Whether he was by nature base, or only reckless and extravagant under the influence of ill-advisers, I cannot tell. As a lad I loved him dearly, in spite of his wilfulness; but when I saw the unhappiness caused by his conduct as a young man I was inclined to doubt whether he had ever been worthy of the affection we all lavished upon him. For four years things went on thus, with much trouble for the earl, of which he made no secret, and profound sorrow for Lady Barbara, who maintained a proud silence upon the subject of her grief, but whose despondency was but too obvious to all who loved her, except perhaps to the offender himself, whom she treated with a haughty distance which must have been to the last degree galling to that proud spirit. He for his part affected an indifference to her ill opinion, and even told me in confidence that, since his cousin had ceased to love him, he cared not a doit how badly she thought of him. I would fain have persuaded him that he was still beloved, but he laughed me to scorn. 'Why, she is kinder to her lap-dog than to me,' he cried; and when I have tried to entreat her pardon for my manifold iniquities, she has received my apologies with such black looks as speedily silenced me.' One day the storm, long threatened, burst in sudden fury. There was a desperate quarrel between Lord Hauteville and his nephew, in which my lord reproached Mr. Ainsleigh with his ingratitude, and reminded him of his dependence. Roderick Ainsleigh was the last of men to brook such humiliation. He boldly asserted his independence, and in proof thereof declared that he

would never again owe a favour to the kinsman who had so degraded him. 'I would rather take the king's shilling than eat the bread of dependence,' he said; and I thank your lordship for reminding me that I have no right to the bounties I have enjoyed at your hands. I blame my own dulness for my having so long remained unconscious of my abject position, and am glad to be awakened to the truth, though the waking has been somewhat rough. For the past I must remain your debtor, and I confess the debt is a heavy one; happily the future is my own, and I can promise that it shall cost you but little.'

"Upon this Mr. Ainsleigh flung himself out of the room with such an air of offended manhood, that my lord confessed he felt himself the aggressor. He will come back, Tony,' he said to me, when his nephew had left Hauteville, which he did directly after the interview. Sure, he knows I love him as a son, and am but too weakly disposed to excuse his errors, nor can I think that he has ceased to love my little Barbara, though the two do not seem such fast friends as they once were.'

[ocr errors]
"And did the young man come back?" I asked, deeply concerned. "Never since that day has Roderick Ainsleigh crossed the threshold of this house. Whether he is living or dead none here can tell, though there is one who would, I doubt not, be glad to know the truth. He went straight from here to Cambridge, and it came to my lord's ears by and by that he had lost money to his Newmarket friends, over and above the debts my master had paid, and was in some sort a defaulter. If he had come back I know he would have been received with open arms; but my lord was too proud to invite his return. He had left but a year when his uncle died. The title died with him, and Lady Barbara, as sole heiress, became mistress of the estate. When her mourning was over she went to London to visit the Honourable Mr. and Mrs. Davenant, relations of her mother; and while residing with them she married Sir Marcus Lestrange, a widower of high family and small fortune, but of much political influence. She spent a few months here with her husband soon after their marriage, and then departed, to return no more except for that flying visit when you were brought hither."

"But was nothing more ever heard of Mr. Ainsleigh ?"

"No further tidings of that misguided young man ever reached my cars, except one painful rumour, which connected the flight of a clergyman's daughter from her father's house near this place with the name of Roderick Ainsleigh. How justly I know not. Slander fattens upon the misdoings of the absent. The young man was not here to defend himself against these evil reports, and I doubt not they had some influence with his cousin, Lady Barbara."

"What was he like ?" I asked; "I have seen no picture of him in the house."

"Ay, but his portrait was painted. It used to hang above this chimney-piece, but it was taken down and thrust away at my lord's

desire when his nephew had been some six months absent without any sign of repentance. Take that ungrateful boy's face from my sight,' he said; it haunts me like a bad dream.' Would you like to see Roderick Ainsleigh's face?"

"Yes, that I should mightily."

The old man crossed the room and opened a cupboard in the wainscot beneath one of the windows.

"Light a candle, Robert," he called to me as he groped on his knees before the open cupboard.

I took a candle from the chimney-piece, and lighted it by the blaze of the wood-fire.

"Bring your light here," he cried; and I went to him, and held the flickering candle before a frameless picture which he held upright upon a table near the window.

""Tis a good twenty years since that has seen the light," he said, wiping the dust from the mildew-stained canvas.

It was the portrait of a man in the dawn of youth, a dark handsome face with a bright smile, but a look of indomitable pride in the eyes, which were black as a Spaniard's.

"Have you ever seen such a face as that, Robert ?" asked my tutor.

"I can scarce tell," I answered thoughtfully; "but the features Ecem familiar to me."

"Seem familiar; ay, lad, and so they must. Think again, Bob. Where have you seen that face?”

"In the glass!" I cried, with a great start. "O, for God's sake, Anthony Grimshaw, tell me the truth, if you can!-was Roderick Ainsleigh my father?"

"In good sooth, Robert, I cannot tell. I have told you all that I know. But you and my late master's nephew are like as-I'll not say two drops of water, for there is little waterishness in your dispositions -you are like as two flames of fire."
CHAPTER IV.

1 AM INTRODUCED TO MY BENEFACTRESS.

I MIGHT have brooded long on Anthony Grimshaw's strange revelation but for the rapid succession of events which followed within a short time of the conversation I have recorded.

After an enchanted sleep of nearly twenty years the castle in Hauteville woods suddenly awoke to life, and the monotonous calm of our existence was exchanged for all the stir and clamour which accompanies the sound of many voices, the tread of many feet, and the bustling industry of a full household.

It was upon a lovely evening in June that the spell which had so

long held Hauteville Hall was suddenly broken. Not a word, not a whisper of rumour's busy tongue, had prepared my guardians or myself for the startling transformation. Anthony Grimshaw's indifference to the political events of his own time had kept him ignorant of ministerial changes at home, and of our diplomatic relations abroad, or he might have apprehended the possibility of Sir Marcus Lestrange's recall from Madrid, where he had been our plenipotentiary for some years.

Mr. Grimshaw and I were walking on the terrace in the pleasant summer sunset, while my tutor's stern partner was occupied with her incessant needlework by one of the windows of the oak parlour. Her sharp gray eyes watched us as we paced to and fro, and I doubt not it vexed her to see us in such friendly communion, as it most assuredly vexed her to find me impervious to the slights she put upon me, and indifferent to her ill-will. Again on this evening we talked of Roderick Ainsleigh, of whom I had indeed often spoken since I had seen the portrait hidden in the library-closet.

[ocr errors]
"Surely there can be little doubt of his death," I said, or some tidings of him must have reached you in all these years."

"It would seem likely, unless he has gone to push his fortunes abroad, as he may have done, under a feigned name, perhaps. He was ever a rank Jacobite, and got himself into no little trouble here and at Cambridge on that score. It was his nature, or his humour, to oppose those who loved him; and as the earl was a stanch Hanoverian, my young gentleman must needs toss off his wine to the king over the water. If he was living in forty-five, I would wager he was amongst the rebel crew that disturbed peaceful Englishmen in that year. He loved fighting and riot and intrigue, and would have refused to serve the best of rightful sovereigns if there was but a wrongful one to plot and fight for. I doubt there are always a number of these rebellious spirits, these innate revolutionaries, to create and foster rebellion. Few men ever have life's highway made so smooth and easy for them as it was made for Roderick Ainsleigh; but, you see, he preferred to scramble through brake and brier, and lose himself in a forest of guilt and sorrow."

"You speak of him bitterly."

"I cannot well refrain from bitterness, though I loved the lad well, and took rare pride in his teaching. But he broke my old master's heart, and went near to break Lady Barbara's; for I doubt if all her fashion and grandeur at foreign courts have ever made her as happy as she was in the old days, when she and her cousin Roderick used to study the classics together, and stroll in the garden yonder on summer evenings."

"She must have been very beautiful in those days," I said, "if she was like her portrait in the picture-gallery."

"The portrait barely does justice to her features and complexion,

But there was a sparkling brightness in her countenance which no painter could ever seize. It was such a changing face. A landscape in oils will give you the face of the country-side and the steady sunshine of a midsummer noon, but not the play and flicker of the light that comes and goes upon the meadows twenty times in a minute. She told her sorrow to no one when her cousin left Hauteville, but the changeful brightness of her beauty faded from that hour."

"Was the marriage with Sir Marcus Lestrange a love-match ?" "I doubt it. The Somertons are not given to change; and I do not think Lady Barbara could so soon have forgotten her cousin. But she was alone in the world, and an heiress, and doubtless felt her unprotected position."

We talked some time longer of the house which my tutor had served so faithfully, and in the service whereof he hoped to end his days. The sun sloped westward behind a line of dense foliage that looked black against the vivid golden light. Patches of roseate brightness illumined the westward side of the great brown trunks of rugged elm and oak, and shone still brighter on the smooth silvery bark of the beeches. Belated crows sailed across the tender upper gray, making for their nests in the oldest elms. Thrush and blackbird sang their vesper-hymn; and pensive from some mysterious depth of foliage sounded the song of the nightingale. The distant water-pools reddened in the reddening sunlight, and the stillness and calm glory that belong to this one hour alone possessed our souls, as we stopped in silence to lean lazily upon the marble balustrade of the terrace and watch the sinking sun.

While we thus watched, a sound so unfrequent as to be startling roused each from his reverie.

It was the sound of carriage-wheels-the wheels of not one only, but several vehicles. Anthony Grimshaw and I regarded each other in silent amazement, and then the old man hurried to the end of the terrace whence he could obtain a view of the broad gravelled drive leading to the great gates.

I followed closely on his heels, to the full as eager as himself.

Three carriages were winding slowly up the hill; the foremost a handsome travelling - chariot with four horses, and smartly-dressed postboys; the two others clumsier vehicles, each drawn by two horses.

"It must be Sir Marcus, or my lady!" cried Anthony; "who else should come here with such a train? Run, boy! bid Martha have the doors opened, and the shutters in the library and saloon, and a fire lighted in the great hall, for it strikes deadly cold in summer-time. And tell Betty and Sue to stir themselves. The carriages will be at the gate in less than five minutes."

"I'll open the shutters with my own hands!" I cried, and ran off to the oak parlour, where I dashed open the half-glass door, and burst into the room, to the horror of Martha Grimshaw.

"What now, you unmannerly creature ?" she asked. I told her who was at hand. She started from her chair and stood before me, deadly pale and trembling; never had I seen her so affected.

"My lady!" she exclaimed. "It can't be."

"But it is, Mrs. Grimshaw. Who else should it be? There'll be wax-candles wanted for the saloon; 'twill be dark in half-an-hour. Shall I run and bid them open the gates?"

"Yes, yes,” she answered in a strange, absent way; and I left her still standing rooted to the ground, with a scared, pale face.

By this I perceived that there was one person in the world of whom the steward's wife stood in awe.

The bell in the gothic archway sounded with a great clanging stroke as I ran to call the maids. Betty came flying to the gate, and Anthony Grimshaw appeared at the same moment with a ponderous bunch of keys, ready to perform his office of seneschal. Susan, the second maid, went with me to open the shutters of the great saloon. We lighted the wax-candles scattered here and there in crystal candelabra, and the feeble lights twinkled faintly in the dusky chamber. I went on to the library to open the shutters there, while Susan stayed behind to kindle the logs on the wide stone hearth. I heard the sound of several voices, and the echoing tread of high heels on the marble floor of the hall; and then from the half-open door of the library I saw Mr. Grimshaw usher the unexpected visitors into the saloon.

Two ladies and a gentleman followed him into the dimly-lighted room. The ladies were so hooded and muffled that I saw but little of their faces. One was of a commanding figure, the other slender and graceful as the tall white lilies in the Italian garden. The elder lady sank into an arm-chair, with a sigh of fatigue, and flung off her black-silk hood. Yes, this was my Lady Barbara, as beautiful as the portrait with which I was so familiar, but of a more developed and regal beauty. Her dress was of a dark crimson brocade, her shoulders and arms veiled in a cloud of black lace. She wore powder, which became her admirably, and her full round throat, of marble whiteness, was encircled by a broad band of black velvet, clasped with a gem that seemed to emit a brighter flame than any of the tapers twinkling against the mirrors on the walls. Never, except in pictures, had I seen a woman of high rank, and for the moment the vision somewhat dazzled my unaccustomed eyes.

The younger lady also removed her hood, and I beheld a pale, fair face, framed by loose unpowdered auburn hair. Such pale and fragile loveliness showed poorly beside the blaze of Lady Barbara's beauty; but I felt rather than saw that this young lady was beautiful.

The gentleman yawned aloud, and leaned with a listless air against the carved-oak chimney, amusing himself by kicking the smouldering logs with the toe of his boot.

"Damp wood, and a room that feels like a vault; and, I conclude,

very small probability of supper. You should really have written to apprise your people of your coming, Lady Barbara."

The speaker was a young man, tall, slim, good-looking, and dressed in a suit of cut velvet, with point-lace ruffles and cravat. He wore high riding-boots, and a court-sword dangled at his side. My only acquaintance with this species was derived from Pope's Rape of the Lock, and this gentleman reminded me of Sir Plume.

"It was my humour to come unannounced," replied my lady somewhat haughtily; and then she addressed her steward, in a much sweeter tone. "You will not let us go to bed supperless, will you, Anthony?" "Indeed, no, my lady; if a pair of chickens and a dish of broiled ham, with strawberries from the garden, and a bowl of cream from Betty's dairy, will content your ladyship-and this gentleman."

"Nothing could be better, my good Anthony. But you must not let our sudden arrival disturb you. We have brought two coachloads of London servants, and all they want is to be shown the way to the kitchen, and the geography of larders, pantries, and still-rooms, which, I remember, is rather intricate at Hauteville. Sir Marcus will not be able to join us for a week. This lady is Miss Hemsley, my husband's niece; and this gentleman is my stepson, Mr. Everard Lestrange. But where is Martha? I shall be glad to see her, and to settle what rooms we had best occupy."

Mrs. Grimshaw entered the saloon as her mistress spoke. She had changed her black-stuff gown for one of stiff rustling silk, and wore a frilled-muslin handkerchief, fastened with a diamond brooch. Never before had I seen her so attired. She saluted her mistress with a profound curtsey, and bade her welcome to Hauteville.

My lady acknowledged her compliments somewhat coldly, as I thought.

"How is your charge, Martha ?" she asked. "Your letters have been of the briefest, and gave me little news of him."

I knew it was of myself she spoke, and an irresistible impulse impelled me to approach her. There was a kindness in her tone which invited my confidence. "Here is a friend," I thought.

I had just lighted a pair of wax-candles, in heavy bronze candlesticks, which stood on a writing-table by the hearth. With these in my hands I entered the saloon, and carried them to the table by which Lady Barbara had seated herself.

"O God, a ghost!" she cried, half-rising from her chair, and looking at me with wide-opened eyes of horror and surprise; and then sinking back into her chair, she murmured faintly, "You never told me he was so like. You should have prepared me for this, Martha."

"My father would scarcely feel flattered by your emotion, madam," said Mr. Lestrange with a sneer.

"I have no secrets from your father, sir," my lady answered proudly; and the gentleman's sarcastic smile vanished as she looked at him.

"It is possible my jealousy is keener than my father's," he said, not without a certain significance of tone.

Lady Barbara turned from him with an air of supreme indifference, and addressed herself to me.

"Your face reminds me of the dead, sir; but you are not less welWhat is your name?"

come to me.

"Robert, madam."

"What else ?"

"I have no other name, madam.”

66 And you have never taken the pains to seek one?"

"No, madam.

When first I came to this house Mrs. Grimshaw told me I was nameless. I have asked no further questions."

I might have added that I had been reminded not once but twenty times a week of my abandoned condition, and that such epithets as foundling, beggar, castaway, and even coarser terms of reproach, were but too familiar to me.

"Indeed," cried my lady, with a glance at Mrs. Martha, which boded ill for that personage. "Mrs. Grimshaw volunteered information upon a subject of which she knew little. She is fond of giving information." This was said with a most bitter emphasis; and then, turning to me with a sweet protecting smile, Lady Barbara continued: "Your name is Robert Ainsleigh, and you are my kinsman. I fear you have had a somewhat desolate boyhood in this deserted house; but I placed you in the care of my old friend Anthony, because I knew you would find in him a kind friend and an accomplished tutor."

"And I have found both, madam," I answered promptly; "as good a friend as a fatherless lad ever knew, as patient and learned a master as ever earned the affection of his pupil."

"I am glad to hear you speak so heartily," replied my lady. “While I remain at Hauteville you will live with me and my family, and it will be for yourself to determine your future career."

She extended her hand, and I dropped on my knee, as I raised the fair hand to my lips.

The gentleman lounging against the chimney-piece gave a little sarcastic laugh.

"Egad, Lady Barbara, your country cousin is a courtier by instinct. I warrant me he will soon eat a toad with as good a grace as if he had hunted tufts at the University and graduated at Leicester House."

I wondered at so much animosity from a stranger, but it has been my ill-fortune in life to find more than one bitter enemy ready-made like this, and to receive direst injuries from those I have never consciously offended.
