CHAPTER XXXII. I ACQUIRE CERTAINTY.
I HAD the happiness to win my father's release ftom Colonel Clive
through the intercession of my ever-kind friend Mr. Watts; and this
favour was but the signal for our parting, with only the vaguest hope
of meeting again, when or where we dared not speculate.
I think my father's heart yearned towards me in those few days
of frequent intercourse which we enjoyed at Muxadavad, and that it
grieved him to bid me farewell.
"You will go back to England, Robert, and I to France, whenever
my regiment returns thither, always supposing I live to accompany it.
I will give you an address in the city of Paris whence a letter is sure
to reach me sooner or later, if I am above ground; and you must tell
me where I can write to you in London. Stay; under cover to Mr.
Swinfen. That will be a safe address, will it not?"
"The best in the world, sir; and, indeed, I think the only one I
could give you. And now tell me, sir,-I am a young man, and you
yourself in the prime of life; Fortune may yet favour one or both of
us;—if I can ever make a home in England, will you come and share
it ?"
"A home, Robert! What does that mean? 'Tis a word I never
could understand. A roving devil entered me when I was a boy, and
has tugged at my heartstrings ever since, dragging me now here, now
there, by land and sea. I once shared a garret with thy mother,
poor devoted soul; and if I could have got bread for her and thee,
should not have deserted it. Since then I have been a wanderer,
with a past so sad, I dare not look back upon it, and with a blank for
my future. Nay, Robert, do not look so sadly at me. If I live to be
a battered old graybeard, and thou wilt give me a corner at thy
hearth, I will come and smoke my pipe there, and tell stories of
Lauffeld and Bergen-op-Zoom, St. Thomé and Gingee, and dandle thy
little ones on my feeble old knees. But that is a long way to look
forward. In the mean time be sure that I love thee."
And so we parted. One gift I was able to offer my father as a
memento of this strange meeting, and I doubt if all Omichund's jewels
would have seemed to him a treasure so precious. I had contrived,
since our first encounter, to get Lady Barbara's miniature copied on
ivory by a Hindoo. The colours were somewhat too vivid, and the

stippling, though performed with an amazing neatness, lacked the
softness of Miss Kauffman or Cosway; but poor as the art was, the
likeness was a fair one, and the gift was received with rapture.
There now came a kind of lull in the affairs of this province,
though the horizon was by no means cloudless. In the first expansive
impulse of gratitude, or perchance with the hope that by rewarding
the chief he might escape some part of his engagements to the sub-
ordinates, Meer Jaffier presented Colonel Clive with a sum of money that
I have heard computed at one hundred and eighty thousand pounds.
This gift our hero took without scruple, but refused presents of a yet
larger amount from the Seats, and other wealthy inhabitants of the
capital. Nay, had he been of the unscrupulous nature which his ene-
mies loved to depict him, there are no limits to the wealth he might
have acquired, or to the power he might have seized. When he was
afterwards called upon to defend his acceptance of Meer Jaffier's
bounty, he did it with a boldness that gave evidence of a clear con-
science, and with a logic that none could dispute.
In Calcutta, where of late had prevailed discontent and anxiety,
there now arose a spirit of universal rejoicing. Fortunes that had
been thought destroyed for ever were now restored, and the sunshine
of prosperity illumined a city where Desolation had long held her
gloomy reign. I think at this juncture, while the money won from
Meer Jaffier's reluctance, by him alone, was pouring into the Com-
pany's treasury, the people whom Robert Clive had redeemed from
despair entertained some faint sense of gratitude for his services. Yet
even at this early stage the spirit of dissension had arisen. The distri-
bution of the donations to the army and navy was not made without
a display of ill-feeling on the part of the recipients, and a small body
of military officers protested against an equal division of the Nabob's
bounty with the officers and sailors of the squadron which had ac-
companied the army to Plassey. These malcontents Clive was com-
pelled to remind, with that undaunted frankness which was natural
to him, that a sum of money obtained from the Nabob solely by his
negotiation was not a matter of right, or property to be disposed of by
their vote.
"So very far from that," wrote the Colonel in a letter, of which a
copy was forwarded by him to Mr. Watts, "it is now in my power to
return to the Nabob the money already advanced, and leave it to his
option whether he will perform his promise or not. You have stormed
no town and found the money there; neither did you find it in the
plains of Plassey after the defeat of the Nabob. In short, gentlemen,
it pains me to remind you that what you are to receive is entirely
owing to the care I took of your interest."
He then went on to declare that he would consent to no injustice
towards the navy, and begged to retract his promise of negotiating the
payment of the Nabob's bounty.

This speedily brought these discontented gentlemen to the dust,
and they were as cordially forgiven as they had been sharply repri-
manded.
And now occurred an event which shed a gloom over our victory,
in the sudden death of that brave and honourable seaman Admiral
Watson, who perished of a putrid fever on the 3d of August, and
within six weeks of our victory at Plassey.
It was shortly after this calamity that the dearest wish of my soul
was fulfilled, and I found myself free to return to England. My
humble services, and the real dangers which I had endured at Mux-
adavad, were deemed by Mr. Watts and the committee worthy of a
reward I should never have dreamed of; and my patron surprised me
one morning by the gift of bills for three thousand pounds.
"It was the Colonel's doing, Robert," said Mr. Watts, when I
expressed my surprise at this bounty; "he said you deserved as much
as that for your spirited journey to Meer Jaffier's palace, and as much
more for having been through the fire with me, to say nothing of your
service as a volunteer at Plassey. There were some black looks among
our friends of the select committee when he said this, as you may guess,
and they were for giving you six months' extra pay as a sufficient
reward for having lived for several months in daily peril of impale-
ment or decapitation. Upon this the Colonel swore that you should
have the money, even if it must needs come out of his own purse.
'And it is not the first time I have stood between you and a meanness,
gentlemen,' he added, in his grandest manner. Of course this brought
them to their senses; for though I daresay they would have had no
objection to the Colonel's rewarding you from his own pocket, they
have a great terror of offending him. So the item was passed with a
smothered groan: Three thousand pounds sterling to Mr. Robert
Ainsleigh, clerk and interpreter."
27
"I know not how to thank the Colonel, or you, sir."
"Nay, Robert, 'tis no more than you deserve; for you have been
vastly useful. But this money is not to be your sole reward. In
acknowledgment of your services at Plassey, the Colonel intends giving
you the rank of ensign, with two years' leave of absence. I told him
you were very eager to obtain military rank."
66
"O sir," I cried, fairly overcome by such thoughtful kindness,
"this is too much!" I could say no more; this shower of gifts
almost bewildered me. I was free to return to England, an ensign
in the Honourable East India Company's service; a rank that was
modest enough, but one to which Everard Lestrange could not deny
the right of a gentleman. I was in a position to prove my legitimacy,
to annul my hateful marriage; and I held in my hands the nucleus of
a decent fortune. What more could I have asked? What more!-if
Dora had still been free! But, alas, she was lost to me for ever, since,
should any encounter between her husband and myself prove fatal to

him, she was of a nature too noble to permit her acceptance of a hand
stained with his blood, however fairly he might come by his death,
however dearly she might love his slayer.
"How dare I think of her as still loving me?" I asked myself
angrily. "Because life has stood still for me since the hour in which
I was severed from her, am I so weak a fool as to suppose time has
made no change in her? Nor are our positions in any manner identical,
for while I have guarded her image pure and stainless, she has been
taught to think of me as a liar and a villain, unworthy of so much as
one thought of hers."
I told myself this, and yet I longed with no less eagerness to return
to Europe, to look once more upon the face that had been with me in
so many an exile's dream of home. When I reached England, I might
hear of Mrs. Lestrange abroad, at St. Petersburg, at Hanover, at
Venice-wherever the diplomatic service might take her husband; but
in whatever country she might be, if she still lived upon this earth, I
was determined to see her, to prove to her that I had never been the
false wretch my enemies had taught her to think me.
If she still lived! Chilling as a sudden blast from the frozen pole
came the thought that she might be dead. From mortality's common
foe neither youth nor beauty would exempt her; and there was never
an English newspaper came to me that did not contain the tidings of
some unexpected doom--a husband swept off in the prime of manhood
by a fever, a family extinguished by malignant sore-throat. Death was
ever busy among the homes of the great, and medical science seemed
powerless to cope with the destroyer. Her name I had never seen
among the ranks of the dead; but many events may escape the know-
ledge of an exile who thinks himself fortunate if he sees a newspaper
or a London magazine once in six months.
I sailed for England in the Prince Edward, a noble vessel, which
performed the voyage in less than seven months. Yet even this transit,
rapid as it was compared with the progress of the Hecate, seemed slow
to my impatience. No longer was I cooped in a Pandemonium between
decks; I now enjoyed all the luxuries permitted to the sea-voyager;
but I should have been inhuman had I not sometimes visited the lower
deck, on which numerous disabled soldiers were being conveyed back
to England. With these poor wretches I spent some time daily, and
was enabled to obtain certain small indulgences for them from the
captain, a very superior person to the brute with whom it had been my
ill-luck to sail on board the Hecate.
It was bleak March weather when I landed at Portsmouth; but no
words can describe the rapture with which I inhaled the chill wind of
my native country, and gazed on the mean housetops and steeples of
the little naval town, with all its common sights and sounds. The
dingy inn where I put up for the night seemed a palace, and I was


delighted with the novel sensation of being somewhat unceremoniously
served by one free-and-easy waiter, instead of the stately crowd of
slavish oriental servants, who attended the dinner-table of Mr. Watts
and myself as if it had been a banquet of the gods. I cannot, how-
ever, go so far as to say that the steak which composed my dinner
seemed to me a happy exchange for the pilaus and curries, the various
fish, fruits, and vegetables of Hindostan ; but I was in no humour to
be critical as to what I ate, being in a fever of impatience that deprived
me of all appetite.
I started for London at daybreak next morning, on the top of a
stage-coach, which seemed to me a thing of supernatural speed after
the wearisome slowness of a palanquin ; but even by this rapid mode of
travelling I did not reach the city till the dead of night, and was fain
to await the advent of morning at an inn in the Borough, where I was
put into a room looking out on a covered gallery, much like that where
I had slept on my first coming to London. Nor did I sleep more
soundly than on that never-to-be-forgotten night now, as then, I
came friendless to a strange city, and though I carried a small fortune
in my pocket, I think I would have gladly bartered my three thousand
pounds for the certainty that one friend would welcome my return with
affectionate delight.
I breakfasted as early as London habits would allow, and found
myself in the streets at an hour when the city had still a half-awakened
look, shutters scarcely unclosed, and stout country wenches bawling,
"Milk, maids below!" at every area. On London-bridge I found
workmen busy taking down the ruinous old houses which here impeded
the thoroughfare, narrowing the roadway to but twenty feet, and in
some places only twelve feet. I was not sorry to see this reformation;
for though the effect of these old many-gabled houses overhanging the
river, like a street suspended by some magical enchantment betwixt
sky and water, was very pleasing to the lover of the picturesque, the
narrow space allowed for all kinds of traffic was a most serious
nuisance, and the cause of many accidents. This improvement, which
I thus saw in its commencement, progressed with the slowness common
to public works, and was not completed till 1760.
On the Middlesex side of the bridge I took a hackney-coach, and
bade the man drive me to St. James's-square, for I considered that at
Sir Marcus Lestrange's residence I should most easily obtain tidings of
her I came to seek. The Indian sun, to which I had exposed myself
somewhat recklessly, and seven years of absence, had so much altered
me, that I hardly feared recognition, whoever I might meet.
I found the house in St. James's-square, with but one unshrouded
window, just opening itself to the March sunshine, like a fashionable
belle who lifts one languid eyelid when all the working world has been
long astir.
I alighted and knocked boldly, determined to run all hazards rather

than remain unsatisfied. The same gigantic porter who had answered
my questions seven years before appeared in response to my summons,
as little changed in face, figure, dress, or bearing, as if he had been
some servitor of fairy legend, and had spent the interval in an en-
chanted sleep.
I had suffered and seen so much in my absence that I was un-
reasonably surprised by the unchanged appearance of this man. Seven
years! Great Heaven! did I judge by my own feelings, I should esti-
mate the period a century. Seven years, and my noble benefactress,
whom I had left in the pride of womanhood and beauty, was moulder-
ing in her grave! Seven years, and I returned to find myself doubtless
despised and forgotten by the only woman I had ever loved!
I asked the porter if Sir Marcus Lestrange were in London. He
shook his head, and regarded me with a wondering stare.
"Sir Everard Lestrange and his lady will be in town to-morrow,
sir," he said; "they are on a visit in Surrey."
"Sir Everard Lestrange! Is Sir Marcus dead ?" I asked.
"Sir Marcus Lestrange has been dead nearly two years, sir. This
house now belongs to his only son Sir Everard, and his lady."
"Miss Hemsley that was ?" I asked; for the sense of a great lapse
of time again seized upon me, and it seemed but too possible that Dora
might be dead, and some second wife installed in her place.
"Miss Hemsley that was," replied the porter solemnly, and then
asked if I would leave my name.
"No," I said, "the name is of no consequence. I will wait upon
Sir Everard in a day or two-here or elsewhere. He frequents some
club, I suppose?"
66
Yes, sir; my master is to be seen at White's in St. James's-street,
by his friends, who are mostly members of the club."
There was a covert insolence in this which I fully understood. The
porter would have me to know that his master was not accessible to
any copper-visaged stranger who might seek an interview with him.
"Lady Lestrange is well?" I asked; and to soften this pompous
Cerberus I here slipped a crown into his ready hand.
"Yes, sir, my lady is vastly well," he replied with friendly readiness.
"Would your honour step in and rest a bit, while I answer any in-
quiries you may please to make about the family? Your honour has
lately returned from foreign parts, I think?"
66
Yes, from " I hesitated a moment as I was about to pronounce
the word 'India:' that one word, repeated to Sir Everard, might have
betrayed my identity, and I wanted to spend some little time in Eng-
land before he knew of my return-" from Spain.”
"Dearey me! The late Sir Marcus and his lady spent many years
in Spain. Would your honour please to sit ?"
I had entered the hall, a lofty apartment paved with gray marble,
and distinguished by a dismal splendour. Never till this moment had


I penetrated even so far into this house, and I looked around me curi-
ously. 'Twas here she lived; I fancied her slight figure passing to and
fro upon the broad staircase, her little hand lightly resting on the grim
bronze balustrade.
"Yes, sir," said the porter, completely mollified by my donation;
"my lady is well, or as well as a lady of fashion can be, that is out at
theatres and routs, and Vauxhall and Ranelagh, and suchlike, every
night of her life, and at sales of pictures and curiosities almost every
day."
"What! she leads a life of pleasure-she loves the amusements of
the town?" I said, with an unreasonable sense of bitterness. Because
my life had been one long mourning, did I think she too must needs
be desolate ?
"Yes, sir; my lady is obliged to do as other ladies of her station,
and Sir Everard likes to see her happy."
"Happy!" I exclaimed involuntarily; " and that is called happi-
ness!"
The porter scrutinised me sharply.
"You are some relative of my lady's, perhaps, sir?" he asked.
"No; but I come from one who is much interested in her welfare.
I hope to see her soon after her return to town; yet I would rather you
did not mention my visit either to Sir Everard or my lady;" and to
give emphasis to this hint I slipped a second crown into the man's
hand.
66
'I shall not say a word, sir," he replied, as he ushered me to the
door.
She was well, she was happy, her life a round of fashionable dissi-
pation, and she had forgotten me. This seemed to me the sum of
what I had heard; and although in my fondest dream I could scarce
have hoped to find myself remembered or regretted, it was never-
theless a pain to me to hear of her gaiety.
"Fool!" I exclaimed within myself, "what other fate couldst thou
expect? Her love for thee was but a girlish fancy, born of her distaste
for thy rival; and thou gone, and the rival thrust upon her, she has
reconciled herself to her fate, and takes life gaily, like other women of
property."
Thus did I argue with myself; yet so crestfallen was I, that, on
the simple strength of this porter's intelligence, I had half a mind to
go back to India by the next ship that would carry me thither. Better
to be facing Meer Jaffier's foes on the borders of Behar than to
suffer these pangs of jealous anguish in a country where I had not
one single friend. With the strange perversity of human nature, I,
who had so languished to return to England, now felt that my coming
had been but a folly. It seemed that I had scarce a purpose in this
great city, to which I had hastened with such burning impatience.
The invalidation of my marriage? Yes, that was a task to perform;


but of what avail the undoing of those rites when she whom alone I
loved was the happy wife of another? What else had I expected to find
her? Had I hoped to discover her a widow waiting for my return ?
Alas, I knew not what I hoped; I knew only that I had found dis-
appointment.
I carried Philip Hay's letter and statement in a pocket-book that I
wore always about me; and provided with this I returned to the City
and sought out Mr. Blade's office in Little Britain. I found this office
a darksome den in a somewhat dingy locality, and Mr. Blade himself
struck me as a kind of practitioner better versed in the exercise of
legal chicanery than in the nobler offices of the law; a man who
would take to a doubtful case with a natural relish, and be more at his
ease in the darkest labyrinth of fraud than in the broad highway of
honesty.
This gentleman received me with amazing civility, and seemed
really moved when I told him of Philip Hay's fate.
"That man's disappearance has always been a puzzle to me, sir,"
he said; "and I much regretted his loss as client, companion, and
friend. In the first capacity he was of little profit to me directly, for I
believe he never paid a debt in his life; but I am bound to confess
that he put me in the way of two or three very good things with his
young patron, Lord Mallandaine. There was an affair on Hounslow-
heath, sir, an assault and abduction, which might have resulted in a
most prodigious scandal, implicating more than one member of the
peerage, if a man had not been found, sir―Jumping Joseph, a young
man very well known upon the road-who was tried and hung, sir, for
that very affair; and, I think I may venture to say, by my agency alone."
"What!" I exclaimed, aghast at this horrid avowal; an innocent
man was executed for a crime of Lord Mallandaine's! and you are
proud of the transaction?"
66
"An innocent man! No, my dear sir, Jumping Joseph had earned
a halter a dozen times over; but it was not he who ran away with
pretty Miss Lockson of Holford Hall, Wiltshire, and left her father
for dead in his own travelling-carriage, though a train of circumstan-
tial evidence, which I had the honour to prepare, brought it home to
him in the most convincing manner. The hemp was grown, and the
yarn was spun, my dear sir; it was only a question who should put the
rope round his neck."
"And
my
Lord Mallandaine's victim, this Miss Lockson ?"
Mr. Blade shrugged his shoulders.
"I cannot say for certain what became of the girl," he said.
""Twas murmured in her father's neighbourhood that she wandered
home one day about a year after the abduction, somewhat touched in
the head, and would never speak the name of her betrayer. But your
country folks have a knack of inventing these romantic stories. The
history of Lord Mallandaine's victims would fill a big book.".

"Does the wretch still live ?" I asked.
66 Live? yes; and is counted of some importance in his party. 'Twas
but the other night he stood up in the House of Lords to denounce the
reputed author of an immoral poem, with whom he was not long ago
on terms of warm friendship.-But I ramble, sir; so to business."
I gave him Philip Hay's letter, which he at once acknowledged as
genuine, but was not so prompt to hand me the box containing the papers.
"There is one circumstance our lamented friend appears to have
forgotten," he said, with a smothered sigh.
"And pray what is that ?"
"The fact that he left these herein-named papers with me as a—
ahem!-a kind of security for my claim against him."
"I have no knowledge of that, Mr. Blade, nor, I dare venture to
say, had Mr. Hay any notion you would advance such a claim. He
spoke of you as a friend rather than as a lawyer."
"I am flattered by the friendship of a man who possessed all the
elements of greatness," replied Mr. Blade; "but, as the father of a
family, I am bound to remember my claim against our lamented friend,
which includes costs out of pocket."
"But you are also bound to remember that these papers are of no
intrinsic value—”
66
"They are of value to you, my dear sir," interposed the lawyer,
with a wily grin, or you would scarce take the trouble to come after
them."
This was an unanswerable argument; so I replied to my gentleman
with more candour than such a knave deserved at my hands.
"I have reason to believe there is one document in that box of im-
portance to myself," I said; "but I am very sure there is no paper in
it of the smallest intrinsic value."
"Intrinsic value is one thing, sir, and personal value another. I
never supposed that my lamented friend had left bank-notes or India
stock in my keeping. But there is no commodity of such fluctuating
value as private papers. I have seen a gentleman's note of hand, and a
lady's love-letter, sold at a price that would astound you."
"No evidence of a fine gentleman's iniquity or a fine lady's folly
would astonish me, sir. But to return to Mr. Hay's papers."
"To return to those papers, sir. You will perceive, in the first
place, that I have an equitable lien upon them in the shape of my bill
of costs; and in the second place, had I no such lien, I should not be
authorised in handing them to you on the strength of that letter."
"What can be plainer than this letter, Mr. Blade ?"
66
Nothing, if the writer were still alive, and the property his to
dispose of. But the writer's life having lapsed in the interim, the
papers in question belong to his next of kin, who, on taking out letters
of administration, would be able to claim these with the other effects of
the deceased."


“Good heavens, sir, what do you mean by letters of administration?
You must be aware that Philip Hay lived and died a pauper."
"I am aware of nothing relative to the last six years of his life, sir;
and in the eye of the law he has an estate which must be administered
according to the law in such cases made and provided. And I, sir, as
a gentleman and an attorney, would be guilty of a gross misdemeanour
—nay, indeed, a fraud upon Mr. Hay's heirs, executors, and assigns—
should I hand you the aforesaid papers on the strength of that letter."
This was beyond measure provoking, and I was sorely tempted to
lose patience with Mr. Blade.
"Come, come, sir," I said; "I doubt there is some little mistake
here. My bronzed face deceives you, and you fancy because I have
come from the Indies I must needs be a greenhorn in all matters of
business. Allow me to tell you that I was a civil servant of the Com-
pany, and that my duties brought me in hourly contact with the natives
of Hindostan, who are the veriest rogues and knaves that live upon this
earth. A man who has dealt for six years with them, sir, has little to
learn in chicanery, and will scarce submit to be defrauded of his honest
rights by a knavish perversion of justice."
"You are impertinent, sir," replied Mr. Blade, with an air of
dignity," and since you choose to advance your claim in an offensive
manner, I shall stick to the letter of the law, and hereby refuse to
surrender that box to anyone but the lawful administrator of the late
Mr. Philip Hay's effects."
There was a resolution about the scoundrel's tone that told me he
was only to be countered by equal resolution on my part. Should I
show any desire to conciliate him, or to bargain with him, he would
suppose the paper to be of vital importance to me, and would do his
utmost to bleed me of my last guinea.
"Very well, sir," I said, rising and putting on my hat; "in that
case there is no more to be done. If the letter of the law will not give
me the paper my friend desired me to have, I must e'en do without it.
I have too much respect for the law to tempt you to a breach of it.
Good-morning."
Mr. Blade stared at me for a moment dumfounded; but as I
moved towards the door, he skipped suddenly forward and placed
himself before it.
"Not so hastily, sir!" he exclaimed; "you had best, at any rate,
leave me your name and address. In this letter you are but spoken of
as the bearer. If I find I can strain the law in your favour, I—”
"I would not have you burden your conscience to do me a service,
sir. My name and address are of no importance. Be so good as to
move away from that door; I have engagements elsewhere, and am
somewhat hurried."
66
Sir," cried Mr. Blade in an appealing tone, "between men of
business this is childish. You want a paper from that box, or you

would not have come to Little Britain. What will you give for that
letter ?"
"I decline to treat with you on the subject, sir. If my friend's
desire gives me no sufficient claim to the paper, I will have none
of it."
"Sir, this is mere histrionic display. You want the paper. Give
me Bank-of-England notes for one hundred pounds, and it is yours."
"I will not higgle for it, sir."
"Come, come, sir; say fifty. 'Tis not half my bill of costs."
"I have no money about me, sir, and can very well exist without
the paper;" and I made another move towards the door.
"Bring me five-and-twenty guineas, sir, and it is yours. "Twill
barely cover my costs out of pocket; but the father of a family is the
plaything of Fortune;" and at this juncture Mr. Blade brushed away an
imaginary tear with his dingy ruffle.
"I blush to sink so low, sir, but as the father of a family I will
take five-and-twenty guineas. In the words of the Apothecary-but
no, sir, I will not trouble you with a hackneyed quotation. If you
would let me have the money before two o'clock this afternoon, I
should take it kindly."
"You shall have it, Mr. Blade. I do not much affect this kind of
barter; but as I have trespassed on your time, I shall be happy to make
you some recompense, and will bring you the money you demand at
two o'clock."
"Sir, God bless you! I despise my weakness in thus allowing the
feelings of a father to vanquish at once the principles and instincts of
a legal practitioner; but the times are bad; there is positively no-
thing doing, sir, nothing."
I left Mr. Blade, and hastened to deposit the bulk of the bills Mr.
Watts had given me with a banker, to whom the same kind friend had
recommended me. A couple of hundred pounds I kept in hand; and
as I thought it but likely there might be something outlandish in my
appearance, and as I had no desire to be remarkable, I went at once to
a respectable tailor in the City, and bade him measure me for a suit of
clothes in the plainest modern style. He would fain have persuaded
me to choose some gaudy hue, such as that bloom colour which my
dear friend Goldsmith afterwards made so famous; but I selected a
cloth of a dark, sober green, which, when he saw me resolute to have
it, Mr. Snip declared was the genteelest thing in his shop. But even
after this I had some difficulty in leaving him without giving an order
for a scarlet shag frock, without which he declared no gentleman's
wardrobe could be complete. This done, I was fairly puzzled when
the man asked me where he should send the goods, and could give him
no better address than the inn where I had put up. From the tailor's
I went to a barber, who dressed and powdered my hair after the pre-
vailing fashion, and tried hard to persuade me to buy a wig, recom-

mending me one entirely of human hair, and in a style which he called
Jehu's Jemmy, for it seems that fine gentlemen had of late been seized
with a passion for resembling their coachmen. After this he showed
me a scratch, which he called the genuine Blood's skull-covering. But
finding me unmoved by the exhibition of these, he produced one of a
monstrous size and feathery appearance, which he told me was known
amongst men about town as the Apothecary's Bush. This last he
pressed upon me as the ne plus ultra in taste. The price of this modish
headpiece he informed me was six guineas, adding by way of apology
that human hair was now fetching three guineas an ounce.
"And, pray, where do you get this human hair ?" I asked.
"That, sir, is one of the secrets of the trade. We import from
Germany, sir, and we buy British hair from the public institutions of
this city."
"From the prisons and hospitals, I suppose," I hazarded.
"Well, sir, I confess Sir John Fielding and the gaoler's shears send
us many a handsome head of hair. Nor do we inquire too curiously
into the origin of the article, provided the quality be unimpeachable.
Let me tempt you to try that Apothecary's Bush, sir. With a dark
complexion like yours, the effect of those frizzy curls is killing."
"Nay, my good friend, I am but newly returned from the East,
and am not yet enough in the mode to prefer the hair of some Mistress
Doll Tearsheet or Molly Seagrim to that with which Nature has clothed
my head."
I left the barber deprecating my want of taste, and went straight
to Mr. Blade's office, it being now close upon two o'clock.
I found the lawyer seated at his desk, with a shabby little tin box
before him. It was securely sealed with a cipher that I had seen used
by Everard Lestrange; and I thus perceived how close the intimacy
had been between these two men at the time of my undoing.
Having paid Mr. Blade the stipulated five-and-twenty guineas, I
broke the seal and opened the box. It contained a packet of letters
written by Everard Lestrange to Philip Hay; and these I read. I had
received the owner's permission to use them against the writer; but
this I had no intention to do. I desired only to obtain a yet fuller
comprehension of Mr. Lestrange's character than his iniquitous con-
duct to myself and Margery Hawker had already afforded me.
The letters were in great part incomprehensible to me, so lavishly
did the writer employ cant phrases that seemed to constitute a kind of
secret language between Philip and himself. But of that which was
plain to any reader there was enough to stamp the author of these.
epistles as a consummate villain. Profligacy and heartlessness were
revealed in every line; and when I read those portions of the corre-
spondence in which the seducer alluded to Margery Hawker, my detes-
tation of this man reached a supreme degree it had not attained before.
Alas, poor victim of a libertine's caprice, couldst thou have seen those

lines in which he described the passion thou didst mistake for love, thy
bruised heart must have broken at once! And this wretch was the
husband of the pure and gentle creature I had known in the happy,
unforgotten days at Hauteville! I shuddered as I thought of a union
between beings so opposite. Could I marvel that my lady spent her
days and nights in a ceaseless round of fashionable pleasures? For her
there could be no such word as home.
I looked up presently from the letters, and saw Mr. Blade staring
at me with an astonished countenance, which I doubt not was warranted
by my own scowling face.
66
Upon my honour, sir, I should have thought you had found
a nest of scorpions in that box instead of a bundle of old letters,"
he said.
"There are viler things than scorpions, Mr. Blade, the thoughts
of a bad man. Do you know Mr.-nay, Sir Everard Lestrange?"
"I once had the pleasure to be of some service to him, sir, in a
delicate transaction. My honour as a professional man forbids me to
reveal-"
66
"O, sir, I should be the last to question you upon the subject.
Mr. Lestrange did me a most foul injury some seven years ago, and I
mean to have redress. Beyond this point I have no interest in him.
Where is he most easily to be met?"
"Humph! It is some time since I have been employed by him;
but there are certain distinguished characters upon whom a man of the
world, and the father of a family like myself, feels it a duty to keep an
eye. Since Sir Everard's return from St. Petersburg he has aban-
doned the onerous paths of diplomacy, and has become solely a man of
pleasure. His father's death gave him a handsome fortune; for Sir
Marcus, although himself a poor man, had inherited largely from his
wife, who died suddenly, leaving him a very fine estate, which now
belongs to Sir Everard. He is a member of White's, attends the
debates and votes with the Ministry, but seldom or never speaks. He
is said to play high, and is a hanger-on of the two patent theatres,
where he may be seen paying his court to the younger and prettier of
the actresses. This, sir, is what I am told of the gentleman. My
own humble opportunities do not permit me to come in contact with
him."
"I thank you for your information, sir, so far as it goes. I find
here the one paper which I especially require; and now if you please
to accept ten guineas as the price of the remainder, which you can ex-
amine before parting with them, I am willing to take them."
"Ten guineas is really so contemptible a sum, sir."
"It is offered for a most contemptible commodity. If you will take
the trouble to glance over those papers, you will perceive they are but
the letters of a libertine written to his venal instrument.
It is a cor-
respondence between Don Juan and Sangarelle, Mr. Blade."

"These letters might fetch me more money from Sir Everard Le-
strange himself, sir."
"If you think that, you had best keep them."
"Say fifty pounds, sir, and the letters are yours."
The little comedy which we had performed in the morning was now
repeated, and I finally consented to give twenty guineas for the re-
maining contents of the case. Amongst the letters I had found two
containing allusions to that villanous plot of which I had been the
victim, allusions which would hardly have been clear to a stranger,
but which must needs be sufficiently obvious to anyone familiar with
previous relations between myself and the writer.
"These shall justify me in the sight of Dorothea Lestrange,” I said
to myself, "if I survive an encounter with her husband."
