CHAPTER XXXVI. MARGERY.
MRS. HUNTER's lodgings commanded a view of the river, and were
not invaded by the noises of the street. They were comfortable and
orderly, but in no way remarkable. No cynic or critic could have
found material in their furniture or decorations, or in anything which
surrounded my foster-sister and told of her tastes and occupations,
for the strictures on the coarseness and meretriciousness of actresses,
their extravagance and vulgarity, their ignorance and their greed, such
as I had heard and read at that time, and have encountered more
frequently and fully since. Playbooks lay about, indeed; but there
were other books besides, and materials for women's work. I caught
sight of a cushion and some bobbins, such as Margery had learned to
use for lace-making when we were children; and the sight brought me.
another vision out of the past-of the door of our woodland cottage,
and the dear child's little figure on the doorstep, with the sunshine on
her curls, and her brown fingers moving among the threads, while I
distracted her not very fixed attention by many an idle and mischievous
device. Her fingers were not brown now, but as white as they were
shapely, and many a handsome ring sparkled upon them; while her
morning robe was trimmed with lace which even my untaught eye
discerned was not English made. There are minds in which memory
works by the aid of pictures, and others in which its operations find
their readiest auxiliaries in sounds or in perfumes. Mine is a mind of
the first category, and recollection always comes to me with every
accessory of form, colour, and position complete. The happy days of
my childhood in the warrener's lodge; the grim severe time of Mrs.
Grimshaw's rule over me; the memorable period which passed under
the eyes of my kind, beloved, lost patroness; the lurid, terrible, pic-
turesque epoch of my life in India,-each of these has many a picture
which at the bidding of memory flashes into form and colour; but not
one is more clear, more perfect, more constant in its recurrence than
that which shows me Margery and the room I found her in on that
bright spring day. And I think I know why-I think it was because
there, in that room and in her presence, I lost, for the first time, the
haunting sense of loneliness, the painful feeling that from a strange

land I had come back to a country in which I was a stranger, the
object of some hatred, but of no love. I had led a hard life in some
respects, and had seen death under horrible shapes, and many kinds of
danger; much of human wickedness and selfishness, mingled with much
bravery, heroism, and nobility: mine had been just the kind of ex-
perience which shallow thinkers would deem likely to do away with
sentiment, and harden all the nature which had passed through it.
But it was not so with me, nor do I believe it would have been so with
others of ordinary mould and capacity of heart and brain. I have
always held that a hard life, full of trials, with little external help,
and much demand on personal resolution and endurance, is hardening
only to exceptionally bad men. For myself, I knew that I had re-
turned with much-increased sensibilities, and yearnings of heart and
memory, quite apart from the strong and resentful purpose which
animated me against the man who had endeavoured to lay my life
waste, and had succeeded in carrying desolation into the lives of those
who were dearest to me. If, after a long and weary search, I had
found Margery as, in spite of her poor mother's trusting representa-
tion, I had feared I might find her, I should have rejoiced even then;
but to find her thus, as little harmed by the devilish wickedness of my
enemy and hers, as the story of the past made it possible she should
be, was an instalment of happiness and augury of success which I re-
ceived with gratitude.
While Margery had been endeavouring to get rid of Mr. Johnson, I
had taken note of all the features of the room, and had especially
remarked, upon the broad window-sill, a bow-pot of common country
ware, like that whereof the mugs were made in which Margery and
I had taken pride when we were children, filled with a profusion of
flowers. No dainty blossoms these, putting to shame their brown-and-
yellow earthenware receptacle; no costly flowers purchased by enthu-
siastic admirers of Mrs. Hunter's girlish grace as Juliet, or gay daring
humour and coquetry as Rosalind; but common flowers, yet strange to
see in London, where the luxury that money can purchase is oftener
found than the simply beautiful things which Nature gives without
price. These were cowslips and primroses, and the tiny starwort and
harebell of the hedges and the fields. There was eloquent testimony
to me of the unspoiled goodness of heart and fidelity of feeling of my
foster-sister, in this humble decoration of the great actress's sitting-
room.
"I have seen your mother, Margery," I said, when we had settled
down to talk with something like composure, and her woman had re-
ceived orders that no other visitor was to be admitted. "She did not
know me at first; and when she recognised me she was not certain what
manner of reception to give me, though she knew, as she afterwards
told me, that I had not brought her great trouble upon her. Still, I
was mixed up with it, and she could not see me without remembering

I was so, though she could not forget that I was almost like her own
child."
"It is strange," said Margery moodily, "that we two have brought
so much grief upon each other-I to you, in the wrong they made me
do you; you to me in first bringing Sir Everard across my path,
and-and-but no; the other wrong was of my own doing, and we
must not speak of it now."
I knew to what she alluded; I knew she had loved me with the
love I never could have given her-not even if I had first met her
as she was now, brilliant, beautiful, and famous. There was perfect
candour in her manner, perfect fearlessness in the glance of her liquid
beaming eyes. She had so loved me, she had been beguiled by that
love into the snare laid for my peace and my honour, and she had bit-
terly repented of her credulity and her consent; long repented, with
agony as heartfelt as the grief which had convulsed her when she had
knelt at my feet on that terrible day and implored the pardon I had
never hesitated to accord to her, and she had passionately deplored the
wrong which had been done me. But love in the sense in which she
had given it to me was over now, as much over as the grief which my
return had banished; and in establishing thorough confidence and per-
fect friendship with her, I should be doing no unfair act, nothing which
could bear any fruit of bitterness to her: this she made me understand
in every look and tone, and in a few pertinent though not precisely
plain words.
"It is wonderful," she said, "how efficacious hard work, steadily
done and persevered in, is to cure one of fancies, and how the cares of
life make one real and tolerant. Half at least of the sum of our
misery is wrought by our own imaginations; and not alone our own
misery, but others' too. If we could go back, Robert, you and I—
But it is vain to talk of that. My poor dear mother, I see her some-
times in a secret way; but my father I may not see, nor will he hear
my name mentioned. I think he loved me even better than my
mother did, and was prouder of me; and so he has felt the bitter
shame and disappointment more, and cannot forgive me. The bad
world has not so blinded me to better things as to prevent me from
understanding that. My father could not be made to comprehend
the place I have taken in the world, and how little the story of the
past means now; with him all I have done and suffered could not
avail."
"But, Margery, I promised your mother I would find you, and
bring you home. I know nothing of my child except that she loves
me,' she said; and I promised she should know."
"What would be the use, Robert? They would understand nothing
but that I was the betrayed, deceived mistress of one bad man, and the
nominal wife of another."
"No, Margery; you are not the latter. Philip Hay is dead."


"Dead!" she exclaimed. "He was not so bad as the other, his
master, his tempter; but it is an awful thing to think of such an
account as he had to give of his deeds."
"The agent of your misfortunes and of mine, but with germs of
good in him. When I tell you all about Philip Hay, you will not
wonder that I feel somewhat kindly towards his memory, after all."
Then I told my foster-sister in detail the story of which I had
given her the outline on the preceding night; and when I came to the
conclusion of it, I placed the certificate of her marriage with Philip
Hay in her hand.
She looked at the faded writing on the slip of paper with sadness,
and said:
"He pitied me, I think, though he was a villain. At all events,
Robert, this superfluous piece of wickedness has been fortunate for you.
My simple word, I suppose, would not have been sufficient to free you
from the trammels of that mock marriage."
She said "that," not "our;" and though there was regret, there was
no embarrassment in her tone and aspect.
"Not only so," I replied; "but the first use which we will make of
this document shall be to substantiate your story to your parents.
This is the proof that at least you have been a wife. I will show the
paper to your father myself; he will not refuse to look at it, and
listen to me."
66
'No, I think he will not, Robert; and so to you, whom I was
made to injure so deeply, I may come to owe the great relief and con-
solation of my life."
"But I too owe much to that injury."
"Yours was always a generous nature, Robert, and you have not
belied or changed it. Now tell me where you are living, and what you
are doing."
"I am living in the chambers in Brick-court where Philip Hay
found me, where the misery of my life really began; and I am doing
nothing."
"Nothing! Such was not your way of old."
"Nor would it be my way now, but that I can apply myself to
nothing while the score between me and Sir Everard Lestrange re-
mains unsettled. It is that which has brought me to England; and
is my business, the end, the aim, the meaning of my life."
"I should not have thought you could ever have made revenge
an object to be deliberately and steadily pursued. Mind, I am not
speaking for him, I am not thinking of him, in this, but of your-
self."
"Margery, this is less revenge than justice. Do not smile, as if
you thought I was trying by sophistry to blind myself to my own
motives, to make myself out to you better than I am; it is not
so, indeed.
This man has wronged, not me alone, but all who are


dear to me; not only the living, but the dead; my father's name, my
mother's honour, my own place in the world, were basely traduced by
him. And Lady Barbara! He caused her death, Margery. I don't
mean he murdered her, though I think my first feeling when I read
the account of that terrible calamity was a suspicion of him; but
his conduct broke her heart, and she died of it, and he robbed her
ere she was laid in her grave. The burglars who broke into Haute-
ville were his creatures; the job they did was done for him; and the
will which Lady Barbara made in my favour was their booty."
Margery listened to me with horror and astonishment, as I told
her what I had elicited from Mrs. Winbolt, and the result of my
observation of the bearing of Mrs. Grimshaw, and poor old Anthony's
melancholy condition. I found her more ready to be convinced of
the truth of my surmises than Mr. Swinfen had been; she had no
hesitation in suspecting a gentleman of so vile a deed, when the "gen-
tleman" was Sir Everard Lestrange.
"To think Lady Barbara should be thus treated by this man
and his father, for, remembering Sir Marcus's treatment of myself,
the horrible injustice of his conduct, the perverse twisting of evidence
of which he was guilty, I cannot acquit him of complicity in his son's
villany, would be intolerable to me, if I were in no way concerned
in the success of his evil deeds. I will never relax in my efforts to
convict and punish him."
"The will is destroyed, of course," said Margery. "No doubt he
did not make any delay in securing himself by its destruction."
"I conclude it is; but if I could prove that such a document
existed, and its nature, and then connect Sir Everard with its abstrac-
tion, I should have a case against him, which, though it would not
restore me to my rights, would ruin him. The first step to be taken
in this matter must be taken by you."
"By me!" exclaimed Margery. "I will do anything you bid me,
Robert; but how can I aid you? What is this first step?"
"The relinquishment of your present name, and the assumption of
that which is legally yours. You must make a formal announcement
that you are not Mrs. Hunter, but Mrs. Philip Hay. I will explain
the motive of this to your satisfaction. Lestrange does not know
Philip Hay is dead, and the mere possibility of his return to England
will alarm him so much, he will be thrown off his guard. Though the
poor fellow who is gone was not mixed up in this transaction of the
will, he was concerned in so many of Sir Everard's villanies that he
must dread his reappearance, especially with the deadly animosity of
revenge for such atrocious injury in his breast, as the most terrible
thing which could befall him. He will endeavour to find out from you
whether Philip lives and is in England; and in such a state of mind
as his will be, we may safely calculate on his committing some impru-
dence which may furnish a clue to his accomplices. If he finds out


Mr. Blade, and applies to him, he will discover, not Philip indeed, but
me, whom he must dread still more; and he will learn that I have
been put, by Philip's order, in possession of all his papers, and espe-
cially of that marriage-certificate which renders his worst machination
harmless. My having made no attempt to confront him will be natu-
rally more alarming to him than my making him aware of my pre-
sence; and if he learns my visit to Hauteville, reported in the way
in which it would be by Mrs. Grimshaw, he will perceive at once I
am on his track, and his common sense will tell him that, though he
may be secure against any possibility of my gaining restitution or re-
paration from him, I am certain of my revenge. You see now, Mar-
gery, do you not ?"
"Yes, I see, and I will do what you require whenever you give me
the word. But, Robert-" she hesitated here, and played with the
tags on her dress-" have you thought of Lady Lestrange in all this?
I ought not to speak of her, perhaps; one like me should not judge
for one like her; but if her husband be disgraced and ruined, a part of
the disgrace and ruin must fall on her."
I felt abashed before the superior instincts, the loftier feelings, of
this woman, who had been so wronged and had done no wrong, who
retained the pure and noble inspirations of her sex.
"I don't think you would be revenged on her because others de-
ceived you basely in her name, or because, when you were quite lost
to her, and everyone was against her, and when there was no other
means of procuring peace and decent treatment for Lady Barbara-for
that's my reading of the riddle, Robert-she married another. Re-
member, she believed you had married me while you were courting
her, trying in every way to win her ove, and induce her to make
the great sacrifice of disappointing and displeasing everyone for your
sake. If you had only disappeared; if she had been able to think of
you as only lost to her by exile or death, it might have been other-
wise; but she had falsehood, deliberate falsehood, to resent, remember,
and Adolphine at hand to instil the belief into her mind."
Her words carried sharp pain with them; how true they were !
And yet, must I renounce my purpose? Was I to forego the great
object of my life, and let this villain go unpunished, for Dorothea's
sake? Had she no injuries, which I should avenge in punishing him
for those inflicted upon me? Was she indeed identified with this man
so completely that I could not strike at him without wounding her?
It was keen intolerable pain to me to think of her as one must think
of a wife, absolutely identified with her husband. I answered hastily:
"I am sure he ill-treats her; I am sure she is wretched with him.
I know from his own words, even apart from his pursuit of you, that
he is grossly, scandalously unfaithful to her. Good God! to think of
her, sneered at and pitied by other women as the neglected wife of Sir
Everard Lestrange!"

Margery smiled, not gaily, but just a little mockingly.
"Don't you think she is likely to be rather envied too? The world
says Lady Lestrange is the gayest of the gay; no rout, no drum, no
ridotto, no fashionable gathering of any kind, but she is there, and
the best-dressed woman in the crowd. Her coach for the birthday
is always a sight, and her taste in pugs and china is proverbial. They
say she plays eagerly, and has uncommon luck with the cards; in short,
she is quite a model woman of fashion. I don't think she needs pity
very much."
"And just now you were pleading for her, Margery, and pointing
out how she was not to be blamed, but pitied, for marrying a man she
did not, could not love."
"Yes, and I am not inconsistent; but I understand the world-the
world in which women such as she live-better than you. No doubt
it was very dreadful at first; but she has been married to him a long
time now, and especially as she cannot see much of him—for they are
rarely together in public, and yet each is perpetually abroad-it is likely
she has got over all the misery of it, and goes on just as other women
of fashion. Do you suppose seven years have so changed yourself and
me, but have left her precisely as she was at their beginning, with
all the imaginativeness and sensitiveness, and power of suffering, one
has when one is very young?"
Margery was only uttering my own thoughts, only giving expres-
sion to what had passed through my own mind, as I turned away from
the house in St. James's-square; but the sound of them was very
distasteful to me, and the idea that the woman I loved had "got
over all the misery of it," like this other woman, who had loved me,
and certainly had got over her misery, was the hardest thing to
bear now left in my life. There came over me a sudden craving to
know this, to be quite sure whether it was so or not; a longing for
the sight of her, which I had not felt in such intensity for many a
day. Happily for me; for if that desperate intolerable thirst had
assailed me at the other side of the world, I know not how I should
have borne it. I could talk to Margery no longer; I must have time
to think of all this afresh-to decide whether my cherished design
should be persisted in or abandoned. Ah, how easy it would have been
but for her! To confront my enemy, my base dastardly foe, scoundrel,
liar, seducer, thief-to insult him and force him to fight-and then
to kill him! Yes, I knew I should kill him; I could afford to trust
the equity of Heaven for so much. These were my thoughts, as I took
credit with myself for cherishing designs of lofty justice, and had in
reality the mind of a murderer. But there lay hopeless separation
from Dorothea, as I needed to remind myself every time my thoughts
took that direction. The most injured of his victims was his most
potent defence.


CHAPTER XXXVII.
I FULFIL MY PROMISE TO PHILIP HAY.
IF my mind had been less engaged, my spirits lighter, and my
heart more free, I might have passed my time in London at this period
very agreeably. My kind friend, Mr. Watts, had charged me with
letters for friends of his in town, and the Colonel had bidden me see
to certain private matters for him; besides which there was some lively
and kindly curiosity afloat among the fashionable and middle-class
circles of society concerning the affairs of John Company, and there
were many who looked upon a survivor of the Black Hole, and one
who had actually seen the monster Suraja Doulah, as a rare and
curious personage; so that I did not lack acquaintances, and had in-
vitations enough to fill up my time. But of the latter I availed my-
self sparingly, and with the former I consorted but little.
My mind was so much troubled and disturbed, that I could not rest
in the satisfaction of the material good fortune which had befallen me;
a constant sense of the injury which had been done me, and of the
impossibility of laying the old thwarted love aside out of my memory,
haunted me. I find it easy to recall the feelings, the motives, the im-
pulses of that time, but not the things which filled up my days and
hours. I know that I cannot always have been occupied with my
thoughts of Dora, with my plans for the detection and discomfiture of
Sir Everard, with my brooding over the past; and yet, in retrospect, it
seems to me that it must have been so, so little beside do I remember
with reality or vividness. Some of the pleasantest associations of that
period of my life were mainly attributable to my residence in the
Temple. In the society of that gentlest and most genial, frankest and
most unsuspecting of natures, purest, brightest, and most versatile
among the many men of genius with whom it has been my good for-
tune to meet, my dear friend Oliver Goldsmith, I passed many pleasant
hours, always admiring his sweet temper and kindness of heart, and
finding his very weaknesses charming, in a greater degree than the
more disciplined and elevated characters of the famous men who were
his companions, and who patronised him too much for my taste.
There is Mr. Garrick, for instance, who hath of his genius and his
worth no more ardent admirer than I am; yet sure his great insight,
which made him so accomplished a personator of character and fashion,
did not serve him truly in the case of Oliver. The truth is, I had an
almost foolish fondness for the man, who seemed, for simplicity and
kindly belief in everything that was good, a child among men; and his
untimely death stands out prominently in my registry of sorrows. Not
even to him, however, did I speak of the matters which filled my heart;
for among his good gifts reticence was not, and the mode of the time
was not delicate as regarded the handling of women's names. I heard

enough of Sir Everard Lestrange and his manner of life to know that
if it were noised abroad that any man in the town regarded his lady
with more than common admiration and tenderness, it would speedily
be said that she was consoled for the flagrant infidelities of her hus-
band, the which she was reported to bear with a tranquil and uncon-
scious-seeming pride, which it was difficult for me to picture in the
timid and girlish Dora. But I had never seen the school in which
women of fashion were trained, and its ways were strange to me. So I
kept her name unspoken, and no one but Margery in all London—
no one but the player-woman, as I heard her contemptuously styled
-knew that Lady Lestrange was anything to me.
I had not yet seen her, though I frequented the usual resorts of
the world; and each day it seemed to me that I must meet her some-
where. But my foster-sister explained how it was that I did not. Lady
Lestrange was ill, had taken cold on her way to town, and had kept
her room since then. I sent to inquire for her frequently, but not in
my own name. It was easy and harmless to use the names of the
people whom I met daily, and who all knew Lady Lestrange. She was
not seriously ailing, and Dr. James had no anxiety about her. I con-
trived to hear his opinion from himself, for just then Goldsmith fell
ill, and the doctor, visiting him, found me by his bedside, and, not-
withstanding his pain and fever, there was more gossip than was
reasonable. So, being in an irresolute mood of mind, I did not give
Margery the word I had warned her of for some days, and in the
mean time set about a task with some satisfaction in it, which, to tell
the truth, I rarely found in anything at that time.
I had not been able to get the sum of poor Phil's pay and prize-
money settled before I left Calcutta, but I had placed the matter in
safe hands, and was under no uneasiness about the claims of the dead
soldier being attended to, at the dilatory rate at which such things
are done by the officials; but I could not allow his sisters to wait for
the little pittance which I believed they must sorely need. I had been
careful to write to Mistress Lettice Hay, at the address I found in poor
Phil's pocket-book, telling her of her brother's gallant end, and that
I had closed his eyes, and seen his burial; and I had had an acknow-
ledgment of my letter, in a few meek lines, such as women who have
known only sombre lives write in their trouble, as though trouble in
some sort were always familiar to them, and they were never unready
to say to the Great Disposer of events, "Thy will be done."
It was on a fine spring morning, nearing the richer splendour of
the summer, that I rode to Wanstead, through the deep lanes, and by
the borders of Epping Forest, which also had a bad name as a resort
of highwaymen and footpads, carrying in my mind a vision of the sterile
plains, the wearisome roads, and the cloudless pitiless skies of Bengal,
and felt that I had never before really understood all the beauties of
the English fields and hedgerows. I think such quiet and rich loveli-

ness of nature makes a light heart lighter, and aids a heavy one to bear
its burden.
It was yet some time before noon, when I came to a village inn, on
a green where four roads met, and there were many ancient trees with
wide-spreading arms and profuse foliage; and here I put my horse up,
and learned of the ostler that the path to the right would bring me to
my destination. I found within some hundreds of yards a row of
small cottages, with overhanging roofs and little pointed windows,
with twisted chimneys, and rough fronts crossed with beams of black
painted wood, which had a sort of resemblance to the warrener's lodge
at Hauteville, but lacked its substantial comfortable air. A low paling,
over which sweetbriers and woodbine grew, divided the cottages from
the road. I turned in at one of the small gates at random, seeing a
woman's bending figure at a window, the hands moving rapidly about
some bright-coloured stuff, and knocked at the door.
A tall thin wan-faced but far from ill-looking woman answered
my summons. She was plainly dressed in black, and had exactly the
sombre and subdued look which I had associated in my mind with
Philip Hay's sister. And Philip Hay's sister she proved to be.
"Please to walk in, sir," she said. "This is the place you are seek-
ing. I am Lettice Hay."
small
I crossed the narrow passage at her bidding, and entered
parlour, very barely furnished, but clean and neat. The space was
still more restricted by a large frame, of the kind in which I had often
seen women's needlework, embroidery or otherwise, contained, and
which was occupied by a piece of red satin. Several threads depended
from the frame, and the satin was traversed by rows of stitching form-
ing diamond shapes, which kind of pattern I had heard called "quilt-
ing," and had remarked to be very modish. This lumbering object
explained the movements of the hands I had seen in the window.
There was no one in the room, which had a trim and solitary appear-
ance.
"I daresay you divine who I am," I began, "but I had better in-
troduce myself. I am Robert Ainsleigh."
"I thought so, sir. Please to be seated. You are very welcome,
and this visit is another kindness added to your letter."
Her manner was plain, simple, but unembarrassed, and she had
the unmistakable appearance of perfect worth and respectability. Poor
Philip's erratic ways and desultory morals had not extended to his sis-
ter, that was evident. But he had spoken of two sisters. Where was
the other?
"You were very good to my brother, Mr. Ainsleigh, and it has
consoled me much to know that he had so true a friend with him at his
last hour. But, indeed, Philip was one to win friends."
I was not absolutely without experience of the extraordinary credu-
lity of women, and their tendency to believe all that is good of their

male belongings, even against the evidence of their own personal
experience, but this was quite an astonishing instance of that amiable
feminine trait. No doubt this good hardworking secluded woman
entertained altogether ideal notions concerning her brother. So much
the better; I certainly would not dispel the illusion. But, remember-
ing the ill deeds he had done in my regard, it seemed a strange and
cynical turn of fate that his sister should be pouring eulogium upon
him, and bitter regrets for his loss, into my ear. Nevertheless, there
was a great deal which I could say, without any straining of the truth,
for Philip's memory, and in his praise; and I said it; noting curiously
how his sister's pale face got a tinge of red upon it, and how the
whole frame of the commonplace woman, who had lived so far remote
from stirring scenes and great interests, quivered with excitement. I
softened the horrors of the Black Hole, while I spoke of Philip's
bravery and endurance; and the tears with which Lettice Hay heard
the story of the fight in which Philip fell had pride as well as sorrow
for their source. Then I approached the subject of his last request to
me, and repeated the words he had spoken. She heard me to the end,
and replied:
"My brother was always careful for his sisters, Mr. Ainsleigh, and
compassionate to all women. He had not much pity for men; he was
used to say, they could always help themselves and get through the
world somehow, let it be ever such rough and hard work; but the poor
women were not meant to provide for themselves, and helpless. I
don't quite think that. I have had to help myself-only myself, of
late-and I have done it somehow."
66
Only yourself," I repeated; "Philip spoke of his sisters."
"Yes," she answered, " and he thought he was speaking correctly;
but before that day, Betty had been taken away from this present evil
world. My sister has been dead these eighteen months."
It struck me then as strange that this woman, who had let me see
plain enough how much she lamented her brother, whose life and death
had been in places so far removed from her, was quite calm and cheer-
ful in her reference to her sister, who had left her solitary. But I
have noticed since, among women of this sombre type, that they accept
the death of women as the best thing that can happen, expecting no-
thing good for them from life, and holding that all the world's prizes
fall naturally and of right to men, without their dreaming of disputing
the justice of such an allotment.
"And you are quite alone here ?" I said.
"Yes, I am quite alone."
"Your brother charged me to deliver to you the sum due to him
in pay and prize-money, and I have come here to-day prepared to do
so."
Lettice Hay looked at the small packet, in which were notes for
one hundred and fifty pounds, with anxiety, which I detected.


"I fear the delay in sending you this money has been inconve-
nient," I said.
"No, not quite that. My sister's illness, being the wasting sick-
ness, put me to many charges, more than our general way of life, and
the doctor's bills and her burial-fees were heavy for me.
I am trying
to get out of debt, and shall soon succeed, no doubt; but it is not easy
to do so, and live."
There was no tone of undignified complaint in the way she said.
this, only the free statement one would make to a person proved to be
trustworthy and well-disposed. I wondered how it was that Philip
Hay's sister lived; so, putting my question on the score of being in
a manner her brother's executor, I made bold to ask her.
without any embarrassment, pointing to the work-frame :
She replied
"I live by my needle. It is not such a poor trade as a gentleman
like you may suppose; and I have constant employment, for which, at
the beginning, I was indebted to Philip. He spoke for me to Madame
Adolphine years ago, and I have worked at the quilting for her ever
since, and been recommended to others. You don't know what I
mean, perhaps, Mr. Ainsleigh-it is the kind of work put upon the
satin and silk petticoats which are the mode."
"That is a petticoat upon the frame?-a rich court petticoat,
I should suppose. But how did Philip happen to have the ear of a
fashionable milliner like this Madame Adolphine ?"
"She was not a fashionable milliner then, but own woman to a
young lady of great fortune, who married Philip's patron, Mr. Le-
strange. I believe he is Sir Everard now, and the young lady is Lady
Lestrange; but I still work for her, though Madame Adolphine has
been for a long time in a large way of business. That petticoat is for
Lady Lestrange."
I touched the soft shining satin with my hand-I would have given
much to be alone, that I might have touched it with my lips. What
a fool I was ay indeed, but at least wise enough to know it.
"I knew Lady Lestrange formerly," I said, "and remember to
have seen this Adolphine, her waiting-woman. Where is her shop ?"
"It is not a shop, sir-she is too modish for that; she has show-
rooms in Bond-street, and I have been told the fine ladies go there in
crowds of an afternoon, to see the fashions and drink chocolate. I
have never seen the place-I have not been in London for years; my
orders and my materials come to me by the carrier."
"You do not know Lady Lestrange by sight, I suppose ?"
"No, I have never seen her; but folks say she is a beauty and a toast,
and very good and charitable. Philip often spoke of her in old times."
"Is this Madame Adolphine the only person who employs you?"
"No, I have some custom besides, and do a good deal for Mrs.
Winbolt, of Long-acre. I had the quilting of a petticoat for the
Princess of Wales last week."

"I know Mrs. Winbolt; she was employed by my old friend and
protector, Lady Barbara Lestrange, of whom Philip has doubtless
spoken to you."
Nothing more of any note passed during our interview, and I
quitted the cottage, carrying with me a curiously ingenious lavender-
ball, shaped like a pouncet-box, of her own making, with which Lettice
Hay presented me, to be laid among my shirts and ruffles. So I left
her to her quiet industrious life, resolving to befriend her to the utmost
of my power, and, when my leave should have expired, to make some
small provision, before returning to Bengal, for the future of my ene-
my's, my friend's, sister, almost the only person living who had any
claim on me.
It was late in the afternoon when I reached town, and having put
up my horse, I sauntered through Bond-street, looking for the show-
rooms of Madame Adolphine. I was not long in finding them, and
testing the accuracy of Lettice Hay's statement concerning the fashion
and popularity of this Frenchwoman; for I could hardly get along the
pavement for the jostling of the chairmen carrying purchasers or the
curious to this vanity mart; and as the door stood open, I could see
the stair crowded with ascending figures. The unscrupulous wretch
who had aided in working me wrong and misery was apparently doing
a prosperous business and flourishing in the world.
I dined, and went to the play. Margery was superb as Belvidera,
and I had the advantage of observing those points in his rendering of
Jaffier on which poor Mr. Johnson fondly believed he had provoked
the envy of Mr. Garrick. I might have contented myself with simply
laughing at his pretensions, had I merely known them and nothing
beyond, for his acting was of a commonplace kind, and his appear-
ance was in no way remarkable; but I protest the honest passion of the
man elevated and refined him in my eyes, so that I observed him
with real pleasure. After the performance I went to the stage-door,
where I rightly conjectured I should find him waiting to see Mrs.
Hunter, who usually went home in a chair. Mr. Johnson acknowledged
our slight acquaintance by a very curt bow and a decided scowl; but
I was determined to overcome his distaste to me, and accosted him, as
if I had not noticed his reluctance, with a remark upon the number
and appreciativeness of the audience, and a complimentary reference
to his own acting. Mr. Johnson fell into the harmless trap, and we
were soon walking away from the theatre arm-in-arm towards a neigh-
bouring tavern, where I had previously ordered supper. He would not
stir until he had seen Mrs. Hunter; and she saluted us graciously as
she passed, directing a glance towards me, whose pleased and grate-
ful meaning I understood.
I cannot say I found Mr. Johnson a pleasant companion. He
talked incessantly, but only on two subjects: the indifference of the
world to true talent, as exemplified in his own obscurity, while mere

quacks and charlatans took the town by storm, and won fame and
fortune; and the charms and virtues of Mrs. Hunter. I tired of the
former sooner than of the latter subject, but I hope I disguised my
weariness, if I did, my efforts were rewarded by his beginning to talk
about Sir Everard Lestrange. Having formally "hoped that I was
not acquainted with that incomparable villain," but in a manner which
led me to believe that he would not have materially modified his tone
if I had been, he went on:
"He is a traitor to every sentiment of right, sir; an unscrupulous
traducer, to whom nothing is sacred. I protest I have no such con-
tempt for the poor thief who steals for his living, as for this fine gentle-
man, who boasts of a woman who was always far above him, because
she is an actress and has that to contend against in the opinion of the
world, and because she has no one to defend her."
"Is Sir Everard Lestrange quite sure of that?"
-
"Why, how can it be otherwise? Mrs. Hunter has no father and
no brother; and though I would defend her with my life, and ask no
better, more delightful task than to cram the lie down this man's scoun-
drelly throat, I could only injure her by my unauthorised interference.
If she would marry me, Mr. Ainsleigh, if she would marry me,
and give me the right to protect, to defend her! If she would
marry me, and break with all these fools and fribbles and worse, who
surround her, and spoil her own frank gentle nature! Do you not
think, Mr. Ainsleigh"- the change from the excited tone in which he
had been speaking to one thoroughly commonplace and business-like
was almost ludicrous-" she could not do better than marry me?"
"That is an awkward question to answer. I think the lady only
can be a judge in such a case."
He looked at me with hostile suspicion, which I saw at once, and
determined to turn aside.
"Mrs. Hunter and I are the best friends in the world; we are, in-
deed, connections, and have known one another intimately from our
childhood; but I could not press her upon such a point. Indeed, judg-
ing by what she has said to me, I think it is very unlikely that she will
ever marry again."
"Again! then she really is a widow, she really was married? I
always thought she had fallen innocently into some fellow's power who
had deceived her. It did not seem to me that she ever had the ease
of mind of a lawful wife and a widow in the course of nature."
"I assure you, Mr. Johnson," I replied seriously, "I was well
acquainted with the person whom Mrs. Hunter married, and that he
died of a wound received in battle in India; I was present at his death;
and though Mrs. Hunter has not hitherto borne his name, I think it is
very probable she will shortly assume it. And-this in particular for
your private ear, Mr. Johnson-I have reason to think it would be sin-
gularly displeasing to Sir Everard Lestrange to hear that name, espe-

cially if he could be kept in ignorance of the death of the bearer
of it."
"Then, by G-!" he exclaimed, striking the table with his clenched
hand, so that the glasses rang, "he shall hear it! I will take care
of that. He shall not sneer and lie away her reputation any longer;
though he is a great man and I am nobody, I can put a stop to his
pursuit of her. You can prove what you tell me, Mr. Ainsleigh?”
"Certainly; anyone who doubts Mrs. Hunter's marriage may be
referred to me. He is very persevering, is he not?"
"Sir, it is more than perseverance, it is persecution. Not content
with being in the theatre every night, he follows her in her walks, and
if she goes abroad in a coach he waylays her. Can anything be more
impertinent or cowardly? Surely nothing. And he glories in the
indecency of his pursuit. Some time ago, Jarvis, the box-keeper, told
me that Lady Lestrange having places for herself and a friend, Sir
Everard hired a box immediately over hers, and made himself more
than ever conspicuous to all the house in his admiration and applause."
My blood boiled within me at this fresh instance of the indignity to
which Dora was exposed by the worthless wretch who had won such a
prize. I wondered whether she had any idea who Mrs. Hunter was;
any knowledge of the brilliant actress's identity with the cottage girl
for whose fate she had felt such pity and such indignation directed
against me. My companion went on talking almost unheard, while my
mind busied itself with this conjecture; and presently I thought of an
association through which such knowledge might have reached Lady
Lestrange. Adolphine! That she had access to Dora I knew from
Lettice Hay, and that she knew all about Margery I did not doubt.
She could not forget the poor girl whom she had hoped to cajole and
ruin, any more than her employer could forget me. Much as time and
suffering had changed me, in spite of the transformation of the youth
into the wayworn man, bronzed by tropical suns and aged by danger
and hardship, I knew that, whenever the moment should come when he
and I should be face to face, Sir Everard Lestrange would have no
difficulty in recognising Robert Ainsleigh.
When Mr. Johnson took his way to his lodgings, at an advanced
hour of the night, he and I had become very friendly together. I had
disarmed his hostility by allaying his suspicions respecting the nature
of my feelings towards the goddess of his idolatry. This poor gentle-
man suspected everybody; nothing was so impossible to him to credit
as that any man could behold Mrs. Hunter without falling in love with
her. I believe he did not even exempt Mr. Garrick, who in truth had
but a tepid liking for Mrs. Hunter, and who cared only, since Mrs.
Woffington's time, for "the divine Violetta," as I had heard Mrs. Gar-
rick called. I had not at this time seen that lady, but I came to know
later how well she merited the epithet.
On the following day, late in the afternoon, when the fine ladies had

vacated the premises, I presented myself at Madame Adolphine's show-
rooms, and requested to see her on particular business, but did not give
my name. The servant showed me into a front room, and saying that
Madame Adolphine was engaged, but he would let her know presently,
left me.
I think he did not apprise his mistress that anyone was there,
for I heard no door opened for several minutes, during which I was
aware of a conversation being carried on between two persons in the
adjoining room, and making itself audible through the folding doors.
The voices were those of a man and a woman, and they were using the
French tongue.
The tones of both were familiar to my ear, though
one had been unheard by me for many years, and they conveyed an
impression that there was dispute, not loud, yet fierce, and concentrated
anger between the speakers. The following sentences reached me:
"You are determined, then ?"
"I am determined. Nothing shall induce me to give it up."
"You are foolish, Adolphine. It is a large sum I offer you.'
"I am wise, on the contrary, Sir Everard. It is a large sum, but it
would be the last, and that is not my bargain. I mean to have many
such sums."
•
"Take care. You had better not provoke me."
"I heed your threats not in the least, nor your anger. It is for me
to threaten. Hush! there's someone in the next room."
"There is no one there: you say so, because you want to escape
this. I tell you there is danger."
"To you, perhaps; not to me. I am safe, either way."
I waited for no more; I did not choose to encounter my enemy
then, until I had taken counsel with myself, and perhaps with Margery.
I went softly down the stairs; and telling the servant I would call
again, got out of the house unperceived.

