CHAPTER XXXII. I ACQUIRE CERTAINTY.
I HAD the happiness to win my father's release ftom Colonel Clive
through the intercession of my ever-kind friend Mr. Watts; and this
favour was but the signal for our parting, with only the vaguest hope
of meeting again, when or where we dared not speculate.
I think my father's heart yearned towards me in those few days
of frequent intercourse which we enjoyed at Muxadavad, and that it
grieved him to bid me farewell.
"You will go back to England, Robert, and I to France, whenever
my regiment returns thither, always supposing I live to accompany it.
I will give you an address in the city of Paris whence a letter is sure
to reach me sooner or later, if I am above ground; and you must tell
me where I can write to you in London. Stay; under cover to Mr.
Swinfen. That will be a safe address, will it not?"
"The best in the world, sir; and, indeed, I think the only one I
could give you. And now tell me, sir,-I am a young man, and you
yourself in the prime of life; Fortune may yet favour one or both of
us;—if I can ever make a home in England, will you come and share
it ?"
"A home, Robert! What does that mean? 'Tis a word I never
could understand. A roving devil entered me when I was a boy, and
has tugged at my heartstrings ever since, dragging me now here, now
there, by land and sea. I once shared a garret with thy mother,
poor devoted soul; and if I could have got bread for her and thee,
should not have deserted it. Since then I have been a wanderer,
with a past so sad, I dare not look back upon it, and with a blank for
my future. Nay, Robert, do not look so sadly at me. If I live to be
a battered old graybeard, and thou wilt give me a corner at thy
hearth, I will come and smoke my pipe there, and tell stories of
Lauffeld and Bergen-op-Zoom, St. Thomé and Gingee, and dandle thy
little ones on my feeble old knees. But that is a long way to look
forward. In the mean time be sure that I love thee."
And so we parted. One gift I was able to offer my father as a
memento of this strange meeting, and I doubt if all Omichund's jewels
would have seemed to him a treasure so precious. I had contrived,
since our first encounter, to get Lady Barbara's miniature copied on
ivory by a Hindoo. The colours were somewhat too vivid, and the

stippling, though performed with an amazing neatness, lacked the
softness of Miss Kauffman or Cosway; but poor as the art was, the
likeness was a fair one, and the gift was received with rapture.
There now came a kind of lull in the affairs of this province,
though the horizon was by no means cloudless. In the first expansive
impulse of gratitude, or perchance with the hope that by rewarding
the chief he might escape some part of his engagements to the sub-
ordinates, Meer Jaffier presented Colonel Clive with a sum of money that
I have heard computed at one hundred and eighty thousand pounds.
This gift our hero took without scruple, but refused presents of a yet
larger amount from the Seats, and other wealthy inhabitants of the
capital. Nay, had he been of the unscrupulous nature which his ene-
mies loved to depict him, there are no limits to the wealth he might
have acquired, or to the power he might have seized. When he was
afterwards called upon to defend his acceptance of Meer Jaffier's
bounty, he did it with a boldness that gave evidence of a clear con-
science, and with a logic that none could dispute.
In Calcutta, where of late had prevailed discontent and anxiety,
there now arose a spirit of universal rejoicing. Fortunes that had
been thought destroyed for ever were now restored, and the sunshine
of prosperity illumined a city where Desolation had long held her
gloomy reign. I think at this juncture, while the money won from
Meer Jaffier's reluctance, by him alone, was pouring into the Com-
pany's treasury, the people whom Robert Clive had redeemed from
despair entertained some faint sense of gratitude for his services. Yet
even at this early stage the spirit of dissension had arisen. The distri-
bution of the donations to the army and navy was not made without
a display of ill-feeling on the part of the recipients, and a small body
of military officers protested against an equal division of the Nabob's
bounty with the officers and sailors of the squadron which had ac-
companied the army to Plassey. These malcontents Clive was com-
pelled to remind, with that undaunted frankness which was natural
to him, that a sum of money obtained from the Nabob solely by his
negotiation was not a matter of right, or property to be disposed of by
their vote.
"So very far from that," wrote the Colonel in a letter, of which a
copy was forwarded by him to Mr. Watts, "it is now in my power to
return to the Nabob the money already advanced, and leave it to his
option whether he will perform his promise or not. You have stormed
no town and found the money there; neither did you find it in the
plains of Plassey after the defeat of the Nabob. In short, gentlemen,
it pains me to remind you that what you are to receive is entirely
owing to the care I took of your interest."
He then went on to declare that he would consent to no injustice
towards the navy, and begged to retract his promise of negotiating the
payment of the Nabob's bounty.

This speedily brought these discontented gentlemen to the dust,
and they were as cordially forgiven as they had been sharply repri-
manded.
And now occurred an event which shed a gloom over our victory,
in the sudden death of that brave and honourable seaman Admiral
Watson, who perished of a putrid fever on the 3d of August, and
within six weeks of our victory at Plassey.
It was shortly after this calamity that the dearest wish of my soul
was fulfilled, and I found myself free to return to England. My
humble services, and the real dangers which I had endured at Mux-
adavad, were deemed by Mr. Watts and the committee worthy of a
reward I should never have dreamed of; and my patron surprised me
one morning by the gift of bills for three thousand pounds.
"It was the Colonel's doing, Robert," said Mr. Watts, when I
expressed my surprise at this bounty; "he said you deserved as much
as that for your spirited journey to Meer Jaffier's palace, and as much
more for having been through the fire with me, to say nothing of your
service as a volunteer at Plassey. There were some black looks among
our friends of the select committee when he said this, as you may guess,
and they were for giving you six months' extra pay as a sufficient
reward for having lived for several months in daily peril of impale-
ment or decapitation. Upon this the Colonel swore that you should
have the money, even if it must needs come out of his own purse.
'And it is not the first time I have stood between you and a meanness,
gentlemen,' he added, in his grandest manner. Of course this brought
them to their senses; for though I daresay they would have had no
objection to the Colonel's rewarding you from his own pocket, they
have a great terror of offending him. So the item was passed with a
smothered groan: Three thousand pounds sterling to Mr. Robert
Ainsleigh, clerk and interpreter."
27
"I know not how to thank the Colonel, or you, sir."
"Nay, Robert, 'tis no more than you deserve; for you have been
vastly useful. But this money is not to be your sole reward. In
acknowledgment of your services at Plassey, the Colonel intends giving
you the rank of ensign, with two years' leave of absence. I told him
you were very eager to obtain military rank."
66
"O sir," I cried, fairly overcome by such thoughtful kindness,
"this is too much!" I could say no more; this shower of gifts
almost bewildered me. I was free to return to England, an ensign
in the Honourable East India Company's service; a rank that was
modest enough, but one to which Everard Lestrange could not deny
the right of a gentleman. I was in a position to prove my legitimacy,
to annul my hateful marriage; and I held in my hands the nucleus of
a decent fortune. What more could I have asked? What more!-if
Dora had still been free! But, alas, she was lost to me for ever, since,
should any encounter between her husband and myself prove fatal to

him, she was of a nature too noble to permit her acceptance of a hand
stained with his blood, however fairly he might come by his death,
however dearly she might love his slayer.
"How dare I think of her as still loving me?" I asked myself
angrily. "Because life has stood still for me since the hour in which
I was severed from her, am I so weak a fool as to suppose time has
made no change in her? Nor are our positions in any manner identical,
for while I have guarded her image pure and stainless, she has been
taught to think of me as a liar and a villain, unworthy of so much as
one thought of hers."
I told myself this, and yet I longed with no less eagerness to return
to Europe, to look once more upon the face that had been with me in
so many an exile's dream of home. When I reached England, I might
hear of Mrs. Lestrange abroad, at St. Petersburg, at Hanover, at
Venice-wherever the diplomatic service might take her husband; but
in whatever country she might be, if she still lived upon this earth, I
was determined to see her, to prove to her that I had never been the
false wretch my enemies had taught her to think me.
If she still lived! Chilling as a sudden blast from the frozen pole
came the thought that she might be dead. From mortality's common
foe neither youth nor beauty would exempt her; and there was never
an English newspaper came to me that did not contain the tidings of
some unexpected doom--a husband swept off in the prime of manhood
by a fever, a family extinguished by malignant sore-throat. Death was
ever busy among the homes of the great, and medical science seemed
powerless to cope with the destroyer. Her name I had never seen
among the ranks of the dead; but many events may escape the know-
ledge of an exile who thinks himself fortunate if he sees a newspaper
or a London magazine once in six months.
I sailed for England in the Prince Edward, a noble vessel, which
performed the voyage in less than seven months. Yet even this transit,
rapid as it was compared with the progress of the Hecate, seemed slow
to my impatience. No longer was I cooped in a Pandemonium between
decks; I now enjoyed all the luxuries permitted to the sea-voyager;
but I should have been inhuman had I not sometimes visited the lower
deck, on which numerous disabled soldiers were being conveyed back
to England. With these poor wretches I spent some time daily, and
was enabled to obtain certain small indulgences for them from the
captain, a very superior person to the brute with whom it had been my
ill-luck to sail on board the Hecate.
It was bleak March weather when I landed at Portsmouth; but no
words can describe the rapture with which I inhaled the chill wind of
my native country, and gazed on the mean housetops and steeples of
the little naval town, with all its common sights and sounds. The
dingy inn where I put up for the night seemed a palace, and I was


delighted with the novel sensation of being somewhat unceremoniously
served by one free-and-easy waiter, instead of the stately crowd of
slavish oriental servants, who attended the dinner-table of Mr. Watts
and myself as if it had been a banquet of the gods. I cannot, how-
ever, go so far as to say that the steak which composed my dinner
seemed to me a happy exchange for the pilaus and curries, the various
fish, fruits, and vegetables of Hindostan ; but I was in no humour to
be critical as to what I ate, being in a fever of impatience that deprived
me of all appetite.
I started for London at daybreak next morning, on the top of a
stage-coach, which seemed to me a thing of supernatural speed after
the wearisome slowness of a palanquin ; but even by this rapid mode of
travelling I did not reach the city till the dead of night, and was fain
to await the advent of morning at an inn in the Borough, where I was
put into a room looking out on a covered gallery, much like that where
I had slept on my first coming to London. Nor did I sleep more
soundly than on that never-to-be-forgotten night now, as then, I
came friendless to a strange city, and though I carried a small fortune
in my pocket, I think I would have gladly bartered my three thousand
pounds for the certainty that one friend would welcome my return with
affectionate delight.
I breakfasted as early as London habits would allow, and found
myself in the streets at an hour when the city had still a half-awakened
look, shutters scarcely unclosed, and stout country wenches bawling,
"Milk, maids below!" at every area. On London-bridge I found
workmen busy taking down the ruinous old houses which here impeded
the thoroughfare, narrowing the roadway to but twenty feet, and in
some places only twelve feet. I was not sorry to see this reformation;
for though the effect of these old many-gabled houses overhanging the
river, like a street suspended by some magical enchantment betwixt
sky and water, was very pleasing to the lover of the picturesque, the
narrow space allowed for all kinds of traffic was a most serious
nuisance, and the cause of many accidents. This improvement, which
I thus saw in its commencement, progressed with the slowness common
to public works, and was not completed till 1760.
On the Middlesex side of the bridge I took a hackney-coach, and
bade the man drive me to St. James's-square, for I considered that at
Sir Marcus Lestrange's residence I should most easily obtain tidings of
her I came to seek. The Indian sun, to which I had exposed myself
somewhat recklessly, and seven years of absence, had so much altered
me, that I hardly feared recognition, whoever I might meet.
I found the house in St. James's-square, with but one unshrouded
window, just opening itself to the March sunshine, like a fashionable
belle who lifts one languid eyelid when all the working world has been
long astir.
I alighted and knocked boldly, determined to run all hazards rather

than remain unsatisfied. The same gigantic porter who had answered
my questions seven years before appeared in response to my summons,
as little changed in face, figure, dress, or bearing, as if he had been
some servitor of fairy legend, and had spent the interval in an en-
chanted sleep.
I had suffered and seen so much in my absence that I was un-
reasonably surprised by the unchanged appearance of this man. Seven
years! Great Heaven! did I judge by my own feelings, I should esti-
mate the period a century. Seven years, and my noble benefactress,
whom I had left in the pride of womanhood and beauty, was moulder-
ing in her grave! Seven years, and I returned to find myself doubtless
despised and forgotten by the only woman I had ever loved!
I asked the porter if Sir Marcus Lestrange were in London. He
shook his head, and regarded me with a wondering stare.
"Sir Everard Lestrange and his lady will be in town to-morrow,
sir," he said; "they are on a visit in Surrey."
"Sir Everard Lestrange! Is Sir Marcus dead ?" I asked.
"Sir Marcus Lestrange has been dead nearly two years, sir. This
house now belongs to his only son Sir Everard, and his lady."
"Miss Hemsley that was ?" I asked; for the sense of a great lapse
of time again seized upon me, and it seemed but too possible that Dora
might be dead, and some second wife installed in her place.
"Miss Hemsley that was," replied the porter solemnly, and then
asked if I would leave my name.
"No," I said, "the name is of no consequence. I will wait upon
Sir Everard in a day or two-here or elsewhere. He frequents some
club, I suppose?"
66
Yes, sir; my master is to be seen at White's in St. James's-street,
by his friends, who are mostly members of the club."
There was a covert insolence in this which I fully understood. The
porter would have me to know that his master was not accessible to
any copper-visaged stranger who might seek an interview with him.
"Lady Lestrange is well?" I asked; and to soften this pompous
Cerberus I here slipped a crown into his ready hand.
"Yes, sir, my lady is vastly well," he replied with friendly readiness.
"Would your honour step in and rest a bit, while I answer any in-
quiries you may please to make about the family? Your honour has
lately returned from foreign parts, I think?"
66
Yes, from " I hesitated a moment as I was about to pronounce
the word 'India:' that one word, repeated to Sir Everard, might have
betrayed my identity, and I wanted to spend some little time in Eng-
land before he knew of my return-" from Spain.”
"Dearey me! The late Sir Marcus and his lady spent many years
in Spain. Would your honour please to sit ?"
I had entered the hall, a lofty apartment paved with gray marble,
and distinguished by a dismal splendour. Never till this moment had


I penetrated even so far into this house, and I looked around me curi-
ously. 'Twas here she lived; I fancied her slight figure passing to and
fro upon the broad staircase, her little hand lightly resting on the grim
bronze balustrade.
"Yes, sir," said the porter, completely mollified by my donation;
"my lady is well, or as well as a lady of fashion can be, that is out at
theatres and routs, and Vauxhall and Ranelagh, and suchlike, every
night of her life, and at sales of pictures and curiosities almost every
day."
"What! she leads a life of pleasure-she loves the amusements of
the town?" I said, with an unreasonable sense of bitterness. Because
my life had been one long mourning, did I think she too must needs
be desolate ?
"Yes, sir; my lady is obliged to do as other ladies of her station,
and Sir Everard likes to see her happy."
"Happy!" I exclaimed involuntarily; " and that is called happi-
ness!"
The porter scrutinised me sharply.
"You are some relative of my lady's, perhaps, sir?" he asked.
"No; but I come from one who is much interested in her welfare.
I hope to see her soon after her return to town; yet I would rather you
did not mention my visit either to Sir Everard or my lady;" and to
give emphasis to this hint I slipped a second crown into the man's
hand.
66
'I shall not say a word, sir," he replied, as he ushered me to the
door.
She was well, she was happy, her life a round of fashionable dissi-
pation, and she had forgotten me. This seemed to me the sum of
what I had heard; and although in my fondest dream I could scarce
have hoped to find myself remembered or regretted, it was never-
theless a pain to me to hear of her gaiety.
"Fool!" I exclaimed within myself, "what other fate couldst thou
expect? Her love for thee was but a girlish fancy, born of her distaste
for thy rival; and thou gone, and the rival thrust upon her, she has
reconciled herself to her fate, and takes life gaily, like other women of
property."
Thus did I argue with myself; yet so crestfallen was I, that, on
the simple strength of this porter's intelligence, I had half a mind to
go back to India by the next ship that would carry me thither. Better
to be facing Meer Jaffier's foes on the borders of Behar than to
suffer these pangs of jealous anguish in a country where I had not
one single friend. With the strange perversity of human nature, I,
who had so languished to return to England, now felt that my coming
had been but a folly. It seemed that I had scarce a purpose in this
great city, to which I had hastened with such burning impatience.
The invalidation of my marriage? Yes, that was a task to perform;


but of what avail the undoing of those rites when she whom alone I
loved was the happy wife of another? What else had I expected to find
her? Had I hoped to discover her a widow waiting for my return ?
Alas, I knew not what I hoped; I knew only that I had found dis-
appointment.
I carried Philip Hay's letter and statement in a pocket-book that I
wore always about me; and provided with this I returned to the City
and sought out Mr. Blade's office in Little Britain. I found this office
a darksome den in a somewhat dingy locality, and Mr. Blade himself
struck me as a kind of practitioner better versed in the exercise of
legal chicanery than in the nobler offices of the law; a man who
would take to a doubtful case with a natural relish, and be more at his
ease in the darkest labyrinth of fraud than in the broad highway of
honesty.
This gentleman received me with amazing civility, and seemed
really moved when I told him of Philip Hay's fate.
"That man's disappearance has always been a puzzle to me, sir,"
he said; "and I much regretted his loss as client, companion, and
friend. In the first capacity he was of little profit to me directly, for I
believe he never paid a debt in his life; but I am bound to confess
that he put me in the way of two or three very good things with his
young patron, Lord Mallandaine. There was an affair on Hounslow-
heath, sir, an assault and abduction, which might have resulted in a
most prodigious scandal, implicating more than one member of the
peerage, if a man had not been found, sir―Jumping Joseph, a young
man very well known upon the road-who was tried and hung, sir, for
that very affair; and, I think I may venture to say, by my agency alone."
"What!" I exclaimed, aghast at this horrid avowal; an innocent
man was executed for a crime of Lord Mallandaine's! and you are
proud of the transaction?"
66
"An innocent man! No, my dear sir, Jumping Joseph had earned
a halter a dozen times over; but it was not he who ran away with
pretty Miss Lockson of Holford Hall, Wiltshire, and left her father
for dead in his own travelling-carriage, though a train of circumstan-
tial evidence, which I had the honour to prepare, brought it home to
him in the most convincing manner. The hemp was grown, and the
yarn was spun, my dear sir; it was only a question who should put the
rope round his neck."
"And
my
Lord Mallandaine's victim, this Miss Lockson ?"
Mr. Blade shrugged his shoulders.
"I cannot say for certain what became of the girl," he said.
""Twas murmured in her father's neighbourhood that she wandered
home one day about a year after the abduction, somewhat touched in
the head, and would never speak the name of her betrayer. But your
country folks have a knack of inventing these romantic stories. The
history of Lord Mallandaine's victims would fill a big book.".

"Does the wretch still live ?" I asked.
66 Live? yes; and is counted of some importance in his party. 'Twas
but the other night he stood up in the House of Lords to denounce the
reputed author of an immoral poem, with whom he was not long ago
on terms of warm friendship.-But I ramble, sir; so to business."
I gave him Philip Hay's letter, which he at once acknowledged as
genuine, but was not so prompt to hand me the box containing the papers.
"There is one circumstance our lamented friend appears to have
forgotten," he said, with a smothered sigh.
"And pray what is that ?"
"The fact that he left these herein-named papers with me as a—
ahem!-a kind of security for my claim against him."
"I have no knowledge of that, Mr. Blade, nor, I dare venture to
say, had Mr. Hay any notion you would advance such a claim. He
spoke of you as a friend rather than as a lawyer."
"I am flattered by the friendship of a man who possessed all the
elements of greatness," replied Mr. Blade; "but, as the father of a
family, I am bound to remember my claim against our lamented friend,
which includes costs out of pocket."
"But you are also bound to remember that these papers are of no
intrinsic value—”
66
"They are of value to you, my dear sir," interposed the lawyer,
with a wily grin, or you would scarce take the trouble to come after
them."
This was an unanswerable argument; so I replied to my gentleman
with more candour than such a knave deserved at my hands.
"I have reason to believe there is one document in that box of im-
portance to myself," I said; "but I am very sure there is no paper in
it of the smallest intrinsic value."
"Intrinsic value is one thing, sir, and personal value another. I
never supposed that my lamented friend had left bank-notes or India
stock in my keeping. But there is no commodity of such fluctuating
value as private papers. I have seen a gentleman's note of hand, and a
lady's love-letter, sold at a price that would astound you."
"No evidence of a fine gentleman's iniquity or a fine lady's folly
would astonish me, sir. But to return to Mr. Hay's papers."
"To return to those papers, sir. You will perceive, in the first
place, that I have an equitable lien upon them in the shape of my bill
of costs; and in the second place, had I no such lien, I should not be
authorised in handing them to you on the strength of that letter."
"What can be plainer than this letter, Mr. Blade ?"
66
Nothing, if the writer were still alive, and the property his to
dispose of. But the writer's life having lapsed in the interim, the
papers in question belong to his next of kin, who, on taking out letters
of administration, would be able to claim these with the other effects of
the deceased."


“Good heavens, sir, what do you mean by letters of administration?
You must be aware that Philip Hay lived and died a pauper."
"I am aware of nothing relative to the last six years of his life, sir;
and in the eye of the law he has an estate which must be administered
according to the law in such cases made and provided. And I, sir, as
a gentleman and an attorney, would be guilty of a gross misdemeanour
—nay, indeed, a fraud upon Mr. Hay's heirs, executors, and assigns—
should I hand you the aforesaid papers on the strength of that letter."
This was beyond measure provoking, and I was sorely tempted to
lose patience with Mr. Blade.
"Come, come, sir," I said; "I doubt there is some little mistake
here. My bronzed face deceives you, and you fancy because I have
come from the Indies I must needs be a greenhorn in all matters of
business. Allow me to tell you that I was a civil servant of the Com-
pany, and that my duties brought me in hourly contact with the natives
of Hindostan, who are the veriest rogues and knaves that live upon this
earth. A man who has dealt for six years with them, sir, has little to
learn in chicanery, and will scarce submit to be defrauded of his honest
rights by a knavish perversion of justice."
"You are impertinent, sir," replied Mr. Blade, with an air of
dignity," and since you choose to advance your claim in an offensive
manner, I shall stick to the letter of the law, and hereby refuse to
surrender that box to anyone but the lawful administrator of the late
Mr. Philip Hay's effects."
There was a resolution about the scoundrel's tone that told me he
was only to be countered by equal resolution on my part. Should I
show any desire to conciliate him, or to bargain with him, he would
suppose the paper to be of vital importance to me, and would do his
utmost to bleed me of my last guinea.
"Very well, sir," I said, rising and putting on my hat; "in that
case there is no more to be done. If the letter of the law will not give
me the paper my friend desired me to have, I must e'en do without it.
I have too much respect for the law to tempt you to a breach of it.
Good-morning."
Mr. Blade stared at me for a moment dumfounded; but as I
moved towards the door, he skipped suddenly forward and placed
himself before it.
"Not so hastily, sir!" he exclaimed; "you had best, at any rate,
leave me your name and address. In this letter you are but spoken of
as the bearer. If I find I can strain the law in your favour, I—”
"I would not have you burden your conscience to do me a service,
sir. My name and address are of no importance. Be so good as to
move away from that door; I have engagements elsewhere, and am
somewhat hurried."
66
Sir," cried Mr. Blade in an appealing tone, "between men of
business this is childish. You want a paper from that box, or you

would not have come to Little Britain. What will you give for that
letter ?"
"I decline to treat with you on the subject, sir. If my friend's
desire gives me no sufficient claim to the paper, I will have none
of it."
"Sir, this is mere histrionic display. You want the paper. Give
me Bank-of-England notes for one hundred pounds, and it is yours."
"I will not higgle for it, sir."
"Come, come, sir; say fifty. 'Tis not half my bill of costs."
"I have no money about me, sir, and can very well exist without
the paper;" and I made another move towards the door.
"Bring me five-and-twenty guineas, sir, and it is yours. "Twill
barely cover my costs out of pocket; but the father of a family is the
plaything of Fortune;" and at this juncture Mr. Blade brushed away an
imaginary tear with his dingy ruffle.
"I blush to sink so low, sir, but as the father of a family I will
take five-and-twenty guineas. In the words of the Apothecary-but
no, sir, I will not trouble you with a hackneyed quotation. If you
would let me have the money before two o'clock this afternoon, I
should take it kindly."
"You shall have it, Mr. Blade. I do not much affect this kind of
barter; but as I have trespassed on your time, I shall be happy to make
you some recompense, and will bring you the money you demand at
two o'clock."
"Sir, God bless you! I despise my weakness in thus allowing the
feelings of a father to vanquish at once the principles and instincts of
a legal practitioner; but the times are bad; there is positively no-
thing doing, sir, nothing."
I left Mr. Blade, and hastened to deposit the bulk of the bills Mr.
Watts had given me with a banker, to whom the same kind friend had
recommended me. A couple of hundred pounds I kept in hand; and
as I thought it but likely there might be something outlandish in my
appearance, and as I had no desire to be remarkable, I went at once to
a respectable tailor in the City, and bade him measure me for a suit of
clothes in the plainest modern style. He would fain have persuaded
me to choose some gaudy hue, such as that bloom colour which my
dear friend Goldsmith afterwards made so famous; but I selected a
cloth of a dark, sober green, which, when he saw me resolute to have
it, Mr. Snip declared was the genteelest thing in his shop. But even
after this I had some difficulty in leaving him without giving an order
for a scarlet shag frock, without which he declared no gentleman's
wardrobe could be complete. This done, I was fairly puzzled when
the man asked me where he should send the goods, and could give him
no better address than the inn where I had put up. From the tailor's
I went to a barber, who dressed and powdered my hair after the pre-
vailing fashion, and tried hard to persuade me to buy a wig, recom-

mending me one entirely of human hair, and in a style which he called
Jehu's Jemmy, for it seems that fine gentlemen had of late been seized
with a passion for resembling their coachmen. After this he showed
me a scratch, which he called the genuine Blood's skull-covering. But
finding me unmoved by the exhibition of these, he produced one of a
monstrous size and feathery appearance, which he told me was known
amongst men about town as the Apothecary's Bush. This last he
pressed upon me as the ne plus ultra in taste. The price of this modish
headpiece he informed me was six guineas, adding by way of apology
that human hair was now fetching three guineas an ounce.
"And, pray, where do you get this human hair ?" I asked.
"That, sir, is one of the secrets of the trade. We import from
Germany, sir, and we buy British hair from the public institutions of
this city."
"From the prisons and hospitals, I suppose," I hazarded.
"Well, sir, I confess Sir John Fielding and the gaoler's shears send
us many a handsome head of hair. Nor do we inquire too curiously
into the origin of the article, provided the quality be unimpeachable.
Let me tempt you to try that Apothecary's Bush, sir. With a dark
complexion like yours, the effect of those frizzy curls is killing."
"Nay, my good friend, I am but newly returned from the East,
and am not yet enough in the mode to prefer the hair of some Mistress
Doll Tearsheet or Molly Seagrim to that with which Nature has clothed
my head."
I left the barber deprecating my want of taste, and went straight
to Mr. Blade's office, it being now close upon two o'clock.
I found the lawyer seated at his desk, with a shabby little tin box
before him. It was securely sealed with a cipher that I had seen used
by Everard Lestrange; and I thus perceived how close the intimacy
had been between these two men at the time of my undoing.
Having paid Mr. Blade the stipulated five-and-twenty guineas, I
broke the seal and opened the box. It contained a packet of letters
written by Everard Lestrange to Philip Hay; and these I read. I had
received the owner's permission to use them against the writer; but
this I had no intention to do. I desired only to obtain a yet fuller
comprehension of Mr. Lestrange's character than his iniquitous con-
duct to myself and Margery Hawker had already afforded me.
The letters were in great part incomprehensible to me, so lavishly
did the writer employ cant phrases that seemed to constitute a kind of
secret language between Philip and himself. But of that which was
plain to any reader there was enough to stamp the author of these.
epistles as a consummate villain. Profligacy and heartlessness were
revealed in every line; and when I read those portions of the corre-
spondence in which the seducer alluded to Margery Hawker, my detes-
tation of this man reached a supreme degree it had not attained before.
Alas, poor victim of a libertine's caprice, couldst thou have seen those

lines in which he described the passion thou didst mistake for love, thy
bruised heart must have broken at once! And this wretch was the
husband of the pure and gentle creature I had known in the happy,
unforgotten days at Hauteville! I shuddered as I thought of a union
between beings so opposite. Could I marvel that my lady spent her
days and nights in a ceaseless round of fashionable pleasures? For her
there could be no such word as home.
I looked up presently from the letters, and saw Mr. Blade staring
at me with an astonished countenance, which I doubt not was warranted
by my own scowling face.
66
Upon my honour, sir, I should have thought you had found
a nest of scorpions in that box instead of a bundle of old letters,"
he said.
"There are viler things than scorpions, Mr. Blade, the thoughts
of a bad man. Do you know Mr.-nay, Sir Everard Lestrange?"
"I once had the pleasure to be of some service to him, sir, in a
delicate transaction. My honour as a professional man forbids me to
reveal-"
66
"O, sir, I should be the last to question you upon the subject.
Mr. Lestrange did me a most foul injury some seven years ago, and I
mean to have redress. Beyond this point I have no interest in him.
Where is he most easily to be met?"
"Humph! It is some time since I have been employed by him;
but there are certain distinguished characters upon whom a man of the
world, and the father of a family like myself, feels it a duty to keep an
eye. Since Sir Everard's return from St. Petersburg he has aban-
doned the onerous paths of diplomacy, and has become solely a man of
pleasure. His father's death gave him a handsome fortune; for Sir
Marcus, although himself a poor man, had inherited largely from his
wife, who died suddenly, leaving him a very fine estate, which now
belongs to Sir Everard. He is a member of White's, attends the
debates and votes with the Ministry, but seldom or never speaks. He
is said to play high, and is a hanger-on of the two patent theatres,
where he may be seen paying his court to the younger and prettier of
the actresses. This, sir, is what I am told of the gentleman. My
own humble opportunities do not permit me to come in contact with
him."
"I thank you for your information, sir, so far as it goes. I find
here the one paper which I especially require; and now if you please
to accept ten guineas as the price of the remainder, which you can ex-
amine before parting with them, I am willing to take them."
"Ten guineas is really so contemptible a sum, sir."
"It is offered for a most contemptible commodity. If you will take
the trouble to glance over those papers, you will perceive they are but
the letters of a libertine written to his venal instrument.
It is a cor-
respondence between Don Juan and Sangarelle, Mr. Blade."

"These letters might fetch me more money from Sir Everard Le-
strange himself, sir."
"If you think that, you had best keep them."
"Say fifty pounds, sir, and the letters are yours."
The little comedy which we had performed in the morning was now
repeated, and I finally consented to give twenty guineas for the re-
maining contents of the case. Amongst the letters I had found two
containing allusions to that villanous plot of which I had been the
victim, allusions which would hardly have been clear to a stranger,
but which must needs be sufficiently obvious to anyone familiar with
previous relations between myself and the writer.
"These shall justify me in the sight of Dorothea Lestrange,” I said
to myself, "if I survive an encounter with her husband."
CHAPTER XXXIII. ON THE TRACK OF MY ENEMY.
AFTER leaving Mr. Blade, with the certificate of Philip Hay's mar-
riage and Sir Everard's letters safely bestowed in my pocket-book,
I took a hasty dinner at a tavern not far from Little Britain. Here I
lingered some time to read the papers, which were full of laudation of
Mr. Pitt, that master-spirit of statecraft, who was fast doing for Eng-
land what Clive had begun so gloriously for India. For years past our
country had lain in a kind of stupor inglorious and despised abroad,
unprosperous at home, accepting peace at the price of fame and honour,
and studying economy in that miserly spirit which is but too sure to
result in ultimate loss.
Upon this scene of despondency and inaction appeared Pitt, and
these peace-loving politicians found themselves bound to the chariot-
wheels of the very genius of war. Already he had heated his colleagues
and his country with the fire of his own ambition, and so moved his
hearers by a noble panegyric upon King Frederick of Prussia, that an
annual subsidy to this monarch of six hundred and seventy thousand
pounds was voted by acclamation. This had occurred in December
of the year last past, after the victories of Rossbach and Lissa had
elevated the King of Prussia-whom we have since known to be a
declared infidel-into our Protestant hero.
I was pleased to hear from a gentleman with whom I conversed at
this tavern that the prime minister had also offered a handsome tribute
to the genius of my great master, Colonel Clive, of whom he had
spoken to an approving House as a "heaven-born general." Indeed,
this ready recognition of merit in others seemed one of the instincts
of greatness, and one possessed in an eminent degree by Pitt. Nor did
he wait till a brilliant success had revealed the power that achieved it.
In Wolfe he had already discerned the latent spark of heroism which
was to burst into so grand a fire by and by at Quebec.
I left the tavern as the day was closing in, and walked westward
again, moved only by the roving instinet of a stranger to the town, to
whom its commonest sights are new and wonderful. The lamplighters
were mounting their ladders and filling the lamps from their oil-cans
as I walked up Holborn-hill, jostled on every side by that eager, push-
ing throng of citizens, so different from the lounging populace of
Muxadavad. Instead of the cry of the priests calling the faithful to

prayers, I heard the shrill clamour of orange-girls, and small catch-
penny traders offering their strange varieties of merchandise, to the
utter hindrance and obstruction of all traffic. Instead of picturesque
groups of turbaned Moors squatting in the Bengal sunshine, I saw a
throng so diverse in dress and appearance that I might have fancied
myself amidst a concourse of people from all the ends of the earth.
At one point the crowd bearing towards St. Sepulchre's Church
was so dense that I was fairly brought to a standstill, and while wait-
ing for the rabble to pass, inquired of a neighbour where all these
people were going.
"I suppose they are going to see the execution to-morrow," my
neighbour answered civilly.
"An execution ?"
"Yes; three brothers-mere lads-who are to be hung at eight to-
morrow morning."
"And it is now six in the evening. Do you mean to tell me that
this rabble will wait for fourteen hours, standing in an open street, for
the brief delight of seeing three of their fellow-creatures hung?"
"Not only this rabble, sir, but the finest gentlemen in the town.
There is not a window within view of the gallows where you will not
see a group of bloods, drinking and gaming. 'Tis said that Mr. Sel-
wyn, the wit, has a suit of black on purpose for executions."
"And pray, sir, what is the crime of these unfortunates? Is it
murder, arson, or piracy for which they are to suffer ?"
"No, sir; the lads are somewhat to be commiserated. Their sole
offence is the appropriation of three oak-saplings, which they severally
cut and converted into walking-sticks while enjoying a sabbath ramble
in a copse at Edgeware. The law for the protection of timber is some-
what stringent."
I had seen something of the severity of English laws before I was
sent to India, but this formal sacrifice of three young lives for as many
oak-saplings seemed to me more appalling than the cruelties of Suraja
Doulah, which were at least the blind impulses of passion.
"Yes," said my neighbour, perceiving my concern, "it is really a
sad case, for the lads are of respectable parentage-the sons of a small
yeoman and had no idea they were committing a felony."
"It is of a piece with the rest I hear of this country, sir," I replied.
"We frame laws that would have revolted Draco himself by their
cruelty, and then regret their application. It was but last year that a
body of English officers were compelled to condemn a brave man to an
ignominious death, not because they thought him unworthy to live, but
because the act of parliament that provided against his offence left
them no alternative."
"Nay, sir," replied my neighbour; "Admiral Byng was the scape-
goat of a party-a sacrifice to public disappointment. He could never
have been so sacrificed if his judges had not been bound by the letter

of a cruel law. They condemned him to death in obedience to an act
of parliament, and recommended that he should be spared in deference
to the common instincts of humanity. Is this right, sir? Should not
law and humanity go hand in hand? Byng would have been pardoned,
I doubt not, sir, had not his Majesty given his promise to the City that
he would allow proceedings to take their course. He would fain have
saved the Admiral, but was bound hand and foot by that pledge."
"What, sir," I cried, "could a Christian king mortgage his divinest
prerogative-the right to be merciful ?"
The stranger shrugged his shoulders in an evasive manner, as who
should say, "Really, sir, this is no affair of ours ;" and the mob having
by this time passed us, we bowed and parted.
I was glad to turn from the bustle of Holborn into the quiet of
Lincoln's-inn-fields, whence I rambled on to Great Queen-street, and
thence to Long-acre, staring about me as I went along with all the
curiosity of a country bumpkin who surveys the town for the first time.
It was but the random impulse of an idler that took me to this locality,
yet no sooner was I there than it occurred to me this was a place which
of all others I should visit.
It was here the milliner resided to whom Lady Barbara had desired
me to address my letter-a woman of whom she had spoken as a "good
soul," who might be trusted. She would scarce have said this of a
person she was but little familiar with. I knew the intimacy that
must of necessity obtain between a fine lady and her milliner, since the
despotic changes and caprices of fashion must oblige a frequent inter-
course, and it suddenly struck me that from this woman I might learn
some details of the last year of Lady Barbara's life.
"I can at least call upon her," I said to myself. "If the visit.
prove useless, I would take much more trouble than that for the chance
of hearing the smallest tidings of that dear friend."
I looked for the house, and after some time discovered a painted
and gilded doll hanging over a doorway, and on the door below this
sign an announcement to the effect that Mrs. Winbolt, mantua-maker
and milliner to her Royal Highness the Princess of Wales, had corre-
spondents at Paris and Vienna, and might be relied on for the newest
modes in court-robes, sacs, cardinals, petticoats, and mantuas.
I rang the bell, and was speedily admitted by a grinning black boy,
who ushered me into a small oak-parlour at the back of the house,
where he set a candle upon the table and left me without a word.
There was a half-open door between this and another apartment, whence
I heard the animated tones of a female voice.
"Nay, indeed, madam, 'tis the very same material I sold but last
Thursday week to the Princess of Wales. She said, 'I will have that,
or nothing. I protest there's no living without a sac of Lyons brocade
these days.' And for your complexion, ma'am, which is, I need scarce
say, far superior to her Royal Highness's-"

"But the price," remonstrated another voice; "I had thought six
guineas would have bought the finest sac you could make me, and for
one of this material you have the conscience to ask ten."
"Her Royal Highness paid twenty guineas for the same stuff,
ma'am, and found her own point. With a tucker of English lace I
could not do it for sixpence less than eleven guineas, and then 'tis be-
cause I would not disoblige a customer."
"I am vastly afraid your obligingness will end in my ruin," replied
the customer with a profound sigh, and then followed a little more
haggling, which resulted in an order for the garment under discussion.
This conquest achieved on the part of the mantua-maker, and the lady
shown to the door, the black boy condescended to inform his mistress
of my presence, and she came bustling in upon me.
"Upon my word, sir, I know not how to apologise," she exclaimed ;
"that Pompey is the most incorrigible rascal; and if he had not been
given me by a lady of quality, who, I make no doubt, was heartily tired of
his impish tricks, I should have turned him out of my house long ago."
I was pleased with the appearance of Mrs. Winbolt, who was that
kind of person usually described as "a good motherly soul." She dis-
played that comfortable bulk of figure which is generally supposed to
accompany an easy disposition, and her complexion was as fresh as if
she had been the rustic wife of some prosperous farmer.
This matronly person saluted me with a profound curtsey, and
then, as she approached nearer to me, stopped suddenly short, and
regarded me with a closer scrutiny than the occasion warranted. For
the moment some peculiarity in my appearance seemed fairly to be-
wilder her; she gave a little gasp, and then began to apologise for
having stared at me with apparent rudeness.
"I trust you'll be so obliging as to pardon me, sir," she said; "but
I never saw a more startling likeness-but for the darkness of your
complexion it would be perfect-and for the moment I was so foolish as
to take you for a gentleman who has been dead these five-and-twenty
years."
"You took me for my father, Mr. Roderick Ainsleigh," I said.
"Good heavens, sir! are you Mr. Robert Ainsleigh, the gentleman
that was sent to India?"
"I am that ill-used person."
Mrs. Winbolt offered me both her plump hands, and shook mine
with a heartiness that almost took me aback.
“O sir, you must be so good as to excuse the liberty, but I couldn't
be better pleased than I am to see you,-unless, indeed, Lady Barbara
had lived to see this day. Alas, sir, what a loss!"
She wiped some tears from her eyes with an unobtrusive gesture.
"To me an irreparable one. 'Twas the merest hazard that brought
me here; but I am very glad I came. It seems you loved my benefac-
tress? She was something more to you than an ordinary customer?"

Something more than a customer? Yes, sir, indeed, she was
my benefactress; it was her blessed nature to shower favours on all
she knew. I was born on the Hauteville estate, sir. Yes, I'm a Berk-
shire woman; and folks tell me I keep my country looks, though I've
had nigh thirty years' hard work in London. My father was a tenant-
farmer in a small way; and I used to go to the Hall sometimes to
assist with the needlework when Martha Peyton had more on her
hands than she could get through; and my Lady Barbara used to see
me, and talk to me. And in those days-well, sir, I'm getting an old
woman, and may speak out without vanity-I was accounted some-
thing of a beauty. My good looks brought me nothing but trouble,
however; for there was a young squire-Mr. Langdon of Langdon Hill
-lived within ten miles of my old home, and was always riding over
to our place, and talking fine poetical stuff to me; and I was a weak
foolish girl, sir, and thought he was honest, and meant well by me.
Other folks didn't think so, and their talk got to Lady Barbara's ears,
and she came to me and told me what was said, and bade me, as I
loved my own soul, see Mr. Langdon no more, unless he declared
himself willing to make me his wife. If he loves you honestly,
Susan,' the dear lady said, 'he will love you all the better for that
honest question.' And I obeyed her, Mr. Ainsleigh; though it was
a hard thing for a poor country girl to ask such a question; and I
read my answer in my gentleman's face, though he turned it off with
a careless jest, and said 'twas early times to talk of matrimony, which
was apt to be the death of love; and then muttered something about
country wenches being now as cautious and mercenary as any fine lady
in the town. I went to my Lady Barbara that night and told her
what he had said; and I was such a foolish creature in those days that
I was half heartbroken to think that my suitor could be so base. My
lady saw how great a trouble it was to me, and she set to work at once
to get me away from a home where I was miserable and in danger. So,
as I had shown a kind of talent for mantua-making, having worked a
good deal with Martha Peyton for my lady, my lady persuaded my
father to send me to London, and she herself paid the money to ap-
prentice me to a court-milliner and mantua-maker; and I came, and
in a few years set up in business in a small way for myself. My lady
gave me her custom, and I made all her clothes when she married Sir
Marcus Lestrange, and that was the making of me; and here I am.
Heaven only knows what I might have been without my lady's kind-
ness; for my father was an easy-going man, given to drink, and looked
sharper after his pigs than he did after his children. And now, sir,
that's a long story; but I've been obliged to tell you as much in order
that you may understand what reason I had to love Lady Barbara
Lestrange."
"And you knew my father?"
"Yes, sir, I have seen him many a time, when I was working in my


lady's dressing-room at the Hall. I helped with a tapestry-screen that
my lady was doing, you see, sir; and Martha Peyton and I used to sit
at work with my lady herself, and your father used to come into the
room and stand over my lady's chair, talking to her as she worked.
It was but little she used to do at those times. Ah, sir, there were
two hearts broken when your father left Hauteville; for I am sure he
loved my lady as truly as she loved him. And she loved you as well
as if you had been her own son, sir. I have heard her say so; for she
would tell me her troubles, when she would tell them to no one else."
"Put me out of misery by answering one question, if you have
power to do so!" I exclaimed eagerly. "Did Lady Barbara believe
me the wretch I must have seemed when I disappeared from London ?"
"No, sir, she would believe no ill of you. She came to me within
a few days of your marriage. Sir Marcus had shown her the certificate;
but she declared it was a false one, and believed that some evil had
befallen you.
'I will swear he loves Miss Hemsley,' she said to me;
and this paper has been forged to do him mischief. What motive had
he to marry that wretched girl? But from a marriage with Dora he
had everything to gain. O, there is some odious treachery at work,
and the same hidden enemy who caused him to be driven from Haute-
ville has been since working to destroy him.""
"And Miss Hemsley-did she believe me false?"
"Alas, yes, sir; that young lady did believe the story of your
marriage, and upbraided herself for having stooped to let you know
she had loved you. My lady was sorely grieved by this; yet you can
scarce wonder it was so, for all things told against you-above all,
your disappearance. You were advertised for in the Flying Post, and
many times, at my lady's bidding; and one day she came to me in
much distress of mind. 'He is dead, I fear!' she exclaimed. 'Were
he living, I am sure he would have answered those advertisements.' I
told her perchance you were kept out of the way by force, as I knew
what things are done in this town: this she seemed to think probable.".
"Did she suspect Everard Lestrange as my hidden enemy?"
"Yes, sir, I am sure of it, though she never spoke his name. 'He
has one bitter enemy,' she said; 'my poor boy has one unscrupu-
lous, relentless foe.' And then she told me how she had been to Mr.
Swinfen, the gentleman to whom she recommended you, but could
get no tidings of you there, or at your chambers, save that you had
gone out one day never to return. And so things went on; I seeing
a good deal of my dear lady, who had none about her that she cared to
trust. There was a French maid of Miss Hemsley's, whom I always
took for a spy, for she was ever watching and listening when I waited
on my lady."
"Ay, she was the veriest viper," I cried; and thereupon told the
mantua-maker Ma'amselle Adolphine's share in my undoing.
"I thought as much, sir. That French hussy was in the pay of


Mr. Lestrange. She used to watch me as a cat watches a mouse; yet
I don't think she ever got much good from her watching. One day
came your letter from the Indies; but my lady was at that time in
Paris with her husband, and I was obliged to trust the letter to the
post, in a cover which I myself wrote for it. Sure I am there is no
reason it should miscarry; but neither that nor another that came after
it reached my lady. The family only came back to town in time for
Miss Hemsley's wedding. How Sir Marcus prevailed on that young
lady to marry his son, I know not, for sure I am there was no love
between them; but he did so work upon her that she at last consented.
There was a very fine wedding, and I was employed to make the
wedding-clothes, as I had been for my lady's. It was a week after the
wedding that your last letter came. Lady Barbara was now in town,
and I carried it to her with my own hands, and would give it into none
but hers. O sir, I never shall forget her face when she read how you
had been treated. 'O, what a villain!' she cried, starting up from her
chair, with the letter crushed in her hand; but he shall suffer for his
baseness; suffer in that kind of loss which alone can touch his sordid
soul.' 'Twas this she said, or words very near this; for there are some
scenes that take a hold upon one's memory, you see, sir, and it would
not be easy for me to forget this. And then she told me what had
happened to you. He shall come back triumphant,' she said; 'yes, I
will have him brought back to confront that scoundrel;' and then she
sighed and exclaimed, 'Alas, poor Dora! what a fate for thee! and my
arm could not shield thy helplessness!' and so she went on, in a wild
random way, as if she had been alone. Next day she came to my
house in her chair, and told me she wished to draw-up a paper, upon
some business matter, and did not care to do it at home.
'One might
as well live upon the stage of Covent-garden Theatre as in a fine house.
full of servants,' she said; and I knew but too well she was watched.
And then she asked me if I knew of any decent lawyer who could write-
out the paper she wanted. So I sent for old Mr. Sollis, a respectable
attorney in King-street, who had drawn up the lease of this house for
me, and sometimes sued a customer for me that hung back from paying.
He came immediately; and my lady and he were shut in this very par-
lour for nigh upon an hour, at the end of which time Mr. Sollis opened
the door and called me. 'I want you to witness Lady Barbara Le-
strange's signature to this paper, Mrs. Winbolt,' he said; there is no
occasion for you to know what the paper contains; you have only to
attest my lady's signature.' On this my lady signed the paper, and I
after her, and Mr. Sollis put his name below mine."
"Can I see this Mr. Sollis?" I asked eagerly, for I shrewdly sus-
pected that my interests were involved in this paper.
"Alas, no, sir; he lies in the burying-ground by Drury-lane. He
was near seventy years of age, and was carried off by a fever last mid-
summer twelvemonth."


"Has he left any son or successor likely to be familiar with his
business?"
"No, sir; he was an old bachelor. The business passed to a
stranger, Mr. Compit."
Hopeless as it might seem to think of obtaining information from
such a source, I resolved to see Mr. Compit next morning. But, before
bidding my kindly mantua-maker good-night, I had more questions to
ask her.
"How long before her death did you see my benefactress?" I
inquired.
"Never again, sir, after the day she signed the paper; it was but
three weeks after that she died. I shall never forget with what a shock
the news came upon me. She had been to Hauteville for a fortnight,
and came back to St. James's-square to preside at an assembly given
in honour of Miss Hemsley's marriage. Her death was awfully sudden."
"Mr. Lestrange and his bride appear to have been with her?"
"Yes, sir. 'Twas after a grand dinner given in honour of them that
the sad event happened. I had the account from the housekeeper in
St. James's-square. 'Twas just when the visitors had left, and my
lady had gone into a little room behind the drawing-room with Mrs.
Lestrange, when she gave a sudden cry, and the blood gushed from
her lips. Sir Marcus and his son both ran to her, and bells were rung
and doctors sent for; my lady's own maid, that French viper Adolphine,
and the housekeeper, all came with their different nostrums; but it was
all of no use; she lived but to speak a few words.”
"O Mrs. Winbolt!" I exclaimed, "what would I not give to know
those last words!"
66
Ay, sir, she may perchance have spoken of you in that final
moment. I know she loved you dear."
"And that wretch Adolphine was still with Mrs. Lestrange? It
would seem my lady had not told of her treachery."
"No, sir, I do not think my lady told your story to Mrs. Lestrange;
it would have been but to make her wretched. And I believe Lady
Barbara had it in her mind to bring you home, so that you might
appear suddenly, as one risen from the dead, to confound your enemy."
"God grant I may yet so appear to his confusion !" I answered.
After some further conversation of an unimportant nature, I bade
Mrs. Winbolt good-night, and left Long-acre, very grateful to that Pro-
vidence which had conducted me thither by what had seemed hazard.
After careful consideration of all that Mrs. Winbolt had told me, I
arrived at the conviction that the document executed by Lady Barbara
in the mantua-maker's parlour was a will in my favour. Was not this
implied in her declaration that she would punish Everard Lestrange
in the sole manner his sordid nature could feel? How more surely
could she punish him than by depriving him of the wealth which he
had doubtless hoped my disgrace must needs assure to him?


I went early the next morning to Mr. Compit; but that gentleman
could give me no help. The transaction in which his predecessor had
been engaged with Lady Barbara Lestrange was of a nature too trifling
to leave any record, unless it might have been some private entry in
Mr. Sollis's memorandum-book; and of such personal property Mr.
Compit possessed none.
"If Lady Barbara Lestrange had been a regular client of my pre-
decessor's, it would be another matter," he told me; "but, you see, the
occurrence was a mere casualty, on which Mr. Sollis would scarce be
likely to bestow a second thought."
"Yet the rank of the client and the peculiar circumstances of the
case might surely have made some impression upon him ?”
""Tis like enough they did, but not such an impression as would
embody itself in documentary evidence. Mr. Sollis was not the man
to communicate his sentiments in relation to a business matter; he
was an excellent lawyer, and as silent as the grave. If the lady wanted
secrecy, she could not have employed a better man.”
This was all. I left Mr. Compit's office no better informed than
when I entered it.
From thence I went to the Temple, where I was so fortunate as to
find Mr. Swinfen at home. He received me with much kindness, and
made me relate my Indian adventures. I was surprised to discover
how little was known in England of those stirring events in the East,
save the names of the potentates we had been concerned with, and the
battles we had fought. Pitt's laudation of Clive had alone been equal
to the occasion; and indeed I think this great statesman was the only
man in England who perceived the grandeur of that theatre now open-
ing for British enterprise and British valour on the far shores of the
Indian Ocean.
Having satisfied Mr. Swinfen with a full account of my public
adventures abroad, I proceeded to relate my strange meeting with my
father; a piece of news that was most surprising to him; and after that
my conversation with Mrs. Winbolt of Long-acre.
"And you think the paper drawn-up by this Mr. Sollis was a will
in your favour?" asked Mr. Swinfen, when I had finished.
"I do, sir. The fancy may seem presumptuous, but it is founded
on many small circumstances that, to my mind, make a chain of evi-
dence almost conclusive."
"And you would insinuate that such a document has been sup-
pressed or destroyed by Sir Everard Lestrange ?"
66
That, sir, is my suspicion. I know Everard Lestrange to be
capable of any villanous act. Lady Barbara was at Hauteville a week
before her death; she was not cold in her coffin when her own private
apartment was broken in upon, and the cabinet where she kept her
papers-not her jewels, mark you, sir; those I know to have been kept
elsewhere ransacked and destroyed by masked ruffians. A common


burglary, you will say, which by a mere coincidence of time happened
within twenty-four hours of the lady's death. But would burglars
choose this room for their point of attack, and content themselves with
rifling a Japan cabinet, when the plate-room of Hauteville is known to
contain that kind of treasure which alone burglars covet?"
"Your argument is plausible," replied Mr. Swinfen thoughtfally;
"but it is hard to suspect a gentleman of so vile a deed."
"Have I not suffered the vilest usage at that gentleman's hands,
sir? Is there any act so base that I should hesitate to believe him
capable of it? But I will not press this subject upon you; I am bent
on investigating the matter in some sort, though little good can come
of any discovery I may make. Lady Barbara's will is doubtless de-
stroyed; and to prove that such a paper ever existed is perhaps a task
beyond human ingenuity."
After leaving Mr. Swinfen's office, I felt that my business in London
was for the time concluded. Eager as I might be for a meeting with
Everard Lestrange, I wished to make myself, as far as possible, master
of his secret before meeting him. And I was now free to revisit that
spot which I had seen so often in my dreams, and to which my thoughts
had ever turned with inexpressible fondness. I went straight from the
Temple to the coach-office where I had alighted on first arriving in
London, and booked my place for Willborough, in the Bath coach, which
stopped to change horses and refresh its passengers in that small
market-town.

CHAPTER XXXIV. THE OLD PLACE AND THE OLD FOLK.
THE Bath coach left London at dusk, and travelled all night, much
to the terror of its passengers, who regarded the passage of Hounslow-
heath as a period of imminent peril. Yet I think a dark narrow road
in a woody country is infinitely more appalling than a wide open land-
scape, such as Hounslow or Bagshot; across which, on moonlit nights,
one may see a scudding hare at half a mile's distance, and where at
all times the sound of horse's hoofs travels far to warn the ear of an
approaching foe. Hounslow and Bagshot have, however, the stamp of
fashion; and I suppose it is as much the mode for a knight of the road
to assail his prey upon these particular spots, as for a gentleman to air
his long-skirted coat in the Ring.
The coach deposited me at Willborough before daybreak; and while
breakfasting in the coffee-room of the George by a good fire, I had
leisure to consider how I should approach Hauteville. I was not cer-
tain of one friend in the home of my childhood and youth, and knew
not whether I should be permitted to cross the threshold of the mansion,
or sit once more beside the familiar hearth of the warrener's lodge.
"Yes," I said to myself after a long debate, "it is to the instinct of
my foster-mother I will trust. How ever she may have heard me ma-
ligned, I doubt not I shall soften her. There must be a subtle power
in affection that will prove stronger than lies or treachery. Yes, I will
go straight to her whose tenderness sheltered my childhood, and I
know she will not refuse to believe the truth spoken by her foster-son."
With this resolve I set out for Hauteville, and just as the sun
brightened over the landscape with the promise of a glorious day, I
crossed the little rustic stile which marked the boundary of the estate,
and entered Hauteville woods.
O, how bitter and how sweet, how new and how old, how strange
and how familiar, the scene was to me! Here all seemed unchanged.
On the face of Nature time had set no mark; but those who had made
the place dear were dead or estranged from me, and it was with a stifled
sob that I paused to look around.
The walk from Willborough to Hauteville was a long one; and I
knew that before I could arrive at the warrener's lodge honest Jack
Hawker would in all probability have set out on his daily round.
This was what I wanted. It was upon my foster-mother's affection
I relied, and I meant to make my appeal to her alone. I had occasion


to pass within sight of the house; the shuttered windows looked blank
and dismal as when my childish eyes had first beheld them. The same
air of desolation hung over the place, despite the careful neatness of
gardens and parterres; and I fancied that Sir Everard and Lady
Lestrange came seldom to their country mansion. I turned from
the scene with a sigh, and continued my journey at a quicker pace.
The blue smoke from the warrener's lodge was curling cheerily
upward from among the newly-budding trees, ever so faintly tinged
with a tint of tender green. Here at least there was life; here some-
thing much more like home than was to be found in yonder stately
dreary pile, which Vanbrugh had improved away from its original
gothic splendour. My heart beat fast as I hurried along the path
which little Margery and I had so often trodden hand in hand.
Dear child! Her image came back to me, not as I had seen
it in the hour of my enthralment by a base plotter, but in the gentle
innocence of childhood, fair as the face of an angel.
The outward aspect of Jack Hawker's cottage had changed in no
particular since I last looked on it. The latticed windows twinkled
in the morning sun, the chickens pecked invisible nourishment from
the short dewy grass, and close at hand sounded the comfortable grunt
of satisfied English pigs. The door was fastened only by the latch
with which my hand had been of old so familiar. I paused for a
minute ere I crossed the threshold, and the next moment was stand-
ing face to face with my foster-mother.
She had just emerged from the dairy, carrying a dish of butter.
This she set down hastily, startled by the entrance of one she took for
a stranger. I was standing with my back to the light, and my seven
years' apprenticeship under an Indian sky had doubtless wrought some
change in me. How ever slight this change may have been, my foster-
mother took me for a foreign pedlar.
"Nay, sir," she said, with a furtive glance of apprehension towards
a certain walnut-wood box, in which I had of old known her to keep
the family treasure of plate-six teaspoons, a battered caudle-cup, and
a monstrous silver watch-"I am but a hard-working countrywoman,
that never wore lace in her life, and have no need of your smuggled
foreign stuffs. At the great house you might find a customer, were my
lady at home; but she has not been there this year past, nor is likely
to be there for as long to come."
"What, Mrs. Hawker!" I said reproachfully; "your eyes are bright
enough yet, but it seems to me they will not help your memory to re-
call an old friend."
She looked at me for a moment, and then clapped her hands toge-
ther with a shrill cry.
"Why, Robin," she exclaimed, "how brown thou art grown!"
"Mother," I said, "I left this place an outcast. Did you believe
me guilty of that foul wrong for which Sir Marcus drove me out?"

She hung her head as she answered me:
"Yes, Robin, at first I half-inclined to think my darling's ruin must
needs be your work; I knew she loved you. How he lured her from
her home I know not to this hour; but I have long known it was no
act of yours."
"Yet whence should come my justification, mother, if not from your
own heart?"
"It came from hers. A year after she left us, there came a woman
to me one morning, while my husband was in the woods, to say I was
to call next day-market-day-at the George at Willborough, where
there was one who wanted to see me. It was not strange that I guessed
at once 'twas something to do with Margery, for my lost child was never
out of my thoughts. I questioned the woman, but she would tell me.
nothing. I was to go to the George, and ask for the person who wished
to see Mrs. Hawker. This was all. O Robin, thou art a man, and
knowest not what a mother's heart can suffer! I thought the time
would never pass. I lay awake all night, praying that I might hear
of my child; and next day, setting out on the journey, I felt like one
distraught. The house was scarce up when I went to the George, and
I had to wait a chambermaid's leisure before I was taken upstairs to a
sitting-room, where the shutters were still shut. While the woman was
opening them, a figure wrapped in a white gown came out of a room
adjoining. O God, it is my child!' I cried; and the words were scarce
spoken when Margery was sobbing in my arms. I stayed with her all
day, Robin. There was no stall of mine set in the market that day,
and I had to sell my butter and honey, at a dead loss, to a chap-
woman in the town. We were together all day, my child and I;
but she would tell me scarce anything, save that we had done thee
wrong, and that an enemy had hatched a wicked plot to bring about
thy ruin. 'Twas no act or word of his that tempted me from my
home, mother,' she said. Yet when I pressed her to tell the villain's
name, she would not. You must ask me no questions, mother, as
you love me,' she said. 'I was mad to trust myself here, but I could
not live a day longer without seeing you. I am rich enough to go
where I please.' And she swore there was no shame in the money,
Robin; it was all won by her own honest labour. She lived alone,
with but few friends, and had neither lover nor suitor. She had
sinned and suffered and repented: those were her very words, Robin.
I begged her hard to tell me where she lived, and how; but she would
not. I am lost in the great wilderness of London, mother,' she said;
'but there is not an hour in which I sit alone that my thoughts do not
fly back to my old home and hover around those I love. Would they
were guardian spirits to protect and shelter you!' She pressed money
upon me, but that I refused; and it was but to stop her tears that I
consented to take a locket from her neck."
"
"And have you never seen her since, mother?"

"Yes, Robin, often. The same woman brings me her message, and
we meet in the same room three or four times in the year, and I know
my child loves me. Yet I dare not speak, her name to her father,
unless I could tell him she was coming home to us; and that she will
not do. And so we go on, Robin. I know nothing of my child except
that she loves me."
"And you have never been to London to look for her?"
My foster-mother regarded me with a wondering smile. It was as
if I had asked her whether she had been to Hindostan.
"I was never in London in my life, Robin, nor my husband either,
and I know not a creature in that great city."
"Shall I search for Margery?" I asked.
“Ah, Robin, if thou wouldst !" cried she, clasping her hands.
"Who has a better right than I? Did I not ever love her as a
brother should love his sister? She was made the unconscious instru-
ment in a vile plot against me; but that is cleared up now, and there is
no cloud between us. I will seek her, mother; and, if it is possible, I,
who was accused of luring her away, will bring her back to you."
And now I entreated my foster-mother to tell me all she knew of
that strange event which had happened at the Hall on the night after
Lady Barbara's death, and how it had fared with my old friend An-
thony Grimshaw since that time.
"Alas, poor soul!" she exclaimed, "he lives, and that is all can be
said. His poor wits have gone for ever, the doctor says; and yet there
are times when he knows people, and for a few minutes together will
be quite rational. I doubt he might mend if he lived a different life,
amongst cheerful sights and sounds, and with people that would talk to
him; but to be mewed up for ever with Martha Grimshaw is enough to
drive the sanest folks mad."
"Faith, I have reason to know that. Mrs. Grimshaw is the very
genius of gloom; and these last seven years have not improved her, I
suppose ?"
"Nay, Robin; she has changed for the worse since you left; and yet
she goes more than ever to the chapel in Brewer's-yard. It is not often
I go to the great house, but I never see her that she does not sigh and
groan as if a corpse were in the next chamber."
"Poor Tony!"
"Ay, poor soul! 'tis a dreary life for him. He sits moping by the
fire; and were it not for the comfort of his pipe, I doubt he would have
been dead long ago. "Tis his sole companion and friend."
"Were the scoundrels who made the attack ever brought to jus-
tice?" I asked.
"No, Robin; they were never so much as seen in the county."
"And they were known for no foul work before or after?"
"Never that Jack or I could hear of. No men answering to the
description have been caught by the thief-takers since that time."

"Were no means taken to discover the wretches ?"
"Sir Marcus sent two men down from London-one, an ugly fellow,
that they said was as clever at hunting a thief to the gallows as one
Jonathan Wild that had taught him the trade; but the men could
make nothing of the business."
"And after this no more was done ?”
"What more could be done? Squire Hedges, one of the county
magistrates, was set upon catching the scoundrels, and there was not a
tramp or a vagabond brought before him that he did not suspect as
concerned in the Hauteville burglary; but nothing came of his pains."
This was all my foster-mother could tell me, and it only helped to
confirm my suspicions of foul play. I was determined to see Anthony
Grimshaw and his wife before going back to London; so I bade the
dear soul good-bye, promising to see her again before many months.
"I shall go back to London by to-night's coach," I said. "I have
no purpose in Berkshire but to see you and poor old Anthony."
Before leaving, I asked her one more question. Had she told my
foster-father how cruelly he had wronged me?
"Alas, no, Robin!" she answered, hanging her head. "For two
reasons I dared not tell him that: first, because I must have owned to
having seen the child; and next, because to tell him as much would
have been to set him looking for the wretch that really did the mis-
chief. If my good man doubted Sir Everard Lestrange was the scoun-
drel-I think he is, Robin-he would not sleep another night under
this roof; and I love my home, dear. My child was born in this house.
It would be a kind of death to leave it. And, after all, we know not for
certain that it was Sir Everard stole our girl away from us."
I could but smile sadly at the woman's reasoning. She was the
fondest, tenderest creature I had ever known; yet the finer sense of
honour, which the rugged man had, was wanting in the softer woman.
"Tell my foster-father nothing till I bring his daughter home to
him with a name which is honestly hers," I said; and left the cottage
without waiting to be questioned.
I reflected that, as the widow of Mr. Hay, a soldier slain in Bengal,
my foster-sister might return to her home without shame or scandal.
It must needs be easy enough to prove a marriage performed no more
than seven years ago; and I resolved to visit Paris myself, in order to
obtain due evidence of the fact. It was only by making this first mar-
riage a certainty that I could assure myself from the hazard of any
legal entanglement arising out of the second.
Grimly dreary-splendid as it had seemed to me when I first en-
tered it appeared Hauteville Hall on this the occasion of my revisiting
it after a lapse of years. A strange maid-servant admitted me at a
small iron-clamped door that had been used by the Grimshaws and
myself during the long absence of the family. I was conducted across


the great hall-where the banners looked dingier and more ragged than
of old to eyes that had so lately beheld the blaze of Indian standards
beneath an Indian sun-along the same passages by which I had first
reached Mrs. Grimshaw's dreary sanctum, and so to the door of the
sanctum itself, which the woman opened softly and admitted me.
"A gentleman from London to speak with Mrs. Grimshaw on
business," she solemnly announced in my own words, and retired,
closing the door behind her, leaving me face to face with my old
enemy, who dropped the book she had been reading, and started up
from her chair, staring at me with a ghastly face.
My tutor was dozing in an arm-chair close to the fire, with a hand-
kerchief over his face. My heart yearned to this kind friend in his
affliction, and it was to him I should at once have addressed myself, had
not his wife's awful looks arrested me by a kind of magnetic power.
"Robert Ainsleigh!" she cried.
"Yes, madam," I answered, "and I am pleased that you at last
deign to call me by my right name. During my absence from this
place I have met one who was witness to my mother's wedding, and
am thus able to tell you I never deserved that opprobrious title you
were wont to bestow upon me."
"Indeed, sir; I am glad to hear Miss Lester was not the base
creature folks believed her when she ran away from her home to take
up with your father."
"It is the misfortune of the generous and impulsive to invite the
censure of the malevolent, madam,” I replied. "My mother has passed
to a world where her actions will happily meet a more tender judgment
than they received on earth."
"May I ask what business brings you to Sir Everard Lestrange's
house after these many years? I was not aware that you and he were
on terms of friendship, however you may stand with his lady.”
This was said with a little spiteful shiver. The woman had an
inordinate capacity for hatred, and her manner told me that even
gentle Dorothea was not exempt from her ill-will.
66
"I come to see a very old friend, Mrs. Grimshaw," I replied; "one
for whose kindness I had reason to be grateful at a period when I had
sore need of friendship."
"My husband is in no condition to profit by your politeness, sir,"
replied the pitiless creature; "he knows no one-not even his wife."
"It will be a melancholy satisfaction to me to see him, notwithstand-
ing, madam; and with your leave I will wait till Mr. Grimshaw awakens."
I seated myself without invitation, and Mrs. Grimshaw resumed
her lecture. A glance at the cover of the pamphlet in her hand showed
me that it was one of George Whitfield's innumerable sermons.
"And that woman will account herself justified by faith," I said to
myself," as if she, who has not one Christian thought or impulse, can
with the heart acknowledge Christ. O miserable lip-service!"


For about a quarter of an hour we sat in silence-a silence broken
only by the slow ticking of the eight-day clock, the heavy breathing of
the sleeper, and the falling of the light wood-ashes on the hearth. The
fire was the only comfortable thing in the room.
The striking of the clock awoke my old friend. He pushed the
handkerchief from his face with a tremulous hand, and looked around
him like a child that is newly awakened. Great Heaven, how changed
was that wan white face from the intelligent countenance I had known
so well! It was like a mask moulded from the dead, rather than the
visage of the living.
66
My pipe, mother," he said, stretching his hand towards his wife
without looking at her.
Mrs. Grimshaw filled a clay-pipe that lay beside a brown jar of
tobacco on a little table near the old man's chair, and handed it to him,
assisting him submissively while he lighted it.
"It is not in such vile creature-comforts the benighted soul can
find pleasure," she said, by way of commentary on this small act of
charity. "The bread of life hath no power to nourish or console him.
It is in vain that I read the inspired pages of Mr. Whitfield, or the
learned discourses of the late holy Venn. He doth but stare at me
with a blank unmeaning gaze; and you will have observed that he
calls me mother.' He has by some strange hazard forgotten his later
life, and takes me for his mother, who departed to the rest of the
pious nigh forty years ago. The mind is quite gone you see, Mr. Ains-
leigh."
No, not quite. At the sound of that familiar name, there came a
faint flicker of the lamp which Mrs. Grimshaw thought to be for ever
extinguished.
"Ainsleigh," muttered the old steward, "Ainsleigh! Roderick
Ainsleigh—a wayward lad-proud, but generous; and I think he loved
me. Yes, I am sure he loved me. Poor lad! Dead, they tell me. Yet
who should be master of Hauteville, if not he? There is no one else;
I say
there is no one else."
It seemed as if these broken sentences struck terror to the mind of
Martha Grimshaw. She hastened to the old man, and did her best to
stop his talking.
""Tis your coming has sent him into this fever," she cried angrily;
"he is not fit to be seen by strangers, and cannot bear to see them."
"Strangers! yes, madam, he may be loath to see strangers; but I
am no stranger. I am one who loves him-one whom, I dare venture
to say, he loved.-Come, dear sir," I said, going to my old friend and
kneeling down beside his chair, sorely against the will of his wife, who
lacked only the strength to keep me off by main force, and wanted not
the will to be violent; "come, sir, look at one who has ever loved you;
your friend, your pupil-not Roderick, but Robert Ainsleigh!"
The old steward gazed upon me with a fixed countenance, but the


transient gleam of intelligence that had lighted it a few moments before
was gone; it was a blank.
"Dear sir, do you not remember me?"
"Is it likely he should remember you, when he does not know his
own wife?" Mrs. Grimshaw demanded with a sneer.
I was still kneeling at my old friend's feet, gazing curiously into
his face, with his cold wasted hand clasped in mine. Alas, I could
neither warm that feeble hand into the genial glow of health, nor
awaken one thrill of memory in that frozen brain!
While I thus watched him, the old man suddenly rose from his
chair and tottered with feeble steps towards the door.
"Come, come," he said in a confidential whisper; "I promised-
come, all is safe. I promised to take care. An old man, my lady, but
a faithful servant. Come."
He beckoned to his wife, and then laid his hand, as if mechanically,
upon my arm, and drew me, by no means unwillingly, along with him.
In this manner we left the room, and walked along the narrow passage,
and through the deserted chambers in which I had lived in the brief
period of my gentility. Heavens, how ghastly they looked! with all
their splendour shrouded by holland draperies, and only a glimpse of
the chill March sunlight creeping in here and there through a hole in
a shutter. Mrs. Grimshaw followed us closely, with a countenance
that expressed at once impatience, anger, fear, contempt-a very con-
flict of passions.
My old tutor led me to the foot of the grand staircase and upward
to a room that I remembered with a pang of unspeakable bitterness, a
tenderness that was anguish-that last worst agony the Italian tells of
in his catalogue of hell's various tortures-the memory of departed
happiness. It was my Lady Barbara's morning-room before the door
of which my tutor stopped.
"It is a madness with him to come to this room, where he met
with the accident that lost him his wits," said Mrs. Grimshaw; "he
will come here every day, sometimes twice a-day. The Lord has been
pleased to afflict him grievously in punishment of his sins."
"Nay, madam, I doubt if it were a question of punishment for sin,
my old friend might have kept his wits till others I know of had lost
theirs. I do not believe in that nice scale of earthly reward and pun-
ishment, that debtor-and-creditor account with the Almighty, which
some folks pretend to keep. It has pleased God to afflict a good and
harmless old man in this instance, as He hath often chastised the inno-
cent in days gone by, for some wise purpose of His own."
Mr. Grimshaw rattled the handle of the door impatiently.
"Open, open!" he cried; and his wife, with a most unwilling air,
took a key from her pocket and unlocked the door.
"It is but to encourage his madness to let him come here," she
said;
"and you, sir, who can have no business here, and whose presence

in this house would, I am sure, be displeasing to my master, Sir
Everard Lestrange, will oblige me by leaving me alone with my hus-
band. It can be no pleasure to me that he should exhibit his infirmities
to curious eyes, and I know not at whose invitation you came hither."
"At no invitation, Mrs. Grimshaw. I come to a house in which I
have been grievously wronged." My looks were fixed on her counte-
nance as I said this, and I saw her blench. "And I come chiefly to see
this one old friend; secondly, because I believe this house hides the
secret of a great wrong done to me."
At this her countenance grew livid, and from this moment I was
sure that whatever evil had been done me in my absence, this harridan
was in the secret of it. For the minute my random words had a crush-
ing effect upon her, and she made no further attempt to prevent my
entrance into the chamber where I first heard the story of my birth,
seated at the feet of my benefactress. The room had a disused air, and,
except in the one instance of the ebony cabinet, which had disappeared
from a recess by the fireplace, there was nothing changed since I had
last beheld the apartment. I was very curious to see what purpose,
or what fragmentary memory of some past duty, had brought my tutor
to this room, and I stood apart observing him in silence.
He walked slowly round the room, looking at every article of
furniture with an inquiring gaze, as if he would have demanded of each
inanimate object what it was that he sought. Sometimes he came to a
dead stop, shaking his head with a strange helpless gesture; then with
a faint sigh walked on, and thus completed his round.
"Something missing," he muttered at last. "An old man, my lady,
but a faithful servant. Yet there is something missing. What, what,
what, what?"
No words can describe the piteousness of his tone as he reiterated
this last monosyllable.
"It must be the ebony cabinet he misses!" I exclaimed.
"Likely enough," replied Mrs. Grimshaw, with a carelessness which I
felt sure was but assumed. "He had a childish fancy for taking charge
of this room-the odds and ends of old china, and books, and suchlike;
and the thought of it worries him now his poor wits have gone."
"There must surely have been something of peculiar importance in
this room," said I; "my old friend was too sensible to perform a duty
that might have been better discharged by a housemaid. He must
have had some solemn charge in this room, or the broken memory
would scarce prey upon his mind as it does."
I watched Mrs. Grimshaw as I spoke, and I saw that every word
was a home thrust. Yes, there had been a plot, and the outrage com-
mitted in this room was a part of it. It had been a plot against me,
and this woman was concerned in it, or privy to it. But what
advantage was it to me to know this? and what more than this was I
ever likely to discover?

""Twas strange that nothing was ever heard of the villains who
misused your husband, madam," I said.
"Yes, sir, it was very strange."
"Did his master, Sir Marcus, take no pains to avenge so faithful a
servant ?"
"Sir Marcus did his duty to my husband, sir. All was done that
could be done.”
"And who were the doctors that preserved my old friend's life, and
yet failed to restore his reason?"
"My husband had the attendance of two doctors, sir; Mr. Harris of
Rerton-green, and Mr. Claypole of Willborough."
"What! two country surgeons only? Were no eminent men brought
down from London to pronounce upon his state ?"
"He had every care, sir, and constant prayers. Mr. Whitfield him-
self prayed for him by name during a blessed visit to Willborough."
"And these prayers were to avail instead of medical science! Why,
woman, this is a kind of murder, to let the lamp of reason go out for
want of a judicious breath to coax back the flame."
"I cannot argue with a blasphemer, sir; Elisha went up into his
chamber."
"Elisha lived in the childhood of this earth, when man was still
an infant at the knees of his Creator. The age of miracles is past, and,
instead of His own divine interposition, the Almighty has given us
science. He has taught us to be ourselves the miracle-workers; but
you bundle away the gift in a napkin, and think to save yourself
cheaply and easily by prayer."
"I do not ask your advice, sir, as to the treatment of my husband,
and I am fully satisfied with what was done for him.”
"Ay, madam, I doubt not it suited you that he should lose his wits.
There may be secrets in this house that could scarce be kept hidden
while so honest a man had his senses."
Again I saw that every word went home. And now, having little
more motive for remaining in this house, since my old friend gave me
no token of recognition, I wished Mrs. Grimshaw good-day, and left her,
I felt sure, furious and bewildered, not knowing how much, and cer-
tainly in no wise suspecting how little, I knew of the evil-doings with
which she was acquainted.
