CHAPTER XXII. RELEASE.
I FOUND myself shortly after our release sitting on the wet grass
outside the veranda, in a stupefied condition, staring vacantly on
the prostrate form of my patron, who was stretched at full length
beside me.
I think I had followed him and remained with him by a
kind of instinct, which was something less than sense or affection;
for my brain was dazed, and all that followed during this day, and
several other days, seemed of the nature of a dream.
First came a vision of a spacious chamber, adorned with a certain
barbaric splendour-the throne-chamber of a conqueror-roughly put
together in a house half destroyed by cannon-shot;-a handsome
brown face and glittering eyes, arched brows of deepest black scowl-
ing upon us from beneath a jewelled turban, and round about us a
crowd of grinning slaves and parasites, and the flash of arms, and
gaudy colouring of Moorish uniforms.
This is Suraja Doulah, before whom my patron has been brought
to answer for his misdeeds, and to say what he has done with the
English wealth that is missing from the treasure-chamber of the
factory.
I hear a voice that is strange and yet familiar relating, in faint,
broken accents, the horrors of last night; and looking towards the
speaker, see Mr. Holwell sitting on a heap of plundered books, sup-
ported on each side by a Moorish sergeant, and with a countenance
more ghastly than death.
The Sun of the State has neither time nor attention for this stupid
recital of human agony.
"Tell me where the English treasure is buried," he cries savagely;
"that there is hidden wealth in this place, I know; and you, who held
the fort when the others had fled, doubtless helped to put it away.
Lead my treasurer to the hiding-place, or, by the soul of the Prophet,
you shall be blown from a cannon's mouth before sunset."
"Death, saheb, has no terror for me," answered Mr. Holwell
calmly; "I suffered last night an anguish as many times worse than
sudden death as there are grains in a handful of sand. Think not I

fear death at the mouth of a cannon, or from the lash of a native
executioner."
He then, with a most wonderful calmness, proceeded to assure the
Soubahdar that none of the Company's money had been buried or
hidden, and to explain how it happened that the treasury was so low
at the time of the siege; how the greater part of the native mer-
chandise had been shipped before the month of April, while the ves-
sels containing our British importations had not yet arrived; and how
we were thus as poor in goods as in cash,—which was diminished by
the large sums advanced to native factors, whose cotton-stuffs would
only be ready in the ensuing year.
The tyrant listened, but half-convinced as I could perceive, and,
with a muttered execration, ordered us from his presence as prisoners,
in the charge of the general of the household troops.
Mr. Holwell reminded him of his solemn promise of honourable
treatment; but this question he waived, and still harped upon the hid-
den treasure.
We were carried in a hackerry to the general's camp, which lay
within the Morattoe ditch, and near Omichund's garden, full three
miles from the fort. The rest of the survivors were set at liberty,
with the exception of Mrs. Carey, our one female companion in that
fatal death-chamber. This wretched creature-whose husband, a man
of full habit, had expired of suffocation-happened to be young and
handsome. She was conducted at once to the Soubah's zenana; and
by this one cruel instance, we may divine what fate would have
awaited other Englishwomen had they been so unfortunate as to fall
into the power of this Moorish profligate.
The dead were thrown promiscuously into the ditch of an unfinished
ravelin, and hastily covered with the earth.
Arrived at the camp, we were loaded with fetters, and stowed, with
two miserable companions-also members of the Company's civil ser-
vice into a sepoy's tent, four feet long by three wide, and about
three feet high. Here we lay, half in and half out of the tent. But
although a heavy rain fell without ceasing all through the ensuing
night, it was as a night in Paradise compared with the sufferings that
had gone before.
My next vision is of a march under the burning sun, the march of
four gaunt ghosts, heavily laden with fetters, scarce able to drag their
weary limbs onward at the savage word of command. Then a night
in an open veranda fronting the broad bright river, the four wretches
still laden with irons, and guarded by a strong detachment of stalwart
Mahometans-it is so probable these fever-stricken, fettered creatures
will try to run away.
Now comes a journey in an open boat, a journey that seems end-
less. The four English wretches have broken out into boils, which

spread all over their bodies like the boils of Job. The boat draws a
good deal of water, and the four sufferers lie on a bed of wet bamboos.
When the crew are negligent of baling, the sufferers wake from fitful
feverish slumber to find themselves half under water. But after the
Black Hole this is luxury: yes, even though no one of the sufferers
can move his cramped and fettered limbs without inflicting exquisite
tortures upon himself, or on his companions. These travellers are
half naked, and for sole defence from sun, rain, and dew, possess a
ragged bit of matting, which they begged as they were leaving the
dock-head at Calcutta. Their diet is rice-water gruel.
And so up the noble river to Hooghley, scarce a less ghastly burden
than the corpses which piety sets afloat on the sacred waters. Forward
again, with numerous misadventures, to Santipore, where our open boat
broke down, and a request being sent to the zemindar for other boats.
was refused; and here, after incalculable sufferings endured by my
patron, who was marched to the rebellious zemindar ironed as he was,
his legs streaming with blood, his body faint and exhausted by fever,
fatigue, and pain, we were at last transferred to an open fishing-dingy.
In this boat we endured a new torture from want of room, and so con-
tinued our voyage, which only ended on the afternoon of July 7th,
having thus lasted thirteen days.
Much kindness had been shown us on our way, notably by Mr. Law,
the manager of the French factory, who bribed our guards to indulge
us, and provided us with clothes, linen, provisions, liquors, and cash.
We landed at Muxadavad, and after being marched as felons
through the streets of the city, were deposited in an open stable near
the Soubah's palace. Here we lay, closely guarded on one side by
Moors, on the other by Gentoos, and almost stifled by the crowds of
spectators who came from all quarters of the city to stare at this pleas-
ing show, and so blocked us in from morning till night that we nar-
rowly escaped a second suffocation.
On the 11th of July the Soubah arrived at the city from Calcutta,
which he had rechristened Allynuggur, the Fort of Ally,* in pious com-
memoration of his heroic victory. We were now moved from the stable
to a bungalow, and flattered with hopes of speedy release. These hopes
were, however, suddenly destroyed by the intelligence that the Soubah
had determined upon sending us back to Calcutta in irons, to be deli-
vered to the mercy of Manickchund, the new governor. My patron
now abandoned himself to despair, protesting that we should never be
got alive out of the hands of that Hindoo miser.
Seeing nothing but destruction before us, we dined with the des-
perate appetite of wretches doomed to immediate execution, and lay
down to sleep with the lazy apathy of despair. From this slumber we
were wakened suddenly by the chief of our guard, who told us the
Ally was the son-in-law of the Prophet Mahomet, and is venerated by all
Mahometans.

Soubah was approaching on his way to the palace. Resolved to appeal
once more to this wretch, we entreated the guard to leave us free to
see and be seen by him; and when the royal litter came abreast of our
shelter, saluted the tyrant with the usual salaam.
It seemed as if some touch of pity was actually awakened in that
brutal breast; or it is more likely Suraja Doulah was weary of tortur-
ing us, and was at last convinced of our poverty. He beckoned us to
the side of his palanquin, stared at us inquisitively from head to foot
for some moments, as at some curious spectacle, and then ordered the
guard to strike off our irons and set us free.
It was all the work of a few minutes. We stood in the road staring
at one another stupidly, until one of us burst into tears, and we fell
upon each other's breasts and embraced as Englishmen rarely do in the
most moving moments.
CHAPTER XXIII.
I TAKE SERVICE WITH A NEW MASTER.
AFTER receiving hospitable entertainment and much kindness from
the gentlemen of the Dutch factory, we started on our journey to Fulta,
where the fugitives from Calcutta were now stationed. The care of our
Dutch friends had done much to recover us; but we were still shattered
in health and spirits, and the shadows of what we had been before
that fatal night of the 20th of June. At Fulta we found nothing
but misery. The frightened creatures who had left Calcutta had fled
for the most part without so much as a change of clothing, and were
now herded together in the ships, where they slept on the decks, ex-
posed to all the hardships of weather, and threatened on every side by
death; for this part of the river is most unhealthy, and a malignant
fever had already begun to decimate our countrymen when Mr. Holwell
and I arrived at Fulta.
He spoke with considerable warmth of the folly the English were
guilty of in remaining at this miserable station one hour after the wind
and weather permitted them to make for Madras.
me.
"These people have a perfect genius for fatal mistakes," he said to
"What could be easier for them than to push on to Madras? yet
they stick here, at a constant waste of life and money. Since ships
have to be kept here in order to protect them, they say that to leave
the river would be to give up the cause for lost. It would be but
abandoning a cause already lost, and lost by their own misconduct.
These miserable creatures can do nothing to retake Calcutta; and what-
ever effort is to be made for its recapture would be assisted by our
departure, as the Nabob would consider we had abandoned the case
as hopeless, and would thus be thrown off his guard."
The fugitives were, however, in no humour to listen to reason.
They had lost everything. The wealth and independence for which

they had toiled for years, the golden fruit of many a lucky speculation,
the prize of many a bold adventure, had been snatched from them in a
single night. Nothing could be more complete than the ruin of the
English in Bengal at this juncture; and he must have been a bold
visionary who could dream we should ever regain our footing there.
Happily for us, there was ONE such daring dreamer; but not amongst
the fever-stricken, despairing fugitives of Fulta.
Here we remained for five long dreary months, during which I had
some occupation in assisting my patron to draw up a full and particular
account of the defence and surrender of Fort William, together with
the intrigues that preceded the Soubah's attack. This paper proved of
great value to him afterwards when anonymous slanderers, aided by
the malice of a faction, would have stigmatised him as the chief cause
of our troubles in the June last past.
This dismal interval gave me but too much leisure in which to
brood over my private troubles, and above all to consider that strange.
piece of information which Philip Hay had volunteered in the Black-
Hole Prison. Whether that faithful-unfaithful companion of mine had
outlived the 20th of June I knew not; but he had not yet appeared at
Fulta, where most of the survivors had found their way after receiving
some kindness from Omichund, who was now high in the favour of
Suraja Doulah, and who, in spite of his wrongs, had shown this much
charity to the English.
"I have little doubt the wily old Gentoo betrayed us, Bob," said
Mr. Holwell; "but when he moved the hidden spring of the machine
that crushed us, he knew not how deadly an instrument he was setting
in motion. The ruin he intended for us has ingulfed his own trea-
sures, and he has suffered alike in his affections and his pocket. But
so long as he refills the last, I fancy he can bring himself to endure the
wounds inflicted on the first. They say he is in a fair way to get his
money restored to him by the Soubah, and he seems to take the anni-
hilation of his family with exemplary fortitude."
"Yet the Hindoos are an affectionate race, sir."
6
"True, Bob; but the man who gives his soul to the worship of
lucre has no room for any other affection. Remember the inspired
dictum: Thou canst not serve God and Mammon.' And when Shy-
lock has to choose between his daughter and his money-bags, be sure he
I will take the latter."
"I hope the English will not be so weak as to trust Omichund
again, sir,” I said.
"Trust him? No, Robert; but if we want his services we shall buy
them. The man will sell Suraja Doulah to us, as he sold us to
Suraja Doulah, if we can pay him his price. We English traders
have never been over-particular in the choice of our tools. We should
be more than human did we not sometimes take a lesson in political
manoeuvring from these unscrupulous Moors."

At Fulta I frequently saw the gentle Indian maiden whom it had
been my good fortune to rescue from a violent end. The simple crea-
ture regarded me with so warm a gratitude as to shame my small and
accidental service; but when I suggested some plan for conveying her
back to her grandfather, she shrank affrighted from the idea of such
a return. By her association with the English, and the performance
of small menial duties in good Mrs. Witherington's service, she had
lost caste; and she told me in all seriousness that her grandfather
would rather have known her dead with the rest than so dishonoured
a survivor.
"Let me stay with the good English lady," she pleaded; "and
with the dear English babies who love me. They are sick, and they
need Tara."
Sure I am that a more faithful nurse never watched a sick-bed than
this dear girl. I was stricken with fever myself while I stayed aboard
ship, and she tended me with unwearying devotion; a care so fond
and tender that, had I not been bound heart and soul by the old hope-
less love, I must needs have given her my affection, and formed one of
those alliances which are of such frequent occurrence.
Had I so pledged my heart and my honour, as God is my judge, I
would have been true to the vows thus made, and would have scorned
to repudiate a tie so holy, as I have but too often seen such ties repu-
diated by my countrymen.
One day during my slow recovery from the fever, some unconscious
touch of tenderness in the Gentoo maiden's tone and manner awakened
me to a sense of danger to her in this most innocent companionship.
As her deliverer, she had been from the first inclined to regard me
with a somewhat romantic feeling; and in the confusion of our wretched
existence at Fulta we two had been thrown more together than we
could have been under any but such exceptional circumstances. Un-
intentionally to win this gentle heart, and wound it, would have been
a real affliction to me; so, convinced that in such matters candour is
ever wiser than diplomacy, I made some excuse for relating the story
of my youth, and told Tara how I had loved, and how I had lost all
dear to me in the home I had left so far away.
The passionate sorrow with which she heard the conclusion of my
story showed me that my fancy had been no vain delusion of a cox-
comb, and that plain-mannered, dark-faced Robert Ainsleigh had indeed
been so unlucky as to win this tender heart. All that the affection of
a brother could do to alleviate a grief which I was bound to respect,
and in a manner ignore, I did; and my Indian maiden smiled as she
parted from me. But from this time I carefully avoided any renewal
of our familiar intercourse; and when I by and by left the wretched
settlement, our parting, although affectionate, was of the briefest.
Mr. Holwell's property embarked in the Diligence Snow had all


fallen into the hands of the enemy, and he now decided upon return-
ing to England for the restoration of his shattered health. My own
savings, the yearly residue of a very modest salary, and the result of
two or three happy investments, had been confiscated with the effects
of my patron, and I was now penniless. Thus, though I yearned to
revisit England with a passionate longing, I felt myself constrained to
remain in Bengal, since I could not with a decent grace ask the favour
of my passage-money from Mr. Holwell's impoverished resources.
To stay behind seemed a dismal prospect, for my patron's departure
would leave me without a friend. The fugitives of Fulta were all too
much disgusted with their reverse of fortune to be capable of charity.
Their sole delight consisted in quarrelling and recrimination; and
until this period of my life I had no adequate notion of the pettiness
to which humanity can sink when unsustained by fortitude.
"And these are Christian gentlemen!" I said to myself as I surveyed
their sordid squabbles. "O for a generous heathen, a Themistocles
or a Cincinnatus, to show these paltry spirits how a great mind can rise
superior to calamity!"
I have since thought that my own fortitude under the loss of
fortune may possibly have been attributable to the fact that I had
very little to lose, and that I may have been somewhat hard on these
unhappy merchants, who had lost a great deal.
In imagining that my position would be utterly hopeless after my
patron's departure, I had done that worthy gentleman much wrong.
He was at once too kind and conscientious to leave me friendless, and
a few weeks before he was to sail in the Siren sloop announced his
intentions regarding me.
"I can scarce believe that the English in Bengal are completely
ruined, Bob," he began, "though they deserve no better fate. By the
help of Providence and Clive, I think we may weather the storm,
always provided the committees of Madras and Fulta do not wreck
the ship by their absurd jealousies and squabbles for precedence. Now
in the event of Clive setting us on our feet again, be sure he will do
it in a grand manner. The conqueror of Arcot is of the stamp of your
antique heroes, and does everything on a large scale. So in the case
of success there will be chances for a daring young fellow like your-
self; and it is on this account that I mean to leave you in Bengal,
though I at one time thought of taking you back to England with
me."
"O sir!" I gasped, my heart beating a hundred to the minute.
"Heavens, how the boy's eyes sparkle! And you would like to go
back to England, and challenge Mr. Lestrange to mortal combat, and
ride off with his blood upon your coat-sleeve to woo his widow? No,
Bob; I have considered your story, and do not see that a return yonder
would do you any good, while I am sure you may profit by remaining
here."


"I will do whichever you please, sir," I answered with, I fear, an
almost sullen resignation.
"Wisely spoken, Robert; and now for my plans. Your knowledge
of the languages renders you a very valuable coadjutor to any man in
a public post. I wrote some time ago to Watts, who is just now a
kind of State prisoner at Chinsurah, telling him of my intention to re-
turn to England, and recommending you to his service in the same
capacity you have held with me. Any fortunate change in our affairs
will of course restore him to power; and in the mean time I have no
doubt he is busy in some secret manner, since he has a rare talent for
diplomacy. As I expected, he promptly accepts the transfer, and if
you are content to be confidential secretary to Mr. Watts, instead of
to John Zephaniah Holwell, the post is ready for you."
I thanked Mr. Holwell heartily for his consideration, and was very
glad thus to obtain my release from Fulta, and to proceed as best
I might up the river to Chinsurah, which station I reached early in
December. Here I found Mr. Watts established, in a very doubtful
frame of mind as to the prospects of the Honourable East India Com-
pany in Bengal; though he knew that Admiral Watson, with a small
armament, was on his way to our rescue, and that, after much squab-
bling of committees and jealousy of brother-officers, Robert Clive had
been finally accredited with full powers for the delivery of the English
out of the hands of Suraja Doulah.
CHAPTER XXIV.
CLIVE TO THE RESCUE!
THE pains of disappointed avarice had imbittered the tyrant's suc-
cess at Calcutta. The pitiful condition of the treasury, and the limited
amount of merchandise which could be realised for the royal plunderer
after the daring depredations of his soldiery, had been a death-blow to
his hopes. The native inhabitants of Calcutta had all contrived to
make off with their treasures while the Soubah's army was on the road
to the city, with the exception of the ill-fated Omichund; and the only
prize in the shape of private fortune swallowed by the royal maw was
forty thousand rupees and a variety of valuable effects belonging to
this Gentoo merchant. Thus, that English caution which had im-
prisoned Omichund on the eve of the siege had thrown this large
amount into the lap of our worst enemy.
Disgusted beyond all measure with the poverty of Calcutta, where
he had perhaps expected a booty as great as Nadir Shah carried away
from imperial Delhi, the Soubahdar consigned the governorship of the
Fort of Ally to the Gentoo Manickchund, and turned his royal back
upon his conquest in search of new victories. In the month of October
he achieved a rapid conquest of a rebellious relation, the Phoujdar of

Purneah, and having seen this youth slaughtered, and his country re-
duced to submission, returned in triumph to Muxadavad, where he
expressed himself convinced of our complete annihilation, assuring his
low-born favourites that we were a very beggarly set of people, and
that the whole of Europe did not contain ten thousand men.
From this blissful state of ignorance Suraja Doulah was disturbed
by the news that Robert Clive and Admiral Watson had retaken Cal-
cutta by force of arms, after a vain attempt to obtain its peaceful sur-
render from Manickchund. It had been almost a bloodless victory,
for the might of Mahometan arms had fled panic-stricken at the aspect
of British men-of-war, with British soldiers on board them, brighten-
ing the broad river with an awful glory, while to landward sounded
the rattle of the cannonade from Colonel Clive's artillery.
This capture had been achieved after a spirited skirmish in a green
hollow, close by a deserted village of mud-huts, within a mile and a
half of Buz-buzia, where the English were surprised asleep by Manick-
chund and his army. This surprise might have proved fatal for
the English arms, had a lesser spirit than Clive's ruled the fortunes
of the day. The men had dragged two field-pieces and a tumbril of
ammunition through a swampy country, and had arrived at this halt-
ing-place, after a sixteen-hours' march, worn-out with fatigue, and
entirely ignorant of the enemy's vicinity.
Happily, Clive and British valour prevailed against strength and
numbers immeasurably superior, and a ball chancing to come unplea-
santly close to Governor Manickchund's turban, that distinguished
Hindoo turned his elephant's head, and the whole army went lumber-
ing back through swamp and jungle to the fort named in veneration
of the god whose shrine was so soon to be overthrown.
The 1st of January 1757 witnessed the taking of Calcutta by Wat-
son and Clive, a noble New-Year's gift, which the Colonel offered to
the Directors of the East India Company, and for which, with all other
benefits from the same daring hand, they showed themselves as usual
ungrateful in the future. Some ill-feeling was displayed between the
naval and military heroes on this occasion, Admiral Watson allowing
Clive to be rudely repulsed from the fort which he had helped to cap-
ture, and Clive asserting his own rights with his usual spirit.
The English flocked back to their once flourishing settlement to
find a scene of desolation. The best houses had been demolished, or
damaged by fire. A Moorish mosque, built with the materials of ruined
English habitations, defaced the fort; all the prosperous native in-
habitants had fled from the rapacity of Manickchund, and squalid
poverty prevailed in every quarter. The private losses of inhabitants
were roughly estimated at two millions.
Before January was over, Clive and his army, supported by the
naval force, had taken Hooghley, a wealthy Moorish city, close to Chin-
surah, whose inhabitants had been thrown into consternation by the

capture of Calcutta, and were ill-prepared to resist a foe they had
begun to consider invincible, so speedily do these Mahomedans change
from insolence to cowardice. We heard the cannon roaring as the
ships battered the fort, and at nightfall were gladdened by the news of
victory. This conquest gave the English army a handsome booty, and
must have awakened the Soubahdar from his pleasant delusion respect-
ing the insignificance of European arms.
Hooghley was scarce taken when news of the declaration of war
between England and France arrived from Aleppo. These tidings Mr.
Watts considered to the last degree alarming, and at once hastened to
Calcutta, taking me with him, in order to be present at the meetings
of the select committee. These gentlemen expected that the French
forces at Chandernagore would at once join the Nabob, as it was well
known that the ambitious Bussy thirsted for the extirpation of the
English from Bengal, and for that extension of French empire which
had been the daring dream of Dupleix.
Impressed with the belief that even British valour would be power-
less against the combined forces of Suraja Doulah and Bussy, Clive
at once wrote to Juggat Séth, the great Gentoo banker at Muxadavad,
requesting his mediation with the Soubahdar, with a view to arranging
a peace. Tidings of the capture of Hooghley happened, however, to
reach the council-chamber at the same time as this pacific overture,
and the mediator found the tyrant frantic with rage against the Eng-
lish plunderers who had sacked his town, and eager for an instantaneous
march to Calcutta.
Hither he hurried, while Clive, hearing of his approach, made
prompt preparations to receive him, and at once encamped his forces
in a strong position on the outskirts of the settlement. To the native
mind the very tidings of the Soubahdar's march carried panic-neigh-
bouring villages refused to send us our usual supplies, Bengalese
troops deserted. We had but few bullocks for draught, and but
one horse in the whole settlement, and he a stranger, brought from
Madras.
Sorely doubtful of success, and as prudent as he was bold, Colonel
Clive now wrote to the Nabob, inviting him to peaceful negotiation.
The Nabob replied with vast cordiality, but continued his progress;
and at daybreak on the 3d of February the flames of burning vil-
lages reddened the sky to the northward, and the flash of arms and
sound of barbarous music announced the approach of the Soubahdar's
army.
Suraja Doulah encamped in Omichund's garden, leaving two-thirds
of his army on the other side of the ditch, while the remaining third of
his forces took possession of a raised causeway that crossed the Mo-
rattoe ditch, and thus led into the Company's territory. When I per-
ceived their position I could but wonder that Colonel Clive had suffered
them to seize a post so formidable.


Having pitched his royal tent in Omichund's garden, no doubt at
the invitation of the wily Gentoo, the Soubahdar held a durbar in full
state. To this council came two of the Company's servants, who were
searched by the prince's prime minister, before entering his tent, lest
they should carry hidden weapons wherewith to extinguish that light,
the Sun of the State.
These two English gentlemen, Mr. Scrafton and Mr. Walsh, found
the Nabob surrounded by all his chief officers, and by a circle of scowl-
ing rascals of enormous stature, men of low birth, but much affected
by the Sun of the State on account of their bulk and ferocious
aspect.
These men sat frowning at our deputies throughout the audience;
and Mr. Scrafton afterwards told me how he had at this juncture re-
called to mind the murderous plot by which this young man's grand-
uncle, Allaverdy, had beguiled the Morattoe general into his tent, there
to slay him.
With the ever-present fear of assassination, our gentlemen ventured
to remonstrate with the Nabob for his breach of courtesy in thus enter-
ing our settlement while he was beguiling Colonel Clive with offers of
peace, and then handed his Mahometan highness a paper stating the
proposals of the Company. This the Nabob perused in gloomy silence,
and anon dismissing the assembly, after some rather alarming whispering
between himself and his officers, bade our deputies repair to the tent
of his prime minister, there to await a more private conference.
"Egad, Ainsleigh," said Mr. Scrafton, as he related the adventure
to me next day, "I had a sensation as of cold water trickling down
my back the whole time I was in the yellow-faced heathen's presence,
and I think had you seen those truculent scoundrels of his glaring at
us from under their enormous turbans, you'd scarce wonder at our dis-
taste for the situation. As we left the tent, that Gentoo rogue Omi-
chund whispered us to take care of ourselves, with a look that I shall
never forget. Once safe outside the Nabob's tent, you may be sure we
did not go to the prime minister's. The invitation sounded too much.
like the farmer's wife's one of 'Dilly, dilly, come and be killed.' We
bade our black servants extinguish the torches with which they had
escorted us, preferring the shelter of darkness to so dangerous a dis-
tinction, made off for Perrin's redoubt as fast as we could scamper, and
thence in safety to the camp."
It was the report of these two gentlemen that decided Colonel Clive
upon an immediate attack; and about three o'clock in the morning of
the 5th he marched out with the chief part of his force, assisted by five
or six hundred seamen, who drew the artillery and carried ammu-
nition. At six the English entered the enemy's camp in a thick fog.
Had this fog cleared off after they had made themselves masters of the
camp, the colonel would doubtless have successfully executed his bold.
design, which was to make his first assault upon a train of heavy artil-


lery, spike the guns, and push straight forward to the Nabob's head-
quarters. But the fog thickening to a dense impenetrable darkness
threw our men into confusion, and Clive had a sharp contest with a
strong body of the enemy, from which he withdrew the poorer by two
field-pieces and an eighth of his small army. Yet, so poor a thing
was this descendant of the hardy Tartar general, Allaverdy, that a
skirmish, which Clive considered a defeat, struck terror to his craven
spirit, and he looked upon this night-attack on his camp as the extreme
of desperate valour, and, while shivering in his jewelled shoes, roundly
abused his officers for their arrant cowardice. His own losses had been
indeed far greater than ours, many officers of distinction, with six hun-
dred common soldiers, five hundred horses, four elephants, some camels,
and innumerable bullocks, having perished in the struggle. It was with
difficulty this cowardly prince, whose host of forty thousand strong
could not sustain him against Clive and two thousand, was induced to
spend a second night in such dangerous quarters. His whole army
were on the watch from sunset to sunrise, and an incessant firing of
cannon and small arms was kept up as a precautionary measure, lest
we should again run our raid upon this host of Moorish heroes. It is
strange how these eastern soldiers take their colour from the captain
who leads them, and thus the men who could achieve wonders of valour
under grim old Allaverdy prove the veriest cravens when a craven
commands them. A Nadir Shah has but to plant his banner on Persia's
barren mountains, and a host of conquerors arise at his call. A Clive
takes a handful of sepoys, and the Moorish legions shrivel like the
jungle foliage before the rush of a conflagration. What is this subtle
spirit of the master-mind which can thus infect battalions, this won-
drous Promethean spark that from the breath of one man's nostrils
can fire an army? Yet, when some man like Clive has made our arms
victorious, there is always a little knot of cavillers ready to dispute his
claim to praise or reward, while some small evening paper, the oracle
of coffee-house macaronies, must have its little vapid sneer at the
hero's achievements. I lived to see Robert Clive hated because,
while pouring millions into the coffers of the East India Company,
he had contrived to make his own fortune. I lived to read the com-
plaint of one fine gentleman that, while the Roman conquerors were
content with a garland of oak, our Indian hero had secured a handsome
income. I lived to see that man who redeemed India from the hands
of our mortal enemies turn indignantly upon his interrogators of the
House of Commons, and tell them that had he been a sheep-stealer
they could scarce have questioned him more insolently.
This is a long digression; but when I remember what I saw Robert
Clive achieve in Bengal, and consider his experience of a commercial
nation's gratitude, I am apt to grow warmer than becomes the writer
of a sober chronicle such as this.

CHAPTER XXV.
FAST AND LOOSE.
THE tables were now turned, and the Nabob as eager for peace
as he had been insolently neglectful of our advances. Swift was his
retirement from the city whose capture six months before had so
swelled his pride. The forty thousand black soldiers, with their train
of elephants and camels, their herds of draught-oxen, their cymbals
and clarions and gay barbaric banners, turned right-about-face, and
made the best of their way homewards.
A treaty was concluded, giving the English all they asked-the
restoration of their factories, with such effects and moneys as had
been brought to account in the books of the Nabob's government, the
permission to fortify Calcutta, and the confirmation of all those privi-
leges obtained by Mr. Hamilton, the English surgeon, from the Em-
peror Ferokhshere. Such was the happy result of Clive's bold invasion
of the enemy's quarters.
While the Nabob's ponderous army was still on the road, a pre-
sent of costly native dresses arrived for Admiral Watson and Colonel
Clive, according to the custom of this country, together with a pro-
posal of alliance offensive and defensive against all enemies. This
was precisely what the select committee and Colonel Clive desired,
since Bussy's late successes in the Carnatic had brought the French
power dangerously near to Bengal, where they already possessed a
considerable force at their settlement of Chandernagore. The Nabob's
offerings were therefore accepted with all courtesy, and as much affec-
tion as if the one hundred and twenty-six unhappy creatures who
perished miserably in the Black-Hole prison had never been upon the
face of this earth. Such Christian-like forgiveness and oblivion of
past wrongs is doubtless a necessary element of state policy; yet while
this alliance was making I could not but remember one unfinished
ditch of the ravelin, into which an undistinguishable heap of corpses
had been cast without so much as a murmured "requiescant in pace"
from any Christian lips.
A handsome monument now surmounts that common burial-place
of so much virtue, valour, and promise; but at this time of which I
write the murders of the 20th of June were yet unavenged; nor did
it seem anyone's special business to avenge them. Indeed, I think this
iniquitous sacrifice of life will make more impression on the minds of
mankind in the pages of history than it ever produced on the inhabit-
ants of Calcutta, many among whom I encountered some ten years
afterwards who had not so much as heard the story of our sufferings
on that never-to-be-forgotten night.
In my position as Mr. Watts's private secretary, I was present at

an interview in which Colonel Clive expressed himself freely upon the
subject of our European enemies.
"It is a question whether the French or the English are to be
masters of Bengal," said the Colonel, whose face always darkened when
he spoke of our famous rivals. "Be sure, Watts, there are no bounds
to the ambition of Bussy; and if once he leaves the Carnatic he will
make himself master of Suraja Doulah, who is as weak as he is cruel.
Be sure of that. I trust this Mahometan tyrant about as much as I
would trust a tiger I had just wounded. So long as the brute can
scarce crawl he is at our feet; but give him power to spring, and he
will be at our throats. His pledges of alliance will be cast to the
winds if once he has Bussy's men at his back. He owes the French
no grudge, you see, for they have not made him bite the dust as we
have; and he is too short-sighted to consider that their conquests in
the Carnatic would be repeated here at his expense. Rely on it, the
time has come for decisive action. We must not suffer ourselves to be
fooled or hoodwinked by a weak-minded boy's cunning. Chandernagore
must fall."
No time was lost in preparing the ground. Omichund, who had
been taken once more into favour with the English, was despatched at
once to the Nabob, as the most suitable person to sound him upon the
subject of an early attack on the French settlement, which would be
impossible after the setting-in of the southern monsoon.
Omichund returned by and by with a somewhat unsatisfactory
account of the Nabob, who could not be brought to give a straight
and clear assent to our wishes. He, however, affected excessive friend-
liness, requested that Mr. Watts might be appointed the Company's
deputy at Muxadavad, and asked the loan of twenty English gunners
to serve in his own artillery,—a trick intended to blind us to his
treachery, as we had afterwards good reason to know.
This choice of the Nabob's caused Mr. Watts to depart at once for
Muxadavad, I going in attendance upon him. I think there can be
little doubt the tyrant selected my new patron on account of his some-
what mild and peaceable temper, which had permitted the too easy
surrender of Cassimbazar, an act that must needs have impressed the
Nabob with an idea of Mr. Watts's weakness. He had before long
reason to see with how perfect a heroism these placable natures can
sometimes confront mortal danger.
Now followed a wearisome series of intrigues-a tangled skein, the
threads of which passed through my hands. Omichund, who now
affected an eager desire to serve the Company, had accompanied us
to the capital, a vast and wealthy city, as populous and much richer
than London, but boasting little splendour of architecture, and no at-
traction in the matter of cleanliness. The streets are close and nar-
row, the drainage abominable; and while commercial enterprise and
oriental luxury continue to render the city a wonderful one, this popu-

lous capital has little beauty wherewith to captivate the eye of a
European traveller.
When I had last visited the city it was as a prisoner in irons, scarce
able to drag my tortured limbs to the shed where I was to lie. I came
now under vastly different circumstances, and was luxuriously lodged
with my patron in a house near the palace, and on the banks of the
river, whence I went to the council-chamber very often, to carry letters
and assist as interpreter at some solemn interview.
It would be idle to enter closely into the details of an intrigue
which might seem trivial to the reader, though to us of life-and-death
interest. The permission to attack Chandernagore was given and re-
tracted many times; and it was obvious to Mr. Watts and myself that
the friendship of the Nabob was with our enemies, and not with us.
It was only after the receipt of a threatening letter from Admiral
Watson, wherein the sturdy English sailor swore he would kindle such
a blaze in Bengal as all the waters of the Ganges should not quench,
that Suraja Doulah gave a reluctant consent to the siege. Even
this tardy concession was no sooner yielded than it was revoked; but
too late. The Admiral and the Colonel laughed at the revocation as
an insolent folly; bigger vessels than had ever. been seen so high up
the river were navigated from Calcutta and laid alongside the batteries
of Chandernagore, while Clive had prepared the way for a naval victory
by disabling the enemy's guns. It was no doubtful conquest. The
French surrendered at discretion, and were treated with much gene-
rosity.
The fall of Chandernagore struck new terror to the coward soul of
the Nabob, and increased by tenfold his secret anger against us. But
this was no moment in which to show his teeth, since at this very time
came the news that an army of Patans-that fearless and hardy race
before whose audacity the greatest captains of the East have quailed-
were marching upon his province of Behar. So the prince wrote com-
plimentary letters to the Admiral and the Colonel, and treated Mr.
Watts with unusual courtesy. He further evinced his friendship by
offering Chandernagore to the English on the same terms as it had been
enjoyed by the French; but he did not remove a division of his army
which he had sent to Plassey, on the island of Cassimbazar, thirty
miles from Muxadavad. In a word, he played fast and loose with us;
and while protesting his fidelity, and pledging himself to protect our
interests, he encouraged the French, whom we had beaten, to remain in
Bengal, wrote secret letters to M. Law, the chief of the French factory
at Cassimbazar, and languished for the coming of Bussy. We had
shown ourselves his masters, and he hated us with a savage hatred.
It was not till this fact was patent, and the Soubah, in a fit of un-
governable rage, had threatened to impale Mr. Watts-a threat which
my patron heard with supreme coolness-that we began to give ear to
the hints of Omichund, who was a daily attendant at the Nabob's

durbar, and had ears to hear the lowest whisper of intrigue, and a nose
to scent the faintest breath of treason. This subtle scoundrel informed
us that Suraja Doulah was detested as much as he was feared, even
by his own chief officers, and scarce loved by the low favourites whose
base-born feet he had allowed to trample on the necks of Moorish
gentlemen.
"Why should the English wait and pray for my lord's consent to
extirpate their enemies?" he asked of Mr. Watts. "Why should they
hang upon his looks and exist by his pleasure; to be threatened one
day with death, and the next caressed and complimented with treachery
more fatal than death? At Calcutta last year the English were weak,
very weak; but they are strong to-day. Have they not Sabat Jung,
the firm in war, as their leader? and whom shall they fear? It is
no longer the time to crouch and crawl; the hour has come for them
to strike. The Nabob is hated by all; yes, by all. He has imprisoned
Manickchund, and made him pay a million of rupees for such poor
profits as he may have obtained in Calcutta." (Here my gentleman
made a piteous face as in compassion for his brother Gentoo, who was
of his own kidney.) "He has offended Meer Jaffier; and in any con-
test between those two the army will stand by their paymaster and
general. He has degraded his treasurer Roydoulub by subjecting him
to the authority of his low favourite, Moonlol. The Séths fear him,
though to them he is civil; for they know his greedy nature, and that
it can scarce be long before his clutch shall fasten on their gold. Yar
Khan Latty, an officer of some renown, is fast friends with the Séths.
He has two thousand horse under his command. The Nabob must
march with the chief part of his army against the Patans; he has
sworn to exterminate the English on his return. Let Sabat Jung,
your colonel, strike the first blow; and let the English join Yar Khan
Latty, seize Muxadavad, and proclaim Latty Nabob. He will give
them all favours they choose to ask. Give them? He will be their
servant to do their bidding, if it were the surrender of half his king-
dom."
Thus argued Omichund, doubtless tempted by splendid promises
from Latty and the Séths, and ever ready to sell his soul to the highest
bidder.
It was about this time that I ventured to speak to the old Gentoo
upon the subject of his domestic bereavements. I found him very
calm; but he displayed more feeling than I had expected to see in one
who had so abandoned himself to the worship of Mammon. When I
told him of his granddaughter's safety he was deeply moved, and
thanked and blessed me with much agitation, and promised me a noble
present. This, however, he contrived to forget; nor should I have
cared to accept a rupee from his secret stores, so deep a contempt had
I for his sordid nature, and so little faith in his sincerity.
He told me that Juggernaut Sing, his head jemadar, the wretch

who had slaughtered thirteen unoffending women, was a distant kins-
man of his own, a man of equal piety and courage; and it was evident
from the whole tenor of his discourse that he considered the bloody
act of this fanatical murderer excusable, if not laudable.
"Juggernaut is now at Calcutta," he said, "but just recovered
from his wounds. He has a ferocious hate of the English; and it is
but to please me he can be brought to live peaceably among them.”
I remembered the ghastly face and blood-stained mantle of the
man I had seen leading our enemies against Fort William, and the
savage yell of rapture with which he had betrayed our weakest points
to the foe.
At Omichund's request I wrote to Mr. Witherington, with whose
family his granddaughter was now living at Calcutta, begging him to
find some means of sending her safely to Muxadavad.
In something more than a week the damsel arrived, having travelled
by water; but on going to the landing-place to meet her I found the
old man there before me. He had been on the watch for her during
the last three days. He had a litter waiting, into which he hurried
his granddaughter before she could speak a word to me. But when
the bearers had carried her off to his house he lingered to thank me
once more for her safety.
"You have redeemed an old man from desolation, and have given
him a fresh object in life," he said; "Omichund may yet leave great-
grandchildren behind him to inherit his wealth-if the Nabob should
ever pay me the compensation he has promised for my losses in Cal-
cutta," he added hastily.
I could scarce refrain from a smile at this, for I knew the Nabob
had already paid this Gentoo miser half the promised compensation.
"You would perhaps have liked to speak to the maiden," he said
presently; "but it is better not. She has already lost caste by her
intercourse with your people, and, for the bigoted amongst us, is a
pariah. But I have lived among English merchants, and learned to
regard these things less strictly. There was once a time in which
the wives and daughters of Hindostan mingled freely among strangers;
but the Mahometans have taught us to distrust our women, and to
hide the brightness of our homes."
With this he departed; and by and by, as I walked homewards
through the narrow streets, sweltering in the hot breeze of noontide,
I looked wistfully at the closed shutters of the merchant's dwelling,
behind which my tender little Hindoo maid was perchance watching.
No, I had never loved her. That one pale English face, enshrined in
my heart of hearts, was an image not to be blotted out by all the
houris of Inde:-but she had loved me; and a man must be made
of a hard material who has not some chance moment of dangerous
tenderness for the girl who has loved him in vain.
It was with a feeling of extreme pain that I heard, a few weeks


after this, the tidings of Juggernaut Sing's arrival in Muxadavad,
and of a marriage between him and his master's granddaughter. It
seems that the Brahmins, to whom the fanatic youth had confessed and
defended his deed of slaughter, had approved the crime; and Omichund
did not shrink from bestowing his grandchild upon the man whose
hands were red with her mother's blood. But what human affection
can be expected from a people whose devilish creed teaches them to
cast their babes beneath the murderous wheels of Juggernaut, and
make a family of children motherless by the burning alive of an un-
offending widow ?
Of the poor girl's feelings I scarce dared think; and when I re-
membered our friendly companionship at Fulta, and the tender devo-
tion with which she had watched my sick-bed, my heart bled sorely
for her griefs. Had it been possible to have saved her in any desperate
manner from a fate to my mind so terrible, I would have hazarded the
attempt; but Mr. Watts's counsel and my own reflections alike con-
vinced me that her rescue was impossible.


CHAPTER XXV.
FAST AND LOOSE.
THE tables were now turned, and the Nabob as eager for peace
as he had been insolently neglectful of our advances. Swift was his
retirement from the city whose capture six months before had so
swelled his pride. The forty thousand black soldiers, with their train
of elephants and camels, their herds of draught-oxen, their cymbals
and clarions and gay barbaric banners, turned right-about-face, and
made the best of their way homewards.
A treaty was concluded, giving the English all they asked-the
restoration of their factories, with such effects and moneys as had
been brought to account in the books of the Nabob's government, the
permission to fortify Calcutta, and the confirmation of all those privi-
leges obtained by Mr. Hamilton, the English surgeon, from the Em-
peror Ferokhshere. Such was the happy result of Clive's bold invasion
of the enemy's quarters.
While the Nabob's ponderous army was still on the road, a pre-
sent of costly native dresses arrived for Admiral Watson and Colonel
Clive, according to the custom of this country, together with a pro-
posal of alliance offensive and defensive against all enemies. This
was precisely what the select committee and Colonel Clive desired,
since Bussy's late successes in the Carnatic had brought the French
power dangerously near to Bengal, where they already possessed a
considerable force at their settlement of Chandernagore. The Nabob's
offerings were therefore accepted with all courtesy, and as much affec-
tion as if the one hundred and twenty-six unhappy creatures who
perished miserably in the Black-Hole prison had never been upon the
face of this earth. Such Christian-like forgiveness and oblivion of
past wrongs is doubtless a necessary element of state policy; yet while
this alliance was making I could not but remember one unfinished
ditch of the ravelin, into which an undistinguishable heap of corpses
had been cast without so much as a murmured "requiescant in pace"
from any Christian lips.
A handsome monument now surmounts that common burial-place
of so much virtue, valour, and promise; but at this time of which I
write the murders of the 20th of June were yet unavenged; nor did
it seem anyone's special business to avenge them. Indeed, I think this
iniquitous sacrifice of life will make more impression on the minds of
mankind in the pages of history than it ever produced on the inhabit-
ants of Calcutta, many among whom I encountered some ten years
afterwards who had not so much as heard the story of our sufferings
on that never-to-be-forgotten night.
In my position as Mr. Watts's private secretary, I was present at

an interview in which Colonel Clive expressed himself freely upon the
subject of our European enemies.
"It is a question whether the French or the English are to be
masters of Bengal," said the Colonel, whose face always darkened when
he spoke of our famous rivals. "Be sure, Watts, there are no bounds
to the ambition of Bussy; and if once he leaves the Carnatic he will
make himself master of Suraja Doulah, who is as weak as he is cruel.
Be sure of that. I trust this Mahometan tyrant about as much as I
would trust a tiger I had just wounded. So long as the brute can
scarce crawl he is at our feet; but give him power to spring, and he
will be at our throats. His pledges of alliance will be cast to the
winds if once he has Bussy's men at his back. He owes the French
no grudge, you see, for they have not made him bite the dust as we
have; and he is too short-sighted to consider that their conquests in
the Carnatic would be repeated here at his expense. Rely on it, the
time has come for decisive action. We must not suffer ourselves to be
fooled or hoodwinked by a weak-minded boy's cunning. Chandernagore
must fall."
No time was lost in preparing the ground. Omichund, who had
been taken once more into favour with the English, was despatched at
once to the Nabob, as the most suitable person to sound him upon the
subject of an early attack on the French settlement, which would be
impossible after the setting-in of the southern monsoon.
Omichund returned by and by with a somewhat unsatisfactory
account of the Nabob, who could not be brought to give a straight
and clear assent to our wishes. He, however, affected excessive friend-
liness, requested that Mr. Watts might be appointed the Company's
deputy at Muxadavad, and asked the loan of twenty English gunners
to serve in his own artillery,—a trick intended to blind us to his
treachery, as we had afterwards good reason to know.
This choice of the Nabob's caused Mr. Watts to depart at once for
Muxadavad, I going in attendance upon him. I think there can be
little doubt the tyrant selected my new patron on account of his some-
what mild and peaceable temper, which had permitted the too easy
surrender of Cassimbazar, an act that must needs have impressed the
Nabob with an idea of Mr. Watts's weakness. He had before long
reason to see with how perfect a heroism these placable natures can
sometimes confront mortal danger.
Now followed a wearisome series of intrigues-a tangled skein, the
threads of which passed through my hands. Omichund, who now
affected an eager desire to serve the Company, had accompanied us
to the capital, a vast and wealthy city, as populous and much richer
than London, but boasting little splendour of architecture, and no at-
traction in the matter of cleanliness. The streets are close and nar-
row, the drainage abominable; and while commercial enterprise and
oriental luxury continue to render the city a wonderful one, this popu-

lous capital has little beauty wherewith to captivate the eye of a
European traveller.
When I had last visited the city it was as a prisoner in irons, scarce
able to drag my tortured limbs to the shed where I was to lie. I came
now under vastly different circumstances, and was luxuriously lodged
with my patron in a house near the palace, and on the banks of the
river, whence I went to the council-chamber very often, to carry letters
and assist as interpreter at some solemn interview.
It would be idle to enter closely into the details of an intrigue
which might seem trivial to the reader, though to us of life-and-death
interest. The permission to attack Chandernagore was given and re-
tracted many times; and it was obvious to Mr. Watts and myself that
the friendship of the Nabob was with our enemies, and not with us.
It was only after the receipt of a threatening letter from Admiral
Watson, wherein the sturdy English sailor swore he would kindle such
a blaze in Bengal as all the waters of the Ganges should not quench,
that Suraja Doulah gave a reluctant consent to the siege. Even
this tardy concession was no sooner yielded than it was revoked; but
too late. The Admiral and the Colonel laughed at the revocation as
an insolent folly; bigger vessels than had ever. been seen so high up
the river were navigated from Calcutta and laid alongside the batteries
of Chandernagore, while Clive had prepared the way for a naval victory
by disabling the enemy's guns. It was no doubtful conquest. The
French surrendered at discretion, and were treated with much gene-
rosity.
The fall of Chandernagore struck new terror to the coward soul of
the Nabob, and increased by tenfold his secret anger against us. But
this was no moment in which to show his teeth, since at this very time
came the news that an army of Patans-that fearless and hardy race
before whose audacity the greatest captains of the East have quailed-
were marching upon his province of Behar. So the prince wrote com-
plimentary letters to the Admiral and the Colonel, and treated Mr.
Watts with unusual courtesy. He further evinced his friendship by
offering Chandernagore to the English on the same terms as it had been
enjoyed by the French; but he did not remove a division of his army
which he had sent to Plassey, on the island of Cassimbazar, thirty
miles from Muxadavad. In a word, he played fast and loose with us;
and while protesting his fidelity, and pledging himself to protect our
interests, he encouraged the French, whom we had beaten, to remain in
Bengal, wrote secret letters to M. Law, the chief of the French factory
at Cassimbazar, and languished for the coming of Bussy. We had
shown ourselves his masters, and he hated us with a savage hatred.
It was not till this fact was patent, and the Soubah, in a fit of un-
governable rage, had threatened to impale Mr. Watts-a threat which
my patron heard with supreme coolness-that we began to give ear to
the hints of Omichund, who was a daily attendant at the Nabob's

durbar, and had ears to hear the lowest whisper of intrigue, and a nose
to scent the faintest breath of treason. This subtle scoundrel informed
us that Suraja Doulah was detested as much as he was feared, even
by his own chief officers, and scarce loved by the low favourites whose
base-born feet he had allowed to trample on the necks of Moorish
gentlemen.
"Why should the English wait and pray for my lord's consent to
extirpate their enemies?" he asked of Mr. Watts. "Why should they
hang upon his looks and exist by his pleasure; to be threatened one
day with death, and the next caressed and complimented with treachery
more fatal than death? At Calcutta last year the English were weak,
very weak; but they are strong to-day. Have they not Sabat Jung,
the firm in war, as their leader? and whom shall they fear? It is
no longer the time to crouch and crawl; the hour has come for them
to strike. The Nabob is hated by all; yes, by all. He has imprisoned
Manickchund, and made him pay a million of rupees for such poor
profits as he may have obtained in Calcutta." (Here my gentleman
made a piteous face as in compassion for his brother Gentoo, who was
of his own kidney.) "He has offended Meer Jaffier; and in any con-
test between those two the army will stand by their paymaster and
general. He has degraded his treasurer Roydoulub by subjecting him
to the authority of his low favourite, Moonlol. The Séths fear him,
though to them he is civil; for they know his greedy nature, and that
it can scarce be long before his clutch shall fasten on their gold. Yar
Khan Latty, an officer of some renown, is fast friends with the Séths.
He has two thousand horse under his command. The Nabob must
march with the chief part of his army against the Patans; he has
sworn to exterminate the English on his return. Let Sabat Jung,
your colonel, strike the first blow; and let the English join Yar Khan
Latty, seize Muxadavad, and proclaim Latty Nabob. He will give
them all favours they choose to ask. Give them? He will be their
servant to do their bidding, if it were the surrender of half his king-
dom."
Thus argued Omichund, doubtless tempted by splendid promises
from Latty and the Séths, and ever ready to sell his soul to the highest
bidder.
It was about this time that I ventured to speak to the old Gentoo
upon the subject of his domestic bereavements. I found him very
calm; but he displayed more feeling than I had expected to see in one
who had so abandoned himself to the worship of Mammon. When I
told him of his granddaughter's safety he was deeply moved, and
thanked and blessed me with much agitation, and promised me a noble
present. This, however, he contrived to forget; nor should I have
cared to accept a rupee from his secret stores, so deep a contempt had
I for his sordid nature, and so little faith in his sincerity.
He told me that Juggernaut Sing, his head jemadar, the wretch

who had slaughtered thirteen unoffending women, was a distant kins-
man of his own, a man of equal piety and courage; and it was evident
from the whole tenor of his discourse that he considered the bloody
act of this fanatical murderer excusable, if not laudable.
"Juggernaut is now at Calcutta," he said, "but just recovered
from his wounds. He has a ferocious hate of the English; and it is
but to please me he can be brought to live peaceably among them.”
I remembered the ghastly face and blood-stained mantle of the
man I had seen leading our enemies against Fort William, and the
savage yell of rapture with which he had betrayed our weakest points
to the foe.
At Omichund's request I wrote to Mr. Witherington, with whose
family his granddaughter was now living at Calcutta, begging him to
find some means of sending her safely to Muxadavad.
In something more than a week the damsel arrived, having travelled
by water; but on going to the landing-place to meet her I found the
old man there before me. He had been on the watch for her during
the last three days. He had a litter waiting, into which he hurried
his granddaughter before she could speak a word to me. But when
the bearers had carried her off to his house he lingered to thank me
once more for her safety.
"You have redeemed an old man from desolation, and have given
him a fresh object in life," he said; "Omichund may yet leave great-
grandchildren behind him to inherit his wealth-if the Nabob should
ever pay me the compensation he has promised for my losses in Cal-
cutta," he added hastily.
I could scarce refrain from a smile at this, for I knew the Nabob
had already paid this Gentoo miser half the promised compensation.
"You would perhaps have liked to speak to the maiden," he said
presently; "but it is better not. She has already lost caste by her
intercourse with your people, and, for the bigoted amongst us, is a
pariah. But I have lived among English merchants, and learned to
regard these things less strictly. There was once a time in which
the wives and daughters of Hindostan mingled freely among strangers;
but the Mahometans have taught us to distrust our women, and to
hide the brightness of our homes."
With this he departed; and by and by, as I walked homewards
through the narrow streets, sweltering in the hot breeze of noontide,
I looked wistfully at the closed shutters of the merchant's dwelling,
behind which my tender little Hindoo maid was perchance watching.
No, I had never loved her. That one pale English face, enshrined in
my heart of hearts, was an image not to be blotted out by all the
houris of Inde:-but she had loved me; and a man must be made
of a hard material who has not some chance moment of dangerous
tenderness for the girl who has loved him in vain.
It was with a feeling of extreme pain that I heard, a few weeks


after this, the tidings of Juggernaut Sing's arrival in Muxadavad,
and of a marriage between him and his master's granddaughter. It
seems that the Brahmins, to whom the fanatic youth had confessed and
defended his deed of slaughter, had approved the crime; and Omichund
did not shrink from bestowing his grandchild upon the man whose
hands were red with her mother's blood. But what human affection
can be expected from a people whose devilish creed teaches them to
cast their babes beneath the murderous wheels of Juggernaut, and
make a family of children motherless by the burning alive of an un-
offending widow ?
Of the poor girl's feelings I scarce dared think; and when I re-
membered our friendly companionship at Fulta, and the tender devo-
tion with which she had watched my sick-bed, my heart bled sorely
for her griefs. Had it been possible to have saved her in any desperate
manner from a fate to my mind so terrible, I would have hazarded the
attempt; but Mr. Watts's counsel and my own reflections alike con-
vinced me that her rescue was impossible.

CHAPTER XXVI.
PLOT AND COUNTERPLOT.
WHILE Omichund's intrigue with Khan Latty was yet in the bud,
a new and much more important pretender presented himself in the
person of Meer Jaffier, commander-in-chief of the Nabob's forces, a
man of years and experience, who had stood high in the estimation of
Allaverdy, and to whom that wise ruler had given his sister in mar-
riage. An Armenian called Petrus, a man that had been employed as
a messenger between ourselves and Suraja Doulah in the negotiations
of February last past, now came to Mr. Watts on behalf of Meer Jaffier,
who declared himself pushed to rebellion in sheer self-defence, since he
never entered the durbar but with the dread of being assassinated.
Meer Jaffier was ready to promise anything, and Mr. Watts made haste
to acquaint Clive with his offers, whereupon there commenced a revo-
lution destined to end most happily for our English interests.
I will not follow all the windings and intricacies of this eastern
plot and counterplot. Subtlety and falsehood were the order of the day,
and the Nabob alternated between loud-spoken distrust and smooth-
tongued conciliation of ourselves and Meer Jaffier, who played his
cards, however, with extraordinary skill, and contrived to fool his weak
master to the very last. It was a period of incessant letter-writing
between Mr. Watts at Muxadavad and the select committee at Cal-
cutta, and my post of secretary was a laborious one, leaving little time
in which to think of private troubles and anxieties. So critical indeed
was our situation, that there were many nights on which my patron
and I lay down to rest not knowing whether we should be alive in the
morning. It was very well for the gentlemen at Calcutta to be easy as

to the result of our intrigue: WE were in the lion's den, and knew that
in any luckless hour the brute's ravenous jaws might open to devour
us. I am happy to say, however, that we faced all dangers coolly,
and asserted the interests of our honourable masters with as calm a
front as if we had been safe in the council-chamber of Leadenhall-street.
The Nabob's army was still encamped at Plassey, while Clive, by
the advice of Meer Jaffier's party, had withdrawn his forces to Cal-
cutta, the better to lull the tyrant into a false security. But Suraja
Doulah, by nature the most cowardly of mankind, was a prey to per-
petual suspicions, now turning upon us, now upon Meer Jaffier, as
ready to cringe as to assassinate, and knowing not whom to trust or
whom to destroy. His spies lurked in every quarter of the province,
and traded alike upon his fears and his ignorance; one day making
him believe that the English army lay concealed in the factory of
Cassimbazar, and the next deluding him with the hope that a French
fleet was about to ravage Madras.
Urged by his ever-increasing fear of Clive, he sought a reconcilia-
tion with Meer Jaffier, whom he had lately treated with the utmost
ignominy, and sent him, with fifteen thousand men, to reinforce his
prime minister, Roydoulub, at Plassey. Meer Jaffier, afraid to refuse,
was thus compelled to leave Muxadavad while the plot was hatching,
but left his agent Petrus behind, in daily, and sometimes hourly, cor-
respondence with my patron, Mr. Watts.
The articles were now drawn up which were to pledge Meer Jaffier
in the event of his success. They were to include all that had been
promised by Suraja Doulah, and one clause of extreme advantage to
the English, whereby the future Nabob agreed to pay a sum of money
sufficient to make good all the losses which had been sustained by the
Company and individuals at the taking of Calcutta. Meer Jaffier, with
all the generosity of an adventurer who has as yet nothing to lose and
all things to gain, readily agreed to these articles, but stipulated that
the plot should be kept secret from that Gentoo intriguer, Omichund.
This last condition was perplexing. The old man had been hanging
upon our footsteps ever since he had broached the subject of Yar Khan
Latty's pretensions, and had pressed us closely for a definite answer.
For some time he had, I know, suspected us, too well versed in the art
of prevarication to be deluded by an Englishman's less subtle false-
hoods. He came in upon us suddenly, on the very day after Petrus
brought us Meer Jaffier's message, livid with rage, and told us that we
had been trifling with him, and that he knew the secret game we were
playing.
Of all men about the Soubahdar's court this was the one whose
influence my patron most dreaded. He saw that Omichund knew
something of our secret, and that to obey Meer Jaffier's desire would
be to provoke his vengeance. After binding him to secrecy he there-
fore confided the details of our enterprise, which Omichund heard with

pretended approval. But I had now known this old man for some
years, and had made a close study of his countenance. I watched him
attentively throughout this conversation, and saw quite enough to
assure me that he did not forgive us for the endeavour to deceive
him, and that in his heart of hearts he cherished a most malignant
hatred of us.
Soon after this came news from Calcutta of the arrival of a mes-
senger from Hyderabad, a stranger called Govinderoy, who brought a
letter purporting to be written by Ballajee-Rao, the general of the Mo-
rattoes, offering to invade Bengal with a hundred and twenty thousand
men within six weeks after he should receive the invitation of the Eng-
lish governor. The letter was suspected to be a trap set for us at the
instigation of Suraja Doulah; and Clive, ever ready in expedients, ad-
vised the committee to forward the letter to the Nabob, affecting a
belief in its authenticity. By this means, should the letter be indeed
a trick, the tables would be turned upon the trickster; while, if it were
otherwise, no act could be more adapted to soothe him into a confidence
in our friendship.
The treaty which Mr. Watts and myself had sketched out with
infinite pains and very close calculations was now submitted to the
committee at Calcutta. The sum therein demanded for the restitution
of all losses amounted in all to seventeen millions of rupees; but this
sum, large as it appears, did not seem sufficient to the gentlemen of
the Calcutta committee, who cherished an extravagant notion of the
wealth in Suraja Doulah's treasury, an idea founded rather on the
mythical wonders of the Arabian Nights than on the possible revenues
of the tyrant, whose predecessor's reign had been one of constant tur-
moil and expenditure.
Determined that Meer Jaffier should pay for his elevation, the com-
mittee asked a donation of five million rupees for the squadron and
army, while Mr. Watts was also recommended to request a handsome
tribute for each of the gentlemen of the committee.
These preliminaries being settled, we awaited the final blow, not
without a terrible uncertainty of mind; for the spies of Suraja Doulah
slept not, and the shadow of death hovered very near us during this
most critical period.


CHAPTER XXVII.
OMICHUND THROWS OFF THE MASK.
THE time was now come in which the Gentoo deceiver, Omichund,
was to reveal himself for the first time in his true colours. I have
already described the lurking doubt which had ever been entertained
of his sincerity by Mr. Holwell and myself, and afterwards by Mr.
Watts; but he was now to throw off the mask, and boldly declare
himself a villain.


It was when matters were at the most perilous crisis-the Nabob's
army encamped at Plassey fifty thousand strong, and Clive prepared
to march from Calcutta so soon as the treaty was signed-when this
avaricious scoundrel came one morning to my patron, and rudely in-
sisted upon an interview. His usual cringing manner was exchanged
for an audacity which threatened mischief. He began at once to talk
of the confederation, and our hopes of success.
"I have come fresh from the durbar, Mr. Watts," he said, "and the
countenance of the Nabob was not pleasant to look on. He has spies,
saheb, many spies; and he suspects. It needs but one word, one hint
of the truth in his ear, and before the echo of the voice that spoke
it had died away in the hall of his palace, the messengers of death
would be on their way hither. Have you ever considered that the
game we are playing is one in which we stake our heads?"
"I have never esteemed my life especially safe in this country," my
patron answered with admirable coolness. "But what does this pre-
face mean, my good Omichund."
"It means that if you, saheb, hold your life at a trifle, I set some
value on mine, and expect a handsome recompense when I place myself
in mortal peril, which I have done daily, hourly, within the last month,
for the service of your people at Calcutta."
"You cannot suppose that your services will go unrewarded."
"I do not know that. When I served you a year ago—as I did,
faithfully-your people at Calcutta rewarded me with a prison. They
made me a prisoner, saheb, for a groundless suspicion; and while the
rest of my countrymen had ample leisure to decamp with all their pos-
sessions, my hard-earned wealth was sacrificed; and that I owe to the
English. The women of the household were slaughtered; that also
do I owe to the English. Yet these bitter wrongs do I forget, when
Sabat Jung has given you back your settlement, and I try to serve
you-because, though they have ill-used me, I believe the English are
faithful, and will keep promise or treaty that they make. My fortunes
are broken, and I am labouring to restore them. I have served you
well, saheb, and there have been many times when the Nabob would
have had you slain without mercy had he not been beguiled by me to
trust you a little longer. To do this, I have risked my life daily, and
shall continue in the same peril so long as I remain in this city. I
must have my reward. It must be no promise of the lips-a breath
which the evening wind blows away. It must be written in the treaty.
The reward that I am to have must be written there, in words that
no man can misunderstand."
"Such a proposal is somewhat insulting to your employers,” replied
Mr. Watts; "but I do not suppose the gentlemen of the committee.
will object to your name being set down in the treaty between them
and Meer Jaffier. Pray at what amount do you estimate your ser-
vices ?"


Omichund smiled in a thoughtful manner before replying to this
plain question.
"I have to remember that without my mediation the Nabob would
never have been reconciled to the English. Ever since the capture of
Calcutta I have been the secret friend of your countrymen not be-
cause I have reason to love them, but because-nay, saheb, no man
is bound to reveal his motives. It is enough that I have served you.
'Twas I who pleaded with Suraja Doulah for the miserable survivors of
the 20th of June, and gave them food and shelter at Calcutta, where
they might have remained with impunity, but for the folly of one
English soldier who killed a Moor in some drunken quarrel, an act
that led to the banishment of every Englishman from the settlement.
Yes, saheb, I have been your friend, but my experience does not teach
me to hope much from British gratitude. I have a better claim to the
reward I ask than past services."
"What is the nature of that claim, Omichund?"
"My power to destroy you!" cried the old traitor, with a sudden
energy that struck us dumb. He stood for some moments watching
our faces with a malignant grin upon his own. Then slowly extending
his brown skinny hand, he looked downward at the outspread fingers
with a smile of triumph. "See here, saheb," he said, "in these fingers
I hold the threads of your intrigue. It needs but a motion of my hand
and they are entangled hopelessly. In this palm I hold your lives—
yours and your secretary's yonder, and the lives of many more-and by
the closing of this hand can destroy you. What, gentlemen! how pale
you look! And yet I do but remind you of my power; to speak is not to
act. Do you think Omichund would betray his patrons-even though
they once betrayed him-and though but the other day you sought to
fool and hoodwink the poor old Gentoo? No, Mr. Watts, saheb, I do
not threaten; I ask only that when others are remembered my reward
may not be forgotten."
"Put your demand in plain figures," replied Mr. Watts, somewhat
coldly; "I do not comprehend this violent language, or the looks with
which you have accompanied it."
"The treasury of Bengal is accounted rich, and if Meer Jaffier
mounts the musnud, my honourable masters will profit by millions.
For my share I claim five per cent upon the Nabob's treasures in
specie, and the fourth part of his jewels."
This demand was made with a most consummate coolness of tone
and manner, and having thus stated his claim the old Gentoo stood be-
fore us with downcast eyelids and folded hands, the very picture of
meek honesty. But beneath the shrivelled lids I could discern the
piercing black eyes casting rapid stolen glances at my patron's face.
The proposition was so monstrous that Mr. Watts stood for some
minutes aghast, more struck by the enormity of this demand than by
the iniquity of the threat that had preceded it. Treachery of the

blackest hue is so common a thing among these orientals that the
diplomatist must be indeed unversed in their politics who can be sur-
prised by any new revelation of it. But there is a height of im-
pudence more astounding than baseness, and of such impudence this
proposal of Omichund's was a flagrant example.
My patron drew a long breath, and after that first movement of
surprise refrained from any expression of his feelings.
"My good Omichund," he began quietly, "I thought your commer-
cial experience would have saved you from the folly of so childish a
proposal. You ask five per cent on the Nabob's money-a fourth of his
jewels! Are you aware that the jewels alone are rated at forty-five
millions sterling?"
"Yes, saheb; by children and fools. The royal jewels are worth
four-and-a-half millions at most."
"And of this amount you would claim a fourth ?"
"Yes, saheb,” replied the Gentoo, with a grave reverence of his
head, and with the sober air of an honest tradesman who respectfully
defends a disputed charge in his bill.
"Well, my good friend, you cannot be accused of neglecting your
interests, or rating your services at too low a figure," said Mr. Watts
with his easiest air; "and I thank you for your candour. But you
see I have no real authority in this business. I am here only as a
mouthpiece and communication for the gentlemen at Calcutta. I will
refer your demands to the select committee there in my next letter,
and we shall see how they treat them."
"You do not think the gentlemen at Calcutta will refuse my
claim, saheb?" asked Omichund, with a somewhat sinister look.
"I cannot venture a guess as to their reply; but I am sure they
will do whatever they consider just and liberal."
"And the treaty, saheb? The sum to be paid to me must be set
forth in a special clause of the treaty. Let the gentlemen at Calcutta
understand I will be satisfied with nothing less than that."
"I will tell them as much. You are now at liberty to leave us,
Omichund."
The old man honoured us each with a profound reverence, and
quitted the chamber. We heard him groan faintly as he put on his
shoes and shuffled away on the smooth marble pavement—a groan as
of lamentation over the iniquity of the English.
My patron walked to the doorway, looked into the corridor to make
sure there was no spy lurking without, and then returned to me with
a very grave expression of countenance.
"Robert Ainsleigh," he said, "if you set any value upon your life,
you must leave this place to-night."
"Why, sir?"
"Because the Calcutta committee will refuse to accede to that
scoundrel's extortionate demands, and, so surely as they do, he will


betray you and me to Suraja Doulah. To-night you can leave this
place unsuspected as the bearer of a letter to Calcutta: a few nights
hence flight may be impossible."
"And you think that I would leave you, sir, in such a time of
danger? No, if I valued existence at its utmost price, I do not believe
I could be so base as that; and my life is not a treasure that I care
to defend. Let them impale me to-morrow, and there is scarce a
creature living to lament my fate. I thank you heartily for your
consideration, sir; but, by your leave, I will remain to see the end of
the play, whether it prove a comedy or a tragedy."
"I fear the last act will be bloody, Robert."
"It cannot be worse than the Black Hole, sir. But surely, with
Colonel Clive at our back, we may master this Gentoo scoundrel? Can-
not the committee finesse the question of his claim?"
"I doubt their power to do so. Satan himself is not more versed
in guile than this Gentoo plotter. You see he declines at the outset
to accept any verbal pledge. He will have his reward set down in the
treaty to be signed, sealed, and delivered between ourselves and Jaffier.
I can see no safety, Robert, but in compliance; and I do not believe
that the committee would comply. We have already pushed our de-
mands upon Jaffier to the utmost limit, and to ask for nearly another
million might be the ruin of our cause. Remember, it would be as
easy for Jaffier to ally himself to the French as to us. Bussy is ever
ready to adopt any pretender who can promise him an extension of
power, and to provoke Jaffier by extortionate demands might be to
throw him into the arms of our enemies."
The letter communicating Omichund's demands was written and
despatched to Calcutta, and we had but to wait the issue of this affair,
and of all other knots and entanglements in the skein of intrigue, with
what tranquillity we might. It was on the second night after the
despatch of the letter that we received, through a singular channel,
a new revelation of this villain's iniquity. The house in which we
lived lay on the river-bank, in a small garden that adjoined the splendid
grounds of Heraut-jeel, the Nabob's palace, a fortified building sur-
rounded by towers provided with cannon. I was lounging here in the
summer darkness, well-nigh worn out by the anxieties and suffocating
heat of the day, when a little boat shot along the stream and ran under
the bank where I walked. A cloaked and hooded figure, very small
and slender, stepped out of the boat and approached me.
I expected to see some youthful dervish come to solicit alms; but,
on drawing quite close to me, the stranger uttered a timid greeting,
and I recognised the accents of Tara.
It was but a few weeks since her marriage, after which event I had
scarce hoped ever to see her again.
"Robert, saheb," she began,-she had learned my Christian name
from Mr. Holwell, who never addressed me by any other, and I doubt

if she knew that I owned a surname,-" Robert, saheb, I have come
to warn you of a great danger. I have come secretly, with much
difficulty; and I think my husband would kill me, as he killed the
others, did he know that I could so degrade myself. But can I forget
how you saved my life, saheb, or how happy I was on board the Eng-
lish ship when the English doctor said my care had saved yours?
No, Robert, saheb, I cannot forget those days; they stand apart from
my life. I have no share in their brightness now, and my life seems
all dark-so dark that I long to die and pass into a new world, where
I shall be purified from my sins, and so pass on through other
worlds of purification to the heights of heaven, where the great God
is happy for ever among the happy angels who serve him. We have
a Brahmin who lives in the house and reads the Shastrah to us every
day, and his words give me comfort when my heart is heavy."
66
My darling!" I involuntarily exclaimed in English; and I am
happy to think this innocent Hindoo did not understand the import
of the word, which she no doubt took to be some term of ceremony;
"alas, I fear you are not happy?" I continued in Bengalee.
"I am as happy as we ought to be in a world of purgation, saheb.
But it is not to speak of myself I came hither. You are in danger,
you and the other English saheb. My grandfather is angered against
you.
He says that Mr. Watts and the English mean to cheat him;
but that he will be the death of you all if you play him false. He
is not easy in his mind. He is pale, and walks about the house all
day, and hurries backwards and forwards to the Nabob's palace like
an evil spirit; and last night, when he knew not that I was within
hearing, I overheard him tell my husband that he and Roydoulub, the
Nabob's treasurer, had sworn to each other to secrete and divide be-
tween them a great part of the royal treasure before the new Nabob
comes. But that is nothing. It is your life that is in danger, Robert,
saheb, and you must leave the city at once. You see how dear your
life is to me, when I betray my grandfather for your sake; but I know
that you English sahebs will not hurt the old man."
This last speech was made in all simplicity, for Tara was inno-
cent as a child. I thanked her heartily for her devotion, but told
her that it was impossible for me to leave Muxadavad for some time
to come. This so distressed her that I was obliged to temporise, and
promise I would fly from the threatened danger, for the dear girl was
imperilling her own life by remaining with me, and I was eager to
see her return to her home. The boatman who had brought her had
been bribed to fidelity by the gift of one of her gold ornaments. This
I redeemed from him by a handsome donation, and urged him to con-
duct her in safety to the garden landing-stage a little way down the
river, whence she had come. I have the quaint Indian bangle still
amongst my dearest treasures, a memorial of this perilous time and the
affection that would fain have protected me from danger.


