CHAPTER XIX. THE BOLT ABOUT TO Fall.
WERE this a record of private griefs, I might dwell long upon the de-
solation of spirit and unutterable anguish of heart which followed the
receipt of those tidings that gave the death-blow to all my hopes; and,
Heaven knows, these had seemed faint and feeble enough since my
cruel marriage and more cruel exile. I had lost all. Henceforth
nothing was left me in the past; and I looked forward to the unknown
future from a present standpoint as desolate as it is possible for the
mind of man to conceive.
Yet, as I pen these lines, and recall the dull despair of those days,
I cannot but reprobate my ingratitude to the one friend whom God had
raised up for me in this unknown world, and my impious forgetfulness
of the mercy that had secured me so kind and powerful a protector.
If my situation was desolate in spite of Mr. Holwell's friendship, what
would my state have been without that supreme advantage? By this
gentleman I had been rescued from a crew of wretches, who were, for
the most part, the very refuse and sweepings of English jails, and ele-
vated to a position of companionship. The friendship of so respectable
a gentleman won for me other acquaintances, and I soon occupied an
established position amongst the gentlemen of the factory. Of the life
which these gentlemen and their families enjoyed I will say nothing,
save that to them it seemed a pleasant one. My own troubles unfitted
me for such agreeable dissipations as prevailed among them, and I pre-
ferred the solitude of my office to the most boisterous dinner-party in
Calcutta. The day came when the tragic and exciting incidents of
public life blunted the keen edge of individual sorrow, and I was better
able to appreciate the advantages I had derived from the happy chance
that threw me across Mr. Holwell's pathway. But for more than a
year after my receipt of Mr. Swinfen's letter I was able to take comfort
from nothing; and though I still performed my daily round of duty,
and contrived to give satisfaction to my employer, the pleasure and
interest which I had hitherto felt in my work had completely left me.
The years which elapsed between the autumn of 1753 and the sum-
mer of '56 were years of comparative tranquillity; and before that me-
morable summer came, we had seen the reduction of French power in

the East by means of French folly, cowardice, and ignorance in the West.
Enemy to my country though he was, false as he had shown himself in
his violation of the treaty of Madras, I cannot withhold my pity from
that daring and ambitious statesman, Joseph Francis Dupleix, when I
consider the ignoble treatment he received from the government he had
served so well.
While the rival powers on the coast of Coromandel were fighting
for the supremacy of their chosen native rulers, and disputing the va-
lidity of titles and grants given by the shadowy court of Delhi, where
the Mogul himself was but a usurper of very recent date, the English
Company at home pestered the Government with complaints that,
despite a treaty of peace between the two nations, they were harassed
by a distressing and dangerous war, produced by the ambition of the
French governor.
Nor were the French themselves better satisfied
with the conduct of their Indian affairs. Too remote from the seat of
war to be affected by the glories of success, they considered only the
expense and loss entailed by those triumphs, and were unable to ap-
preciate the future advantages which these struggles were to secure.
Dupleix was too successful a man to be without enemies. These ac-
cused him of wasting the Company's money in ambitious wars; and
France, after leaving this bold and faithful servant, inefficiently sup-
ported, to extend her dominions and maintain her army by the outlay
of his private fortune, determined upon repudiating his claim for repay-
ment and breaking him altogether.
At a conference which took place in London between the repre-
sentatives of the French and British Governments, the French Ministry
consented to recall Dupleix, and to send commissioners to India for the
settlement of all differences between the two nations. Thus it hap-
pened that Monsieur Godcheu, a stranger to affairs in the East, was
permitted to supersede the man who had first taught Moorish power
to bow before European arms, and who had won for his country a name
of might throughout the length and breadth of the Deccan. Injustice
so glaring was second only to that which had flung De la Bourdonnais
into a cell of the Bastille; and I doubt not that in the hour of his own
misfortunes the Governor of Pondicherry remembered his underhand
share in the downfall of his blameless rival.
Negotiations between M. Godcheu and Mr. Saunders, the English
Governor of Madras, resulted in extraordinary concessions on the part
of the French. That nation, thanks to the ambition of Dupleix and
the prowess of Bussy, were now masters of the sea-coast of Coromandel
and Orixa; but this advantage, together with many others, was precipi-
tately resigned by the French Company in the general desire for peace.
While evil fortune thus overtook Dupleix, his happier enemy, Clive,
was in London, fêted by an admiring public, and gratified by the gift
of a diamond-hilted sword, worth five hundred pounds, from the Court
of Directors, which he, however, generously refused to receive unless


a testimonial of equal value were presented to his friend and command-
ing officer, Colonel Lawrence, to whose liberal encouragement he owed
so much of his success.
In the November of '55, the hero of Arcot returned to India as
Governor of Fort St. David, bearing a commission as lieutenant-colonel
in the British army, which had been obtained for him from his Majesty's
Government by the Court of Directors, anxious to prevent those quar-
rels about rank between the King's and Company's officers which had
so often obstructed the progress of affairs.
Instead of at once proceeding to his new government, Colonel Clive
landed at Bombay, where he found Admiral Watson and a little fleet,
which had been prudently despatched from England at the time of the
conference between the French and English Companies. Assisted by
the admiral, Clive attacked and routed a famous pirate, called Angria,
who, with his father before him, had been the scourge and terror of
this coast for the last half-century. This Morattoe rascal's stronghold
of Gheria Colonel Clive razed to the ground on the 13th of February
'56, on which occasion the British forces shared ten lacs of rupees by
way of plunder.
This was the last event of importance on the western coast before
the revolution which overtook Bengal. Here a false security, or rather,
perhaps, an habitual distaste for action or exertion of any kind, on the
part of the chief authorities, civil and military, had prevailed ever since
the fear of Morattoe invasion had ceased to alarm the native and Eng-
lish inhabitants of the settlement. Every species of neglect had been
practised. The defences of fort and city were in a dilapidated and
almost useless condition. In all the arsenal there was scarce a carriage
that would bear a gun; while fifty-five cannon, eighteen- and twenty-
four-pounders, sent out from England in '53, had lain ever since
neglected beneath the walls. Nor had the orders of the Directors at
home been better attended to with regard to the drilling and military
training of the militia. These, though entirely untaught, were hardly
more ignorant than the meagre garrison, not one in ten among whom
had ever seen a musket fired in earnest.
This was our condition at Fort William when the tidings of Alla-
verdy's approaching death came upon us. The daring spirit of the
grand old Tartar chief was fading out amidst a scene of intrigue and
treachery-the last act in that drama of falsehood and ambition which
is for ever being enacted in this Eastern world.
On the one side, Allaverdy's dying eyes beheld his beloved grand-
nephew, Mirza Mahmud, the adopted child of his old age, dear to him
as an only son, and whom he had installed as his successor two years
before, with the Moorish name of Serauje-ad-Doulah, or the Lamp of
Riches; who was afterwards known as Suraja Doulah, by which title
he made himself infamously renowned to all time. On the other side,
the deathbed of the old nabob was watched by his daughter-a woman

of more than doubtful character, who had been married to her cousin,
Shawamut Jung, and was now a childless widow.
The close of Shawamut Jung's life had been darkened by a tra-
gedy of which his nephew, Suraja Doulah, had been the hidden cause.
He was Governor of Dacca-a province which could easily become
the centre of a revolution-and possessed treasures and influence which
might have made him a formidable opponent in any struggle for
power. Suraja Doulah dreaded this; but his treachery assailed, not
his uncle, but his uncle's prime counsellor and intellectual superior,
Hassein Coolly Khan. Hassein's nephew was at this time deputy-
governor of Dacca. Him Suraja Doulah caused to be despatched by
assassins, who entered the city disguised in the dead of the night; and
before the public mind had recovered the shock of this event, Hassein
himself was murdered in the streets of Muxadavad in open day.
Gloomy were the anticipations formed of the youthful director of
these crimes, who, of course, denied all participation in the bloody
work. While Allaverdy yet lingered, death swept both his nephews,
the two uncles of Suraja Doulah, from the stage of politics. Both died
of fever, without suspicion of poison, though it must be owned their
removal was convenient for the Lamp of Riches.
There now remained but one possible pretender to the sovereignty
of Bengal, and this was a child of two years old, the orphan son of
Suraja Doulah's younger brother. This infant's father had been
adopted by the late Shawamut Jung, and the baby pretender was now
in the hands of the Begum, widow of Shawamut Jung, and daughter
of Allaverdy, who had succeeded to her husband's treasures, and to-
wards whom Suraja Doulah looked with the eye of hate and suspicion.
Hassein Coolly Khan had been succeeded in his post of duan or
prime minister to Shawamut Jung by a Gentoo called Raja Bullub,
who was now supposed to exercise a paramount influence over the mind
of the widow. Suraja Doulah had given this man a taste of his quality,
having seized upon him, and, by imprisonment and other cruelties,
endeavoured to force from him a full account of Shawamut Jung's
treasures. This the faithful Gentoo resolutely refused, and was by and
by set at liberty by the influence of his mistress, who, as Allaverdy's
daughter, had some power at court.
Thus did matters stand at Muxadavad, the capital of Bengal, when
the imminence of the nabob's end brought affairs to a crisis. Raja
Bullub, trembling for the safety of his treasures at Dacca, determined
to remove with his worldly wealth and his family to a place of safety.
But to effect this he was obliged to screen his real motives under a pre-
tended access of piety. He therefore wrote to Mr. Watts, the chief of
our English factory at Cassimbazar, hard by Muxadavad, informing
him that his family were going from Dacca to worship at Juggernaut,
and would take Calcutta on their way, at which settlement he entreated
their favourable reception.

In compliance with this request Mr. Watts wrote to our president
at Calcutta, and to Mr. Manningham, his junior in command. These
letters arrived on the evening of the 13th of March, and during the
absence of the president. They had but just reached Calcutta when
Kissendass, the eldest son of Raja Bullub, and the rest of the family,
landed from the little fleet of boats that had conveyed them from Dacca.
There was brief leisure for consideration, and the family was received
with all possible courtesy.
Mr. Holwell shook his head doubtfully when his people brought
him the news of this unexpected arrival, as he and I lounged in an
open veranda in the cool of the evening.
"I don't like such visitors, Bob," he said gravely; "and yet I
own it would be awkward to refuse them hospitality. In oriental
politics it is hard to know what turn events may take. If the Begum,
Shawamut Jung's widow, should succeed in getting her adopted brat
proclaimed nabob-and we know that Suraja Doulah is heartily de-
tested by all classes-it would be well for the English to have secured
her favour. But if, on the other hand, Suraja Doulah holds his own-
which is more likely, since he has his paw upon the old nabob's treasury,
and sticks at nothing in the way of assassination we shall mortally
offend him by anything like protection of these Gentoos. Would to
Heaven we had better defences, Bob, and a more energetic garrison!
for it strikes me this settlement is about as safe as a village built
under the shadow of Vesuvius, or a chateau on the slope of Etna."
It was on the day after this arrival that Omichund, the Gentoo
merchant, came to wait upon my patron. This man's revenues had
been considerably diminished during the last three years by the Com-
pany's withdrawal of the privileges he had so long enjoyed; and to a
mind so avaricious even the possession of vast wealth would fail to
atone for this diminution of income. The old man's influence had also
been lessened, and his pride humiliated, by the Company's ceasing to
employ him as a mediator at the Durbar; and this, I doubt not, he felt
no less keenly than his more substantial loss.
His manner was even more servile than usual; but I fancied I de-
tected a sinister light in his eyes as he complimented Mr. Holwell, who
gratified him with a piece of betel-nut wrapped in a leaf called pawn,
a kind of sweetmeat much affected by the natives, and the interchange
of which is a token of friendship.
Omichund had heard of our guests' arrival, and began at once to
discuss the subject.
"Company Saheb do well to receive Kissendass," he said. "Raja
Bullub, the father of Kissendass, is great friends with Begum Saheb
-much very great friends. Wicked people say Begum Saheb is too
much friends with Raja Bullub; but Omichund is no man to believe
lies. If Begum Saheb and the little child get into power, it will be
good for the English Company; but if not-"


He stopped, and shook his head ominously, with his shining black
eyes fixed on my patron's face.
"If not, what?" asked Mr. Holwell impatiently.
"What should Omichund know, saheb?" replied the old man with
a crafty smile; "Omichund is less than no one. Company Saheb has
not employed him at the Durbar these many years. His honourable
masters have left off to trust him. But he is an old man, and has
much experience, and eyes that see and ears that hear. He has heard
something."
"What, man?" cried Mr. Holwell; "for Heaven's sake don't stand
croaking there like a bird of evil omen. Speak, raven!"
6
"I have heard what the Soubah Allaverdy said to his great-nephew,
Suraja Doulah, not three days ago," said Omichund solemnly. "He
has been long dying, the old Soubah, but the hour is near. Siva,
the destroyer, has his hand outstretched to seize the old Mahometan,
and he will go to the lower hell of darkness with the spirits that know
not Brahmah. Not three days ago the old man sent for his adopted
son, and it seemed that he had an unnatural strength lent him to
enable him to give his last counsels to his heir. Lamp of Riches, light
of my soul,' he said to Suraja, 'I leave you a mission. It is to sweep
the European off the face of Hindostan. They are a dangerous people,
my son. They make quarrels between the Hindoo kings, and profit by
the strifes they raise. They make pretences, to seize and plunder the
goods of the rulers of the south; and think not they will let you free
from their depredations. The most dangerous of all are the English.
I myself would have freed you from this danger, had Allah lengthened
my days. The work, my son, must now be yours. The power of the
English is great; they have lately reduced Angria, and possessed
themselves of his country. Suffer them not to have fortifications or
soldiers: if you do, the country is not yours.""
Mr. Holwell affected to receive Omichund's information with
entire equanimity; but when the old man had paid his farewell com-
pliments and departed, I quickly saw that my patron was somewhat
alarmed. I asked him whether it was not so; and he answered me, after
his wont, with perfect frankness. He had, indeed, by this time, elevated
me to a position of confidence and friendship second only to that of a
son.
There is no
Allaverdy was
When the hour
"Yes, Robert," he said, "I do fear Suraja Doulah.
tyrant so cruel, no despot so murderous, as a coward.
capable of hellish treachery, but he was a brave man.
of extreme peril arose, he cared not with what weapon he destroyed his
enemy; but he did not war against possible antagonists. To be sus-
pected by Suraja Doulah is to be doomed. He feared the Deputy-
governor of Dacca, and midnight assassins removed the object of his
fear. He feared Hassein Coolly Khan, and Hassein Coolly was slaugh-
tered at noontide in the streets of the city. In his two uncles he saw

probable opponents; both are dead. If he fears the English, Heaven
protect us against a foe so secret and so deadly; for we have not the
power to protect ourselves. From the sleep which we have slept for
the last ten years, nothing short of a thunderclap will awaken us. It
is quite possible the bolt is about to fall."
In little more than a month after this interview, on the 9th of
April 1756, the Nabob Allaverdy died; and about the same date came
a second letter from Mr. Watts of Cassimbazar, recommending that
Raja Bullub's family should no longer receive protection in Calcutta,
as affairs were now very doubtful.
This prudent recommendation was unattended to, in spite of Mr.
Holwell's remonstrances with his seniors in Council. It seemed, indeed,
as if these gentlemen were bent upon inviting the ruin which was so
soon to overtake them.
A private letter from Mr. Watts arrived about the same time, to
warn our president that Suraja Doulah had spies at Calcutta ; that
the weakness of its fortifications and garrison was the common talk of
the Durbar, nay even of the very streets and market-places of Muxa-
davad; and that it behoved us to prevent such spies carrying their in-
formation daily to the Soubah's council-chamber.
This letter was communicated by the president to Mr. Holwell, as
zemindar, who gave immediate orders at all the guarded landing-places
that no one should be permitted to land or enter the town without a
passport from him. Several suspected persons were arrested, and
turned out of the place, and none admitted without a strict examina-
tion. My own suspicions pointed to a far more important person than
any among those who were thus arrested. The English Company had
made a powerful enemy for themselves in Omichund, whose pretended
friendship I could not doubt was but a mask to hide his real feelings.
A Hindoo, passionately fond of money, crafty, proud, and subtle, was
of all created beings the least likely patiently to endure an injury such
as the Company had inflicted upon him. We knew him to have ready
access to the Durbar. Where else need we look for spies, when this
hidden foe had the ear of the tyrant?
I ventured to hint my suspicions to my patron, and found that his
ideas on the subject fully coincided with my own.
Within a few days of Suraja Doulah's accession, Omichund came
to Mr. Holwell to inform him that Narain Sing, whose brother occupied
a post of some importance about the person of the new nabob, had got
into Calcutta in the mean disguise of a European pedlar, and was at
Omichund's house, where he awaited my patron's permission to visit
him. He brought a perwannah, or order, from the nabob, demanding
that Raja Bullub's family should be immediately given up. In the
absence of the president and his second in authority, Mr. Holwell felt
himself bound to receive this messenger. He came accordingly, and was
entertained with all due respect; but when he tendered his official docu-

ment, Mr. Holwell prudently declined to receive it in the absence of the
president, to whom the paper was addressed. By this means time was
gained for deliberation; and on the president's return, which occurred
the next morning, a council was immediately held to decide this im-
portant question. My patron had in the mean time discovered that the
nabob's messenger had been smuggled into the place by the agency
of Omichund-another suspicious fact against this venerable Gentoo.
The authorities of Calcutta now found themselves on the horns of
a dilemma. The fortune of the hour was yet undecided. Should the
Begum's cause prosper, it would be fatal to offend her favourites :
should she fail, it would be ruin to have defied Suraja Doulah.
In this difficulty the council decided that as Narain Sing had stolen
like a thief into the settlement, his perwannah should not be received,
and he was turned out of Calcutta with contumely by unwise and inso-
lent subordinates, who entertained themselves at the spy's expense. A
letter from the president to Mr. Watts at Cassimbazar explained, and
in a manner apologised for, this treatment.
Not long were we suffered to remain ignorant of the mistake we
had made. Allaverdy's widow, desirous of peace, prevailed upon her
daughter to acknowledge Suraja Doulah, which concession was no
sooner made than Suraja put the Begum under lock and key, and at
once possessed himself of her palaces and treasures, together with the
person of the baby pretender. Thus in a few hours perished all our
hopes of favour from the family of Raja Bullub.
Nor was the new nabob slow to show us that we had little to expect
from his friendship. Tidings from home of a breach between England
and France had at last aroused us from our torpor; and workmen were
employed in repairing the parapet and embrasures of the fort, together
with the gun-carriages-all sorely in need of reparation.
This most necessary work-so imprudently deferred to the hour of
imminent danger-was but half done, when the president received a
perwannah from the nabob, to the effect that he had been informed we
were building a wall and digging a large ditch round the town of Cal-
cutta, and further commanding us to desist at once from such works.
The president immediately replied, that we had dug no ditch since
the invasion of the Morattoes; that in the prospect of a war between
France and England, we were anxious to prevent the possibility of such
a calamity as that which had some years since overtaken our country-
men at Madras; and for this end we were repairing our line of guns to
the water-side.
The result of this hasty answer was fatal. A war between the
French and English was the very danger this craven-hearted prince had
been taught to dread.
After this the authorities at Calcutta endeavoured to soothe the
nabob's wrath with some slight concessions, and even went so far as to
destroy some of our few defences; but without avail. Suraja Doulah

still obstinately demanded that we should throw down a wall we had
never built, and fill up a ditch that had not been dug.
On the 6th of June came rumours of calamity. The Company's
factory and fort at Cassimbazar had been invested by the nabob, to
whom Mr. Watts had surrendered after a brief parley. With a garri-
son of less than fifty men, a deficiency of ammunition, and but a few
small cannon, all more or less out of repair, it would indeed have needed
the genius of a Clive to encounter so powerful a besieger. Yet had the
garrison but held out for ever so short a period, the time gained would
have been invaluable to us at Calcutta; since, had the nabob's march
been deferred but a few days, the season of heavy rains would have
commenced, and the country have become almost impassable for troops
and cannon.
So deeply did Ensign Elliot, the commanding officer at Cassim-
bazar, feel the humiliation of this tame surrender, that he shot himself
through the head, whereby at least he escaped the fate of his men, who
were all put in irons and marched off to the common jail at Muxadavad.
So much clemency had we to expect from the new nabob.
Dark was the gloom which now brooded over Calcutta. In every
face appeared the common expectation of a swift-approaching peril.
With some it took the form of fear, and many a pale face was to be
seen in the streets and on the fort, for Suraja Doulah had the repu-
tation of being a man to whom cruelty was a favourite pastime; and who
could tell what hellish ingenuity he might exercise to make the cup of
death unnaturally bitter?
With some bold spirits, however, this crisis was a period of feverish
excitement. Warriors by nature, these poor untutored heroes sniffed
the scent of battle from afar, and were glad.
Amongst these was Philip Hay. I talked with him after the evil
tidings had come from Cassimbazar, and found him in excellent spirits.
However bitterly I had suffered from this man, there were times when
I was compelled to admire his marvellous equanimity of temper. He
had borne his dreary life during the last four years with consummate
cheerfulness, and had ingratiated himself into the favour of his officers,
from whom he had speedily picked up any military knowledge they
were willing to impart. His good conduct had advanced him from the
rank of a private to that of corporal, in which position he was more
than a match for the truculent Irish sergeant, Mr. O'Blagg. Between
Hay and myself friendly relations had steadily continued, despite our
altered positions. He had seen my good fortune without envy-nay,
indeed, I believe with a lazy kind of satisfaction, as releasing his con-
science from the burden of my ruin. He could now rub his hands
cheerily, and say, "Egad, Bob, 'tis the old Scripture story of Joseph
and his brethren over again. My selling you into slavery has made
your fortune."
Meanwhile, I on my part had never omitted to do him a service

when the opportunity arose; and though my small influence had not
gained him much promotion, it had secured him some trifling benefits,
for which he was needlessly grateful.
I found him lounging on one of the batteries, and looking up the
Hooghly with an eager expression in his eyes.
"Well, Bob," he cried as I approached, "I think we are near the
end of this dead calm. Be sure the taking of Cassimbazar was but
the first act in a stirring tragedy, and we shall soon hear the thunder
of the nabob's guns."
"I think the French have taught these Eastern tyrants not to
count too much upon their ponderous artillery, which they can but fire
once in a quarter of an hour. It was said in the Deccan the other day
that Bussy's musketry drew smoke from the Morattoes' breasts, and
sacrificed hecatombs upon the fire-altars of the French. Depend upon
it, they have begun to awaken to the power of European artillery."
"But not such artillery as ours, Bob. The nabob knows our
strength to a gun, and knows he can crush us; and, what is more, means
to do it, Mr. Robert Ainsleigh. So much the better, say I; welcome
the struggle. Let us not walk meekly into the Indian lion's jaws, like
those poor cravens of Cassimbazar. Give us a hard fight and a bloody
death, if needs be, so that history may record how one handful of Eng-
lishmen were found to defy the Eastern tiger. Do you know what I
would do if I were commandant of the fort ?"
"I cannot conceive what original piece of strategy your heroic
genius might devise."
"I would collect every ounce of powder we could scrape together-
and the Lord knows it would not be much-in the cellars below the
fort, and blow fort, factory, and Englishmen to the stars, before the
nabob's black devils should enter our gates."
"It would be a more brilliant ending than the capitulation of
Madras, and hardly a more costly one, and as a last resource might
fairly be tried. But when we have used all our gunpowder in defend-
ing ourselves, we shall not have the means for so heroic a suicide.
Alas, Phil, I fear a darker doom and a more ignoble end awaits the
English in Bengal!"
Upon this we parted, with a friendly nod of farewell; I being
obliged to return to my patron's house, where my services might at any
time be wanted to copy or translate a letter, or for some other small
business detail. Mr. Holwell was now constantly backwards and for-
wards between his house and the council-chamber, where all the ex-
citement of expectation and uncertainty prevailed.
Now that danger was at our very doors, there was at least some
show of activity. Letters demanding reinforcements were despatched
to Madras and Bombay, but with little or no hope that help could
reach us from either station in time, since the sea was closed by the
south monsoon for the present, and the journey by land the work of

a month. Nor did we shrink from the humiliation of asking nearer
aid from the French and Dutch; only to meet with contumely and dis-
appointment from both. We had no resource, therefore, but in our
own feeble numbers. These, augmented by militia, amounted to scarce
five hundred men, two-thirds of whom were Topasses, Armenians, and
Portuguese inhabitants, of whose temper or constancy we knew no-
thing. Our Indian matchlock-men were increased to fifteen hundred,
and we now lost no time in storing provisions and erecting such works
of defence as we were capable of constructing at so short a notice.


CHAPTER XX.
TARA.
Now was enacted a terrible tragic drama, in which I was destined
to play a strange part. Nearly a week had gone by since the fatal
news from Cassimbazar. The nabob and his army were on the road
to Calcutta, advancing with so impatient a haste on the part of their
vengeful master that many of the troops fell a sacrifice to the fierceness
of an almost tropical sun. During this interval the president and Mr.
Holwell had kept a sharp watch upon the movements of Omichund,
who was now suspected as the hidden instigator of all this mischief.
They did not watch in vain. On the 13th of June a letter was inter-
cepted, addressed to Omichund by the nabob's chief spy, and advising
him at once to place his treasures and effects beyond the reach of
danger.
This was considered decisive evidence of the Gentoo merchant's
perfidy; and as he happened, unluckily for himself, to visit the pre-
sident shortly after the stoppage of this letter, and having probably
heard of the circumstance by one of those side-winds of treachery which
are ever blowing in the East, he was at once placed under arrest and
confined in the fort, while a guard of twenty men were despatched to
his house to prevent the removal of his effects.
With this sinister event closed the 14th of June. On the evening
of the 15th I left my office, where I had been working busily all
day under my employer's direction, sorting and arranging papers in
sealed packets, in readiness for their sudden removal. I was relieved.
by the change from the tropical heat of day, which even our wetted
blinds could not exclude, to the comparative coolness of evening,
and strolled along the streets of Calcutta in a listless, mechanical
way, thinking of our desperate position, and contrasting the sluggish
quiet of the half-built town-where vagabond dogs were squabbling in
the gutter and noisy cranes performing their work of scavengers, and
here and there a lazy Gentoo shuffling from his shop to a neighbour's,
or a dirty fakir squatting on the muddy path, absorbed in his pretended
devotions-with the dread scene of warfare that must ere long be en-
acted in those very streets.

In such an idle meditative mood I walked a distance of three miles
from the fort, and by and by found myself near that splendid habita-
tion which I had once entered at a time of festival, and the image of
which had ever since remained imprinted on my mind as the picture
of some fairy palace in the tales of the Arabian Nights. Under what
an altered aspect was I now to behold it!
A great crowd had gathered round the gilded gates, and a hundred
voices rose upon the air in a confused clamour as I drew near. Nor
was the excitement of the crowd without sufficient cause. A volume
of flame and smoke had just burst from the open roof of the quad-
rangle, and loud and shrill from every lip arose the cry of "fire!"
I asked one of the bystanders how the fire had arisen.
"I know not, saheb," the man replied in Bengalee; "there has
been a fight between Omichund's servants-Omichund has many ser-
vants, three hundred servants-and the Company saheb's guards, and
there has been much people killed. Hazarimull, Omichund's brother,
and steward of his house, had hidden himself in the women's apart-
ments, and the Company's guards went to seize him."
The flame and smoke mounted higher from the open roof, and
above the clamour of the crowd I heard the agonised shrieks of women
within the burning house.
"Great God! the women are there," I cried.
66
Yes," the Gentoo answered coolly, "much women in the house
-Omichund's daughters and granddaughters. They all live in the
house."
I remembered those latticed apartments which Mr. Holwell had
pointed out to me on the night of the nâtch, and without another
thought I broke through the passive crowd, whose shrill exclamations
in Bengalee sounded like the chatter of a flock of parrots, and entered
the central hall of the house.
Happily the fire had but just broken out, for in Calcutta this
element of destruction is doubly fearful, so swift is the progress of the
flames where there is so little to check or arrest them. But though the
fire had yet attacked only one corner of the gallery, a universal scene
of ruin met my gaze.
The fray had been a severe one, many being
wounded on each side; and it is only to be wondered that our own
guard were not slaughtered to a man, since the odds were fifteen to one
against them.
By the time I made my way into the centre of the court, those
piercing shrieks of terror-stricken women which I had heard without
the gate had subsided, or were smothered by the groans and execrations
of the peons, or native servants, who were crowded on the staircases
and in the great open hall.
Pushing my way through a swarm of these wretches, I came upon
a sergeant of our own troops, who was leaning wounded against the
marble basin of a fountain.

He staggered to his feet and grasped me by the arm.
"O, for God's sake, sir, do something to stop those black devils !”
he cried; "they are murdering the women up yonder."
"Murdering the women ?"
"Yes; butchering them in cold blood. One of Omichund's head
peons, a man of high caste, has set fire to the house, and is slaughtering
those helpless creatures to save them the pollution of an honest Eng-
lishman's touch. Half our men are wounded, the rest mad with rage
-there is no one can stop the hellish work. Hark!"
He pointed upwards as a wild, long cry of despair rang out above
our heads. I dashed towards the staircase, mounted with a rush, and
broke through the first door I came to. It opened into one of the
women's apartments, which communicated with each other in a long
range of gaily-decorated rooms, with gaudy painted ceilings and bright
lattices, walls hung with muslin draperies, divans covered with rich
embroidered stuffs, and in every corner the clumsy bepainted and
begilded image of Doorgah, with her ten arms; or Siva, seated on his
white bull, the symbol of purity and dominion; or Sukee, the Hindoo
Ceres, crowned with grain, and encircled by a fruit-bearing plant; or
Ram, the protector of empires, encircled with a snake, and riding on
a monkey.
A glance showed me these things in the first two rooms through
which I passed. Of human life or death both these were empty; but
in the third room I came upon a spectacle the like of which has
seldom frozen the heart of an Englishman.
Five women, all in the bloom of youth, lay stretched on the floor
and divans, stabbed to death. For a few thrilling moments I bent
over each with the faint hope that among these victims of pagan pre-
judice some might yet be saved; but, alas, in every breast the vital
spark was extinct. For a moment I paused to listen. I heard the
hoarse clamour of men's voices in the court below,
but upon this upper
floor all was silence; the hellish work was done.
I passed on, appalled by this unsurpassable horror. In the two
following chambers I found eight more women, thirteen in all, massa-
cred by the fury of the misguided wretch, who doubtless thought that
by this barbarous act he was rescuing his master's household from the
abomination of the Christian's accursed touch, and further, procuring
for his victims a swift transition to the heights of heaven without the
preliminary ordeal of those five worlds of purgation through which the
soul despatched under ordinary circumstances must needs travel.
The bigotry which will cast its victims beneath the obscene car of
the Hindoo Moloch, or enable them to be swung in mid-air by an iron
hook thrust through the muscles of the spine, is an unknown quantity,
and I had less reason to be surprised by this dreadful scene than to
regret that it should have been caused, however indirectly, by the
policy of the English Company.


While I stood, as if transfixed, gazing blankly upon the scene of
ruin, a long hollow groan of human agony startled my ear, and looking
in the direction whence it came, I perceived by the movement of a
curtain that some sufferer yet lingered in the agony of death. I sprang
towards the spot, pulled aside the curtain, and discovered a Hindoo
servant lying close to the wall, desperately wounded, and with a bloody
dagger grasped in his hand.
hate.
He rolled his black eyes towards me with a hideous expression of
66
Away!" he cried; "avaunt, accursed Englishman! Leave me to
die by the wounds this hand has inflicted; or, if I am destined to live,
be sure I shall be an instrument to execute vengeance on your hated
race. Was it not enough that the glory of Hindostan should be
trampled beneath the foot of the Mahometan invader? was it not
enough that the rugged hordes of Tamerlane should sweep over the
mountains that defended the sons and successors of Brahmah? was it
not enough that the universal monarchy of India should be broken and
spoiled by the lying followers of a false prophet, and the glorious reign
of Vicram blotted out like a forgotten dream by these Tartar destroyers
of our gods; nay, the holy temple of Benares buried beneath the im-
pious shrine of our usurpers? Is this last degradation to be worse
than the first, and our masters' daughters defiled by the eaters of sheep
and oxen? Sooner may Siva, the destroyer, blast us with the mur-
derous breath of his giant nostrils !"
"What!" I cried, "are you the barbarous slaughterer of yonder
helpless women ?"
"Yes," answered this madman; "and were there fifty more, my
hand should slay them, rather than they should fall into the power of
your unholy race."
"Mistaken wretch, they would have suffered no harm from us," I
answered.
"What!" he cried; "are your soldiery so pure that you can answer
for their treatment of my master's household? or has my master re-
ceived such kindness from the English traders he has served as shall
warrant his women in trusting themselves to their mercy? You lock
him in your prison without allowing him an hour to bid his children
good-bye or give orders to his household, and then you send your
soldiers hither to ravage the house of the man who has served you
faithfully for thirty years, and whose service you reject with scorn at
the first whisper of a slanderer."
To this effect did the wounded wretch address me, in very pure
Hindoostanee. He was a young man, with a powerful frame, and
features which, when undistorted by pain, must have been singularly
handsome.
I left him in utter disgust, yet not without some sense of shame for
the proceedings of my masters. That Omichund was a traitor, I had

little doubt, and his imprisonment in the fort an act of common pru-
dence justified by the occasion; but I considered the attack upon his
house an act of violence at once unwarrantable and unwise.
The fire had been by this time extinguished, but the apartments I
next entered were filled with smoke, through which the lamps glim-
mered faintly. In the first of these I groped for some time, half-
suffocated by the foul atmosphere, and found nothing; but imme-
diately on entering the second, I stumbled against a prostrate form,
and for the moment supposed I had fallen upon another victim to the
peon's fury.
I knelt down and took the inanimate figure in my arms. The form
was slender as that of a child, and lay quite lifeless across my shoulder
as I bore my light burden from that suffocating atmosphere, overjoyed
to feel the faint flutter of a heart which I had supposed stilled for
ever.
As I returned towards the room in which I had left the wounded
peon, it flashed upon me that to carry my burden thither was but to
convey a new victim to that murderous fanatic. For a few moments
I paused, at a loss what to do. I knew not yet whether the helpless
creature in my arms was wounded to death, and this faint throb I felt
only the last expiring struggle, or whether animation was but suspended
by the suffocating smoke. To be seen attempting to carry her from
that house would be to doom her to instant death, and in all likelihood
to perish with her.
Casting a rapid glance around the chamber in which I stood, I
perceived that besides the lattices on the side of the court, there were
windows on the opposite side, curtained with embroidered muslin. To
tear aside the draperies, and survey the prospect from one of these
windows was the work of an instant. Thank God! here there seemed
a chance of escape. The window opened on a balcony and veranda,
from which a flight of steps led down to the garden, a noble area of
highly-cultivated ground, on which Omichund had spent much care
and money.
I was sufficiently familiar with the geography of Calcutta to know
that this garden was bounded on one side by the Morattoe ditch, on
the other by the garden belonging to that harpy, Govindram Metre, who
possessed a handsome house next to that of Omichund. Could I but
cross the garden unperceived, I might return to Fort William by the
unfrequented road which followed the line of the Morattoe boundary,
a road which was guarded by our own men, by whose aid I might per-
chance obtain a hackerry, in which to convey my helpless burden to
the fort.
I opened the window, ran down the steps and into the garden,
where the stars were shining upon the rich oriental foliage, and where
I heard the shrill cries of the jackals in the country beyond, like the
voices of children at play. A huge vampire bat brushed across my


face as I turned into one of the dark walks, and for the moment
blinded me.
A kind of instinct guided me to the part of the garden which I
wanted to reach; and here I found a gate, guarded by a topaz in our
service, who was lounging at his post, ignorant of, or indifferent to, the
work of ruin going on so near him.
Now, for the first time, I paused to look upon the creature I had
perchance snatched from the jaws of death. The night-air had re-
vived her senses. The heavy lids were slowly lifted from large dark
eyes, which gazed upon me with a look of mingled fear and wonder.
"Save them!" she cried with a shudder, in that Indian language which
was now familiar to me as my own,-" save them, or he will slaughter
them all-mother, sisters, all dead! Ah, why not Tara also? Shall
Tara live when all she loves are slain ?"
I saw the poor creature's senses were yet wandering, and tried to
soothe her with broken words of comfort, such as one speaks to a child,
but made no attempt to. enlighten her as to her real position. She
seemed to me, indeed, scarce more than a child, and I had seen too
little of Hindoo women of high caste not to be surprised by her beauty,
which was perfect of its type, combining as it did the pure lines of the
Greek with the rich colouring of the Asiatic.
It was not in this moment, however, that I awoke to a full sense of
her loveliness. I thought now only of saving her, and hastened on-
ward to a point where the topaz had told me I might possibly find that
species of coach drawn by oxen which the natives call a hackerry. I
was fortunate enough to find such a vehicle, in which I placed my
hapless companion, who had by this time fully recovered consciousness,
and besought me most piteously to take her back to the house where
her mother and sisters were lying.
I explained that to do this would be to carry her straight to death,
and told her that I would convey her to some English ladies, who
would succour and protect her.
She thanked me, but I could perceive she felt a sense of shame in
my companionship, to which her despair alone rendered her compara-
tively indifferent. I took my beauteous charge straight to Mr. Holwell,
assured that from him I should receive the wisest counsel and the most
generous help. He was inexpressibly shocked by the catastrophe which
I described to him; but after having assured the weeping damsel of his
protection, he drew me aside, and I could see that my adventure was
somewhat distasteful to him.
"Upon my word, Bob, thou art a most unlucky fellow," he ex-
claimed ; "for thy most generous instincts only lead thee into mischief.
If anything could complicate our relations with that crafty knave
Omichund, it is this chivalrous rescue of his granddaughter. Be sure
he will swear that the whole affair yonder was a planned thing to
enable you English Paris to ravish this Asiatic Helen. Were it not

inhuman to harbour such a thought, I should be inclined to wish the
poor child had perished with the rest of her family. But I will take
her at once to Mrs. Witherington-a kind soul, as you know-who
will keep your fair Hindoo in hiding till we can decide what is best to
be done with her."
Mrs. Witherington was the wife of one of the civil servants of the
factory, a good, matronly creature, whom I knew and respected. To
her house Mr. Holwell conducted the weeping Indian girl; but before
the dear child was removed by him she approached me suddenly, and
falling on her knees at my feet, lifted her clasped hands towards me
with a pathetic grace that touched me to the heart.
"Think not Tara is ungrateful," she said, in that native language
which sounded peculiarly harmonious from her lips, "or that she will
ever forget the brave Englishman who has saved her. Ah, no, saheb,
she is not ungrateful-she is only despairing. She has lost all-all!"
Her voice was here made inarticulate by the sobs that well-nigh
choked her. I raised her from the ground, and Mr. Holwell, with a
gentle force, removed her. He brought a dark cloak of his own in
which he wrapped this white-robed maiden, and, thus enveloped, was
able to conduct her unobserved to Mr. Witherington's house, which was
fortunately near at hand.
The next day, the 15th of June, was spent in frantic efforts to
erect works of defence, which might wisely have been prepared in the
long leisure of the last eight years, but which it was alike hopeless and
useless now to attempt. Such an attempt was, however, made; and
now that the enemy was at the door, the civil and military commanders
of the settlement showed themselves mightily energetic.
I had at the beginning of our troubles enlisted myself among the
militia, and am proud to declare my association with a body of men
who proved themselves more than equal to the better-trained military
in courage, skill, and patience. With these gentlemen I spent the best
part of the day at drill, and was amused by the eagerness of many a
young Alexander who scarce knew one end of his piece from the other.
Even while thus employed, I could not keep my thoughts from
Omichund and his lovely granddaughter. The images of the Indian
girl, so helpless and desolate in her strange home, and of the old man
in his prison, haunted me with a painful persistency.
When I met my patron in the evening at our melancholy dinner,
he gave me a sad account of Omichund's condition.
"I knew that the tidings of his calamity must soon reach him,"
said Mr. Holwell, "and thought it best he should receive the news
from my lips, with such extenuation as I could urge of our own
share in the event. I found the old man pacing his prison-chamber-
which is one of the best rooms in the fort-like some caged tiger, and
it was some minutes before he would listen to me with any show of
He was most bitter in his denunciations of what he called our
reason.


nglish perfidy, violently asseverated his innocence of any underhand
dealings with the nabob or the nabob's people, and declared that-after
profiting largely by his devotion and services-we had used him with
unexampled cruelty, and were bent on reducing him to beggary. 'You
envy me my hard-won wealth,' he cried, with a piteous whine,' and
would see me end my days as a mendicant in the streets of Calcutta.'
"This was before he knew the fate of his household?" I asked.
"It was.
Not once did he question me about his family. His
every thought was of his treasures, and of these he raved like the
veriest madman. Our detention of him at the fort was a trick to enable
us to plunder his house. We were robbers, nothing but robbers. I
bade him be calm, and summon all his fortitude to enable him to bear
what I had to tell, since a worse calamity than the plunder of his
treasures had fallen upon his house; and then I told him what had
happened, defending the policy of the president, who had but sought to
guard against the secret removal of his possessions. My tidings pro-
duced a more awful effect than I had anticipated. He fell on a sudden
from loud raving to a kind of stupor, and glared at me with glassy eyes
in utter silence. I stopped with him for a long time, endeavouring by
every means I knew to comfort, or, at least, to win him to speak freely
of his affliction; but in vain. For the space of an hour, as I believe,
he sat silent, statue-like, gazing now at me, now into space, with the
most awful look I ever beheld in mortal eyes. At last his limbs stirred
faintly, with a shivering motion, and he whispered between his clenched
teeth, And this too I owe the English!'"
6
"Good heavens!" I exclaimed indignantly; "it is no fault of ours
that the chief of his servants is a bigot and a madman."
"True, Bob; and this I tried to explain to him, but might as
He waved me from him, and
usefully have argued with the monsoon.
with his stony gaze fixed upon blank space, cried alond, like some
prophet of old, 'The day shall come when English maidens shall fear
the power of the Hindoo despoiler, and when the blood of your children
and your children's children shall be shed in payment of that which
was spilt last night! In this mood I left him, after entreating that
all kindness and attention should be shown to him by those who have
the care of his prison."
"And you did not tell him of his granddaughter's escape ?"
"No, Robert; for I saw he was in no mood to be consoled by that
single rescue, and I feared that, to his suspicious mind, the circum-
stance would tell against us. It will be safer to let him know the
truth by and by."
CHAPTER XXI.
THE BOLT FALLS.
NEXT morning, the 16th of June, brought us tidings of the nabob's
approach. His army had crossed the river from Hooghly on the pre-

vious day, in a vast fleet of boats, and were fast bearing down on us—
an armament as mighty in proportion to our numbers as that barbaric
host which descended on the sea-sands of Marathon two thousand years
before; and we, alas, had no Aristides. Now, for the first time in my
life, I beheld the horror and confusion of war; and piteous was the
scene which Calcutta presented to my unaccustomed eyes. Fear took
possession of every breast. The Gentoo inhabitants who had not
already fled abandoned their houses, carrying such possessions as they
could, and flying they knew not whither, to escape the wrath of the
tyrant; though what offence these, or we ourselves, had committed
against Suraja Doulah I cannot conceive. While the Gentoos thus
scattered themselves, the Portuguese, to the number of two thousand,
flocked to the fort, where men, women, and children were indiscrimi-
nately admitted, together with the Englishwomen, who all exchanged
the doubtful shelter of their houses for the comparative security of
Fort William. And now military and militia were ordered to their
posts, from the northernmost of which the van of the nabob's army
was descried at midday.
I will not enter into the details of the siege that gave Calcutta into
the hands of our bloodthirsty foe. A full account of the many errors
and blunders which assisted our defeat has been published by my friend
Mr. Holwell, who, as second in command, held one of the most dan-
gerous outposts on the second and busiest day of our defence. That
we had among us many brave men, there can be no doubt-from the
gallant captain who perished in our subsequent most cruel agony of
the Black Hole, to the fiery young civilian, who, on finding himself cut
off from his party, refused quarter, and contrived to demolish five of
the enemy in a hand-to-hand fight before he fell. But that we had
amongst us not one great soldier is, alas, equally true.
have been achieved for us, had there been time to call Clive to our
aid! One hour of his presence might have saved us a hundred errors
and a shameful fate; but Providence had willed it otherwise, and Clive
only landed at Fort St. David on the day that witnessed the fall of
Fort William.
What might not
Our errors were too numerous for detail, as the weakness of our
defences is almost beyond description. A body of men who might have
done wonders in the close quarters of Thermopyla were scattered wide,
as on the plains of Babylon; or, in plain words, instead of concentrating
our forces at the fort, we attempted to hold three paltry batteries, which
had been hastily erected on the three land-sides of the city, each at
some three hundred yards from the fort. Mr. Holwell was second in
command at one of these posts; I had a subordinate rank at another;
and from this moment both of us were as actively engaged in the de-
fence as if we had held his Majesty's commission.
The first day closed with something like a triumph on the English
side, owing to the valiant conduct of Ensign Pischard, who at midnight

took his party across a rivulet, surprised four thousand of the enemy
wrapt in slumber, spiked their guns, drove them from their quarters,
and returned to his station without the loss of a man.
The second day witnessed a defence as desperate as it was unavail-
ing. The murderous wretch whose work I had beheld, Jaggernaut
Sing, Omichund's chief servant, had caused himself to be set on a
horse, wounded as he was, and now appeared leading on the enemy to
the weakest points of our defences, and displaying almost supernatural
activity, and a fiendish ingenuity in his endeavours to secure our ruin.
The struggle began with the break of day, and raged long and
furiously at the batteries and in the streets, where the enemy got pos-
session of several houses, from the windows of which they harassed us
with a perpetual fire of small-arms.
Towards evening the batteries were abandoned, after much loss on
our part, and a far greater waste of human life on the side of the
enemy, whose inexhaustible numbers were scarcely to be weakened by
slaughter. At dusk the English had retreated to the fort, the retire-
ment to which point was not effected without difficulty. The abandon-
ment of the batteries, upon which much reliance had been placed, was
the signal for a kind of panic. The fort was noisy with the clamours
and groans of the Portuguese, who revealed their craven natures with-
out compunction; while the Armenian militia were worse than useless
in this hour of peril. The English were still undaunted; and little
did I expect to see their spirits fail, let the issue of affairs be what it
might.
At two o'clock in the morning a solemn council of war was held, to
which civilians as well as military were admitted; but with a lament-
able weakness on the part of our chiefs, we were allowed to disperse,
after a debate of two hours, in a state of indecision as to whether we
should immediately escape to the ships, or hold out for another day.
With the first glimmer of morning the enemy's cannonade began, while
their matchlock-men fired incessantly upon our yet inhabited houses,
as well as on the bastions and ramparts. Ensign Pischard and his
gallant party took possession of the governor's house, but in a few
hours returned to the fort wounded; on which our men were recalled
from our few remaining outposts. These were immediately seized by
the enemy; and the panic within the garrison increased with every
moment.
Now arose a scene of dire confusion in the endeavour to dispose
safely of the wretched Portuguese women and children, whose presence
had so intensified the horror of our situation. We had but small means
of shipping-off these poor creatures, many boats having deserted under
cover of night. To the few that remained the helpless wretches rushed
helter-skelter, heedless of all attempts to preserve discipline. The re-
sult was fatal: several boats were swamped by the weight of their
crew, and the poor creatures drowned or immediately sacrificed to the


enemy, who remorselessly slaughtered such as floated to shore alive.
These black demons had taken possession of the houses and enclosures
along the bank of the river, whence they discharged fire-arrows into
the Dudaly and other vessels.
The English women had by this time embarked on board the Dudaly,
with several of the garrison. These, alarmed by the fire-arrows, instead
of returning to the fort, removed the ship three miles down the river to
Govindpore, on their own responsibility. The contagion of this example
spread but too fast. All the other vessels weighed anchor and sailed
after the ship; while many of the militia, appalled by this sudden de-
sertion, made haste to abandon the shore. Among the military who
had left us in charge of the women, and were too prudent to return,
was my old enemy, Sergeant O'Blagg. The experience of the siege had
convinced me that this gentleman's heroism went no farther than the
employment of big words, and a bellowing, bullying manner to his
inferiors. In active service he preferred the better part of valour.
Mr. Holwell's plate, jewels, and papers had been embarked in the
Diligence Snow during the previous evening. He and I were now
together on the ramparts-a post of no small danger-and I could see
by his manner that he was prepared for the worst. The governor had
until this moment been firm, and, although no soldier, had exposed
himself to danger with considerable spirit; but at this crisis he seems
to have lost all fortitude, and seeing his friends embarking in the two
solitary boats that remained, and being further disheartened by the
insubordination of his men, and the tidings that our little remaining
gunpowder was unfit for use, he forgot at once the grave responsibili-
ties of his position and the dictates of honour, and joined in the ignoble
flight. The tidings of this last disgrace was brought to us by Philip
Hay, who had fought like a devil throughout the siege, and whose
powder-blackened face was scarcely recognisable this morning.
"Did you ever see such a set of curs, Bob?" exclaimed Mr. Hol-
well, as the Dudaly and the smaller vessels disappeared from our gaze.
"But it is surely only a feint, sir," I answered; "they are coming
back ?"
"Yes, Bob, when Calcutta is a heap of ashes, and they are brought
back as captives of the Soubah. Be sure they will never return of
their own accord. They have left us to perish, lad; that is what it
means."
We went into the fort, where the remaining inhabitants flocked
around my patron, loud in the expression of their indignation against
the deserters.
"You have always been true to our interests, Holwell," cried the
eldest member of Council remaining among us; "I resign my right of
command in your favour."
A loud cheer signified the general approval of this decision.
Mr. Holwell quietly accepted the onerous duty thus assigned him,

thanked his superior and the rest for their confidence, and marched
straight to the western gate leading to the river, whither I followed,
with Philip Hay and some others.
"We will have no more deserters, Bob," said our new governor;
"and when we leave Fort William, it shall be together, and in a decent
soldierly manner."
A ship which had been stationed at the northern redoubt still re-
mained, and to this vessel Mr. Holwell despatched an officer in a boat,
with orders to the captain to bring her down to the fort. But this last
hope was destined to fail us,-the ship struck upon a sandbank, and
was at once abandoned by her crew.
We watched this catastrophe with a groan of despair, but did not
the less vigorously defend our feeble post. Towards afternoon the
enemy's fire abated, and they amused themselves by burning such
of the adjacent houses as did not command our ramparts. No longer
harassed by their incessant fire, we spent the greater part of the after-
noon and ensuing night in throwing out signals for the return of the
ships; but neither flags by day nor signal-fires by night would tempt
these cravens back to us; yet a single sloop with fifteen men on board
might have dropped under our walls during the night and saved every
one of us.
In that long day and night of suspense I had but one source of
consolation; and that was in the knowledge that the poor little Gentoo
maiden I had rescued was safe on board the Dudaly, where Mrs. Wither-
ington had taken her among her children and native nurses, for one of
whom she had easily passed in the confusion of the embarkment.
While the signal-lights were vainly burning, Philip Hay and I paced
one of the terraces, and talked over our situation. In the failure of
our rescue by the vessels now lying at Govindpore, death seemed inevit-
able; and we could not refrain from a shudder as we wondered what
agonising form of death the Soubah's ingenuity might devise for us.
"I have always thought there was something heroic in being blown
from the mouth of a cannon," said the imperturbable Philip; "and
the sensation, if unpleasant, must be brief. But I doubt if Suraja
Doulah will not reserve so dignified a mode for Holwell and our supe-
riors. These Mahometans have a knack of putting out an enemy's
eyes; but I fancy that is an honourable torture they only confer upon
near relations; and then there is the slow poison of the poust-that too
is a privilege allowed only to kindred. But no doubt this oriental
Caligula has numerous modes of executing such small fry as our
humble selves, for the titillation of that fine artistic sense of cruelty
with which he is said to be gifted. I have somewhere heard that in
the old Hindoo law a man who assaults a magistrate shall be punished
as if he had murdered a hundred Brahmins, and, a spike being thrust
through him, shall be roasted alive. Perhaps the nabob may choose
to treat us in Hindoo fashion."

Before daybreak, the enemy swarmed to the attack in greater num-
bers than ever; and Mr. Holwell, moved by the entreaties of the weaker
spirits among us, consented to treat with our adversary. I went with
him to Omichund, whom he had not seen since the day on which he
had been the bearer of such fatal news.
We found the old man singularly calm and reasonable.
"I have come to ask your service, Omichund," Mr. Holwell began
at once. "We have been abandoned by the greater number of our people,
though we might have left Fort William with dignity, and secured all
the books and papers of the Company, had the governor and the rest
but stood by us. Our position is now desperate, and as your fortunes
are linked with ours, I look to you for any help you can afford us."
The old Gentoo bent his head in silence.
"You have been a fast friend of Manickchund, the Governor of
Hooghly, who is now before the fort in command of a body of troops.
A letter from you to him may secure us more favourable terms than we
could make for ourselves. Will you write such a letter?"
"Yes, saheb, I will write."
"You will bid Manickchund inform the Soubah that if he will cease
hostilities, the English will obey his commands. We are only fighting
in defence of our lives and honour."
“Yes, saheb, I will write. If the English Company had trusted
Omichund, he might have served them at the Durbar, and hindered the
coming of this day."
"Ay, friend, we have made many mistakes," Mr. Holwell answered
sadly.
The letter was written and thrown over the ramparts at sunrise;
but hostilities continued until noon. Of the hundred and ninety men
left after the desertion of the ships, twenty-five had been killed or had
received their death-wounds, seventy were disabled, while the common
soldiers had broken open the storehouse of arrack, and were stupidly
intoxicated.
At four in the afternoon a man was seen advancing with a flag of
truce in his hand. This was at once answered by another on the south-
east bastion; for by this time every voice was calling on Mr. Holwell
to surrender. A parley ensued, during which the enemy were doing us
all the harm they could, while one wretch fired at one of our gentlemen
as he stood on the bastion by Mr. Holwell's side. Infuriated by this
treachery, my patron ran down to summon the men to the ramparts;
but he called in vain. The poor creatures who would have obeyed him
had crawled, wounded and helpless, into the fort; and whilst he was
seeking these, amongst whom was Philip Hay, the drunken soldiers,
bent on escaping by the river, burst open the western gate just as a
body of the enemy had forced a gate beyond it, and were rushing to the
attack of this. By this act of supreme cowardice and folly the foe were
admitted, and swarmed into the fort, a very torrent of furious wretches,

shouting their Moorish cries of victory. The warehouses were escaladed
at the same moment; a general surrender followed, and we all were pri-
soners of Suraja Doulah, except a few desperate wretches who dropped
from the embrasures, and escaped along the slime of the river.
At five o'clock the nabob entered the fort, sent his officers at once
to seize upon the Company's treasury, and installed himself with all
pomp in the chief apartment of the factory, where he received the ser-
vile compliments of his flatterers, who extolled the conquest of a hand-
ful of worn-out civilians with such florid eloquence as may have been
lavished on Alexander after the battle of Gaugamela. Omichund and
Raja Bullub's son were both summoned before this eastern tyrant, who
received them with promising civility; after which he sent for Mr.
Holwell, whom he favoured with no less than three interviews, the last
in Durbar, or solemn council, at a little before seven o'clock.
At this last interview I had the honour to be present, in attendance
on my master, and for the first time beheld the tyrant whose sanguin-
ary reign was happily to be of the briefest. I saw a handsome young
man of the higher eastern type, superbly attired, and glittering with
jewels, who surveyed my patron and myself with suspicious, if not
malevolent, looks.
He had been much disappointed by the contents of the treasury-
some fifty thousand rupees-and accused us of having hidden or buried
the Company's wealth.
"But you will show me where it is hidden, or it will be the worse
for you," he said in a threatening tone.
Mr. Holwell assured him in the most emphatic manner that the
money in the treasury constituted the sole funds of the Company at
this settlement.
"Would you make me eat dirt ?" he cried contemptuously; "would
you fool me with your English lies? You are all thieves, and have
robbed my honoured grand-uncle, the late nabob, for the last fifteen
years. You sell your passports to Gentoo merchants, who thus cheat
us of our revenues. You took payment for your protection of that
Gentoo traitor, Kissendass, and the wealth which he has stolen from my
uncle's treasury. You have fattened too long upon the land, and it is
time there should be an end of you. Inshallah, did I not swear to my
dying grandfather that I would blot you from the face of the country,
and shall I not keep my oath ?"
This was by no means promising; but Mr. Holwell contrived so far
to mitigate the Soubah's displeasure that he presently dismissed us for
the night, with a languid yawn, after pledging his word as a soldier
that no harm should happen to us.
Cheered by this hopeful prospect, we left the royal presence, and
were at once conducted to the Arched Veranda, west of the Black-
Hole Prison, where we found the rest of our wretched company, many
among them severely wounded, and all exhausted by days of struggle


and nights of watching. Here they were all gathered-some leaning
against the wall, others seated hopelessly on the ground-helpless and
meek as sheep in an overcrowded market awaiting the butcher, and
closely guarded.
For some time we remained in patient silence, broken only by the
feeble groans of the wounded, until flames breaking out right and left
of us caused a sudden consternation and horror. We thought our
enemies were going to suffocate us between two fires, and were con-
firmed in this fear by seeing officers and people with lighted torches
going into all the apartments under the easterly curtain to the right of
us, bent, as we supposed, on setting fire to them.
A few minutes' hurried consultation succeeded, and rather than wait
to be roasted alive, we determined upon falling on the guard, seizing
their cimeters, and trying to cut our way through the troops on the
parade. Before thus desperately rushing on almost certain death,
Mr. Holwell advanced to watch the proceedings of the men with
torches, and returned to tell us they were no incendiaries, but were
only seeking a place in which to confine us for the night.
At this moment Leech, the Company's smith, who had made his
escape when the nabob entered the fort, approached Mr. Holwell, and
told him in a whisper that he had a boat ready, and knew of a secret
passage through which he would conduct him to the river. My patron
nobly refused to leave the companions who had so affectionately con-
fided in him, and Leech as nobly volunteered to remain and share his
fate, which generous resolution cost the poor fellow his life.
All this was decided in a few hurried whispers, and was scarce
settled when a body of the guard advanced to us, with the officers
whose blazing torches had so alarmed us. They ordered us into the
barracks, a great open place, with arches facing westward, and fur-
nished with a spacious wooden platform, on which we might have
passed the night in tolerable comfort.
We entered willingly, eager to repose even on this Spartan couch;
but were no sooner within the barracks than the guards advanced to
the inner arches and parapet-wall, and, with presented muskets, ordered
us to go into that small square room in which I had already spent a
night, commonly called the Black-Hole Prison; whilst others from the
court, off guard, pressed upon us with clubs and drawn cimeters. So
sudden and unexpected was the stroke, and so great the throng and
pressure upon us, that we rolled like a torrent into the prison; though,
I think, had many of us known the extent of the dungeon, we should,
even in this last extremity have rushed upon the guard and suffered
them to hew us piecemeal rather than force us living into that torture-
chamber.
Now followed a scene of horror I think unparalleled in the history
of past ages. One hundred and forty-six wretches, many among them
wounded past hope, all exhausted by continual fatigue and action,

jammed together in a space of eighteen feet square, open only by two
small close-barred windows looking to the westward, a quarter whence
at this season no air could come.
The first impulse was one wild burst of rage. A block of living
creatures rolled desperately against the door, in the hope to force it
open. But, alas, the door opened inwards, and this dead weight could
do nothing against it. Some of these unarmed wretches next tried to
drag it open with their hands and nails, and fell back presently with
bleeding, lacerated fingers, howling for pain. I, who was at this
period crushed into a corner, with Philip Hay's weight leaning full
upon me, and the blood from a sabre-wound on his forehead trickling
slowly on my face, could but indistinctly perceive what was passing.
After some minutes of riot and confusion, I heard my patron's voice,
sounding singularly calm and clear above the clamour of the rest. He
had fortunately been one of the first to enter our dungeon, and had
thus been carried close to one of the windows.
He exhorted us in the most pathetic terms to a patient endurance
of our sufferings, as the only means whereby we might any of us hope
to survive the night. On this followed a brief interval of comparative
tranquillity, during which, by the surging movement of the restless
crowd, I was borne without effort of my own close to the window at
which Mr. Holwell was posted, Philip Hay's weight still bearing down
upon me, and was by this accident of position among the few who out-
lived the night. Near me, clinging to the bars of the window, I per-
ceived a sergeant's wife, one Mrs. Carey, the only woman among us,
whose husband was also in the prison.
Nothing could be more admirable than my patron's calmness
throughout this night of horror. He watched the faces of the guard
who were posted outside the bars of our window, and whose counte-
nances were now made visible by the fitful glare of their torches, now
hidden in darkness. Among these was an old Indian sergeant, in
whose looks Mr. Holwell read something like pity; and this man he
entreated to get us relieved by being divided into separate cells, since
there were chambers enough in which we could be placed. He further
pressed his entreaty by the promise of a thousand rupees, to be paid
the sergeant next morning.
The man disappeared, and for a few delicious moments we, who
had heard the brief dialogue, enjoyed the rapture of hope. He re-
turned but too soon, to tell us the thing was impossible. Mr. Holwell
was not to be satisfied so easily. He reiterated his entreaties, and this
time doubled his promised reward. Again the sergeant withdrew, and
again returned with the same answer. The thing was impossible with-
out the Soubah's order. The Soubah was sleeping, and no one dared
waken him. One hundred and forty-six wretches languishing in the
awful tortures of suffocation, and for them there is no hope because
the Soubah is sleeping! I think there is one last long slumber from

which Suraja Doulah, Soubahdar of Bengal, Behar, and Orixa, will be
awakened without ceremony, and that the waking will hardly be a
pleasant one.
We had not been shut into this hole of horrors ten minutes when
everyone among us fell into a perspiration so profuse as to drain every
drop of moisture from our bodies. This brought on a raging thirst,
which increased every instant. Some now proposed that we should
strip ourselves of our clothes, and thus gain at once space and coolness.
Many did so, though I can but wonder how they contrived to tear off
their garments, so closely were we wedged together. It was then re-
commended that we should all sit down; and this advice we several
times obeyed for a few minutes at a time; but each time the word was
given to "rise," some of the weaker among us were trampled or crushed
in the struggle, never to rise again.
Before we had been more than an hour immured, our thirst became
painful to an almost maddening degree, and a cry for "water" was re-
peated without cessation. It was a hoarse, perpetual clamour, which
resembled the insensate lowing of thirsty cattle rather than the reason-
able demand of humanity.
And at this juncture the very compassion which sought to aid us
was made an instrument of our destruction; for the old Indian sergeant,
taking pity on our agonies, ordered some skins of water to be brought
to the window. The water appeared, but the openings between the
bars were too narrow to enable the skins to be passed in to us. A clamour
and raving as of a thousand devils arose; and many bewildered wretches
fought furiously with each other without knowing what they did. Mr.
Holwell and two others near the window contrived to pass a little
water in among us in hats; but in the fury and contention of this mad
crowd these precious draughts were wasted, and but a few drops reached
the lips of the stronger struggler who last seized the fragile vessel.
The very sight of this water seemed to increase our thirst twenty-fold,
though it had been unbearable before; for to this one agony there
appears to be no limit.
The cries and ravings of those beyond the reach of this too-tantal-
ising relief were awful beyond description. I heard old and valued
friends calling on my patron by every adjuration of affection for but a
few drops to relieve their tortures. Some desperate creatures made
a frantic effort to reach the windows, and many were trampled to
death beneath their reckless feet. Over these corpses the crowd clam-
bered and struggled, unawed by the horror of death, each sufferer bent
only on obtaining relief for his own pangs.
Can humanity in the West conceive so horrid a picture of Eastern
cruelty? These hellish agonies proved vastly entertaining to the guard
without, who held their torches close to the bars, and peered in upon
us with horrible grins upon their black faces, jeering and hooting at
us for very joy.

I cannot imagine a more vivid vision of hell. A herd of suffering
wretches, with parched tongues lolling from their fevered lips, wrest-
ling insensately with each other in the thick smoke and stench of
Tophet, while black-faced demons glare upon and gloat over their
anguish!
I think I must have been delirious at this time; for I heard a voice,
which was my own, and yet seemed not my own, repeating the words
of Dives: "Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus,
that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue; for
I am tormented in this flame."
O God, what a Pandemonium! On one side rose the blasphemies
and imprecations of unbelieving despair; on another, fainter prayers for
release or death; the choking sobs and hollow groans of the dying; the
Babel-clamour of several languages; while near the windows the crowd
were assailing the guard with every imaginable insult, in the hope that
they would fire in upon us, and put an end to our misery.
What! cut short so amusing a comedy? To such spectators the
best drolling in Bartlemy Fair would have been a poorer show. Was it
to be supposed these merry souls would sacrifice such pleasant enter-
tainment as this exhibition afforded them?
I know not at what hour it was, or how long I had suffered. I
know it seemed as if I had been in that foul pit a lifetime, when I felt
Philip Hay's arm round my neck, and heard him whispering in my ear.
"Bob," he said, "have you ever forgiven me for selling you into
bondage?"
"You know I was so foolish as to forgive you long ago."
"You are the best of creatures. O Bob, what a scoundrel I have
been! My life has been one long villany. I think I was only born
into this world to speak lies and plot treachery. But I was born so
poor. Poverty is the father of scoundrels. But I am dying; and I
want you to bless me before I die. Let me suck the sweat from your
shirt-sleeve; 'tis my sole chance of moistening this red-hot furnace in
my throat. Would you bless me, if I gave you your freedom? Sup-
posing you ever escape from this hell, and get back to England, which
is doubtful, would you bless me, if I told you that the marriage in
Fleet-lane was no marriage-that Margery Hawker is no wife of
yours?"
"What do you mean?" I gasped.
"I mean that her name is Margery Hay. She is my wife. I was
in Paris with those two before I hunted you out in the Temple. I had
helped in the elopement, you know, and was his gentleman body-ser-
vant, henchman, bully, and hanger-on in general. The poor child
fretted over her dishonour, and he proposed to make an honest woman
of her by marrying her-to me. I know not by what process of rea-
soning he won her consent, but he did win it. She was to go back to

her father and mother as the wife of a decent gentleman, one Mr. Philip
Hay, and not as the poor waif and stray she was. We were married by
the chaplain of the British Legation-I in the character of Mr. Le-
strange's secretary; but beyond that marriage-ceremony we are no
more man and wife than I and the Empress Catherine. Mr. Lestrange
continued to prevent the poor soul's return to the home from which he
stole her, for, you see, at this time he had not quite made up his mind
that he was tired of her; and I left them to come to London in search
of you. Then arose the notable scheme of marrying her to you, to
prevent your marriage with Miss Dorothea, and thus make assurance
doubly sure in the event of our kidnapping plan proving a failure.
A tangled web of intrigue, is it not? I left the certificate of my mar-
riage in the safe-keeping of a friend in London, in case it should ever
be wanted."
"What friend?" I asked eagerly; for I felt him growing heavier as
he hung upon me, while his whispers sounded fainter in my ear.
"Your friend's name, Phil!" I cried; " for God's sake tell me that!"
"A lawyer, and a fellow I can trust. A scoundrel, Bob; but your
thorough-paced scoundrels can trust each other. It's only your half-
and-half rogue who turns traitor."
"His name?"
Too late. His arm loosened upon my neck, and he slipped down
in a sitting position, not to rise again within my knowledge.
I tried to bend over him, in the hope of picking him up, but found
myself powerless to move a limb, so close was I packed. A faint glim-
mer of dawn now lighted the chamber, and I looked right and left at
my neighbours. One was a topaz, the other an English sergeant, both
dead. They stood each on one side of me, statue-like and hideous
figures-dead, but unable to fall from the equal pressure round us.
On the opposite side of the dungeon was the long wooden platform
on which I had once slept. This was heaped with the dead and dying
-a very mountain of corpses.
Of the revolting stench that now prevailed, and of other physical
horrors, I dare not speak. As the day dawned, there arose a kind of
calm; the clamour had altogether abated, so much were our numbers
reduced by death.
As the light increased, my breathing became every moment more
oppressive. I had lived through the night with intervals of delirium.
In one of these I had fancied myself in a wooded valley at Hauteville,
while before me, cool and pellucid, stretched a great pool of water,
the banks of which had been a favourite resort of mine and Margery's
in our brief happy childhood. This vision now returned, and no words
can paint the agony with which I gazed on that delusive picture, long-
ing to plunge into those cool depths, and yet bound hand and foot by
the pressure of our charnel-house. When this mirage faded, conscious-
ness vanished with it.


I was awakened by a rush of air and a sensation of acute agony,
caused by the oppression of my head and chest. Lifting my eyelids
with a painful effort, I perceived that the door of our dungeon stood
a little way open. I heard afterwards that this had only been effected
after full twenty minutes' labour, so difficult was it for the worn-out
survivors to remove the dead piled up against this door.
Of the one hundred and forty-six who entered that dungeon some
twelve hours before, twenty-three now crawled slowly out, one by one,
between a lane of corpses; nor do I think that in the seven circles of
his purgatory the Poet-seer beheld any ghosts more awful than those
living creatures who thus emerged into the light of day.

