CHAPTER XXVIII. THE TWO TREATIES.
SOME days elapsed before the arrival of a reply to the letter which
Mr. Watts had written to Colonel Clive, setting forth in detail the
iniquitous demands of Omichund. When Robert Clive's answer did
come, I was at the first blush scarcely less astonished by it than I
had been by the Gentoo's most impudent demand.
"I have received your last letter," wrote he, "and I must confess
the tenor of it surprised me much. I immediately repaired to Calcutta,
and, at a committee held, both the admirals and gentlemen agree that
Omichund is the greatest villain upon earth, and that now he appears
in the strongest light, what he was always suspected to be, a villain
ingrain. However, to counterplot this scoundrel, and at the same
time to give him no room to suspect our intentions, enclosed you
will
receive two forms of agreement, the one real, to be strictly kept by us,
the other fictitious. In short, this affair concluded, Omichund will be
treated as he deserves."
"Well, Ainsleigh," said Mr. Watts, after he had permitted me to
read this letter, "what do you think of the colonel's plan ?"
"It is a bold expedient, sir; but do you consider it an honourable
one ?"
"No," replied my patron, "between man and man such a trick
would be a consummate treachery. But remember that we deal here
with nations. Omichund has it in his power not only to betray you
and me, but to destroy the English in Bengal."
"Since we are so completely in his power, sir, would it not be best
to give him his price, and suffer him to enjoy his ill-gotten gains, and
the ignomony they will carry with them?"
"That is offering a premium to iniquity. You talk like a boy, my
dear Ainsleigh. Is a man to make near a million of money by a stroke
of treachery the most infamous ever hatched in the mind of a traitor?
Were the sum less important, we might consent to his cheating Meer
Jaffier, for remember it is from the future Nabob the money is to be
plundered. I swear that Clive's notion is a masterstroke of genius.
That man is all genius-in politics or in war he shines alike resplen-
dent. His diplomacy is as intuitive as his military skill. Great


heavens, what a man-and he came to Madras scarce thirteen years ago
as a clerk!"
"Yet I wish with all my heart he had hit upon any other plan than
this, sir."
"So do I, Robert; but you see it is just because there is no other
plan possible that this expedient is a masterstroke. That scoundrel
pushes us into a corner. 'I will have my name in the treaty for close
upon a million sterling, or I will betray you,' he says. He shows no
mercy, you see; and we reply, 'Very well, you shall have your name in
a treaty;' but we do not say what treaty; and so the trickster will be
nicely tricked. Do not ask me to pity him, Robert. It is but a puling
sentiment that can plead for such a harpy. The wretch is rolling in
wealth already. He has got half the hoarded rupees plundered from
his house, and is now trying to extort the other half from Suraja
Doulah's treasury. He will have full restitution of his losses in Cal-
cutta, with the rest of the sufferers, native as well as English, should
the revolution succeed. And are you going to plead for him because
his treachery fails to extort an extra million? I tell you the man's
greed of gold is a monomania; give him a million to-day, and you will
but render him the more eager for another million to-morrow. A ficti-
tious treaty! Yes, Robert, it is the only possible means of securing us
from this scoundrel's treachery."
Reflection convinced me that Mr. Watts was right, and that a situa-
tion of peril so exceptional, a traitor so far beyond all common traitors,
justified a deceit as desperate as that proposed by Clive. How this
act may appear to the judgment of after-ages I know not; but it is
scarce possible that the rigid moralists who may point to this deed
as a blot upon Robert Clive's character should realise the difficulties of
our position at this crisis. I have lived to hear the Colonel's policy in
this matter questioned, as almost every other step in the career that
gave India to England has been questioned; and to hear his bold jus-
tification of the deed. "I would do it again a hundred times," he told
the Committee of the House of Commons; and though his humanity
compassionated the disappointed miser's hapless ending, I think he
gloried in the recollection of having successfully cheated so base a
cheat.
Conciliated, and half-convinced by the apparent friendliness of the
course which Clive had taken with regard to the Morattoe letter-a
genuine document, and calculated to alarm his fears-Suraja Doulah at
last consented to withdraw his army from Plassy, and Meer Jaffier
returned to the capital at the head of his fifteen thousand troops. He
was coldly received by the Nabob, whose insolence of manner so alarmed
him that he withdrew to his palace in fear and trembling, not knowing
what discoveries might have been made by Suraja Doulah during his
absence. The frown of a despot is a menace of death, and Meer Jaffier
knew the ways of his countrymen too well to be blind to his danger.


So fearful was he of exciting suspicion that he refused to confer in
private with Mr. Scrafton, whom Colonel Clive had despatched to
Muxadavad to explain the particulars of the two treaties, real and
fictitious, and would only give him a hurried interview in his public
audience-chamber.
All was now prepared for the final blow, and our chief anxiety at
this crisis was to get rid of Omichund, who, as he had boasted, did
but too surely hold the lives of us all in his power, and who at any
moment might, by some diabolical chance, get wind of our intention to
deceive him. He was a creature all eyes and ears, a plotter by nature,
and so greedy of gain that he would at any moment hazard the chances
of our great enterprise in the hope of some immediate profit to himself.
He had done this more than once already, by carrying to the Nabob
false tales of our designs against him, calculated certainly to throw him
off the real scent, but also calculated to keep him in a state of alarm
and watchfulness most inimical to our plans.
For such artful inventions Omichund had received either immediate
payment, or promises of future reward. We knew not what mischief
his lying tongue might do us if he remained longer a hanger-on of the
Nabob's council-chamber, and Mr. Watts and Mr. Scrafton laid their
heads together to withdraw him to Calcutta.
I think the promise of gain would have tempted him to descend
into the Brahminical hell; and when it was made clear to him that
there was money to be picked up at Calcutta in payment of his services
there, he agreed to return with Mr. Scrafton, and Mr. Watts and
myself had the pleasure of seeing him depart in his palanquin in that
gentleman's company.
Mr. Scrafton related to us afterwards, with mingled laughter and
vexation, the difficulties of his journey-how, on the travellers reaching
Cassimbazar, the old Gentoo was missing, and how, on messengers
being despatched back to the city in search of him, he was found sitting
at midnight in the Nabob's treasury, trying to extort from Mohun
Lall, the favourite, some more of the money he had been promised as a
reward for his lies about the English. Here the messengers were fain
to wait until the harpy had assured himself there was nothing to be
extorted from the inflexible Mohun Lall, when they packed him into
his palanquin and bore him off in triumph to Cassimbazar, whence
they continued their journey at two o'clock in the morning. But at
daybreak Mr. Scrafton, awaking from a peaceful slumber, had the mor-
tification to discover that his tiresome charge was again missing, and
this time knowing not where to look for him, had no help for it but to
wait upon the road-side until three o'clock in the afternoon, when the
old man returned from Plassy, whither he had stolen off to confer
with Roydoolub, who had told him that no stipulation had been made
for him in the negotiations with Meer Jaffier.
Alarmed to the last degree by this assertion, the old plotter pushed

Mr. Scrafton with the closest questions; but this gentleman was happily
able to baffle him without trouble.
"You see I had only to tell the old scoundrel the truth," he said to
us, in relating the adventure; "which was that Roydoolub could not
possibly know the particulars of the treaty, since Mr. Watts had not yet.
communicated the ultimate form of the agreement even to Meer Jaffier
himself. Convinced by this, he consented to continue his journey, and
we jogged on in peace, though I rarely woke from a nap without ex-
pecting to miss Omichund's palanquin, and find he had played me
some new trick. At Calcutta he was received with amazing cordiality;
but even this could not quite conquer his suspicions, for he was seen
in secret conference with our Persian scribe; but this fact luckily
reaching the Colonel's ears, the scribe was employed only to draw up
the fictitious treaty. Thus, you perceive, if Omichund had bribed the
scribe to tell him the contents of the document-which there is little
doubt he had done he would be only the more surely deceived."
One difficulty, and one only, had transpired in the preparation of
this fictitious treaty, and that arose from Admiral Watson's peremptory
refusal to sign it.
"Attach my signature to a lie!" cried the fiery old tar; "not for
the wealth of a hundred treasuries as rich as Suraja Doulah's!"
In vain did Colonel Clive and the other gentlemen of the committee
argue the point, and explain the necessity of the case. The sailor was
inflexible.
"I don't know what honour may mean among you military and
commercial gentlemen," he said somewhat rudely; "but if that is in
your estimation an honourable deed for an Englishman to witness, I
must tell you plainly we Jack-tars have a different notion of fair deal-
ing. No, Colonel; you must manage this business without me. I had
sooner cut off my hand than sign that paper."
This is a faithful record of the conversation as it was reported to
me. I have since heard it stated that Admiral Watson, though he
refused to sign his name to the treaty, gave full consent to his auto-
graph being forged. But even in justification of my favourite Clive,
whom I believe to have been a great and good man, I cannot bring
myself to credit a statement so opposed to reason. All I can tell is,
that Admiral Watson's signature was forged, and the fictitious treaty
thus completed.
After the necessary delay caused by the wearisome slowness of In-
dian travelling, how different from those wonders of speed, our English
stage-coaches, which perform a journey of fifty miles between sunrise
and sunset!-a native messenger arrived with the two treaties, the real
one written on white paper, the false on red.
And now my patron had to arrange a secret conference with Meer
Jaffier, whereat the agreement between him and the English might be

executed. This was a matter of no small difficulty. Suraja Doulah's
suspicions never slept, and they had been but lately aroused against
Meer Jaffier. Any open communication between the latter and our-
selves was therefore impossible. After much deliberation, my patron
hit on a favourite oriental stratagem. He ordered his palanquin, and
caused himself to be carried to Meer Jaffier's palace, with me in an-
other palanquin, securely shrouded by the silken curtains of the litters,
and guarded by our servants, on whose fidelity we could fortunately
rely. The palanquins of women are always regarded with respect,
and ours were so arranged as to look like the closely-curtained litters
of some eastern beauties. In this guise we were carried straight to the
pretender's zenana, where it is likely the breath of slander may have
followed us, but where we were safe from a suspicion of the truth.
We found Meer Jaffier and his son Meeran alone in the spacious
apartment where our bearers deposited us. The elder man seemed to
me a shrewd and sagacious person; but in the countenance of the
younger I perceived that savageness of nature which he was too soon
to exhibit.
An ample explanation took place between Mr. Watts and Meer
Jaffier. The latter reluctantly confessed that in all his master's army
there were but three thousand horse on whom he could rely, a some-
what small subtraction from an army of fifty thousand. Should the
scene of action be this city, Meer Jaffier promised to attack the Nabob's
palace at the first signal of strife. Should a battle take place on the
plain, his conduct must of course be ruled by the position he might
occupy. If in the van, he would advance with drums beating and
standard flying at the approach of the English, and pass over to their
right with all his men; if in the rear, he would display a white flag, set
upon the main body of the Nabob's army as soon as the English began
the attack, and if possible take him prisoner.
These explanations made, Meer Jaffier held a copy of the Koran on
his own head with one hand while he laid the latter on the head of
his son, and with the papers outspread before him swore, "by God, and
the prophet of God," to be faithful to the treaty. It was an awe-striking
ceremonial, and I wondered, as I beheld it, to think how lightly these
Mahometans can break vows so solemn; yet when I bethought myself
of those venal wretches who pace Westminster Hall with straws in their
shoes, ready to bear false witness for the smallest consideration, I was
less inclined to marvel at eastern perfidy.
The messenger who had brought the treaties carried them back to
Calcutta; and now my patron's business being concluded at Muxad-
avad, it was high time that he should consider his personal safety.
To this he had shown a noble indifference from first to last; and
though he had received several warnings of danger, he had refused
to abandon his post until a special letter from Clive should set him at
liberty.


For this letter of release he was still waiting when a secret mes-
senger came to us at sunset from Meer Jaffier, bidding us instantly
leave the city, as the Nabob's suspicions were now thoroughly aroused,
and he might at any moment open fire on the palace of his traitorous
commander-in-chief, when doubtless he would also take speedy means
to revenge himself upon any English plotters within convenient reach
of bowstring or stake.
The warning was of so peremptory a nature that it would have
been worse than folly to disregard it. Mr. Watts therefore bade me
pack his papers in the smallest compass, and carrying no more than
these and a change of linen, we set out at night for the factory at Cas-
simbazar, as it were on a business visit; but with the fixed intention to
return no more to Muxadavad so long as Suraja Doulah reigned in the
palace of Heraut Jeel.
We reached the factory in safety, and there met a messenger car-
rying the expected letter from Colonel Clive to my patron; and thus
duty and honour were in no way violated by the continuance of our
flight. Guided and aided by an Usbeg Tartar, whom Mr. Watts had
befriended some years before, we now performed an arduous journey
by land and water, carefully eschewing the main road, upon which
the Nabob's emissaries were likely to travel in search of us, and going
over a good deal of unnecessary ground in order to keep clear of this
dangerous path. And thus on to Culna, where to our great joy we
met the English army; and O, how pleasant a sight it was to us,
newly escaped out of the jaws of the eastern lion, to look on the fami-
liar uniforms, and shelter ourselves beneath the victorious flag of that
dear free island in the West!
It was now the fourteenth of June. On the twelfth Colonel Clive
and the troops that had been in quarters at Calcutta had set out for
Chandernagore, where the remainder of the army had been left with
a hundred and fifty sailors from the fleet, and the next day continued
their journey with the whole force, leaving one hundred stalwart Jack-
tars as a garrison in the place. The Europeans, artillery, and stores.
made the journey up the noble Hooghley in boats, while the sepoys
marched by the high-road.
In company with this gallant army we travelled pleasantly enough
for two days, when we halted at Patlee, an insignificant town, whence
Major Coote and a party sallied forth to the attack of the fort at
Cutwah, a strong place garrisoned by a detachment of the Nabob's
troops; and here, after a brief skirmish, Providence blessed our arms.
Mr. Watts and myself arrived at Cutwah soon after this victorious
attack, and encamped in the plain, where I encountered a surprise
which for the time distracted my attention from public affairs, and
threw me back upon my own insignificant existence, with its many
sorrows.
While the army were busy with the work of encamping, Mr. Watts


was summoned to an interview with Colonel Clive, who was resting in
his tent, with his papers spread open before him, and Major Coote
seated by his side, giving him a lively account of the assault upon
Cutwah fort. By this means released from attendance on my patron,
I strolled among the troops, white and coloured, watching their busy
preparations for the night's food and shelter. All were in excellent
spirits, for it was a quality of Clive's mind to inspire life and hope in
the minds of other men, yes even of these sepoys, whose language he
spoke so poorly, and who seemed to take from the very fire of his glance
the spark that transformed them from the venal machines of war to
daring and eager soldiers.
Night was fast closing in after the brief twilight of this eastern
world, and I was walking somewhat listlessly among the newly-erected
tents, when I was startled by the aspect of a face that flashed upon me
across the glare of a cook's fire. It was the smoke-blackened counten-
ance of a European soldier, who lay stretched at full length on the
ground beside the fire, and it seemed wondrously familiar.
My heart leapt into my throat, and wellnigh choked me. Yes, it
was a face that had been familiar to me in my old life-that old unfor-
gotten time in which I had not yet bid good-bye to youth and hope.
It was the face of the man with whom I had shared the slow agonies
of the Black-Hole prison, and whom I had believed dead of that night's
torture.
"Phil!" I cried, with a ringing shout that startled the party by
the watch-fire.
The English soldier leapt to his feet, sprang towards me, and em-
braced me as if I had been his sweetheart.
"Why, Robert, I thought thou wert dead!"
"And I had given you over for one of the hapless wretches buried
in the ditch at Fort William on the 21st of June."
“No, Bob; I came forth out of that hell alive. By what instinct
I saved myself I know not, for when I dropped from your neck I am
sure I was dying. But I think the love of life is extra strong in vaga-
bonds, like the love of drink or of women, or the thirst for an enemy's
blood. I faintly remember clambering over the heaps of dead-yes,
Bob, indifferent that I trod on corpses-to the mountain of corruption
piled on the platform, and here I lay topmost and insensible. Some
black Samaritan dragged me out, still half unconscious, and flung me
on the grass outside, to die or recover as Fate would have it; and as
Fate has constant need of such instruments of mischief as I am, I did
recover, escaping with only a touch of rheumatic fever and a scourge
of boils, which latter affliction I endured with a most un-Job-like im-
patience. Recovered from these, I found myself a beggar amongst
other beggars in Calcutta, where I must have starved but for the
charity of that old Gentoo merchant with whom you statesmen are
now so friendly. Here, however, I had the ill-luck to be the death


of a Mussulman soldier by a chance blow in a drunken fight-for these
Moors drink deep as John Bull himself, if they can but get the for-
bidden liquor and was obliged to run for my life, and for two months.
led a wandering existence, bordering unpleasantly near upon starva-
tion; for these Hindoos, who will do wonders of beneficence for any
greasy, unclean wretch with a withered arm, or his finger-nails growing
through the palms of his shrivelled hands, have little charity for a
decent Englishman. I found more compassion at Chandernagore, where
our enemies the French gave me food and shelter, and looked upon me
as in a manner canonised by the martyrdom of the Black Hole; and
here I lay till I heard that Clive and Watson were coming to the
rescue, when I left my friendly foes, and contrived to join the English
at Fulta."
"And you were at the capture of Calcutta?" I asked.
"Yes, Bob; and at Hooghley, in the night-attack on the Nabob's
camp; and at the siege of Chandernagore. I have had my fill of
fighting, and am a full sergeant, with a prospect of a pair of colours,
should Fortune send us a successful issue to this noble rebellion."
"I wish you good-luck with all my heart, Phil," said I; and,
having answered his eager questions as to my own adventures since
last year, I linked my arm with his, and drew him away from the
tents, for he held the key to a secret that was life or death to me.
"Do you remember what you told me in the Black Hole, Philip
Hay?" I asked solemnly.
"Yes, Robert Ainsleigh," replied he, with mock gravity that ridi-
culed my earnestness; "and be sure what I told you there was the
truth, for I felt the grip of Death's bony fingers on my weasand that
night, and whatever I said to you was a last dying speech and con-
fession."
"You told me that Margery is your wife."
"As much as a marriage-service can make her so."
"And you sank unconscious at my feet while I was entreating you
to tell me the name of the man who holds your marriage-certificate."
"Likely enough, Bob. I have but a shadowy recollection of that
night. The man's name is Blade-Silas Blade, an attorney in Little
Britain. I lodged the certificate with him, in a tin box containing
other papers, chiefly letters from my friend and patron Mr. Everard
Lestrange. Deuced cautious letters they were too; but they tell their
story nevertheless, and, knowing their value, I took care to put them
in safe keeping. You see I always feared mischief from that gentle-
man; and, as he had shown himself anxious to get both the certificate
and the letters from me, I should have been a very idiot to keep them
in my own possession."
"Philip," said I, "you have often acknowledged you did me a cruel
injury six years ago.”
"Yes, Bob, I am ready enough to confess that sin."

"Will you go a step further than confession, and make some atone-
ment for that injury?"
"What atonement can a penniless sergeant of Bengal Infantry offer
to a lucky young fellow who has always fallen on his feet, and is now
no doubt on the high-road to fortune?"
"If ever I go back to England, Phil, my first desire will be to
annul that marriage with Margery. Had the poor child been true to
herself, I would have gladly married her, as I told her father. Sure, I
loved her as well as ever brother loved sister, and the memory of our
happy childhood made her almost holy in my eyes; yet of that love
which makes the glory and brightness of marriage there could, at best,
have been none between us. But do you think I can peacefully endure
the odious link that binds me to Everard Lestrange's cast-off mistress?
No, Philip, that tie could never be otherwise than hateful.
Loosen it,
and.I will be a true friend to that poor deluded girl; loosen it, and
I will say you did me no injury when you lent yourself to a plot that
robbed me of Dorothea Hemsley.",
"What can I do, Bob, more than I have done towards the loosen-
ing of your marriage-tie ?"
"Give me your written statement of the facts, attested by Mr.
Watts. Let me have a letter to your attorney, Mr. Blade, authorising
him to give me that marriage-certificate. You are going into action,
and may fall-God forbid it should be so!-but I cannot afford to run
any hazards, and must be prepared for the worst. If Meer Jaffier and
his party succeed, I shall be handsomely rewarded for my humble ser-
vices, and shall obtain leave to return to England. For pity's sake
give me the power to set myself right there! Cancel the legal obliga-
tion that binds me to your wife, and I charge myself with her mainte-
nance and protection from the hour of finding her."
"My wife!" cried Hay, with a careless laugh; "what a farce it all
seems! My wife! and I know not whether the poor soul be alive or
dead. A courtesan, perhaps, dancing at Vauxhall, with a face coated
half-an-inch thick with white-lead, and patches of vermilion under her
faded eyes!"
"No, by Heaven, I'll never believe that! Fallen, alas, poor child,
but not impure; no grief would ever drive her to depravity."
"Thou'lt not believe! Alas, poor innocent! and what dost thou
know of the town's depravity? Have I not seen simplicity as rustic
descend to the lowest hell of the dissolute? Woe be to that hand
which pushes the frail creature on the first step of sin's fatal slope!
If you loved the girl with that brotherly affection you speak of, pray
you may find the rank weeds growing above her in some City grave-
yard. 'Tis your best chance of finding her no further advanced in vice
than when you left her."
I was inexpressibly shocked by the cruel cynicism and settled con-
viction of my companion's tone, and yet I could not believe the bitterest


fate could have driven Margery to vice. My trust in her better in-
stincts was greater than my belief in Philip Hay's knowledge of the
world. These men who study the worst side of mankind can believe
anything easier than the possibility of virtue.
"Will you do what I want, Phil?" I asked presently. "You shall
have a share of my good fortune if Colonel Clive dethrones the
Nabob."
"Yes, Robert, I will do this thing for you, and without promise of
payment. Though I'll not say that I shall refuse a ten-pound note
should I fall in with you when your purse is full. There are Spartan
virtues to which I never have pretended, and the rejection of a friendly
loan is one of them. Take me where I can have pen, ink, and paper,
and the deed shall be done."
After this I lost no time in conducting my companion to Mr. Watts'
tent, from which my patron was happily absent. Here Philip Hay
seated himself on the ground, and on a small travelling-portfolio of my
providing scrawled a declaration of his marriage with Margery Hawker,
when and where performed, with Mr. Everard Lestrange's name duly
set down as witness of the ceremony.
This done, he wrote a letter to Mr. Blade, of Little Britain, author-
ising that gentleman to permit the bearer to open a certain sealed case
of papers, take from it the document he required, and reseal it with his
own seal.
"I trust to your honour for taking nothing but the certificate,
Bob," Mr. Hay said a little doubtfully, as he folded the letter.
"I am not quite a scoundrel, Phil.”
"You are the simplest and best of men," he replied, with a laugh.
"There is your letter."
"And here is Mr. Watts, who will oblige me by attesting your
signature to the other paper."
My patron entered the tent as I spoke, and at once consented to
witness the document without any knowledge of its contents.
"I hope you'll excuse my black face, sir," said Philip. "We had
rather hot work at the fort to-day, and I had charge of a gun. How
these black fellows sweat when they see us reload and fire charge
number two before they have recovered from their surprise at charge
number one! 'Tis as much as their best gunners can do to fire a heavy
piece once in a quarter of an hour, and they think there's witchcraft in
British artillery."
With this vaunt of our English arms, Philip saluted Mr. Watts,
shook me by the hand, and departed, after a whisper to the effect that
we should meet elsewhere.
I was heartily glad to have seen him amongst the living, still more
glad to hold the two papers he had given me.


THE rainy season, which by a strange fatality had begun late in
the previous year, when an early downpour might have saved our
wretched garrison at Fort William by the stoppage of the Nabob's troops
and artillery, in this year of '57 happened to begin somewhat sooner
than usual, and on the morning of the 19th of June a tempest of
rain descended upon us with such violence as to drive us from under
canvas into the town of Cutwah. Here we sought shelter in huts and
houses, many of which had been abandoned during the siege, and in
one of the more comfortable amongst them Mr. Watts and myself
awaited the tide of events. I fully determined that in case of any
fighting I would not sit idle under cover to hear English cannon roar-
ing and English soldiers shouting in the distance. I had learnt to
carry a gun in my first bitter year of slavery, and had enjoyed some
experience of war with Mr. Holwell at Fort William.
It was on the evening after we abandoned our tents that Colonel
Clive paid an unexpected visit to my patron, whom he found lying on
a bamboo mat, enjoying the luxury of a repose he could never have
tasted at Muxadavad, where the dagger of classic story had ever hung
above his head. I rose to leave the apartment when the Colonel
entered, but he bade me remain.
"It is idle ceremony to leave us," he said; "I know that Watts has
confided in you throughout this business, and I presume you are to be
trusted."
"To the death, sir."
"Faith, youngster, you and Mr. Watts have had a narrow squeak
for your lives as it is," replied our dictator carelessly, and then turning
with sudden gravity to my patron he entered upon public affairs.
"I don't like the look of things, Watts," he began, "and I am in-
clined to suspect Meer Jaffier will turn traitor. Do you know what
he has done since you left Muxadavad?"
"No, indeed, Colonel."
"Why, it seems your flight threw the Nabob into such a tremor
that instead of firing upon Meer Jaffier's palace, he sent for him post
haste, fell upon his neck with maudlin affection, called him the lamp
of wisdom, composer of the state, conqueror of the universe, terror of
the world, and I know not what else, after the manner of these Moorish
mountebanks, and ended by apologising with slavish humility for his
false suspicions of his beloved servant, who owed every advancement to
old Allaverdy, and to whose fidelity the dying nabob had commended
his adopted son."
"And how did Meer Jaffier escape from so awkward a situation?"
"Awkward, pshaw! These Moors think no situation awkward if
lying will help them out of it. Meer Jaffier wept tears of joy upon his

royal master's neck, abased himself to the ground to kiss his noble
benefactor's foot, and ended by swearing on the Koran to give no help
to the English in the contest, provided his beloved ruler allowed him
to quit the province unmolested with his family and treasures."
"He has sworn this?"
"Yes, a native spy of mine was among the Nabob's retinue, and
witnessed the touching scene. His messenger has just brought me a
description of it."
"What revolting treachery!" cried Mr. Watts.
"Perhaps it was only diplomacy," Clive answered coolly; "for
Meer Jaffier to reject a reconciliation would have been to show his
cards too soon. He may mean us well yet; but we ought not to be
in the dark as to his intentions. I have written to him every day
since we left Chandernagore to inform him of our movements, but
have heard nothing from him since the 19th, and that a somewhat
ambiguous missive. Can you find me a messenger to go at once to
Muxadavad and ascertain the real state of the case? My man is dead
beat with the journey, and I cannot send him back to the city without
some loss of time. I want a man who can start immediately."
"Will you trust me with this commission, sir?" I asked eagerly.
"No, the safest messenger would be a native."
"I will go as a native. Mr. Watts will tell you I can speak their
dialects, and disguise for a swarthy-visaged fellow like me will be easy
enough. Pray trust me, sir."
"Nay, Robert," interposed my patron kindly; "you have once
escaped out of the lion's den. Why be so eager to reënter it ?"
"I want to do something, sir, besides a clerk's work, though I am
pleased to do that in your service."
“Egad, he reminds me of my own young days!" cried the Colonel
good-humouredly. "I was always wanting to do something. I re-
member at Pondicherry, in '48, how, in my haste to get ammunition, I
left the battery where I was posted, and ran to fetch it myself, instead of
sending a sergeant for it. One good-natured gentleman said it was fear
and not zeal made me run so fast. His words reached my ears, and I
challenged him, but on our way to the ground the scoundrel struck me.
I drew my sword on the spot, and should have fought him there and
then but a crowd of fellows separated us. He was made afterwards to
ask my pardon in front of the battalion; but as the court that made him
apologise took no notice of the blow, I demanded satisfaction a second
time from the slanderer. This he refused; so I waved my cane above
his head before our men, and told him he was too paltry a scoundrel for
the honour of a drubbing. That seemed to have penetrated; for he
resigned his commission next day. But this is gossip, and not busi-
ness."
There was some further discussion, in which my arguments well-
nigh prevailed; but finding the Colonel still inclined to doubt me, I

watched my opportunity, and presently took advantage of a change in
the conversation to slip out of the room, borrow a turban, shirt, and
loose trousers from one of our bearers, colour my face and hands with
a mixture of turmeric and grease, and, thus transformed, went back to
the room where the Colonel and Mr. Watts were still conversing after
an interval of little more than a quarter of an hour.
I approached my patron with the usual reverence, and gave him
an imaginary message in my best Bengalee, requesting him to go to
one of our men, who was seized with sudden illness.
Mr. Watts rose in hasty compliance with this demand upon his
charity, and brushed past me on his way to the door.
I burst out laughing.
"Come, Colonel Clive," I cried, "you may fairly trust me on your
errand since my own master does not know me."
This turned the scale, and in half an hour I was in a little boat, with
a couple of native rowers, on my way to Muxadavad. The rain fell in
torrents, but I was sheltered under a pitched awning, and travelled
luxuriously in comparison with my wretched transit upon this same
river nearly a year ago. Before leaving my quarters I had taken care
to deposit Philip Hay's two papers in the safe keeping of my patron.
We reached the city without loss of time, and after loitering in the
streets long enough to pick up what news I could, I entered the palace
of the commander-in-chief without any questions but such as I could
easily answer. I sent our ally a message couched in language so figu-
rative that only he could understand it, and after some little delay was
conducted to an inner court, where I found Meer Jaffier alone with his
son Meeran, as on the day we witnessed his signature to the treaty.
He received me with a somewhat alarming reserve of manner, and had
but just begun to question me, when a man whom I knew to be in the
confidence of Suraja Doulah was ushered into the apartment with his
train of attendants, and received with much polite self-abasement by
Jaffier and his son.
This magnate of the court had but just entered when Meeran
turned upon me with sudden fury, threatening to cut off my head for
a spy, and swearing to annihilate every Englishmen in Clive's army
should they dare cross the river into the island. His rage, though
happily unreal, was so well simulated as to be alarming, and I was
glad when I found myself outside the palace; but I had scarce got
clear of the gates when a kitmutgar overtook me, and bade me hang
about the neighbourhood until he should bring me a letter. This
order I faithfully obeyed, and lay in a little niche at a corner of the
Moorish palace, only partially sheltered from the ceaseless rain until
dark, when the same man who had given me the message brought me
a letter, and bade me hasten back with it to Colonel Clive; whereupon
I returned to my faithful rowers, and, the rain now happily abating,
had a swift and pleasant journey back to Cutwah.


At Muxadavad I had heard how the Nabob's troops, not foreseeing
any chance of plunder in an encounter on the open plain, had set up
a sudden claim for their arrears of pay, and refused to stir without a
handsome payment on account; whereby the city had been in a state
of riot for the last three days. This I thought was excellent news for
our party.
I arrived at Cutwah at an eventful moment. The aspect of affairs
was considered most unpromising, and Colonel Clive himself, in his
onerous double capacity of general and statesman, was obviously dis-
heartened. He had received several letters from Meer Jaffier during
my absence; but although these promised fidelity, and appeared to
be written in good faith, they gave no definite pledge of coöperation,
and the Colonel now began to fear that in the impending struggle
the English must stand alone: a sorry prospect, seeing that we were
without horse, and had but three thousand men against Suraja Dou-
lah's fifty thousand. In this dilemma the Colonel had written to
the Rajah of Burdwan, notoriously disaffected towards the Nabob, en-
treating him to join us with his cavalry, were they but a thousand.
Vain hope! when was an Indian leader known to range himself upon
the weaker side? A council of war had just been held, and the decisive
question mooted: "Should the army cross the river at once, and at
all risks attack the Nabob; or should they avail themselves of the large
stores of rice found at Cutwah to maintain themselves during the rainy
season, and in the mean time invite the Morattoes to enter the province
and join them?" Ballajerow's offer was now known to be genuine.
He had a hundred and twenty thousand men ready to join the English
standard. Surely it must be a mad folly to attack Suraja Doulah's
great army with a handful of troops, while this gigantic force lay in
the mountains awaiting our summons.
Clive was himself the first to vote, and his voice was on the side
of caution. The very fact of his voting first was against all martial
etiquette, by which the youngest officer present should first have given
his opinion. It may be supposed that, by his deviation from rule, the
Colonel desired to weigh down the scale on the side of prudence.
I found him alone in a grove of trees near his quarters, lying on
the ground in deep meditation. He started to his feet, surprised by
my coming.
"I was made for a soldier and not a statesman," he cried to himself
rather than to me; and with an impatient stamp of his foot. "Good
God, how it went against my grain to give that opinion just now! and
yet I feel that common prudence demands as much. The game is too
desperate. Those black devils would be twenty to one against us.
I am sure of my own men; but the Bengalese are poor creatures. 'Tis
like throwing a handful into an ocean. And if Suraja Doulah's men
should fight-as we know they can fight, and have fought under
Allaverdy-Yes, common prudence urges me against so rash a folly.

Common prudence! d- common prudence! she is a jade that never
yet led the way to glory. And Coote voted for an immediate attack.
By G-we'll cross the river!"
He was not a handsome man; but as he looked up at this moment,
with his hand upon his sword-hilt, he seemed inspired.
I had never seen a finer countenance.
I thought
"Coote," he muttered, "and so you want to out-hero me, do you,
major? Well, cross the river, coûte qui coûte."
He turned upon me sharply. "What you want?" he asked, in the
vilest Bengalee.
I smiled as I delivered my letter.
"From Meer Jaffier, sir."
"Why, confound your impudence, sir!" cried the Colonel, as he
snatched the packet from my hand with more than his usual impetu-
osity; "this is the second time you have deceived me.
I took you
for a beggarly native; and here have you been listening to my rhap-
sodising."
"It is an honour to have overheard a hero communing alone with
the goddess Fortune, sir," I replied, with a smile.
"Nay, sirrah, you have surprised the reflections of a gamester
tempted to stake his all upon a cast. Great heavens, young man, have
you any notion of the stake we play for? Upon my soul I doubt it,
or you would scarce stand grinning there as if you but watched a game
of piquet. If we cross the river to be beaten, the English cause is lost
in Bengal, be sure of that. The French, who hate us by nature-
yes, sir, they are created with a hatred of Englishmen as surely as with
a taste for frogs-have now a political justification for doing us all the
evil they can. Is it likely they will forgive Chandernagore? To the
French the Nabob inclines, for they have never beaten him. On them
he hangs for help, believing them stronger than they are. Bussy has
but to march from the Circars to join the tyrant, and we are most
inevitably lost. And to lose Bengal is to lose all of India that is of
any real value to us. Bombay and the west coast scarce pay their ex-
penses, and our possessions on the coast of Coromandel are a burden;
for instead of profit they show a debt of nearly half a million. To
fight is to tempt Fate. It is desperate, mad, wicked; for our stake
is not only that which we hold at present, we hazard a hundred times
more than our paltry certainties of to-day, sir; we hazard our glorious
chances of the future. Yes, to fight is madness."
66
He tore open the letter and handed it to me. Translate me that,
sir, you who are learned in tongues."
I read the missive—an assurance of fidelity, and a promise that,
if possible, the troops of Meer Jaffier should come over to us on the
field of battle.
"Yes," cried Clive, with supreme contempt, "they will come over
to our side when the day is ours. I know these people. If you want

to distinguish yourself as a volunteer, Mr. Ainsleigh, you had better
make all haste to wash your face and put on Christian raiment. We
shall be marching in an hour."
I made the Colonel a military salute, and ran off to obey him.
What a fever of the blood, what a pleasant quickening of the pulse,
I felt as I hurried to my patron's tent! Robert Ainsleigh, with all
his sorrowful memories and bitter sense of loss, melted into air. My
individuality was gone; I was a part of England's glory, to triumph
or to fall with the fortunes of the day. Hurried and eager as I was,
I had time to wonder at my own high spirits, and to cry aloud in
astonishment," And this is war! Thrice-divine Mars, be thou hence-
forward my God!"
Mr. Watts was delighted to see me return in safety; and with that
kind patron I shared a comfortable repast before preparing for the
threatened rout. Having but one suit of clothes with me, and that a
civilian's, I borrowed a shabby militia uniform from the captain of the
Calcutta corps, and thus attired felt myself a hero.
The trumpet-call roused us before sunrise, and in the first glory and
brightness of daylight our English host began to cross the river. We
started in excellent spirits, leaving the sick and wounded, and a few
civilians, Mr. Watts among them, at Cutwah. It was four o'clock in
the afternoon when the passage of the troops was completed. We had
crossed our Rubicon, the gauntlet of rebellion was flung down, and
who could tell which among us would live to repass that fatal tide?
The afternoon brought a new messenger with another letter from
Meer Jaffier, a native who had left Muxadavad on the same day as
myself, but had taken bye-roads and otherwise lost time, with the un-
heroic caution common to these people. I was again hastily called
upon as interpreter between the Colonel and his confederate. The
letter informed us that Suraja Doulah had halted at a village some six
miles south of Cassimbazar, where he intended to intrench, and wait
the event. Here Jaffier suggested that the English should surprise
him, by marching round by the inland part of the island.
Clive listened to this letter with a louring brow, and then turning
to me, cried in his angriest voice,
"Bid this fellow tell his master that I shall march to Plassy with-
out an hour's delay. To-morrow morning will bring us to the village
of Daoodpore, and if Meer Jaffier does not join us there, by the beard of
his Prophet, or, what is better, an Englishman's word of honour, I will
make peace with Suraja Doulah, and so end this vacillating scoundrel's
chances of the musnud!"
As may be supposed, I took care to modify the language of this
message, but made it sufficiently firm to convey the Colonel's full
meaning.
Before sunset we were again on the march, but could make head
but slowly, having to wait for the boats, which were towed against the

stream, and thus we pursued a most difficult and toilsome journey,
advancing fifteen miles in eight hours, and at an hour past midnight
arrived at Plassy.
Here we took possession of a mango-grove, and had but just time
to look about us, when those near the Colonel, myself among them,
were startled by a faint sound of discordant music in the distance.
"By G—,” cried Clive, "they are close upon us!"
We kept silence, listening intently to that distant music. It con-
tinued, now fainter, now louder, the shrill cry of clarions, the clash of
cymbals, the incessant beating of drums-to all of us a most familiar
and significant music, for it had accompanied the night-watches of the
Nabob's army when they lay encamped by the Morattoe ditch at Cal-
cutta.
"Yes," exclaimed the Colonel, after we had stood for some time
in silence, "they are here before us!"
He said no more, but hastened to give rapid orders for the placing
of guards and sentinels. There was a sudden hurrying to and fro,
but neither noise or confusion; and the watch being set, the rest of
the troops were bidden to snatch what slumber they could. For the
officers and their commander there was of course no sleep on that event-
ful night.
The grove of Plassy has now become so famous that I need not
describe it minutely. It is a space of some eight hundred yards in
length and three hundred in breadth, planted with straight rows of
mango-trees, and enclosed by a mound, and ditch choked with weeds.
and brambles. A little way from the grove, on the river-bank, there
is a hunting-lodge of Suraja Doulah's, surrounded by a garden wall.
About a mile from this house the river describes a curve like a horse-
shoe, and it was at this point the enemy lay, behind an intrenchment
that had been thrown up by Roydoolub some months before for the
protection of his camp.
At daybreak we saw the enemy advancing towards the mango-
grove where we lay, 50,000 foot, 18,000 horse, and 50 pieces of cannon
of the largest calibre, 24- and 32-pounders. Every gun was mounted
on a monstrous wooden platform, six feet from the ground, carrying
both ammunition and gunners, and drawn by forty or fifty yoke of
huge white oxen, while behind each of these monstrous moving stages
walked an elephant, trained to push the machine forward with his
forehead whenever the ground was unusually heavy. It is impossible
to imagine anything more imposing than this barbarous machine, with
its train of white oxen; and I could fancy myself watching some
savage Carthaginian host in the heroic centuries before Christ, rather
than a modern army.
The tyrant's foot-soldiers were armed with every kind of weapon,
matchlocks, pikes, swords, arrows, rockets. The cavalry were stout
fellows from Northern India, mounted on powerful horses. These and

the foot-soldiers advanced in separate and compact bodies, and pre-
sently fell into position with a regularity and spirit we had scarcely
expected of them.
It was my privilege to be in attendance upon Colonel Clive as he
stood on the roof of the Nabob's hunting-house surveying this formid-
able host. He had kept me near his person since I brought him Meer
Jaffier's letter, in order that I might be ready to serve him as inter-
preter at any moment.
"Egad," he cried, "I did not think they were so strong! That is
a splendid sight, is it not, Mr. Ainsleigh?"
"Splendid indeed, sir. I could fancy myself looking over the sands
of Marathon; nor can I believe that the Persians mustered much
stronger than these, in spite of Herodotus and his big numbers."
"Herodotus was a Greek-and a liar, Mr. Ainsleigh. He sprang
from the same root as these scoundrels, and we know how these give
the reins to their fancy. Why, instead of forty-five millions sterling in
the treasury at Muxadavad, I find it is a question if there are four.
See," he cried, looking through his glass, "there are Meer Jaffier's
troops."
"Will they join us, do you think, sir?"
"Yes, Mr. Ainsleigh, when the day is ours."
The issue of events proved this a true prophecy. And now began
the business of the day. At eight o'clock a shot from the enemy killed
one of our men and gave the signal of battle. Glorious, yet on our side
almost bloodless, was the struggle that followed. After a brief skirmish
in the open-which cost us too many, though it cost our foe ten of his
men to one of ours-the Colonel ordered us back to the grove. Here
our little band seated themselves on the ground, and suffered the
despot's artillery to waste its fury upon the tops of the mango-trees,
while our own gunners answered the enemy's cannon from behind the
bank.
At eleven o'clock Clive held a brief council at the drum-head, when
it was resolved to maintain the cannonade all day, and sally forth upon
the Nabob's camp at midnight.
At noon Providence sent us a sudden storm of rain, which, as we
afterwards ascertained, did much damage to the enemy's powder.
Their fire now abated; and two hours later we were astounded beyond
measure to perceive the trains of oxen re-yoked, and the whole army
retiring slowly towards the camp.
One Sinfray, a French officer, with some forty vagabond fellows of
the same nation, retained their station upon a large mound of earth
surrounding a tank. This was a most favourable position whence to
assail our retreating foe, and Major Kilpatrick, tempted by the oppor-
tunity, advanced from the grove to attack it, with two companies of the
battalion and two field-pieces. Before starting he sent a messenger to
announce his intention to Colonel Clive, who was found asleep in the

hunting-house, and started up with much anger on hearing the Major's
message.
He ran to the detachment, reproved Kilpatrick in no measured
terms, and sent him back to the grove to fetch the rest of the army.
Having thus relieved himself he took the lead of the detachment and
proceeded to attack Monsieur Sinfray, who speedily abandoned his
ground before so formidable an invader. And now for the first time
we perceived a large body of troops hovering on our right, and these
were afterwards discovered to belong to Meer Jaffier, but as they made
no signal, they were saluted at intervals by a sharp fire from our men,
which kept them at a respectful distance.
The hottest part of the action now took place between ourselves
and Sinfray's forty Frenchmen, while the Nabob's matchlock-men
powdered upon us from an angle of his camp. The gunners at the
same time tried to bring out their cannon, but our field-pieces played
so warmly and so well upon them as always to drive them back.
The enemy's horse also suffered considerably at this juncture, and
among them fell four or five officers of the highest rank. Their
loss flung our foes into obvious disorder; and Clive, taking swift
advantage of this, gave orders to storm the angle of the camp, as well
as an eminence to which Sinfray and his men, with a number of blacks,
had withdrawn after being routed from the tank, and whence they had
kept up a galling fire upon us. I was among the party that assaulted
this post, and was happily able to hold my own in a hand-to-hand
skirmish with a couple of Frenchmen, whom I had the satisfaction of
tumbling down the slippery slope on which we wrestled. It was a
regular mêlée, and as I rolled down the incline grappling hand and foot
with these two rascals, I heard Philip Hay on the height above me
roaring out "King George and victory!" and "D-n to all blacks and
frog-eating mounseers!" I kicked myself loose from my Frenchmen,
and scrambled up the embankment eager to join my friend; but while
the triumphant shout was still on his lips, I heard it change to a
shrill scream of pain, as he cried, "Hit, by G-!"
I was with him in the next moment, holding him in my arms.
"What is it, Phil?"
"My quietus, Bob. No mistake about it this time. So, you see,
after all, a rogue may escape Tyburn. Can you lay me down in some
corner where I may die quietly? No, lad, there's no hope. I feel
myself bleeding internally."
All this was said in laboured whispers, and his ghastly countenance
told me but too truly that he was right.
The day was ours: the foe flying right and left of us; the mighty
armament of our eastern Nero retreating with a noise as of thunder,
the tyrant mounted on the swiftest of his camels, foremost among
the flying. Yes, we had beaten them. Mr. Orme protests Suraja
Doulah had eighty thousand soldiers on that fateful field, while

Colonel Clive computes them but at fifty thousand.
I have adopted
the higher figure, but at the lowest our enemies were near fifty to one
against us. And they fled, leaving elephants, oxen, forty pieces of
cannon, machines, carriages, and baggage of all kinds. It is impos-
sible to imagine a rout more ignominous, a victory more complete.
A couple of soldiers aided me to carry Philip Hay back to the
famous mango-grove, now deserted, except by a few bearers and other
black servants in charge of our baggage. Clive and the entire army
had started in pursuit of the fugitives, and only the disabled remained
behind. Sinfray, the French captain, had been wounded and taken
prisoner, after a desperate fight, and carried off to one of the tents,
where he was attended to by an English surgeon, in common with
some of our own wounded.
Philip Hay's strength being but too evidently fast ebbing, we did
not wait to reach the tent, but laid him on a bamboo mat under
the trees, and here I sat down beside him, while the surgeon was
fetched. His hand lay in mine, deadly cold, and his clouding eyes
looked up at me with an affection that touched me to the heart.
"I swear, Bob, thou art the only creature I ever loved, except my
mother-except my mother."
He repeated these words with infinite tenderness, and then lay
silent for some moments, staring absently at his fingers as they wan-
dered about the lappels of his coat.
"Yes, Bob, I loved my mother," he murmured presently, "though
you would scarce believe as much, seeing I have never spoken of her
tenderly until this day. She was a poor weak soul. Alas, how often
I have called her a fool! But she loved me, and was proud of my
scholarship, though she was but a farmer's daughter who knew not
Latin from Greek, and was sorely put to it to spell plain English.
God bless her! I have a foolish sentimental wish that I could lie by
her side under the willows in East Walcott churchyard, instead of by
this Indian river. Thou wilt see they bury me like a Christian, Bob;
and if there is anything thou canst claim for me in the way of prize-
money, thou'lt send it to my sisters at East Walcott. I have sent
them a share of most bits of luck that have fallen to me in a life of
ups and downs. You see the veriest scoundrel has one soft corner in
his heart where he keeps the memories of his childhood, and the
images of those who loved him when he was young and guileless."
"Dear friend, I will get all I can for your sisters, and see it safe in
their hands."
"Dear friend! God bless thine innocence, Robert Ainsleigh! Dear
traitor would be nearer the mark. But Joseph forgave his brothers.
Confess now that my treachery made thy fortune. O, Bob, 'tis hard
to die like this. I was first to mount the bank, and to-day's work
would have won me a pair of colours. Egad, how I have should en-
joyed plundering the enemy's baggage! You can take all the papers

in the tin case; and if you can use those letters against Lestrange,
do so."
"O, Phil, you should die in charity with all men!"
"With all men, yes; but he's a devil. Would you have me die in
charity with the devil? Here comes the surgeon. Don't let him put
me to any torture, Bob, as you love me. It would be wasted pain."
The medical officer knelt down and began his examination with
much tenderness.
"No," he said, in answer to Philip's appeal; "I'll not put you
to any pain."
He seated himself beside the patient with his hand upon the wrist
of the left arm, which now lay listless across the dying man's breast,
while his right hand was held in mine. A look from the surgeon told
me that all was over.
"A soldier's death," muttered Philip-" in the hour of victory.
God's mercy wipe out my catalogue of sins! Better than Tyburn.
Tell-sisters-died like a soldier-faithful service-of his country."
And so was severed the one frail link that bound me to my past
life.


CHAPTER XXIX.
PHILIP HAY MAKES ATONEMENT.
THE rainy season, which by a strange fatality had begun late in
the previous year, when an early downpour might have saved our
wretched garrison at Fort William by the stoppage of the Nabob's troops
and artillery, in this year of '57 happened to begin somewhat sooner
than usual, and on the morning of the 19th of June a tempest of
rain descended upon us with such violence as to drive us from under
canvas into the town of Cutwah. Here we sought shelter in huts and
houses, many of which had been abandoned during the siege, and in
one of the more comfortable amongst them Mr. Watts and myself
awaited the tide of events. I fully determined that in case of any
fighting I would not sit idle under cover to hear English cannon roar-
ing and English soldiers shouting in the distance. I had learnt to
carry a gun in my first bitter year of slavery, and had enjoyed some
experience of war with Mr. Holwell at Fort William.
It was on the evening after we abandoned our tents that Colonel
Clive paid an unexpected visit to my patron, whom he found lying on
a bamboo mat, enjoying the luxury of a repose he could never have
tasted at Muxadavad, where the dagger of classic story had ever hung
above his head. I rose to leave the apartment when the Colonel
entered, but he bade me remain.
"It is idle ceremony to leave us," he said; "I know that Watts has
confided in you throughout this business, and I presume you are to be
trusted."
"To the death, sir."
"Faith, youngster, you and Mr. Watts have had a narrow squeak
for your lives as it is," replied our dictator carelessly, and then turning
with sudden gravity to my patron he entered upon public affairs.
"I don't like the look of things, Watts," he began, "and I am in-
clined to suspect Meer Jaffier will turn traitor. Do you know what
he has done since you left Muxadavad?"
"No, indeed, Colonel."
"Why, it seems your flight threw the Nabob into such a tremor
that instead of firing upon Meer Jaffier's palace, he sent for him post
haste, fell upon his neck with maudlin affection, called him the lamp
of wisdom, composer of the state, conqueror of the universe, terror of
the world, and I know not what else, after the manner of these Moorish
mountebanks, and ended by apologising with slavish humility for his
false suspicions of his beloved servant, who owed every advancement to
old Allaverdy, and to whose fidelity the dying nabob had commended
his adopted son."
"And how did Meer Jaffier escape from so awkward a situation?"
"Awkward, pshaw! These Moors think no situation awkward if
lying will help them out of it. Meer Jaffier wept tears of joy upon his

royal master's neck, abased himself to the ground to kiss his noble
benefactor's foot, and ended by swearing on the Koran to give no help
to the English in the contest, provided his beloved ruler allowed him
to quit the province unmolested with his family and treasures."
"He has sworn this?"
"Yes, a native spy of mine was among the Nabob's retinue, and
witnessed the touching scene. His messenger has just brought me a
description of it."
"What revolting treachery!" cried Mr. Watts.
"Perhaps it was only diplomacy," Clive answered coolly; "for
Meer Jaffier to reject a reconciliation would have been to show his
cards too soon. He may mean us well yet; but we ought not to be
in the dark as to his intentions. I have written to him every day
since we left Chandernagore to inform him of our movements, but
have heard nothing from him since the 19th, and that a somewhat
ambiguous missive. Can you find me a messenger to go at once to
Muxadavad and ascertain the real state of the case? My man is dead
beat with the journey, and I cannot send him back to the city without
some loss of time. I want a man who can start immediately."
"Will you trust me with this commission, sir?" I asked eagerly.
"No, the safest messenger would be a native."
"I will go as a native. Mr. Watts will tell you I can speak their
dialects, and disguise for a swarthy-visaged fellow like me will be easy
enough. Pray trust me, sir."
"Nay, Robert," interposed my patron kindly; "you have once
escaped out of the lion's den. Why be so eager to reënter it ?"
"I want to do something, sir, besides a clerk's work, though I am
pleased to do that in your service."
“Egad, he reminds me of my own young days!" cried the Colonel
good-humouredly. "I was always wanting to do something. I re-
member at Pondicherry, in '48, how, in my haste to get ammunition, I
left the battery where I was posted, and ran to fetch it myself, instead of
sending a sergeant for it. One good-natured gentleman said it was fear
and not zeal made me run so fast. His words reached my ears, and I
challenged him, but on our way to the ground the scoundrel struck me.
I drew my sword on the spot, and should have fought him there and
then but a crowd of fellows separated us. He was made afterwards to
ask my pardon in front of the battalion; but as the court that made him
apologise took no notice of the blow, I demanded satisfaction a second
time from the slanderer. This he refused; so I waved my cane above
his head before our men, and told him he was too paltry a scoundrel for
the honour of a drubbing. That seemed to have penetrated; for he
resigned his commission next day. But this is gossip, and not busi-
ness."
There was some further discussion, in which my arguments well-
nigh prevailed; but finding the Colonel still inclined to doubt me, I

watched my opportunity, and presently took advantage of a change in
the conversation to slip out of the room, borrow a turban, shirt, and
loose trousers from one of our bearers, colour my face and hands with
a mixture of turmeric and grease, and, thus transformed, went back to
the room where the Colonel and Mr. Watts were still conversing after
an interval of little more than a quarter of an hour.
I approached my patron with the usual reverence, and gave him
an imaginary message in my best Bengalee, requesting him to go to
one of our men, who was seized with sudden illness.
Mr. Watts rose in hasty compliance with this demand upon his
charity, and brushed past me on his way to the door.
I burst out laughing.
"Come, Colonel Clive," I cried, "you may fairly trust me on your
errand since my own master does not know me."
This turned the scale, and in half an hour I was in a little boat, with
a couple of native rowers, on my way to Muxadavad. The rain fell in
torrents, but I was sheltered under a pitched awning, and travelled
luxuriously in comparison with my wretched transit upon this same
river nearly a year ago. Before leaving my quarters I had taken care
to deposit Philip Hay's two papers in the safe keeping of my patron.
We reached the city without loss of time, and after loitering in the
streets long enough to pick up what news I could, I entered the palace
of the commander-in-chief without any questions but such as I could
easily answer. I sent our ally a message couched in language so figu-
rative that only he could understand it, and after some little delay was
conducted to an inner court, where I found Meer Jaffier alone with his
son Meeran, as on the day we witnessed his signature to the treaty.
He received me with a somewhat alarming reserve of manner, and had
but just begun to question me, when a man whom I knew to be in the
confidence of Suraja Doulah was ushered into the apartment with his
train of attendants, and received with much polite self-abasement by
Jaffier and his son.
This magnate of the court had but just entered when Meeran
turned upon me with sudden fury, threatening to cut off my head for
a spy, and swearing to annihilate every Englishmen in Clive's army
should they dare cross the river into the island. His rage, though
happily unreal, was so well simulated as to be alarming, and I was
glad when I found myself outside the palace; but I had scarce got
clear of the gates when a kitmutgar overtook me, and bade me hang
about the neighbourhood until he should bring me a letter. This
order I faithfully obeyed, and lay in a little niche at a corner of the
Moorish palace, only partially sheltered from the ceaseless rain until
dark, when the same man who had given me the message brought me
a letter, and bade me hasten back with it to Colonel Clive; whereupon
I returned to my faithful rowers, and, the rain now happily abating,
had a swift and pleasant journey back to Cutwah.


At Muxadavad I had heard how the Nabob's troops, not foreseeing
any chance of plunder in an encounter on the open plain, had set up
a sudden claim for their arrears of pay, and refused to stir without a
handsome payment on account; whereby the city had been in a state
of riot for the last three days. This I thought was excellent news for
our party.
I arrived at Cutwah at an eventful moment. The aspect of affairs
was considered most unpromising, and Colonel Clive himself, in his
onerous double capacity of general and statesman, was obviously dis-
heartened. He had received several letters from Meer Jaffier during
my absence; but although these promised fidelity, and appeared to
be written in good faith, they gave no definite pledge of coöperation,
and the Colonel now began to fear that in the impending struggle
the English must stand alone: a sorry prospect, seeing that we were
without horse, and had but three thousand men against Suraja Dou-
lah's fifty thousand. In this dilemma the Colonel had written to
the Rajah of Burdwan, notoriously disaffected towards the Nabob, en-
treating him to join us with his cavalry, were they but a thousand.
Vain hope! when was an Indian leader known to range himself upon
the weaker side? A council of war had just been held, and the decisive
question mooted: "Should the army cross the river at once, and at
all risks attack the Nabob; or should they avail themselves of the large
stores of rice found at Cutwah to maintain themselves during the rainy
season, and in the mean time invite the Morattoes to enter the province
and join them?" Ballajerow's offer was now known to be genuine.
He had a hundred and twenty thousand men ready to join the English
standard. Surely it must be a mad folly to attack Suraja Doulah's
great army with a handful of troops, while this gigantic force lay in
the mountains awaiting our summons.
Clive was himself the first to vote, and his voice was on the side
of caution. The very fact of his voting first was against all martial
etiquette, by which the youngest officer present should first have given
his opinion. It may be supposed that, by his deviation from rule, the
Colonel desired to weigh down the scale on the side of prudence.
I found him alone in a grove of trees near his quarters, lying on
the ground in deep meditation. He started to his feet, surprised by
my coming.
"I was made for a soldier and not a statesman," he cried to himself
rather than to me; and with an impatient stamp of his foot. "Good
God, how it went against my grain to give that opinion just now! and
yet I feel that common prudence demands as much. The game is too
desperate. Those black devils would be twenty to one against us.
I am sure of my own men; but the Bengalese are poor creatures. 'Tis
like throwing a handful into an ocean. And if Suraja Doulah's men
should fight-as we know they can fight, and have fought under
Allaverdy-Yes, common prudence urges me against so rash a folly.

Common prudence! d- common prudence! she is a jade that never
yet led the way to glory. And Coote voted for an immediate attack.
By G-we'll cross the river!"
He was not a handsome man; but as he looked up at this moment,
with his hand upon his sword-hilt, he seemed inspired.
I had never seen a finer countenance.
I thought
"Coote," he muttered, "and so you want to out-hero me, do you,
major? Well, cross the river, coûte qui coûte."
He turned upon me sharply. "What you want?" he asked, in the
vilest Bengalee.
I smiled as I delivered my letter.
"From Meer Jaffier, sir."
"Why, confound your impudence, sir!" cried the Colonel, as he
snatched the packet from my hand with more than his usual impetu-
osity; "this is the second time you have deceived me.
I took you
for a beggarly native; and here have you been listening to my rhap-
sodising."
"It is an honour to have overheard a hero communing alone with
the goddess Fortune, sir," I replied, with a smile.
"Nay, sirrah, you have surprised the reflections of a gamester
tempted to stake his all upon a cast. Great heavens, young man, have
you any notion of the stake we play for? Upon my soul I doubt it,
or you would scarce stand grinning there as if you but watched a game
of piquet. If we cross the river to be beaten, the English cause is lost
in Bengal, be sure of that. The French, who hate us by nature-
yes, sir, they are created with a hatred of Englishmen as surely as with
a taste for frogs-have now a political justification for doing us all the
evil they can. Is it likely they will forgive Chandernagore? To the
French the Nabob inclines, for they have never beaten him. On them
he hangs for help, believing them stronger than they are. Bussy has
but to march from the Circars to join the tyrant, and we are most
inevitably lost. And to lose Bengal is to lose all of India that is of
any real value to us. Bombay and the west coast scarce pay their ex-
penses, and our possessions on the coast of Coromandel are a burden;
for instead of profit they show a debt of nearly half a million. To
fight is to tempt Fate. It is desperate, mad, wicked; for our stake
is not only that which we hold at present, we hazard a hundred times
more than our paltry certainties of to-day, sir; we hazard our glorious
chances of the future. Yes, to fight is madness."
66
He tore open the letter and handed it to me. Translate me that,
sir, you who are learned in tongues."
I read the missive—an assurance of fidelity, and a promise that,
if possible, the troops of Meer Jaffier should come over to us on the
field of battle.
"Yes," cried Clive, with supreme contempt, "they will come over
to our side when the day is ours. I know these people. If you want

to distinguish yourself as a volunteer, Mr. Ainsleigh, you had better
make all haste to wash your face and put on Christian raiment. We
shall be marching in an hour."
I made the Colonel a military salute, and ran off to obey him.
What a fever of the blood, what a pleasant quickening of the pulse,
I felt as I hurried to my patron's tent! Robert Ainsleigh, with all
his sorrowful memories and bitter sense of loss, melted into air. My
individuality was gone; I was a part of England's glory, to triumph
or to fall with the fortunes of the day. Hurried and eager as I was,
I had time to wonder at my own high spirits, and to cry aloud in
astonishment," And this is war! Thrice-divine Mars, be thou hence-
forward my God!"
Mr. Watts was delighted to see me return in safety; and with that
kind patron I shared a comfortable repast before preparing for the
threatened rout. Having but one suit of clothes with me, and that a
civilian's, I borrowed a shabby militia uniform from the captain of the
Calcutta corps, and thus attired felt myself a hero.
The trumpet-call roused us before sunrise, and in the first glory and
brightness of daylight our English host began to cross the river. We
started in excellent spirits, leaving the sick and wounded, and a few
civilians, Mr. Watts among them, at Cutwah. It was four o'clock in
the afternoon when the passage of the troops was completed. We had
crossed our Rubicon, the gauntlet of rebellion was flung down, and
who could tell which among us would live to repass that fatal tide?
The afternoon brought a new messenger with another letter from
Meer Jaffier, a native who had left Muxadavad on the same day as
myself, but had taken bye-roads and otherwise lost time, with the un-
heroic caution common to these people. I was again hastily called
upon as interpreter between the Colonel and his confederate. The
letter informed us that Suraja Doulah had halted at a village some six
miles south of Cassimbazar, where he intended to intrench, and wait
the event. Here Jaffier suggested that the English should surprise
him, by marching round by the inland part of the island.
Clive listened to this letter with a louring brow, and then turning
to me, cried in his angriest voice,
"Bid this fellow tell his master that I shall march to Plassy with-
out an hour's delay. To-morrow morning will bring us to the village
of Daoodpore, and if Meer Jaffier does not join us there, by the beard of
his Prophet, or, what is better, an Englishman's word of honour, I will
make peace with Suraja Doulah, and so end this vacillating scoundrel's
chances of the musnud!"
As may be supposed, I took care to modify the language of this
message, but made it sufficiently firm to convey the Colonel's full
meaning.
Before sunset we were again on the march, but could make head
but slowly, having to wait for the boats, which were towed against the

stream, and thus we pursued a most difficult and toilsome journey,
advancing fifteen miles in eight hours, and at an hour past midnight
arrived at Plassy.
Here we took possession of a mango-grove, and had but just time
to look about us, when those near the Colonel, myself among them,
were startled by a faint sound of discordant music in the distance.
"By G—,” cried Clive, "they are close upon us!"
We kept silence, listening intently to that distant music. It con-
tinued, now fainter, now louder, the shrill cry of clarions, the clash of
cymbals, the incessant beating of drums-to all of us a most familiar
and significant music, for it had accompanied the night-watches of the
Nabob's army when they lay encamped by the Morattoe ditch at Cal-
cutta.
"Yes," exclaimed the Colonel, after we had stood for some time
in silence, "they are here before us!"
He said no more, but hastened to give rapid orders for the placing
of guards and sentinels. There was a sudden hurrying to and fro,
but neither noise or confusion; and the watch being set, the rest of
the troops were bidden to snatch what slumber they could. For the
officers and their commander there was of course no sleep on that event-
ful night.
The grove of Plassy has now become so famous that I need not
describe it minutely. It is a space of some eight hundred yards in
length and three hundred in breadth, planted with straight rows of
mango-trees, and enclosed by a mound, and ditch choked with weeds.
and brambles. A little way from the grove, on the river-bank, there
is a hunting-lodge of Suraja Doulah's, surrounded by a garden wall.
About a mile from this house the river describes a curve like a horse-
shoe, and it was at this point the enemy lay, behind an intrenchment
that had been thrown up by Roydoolub some months before for the
protection of his camp.
At daybreak we saw the enemy advancing towards the mango-
grove where we lay, 50,000 foot, 18,000 horse, and 50 pieces of cannon
of the largest calibre, 24- and 32-pounders. Every gun was mounted
on a monstrous wooden platform, six feet from the ground, carrying
both ammunition and gunners, and drawn by forty or fifty yoke of
huge white oxen, while behind each of these monstrous moving stages
walked an elephant, trained to push the machine forward with his
forehead whenever the ground was unusually heavy. It is impossible
to imagine anything more imposing than this barbarous machine, with
its train of white oxen; and I could fancy myself watching some
savage Carthaginian host in the heroic centuries before Christ, rather
than a modern army.
The tyrant's foot-soldiers were armed with every kind of weapon,
matchlocks, pikes, swords, arrows, rockets. The cavalry were stout
fellows from Northern India, mounted on powerful horses. These and

the foot-soldiers advanced in separate and compact bodies, and pre-
sently fell into position with a regularity and spirit we had scarcely
expected of them.
It was my privilege to be in attendance upon Colonel Clive as he
stood on the roof of the Nabob's hunting-house surveying this formid-
able host. He had kept me near his person since I brought him Meer
Jaffier's letter, in order that I might be ready to serve him as inter-
preter at any moment.
"Egad," he cried, "I did not think they were so strong! That is
a splendid sight, is it not, Mr. Ainsleigh?"
"Splendid indeed, sir. I could fancy myself looking over the sands
of Marathon; nor can I believe that the Persians mustered much
stronger than these, in spite of Herodotus and his big numbers."
"Herodotus was a Greek-and a liar, Mr. Ainsleigh. He sprang
from the same root as these scoundrels, and we know how these give
the reins to their fancy. Why, instead of forty-five millions sterling in
the treasury at Muxadavad, I find it is a question if there are four.
See," he cried, looking through his glass, "there are Meer Jaffier's
troops."
"Will they join us, do you think, sir?"
"Yes, Mr. Ainsleigh, when the day is ours."
The issue of events proved this a true prophecy. And now began
the business of the day. At eight o'clock a shot from the enemy killed
one of our men and gave the signal of battle. Glorious, yet on our side
almost bloodless, was the struggle that followed. After a brief skirmish
in the open-which cost us too many, though it cost our foe ten of his
men to one of ours-the Colonel ordered us back to the grove. Here
our little band seated themselves on the ground, and suffered the
despot's artillery to waste its fury upon the tops of the mango-trees,
while our own gunners answered the enemy's cannon from behind the
bank.
At eleven o'clock Clive held a brief council at the drum-head, when
it was resolved to maintain the cannonade all day, and sally forth upon
the Nabob's camp at midnight.
At noon Providence sent us a sudden storm of rain, which, as we
afterwards ascertained, did much damage to the enemy's powder.
Their fire now abated; and two hours later we were astounded beyond
measure to perceive the trains of oxen re-yoked, and the whole army
retiring slowly towards the camp.
One Sinfray, a French officer, with some forty vagabond fellows of
the same nation, retained their station upon a large mound of earth
surrounding a tank. This was a most favourable position whence to
assail our retreating foe, and Major Kilpatrick, tempted by the oppor-
tunity, advanced from the grove to attack it, with two companies of the
battalion and two field-pieces. Before starting he sent a messenger to
announce his intention to Colonel Clive, who was found asleep in the

hunting-house, and started up with much anger on hearing the Major's
message.
He ran to the detachment, reproved Kilpatrick in no measured
terms, and sent him back to the grove to fetch the rest of the army.
Having thus relieved himself he took the lead of the detachment and
proceeded to attack Monsieur Sinfray, who speedily abandoned his
ground before so formidable an invader. And now for the first time
we perceived a large body of troops hovering on our right, and these
were afterwards discovered to belong to Meer Jaffier, but as they made
no signal, they were saluted at intervals by a sharp fire from our men,
which kept them at a respectful distance.
The hottest part of the action now took place between ourselves
and Sinfray's forty Frenchmen, while the Nabob's matchlock-men
powdered upon us from an angle of his camp. The gunners at the
same time tried to bring out their cannon, but our field-pieces played
so warmly and so well upon them as always to drive them back.
The enemy's horse also suffered considerably at this juncture, and
among them fell four or five officers of the highest rank. Their
loss flung our foes into obvious disorder; and Clive, taking swift
advantage of this, gave orders to storm the angle of the camp, as well
as an eminence to which Sinfray and his men, with a number of blacks,
had withdrawn after being routed from the tank, and whence they had
kept up a galling fire upon us. I was among the party that assaulted
this post, and was happily able to hold my own in a hand-to-hand
skirmish with a couple of Frenchmen, whom I had the satisfaction of
tumbling down the slippery slope on which we wrestled. It was a
regular mêlée, and as I rolled down the incline grappling hand and foot
with these two rascals, I heard Philip Hay on the height above me
roaring out "King George and victory!" and "D-n to all blacks and
frog-eating mounseers!" I kicked myself loose from my Frenchmen,
and scrambled up the embankment eager to join my friend; but while
the triumphant shout was still on his lips, I heard it change to a
shrill scream of pain, as he cried, "Hit, by G-!"
I was with him in the next moment, holding him in my arms.
"What is it, Phil?"
"My quietus, Bob. No mistake about it this time. So, you see,
after all, a rogue may escape Tyburn. Can you lay me down in some
corner where I may die quietly? No, lad, there's no hope. I feel
myself bleeding internally."
All this was said in laboured whispers, and his ghastly countenance
told me but too truly that he was right.
The day was ours: the foe flying right and left of us; the mighty
armament of our eastern Nero retreating with a noise as of thunder,
the tyrant mounted on the swiftest of his camels, foremost among
the flying. Yes, we had beaten them. Mr. Orme protests Suraja
Doulah had eighty thousand soldiers on that fateful field, while

Colonel Clive computes them but at fifty thousand.
I have adopted
the higher figure, but at the lowest our enemies were near fifty to one
against us. And they fled, leaving elephants, oxen, forty pieces of
cannon, machines, carriages, and baggage of all kinds. It is impos-
sible to imagine a rout more ignominous, a victory more complete.
A couple of soldiers aided me to carry Philip Hay back to the
famous mango-grove, now deserted, except by a few bearers and other
black servants in charge of our baggage. Clive and the entire army
had started in pursuit of the fugitives, and only the disabled remained
behind. Sinfray, the French captain, had been wounded and taken
prisoner, after a desperate fight, and carried off to one of the tents,
where he was attended to by an English surgeon, in common with
some of our own wounded.
Philip Hay's strength being but too evidently fast ebbing, we did
not wait to reach the tent, but laid him on a bamboo mat under
the trees, and here I sat down beside him, while the surgeon was
fetched. His hand lay in mine, deadly cold, and his clouding eyes
looked up at me with an affection that touched me to the heart.
"I swear, Bob, thou art the only creature I ever loved, except my
mother-except my mother."
He repeated these words with infinite tenderness, and then lay
silent for some moments, staring absently at his fingers as they wan-
dered about the lappels of his coat.
"Yes, Bob, I loved my mother," he murmured presently, "though
you would scarce believe as much, seeing I have never spoken of her
tenderly until this day. She was a poor weak soul. Alas, how often
I have called her a fool! But she loved me, and was proud of my
scholarship, though she was but a farmer's daughter who knew not
Latin from Greek, and was sorely put to it to spell plain English.
God bless her! I have a foolish sentimental wish that I could lie by
her side under the willows in East Walcott churchyard, instead of by
this Indian river. Thou wilt see they bury me like a Christian, Bob;
and if there is anything thou canst claim for me in the way of prize-
money, thou'lt send it to my sisters at East Walcott. I have sent
them a share of most bits of luck that have fallen to me in a life of
ups and downs. You see the veriest scoundrel has one soft corner in
his heart where he keeps the memories of his childhood, and the
images of those who loved him when he was young and guileless."
"Dear friend, I will get all I can for your sisters, and see it safe in
their hands."
"Dear friend! God bless thine innocence, Robert Ainsleigh! Dear
traitor would be nearer the mark. But Joseph forgave his brothers.
Confess now that my treachery made thy fortune. O, Bob, 'tis hard
to die like this. I was first to mount the bank, and to-day's work
would have won me a pair of colours. Egad, how I have should en-
joyed plundering the enemy's baggage! You can take all the papers

in the tin case; and if you can use those letters against Lestrange,
do so."
"O, Phil, you should die in charity with all men!"
"With all men, yes; but he's a devil. Would you have me die in
charity with the devil? Here comes the surgeon. Don't let him put
me to any torture, Bob, as you love me. It would be wasted pain."
The medical officer knelt down and began his examination with
much tenderness.
"No," he said, in answer to Philip's appeal; "I'll not put you
to any pain."
He seated himself beside the patient with his hand upon the wrist
of the left arm, which now lay listless across the dying man's breast,
while his right hand was held in mine. A look from the surgeon told
me that all was over.
"A soldier's death," muttered Philip-" in the hour of victory.
God's mercy wipe out my catalogue of sins! Better than Tyburn.
Tell-sisters-died like a soldier-faithful service-of his country."
And so was severed the one frail link that bound me to my past
life.
