BOUND TO JOHN COMPANY
OR THE
Jdbeatures and Misadventures of Robert Ainsleigh
CHAPTER XXXV. FACE TO FACE ONCE More.
WITHIN twenty-four hours of my interview with Mrs. Grimshaw I
was again in London, a solitary stranger, with no concern but that
dreary business of self-interest until such time as I could gratify man's
natural desire for revenge by a meeting with Mr. Lestrange. I called
in St. James's-square immediately on my return; but the gentleman
was not yet back, nor expected for above a week, so I had my time on
my hands for that period. I was so fortunate as to find my old cham-
bers of Brick-court vacant: here I once more took up my abode; and
by the lonely hearth where my treacherous friend had found me, I sat
and brooded over the strange destinies of betrayer and betrayed. And
now I became a haunter of taverns, not because I loved such places,
but because I was like a foreigner in my native land, and was anxious
to learn the ways of the town, and pick up any information with
which strangers could furnish me about Sir Everard Lestrange. Of this
gentleman the gay young Templars, with whom I for the most part
associated, had plenty to tell me; but I knew the liveliness of their
fancy, and that it needed some discrimination to distinguish fact from
fiction in their narratives of the baronet's doings. Some of them af-
fected to know him intimately, but when hard pressed, owned to merely
a public knowledge of him. All agreed in declaring him distinguished
among the bloods of his day by a bad eminence, and about his vices
my informants were so unanimous that I could scarce doubt their
veracity.
"He has a rage for actresses," said one of a somewhat reprobate
party which I had joined at supper in a comfortable but obscure
tavern close to the Temple gates, where some dozen or so of young
law-students had formed a club by the name of Knights-errant.
"You had better say for an actress, Tom," answered his friend;
"it is Mrs. Hunter he has followed for these last two years. His
passion is the talk of the town. And they say she will not listen to
his suit, though he has offered to settle a handsome income on her, and
sign a bond promising to marry her within six months of his present
wife's death."
"Good heavens, what iniquity!" I cried.
"Pshaw, my dear sir, since the elevation of Mr. Gay's Polly to
the peerage there is a fashion for offering coronets to actresses; "and

shall a beggarly baronet be punctilious when a duke can put his pride
in his pocket for the love of a pretty face? Why, Lady Lucretia
Lovegrove ran away with an actor only the other day, and married the
fellow before you could say Jack Robinson, at the very time when her
friends were arranging an alliance between her ladyship and Lord
Fitzpactolus, who owns half Somerset and three-quarters of Devonshire,
and has half a million a-year at the very least from a copper-mine in
Cornwall. But Mrs. Hunter is a living mystery-a virtuous actress ;
the rage of the town, and virtuous!"
"In spite of Sir Everard Lestrange ?"
"In spite of better men than Sir Everard Lestrange," replied the
Templar, with a rakish shrug and simper. "Why, I have been Mrs.
Hunter's declared admirer myself for the last six months, and yet the
citadel stands, though I will not say it has not tottered."
"And pray where is this paragon to be seen, sir?" I asked.
"On the boards of Drury Lane, sir; where her talents and her
beauty have enchanted the town for the last three years. It is said
Garrick picked her up in a country booth, starving on a beggarly
pound a-week. She is the most versatile creature in the world; when
she plays the fine lady, you would swear she had been born the daughter
of a duke; yet she has but to dress herself as a country wench, and
every word and look and gesture smells of green fields and rustic
farmyards. Her Polly Peachum is an angel that has been reared
among thieves; her Sir Harry Wildair has gone near to drive the Wof-
fington to suicide. Pshaw, gentlemen, this sounds like a lover's fool-
ing; but when I begin that divine creature's panegyric, I know not
how to stop."
"And it is this bright creature Sir Everard has pledged himself to
ruin ?"
"Ay, sir; so runs the talk of the town. Some say it is a wager,
and that the baronet-who, though a profligate by the senses, is colder
than ice at heart-would pursue no woman so furiously except for some
great gain to himself."
"I can believe anything of him that is mean or base," said I; and
the remark provoked no argument, for, well as the baronet was known
to the assembly by reputation, no one present appeared to have heard
any good of him.
I was eager to see the fair genius whose talents, or beauty, or
fashion, had given her so powerful an influence over the profligate mind
of my enemy; so, early on the next evening, I seated myself on one of
the foremost benches in the pit of Drury Lane, having first assured
myself that Mrs. Hunter had a part in the night's performance.
The play was As you like it, with Mrs. Hunter in the part of
Rosalind, and Mr. Garrick as the melancholy Jaques. Early as it was,
the house was fast filling when I took my seat, and I found myself in
the midst of a sort of critical club; a little knot of playgoers who

came to the evening's entertainment as epicures come to a feast-pre-
pared to enjoy, but still more ready to criticise.
"I wonder Garrick cares to play so insignificant a part," said one
gentleman.
"Nay, sir," replied a ponderous person in a shabby suit of brown;
"Jaques is no insignificant part. He has two of the finest orations
in the whole of Shakespeare."
"But the man has nothing to do."
"Sir, there is no part in any play where a fine actor will not find
something to do. Do you think when the Greek orator talked of
action he meant only furious posturings and rushings from one end of
the theatre to the other? No, sir. In that phrase Demosthenes in-
cluded all those finer movements of physical nature by which a man
reveals his emotion, from the hand uplifted to the gods to the faintest
quiver of lip or nostril. There are characters in which any stroller
can win applause; Richard the Third, for instance, whom Shakespeare
made a sublime incarnation of evil, and in whose mouth Cibber has put
such claptrap fustian as cannot fail to please the groundlings. But it
is in such a part as Hamlet or Jaques the intellectual man can best
display his powers, and I think Davy does wisely to undertake the
character. They say he is furiously jealous of this Mrs. Hunter, and
that he only brought her forward to mortify Kitty Clive. She has
been heard to complain of his unkindness-a frivolous fault-finding
spirit that would fain thwart her in every original expression of
her art."
The curtain rose upon the first scene, but I, who was chiefly eager
to behold Mrs. Hunter, paid little attention to the Shakespearian dia-
logue. I had not long to wait, for the second scene began with the
entrance of two ladies, and a loud burst of applause from all the house
told me that one of these was the paragon.
She swept the ground in a low curtsey, and seemed, as she rose, to
survey the whole audience with one bright look of gratitude and plea-
sure. She was indeed a lovely creature, and I think in every part of
her exquisite form, in every feature of her radiant face, approached as
near perfection as humanity can do.
Upon me those flashing eyes shone with a familiar light, those
rosy lips discoursed a well-remembered music. I sat dumbfounded,
staring in amazement; for this wonder and divinity of all the town was
the woman with whom I had roved hand in hand beneath the oaks of
Hauteville near twenty years ago. The odour of fallen leaves, the
aromatic scent of pine-woods, came back to me as I looked at her.
This untutored genius, whom the town had elevated into a goddess,
was my foster-sister Margery!
Paralysed by surprise, I sat through three acts of the play gazing
at her, fixed as a statue, unconscious of surrounding objects as a sleep-
walker. Her acting, like her beauty, seemed to me to be simple per-

fection.
There was a freshness and innocence in her manner I have
Every look, every action, seemed
I think, indeed, that she had
never since seen in any other actress.
spontaneous as the singing of a bird.
just the same delight in acting as a skylark has in his rapturous
carollings when he soars into that upper heaven almost beyond our ken.
For her to act was an intoxication; and once she had entered on the
life of the banished duke's daughter, all the cares and memories of Mrs.
Margery Hunter were blotted from the tablet of her brain, and she had
neither griefs nor joys that were not Rosalind's. This she has told me
long since that night; and Mr. Garrick himself has confessed that,
although he found her a strolling player in a barn, beyond the rudi-
ments and veriest mechanism of her art he has never been able to
teach her anything. All the rest was natural to her, and this great
man was quick to recognise in her a genius as perfect and innate as
his own.
The third act was finished before I stirred from my seat. I had
seen Mistress Rosalind in her boyish dress, which was all that womanly
coquetry could invent for man's bewitchment, and yet in no smallest
detail sinned against feminine modesty. At last I roused myself by
an effort from the spell which surprise had cast upon me, and made
my way out of the theatre amid all the bustle of a full house, noisy
with the bawling of orange-girls and the chatter of the audience, who
were pleased to find their tongues at liberty, and made good use of
the interval between the acts of the play.
Outside the house I inquired my way to the stage-door, and here I
asked if it would be possible for an old friend to obtain speech with
Mrs. Hunter before she left the theatre.
"Not till the play is done, were you her nearest relation," answered
the man in charge of the players' entrance; "for Mrs. Hunter will
speak to no one while she is acting. But she sometimes receives com-
pany in her dressing-room before leaving the theatre, and if you will
tell me your name, I will let her woman know that you desire to
see her."
"It would be better for me to write a note," I said, "if you can
give me pen, ink, and paper."
This the man was unable to do, so great was the bustle and con-
fusion of people hurrying in and out, and I wondered to discover how
many unseen workers were necessary to the production of a play.
Finding the man unable to assist me, I ran across to a tavern on the
other side of the street, where I wrote a few hasty lines to my foster-
sister, entreating her to see me after the play. This I gave to the
man, with a crown-piece, and he promised it should be delivered im-
mediately.
I was assured he had kept his promise when Mrs. Hunter came on
the stage in the scene that followed my return to the house, for there
was a startled look on her face, and she gazed around the auditory in

a way she had not done before. For the moment she had ceased to be
Rosalind, and was occupied with her own emotions. I was not able
to regain my old place among the critics in the centre of the pit, and
could get only standing-room in a corner, where I found myself close
against a stage-box.
While I was gazing at the fair creature on the stage, who, I doubted
not, was looking for me among the spectators, a voice sounded close at
hand that sent a shot through me. It was the voice of my enemy, and
it came from the stage-box.
"Who is Mrs. Hunter looking for to-night ?" cried Sir Everard
Lestrange; "I thought she always minded her book, and she tripped
twice in that last speech. Who is there in the house to attract the
lady's brown eyes? There sits Horry Walpole grinning at the audience.
What a dried anatomy it is! He has begun patching-up some gothic
monstrosity at Twit'nam, and is trying to twist a very decent cottage,
in which a man might live, into a compound of Westminster Abbey
and his Castle of Otranto, which is only fit for a scene in a pantomime.
And he leads that wretched Richard Bentley the life of a dog, collect-
ing marbles and pictures for him, which, when collected, rarely please
his virtuoso-ship either in price or in quality, for he is as mean as he
is critical. Is that Chesterfield yonder? Good heavens, how old the
man is getting! That sort of spectacle should be kept at home, wrapped
in flannels and fed with gruel; it is a reminder as unpleasant as the
skeleton at the Egyptians' feasts. Gad, Vernon, is she not lovely?
Had Diana a more perfect form, or Venus a diviner face?"
This outburst of rapture and the remarks that had preceded it were
spoken in that languid courtly voice which Everard Lestrange had
always adopted, and were too low to offend the audience. The curtain
presently fell on the fourth act, and I had leisure to observe the
gentleman with whom I was so eager for a reckoning.
"I will go straight to his box," I said to myself; but then it struck
me that it would be wiser first to see my foster-sister, and hear all she
could tell me about the career of her betrayer.
To find the seducer now the avowed and unsuccessful suitor of his
cast-off mistress was a transformation which I should have believed
impossible; and I knew not to what cause I could attribute so mar-
vellous an effect. Was it the spirit of contradiction that had worked
this miracle in a bad man's soul? Was it wounded vanity-the
macaroni's base worship of fashion? I had afterwards reason to know
it was a compound of these feelings, a vile amalgam of obstinacy,
conceit, and the fribble's slavish deference to the world's opinion. The
country-girl whom Everard Lestrange lured from her home had soon
tired so fine a gentleman; but the gifted woman whose perfections
were the town-talk was a creature he languished to conquer. He had
told people that she had been his mistress, and that he had wearied of
her and cast her off; but, unfortunately, lying on these subjects was so

much the order of the day, that no one could be made to believe the
truthful boaster.
The curtain once down, the gentlemen in the stage-box gave loose
to their tongues; but as a fashionable profligate's conversation is of all
discourses the least edifying, I will not trouble myself to record it here.
I heard enough to be sure that Sir Everard Lestrange was a faithless
husband, and that he had pursued, and intended still to pursue, my
foster-sister with a resolution that had more of hate than love.
"I had her in the dust at my feet once, Vernon," he said, "and
I'll have her there again, and win my wager."
“Faith, it is a wager worth winning, and will make up to you for
your losses to Staindale at White's last week. Was it seven or nine
thousand he won from you at a coup?"
"Upon my life I think it was but seven. We had been doubling our
stakes since dinner, and towards supper-time the play was getting high."
These fine gentlemen were quiet enough during the last act,
throughout which Sir Everard Lestrange lolled upon the cushion of his
box with folded arms, regarding Mrs. Hunter with a fixed stare that
was in itself sufficient to compromise an honest woman. Though he
was near enough to the stage to render his presence obvious to her, she
betrayed no consciousness of his existence, but played her part with the
most lively, unembarrassed air possible, speaking a very foolish epilogue
with enchanting grace and naïveté.
No sooner had the curtain fallen than I hurried to the stage-door,
where I found the porter as eager as he had before been indifferent. I
was to be pleased to go immediately to Mrs. Hunter's dressing-room,
and a hanger-on of the playhouse was in readiness to conduct me
thither. I followed this man with alacrity, by numerous darksome
and narrow passages that smelt strongly of tallow and lamp-oil. Alas,
poor Margery, under what strange circumstances had we last met and
parted! I had seen her kneeling at my feet, piteous, with clasped
hands beseeching my mercy, in that miserable hour of my betrayal, and
had hated and spurned the innocent instrument of my undoing. Now,
I approached the idol of the town, a peerless brilliant creature, whom
every admirer of genius must needs delight to honour.
My conductor stopped at a little door in a narrow passage, which
seemed to me about on a level with the footman's gallery, opened it,
and introduced me into a small chamber, where I beheld the Rosalind
of the evening, dressed as she had left the stage, and seated before a
toilet-table lighted with wax-candles, and carelessly bestrewn with a
heterogeneous collection of combs, brushes, rouge-pots, false hair,
pomanders and pouncet-boxes, powdering-machines, and masks to be
worn during the powdering process, ribbons, fans, laces, feathers, and
trinkets of every kind. An honest-faced waiting-woman was folding a
brocaded petticoat, while her mistress sat idle, with her face turned
towards the door.

She sprang to her feet as I entered the room.
"O Robert," she cried, "what happiness to see you again!-Leave
us, Molly; this gentleman is my brother; you can come back in half an
hour to dress me."
The woman dropped a curtsey and vanished, leaving me face to face
with the loveliest woman I ever looked upon. Yes, I say this,—I, who
never loved but one woman, yet could but acknowledge the superior
brilliance of this peasant-born beauty to my own pale flower. I loved
Dorothea, but from this woman I could not withhold the admiration
which is man's natural tribute to perfect beauty.
"My brother," repeated Margery, with both hands extended to me,
as the door closed on the waiting-woman; "my brother only! O, for
pity's sake, say I am forgiven! I was but an instrument in their hands,
Robert, an ignorant country-girl, who believed again and again, and
consented to be deluded anew after every fresh deception. On my
soul, Robert, I believed it was your wish to marry me, shameful
creature as I was! He told me so, and I believed him, though he had
lied to me a hundred times before."
"But were you free to marry? Had there been no previous marriage?"
"What! you know of that?" she cried, surprised.
"Of the marriage at the French embassy, yes, Margery."
"O, what a catalogue of infamies I must confess, if I tell you all!"
she exclaimed. "He lured me from my home with the most solemn
promises-yes, Robert, the most solemn pledges-that I should be his
wife. Nothing but that certainty would have tempted me, for I never
loved him as other women love the men to whom they trust their
honour. I had not the excuse that others have. I never really loved
him, Robert, and I had loved another."
This was said in a lower voice, and with infinite tenderness. Then
her tone changed to one that expressed only scorn, scorn of her betrayer,
scorn of herself.
"It was my own vanity betrayed me, Robert, aided by his deceitful
tongue. His artful compliments set me thinking of my own merits.
He made whatever beauty God gave me for a blessing, an instrument
for my destruction. He worked upon every weakness of my nature-is
the devil himself so perfect in the art of temptation?-until he made
me discontented with my peaceful innocent life, and eager to be a lady.
And when he had fully succeeded in poisoning my mind thus, he swore,
as if reluctantly, in a kind of desperate passion of love and devotion for
me, that, sooner than lose me, he would seal his own ruin in the world
by making me his wife. Robert, as I have a soul to be saved, I had
resisted every dishonourable proposal. But when he swore this, under
circumstances that would have deceived any ignorant creature like me,
I believed and trusted him. David Garrick himself is no better actor.
I will not pause to tell you the story of my flight. I had scarce
reached London when I found myself in the hands of wretches of my


own sex, and they, by arts too vile for these lips to describe, compassed
my undoing; and then they and he, the arch-deceiver, told me to be
happy. They swore there was scarce a lady of quality in the town
more honest than I, and asked, derisively, if I wanted to be more
innocent than my betters. Mr. Lestrange took me to France, and
gave me the seducer's common recompense to his victim, in the shape of
fine clothes and valueless trinkets, masquerades and suppers. I was
introduced into a world as wicked-I dare venture to declare-as that
on which Heaven rained fire and brimstone; and when I was bold
enough to declare my hatred of this garish hell, my master told me I
was no mate for a gentleman. Whatever charm he had once seen in
me was washed from my face by repentant tears, and he wearied of me
in less than a month, then tried to sell me-it was the custom of the
country, he said-and finding his slave rebellious, told me I must go
back to the home I had abandoned, and that as a reward my folly and
peevishness had ill deserved, I should return thither an honest woman,
the wife of his led-captain. The marriage was to be only a form. Mr.
Hay wanted no wife, but was willing to sell his name for a twenty-
pound note. I wanted to go home, Robert; and it would have been
something to call myself a wife, and to have a certificate of marriage,
so I consented to this shameful proposal, and the ceremony took place.
Alas, it availed me nothing; my tormentor was now seized with a
fancy for detaining me in his grasp, and I was carried hither and
thither at the will of a profligate tyrant. And so I was at last brought
to a lodging near Covent-garden, to be again in the power of those
female wretches whose tyranny was even worse than his, for it was
coarser. If I did not sink to the veriest infamy and become like them,
a wretch for hire, I have to thank God, not Everard Lestrange. From
this hell upon earth one way of escape was offered me. I was told that
my marriage with Mr. Hay was no marriage, for he had half-a-dozen
wives in as many countries, but that you were willing to marry me-
you had been told my true story, and were yet willing. The reprobate
Roderick Ainsleigh's bastard son could stoop to a baseness impossible
for Mr. Lestrange. This is what my destroyer told me. O Robert,
forgive me, forgive me! I believed him, and lent myself to his
villanous plot. My eyes were opened when you spurned me—still
more fully opened when I saw you seized by those ruffians. Then came
a pause-a long oblivion of fever and delirium—and I woke in a garret
in that thrice-cursed house by Covent-garden, to find myself watched
by one poor creature who had always pitied me. She was not an
honest woman, but she had what those other harpies had not-a heart.
She had been bred among strolling players, had come to London to
play small parts in one of the patent theatres, and, being dismissed for
incompetency, had fallen into the shameful ways of the wretches with
whom I found her. What time she lived with them I know not,
but she was no longer young. They were tired of her, she of them;

she was the drudge of the house; and knowing my desire to escape, she
offered to depart with me, and to put me in a way of earning my living
among her old friends the country players. I thanked and blessed her
for the thought; and one night we stole away unquestioned, while the
noisy inmates of that place of infamy were carousing. My friend kept
her promise. She put me in the way of earning a living-such a
living, Robert!-but it was something for so forlorn a creature as I to
live honestly. For a long time I was the most mechanical drudge that
ever slaved at a master's bidding. But one day I awoke to a sudden
pleasure in my art; I, the tragedy-queen of a booth, I heard of Mrs.
Yates and Mrs. Pritchard, Mrs. Woffington and Mrs. Clive; and the
thought came to me like an inspiration, that I might win a name like
theirs-I, the castaway, might become more famous than the ambas-
sador's son who had flung me into the gutter. With this fancy came
a new pleasure in my art; life was changed for me. I no longer
brooded on my own miseries. I thought of Juliet's sorrows and Lady
Macbeth's ambition, the madness of Constance, the shame of Jane
Shore. From that hour, I suppose, I began to be an actress. It was
not till two years afterwards that Mr. Garrick saw me, and brought me
to London. Perhaps you know the rest."
"Yes, Margery, I know that you are now the most famous woman
in London, and that the name under which you have won renown is
stainless."
"That name, yes, Robert; but not the name of my mother's
daughter. There are grand houses open to receive me in London, fine
ladies eager to shower favours on me in the caprice of an idle moment;
but the cottage in which I was born is shut against me. How shall I
repay Sir Everard Lestrange for the misery of my youth, the bitter
remorse of my womanhood! Do you think I forgive or forget, Robert,
or that I do not hunger for revenge?"
"Leave that to me, Margery. I have a catalogue of wrongs that
only blood can blot out; and you have your revenge in this scoun-
drel's public pursuit of you, which must end in his public mortifi-
cation."
"What! you know of that too, Robert? Yes; Everard Lestrange
has done his utmost to dishonour the name I now bear, as he dis-
honoured that which I inherited from my father. You could never
imagine the obstinacy of his pursuit-it is an unrelenting persecution.
They even tell me he has laid a wager that he will make me his
avowed mistress before this year is over. And do you think he loves
me, even with the libertine's base passion? No, Robert, his passion is
a mixture of vanity and malice. I was once his slave, and although
he cast me off, he cannot forgive me for having escaped him. The
world-his world-is pleased to admire me, and to obtain the prize
that other men covet he would commit any folly. Yes, this perhaps is
a kind of vengeance, but a very poor one."

"Will you help me to a meeting with this villain, Margery? for I
think you alone can do it."
"And such a meeting would end in blood, eh, Robert ?"
"It could scarcely end otherwise. But you need not scruple to
grant me this favour, Margery; for if I do not meet him with your
help, I shall find other means. I have come fifteen thousand miles to
pay my reckoning to Sir Everard Lestrange."
"Fifteen thousand miles ?"
On this I briefly related the story of my exile, to Margery's su-
preme admiration. The impulsive creature at once exalted me into a
hero, and was ready to attribute the conquest of Bengal to Robert
Ainsleigh instead of to Robert Clive.
"And you were in that prison where so many luckless wretches were
smothered," she exclaimed," and escaped to win fame and honour!"
"Nay, dear Margery, I have won little honour, but have been
handsomely rewarded for doing my duty, and have returned to my
native country with a modest fortune, instead of lying yonder in a
ditch, where the bones of better men are mouldering. I make no doubt
Mr. Lestrange thought he had seen the last of me when he sold me
captive to the India Company."
After this Mrs. Hunter dismissed me, with a hundred apologies, as
it was high time she should change her dress and leave the theatre.
"The farce is a short one," she said, "and the house will soon be
closing. Do not think I am tired of this talk, Robert-I could go on
for ever; but folks watch and wonder so about an actress. It is
hard to make the world believe one can act Jane Shore and yet be an
honest woman."
She gave me both her hands again, praying that I would call
upon her early next day at her lodgings in Surrey-street, out of the
Strand. And thus we bade each other good-night, and I went back
to my chambers in the Temple, wondering at the events of the evening.
Not the least bewildering fact was the complete transformation of my
foster-sister, who, from the simplest of rustic maidens, was changed
into a perfect woman of the world, passionate, imperious, and most
charming.
"I scarce wonder that Sir Everard is bewitched by his cast-off
mistress," I said to myself. "He little knew what a gem he flung into
the gutter. Yet he has a pearl of greater price at home, had he but
the soul to appreciate that rarer, purer jewel."
Before noon next day I was at Mrs. Hunter's lodgings. She was
not alone; a tall gentleman dressed in rusty black, with a wan pallid
face and a somewhat nervous manner, was in attendance upon her,
and by his conduct on my entrance proclaimed his intention to remain.
Mrs. Hunter regarded him with an air of undisguised vexation as she
shook hands with me.

"I shall be at the theatre to-morrow morning, Mr. Johnson," she
said, "and that will be quite soon enough for us to rehearse our scenes.
I never yet could rehearse in a room."
"But I have stage-business in Jaffier that Garrick will do his best
to spoil if he sees it at rehearsal," answered the gloomy stranger, who
regarded me with a most sour visage. "You know how rabidly envious
he is of any original touch of art. He fancies himself an original
genius, forsooth, yet I know for certain that his Lear is a slavish copy
of an old man in Hatton-garden, that lost his wits on the tragical death
of his only child. I should be better satisfied if we rehearsed the scene
here. It would not detain you a quarter of an hour."
"But I have business with this gentleman, my dear Johnson"-
here Mr. Johnson favoured me with an evil scowl-" and I know every
turn of your head in Jaffier. Sure, we have played the two parts often
enough together before Mr. Garrick had seen either of us, and when we
were both strollers in a country barn."
The dismal gentleman groaned aloud. "Would to Heaven we had
never risen from those humble fortunes !" he cried.
"Nay, for pity's sake, dear Johnson, do not be tragical. The sole
fault thou hast is, that, not content with acting at night, thou art
Hamlet or Othello all day long. I am in no humour for going back
to the booths and the rustics, to see my one poor gown smeared with
the grease of guttering tallow-candles that no one had time to snuff,-
for sure the candle-snuffer was always wanted to play priest or con-
spirator in the tragedy, or take the country-folks' money at the doors.
No, Johnson, I have no wish to go back."
"Alas, no, madam, the town has spoiled her who was once the
noblest and simplest of women, and you set more valuc on the empty
compliments of rakes and fribbles than on the love of an honest man.
But I forget myself. You have business with this gentleman, to whom
you have not yet done me the honour to present me."
Margery shrugged her shoulders with the prettiest air of annoyance.
"Upon my honour, Johnson, you have acquired the art of being
disagreeable. This gentleman is my-well, a kinsman-Mr. Ainsleigh
by name, newly come home from the Indies, as you may guess by his
complexion, which is almost brown enough for Zanga; and I would
have you beware how you blab of having seen him, since he does not
want all Drury-lane to know of his return."
"O, be sure, madam, I shall be silent for your sake, if not for Mr.
Ainsleigh's. Ill as you have treated me, I have still some regard for
your reputation."
"Good heavens, sir !" cried Mrs. Hunter in a rage; "this is the
veriest fooling."
"There is a kind of fooling, madam, by which honest men's hearts
are broken."
"If the hearts of some folks I know are as soft as their heads, they

are stuff that a child could break, sir. But, upon my honour, I am
tired of this nonsense. My kinsman and I have business matters to
talk of, and I must beg you to leave us."
"As you please, madam," cried this most tragic of tragedians;
"you order me from your presence, doubtless, in order that you may
complete the destruction of a newer victim. Coquetry so cruel is a
vice of such enormity that I scarce wonder you have suffered yourself to
become the town-talk by Sir Everard Lestrange's open pursuit of you."
"Have a care, sir!" I cried, with my hand upon my sword; "you
have been told that I have the honour to be this lady's kinsman. You
can scarce suppose I shall tamely stand by to see her insulted."
"O, for pity's sake, no quarrelling!" exclaimed Margery, grasping
me by the arm. "Don't you see this Othello thirsts for your blood?
Go, Mr. Johnson; Cassio himself was not so innocent as this gentle-
man. Go, sir, immediately, if you would ever again be admitted to
my presence."
"Falsest, most cruel of women, I obey!" cried the actor. He
paused but an instant to defy me with a tragic scowl, clapped his hat
on his head, and flung himself out of the room.
"Mad!" cried Mrs. Hunter; "madder than Hamlet or Lear, for
they at least had cause for their lunacy."
"And has this poor wretch none ?"
"None but a diseased vanity, and a foolish jealousy of one who
never favoured his addresses by so much as a look or a word beyond
the commonest friendship. Do not set me down as a coquette, Robert,
because that man reproaches me. On my honour, he has no right
to do so. We acted the leading characters together in those small
country theatres where I learned my trade; and there are some men
who cannot play Romeo to a decent-looking Juliet half-a-dozen times
without falling over head and ears in love with her. This poor fellow
is that kind of foolish, impressionable creature, and we played the
lovers for near three years. In all that time he was for ever plaguing
me to marry him. He has an unconscionable estimate of his own
talents, and sets it down to David Garrick's envy that he has not taken
the town by storm ere this. He was engaged to play third-rate cha-
racters, but sometimes gets a leading part when our manager is out
of humour with the public, or disposed for idleness at Hampton. And
this unlucky Mr. Johnson, who will never be better than a Bartholo-
mew-fair ranter, believes it would be the happiest thing for me to
become his wife. And he will not accept a simple refusal, though I
have told him a hundred times I shall never marry. In plain words,
the man is the torment of my life. He dogs my footsteps at every
turn, and if he were not altogether too ridiculous a creature, would be
a most serious trouble to me."
"Let me be the champion to rid you of this foolish persecutor, as
well as of another, more vicious than foolish."

"No, Robert, not for worlds would I have you harm a hair of that
poor creature's head. You do not know what a heart he has, in spite
of his follies. He is the sole support of two poor sick women his
sisters, who believe him the noblest creature on this earth."
"But even his pursuit may compromise you."
"No, Robert, for it is honest, and everybody knows that. I do not
know but that his constant affection, and even extravagant admiration
and respect for me, which in no way depend on my success-it was
just the same in the days he regrets so much, the time of the booths
and the sputtering candles-have not served me most materially."
"This poor man bears so good a character, you mean, that—
that " I could not finish my sentence, looking at her, remembering
our childish days how far more strongly than the injury she had been
made to do me!
"You find it hard to say, Robert," she said, with the quickness of
perception which was so remarkable in her; " and I thank you for the
difficulty. I mean, that though my enemy is a man of rank and
fashion, of place and power, and this poor player is a nobody, even
among us, so lately known as recognised vagabonds,' not one of my
fellows, not one of my associates, would believe that he would be a
suitor to a woman such as Sir Everard Lestrange describes me."
There fell a shadow on the brightness of her beauty, and her rose-
like cheek paled. I knew whence the shadow fell and the pallor arose.
If Sir Everard had but lied, indeed!
66
Margery, my dear sister," I replied, taking her hand in mine, “to
me this poor gentleman shall be a friend, for the sake of his true
appreciation of you, however baseless, however unreasonable his hopes.
I have known too much of the misery of unrequited love myself to
deny respect and pity to the sufferings of another."
"Evidence, if any were needed, that you have not lived much in
the world, Robert, or you would know that sympathy is vulgar, and
compassion quite out of the mode."
And this was Margery Hawker, who uttered conventional words of
wisdom, and recognised my ignorance of the world! Why did there
come across me at that moment so keen and clear a vision of the Haute-
ville woods, of the spreading roots of trees o'ergrown with branching
ferns, of the twittering birds, and bright-eyed scudding rabbits?
"But," she continued, throwing off the momentary preoccupation
of her manner, "I am glad you have seen poor Johnson, Robert; he is
an injudicious friend, vain, troublesome, and quarrelsome, but true;
and I am so much at the mercy of a world not very merciful to such
as I, that I must needs prize any friendship. But he is gone, and I
have still much to hear from you, and perhaps something more to tell.
It has seemed to me like a dream, incredible, that I had really seen
you last night."


