CHAPTER XXXVIII. MARGERY'S READING of a Riddle.
DURING this time I had not been unmindful of my foster-sister and
of the promise I had made her. Prosperity and applause had not
spoiled the gentle and loving nature of Margery Hawker, and in the
midst of the intoxication of her success, the ever-growing brilliancy of
her fame, she yearned for her father and mother, and her old home.
Margery had spoken the truth as it was in her inmost heart when she
had said bitterly, that every door but one was open to her, and that
one barred her from the threshold she most desired to pass. I wrote
to dear old Jack Hawker, the "daddy" of my childish days, and I have
seldom performed a more painful task. The old gamekeeper was no
common man; to an unbending sense of duty he added strong common
sense and remarkably acute perception; and I knew the story I had
to tell would not satisfy or really console him. Jack Hawker's sorrow
must be irreparable; I could only hope to soften his anger, and induce
him to admit Margery to his home, by proving to him that she had
at least the formal status of " an honest woman." He was a much less
ignorant man than most persons in his humble station; and I knew he
could read my letter without having recourse to assistance. I began
by acknowledging my visit to Hauteville, and screening his wife from
his anger at the concealment from him, by explaining that it had
been agreed upon only until I should have succeeded in tracing Mar-
gery, which I had now done. I told him the story of his child's mar-
riage, briefly and plainly; and trusting to the future for an explanation
of her present position, and for overcoming the prejudice which he
would be certain to feel against a stage career, so terrible and so
utterly unknown to such simple people, I contented myself with saying
that she was earning an honest livelihood, and was respected by every
one who knew her. I entreated him to send his daughter a message
of forgiveness, and permission to revisit her home. I did not read the
letter to Margery, but told her its contents, which she heard with
tearful eyes and a perturbed countenance.
"If he lets me go home, Robert," said Margery, "I will go in the
russet gown and the plain mob, which I wish I had never laid aside for
any other gear; and perhaps, when I see the old place again, and sit


under the old trees, when I help my mother, as I will, please God, to
scour the tiles and skim the pot, I may feel like Margery Hawker again."
And then she and I fell to talking of the Hauteville woods, of the
warrener's lodge, of our childish sports and quarrels, of the pet animals
whom we had reared, until it seemed impossible that she could really
be a famous, fashionable, hard-working actress, and I a weather-beaten,
war-worn soldier of fortune.
It was a week after I had written to Jack Hawker, and on the day
succeeding my visit to Madame Adolphine, that I got an answer,
which I carried at once to Mrs. Hunter's lodgings. It consisted of
only a few lines, written in a large round-hand, each letter having
evidently been formed with great care and pains, and had been de-
spatched by the carrier to Willborough, and forwarded thence by the
coach to London. I shall never forget Margery's face when I came
into her parlour with the letter in my hand. She was attired in a
white-damask morning-gown, and wore no powder. She was busy with
a mantua-maker about a stage costume, it was for "Lady Anne,”
and declared to be a miracle of taste,-and Pringle, her woman, was
turning over a box of laces. Margery's tongue was going volubly
enough when I entered the room, but, catching sight of the letter, she
faltered, turned pale, and sat down. Pringle hurried the mantua-maker
away, and we were alone.
-
"O Robert, is it bad news?" said Margery, with appealing eyes.
"No. Do you think I should have brought it thus if it were bad.
news? Read your father's letter, Margery, for yourself." It ran thus:
"HONOURED SIR,-I am humbly obliged for your letter, and for
the news of my poor girl. Since it cannot now be better, I thank
God she has an honest name, and is living an honest life. Her mother
has taken on sorely about her. She has my leave to come to her home
when she will. With my duty, from your servant to command,
"JOHN HAWKER."
Margery let the paper fall, and covered her face with her hands.
That Jack Hawker should address me, the "Robin" of old times, as
"Honoured Sir," and say he was "humbly obliged," seemed strange
and even ludicrous, but his letter gave me much satisfaction. I did not
heed the coldness of his words; that would have come of the difficulty
of expressing himself in the unaccustomed form of writing; but he be-
lieved me, and he was reconciled with Margery.
"I will go at the end of this engagement," she said. "You will
take me, Robert, will you not?"
I gladly promised her that I would; and then told her the time had
come for her to assume Philip Hay's name. She was amused at the
account I gave her of Mr. Johnson, and the eagerness with which he
had undertaken that the report should reach Sir Everard Lestrange.
"He grows more and more foolish," she said; "last night he seemed


quite beside himself, and was so mysterious, that if I had been at all
afraid of anything, if I had anyone in the world to care about, except
those with whom he could be in no way concerned, he would have
frightened me. The poor man's brain is turned, as I believe, between
his own vanity and his infatuation about me."
I then told Mrs. Hunter of my visit to Wanstead; and she was
very kind and womanly in her pity and regret for the loneliness and
poverty of Philip's sister.
"If she lacks work she shall have it from me," she said. "I don't
give Adolphine credit for employing her from any motive of remorse
about Philip Hay; indeed I doubt whether she had any knowledge
of his fate or yours. Why should he have told her or anyone beyond
the crimps who seized you? I can tell nothing; I never saw her since
that terrible day; I felt her arms around me, lifting me from the ground
and dragging me away, when you fell wounded, and the men seized you;
but that was all. He" (Margery rarely named her cruel seducer) "had
said Adolphine should carry the news of your marriage to her mistress,
and I suppose she did so; but I never knew. I have no notion whether
Lady Lestrange knows who I am; she would be the last to be told of her
husband's pursuit of me, though they say all the town knows that story."
"It is plain that Lady Lestrange has not found out Adolphine's
real character, for she employs her still, and her husband could hardly
force her to do that."
"I am not so sure, Robert; Mrs. Winbolt did not tell you that
Lady Lestrange continued her custom to her, though she had been
Lady Barbara's milliner, and had made her own wedding-clothes. Be
sure her husband would not permit her. I believe she is a lady of such
spirit, that if she had ever come to a knowledge of the truth, she would
have left him for ever, at any cost of publicity and scandal, and though
she must have left him a beggar."
This sounded strange and unlikely in my ears, to whom Dora had
ever appeared the impersonation of gentleness and timid yielding. But
Margery assured me she had heard enough of Lady Lestrange to feel
sure that the mere fact that she still remained under the same roof
with Sir Everard, no matter on what terms they lived,-and of that
she knew nothing,-was evidence quite conclusive and satisfactory that
she was still in profound ignorance of the truth. Even if by any chance
she had learned who Margery was, she doubtless believed her separated
from me, or that I was dead, as Margery herself had long believed.
With what sorrow, what love, what hatred, what wild impatience to
set myself right in her eyes, my heart swelled, as I thought of Dora's
being still deceived. How I longed for the moment when she should
hear the truth from my own lips, as I was resolved she must hear it.
Neither force nor stratagem should prevent that; no earthly power
should come between me and the clearing-up of the iniquitous mystery
which had condemned me to years of such unmerited suffering. When

her health should permit her reappearance in the gay resorts of the
town, I would throw myself in her way and force her to listen to me.
At any cost I would do this, on the very first opportunity that
should offer. In vain did Margery urge that time and patience might
put into my hands the additional weapon of a clue to the plot of which
the burglary, as we were both equally convinced, was the chief feature.
If the clue did not present itself before the opportunity, I would wait
for it no longer. When I told Margery what had occurred at Adol-
phine's show-rooms, she was greatly disturbed.
"I am thankful you did not meet him there," she exclaimed; “a
hostile encounter between you would be most unfortunate; would in
the present state of things put you hopelessly in the wrong. There is
nothing surprising to me in your finding Adolphine and him on terms
implying the utmost intimacy. She was his mistress, when he took
me away, he did not care that I should know it, not even from the first,
—and while he did maintain a poor pretence of liking for me. She was
only one of many victims, though I ought not to call her so; for a vicious
life came easily to her, and she was ready to be his accomplice in any-
thing. When she left his wife's service and took up the milliner's business,
it was with Lady Lestrange's money, no doubt; he set her up in it, and
I suppose she has been a tool of all his wickedness since, as before."
"No doubt; but now they are quarrelling. The rogues are falling
out, Margery."
She sat still, pondering for a while; then she looked up suddenly,
with a bright flush in her face, and caught my hands in hers, crying:
"There's the clue, Robert, there's the clue! It's a secret which
Adolphine knows, and he wants to buy the evidence from her. It's a
secret; it is indeed! I am sure it is; it has flashed across me this
moment. If it is the secret,-O Robert, if it should be the secret, and
Fate has sent you the clue! Repeat the words again, the very words
you heard. Don't say I am foolish; don't say this is a wildly romantic,
stagy notion; but repeat the very words."
Her energy, her eagerness, the intensity of her look and gesture, so
carried me away, that I hardly realised her meaning; but I obeyed her,
and recapitulated the words I had overheard, exactly as I had told them
to her before.
“Nothing shall induce me to give it up," she repeated. “It is a large
sum; I mean to have many such sums. There is danger but to you, not
to me. I am safe either way. Robert, it is the clue; I am sure it is.”
But I did not feel any such confidence. Considering the relations be-
tween Adolphine and Sir Everard Lestrange, and the woman's utterly
unscrupulous character, such as I had good reason to know it to be,
nothing could be more likely than that she held possession of more than
one guilty secret, which he would have been glad to purchase of her at
a heavy price; but why should this particular bargain have any reference
to me? If even it had such a reference, it might very well be to the


devilish device of the mock marriage between Margery and me in which
she had aided. But what could be less likely than that there should be
any question of that, or of me in any way, after the lapse of all these
years, during which their villany had been successful, and their victim,
having made no sign, doubtless forgotten? I reminded my foster-sister
that she and I, being occupied with the fact of my existence and return,
would naturally forget that nothing of the sort would be in the thoughts.
of our enemies. But Margery would not listen to me; she was uncon-
vinced. The idea had taken such hold of her as her impetuous nature
favoured; and when, on Pringle's coming to tell her it was time to go to
the theatre for rehearsal, she had to dismiss me, she repeated, as she
clasped my hand: "It is the clue, Robert; I know it is the clue."

CHAPTER XXXIX.
A MEETING AND ITS RESULTS.
At this time my mind was so entirely occupied with the scenes and
persons belonging at once to the past and the present, that I dwelt but
little on the image of my father and that encounter with him, which
assuredly was one of the strangest incidents of my life, which had
already had more than an ordinary share of romantic vicissitude. In-
deed, all that had befallen in Bengal already seemed distant and dream-
like, and it was very difficult to me to realise that I had actually lived
there so long, had seen such wonderful and terrible sights, and was
destined to return thither to fulfil a soldier's career, and doubtless rest
in an unknown grave in that distant land, of which its conquerors
knew, and cared to learn, so little. It was only when I was about
business for Colonel Clive or Mr. Watts, or when writing to them, that
my thoughts were with the later time and incidents of my life. My
meeting with my father, too, seemed dreamlike; and as I did not.
hear from him-though when a ship came in I went at once to Mr.
Swinfen to ask for the promised letter-it sometimes appeared I must
have fancied all the strange train of incidents, in the delirium which
I have heard said always comes with battle, even to old and seasoned
soldiers. I had written to him during my voyage home and since my
arrival, sending my letter to the address in the city of Paris which he
had given me, and relating to him very fully the particulars of my in-
terview with Mr. Blade, the contents of the box for which I had
driven a bargain, and my visit to Hauteville. I had a feeling, half
hope, half presentiment, that Hauteville might one day revert to the
old line; and I strove to rekindle my father's interest in the place,
dwelling upon such points as I knew must be most fresh in his remem-
brance, as they were in his boyhood most dear to his heart, and re-
lating the sad condition in which I had found old Anthony Grimshaw.
Captain Sangfroid had become so thorough a Frenchman, he had so
resolutely and completely cut himself adrift from the old life, I did


not hope, though I ardently wished, for much sympathy from him,
especially as Lady Barbara's death had severed the strongest link be-
tween him and England.
I was revolving these thoughts sadly enough while waiting for the
return of the messenger I had sent to inquire for Lady Lestrange, when
it occurred to me that I might have gained something if I had let
Mrs. Grimshaw know that Roderick Ainsleigh, the man whom she
hated so unrelentingly, towards whom she cherished an unsleeping
sense of injury, was still alive. Could the old feud between the ban-
ished prodigal, who was in my opinion unconscious of the existence of
the feelings he was believed to have trampled upon and betrayed, and
the harsh vindictive puritanical woman have been healed, if she had
been told that there still was a place for repentance and reparation,
there where she had long believed in only the hopeless silence and
separation of the grave? We are all apt to blame ourselves, when an
occasion is past, for not acting differently from what we have done, for-
getting that the time which has since elapsed has brought more know-
ledge; and this was ever a habit, a defect of my mind.
"I will try that, if all beside fails me," I thought; "I will essay
the striking of that rocky heart, perhaps some sweet waters may yet
flow from it. If, as they say, this woman once really loved him, she
must hear he still lives with relief."
My messenger returned and surprised me with the intelligence that
Lady Lestrange was so much better, she had gone out to take the air
in her coach, as far as the village of Kensington, which the fine ladies
affected, and where there was a noted place for cream and syllabub.
Her ladyship was not expected to return to St. James's-square that
night, but would lie at the house of a friend, one Mrs. Pendaroes, a
lady whom I came to know afterwards, in the lifetime of her second
husband, Dr. Delany. I knew the place where the coaches set down
their loads, and bethought me that I might ride thither, and catch
sight of Dora from a distance; for I did not purpose to accost her,
believing that she could not see me without some emotion, which
might be harmful to her.
The road to Kensington was quite gay with coaches and folks
a-horseback, for the weather was fine, and it was Whitsuntide. I rode
along, sometimes exchanging a salute or a word with an acquaintance,
until I neared the green in front of the palace, where a long line of
coaches was drawn up, and their fair occupants were taking the air,
attended by gentlemen or by their waiting-women. I gave my horse
to one of the fellows who plied at the gates for that purpose, and
entering, strolled about among the groups, but not for some time dis-
cerning her whom I sought. At length I turned aside into a glade, in
which there are some finely-grown trees, where the shade was pleasant,
and there I saw Lady Lestrange seated on the felled trunk of a tree
with a warm mantle wrapped round her, and a silk hood gathered about

her face. She was alone, save for the company of a pug-dog lying at
her feet, with a blue ribbon attached to his collar, which she jerked
now and then unconsciously, I thought, as I watched her unseen. How
my heart beat and my sight grew dim when I knew that this was
Dorothea, the only woman I had ever even fancied I loved, and while
I studied the effect which time-the time of separation and suffering,
which had been full of misery to me-had wrought upon the fragile
frame, the delicate beauty, I remembered so well! With the remem-
brance of every line and feature, every look and gesture, of Miss Hems-
ley as fresh in my mind as if I had parted from her but yesterday, I
gazed upon Lady Lestrange.
She was beautiful, more beautiful than she had been; but very
much changed. I could not trace in her appearance any likeness to
the picture which her servant's description of her habitual life and
Margery's remarks had caused me to draw in my fancy. She looked
as unlike a brilliant, fashionable, coquettish woman of the world as
she had looked in the old time at Hauteville. There was more self-
possession, an assured air of place and station, about her; but her added.
years might easily have produced that. As she sat, her head drooped
forward, and her eyes turned languidly towards the ground, her atti-
tude expressed weariness and dejection; and all the lines around the
delicate mouth confirmed that expression. Her rich luxuriant auburn
hair was raised high above her white forehead, and one long thick curl
fell at the side of her neck, under the cords of her hood. She still
refused, I perceived, to adopt the fashion of powder, and her fair cheek
was guiltless of paint or patch to hide its paleness or enhance its form.
Only a few hundred yards divided the place where she sat and that
whence I watched her from the broad path filled with promenaders, the
echoes of whose laughter, nay, even the swirl of the pebbles under
whose sweeping trains, reached the spot where each of us kept such
silence; but, nevertheless, the seclusion was perfect. The temptation
to speak to her, to forget her feebleness, to beseech her to listen to my
exculpation, to release myself from the pain of her contempt, to fulfil
the dream which had haunted me, to still the longing which had tor-
tured me in the far world, under the burning sun of Bengal, on the
waste of waters, and, more intolerably than ever, in the familiar yet
strange scenes of England,-was becoming too great for endurance.
In another moment I should have forgotten everything, save that she
was there, in bodily presence, before me, that the opportunity waited
for during long years was offering itself, when Dora arose, and after
glancing round, as if looking for some one's approach, walked straight
towards the place where I was. In little more than a minute we were
face to face, and she was standing, her eyes fixed, a half-uttered excla-
mation suspended upon her lips, as though she had been confronted by
a ghost. Another, and I was by her side, at her feet.
"Robert Ainsleigh!"


"Dora!"
I do not know what I said next. I do not remember the words in
which I told her what this meeting was to me; I do not know how I
phrased the prayer which I poured out with all the passion of that
long agony of suffering under injustice and wrong, the prayer that she
would hear me now-she who had listened to my enemies when I was
far away, and defenceless in their hands. I know that she stammered
out, "I believed you were dead; they told me it was almost certain
you were dead;" and that she covered her eyes with her hands and
shivered. I know that I led her back to the tree-trunk on which she
had been sitting, and that, though I was relieved, I was almost
frightened by the self-control she displayed. This was, indeed, a
marked result of time and the world's training very hard to me to
realise, as I saw her composed attitude and steadily-attentive face
before which I told my story, almost abashed, and at a disadvantage.
It had been such pain to me to realise the relation subsisting between
Dora and my arch enemy, that I had never faced the reality which
must arise when I should encounter her; I had not thought of the dif-
ficulty with which I must tell Dora the story of her husband's crime;
and now, when with her calm sorrowful worn face she confronted me,
the extent and nature of that difficulty came rushing to my mind with
a vision of the last time I had seen her, of the glance and the blush
which had acknowledged that she loved me as I loved her, and had
no thought of happiness beyond our union. I protest I never felt such
agony as there was in the swift vision of all this, and the sense that
she upon whom I was looking was the same, and yet the wife, the pro-
perty of the profligate scoundrel from whom, in that brief moment of
security, we had believed ourselves so safe.
There was nothing for me to do but, mastering by a supreme effort
of courage and will the rebellious emotions which threatened to render
this long-hoped-for interview useless, to tell my story with as little
vehemence, as much moderation, as possible, to her whose hand I had
pressed, whose lips I had kissed, as the hand and the lips of my affi-
anced wife. I think I did so; I think, if Everard Lestrange had been
there, within hearing, holden from speech, and forced to judge as for
another, he must have confessed that I said less than the truth. Dora
heard me in silence; and beyond the quivering of her eyelids, and the
close pressure of her intertwined fingers, she gave no sign of emotion,
of the keen and heart-stirring remembrance which must have been-or
she had been less than woman-in her mind. When I told her the
story of the Black Hole, she shrank and shuddered, and stretched out
her hand, as if imploring me to say no more; so I passed that over
lightly, and came to the account of Philip Hay's death, and the charge
he had bequeathed to me. Then I saw by her face that she knew some-
thing of this man. "You have heard of him before?" I said.
"Yes. I heard of him from the woman who, as you say, helped to

entrap you from Adolphine, then my waiting-woman, and in my dear
aunt Lady Barbara's closest confidence."
"What account did she give you of him?"
"That he was the low and unscrupulous fellow your story makes
him out, but that you employed him; that he was the agent of your
pleasures and-and vices."
"I see, I understand; the part he played for another he was said
to play for me. And you believed it?"
"What could I do?" Lady Lestrange spoke with dignified com-
posure, not with the smallest show of pleading or self-exculpation. "I
knew you had made an extraordinary marriage-extraordinary under
the circumstances; for there was no reason why you should have played
the hypocrite's part to me, and to her who had been a mother to me,
and surely the best of friends to you."
"God knows that is true!" I replied fervently; "and that this plot
was laid with such infernal villany, and carried out with such skill, no
one could be blamed for being deceived, you less than anyone. The
poor fellow who did me this great injury expiated it, as far as he was
able. But, Dora-Lady Lestrange-did you not doubt the truth of the
tale that was told you? did you not suspect there must have been some
villany at work to part us? Remembering that day on which we last
met, and I do not, cannot think you have forgotten it,-could you
believe that I had been so base, so false, so utterly unworthy?"
She grew very pale, but she resolutely kept her composure as she re-
plied, "I have not forgotten anything. I had suspicions; all the stronger
when I found that Lady Barbara could not be convinced that you had
not met with foul play. But Sir Marcus had such positive intelligence
of all that had occurred as was not to be disputed or set aside; and
your conduct to me was explained-" here she paused, though I hung
upon her words with intense impatience. "It is not fitting that, cir-
cumstanced as we are now, for ever parted, and in this world removed
from the same sphere, I should enter upon the explanation which was
given to me. It was very painful, very intolerable to me at the time;
but it is all over now."
"And you will not tell me? You will not give me the satisfaction,
the comfort of clearing myself from the treacherous lie, whatever it
may have been, which, for a time at least, you believed? I don't think
this is fair to me, Lady Lestrange."
"Then I will tell you, though I sought to avoid the pain and em-
barrassment; but perhaps it is your right to know. I was told that
you had cajoled me by a false representation of the affair of Margery
Hawker, and that you had used my reputed wealth as a means of
getting credit from your dupes, boasting of the heiress whom you were
about to wed, coupling my name with the low wagers which are among
the infamies of the day, and driving your trade in credulity successfully."
"And you believed all this? you, Dora, to whom I had unveiled


every thought; into whose hand I had put the clue to the mystery of
my foster-sister's disappearance! How much more feeble must your
love for me have been than mine for you! Who could have persuaded
me to think evil of you? Who could have diverted me from the en-
deavour to clear you from an accusation, and cast the lie in the slan-
derer's face?"
Her head drooped, and her face was hidden for a moment in her
hands; but the next she withdrew them, and replied with the quiet
dignity which had so impressed me in her manner: "It is worse than
useless that we should bandy reproaches now; it is vain as regards you,
and—and cruel as regards me. I cannot undo the past, nor rule the
future. I trust that before you is destined to be a prosperous one."
66
Prosperity has no meaning, no value for me," I said bitterly.
"Sir Everard Lestrange has played his game too well. Robbed of the
woman I loved-whom I love-of my betrothed wife, of my name and
character, degraded in the eyes of my best friend; robbed, as I believe
God in heaven knows, of my rightful inheritance, a wanderer and an
outcast in a distant land, finding the means to live through the patron-
age of strangers,-what can he desire more? The prosperity you coldly
wish me, Lady Lestrange, can never be mine; but one compensation,
one solace, one boon may be-shall be, if I have life and senses left me
long enough to win it."
"You mean revenge."
"I do mean revenge. For this, as well as for a sight of you-for
the face I have wearied and longed to see, the voice I have languished
and pined to hear-I have come back to my native land, to endure the
revival of all the old bitterness, the resuscitation of all the old wrong,
the pangs of all the old pain. Do you think I am in truth the mean
and wretched creature they have made me out to you; that I should
tamely bear the unsurpassed evil this man has wrought against me;
that I should not exhaust every conceivable means of bringing his crime
home to him, and disgrace him in the eyes of the world, which admires
the profligate indeed, but would hardly tolerate the convicted confe-
derate and employer of thieves?"
I had spoken with extreme heat and vehemence, goaded to exasper-
ation by the sight of her, and the ever-present sense of the impassable
barrier which divided me from her. She heard me with quivering lips,
her forced composure evidently near its overthrow.
"If you could prove all you say; if you had convincing evidence
of all you believe; if you did your worst against Sir Everard Lestrange,
-what would you gain by it? How would you be the better for it,
Robert Ainsleigh ?"
"How should I be the better for it? In position, in fortune, in
feeling; in the triumph of punishing an unscrupulous enemy, of un-
masking a horrible plot, of bringing ruin upon one who has brought
worse than ruin upon me—"

"And who is my husband-"
I started at the tone of her voice, and hurriedly drew near her, but
she stopped me with a gesture, and continued:
"Yes-who is my husband! When you should have had your way,
when your will should have been done, and exposure, disgrace, ruin
wrought-granting that a miracle came to your aid and helped you to
do it your victim-a righteous victim, it may be, I say naught of that
-would be none the less my husband; I should be the sufferer too.
You cannot injure him without injuring me; your vengeance, whether
you will or not, must needs be two-edged. Do you want any revenge
on me, Robert? Hush! do not answer me yet; let me speak. I be-
lieved an evil tale of you, and I smarted under the terrible mortifica-
tion of believing myself to be cajoled, betrayed, deserted, and insulted.
Then came the sight of my dear aunt's misery, the knowledge of the
deadly slights that were put on her, the daily, hourly pressure that was
exerted to wring my fortune from my grasp, for the relief of the un-
avowed necessities of Sir Marcus and his son. You had left me in utter
ignorance of your fate. How was I to know or surmise that that was
not your doing? Whence was a vision to come to me of you, a kid-
napped prisoner? I believe now that the hour came when Lady
Barbara learned the truth, and that the knowledge killed her-when it
was too late to save me."
"To save you, Dora!" I exclaimed. "Then you did not marry
him willingly-you did not forget me-it was a sacrifice?"
Her sweet pure eyes met mine, the tears were glittering in them
now, and she was more like the timid girl my Dora had been in the
old times, which seemed less far away.
"I did not marry him willingly; I had not forgotten you, and he
knew it. I was not false either to you or to him. Only this means
remained of rewarding my dear aunt's constant goodness to me; only
this means of restoring her peace for the few remaining years of her
life, as I fondly hoped, little thinking, little fearing, that only days
remained. Yes, it was a sacrifice. There is no shame or evil in my
telling you so; you perhaps have a right to know it. If your revenge
falls upon Sir Everard, it must fall upon me, his most unhappy wife.
Is that your purpose, Robert? Have you come back from India to be
revenged upon me also?"
66
Upon you, Dora! you, the utterly guiltless one-you, who have
suffered perhaps as much as I have, perhaps even more, for I at least
have been free, while you have been bound to a loveless marriage!"
I saw the quick shudder which passed over her, as she replied:
"I think I have suffered, if not as much as you, or more, at least
all I am capable of suffering. I cannot imagine any human being to
whom life is of less worth. If you had ever so fixed a purpose of
revenge upon me, Fate has forestalled you, and worked it out for you."
"I could lay down my life for you to-day as readily as ever; I


would bear anything man could endure to insure your happiness. Re-
venge on you! surely you could not suspect me of a thought so base ?"
"Not seriously, I believe; but in your wrath against your enemy
you forgot that you must implicate me."
I had forgotten it, and I felt ashamed, as her clear gaze rested on
me, of the calculation I had made, that every means of injuring Sir
Everard, except the manly and straightforward resource of a duel, was
open to me, without involving a separation from her.
"and
"You will remember this for the future," she continued;
remember also that the injury I did you was not voluntary, and that
it has been punished-awfully punished. I do not ask you to abandon
your purpose for my sake, but only to take into account its effect on me."
"Just Heaven! that you should be in that villain's power!"
"Even so, for I am his wife. Now, Robert, hear me. Into the
history of my marriage it is not fitting I should enter with you. The
tongue of public rumour has doubtless told you it is not a pleasant nor
a profitable one. Let us be silent upon it. My fortune, for which
Mr. Lestrange married me and ruined you, is securely settled, by the
wise care of Lady Barbara. I have no child, thank God; and the dis-
position of it rests entirely with myself. Hitherto Sir Everard has
had no doubt-and, indeed, with reason-but that I shall devise all I
possess to him, for I have no relations, and mere spite is not in my
rule of life and right; but though often urged to do so by him and his
lawyer, I have not as yet made any will. If you will give up this
purpose-which I cannot but regard as wild and difficult to impossi-
bility of proving that Lady Barbara made a will in your favour, which
was destroyed by Sir Everard's means, I will bequeath my fortune—
not to you, because that would tarnish my name, which I would have
to smell sweet above the earth when I am below it--but to Roderick
Ainsleigh, your father, the rightful heir to Hauteville. I am a young
woman, your father is an old man-granted; but he is likely to live
long, and I am not."
"Dora, what do you mean?"
"Just what I say. I am very tired of my life; and though that
may be, without entailing any near prospect of escaping from the bur-
den, I don't think it is so in my case. Since I have seen you, and
heard the truth, I feel as if my escape must come soon, and thus alone
can I do you any small measure of justice. Your father will not re-
turn to England; therefore Hauteville may be replaced to him by
money, which he and you may spend where and how you please. Do
not protest against this, Robert, my mind is quite made up; nothing
you can say will alter my decision."
"Nothing on earth would induce my father or myself to profit by
your generosity. This is the wildest, most impossible scheme ever to
have entered your thoughts. I will renounce anything, do anything
bid me; and you will have a long life, and I trust a more peace-
you

ful one, now that the dreadful mystery which parted us is cleared up.
Here, Dora, at your feet, I renounce every sentiment but that of life-
long devotion to you; I relinquish every project of vengeance-"
me.
"And yet I propose to you the surest of all," she said, interrupting
"What could you do which would punish him so surely as he
will be punished when he thinks himself well rid of his puling fas-
tidious wife, whom he hates for all the evil secrets which speak to him
out of her pale face; free to marry where he will-the player-woman he
raves about, if it pleases him-but with not one penny of my father's
gold to buy his pleasures any more withal."
Her eyes were sparkling with anger now, and I saw in this sudden
passion the natural outburst of feeling in a slighted, insulted wife,
though she cared nothing for the perjured villain. How beautiful she
looked in her disdainful wrath!
"It is impossible, Dora, quite impossible. You shall have my full-
est, most implicit obedience; but this thing cannot be. It is my right
I was striving to recover-my right which I believe Hauteville to be,
not alone by descent, but by bequest. And though I renounce it
utterly at your bidding, and because I would not have the shadow of
that man's disgrace reflected upon you, there is nothing that can be
substituted for it. Say no more about it; I am more than satisfied
that Fate has had so much mercy on me as this one meeting grants.
And now one question: do you know who this Mrs. Hunter is, to
whom you alluded just now?"
"The beautiful actress? No. How should I know ?"
"Did not Madame Adolphine, the viper, ever mention her to you?"
"No, she would not dare; though I have no doubt she would be a
ready go-between for her, as she was before for another."
"Not for another, Dora. Mrs. Hunter is the same: Mrs. Hunter
is Adolphine's dupe, Sir Everard's victim, my foster-sister, whom you
were persuaded to believe was my wife. The beautiful actress is no
other than Margery Hawker."
Lady Lestrange listened with amazement while I told her of my
meeting with Margery, and the reconciliation I had effected between
her and her parents by the discovery of the certificate of her marriage
with Philip Hay. She fell into a softened mood on this, and said she
envied poor Margery. That these two should meet was of course im-
possible; but Lady Lestrange charged me with a message of kindness
for Margery, which I undertook to deliver that very evening, for I pur-
posed to attend the theatre with a party from the Temple.
We had spoken rapidly, and my narrative, for all its pitifulness and
moment, had not taken long to tell; but time had passed nevertheless,
and it was as strange as fortunate that the solitude in which Dora and
I had found ourselves had remained so long unbroken. The shadows
were lengthening, and the sound of voices came more rarely from the
broad walk hard by, while a constant rumble in the distance told of the

departure of the promenaders and syllabub-consumers. There came a
pause in our discourse, which I think we both felt was dangerous.
Then Dora rose and stood beside the fallen tree, and I stood by her,
waiting for the words which I expected, and dreaded. At last they came :
"Farewell, Robert. I am thankful that we have met, and for your
promise. It is made in the spirit I knew of old for yours-brave, frank,
loyal. I accept it. I know you will not harm the man who has
wronged you, and I believe you will prosper in all your life, and he be
foiled. When I can think of all this alone and in quiet, I shall un-
derstand it better, and consolation will come out of it for me. But
you and I must meet no more."
"Meet no more, Dora! You surely cannot mean it. Meet no more,
after all these years, after I have made every concession to your will,
have promised to obey you in all things, to abandon the purpose of my
life at your bidding! And why?"
She was standing with the folds of her mantle wrapped closely
around her, one small hand, covered with a silk mitten, was clenched
upon the cords of her hood under her chin; her pug-dog was pulling
impatiently at the string held in the other. She looked full at me for
one moment before she walked swiftly away, as she said:
"Because I am Sir Everard Lestrange's wife, and have never
ceased to love you, Robert Ainsleigh."
CHAPTER XL.
MY CAUSE IS JUDGED.
It was some time after the hour named for meeting when I reached
the Shakespeare Tavern that evening, and I found the party preparing
to proceed without me to Drury Lane. They had dined, and the talk
was somewhat noisy when I entered, with a face so grave and troubled
that I was immediately bantered upon my appearance. But I was
indifferent to the jokes,-which were remarkable rather for their weight
than for their humour,-and indeed kept my engagement at all only
because Margery had especially desired that I should go that night.
She was to play Lady Anne; and was anxious about it, as she had
had sundry tiffs with Mr. Garrick at rehearsal; and she entertained a
notion that there was a cabal in formation against her; for my foster-
sister was not above some of the weaknesses of her profession, though
she kept clear of its vices. The topic of conversation was Mrs. Hunter;
and there was evidently something new circulating. I was quickly put
in possession of it.
"So the mystery is cleared up. I suppose you have heard it too,
Ainsleigh?" said one of the party as I entered.
What mystery? I have heard nothing."
"The secret about Mrs. Hunter, O thou dull fellow ! Dost not
know no one could find out who she was or whence she came before

Davy picked her up and brought her to London? Lestrange pretended
to be better acquainted with her history than anyone else; but nobody
believed him, not even Selwyn or Horry Walpole, though they seldom
doubt a bad story of anybody, especially a woman.
But it is all out
now, it appears. Vernon has heard all about it."
"All about what? You seem to forget that I do not know what
you are talking of."
66
"Well, then, that Mrs. Hunter is really a married woman, or rather,
really a widow; the widow of a man named Hay, who was a sort of
led-captain of Lestrange's some years ago, but who was killed in Bengal.
It appears she told the story herself at the theatre, where that half-
mad actor Johnson made a disturbance last night, and was all for pis-
tolling Lestrange, or cutting his throat, or amending his morals in
some such decisive way; and that she desired her name might be
altered in the play-bills, and that she might henceforth be addressed
as Mrs. Hay. Vernon says there is as much talk about it as if the
Jacobites had turned up again, or Fox had foresworn cards and curaçoa.
Mrs. Hunter-Hay, I mean-says she can challenge Lestrange to deny
the truth of the story, and for my part I believe it; there is nothing
in her manner or conduct unbecoming an honest woman."
"You may believe it," I replied; "I can confirm the truth of the
story, of which I know all the particulars. I was acquainted with
Mrs. Hay's husband, and heard of his marriage from his own lips."
So Margery had taken the step I had dictated with more precipita-
tion than I expected; and the entire renunciation of my vengeance on
Sir Everard-in accordance with the wish of Dorothea-was thus ren-
dered impossible. Was I sorry or glad? I could not quite make up
my mind, still confused and agitated by the meeting which had
crowned so many years of waiting and longing. The subjugation of
every thought and feeling to the gentle rule of the woman I loved
was, perhaps, not so complete, but that I was secretly, half unavow-
edly, pleased to think she was in a measure disobeyed through no de-
liberate intent of mine.
The house was full; the numerous audience included the most
fashionable and distinguished personages, and almost every man who
had any place in art, literature, or criticism. It was composed very
much as I had seen it first, on that memorable night when I had re-
cognised Margery; and the party to which I belonged had scarcely
taken their places, ere I perceived that Sir Everard Lestrange was
present. He with three other persons-none of them known to me—
occupied a box within a convenient distance of the stage, on the right
side of the theatre. Sir Everard sat forward, intent upon the stage.
I thought he looked old and haggard; and there was a peculiar rest-
lessness about him, which my companions noticed, and which one of
them coarsely assigned to the baronet's habitual indulgence in brandy.
"I should not wonder if Lestrange carried her off," said Captain

Harley to the man next beside me. "He looks quite desperate, and
they say he is so. 'Gad, what a ruffianly, roistering look the fellow
has! Selwyn says he's mad, and the town will be diverted some day
by an account of how a baronet cut his throat, or hanged himself, all
for love of a player-woman."
66
Perhaps he will be sufficiently considerate to give Selwyn notice
of the event, that he may go and see him use the knife, or adjust the
cord. It would be a new sensation, and quite a diversion for George."
Their talk disgusted and jarred upon me. Dora's pale sad face-
the real face, that which was not dressed with smiles for the world—
was before me; and the remembrance that she was his came over me
with more sickening intensity than ever. What did it all matter?
What good was it? Even the interview of this very day, had it gained
me anything? Yes, it had gained me much a priceless boon-some-
thing to be cherished when this feverish interlude should be over, and
once more my life should have resolved itself into a long lapse of re-
trospection and purposeless labour-the assurance that Dora believed
me, that the falsehood of my enemies was defeated and exposed, and
that she loved me!
Only twice had I heard that avowal from her lips: once, coyly
uttered on that day of our brief bliss of betrothal; once, deliberately
spoken with the purposeful gravity of a woman of the world not to
be surprised into saying [anything other or more than her intention.
In the first utterance there had been hope doomed to a swift extinction;
in the second there was consolation. The stern moralist might blame,
might cry shame upon me that I could find comfort in the assurance of
a love whose privileges I could never claim; but I cared not. Dora was
safer, if not less unhappy, in her perilous life as an unloved, a neglected
wife, with this cherished feeling for me in her heart, than she would
have been without it. This may have been the hollowest casuistry,
but it satisfied me then, and I looked at my enemy with a secret sense
of triumph after all. He had ruined her hopes, got possession of her,
spent her money, neglected and insulted her, made himself a by-word
for his profligacy even among profligates, put the affront which is
hardest for a woman to bear upon her, but he had not quite broken her
heart. He must have had it in his keeping to have done that; and it
was in mine. That Sir Everard Lestrange was mightily upset and
discomposed by something was apparent; and that he was much re-
marked and talked about was no less so.
"He is in the toils," I thought; "and though he cannot lay his
hand upon the barrier which closes him in, he knows it is there, and
cannot breathe freely in the suspense of a shapeless undefined fear.
If he has heard that Margery claims to be a widow-and as others
have heard so, no doubt he has then he must have the dread that I
am living, and have returned before him. Perhaps he knows all the
truth from Mrs. Grimshaw, or has heard of me casually, though he has

made no sign. He knows his design against my life has failed, and
that I have been preserved to come back and thwart him.”
My thoughts were so busy with things present indeed, but external
to the stage, that my mind hardly took in the play. Mr. Garrick met
with his accustomed enthusiastic reception, and no doubt he played
the crook-backed king to perfection, as he ever did. Margery's atti-
tude of deep hopeless mourning-the beauty of her face, the majesty
of her figure, and the taste of her attire-rendered her first appearance
as the Lady Anne a triumph from the moment of her entrance; and
I did so far rouse myself from the preoccupation of my thoughts, as
to watch with wondering admiration the extraordinary skill with which
she personated the wronged princess-the widowed and orphaned vic-
tim of Gloucester-with which she flung defiant scorn at him in reply
to his "Sweet saint,"-heaped up every vehement tone, gesture, and
look of loathing and abhorrence, and then gradually sunk into languid
persuaded listening to his glozing tongue. Margery surpassed herself
in beauty and in grace on this occasion; there was more fire in her
eyes, greater dignity in her form, a more ringing, thrilling tone in
her voice, which had always been as sweet as the notes of the thrushes
that hopped about the old warrener's lodge. I knew whence the fire
came, and the added music, and what it was that inspired her when she
denounced the murderer and villain; I knew it was not all acting,
and that she was as much occupied with the realities of the true drama
of our lives as I was. While Margery was on the stage, Sir Everard
Lestrange did not once remove his gaze from her. To the casual ob-
server his demeanour would have appeared precisely the same as on the
former occasion, when I had seen him make his pursuit of Mrs. Hunter
patent to the town. But I noted a difference in his look, as he fol-
lowed her every movement. I had seen before that lurking gleam of
evil anger and hate under the smooth sneering polish of the fine gen-
tleman; and Sir Everard's face had lost some of the finesse of its lines,
and was no longer so serviceable a mask as it had been.
"He would do her a mischief if he could," I thought; "the vague
fear she has excited in him is rendering him desperate."
The drama within a drama was thus going on, and as yet I had no
reason to believe that Sir Everard had perceived me. My attention
was fixed upon Margery, as the leave-taking between the Queen and
the Lady Anne was spoken:
"Farewell, thou woful welcomer of glory!"
"Adieu, poor soul, that takest thy leave of it!"
and I was gazing with delight on that beautiful, dignified, despairing
face, drinking-in the accents of compassion and foreboding in which
she spoke the valediction, and in order to do so more thoroughly was
leaning forward in an attitude which was doubtless more absorbed than
elegant. At the moment when the Duchess speaks, and just before the

general exit, as her grace's representative—I forget who played the part
-said to the Lady Anne,
"Go thou to Richard, and good angels guard thee !"
I shifted my position, and became aware that Sir Everard Lestrange
had seen and recognised me. He was looking at me, his right hand
tightly gripping the front of the box, with the rage and malice of a
fiend, without any attempt to conceal or control the passion in his face.
I steadily returned his look, holding his wicked eyes with mine for a
few moments, and then tranquilly resumed my observation of Margery.
She was in the act of moving off, when a sudden frightful change came
over her features, and uttering a wild shriek, she rushed frantically
towards the back of the stage, with her arms stretched out. At the
same moment, and amid an extraordinary spontaneous movement in
the house, a pistol-shot rang sharply from some unseen point, and Sir
Everard Lestrange fell forward, his head striking heavily against the
front of the box, stone dead. I heard the shot, I saw the fall; I saw
Margery totter for one instant, and then, with an appalling scream,
drop lifeless on the ground. After this ensued a scene of horrible ex-
citement and confusion which baffles all attempt at description, which
was almost maddening at the time, and which comes back to me now,
by an effort of my memory, with all its wild whirl of emotion.
In an instant the stage was crowded; and I was conscious some-
how, though I was fighting my way through the seething multitude,
that Mr. Garrick had lifted Margery from among the trampling feet
thronging round her. I instantly lost sight of her, and was myself
carried along with the rush of people, with whom the men employed
about the theatre were vainly struggling to keep them back, towards
the place where the murdered man lay. Nothing more terrible can be
conceived than the shrieks of the fainting women-some of whom pite-
ously implored to be taken out, which was well-nigh impossible, and
others demanded in agony what had happened, being additionally
frightened by the belief that the theatre was on fire-the press and
noise, the shouts of the people in the galleries, and the distress of those
immediately surrounding the corpse.
The bullet had done its work effectually. The first alarm and cry
for a doctor was answered by two surgeons, for whom a way was made,
and who raised up the murdered man, and laid him upon a bench
while they examined the wound, amid indescribable clamour and con-
fusion. The aim had been awfully accurate and true. Sir Everard
Lestrange had been shot through the heart.
They made a way for the bearers of the dead, and he was carried
on to the stage, where his limbs were decently composed; while the
house was emptied by the officials with the assistance of the watch,
and intelligence of the dreadful occurrence spread rapidly outside the
theatre, and was despatched by Mr. Garrick's messenger to the proper

authorities. In the midst of the confusion my mind occupied itself
with Dora. How was she to learn the awful truth? who would tell it
to her? how would she take it? I felt that there would be such inde-
licacy, such impropriety in the information being conveyed by me, that
I could not venture to carry it, though I could, perhaps, best have
spared her the shock which must accompany any mere perfunctory com-
munication. If even in that scene I felt the rapid recollection that
this event meant freedom for her, was I so very much to blame? I
protest it was long before I remembered that my own injuries had been
fearfully avenged; that my arch enemy was a dead man, with no power
to harm me now, or longer to enjoy the inheritance of which he had
despoiled me.
It was not then, but afterwards, that I realised the awful sudden-
ness of this man's death; that I understood how only an instant had
intervened between that look of deadly, devilish malignity with which
his eyes had met mine and the motionless mask of death, the seal
which for ever shut them from all expression henceforth; how only an
instant had sufficed to change the strong man, full of fierce and unholy
passion, into a heap of senseless clay. When the crowd had been dis-
persed, and only a group of men whispering together stood upon the
darkened stage, the indescribable solemnity of the scene came upon
me in all its intensity, and I felt the awfulness of the power of the
great Disposer of events, together with the littleness and feebleness
of all my own projects and designs.
I know not how I learned that the murderer was in custody. I
had known at once that the poor infatuated creature Johnson must be
the man, and had carried in my mind, through all the confusion and
uproar, an impression of what had been said about him at the Shake-
speare. Rumour had run wild before the house was cleared concerning
the hand which had done the deed, and every kind of false statement was
afloat; but to those who really knew anything of the circumstances, the
thing was plain enough. Johnson had been drinking heavily during
the day, and there were many witnesses to the state of excitement in
which he had been in the greenroom on the previous night. There
was talk, too, of a personal altercation between him and Sir Everard
when the latter was leaving the theatre; and he had uttered the wildest
threats and imprecations against the unhappy victim of his insane
frenzy in the hearing of the crowd and of many of the officials of the
theatre. It appeared that he had not made any attempt to escape, but
was found, the discharged pistol stuck into his belt-for he was dressed
in the stage costume of one of King Richard's soldiers, prepared to go
on in the Bosworth scene-among the crowd around Margery when
Mr. Garrick lifted her up, and had her carried to her dressing-room.
Being roughly seized and handled, he exclaimed, "Don't hurt me!
don't hurt me! I will go with you quietly enough!" and while they
strictly guarded him, waiting the coming of the Bow-street officers,

he sat still, smiling in a vacant sort of way, and muttering to him-
self, but not displaying any emotion of fear, distress, or curiosity.
All this I learned afterwards and piecemeal. My first interest and
anxiety were for Margery, who was attended by some women, who, kind
souls, though sorely disturbed in general by jealousy of her beauty and
talent, and envy of her success and popularity, now vied with each
other in rendering her service. I succeeded in gaining admittance to
her dressing-room, and found her in an alarming state of hysterical
disturbance, and being with difficulty recovered from one fainting-fit
only to fall into another. I took her hand, and spoke to her quietly;
and I am sure she knew me, though she could not for a while control
the wandering of her senses. The first articulate words she spoke were:
"Is he taken? Have they caught him?" She alluded, as I knew, to
Mr. Johnson; and I answered her at once that he was in custody.
"Poor wretch!" she murmured; "it is my fault-it is all my fault!"
I whispered an entreaty that she would be silent and cautious,
urging her to remember that we were not alone; and then hastened
her removal to her lodgings, whither one of the women volunteered to
accompany her. In order to dispose at once of the curiosity which my
presence and interference excited, I told the bystanders that I was
Mrs. Hay's nearest relative. She was soon restored to sufficient com-
posure and strength to admit of her being carried to a hackney-coach
at the stage-door, which was surrounded by an eagerly expectant crowd,
among whom a number of wild and various rumours were in active
circulation. We lifted Margery, nearly stupefied by this time, into the
coach, and drove away from the theatre, where so terribly real a tragedy
had just been enacted, and where the stage was still in the awful occu-
pation of the body of the murdered man.
While Mrs. Pringle and the kind soul who had come with us from
the theatre were getting Margery into her bed, I went in search of
Dr. James, whom I was so fortunate as to find in Brick-court, whither
he had gone to see Goldsmith, whose rooms he found full of people
come to tell the novelist the news of the catastrophe at Drury-lane.
I was beset with questions, and escaped, taking the good doctor with
me, only by assuring the company that Mrs. Hay was dangerously ill,
and her need of Dr. James's services imminent. On our way to Mar-
gery's lodgings I told him sufficient of the circumstances to explain the
extreme and terrible effect of the assassination which she had witnessed
upon Mrs. Hay.
"No doubt she saw the man levelling his pistol at Sir Everard,"
said Dr. James, "when, as you say, she screamed, and ran towards the
back of the stage, before the shot was fired."
"So I explain her scream; but she has not told me anything
coherently as yet."
"The fellow is a madman, of course?"
"I know very little of him, and he certainly seemed to me to be


under the influence of a monomania; but I never dreamed of its turn-
ing to murder."
"Just so," said the doctor dryly; "one never dreams of things
which happen. Now murder, and murder done in this precise manner,
is exactly what I should have expected such a monomania to turn
into. But I suppose nothing of the kind will be taken into rational
consideration, and the town will have the grand diversion of this poor
fellow's hanging. I protest, Mr. Ainsleigh, there is in our system of
law upon such matters a conspiracy against common sense."
I shook my head, but did not reply. I did not feel at all certain
that Johnson was mad when he shot Sir Everard Lestrange. I was
not disposed to regard him as more insane than any man who yields
to the dominion of hatred and jealousy, the prime incentives to most
desperate crimes. I shrank from the thought of the punishment which,
in all probability, must befall poor Johnson, but I could not say that I
did not believe him to deserve it.
Arrived at our destination, Dr. James took his patient in hand,
and looked very grave about her. There was something more than the
shock the matter, he said; she had feverish symptoms, and he did not
doubt was about to have a fit of illness. While he spoke thus to me
apart, Margery had fallen into a restless dozing state, and was moaning
and grinding her teeth.
"Who are these with her?" asked Dr. James.
I told him only her waiting-woman and Mrs. Carteret from the
theatre. He said she must have more skilful tending. I thought of
her mother; I remembered how she had nursed me in many a childish
malady, and how I had seen her, indefatigable and transfigured out of
all her roughness and homeliness into the perfection of deft gentleness,
when my foster-father lay sick of a bad fever, which ensued upon a
hurt he had sustained in pursuing his woodman's craft. Yes, Madge
Hawker should be brought to her daughter's sick-chamber; there the
reconciliation should be effected. I knew honest Jack would not oppose
that, and how thankful I was that I had his letter to inspire me with
confidence now! I told Dr. James that I should be able to procure for
Mrs. Hay the best of nurses-her own mother-and he went away,
having given many directions, and urged me to expedition.
Margery had some strange knowledge of my presence in all the
confusion and oppression of her growing illness; and just as I was
going away to procure a postchaise and start for Hauteville with the
dawn, she called me distinctly. I returned to her bedside, and found
her sensible, but too much exhausted for violent emotion.
"I know it all," she whispered; "I remember it all. O Robert,
I shall never forget it—his mad, mad face! The instant I caught
sight of it, I saw his purpose in it; yes, I did, before I saw the pistol.
His eyes were full of murder and madness. He threatened Sir Everard
the day before, and threatened me. The unhappy wretch thought I

was yielding. Someone about the theatre, to torment him, pretended
he had carried a letter from me to Sir Everard. The poor wretch came
to me this morning-he was mad then-he raved and swore; I declared
he was drunk, and shut the door on him. O that I had not done so—
that I had listened to him, and persuaded him, and denied it! But I
was provoked, and weary of him, and sad, and I had no patience. All
day I had a presentiment of evil, and it grew and grew into blackness
towards the evening, and I could hardly face the audience. But it
went off; and I did my best, and felt at my best until I turned to go
off, and saw him standing on a bench just beside the scene, raised
above me, and looking down—not at me, at the other—with such awful
murderous eyes! O Robert, I shall never forget them-I shall see
them all my life! I knew it all before the shot came-before the
wretched man fell; it seemed an eternity, that one instant of horror,
when I knew it and could not stop him. Two lives! O my God,
two lives!"
She hid her face in her hands, and rocked herself to and fro in
agony, which I hastened to calm by the administration of medicines,
and she soon lay still and exhausted. I then left her, and went my
way to my lodgings, to provide myself with money, feeling giddy and
bewildered by the events and emotions of this terrible night.
The early morning beheld me on my way to Willborough in a post-
chaise, full of impatience at the inevitable duration of the journey; but
I soon sank into a deep sleep, from which it was difficult to arouse me
at the end of the first stage.
This portion of my story cannot be told in detail. They for whom
I am writing these records will be able to imagine the scene which
awaited me, and the feelings it inspired; the difficulty I had in making
the circumstances which had occurred intelligible to such simple honest
folk as Jack Hawker and his wife. The news of the murder had been
transmitted by the drivers of my chaise from one stage to another, and
was made known at Willborough while I took the short cut through
the woods to the warrener's lodge in the dimness of the evening; for
though I had travelled with the utmost speed, it was a long day's
journey. I did not propose to take any rest beyond the brief interval
which Mrs. Hawker's preparations must occupy, or to go near the house.
Mrs. Grimshaw might hear the intelligence of Sir Everard's justly-re-
tributive fate from someone else; it was no part of my business to in-
form her. There was clamour in the quiet village when Jack Hawker
and his wife and I made our appearance; but there was scant time for
questioning, for the horses were ready, according to my orders, and I
was soon upon the road again with my bewildered and weeping com-
panion.


