CHAPTER XVI. AN HISTORICAL RETROSPECT.
I BEGAN my labours as clerk, or secretary, to Mr. Holwell with a hearty
desire to render good service to the one friend I had found on this far
foreign shore, and at once plunged into the entangled mass of accounts
it was my business to examine.
The zemindarship is an office of double duties, and involves two
separate functions, distinct and almost wholly independent of each
other. The zemindar is not only judge of the Court of Cutcherry, but
he is also superintendent and collector of the East India Company's
revenues; and it was in this latter capacity that Govindram Metre, in
his post of standing deputy, had enjoyed ample opportunity of amass-
ing a fortune at the Company's expense.
The rapid rotation of the English zemindarship, which office changed
hands two or three times in twelve months, had thrown all the power
into this fellow's hands; since the superior officer, whose deputy he
was, had no time to learn the details of his office, and little inclination
to enter laboriously into the duties of a position he was to hold for so
brief a period. Mr. Holwell's suspicions of this man's integrity had
been aroused before his voyage to England, while the attention of the
Court of Directors had also been drawn to sundry depredations and
abuses committed by this official. At the request of the court, Mr.
Holwell had taken pains to explain the nature of the zemindarship to
the ruling powers at home; and he now returned invested with full
authority as zemindar, and not to be removed from his office without
express orders from England, since no proper investigation of the
deputy's abuses could be possible while the head-office fluctuated by
rotation as heretofore. Once invested with full powers, Mr. Holwell
spared no labour in his task of cleansing this Augean stable of foul
accountancy.
It would be but dry work to enter into the details of Govindram
Metre's defalcations. Nothing could be more iniquitous than his
system of embezzlement; and while the office of head zemindar had
been a fluctuating one, nothing could be less liable to detection, since
not one of the natives, from the highest to the lowest, durst with im-
punity have given umbrage to him, and 'tis they who alone could have
explored the dark and intricate mazes in which he had so long con-
cealed himself from the eye of justice.
Amongst his other functions it was his duty to dispose of the pottahs

or leases, which apportioned the Company's farms for the space of one
year. These pottahs should have been disposed of by public outcry or
auction in the Cutcherry in the presence of the zemindar; but instead
of being thus offered to public competition, the farms were sold pri-
vately at Govindram Metre's own house at such prices as he chose to
assign to them. All the best of these he bought himself, under fictitious
names, and immediately resold at a profit of from forty to sixty per
cent. This infamous transaction, repeated annually for ten years, and
involving several estates, had alone enabled him to amass a large for-
tune; but this was only one species of fraud amongst many. On the
monthly charge of servants, on charges for repairing the Cutcherries or
court-houses, for repairing roads, and on other items, this knavish ras-
cal's embezzlements amounted to thousands.
Govindram Metre's summary dismission from his too profitable
office was an act of Mr. Holwell's in which the Court of Directors at
home promptly concurred; but the investigation of frauds so compli-
cated, and the exposure of a system of plunder as artful as it was
infamous, was a work of years. To discover the black zemindar's em-
bezzlements was one thing, to prove them was another and far more
arduous labour. Every obstacle by which the genius of dishonesty
could hinder the progress of justice was placed in our way by this
arch plunderer. A complete retrospective examination of his accounts
was impossible, for we were politely informed that the white ants had
destroyed some papers, while others had been washed away in a great
storm. In spite of all opposition on the part of the culprit and his
slavish instruments, Mr. Holwell did, however, contrive to lay before
the Directors a detailed statement of the frauds to which their property
had been subject; while the immediate and remarkable augmentation
of the revenues under his charge fully proved that his discoveries were
of no hypothetical character. It was reserved for this gentleman in the
future to prove how small is the gratitude of princes, or of companies,
and to drink to the dregs that cup of neglect so frequently offered to
the lips of the faithful public servant.
Before I had been many months an inmate of Mr. Holwell's house,
I had the satisfaction of finding that my services were of real value to
this kind friend and master. He honoured me with much confidence;
and I, for my part, told him my own story without the smallest reser-
vation, save on the one subject of Phil Hay's treachery. Meanwhile,
although our life at Calcutta was monotony itself, stirring events were
taking place elsewhere; and Major Lawrence, with his brave young
subordinate, Robert Clive, was teaching Dupleix that French ambi-
tion was not to be for ever unopposed by British enterprise.
But before proceeding farther with this narrative, it may be well
for me to give some brief description of the condition of Hindostan and
her rulers, as I received it from the lips of my well-informed patron,
Mr. Holwell.

"You must accept all that you have heard and read of the Great
Mogul and his absolute power as a page of past history that ended with
the death of Aurungzebe. When that master-spirit sank in the grave,
the soul of Timur expired with him. It is not fifty years since that
great man died, at ninety-four years of age; and indeed it seems as if
to such unscrupulous and commanding genius there belongs a power
that can keep death himself at bay and prolong life beyond its natural
limit; and in that half-century seven emperors have sat on the musnud
of Delhi, but one among them worthy to occupy the throne of his an-
cestors the rest weak slaves of their favourites, and weaker slaves of
their own vices. Hence the power that once extended to the utmost
boundaries of Hindostan, and ruled its haughtiest deputies with a rod
of iron, is now little more than a shadow. Soubahdars and nabobs no
longer wait to be appointed by a mandate from Delhi, but audaciously
seize on territories, which they still more audaciously bequeath to their
sons, or adopted sons, after them; while, with unparalleled impudence,
they impose on the common people by pretended delegates from the
imperial city, before whose spurious dignity they bend their stubborn
knees, and from whose hands they receive forged credentials with a
pretended humility that deludes and satisfies an ignorant populace.
For the last half-century the most dangerous force of the East has been
that of the Morattoes-a nation of hardy mountaineers-natives of the
hilly regions that extend from the borders of Guzerat to Canara. They
are the Swiss of India-ever ready to fight on the stronger side, and
able to change leaders.with the varying breath of fortune. This is a
power which first arose in the palmy days of the Mogul empire, and
has fattened upon that empire's decay."
"Then you consider the despotism of Delhi a power of the past ?"
I asked.
"Yes, Robert. Delhi has seen the last of her greatness. Her
splendour sank in an eternal eclipse, when the shepherd monarch of
Ispahan, Nadir Shah, and his Persians, invested the city, to retire
thence with thirty-two millions' worth of loot, after such a work of
ravage as was new even to Hindostan. Shade of Timur, that was in-
deed a degradation for the chief city of thy Tartar race!"
From Mr. Holwell's conversation I learned the history of the Mogul
empire during the last century. It was a bloody record of ambition
and treachery, and I, who came fresh from a Christian country, was
struck with horror by the crimes of a people whose religion I have
heard philosophers extol as little inferior to the faith of Christ. The
farther I carried my retrospect, the longer was the list of iniquities
which the history of the past revealed; and as a monotonous sameness
characterises the murderous deeds of these Mahometan usurpers, I
will not burden this chronicle by going farther back than to the reign
of Shah Jehan. This noble follower of the Prophet distinguished him-
self in early life by the quiet assassination of his elder brother and an

BOUND TO JOHN COMPANY
unsuccessful rebellion against his father, a feeble-minded monarch, very
much under the governance of his wife, and who, upon beginning his
reign with a little private business in the way of murder on his own
account, assumed the modest surname of Mahomet Jehangire, or Con-
queror of the World. Shah Jehan, knowing the family failing, wisely
inaugurated his reign by a happy despatch, per dagger or bowstring, of
all the male posterity of Timur, except himself and his four sons. Had
he made the exception still narrower, and included the four young
Timurs in the general massacre, he would have shown himself a wise
man; for one of these Tartar cubs was Aurungzebe, who, after his
father had reigned thirty years, and he himself had won the reputation
of a religious enthusiast utterly devoid of ambitious desires, engaged in
warfare with and subjugated two of his brothers, betrayed and im-
prisoned the third, possessed himself by stratagem of his father's per-
son, and, having safely bestowed that ancient ruler under lock and
key, caused himself to be importuned by his nobles, whose entreaties
so touched his tender nature-like the prayers of the Lord Mayor of
London in that famous scene of Shakespeare's Richard III.—that he
submitted to assume the royal power under the title of Aulum Geer, or
Conqueror of the Wind.
Aulum Geer, alias Aurungzebe, proved himself a wise and prudent
despot. He took speedy means to dispose of his best friend and ally,
Meer Joomla, whom he despatched on a warlike expedition, which
resulted in the destruction of his army, by privation and disease, and
his own untimely death, whereupon Aurungzebe had the candour to
remark that he had lost "the greatest and most dangerous" of his
friends.
After languishing in a prison, made tolerable to his senility by the
amusements of a well-furnished harem, Shah Jehan expired, and there
were not wanting slanderers to whisper that a noxious infusion of
poppy-juice, called poust, a favourite slow poison of these orientals, had
somewhat accelerated his death. But the subjects of the Mogul em-
pire were too busy for minute inquiries on this point. The emperor
was bent on the subjugation alike of Mahometan and Hindoo rulers.
He made war upon Morattoes and Sikhs, Rajpoots and Affghans, using
sometimes the pretext of religious fervour, sometimes the right of an
offended chief, and, having subdued the two sovereigns of the Deccan
and made himself almost master of the Carnatic, he closed a reign of
half-a-century in a harassing and useless struggle with the Morattoes,
and died a natural death in his camp, thereby considerably varying the
common close of a Mogul sovereignty.
The successors of Aurungzebe are scarce worthy of being chronicled
in the same page with so wise and renowned a tyrant. Jehandar Shah,
the grandson of this great man, allowed himself to be governed by a
public dancer, whose very name of Lall Koor sounds disreputable to
the English ear. After wasting his days and nights in debauch, and

outraging the feelings of his omrahs, or nobles, this Jehandar was de-
posed and strangled, and his dead body exhibited in the streets of Delhi
at the behest of his nephew and successor, Ferokhshere.
Nor did the usurper show himself better worthy to occupy the
musnud than the kinsman he displaced. He also inaugurated his
accession by the butchery of every man he had reason to fear. He
also submitted to the base dominion of favourites, and, as the historian
Ferishta remarked of one of his predecessors, "delighted in the soft
society of silver-bodied damsels with musky tresses." I should scarcely
have recorded his name save for the fact that to this emperor the East
India Company owe the phirmaund which gave them their richest
privileges in Hindostan. Mr. Hamilton, a surgeon travelling with an
embassy from the English Company, had the good fortune to cure the
emperor of a malady which the unskilful treatment of his native phy-
sicians had failed to subjugate. Ferokhshere bade the English doctor
name his reward, and the generous Briton solicited privileges for the
Company. These privileges included the extension of the Company's
territory, the reduction and simplification of the duties hitherto paid
by them, the exemption of their goods from stoppage and examination
under cover of a passport or dustuck signed by the president of Cal-
cutta, with other protections and exemptions of equal importance.
The grant promised by the emperor was only secured after much
intrigue and counter-intrigue; but the English embassy was patient,
and did not take leave of the Mogul until his royal phirmaund had
been obtained.
From the Court of Delhi Mr. Holwell bade me look to the Deccan,
or southern provinces of India, where the master-mind of Nizam-al-
Mulk had created a sovereignty scarcely second to that of the Moguls,
and which his daring had rendered independent of the imperial power.
The Nizam had given up the ghost, after more than a century of life,
in 1747, and since his death the sovereignty of the Deccan had been
the subject of unceasing contention. But here I must again indulge in
a retrospective glance, even at the risk of appearing prolix, and in order
to make my narrative complete, it will be well for me to quote Mr.
Holwell's description of the aspect of affairs upon the coast of Coro-
mandel, where Clive was at this time winning his youthful crown of
laurels.
"It is just twenty years since Sadatulla, a regular and acknowledged
nabob of the Carnatic, died, much regretted by his subjects, after
appointing his nephew and adopted son, Dost Ally, to succeed him.
His dying wishes were quietly fulfilled, but not without inspiring
secret aversion in the breast of Nizam-al-Mulk, soubahdar of the
Deccan, since the accession of Dost Ally to the subordinate kingdom
of the Carnatic took place without reference to his authority. It is,
however, a peculiarity of the Mahometan mind to smother its resent-
ments, and to patiently await the opportunity of revenge

"Dost Ally had two sons, the elder of whom, Subder Ally, had
attained to man's estate at the time of his father's accession; he had
likewise several daughters, one of whom he gave in marriage to his
nephew, Mortiz Ally, another to a more distant relation, Chunda
Saheb, who became his dewan, or treasurer, one of the most powerful
officers of the state.
"This Chunda Saheb was a man of limitless ambition, a supreme
master of all the native arts of intrigue. On the death of the Rajah of
Trichinopoly, an independent Hindoo state, he was sent with Subder
Ally to obtain possession of the city, and by a series of false pretences
contrived to seduce the garrison and imprison the dowager queen, who
died of grief and humiliation at finding herself thus betrayed. It was
even whispered that the unhappy woman had fallen in love with her
base betrayer, and that it was by the softer arts of the lover Chunda
Saheb penetrated the citadel.
"Once master of Trichinopoly and its appertaining kingdom, Chunda
Saheb showed himself bent on keeping his conquest.
"The nabob, who cherished a high opinion of his son-in-law's
genius, dared not recall him from his new power. Chunda Saheb,
without openly throwing off his allegiance to such an indulgent master,
took care to improve the defences of Trichinopoly, and to plant his
two brothers in the strongest towns of his little kingdom.
"Nizam-al-Mulk's hatred of Dost Ally and his race was only
increased by the extension of their possessions, but as he was obliged
to keep his arms turned towards Delhi, where he was equally dreaded
and detested, he was unable to assail this aspiring family in person.
In this dilemma he had recourse to the Morattoes, and gave those
savage mountaineers permission to attack the Carnatic; thus by the
same stroke wiping out his obligations to that race and gratifying his
own resentments. This permission of the soubah's was like the loosen-
ing of some mighty mountain stream, that carries sudden devastation
to the valleys below its source. A hundred thousand Morattoes under
Ragojee Bonsala swept across the western barrier of the Carnatic
before Dost Ally was able to collect his forces to oppose them. Bloody
was the struggle that followed. The treachery of an Indian officer gave
the nabob and his army into the hands of the foe. Dost Ally and his
younger son, Hassan, fell dead from their elephants on the field of
battle, and, with the common result of a leader's death amongst oriental
armies, immediate rout and ruin followed their fall.
"Subder Ally had happily taken refuge in the stronghold of Vellore,
and from that citadel he made terms with the triumphant Morattoes.
He then assumed the title and authority of nabob, and Chunda Saheb
came to Arcot to do homage to him, with a splendour of retinue and
military force that made him appear the equal rather than the depend-
ent of Subder Ally. In the December of the same year, however, the
Morattoes returned, in consequence of a secret engagement with Subder

Ally, invested Trichinopoly, intercepted and slaughtered the two
brothers of Chunda Saheb-the severed head of one of whom they sent
him as a confirmation of his brothers' defeat-and after a siege of three
months, finally subjugated the city, and captured its resolute defender,
Chunda Saheb, whom they carried off to a strong fort near their metro-
polis of Sattarah.
"That ambitious spirit, Chunda Saheb, being thus safely bestowed
at a remote distance from the Carnatic, and the Morattoes appeased by
the conquest of Trichinopoly, Subder Ally might have enjoyed his
kingdom in tolerable security but for his ever-present fear of the
Nizam, whose wrath could only be appeased by the payment of those
large arrears of revenue which the late nabob, Dost Ally, had withheld.
But to part with his treasures was a sacrifice which Subder Ally could
not bring himself to make, and he strove to soften his creditor by
humble excuses and pretended poverty, even giving out that he intended
to go to Arabia, and end his days in acts of piety at the tomb of his
Prophet.
"His poverty and devotion were alike assumed, but the late ca-
lamities had made such an impression upon his mind that he left the
defenceless city of Arcot, and took up his residence in the fortified
citadel of Vellore, the strongest in the Carnatic, while his family and
treasures were placed under the care of the English at Madras; for it
is a notorious testimony to British honesty that these heathens will
often trust us when they dare not trust each other.
"Unhappily for this cautious sovereign, danger lurked within the
citadel of Vellore, more dire, because more secret, than the perils of
unfortified Arcot. Mortiz Ally was the nabob's brother-in-law, bound
to him by every tie of gratitude and affection; but amongst these
people such ties count for nothing when once interest is at stake. The
nabob knew that inherited wealth and parsimonious habits had made
Mortiz Ally the richest man in his dominions, and was determined that
he should contribute to the satisfaction of the greedy Morattoes in
common with the other governors of the province. None of these
gentlemen were too well inclined to disburse their treasures, and
needed but the example of a respectable leader to refuse obedience to
the nabob's demands. They therefore took occasion to hint to Mortiz
Ally that Nizam-al-Mulk, the soubah of the Southern Provinces,
would be inclined to favour rebellion against a prince who had defied
his vice-royalty.
"In the East rebellion generally means assassination. Mortiz Ally
was at once avaricious, ambitious, revengeful, and cowardly. He never
moved, even in his own palace, without the protection of his guards,
and never tasted food or drink until his wife had affixed her seal upon
the vessel that contained it. For such a character the nabob enter-
tained the most profound contempt, and at last, wearied by Mortiz
Ally's repeated excuses for withholding the payment of his arrears of

the assessment, went so far as to threaten him with displacement from
his government if he persisted any longer in such trifling.
"This imprudent threat was the spark that fired the train. The
discontented governors flattered Mortiz Ally's ambition, promising to
acknowledge him chief of the Carnatic, in the place of his brother-in-
law. The traitor now only waited his opportunity to strike.
"This seemed difficult to seize. Subder Ally's army lay within the
suburbs and under the walls of Vellore. A numerous guard attended
him within the fort. Mortiz Ally was too great a dastard to dream of
open violence, and only showed himself more than usually servile after
the insult he had received from his brother-in-law. The assassin might,
indeed, have waited long for his opportunity had it not been afforded
by the singular imprudence of the nabob himself.
"At the chief religious festival of Mahometan India, Subder Ally's
servants asked permission to absent themselves for two or three days,
in order to celebrate their pious orgies in their own families. The un-
suspecting nabob, contrary to all courtly etiquette, suffered all his
retinue and guards, except four persons, to leave him, and even desired
that some of Mortiz Ally's officers and servants might attend him, in
the absence of his own.
"The governor of Vellore was prompt to seize so excellent an occa-
sion. Poison was at first attempted, and failed. But even this attempt
did not awaken Subder Ally to the consciousness of his peril. He gave
a ready ear to his enemy's servants, who attributed his illness to one of
the bilious disorders so common in India. On this followed a night of
horror, during which the gates of Vellore were shut against all intruders.
Among all his subjects, Mortiz Ally found but one man willing to
execute his orders. This was an officer whose wife the nabob had dis-
honoured. The assassin entered Subder Ally's apartment at midnight,
at the head of a band of Abyssinian slaves, upbraided him with his
wrongs, and stabbed him to death as he was in the act of escaping by a
window.
"Mortiz Ally endeavoured to appease the nabob's army by a some-
what lame account of their master's death; but the general opinion of
his character was such that the soldiery flew to arms, declaring that
their sovereign had been murdered by the governor of Vellore. The
attachment of these devoted creatures, however, had its price; and on
Mortiz Ally bidding high for their affection, they consented to waive
their desire for vengeance, and agreed to accept him as Nabob of the
Carnatic some forty-eight hours after the murder of Subder Ally
Khan.
"The new nabob made a triumphal entry into his chief city of
Arcot, and for some time all went merry as a marriage-bell, until
several of the principal officers of the Carnatic discovered that they
sympathised in a profound detestation of their new master; while the
army, finding that Mortiz Ally's liberal promises had not resulted in

ready-money, surrounded his palace, and tumultuously demanded
their due.
"This was enough for the timorous nabob, who immediately fled
from Arcot to his stronghold of Vellore, disguised in a woman's dress
and shrouded by the curtains of a palanquin, only to reappear when
the time was again ripe for treachery and murder. Upon this, Seid
Mahomet Khan, the youthful son of the murdered Subder Ally, was
immediately proclaimed nabob, and removed under the guardianship of
his mother from Madras to Wandewash, a fortress in the command of
his uncle by marriage. The sagacious and powerful old soubah,
Nizam-al-Mulk, having for the moment no danger to fear from
Delhi, now appeared upon the scene, supported by an army of eighty
thousand horse and two hundred thousand foot. He was at once
indignant and surprised by the state of anarchy which prevailed in the
Carnatic, where every governor of a fort and every commander of a
district had assumed the title and state of nabob. Scourge me the
next son of a dog who dares approach my presence under the name of
nabob!' cried the proud old Viceroy; for I have this day seen no less
than eighteen nabobs in the Carnatic, whereas I imagined there was
but one in the Southern Provinces.'
"The son of Subder Ally was among the visitors who did obeisance
to the soubah. Nizam-al-Mulk did not permit this young prince to
return to the safe-keeping of his uncle at Wandewash, but gave him into
the charge of his own officers, who were bidden to show the lad all
possible respect. The Composer-of-the-State then returned to Gol-
condah, and gave the sovereignty of the Carnatic to one of his generals,
who had the misfortune to be found dead in his bed on the morning
appointed for his departure to his new kingdom, not without suspicion
of poison.
"This somewhat suspicious decease resulted in the appointment of
An'war-adean Khan, whose enemies were not slow to hint that he who
most profited by the death of his predecessor was the person whose
unknown hand had hastened that event. An'war-adean was the son
of a learned Mahometan, deeply versed in the original text of the
Koran, and one of the religious officers attached to the person of the
late mighty Aurungzebe. The new nabob was a brave and prudent
officer; but the people of the Carnatic cherished a warm affection for
the race of Dost Ally, whose descendants had governed them with a
gentle hand, and Nizam-al-Mulk found it prudent to assert that
An'war-adean was appointed only as a regent until such time as Seid
Mahomet, the son of Subder Ally, should be old enough to reign. In
the mean time the boy was placed under An'war-adean's guardianship,
in a position that somewhat resembled that of a famous young prince
of the House of York under the tender care of his kind uncle Gloster.
"An'war-adean treated his charge with all show of kindness, despite
any natural jealousy which may have been aroused in his mind by the

general joy with which the populace had welcomed the youth on his
return to Arcot. Installed in the palace of the fort, Seid Mahomet
had no possible cause for uneasiness, save the somewhat clamorous
demands of the Patans, a body of Mahometan soldiers from the extreme
north of Hindostan, whose hardihood, courage, and audacity distin-
guished them from all other inhabitants of the empire. These men
had served Subder Ally, and they now tormented his son by daily
demands for their arrears.
"In the month of June, the young prince, as head of his family,
was called upon to preside at the marriage festival of a kinsman, which
was to be celebrated with all pomp in the fort of Arcot. Invitations
were sent far and wide to the bridegroom's kindred, many of whom
were governors of cities in the Carnatic.
"Amongst these was Mortiz Ally. The prince was bidden to con-
ceal his natural aversion, and to receive the murderer of his father
with all oriental courtesy. It was thought by many that the cowardly
governor of Vellore would not trust himself outside the gates of his
stronghold upon an invitation from the son of his victim; but to the
general surprise he presented himself among the guests of the young
prince, and was treated with distinguished respect by the regent,
An'war-adean Khan.
"The marriage festival was not suffered to proceed without inter-
ruption from the insolence of the Patan soldiers, twelve of whom, with
their captain at their head, broke through the ceremonial pomp of the
prince's court, to urge their demands with even more than common
insolence. They were repelled by Seid Mahomet's servants, at first
with contumely, and in the end with violence; such an outrage as is
rarely offered to this proud and insolent people without provoking a
sanguinary and immediate revenge.
"The thirteen Patans, however, received this rebuff with unusual
meekness, and on the same day tendered their humble apologies for the
morning's violence. Their submission was readily accepted, and all was
calm; yet it was but a deceitful tranquillity, which presaged the coming
tempest.
"With evening came the most brilliant hour of the festival. Seid
Mahomet, with Mortiz Ally, and most of the other guests, were assem-
bled, when the approach of the Regent Nabob was announced. The
young prince, desiring to pay his venerable guardian public homage,
passed into the vestibule, intending to receive him at the bottom of a
flight of steps leading to the court of the palace. The thirteen Patans
were among the spectators in this lower court, and as the prince ap-
peared, surrounded by his guests, and attended by his officers and
guards, these haughty warriors greeted him with demonstrative rever-
ence and affection. After these compliments, their captain rapidly
ascended the steps, as if about to cast himself at the feet of his offended
lord, and having thrown Seid Mahomet's attendants off their guard by

his contrition of countenance and manner, suddenly drew his dagger,
and with one blow pierced the young prince's heart.
"In an instant the vestibule flashed with naked swords. The
assassin was cut to pieces on the spot, and ten of his companions were
sacrificed by the furious crowd below. Amidst this scene of horror
An'war-adean Khan appeared, and promptly gave such orders as were
necessary for the discovery of the conspirators; since it was the general
cry that the Patans had only been the venal instruments of some hidden
power.
"Nor was it long before a vengeful murmur arose, coupled with
the name of Mortiz Ally. The governor of Vellore had been beside the
prince as he fell, but when he was now sought for, it was discovered
that he had availed himself of the general confusion to fly from Arcot,
attended by a large body of cavalry and other troops, which had been
awaiting him in a spirit of caution that argued a foregone conclusion.
Pursuit would have been worse than useless, for no equal force of
cavalry was ready on the instant, and the distance from Arcot to Vellore
was but twelve miles. Curses and imprecations on the murderer's
head rang out upon the air which had so lately echoed the tinkling of
lutes, and brazen clash of cymbals, and all the joyous sounds of eastern
festival. The populace, dispersed by an order from An'war-adean
Khan, retired to their homes in gloomy silence, or gathered stealthily
in secret companies to communicate their dark suspicions. The nabob
not only dismissed every Patan in his service, but ordered that no
member of that nation should remain an hour longer in the city, and
that their houses should be razed to the ground, the last mark of
infamy which oriental justice can inflict upon a malefactor. Yet, so
given to suspicion is the public mind, even this conduct did not hinder
the assertion that the murder of Seid Mahomet had been plotted by
An'war-adean and Mortiz Ally.
"Such whispers having reached the ear of the nabob, he strongly
denied all share in a crime which he boldly attributed to the governor
of Vellore, and challenged his detractors to the proof of their foul
slanders. Mortiz Ally, for his part, as boldly accused the nabob, but
brought forward no proof to sustain his assertion; and it was supposed
that the same evidence which would have condemned An' war-adean
must also have demonstrated his own guilt.
"Favoured by Nizam- al-Mulk, and sheltered by his vice-royal
power, An'war-adean held his ground as Nabob of the Carnatic; but
his government was not the less hateful to his people. The death of
the Nizam, in 1748, was the signal for revolution. And now the spirit
of European intrigue allied itself to the plotting genius of the East.
Dupleix, the governor of the French establishment of Pondicherry, had
long since secretly fixed on Chunda Saheb, as that member of Dost
Ally's race most gifted with the talents of intrigue. Now followed plot
upon the heels of plot, revolution upon revolution.
Nazir Jung, the

son of the late Nizam, and Moozuffer Jung, his grand-nephew, contested
the government of the Deccan. Chunda Saheb, ransomed from the
Morattoes by French gold, moulded Moozuffer Jung to his own ends,
and struggled for dominion in the Carnatic; while Dupleix, like the
monkey in the fable, waited till his catspaw should have snatched the
prize, to grasp it for himself; and if not actually aspiring to oriental
sovereignty upon his own account, was at any rate bent upon elevating
to power a Soubahdar of the Deccan, and a Nabob of the Carnatic, who
should be little more than the instruments of his will. To what height
this aspiring man might have reached, and what extended dominion
France might have acquired in the East, had not the English at last
awakened from their ignominious apathy, I can hardly venture to cal-
culate.
"For some time the rebels were triumphant. An'war-adean was
slain in an engagement, at the age of one hundred and seven years.
His eldest son was taken prisoner during the same struggle; and his
second son, Mahomet Ally, with the remnant of the army, escaped to
his government of Trichinopoly. Success favoured the arms and in-
trigues of Dupleix and his two allies. The powerful hill-fortress of
Gingee, hitherto deemed impregnable, was taken by the French under
Bussy; Nazir Jung was slain under circumstances of some treachery;
his nephew and opponent, Moozuffer Jung, installed as Soubahdar of the
Deccan; and the ambitious Dupleix made governor of all the countries
south of the Kistna, with Chunda Saheb for his deputy at Arcot.
"Moozuffer Jung was not permitted long to enjoy his triumph.
He perished in an attempt to subdue the ever-rebellious Patans, who,
having helped to raise him to the throne, were insatiable in their
demands for reward. At this perilous juncture, the French interest
was protected by Bussy, who instantly proclaimed Salabut Jung, eldest
surviving son of the Nizam, Soubahdar of the Deccan. This prince
confirmed all the grants made to Dupleix, and it may be fairly said
that at this period the governor of Pondicherry wielded a power supe-
rior to that of the Great Mogul himself.
"While a plotting French politician and his general had thus
contrived to seize the dominion of Southern India, the prospects of the
English Company were of the darkest hue. Mahomet Ally, the one
chief friendly to the British Government, was reduced to the single
possession of Trichinopoly; and nothing appeared more likely than that
the whole Carnatic would fall into the power of Chunda Saheb, from
whom we English could expect neither favour nor mercy. Against the
audacious intrigues of Dupleix, and the military skill of his generals,
we could only oppose the prudence of a petty trade committee; since
Colonel Lawrence was at this most critical epoch absent in England
on private affairs. Menaced with certain ruin in the event of Chunda
Saheb's extending power, and insulted by the French, who planted their
white flags upon almost every field around the English boundary, and

even within the English limits, it was time that forbearance and
neutrality should cease.
"In this dark hour, when British pride had been humbled to the
very dust by the rapid successes and undisguised insolence of a rival
power, there arose upon the clouded horizon a star which, as I think,
is destined to mount yet higher in the military heaven. While Colonel
Lawrence was still in Europe, and in the absence of orders from
England, Robert Clive, with an innate military genius, took the helm
of affairs, and Arcot, the chief city of the Carnatic, was seized by a
handful of English soldiers, held against a siege of fifty days' duration,
and secured to the English ally. This was but the beginning of
triumphs. Other engagements as brilliant have followed in rapid
succession, and thus Robert Clive, at the age of twenty-six, has under-
mined the French power in the Carnatic, humbled the pride of that
most ambitious nation, and founded the renown of British arms in
India."
Thus ran my patron's record of affairs past and present upon the
coast of Coromandel. It was during my own residence in India that
the young captain, whose name had already become synonymous with
victory, enjoyed a signal triumph at Trichinopoly; but before this
new conquest, the daring chief, Chunda Saheb, had terminated his
adventurous and troubled career under circumstances of peculiar
cruelty.
His affairs having become desperate, he accepted a deceitful promise
of protection from Monackjee, the general of the Tanjore forces. It is
possible that Monackjee gave this pledge in good faith, but finding all
other powers bent on disputing his possession of so illustrious a prisoner,
this barbarous Tanjorine put his too-confiding captive to death, and
despatched the head of Chunda Saheb as a bloody offering to his rival
and enemy, Mahomet Ally.
Such was the state of affairs upon the southern coast when I entered
upon my new duties as Mr. Holwell's secretary. In Bengal all was
quiet. The nabob Allaverdy Khan, in his actions in the present, showed
himself a beneficent ruler and an amiable man; but when I ventured to
say as much to my patron, Mr. Holwell regarded me with a somewhat
ironical smile. "Yes, Bob," he replied, "the nabob is a very indul-
gent ruler, and no doubt altogether an excellent person; but for all that
I should scarcely care to trust too much to his honour. I tell you, boy,
these Mahometans are false to the marrow of their bones, and treachery
is as natural to them as truth and honesty are supposed to be to John
Bull; though I have found, by the way, that even that blustering gen-
tleman can tell a lie when his interest pushes him to it."
"Will you tell me why you think badly of Allaverdy, sir ?" I asked,
ever curious about the rulers of this strange empire, which seemed to
me wonderful as a glimpse of fairyland, and ancient as a page of Hero-
dotus.

"You shall hear the darkest passage of his life, Robert, and form
your own judgment upon it. He and his brother, Hodgee Hamed, began
their careers as penniless adventurers, the sons of a wily Tartar, and
rose to power by the favour of Sujah Khan, Nabob of Bengal, Behar,
and Orixa, who made the elder brother, Hodgee Hamed, his prime
minister, and the younger, Allaverdy, general of his troops, and ulti-
mately governor of Behar. Each well suited his allotted post, the
elder being versed in the arts of suppression and diplomacy, while the
younger had all the best gifts of a military leader. The two were closely
bound to each other, for self-interest, in this case, strengthened the
ties of relationship.
"The short-lived gratitude of the East did not long secure to Sujah
Khan the fidelity of these favoured subjects. A conspiracy was ripen-
ing for the casting aside of all authority on the part of the deputy
governor of Behar, and Sujah, apprised of this treachery, was meditating
vengeance, when Nadir Shah, the Persian Alexander, and his forces,
swept like the whirlwind across Hindostan, and every eye was turned
to Delhi. Before the Persian had left the imperial city, Sujah died, and
his profligate son, Suffraze Khan, succeeded to his sovereignty.
"The vices of this new ruler were eminently favourable to the ambi-
tious plans of the two brothers. Suffraze quickly contrived to offend
all his influential subjects, amongst others Juggat Seat, the head of
the princely banking-house of Muxadavad, whose son's wife he insulted
by an act of supreme folly. Hodgee promptly traded upon his master's
errors. A plot was hatched, and Allaverdy invaded Bengal. The
reigning nabob was slain, after a nobler resistance than might have
been expected from so vicious a man, and Allaverdy pushed boldly
onward to Muxadavad, where he was proclaimed Nabob of Bengal,
Behar, and Orixa.
"The power thus audaciously seized was not long unassailed. The
proud and wily Composer-of-the-State, Nizam-al-Mulk, took alarm,
and incited the Morattoes to attack the new nabob. Eighty thousand
of these hardy warriors swooped from their mountain strongholds upon
Allaverdy's new dominions; and long and desperate were the struggles
that inaugurated the nabob's reign. The Morattoes ravaged the
country, collected the revenues of almost the whole of the territory
south of the Ganges, and after being beaten, routed, and driven out of
Allaverdy's dominion one year, reappeared the next, with renewed
strength and unconquerable audacity; nor could handsome payments
on the part of their victim. assure him of exemption from attack.
"In eastern politics, when affairs grow desperate, treachery is not
far distant. Finding himself powerless to cope with so strong and
slippery a foe, Allaverdy pretended a desire to treat, and proposed a
personal conference with Baschir Pondit, the general, and moving
spirit of the Morattoe army. Doubting the good faith of the nabob's
professions, Baschir Pondit refused his consent to this interview

until Allaverdy had sworn on the Koran that no treachery should
be attempted. It was agreed that the two leaders should meet in a
tent pitched on the open plain, each attended by an equal number of
officers and unarmed servants. But the care of providing the tent
was left to Allaverdy, who had contrived to hoodwink the Morattoe
general by offering to send his wife to visit the wife of Baschir Pondit,
a social concession of supreme importance in this land of ceremonies.
"At the appointed hour the two chiefs advanced to the tent, each
attended by the most distinguished of his officers, while in the distance
a long train of covered palanquins, supposed to contain Allaverdy's wife
and her retinue, was seen moving towards the Morattoe camp. What
passed within the tent has been told by many, and seldom told alike.
Enough is known to stamp the work of that hour as one of the darkest
deeds ever committed on this wicked earth. At a signal, fifty armed
men sprang from the sides of the tent, which had been constructed with
a double lining to afford ambush for the assassins. The Morattoe
general and his captains were massacred to a man; but Allaverdy did
not draw his sword. He only looked on, and approved the carnage.
When the work of slaughter was finished, a signal of attack was thrown
out, and the Bengal army rushed at once upon their disorganised foe.
The Morattoes fled in confusion, only to reassemble and renew the war
with redoubled fury.
"Ten years of harassing warfare followed that day of treason; and a
treaty of peace, arranged between the nabob and his hydra-headed foe,
is not yet ratified. But the Morattoes have been propitiated by subsi-
dies and concessions, and Allaverdy, now a very old man, has received his
patent from the sorely enfeebled powers of Delhi, on condition that he
shall annually remit the tribute of six millions of rupees. The courage
and fortitude he has displayed in overcoming innumerable difficulties
have endeared him to his people, despite the murder of Baschir Pondit,
and a few minor treacheries, which his subjects indulgently ascribe to
the account of Hodgee Hamed, who fell a victim to the anger of his
enemies, and expired, universally execrated, some years ago. To his
own people he has been a just and not unkind master; with the Eng-
lish Company he has on the whole dealt fairly, although he has shown
himself somewhat exacting in money-matters. But take him for all in
all, I fear we are likely to have reason to regret his loss."
"How is that?" I asked.
"Because his nephew, and probable successor, Mirza Mahmud, is a
cruel voluptuary, who hates the English, and, indeed, loves nothing but
his own sensual pleasures. He has enjoyed a princely education, which
in the oriental sense of the word means the slavish flattery of para-
sites, and the unrestrained indulgence of every vicious propensity.
The favourite amusement of his childhood was the torture of birds and
animals; the diversions of his manhood consist in the society of pro-
fligate menials and low buffoons, and in the gratification of a propensity


for intoxicating liquors, to say nothing of other vices, which serve to
mark the contrast between himself and his great-uncle, ever a tem-
perate man, and the faithful husband of one wife."
"And is this wretch certain to become nabob?"
"I believe there is little doubt of it, though the appointment has
not yet been formally made. The people of Bengal look forward with
terror to such a ruler; but Mirza Mahmud has contrived to hide his
real nature from his great-uncle, who has regarded the young man
from his birth with an almost doting fondness; and amongst this
servile people no one dares enlighten the old man as to his adopted
son's disposition and pursuits. All we English can do is to pray that
Allaverdy's years may be prolonged to the utmost limit."
CHAPTER XVII.
OMICHUND, THE ENGLISH ALLY.
THESE Conversations, in the course of which Mr. Holwell, thus ac-
quainted me with Indian politics, took place in the leisure intervals of
two busy lives. My patron's own numerous duties and high responsi-
bilities kept him employed during all the working hours of the day,
and during many weary hours in which no one but himself would have
cared to work; while I, stimulated by his example, laboured as unre-
mittingly in my own humbler function. Nor did I confine myself to a
clerk's drudgery, for I had taken to heart Mr. Holwell's remarks on the
importance of an acquaintance with the native language, and I devoted
a great deal of my spare time to the study of Persian, Hindoostanee,
and the vulgar Bengalee, under the tuition of a mild-faced moonshee,
who came to my quarters nightly to instruct me in those tongues.
With this learned man I read the original Shastah, and its more
modern and corrupt versions, and thus became familiar with the
theogony of Hindostan, between which and the Greek system, as re-
corded by Hesiod, I did not fail to find occasional coincidences. It
was, indeed, to hard mental labour that I could alone look for dis-
traction from the painful reflections which oppressed me in this early
period of my exile. I had now been a year and a half in Bengal, but
had received no letter from England, though I had written three times
to my benefactress, in each several letter setting forth my griefs with
all the persistence of despair. Immediately after my removal from the
garrison, I had taken advantage of my liberty to write and despatch
two other letters. The first to Mr. Swinfen, of the Temple, to whom I
related my sad story in its fullest details, and whom I entreated to
take possession of the books and other property I had left in my
chambers, amongst which was the Spanish translation of the Imitation
of Christ, given to me by Dorothea Hemsley. I did not, of course,
fail to inform Mr. Swinfen how kind a friend I had found in Mr.

Holwell; nor did I omit to ask his advice upon the legality of my
shameful marriage. My second letter was addressed to my old
guardian and tutor, Anthony Grimshaw, in whom I scarce doubted I
yet possessed a friend, however foully I might have been slandered in
his hearing. From him I entreated tidings of those I so fondly loved,
and so cruelly had lost. To him also I gave a full account of my
adventures, for I was determined that if my wrongs could be righted,
the opportunity of righting them should not be lost by any omission on
my part.
Having done this I felt somewhat easier in my mind, and better
able to devote myself to my daily labours. That was for me a most
favourable hour in which my grandfather, Colonel Ainsleigh, had the
good fortune to rescue Mr. Holwell's father from the enemy's fire, for
I found in this gentleman a constant and affectionate friend. Amply
did he repay the debt which he owed my ancestor. He rescued me
from a living death, far worse than the swift annihilation of a cannon-
ball, and taught me to hope when every circumstance of my life tempted
me to despair.
"Your moonshee gives me a most glowing account of your pro-
gress, Bob," he said to me one day, after I had been six months an
inhabitant of his house. "That old bookworm house-steward, of whom
you tell me, seems to have grounded you admirably in Sanscrit, and
you have, I think, a natural talent for languages. Rely on it, that
a familiarity with the native tongues is the safest stepping-stone to
success in this country, and the young Englishmen who neglect such
studies are stone-blind to their own interests. Dupleix has profited
greatly by the assistance of his Creole wife, who was born and educated
in Bengal, and whose familiarity with the language and usages of the
people, to say nothing of her natural talent for diplomacy, has enabled
her to aid and abet him in all his oriental intrigues. The day will
perhaps come when you will have reason to bless Providence for your
forced voyage to the East. The stagnation of affairs in this presidency
is but a false calm. Be sure we shall have stirring scenes enough by
and by, and a hard fight to hold our own. But whatever struggles await
us I hope everything from the English spirit when once fairly aroused.
The British lion is a beast that sleeps long and soundly, but God help
his enemies in the hour of his awakening! The French have been for
a long time past trying to show us the road to glory, and I think
young Clive is beginning to show them that we are capable of learning
the lesson. And now, Robert, I want you to put aside your respectable
moonshee for to-night, and come with me to a festival that is to be given
by our friend and ally the Omichund, a Gentoo merchant, and one of
the most remarkable men in this country."
"I shall be proud to accompany you, sir. But, pray, in what does
Mr. Omichund's chief merit or genius consist ?"
"Why, faith, Bob, if the truth must be told, I think his chief gift

is that which most rapidly wins a man distinction at home, in our
native country, as well as among these unenlightened heathens. He
has the true Gentoo genius for making money, and for the last forty
years has devoted all the forces of his mind to that delightful occupa-
tion. Our Company has allowed him to provide more of our invest-
ments than any other contractor, and by this indulgence on our part-
which is against our own rules-and sundry other privileges, he has
become the richest man in the colony. His trade extends to the utter-
most limits of Bengal and Behar, and his influence with the officers of
Allaverdy's court at Muxadavad is so considerable, that we sometimes
stoop to employ him as our mediator when we want to get the ear of
the nabob. Not a very honourable position for John Company, is it,
Bob? But I live in hope the day will come when John will no longer
prostrate himself with eight members before the Mahometan musnud;
but will stand erect and defend his hardly-won privileges at the point
of the sword. In the mean time we are about to make a serious change
in our trading arrangements, and to retrench Mr. Omichund's privileges
in a manner which will, I fear, sorely vex that pious Gentoo's soul. Yet
it is but one of the trials which he has a right to expect in this ninth
stage of purgation. The truth of the matter is, that we have discovered
a very serious decline in the qualities of the merchandise provided by
his agency, together with as serious an advance in its price. But the
man is useful, and it would be a dangerous thing for us to offend him,
for which reason I have accepted his to-night's invitation to a nâtch.
Nothing gratifies these people more than the presence of Europeans
at their festivals."
We were carried to Omichund's house in palanquins. Calcutta,
when I first knew it, had been in existence less than fifty years, and
was but a sorry assemblage of bamboo huts and the curious open
shops of the natives, interspersed with occasional large and some-
times handsome houses belonging to Armenian, native, and English
merchants; while here and there an insignificant building of painted
brick and plaster, surmounted by three small domes, proclaimed itself
the temple of the Mahometan faith; but how different from the
pompous mosque of St. Sophia, or the Jumma Musjeed (chief cathe-
dral) of Delhi, with its rich blending of dark-red sandstone and pure
white marble! At the corner of a road we passed a mean and dirty
house, round which a crowd of natives were clamouring, with angry
gesticulations and frantic cries. This, Mr. Holwell pointed out to me
as the Catwallee, a minor police-court, where petty grievances are re-
dressed, and a kind of rough-and-ready justice administered.
We found the Gentoo merchant's house a handsomer edifice than
any I had yet seen, and brilliantly illuminated. A mixed crowd of
guests and lookers-on was congregated at the gates, through which we
pushed our way into a spacious hall or quadrangular court, occupying
the centre of the house, and surrounded by two galleries with in-

numerable doors, opening into small apartments. The upper story
Mr. Holwell pointed out to me as devoted to the women of the house-
hold, who, although invisible to us, were watching the entertainment
from the covert of their Venetian lattices. I had afterwards good
reason to remember this upper story, and one of its beautiful in-
habitants.
The court, which, like a Sevillian hall, is at ordinary times open to
the sky, was for this occasion roofed-in with red cloth, and lighted with
countless lamps. The white-muslin draperies and rich embroidered
costumes of the guests; the necklaces and aigrettes of rainbow-tinted
gems that flashed in strange contrast to their tawny skins, and shone
only less brightly than their piercing black eyes; the crowd of servants,
of whom my companion informed me Mr. Omichund possessed three
hundred, and who were augmented by the retainers brought by his
visitors; the buzzing of many tongues, the confusion of perpetual move-
ment, and the curious inharmonious native music,-combined to render
the scene one of dazzling bewilderment to my unaccustomed senses.
This was indeed an introduction to fairyland, and its utter novelty
for the moment carried me completely out of myself.
Now began the amusement of the evening. A band of public
dancing-girls advanced into the centre of the hall, and performed a
strange barbaric dance, which had in it few elements of European
dancing. Nothing did I ever behold so devoid of loveliness, for while
the arms, body, and head were exercised in every variety of contortion,
the feet, though constantly moving, never stirred from the same spot.
Whatever dramatic story might be told by the performance-and the
changeful expression of the dancers' countenances seemed to have
some dramatic significance-was beyond my humble faculties, and if it
was by such strained movements and monotonous posturings that the
daughter of Herodias danced St. John the Baptist's head off his shoul-
ders, I can but deprecate the bad taste of Herod as much as I abhor
his cruelty. Both Mr. Holwell and myself grew heartily weary of this
performance, during which we discovered that the splendour of Omi-
chund's palace did not exempt us from the native scourge of musqui-
toes, which venomous insects tormented us throughout the evening.
Immediately upon the conclusion of the dance, the great Gentoo
merchant espied us, and advanced to welcome Mr. Holwell with
demonstrative respect. They talked together for some time in Hin-
doostanee, and I had ample leisure in which to observe Mr. Omichund.
He was a man of advanced years, forty of which he had spent in the
harassing pursuit of wealth. Time thus employed had left its traces
upon a countenance that had once been handsome, and which was of
the most refined native type. But in the expression of that counte-
nance I read only evil. A crafty nature had set its seal upon every
feature of the Gentoo's face. While the flexile mouth expressed only
meekness and submission, the restlessness of the observant eyes belied

its amiable tranquillity; and in those bright and watchful eyes I fancied
I could discover a latent fierceness that augured ill for Mr. Omichund's
enemies.
He had evidently got wind of the discussions respecting him that
had taken place in council, and of the intention to reduce his privileges,
and it was with reference to this that he shaped his conversation to-
night.
"I have been a faithful servant to the Honourable Company, Mr.
Holwell Sahib," he said, "and have stood between my honourable
masters and the nabob's anger many times. The English do not know
the nabob as Omichund knows him. These Mahometans are all false;
they are false as lies. With one hand they will sign a treaty, while
with the other they invoke Allah's vengeance on the party to the
bond. Do not let the Honourable Company trust the nabob unless
they have a friend at the Durbar-an Indian like Omichund, who has
spent his life among these Mahometans and knows how to deal with
them. The Honourable Company have hidden enemies at the Durbar.
The French governor, Dupleix, is very powerful-0, he is great and
powerful, like the old Nizam, and has a head like him to plot and plan.
Governor Dupleix and Jan Begum, his wife, have their spies everywhere.
She writes many letters-clever letters-that win friends for Dupleix
and the French; for she knows these Mahometans, but not as Omi-
chund knows them. She has not had forty years of dealings with them,
as he has. The French are better liked in Bengal than the English;
and if the Honourable Company does not keep a friend at the Durbar
there will be danger, much danger."
"From what quarter, Omichund?" asked Mr. Holwell quietly.
"From the French, from the old nabob, and still more from his
grand-nephew, Mirza Mahmud, who will succeed him, and who hates
the English. He has the heart of a tiger, that young man, with the
courage of a rat, and he loves only evil. Let the Honourable Com-
pany trust Omichund, and he will by and by show them wonderful
things and gain them great friends. It is not so sure that Mirza
Mahmud shall succeed to the musnud."
"Indeed! And who is the pretender ?"
"It is too soon to tell you that; Omichund knows many secrets,
and has much power. It will be well for the Honourable Company if
they treat him generously. But if they rob me of hard-won privileges
-nay, Sahib, I am not the man to threaten," said the merchant,
checking himself suddenly, but with an ominous light in his eyes that
was in itself a threat.
"I know that Omichund also has enemies," he went on, in a more
tranquil tone, "enemies who grudge him the wealth he has earned by
prudence and unremitting toil and faithful service to his honourable
masters, and those slanderous tongues would do him evil with the
honourable council.
But his honourable masters are too wise to listen

to such base whisperers. They know they have a good friend in Omi-
chund."
To this, and much more to the same effect, did Mr. Holwell listen
with that inscrutable calm which was one of his finest gifts. He had
indeed a rare aptitude for business, and a genius for coping with the
difficulties and niceties of a perplexing position.
"I am but an insignificant member of the council, Omichund," he
said at last," and have little power to influence its decisions. Rely
upon it the Company are grateful for all faithful service, and in any-
thing they may do will be influenced only by conscientious motives.
But let me not detain you too long from your Gentoo friends, who will
be ill-pleased if you devote all your attention to a single English
guest."
On this our host quitted us, but not without many obeisances and
oriental compliments.
"The old fox has been informed of our intentions with regard to
him," Mr. Holwell observed to me when Omichund had left us,
"and I
suspect he means mischief. Nothing could be more unwise than to
employ him as we have employed him, except this culminating folly of
diminishing his privileges. We suffer the man to become possessed of
inordinate power, and choose the moment when he is strongest to offer
him mortal offence. Upon my word, Bob, this management of affairs
in Bengal is about the prettiest comedy of errors that was ever en-
acted."
The time came, and but too speedily, when Mr. Holwell had occa-
sion to denominate the mismanaged business of Calcutta a tragedy, and
not a comedy, of errors.
Before he could say more to me, we were escorted to the supper-
room, where we found ourselves placed at one of the highest tables, to
partake of a sumptuous banquet, amid the hubbub of some five hundred
attendants and the discordant noise of barbarous Hindoo music.
CHAPTER XVIII.
BAD NEWS FROM HOME.
Not many weeks after my attendance at Omichund's nâtch, the Eng-
lish mail brought me a packet of direful news which made me for a long
time indifferent to public affairs, and only able to perform my daily duties
in the dullest and most listless manner. To the arrival of every British
ship I had for more than a year looked forward with passionate hope and
expectation, and behold at last the white sail came that was to bring me,
not solace, but the final agony of despair-the coup de grâce that was to
end all the weak struggles of my heart with the utter annihilation of
my last hope. In Lady Barbara's affection I had trusted as in a strong
rock of defence from the assaults of affliction. Had she not told me

that she would be my friend through all the changes of my life, and
that even ill-conduct on my part should not cancel her regard for her
dead cousin's orphan son? During the last two bitter years the
memory of this promise had been my chief comfort; and again and
again, when the arrival of the English mail had brought me only dis-
appointment, I had said to myself, "I will wait. I know that this one
friend is true to me, and sooner or later I shall receive some proof of
her affection."
I think I could have existed for years buoyed up by this one hope;
but even this was taken from me.
Of the three letters which I so anxiously expected, one only came
to me, and that was addressed by the hand of Mr. Swinfen. With the
letter came a packet, which I found to contain two numbers of the
Gentleman's Magazine, and while tearing open the cover of the letter I
had time to wonder why he had sent these to me. Alas, I but too soon
learned his motive.
Mr. Swinfen's letter ran as follows:
"MY DEAR MR. AINSLEIGH,-I was at once surprised and shocked
by the contents of your letter (per ship Godolphin, January 4th, 1753)
and the shameful infringement of an Englishman's liberty therein
described; but find myself unhappily powerless to redress your wrongs.
The system by which you have suffered is an infamous adaptation of
the tactics of the press-gang to the East India Company's service, and
I doubt not is an abuse that will continue to flourish, in spite of com-
plaint from its victims. I bade one of my clerks copy the story of
your capture of course carefully suppressing all private details-and
sent exemplars to the Gentleman's Magazine and another journal, but
could not obtain either editor's consent to its insertion. The Directors
of the E. I. Company are numerous and wealthy, and these slavish
journalists do not care to offend so influential a body. There will, I
hope, come a day when the English press will be more enlightened,
and a British subject may find a prompt hearing, if not a swift redress,
for his wrongs.
"Were your present state as pitiable as the condition in which you
found yourself on first arriving at Bengal, I should be inclined to move
heaven and earth in the endeavour to procure your release and return
to England. But, in all candour, I declare that, to my mind, your
position at Calcutta, as the confidential secretary of an influential
person such as Mr. Holwell, is far superior to any standing you could
hope to obtain at home. Pray cherish this new patron and benefactor
whom a kind Providence has raised up for you in a land of strangers,
and endeavour by your faithful service to become at once necessary
and valuable to him.
"And now, alas, my dear young friend, I come to the saddest part
of my duty, and the performance whereof I enter upon with a pain

second only to that which I know the perusal of this letter will inflict
upon you. A heavy loss and affliction has befallen a distinguished
English family, and has at the same time deprived you of an affec-
tionate and powerful friend. I will not enter upon details which you
will find related at large in the obituary of the Gentleman's Magazine
for December last past; I will tell you only that your kinswoman,
Lady Barbara Lestrange, is no more, having expired of a ruptured
blood-vessel within a month after the marriage of her step-son, Mr.
Everard Lestrange, to his cousin, Miss Hemsley.
"You will perhaps wonder that so kind a friend as Lady Barbara
should have made no testamentary arrangement in your behalf, since
her fortune was large and entirely at her own disposal, while, having
adopted you in infancy, she might naturally desire to extend her care
of you beyond the grave, so far at least as to secure your manhood from
poverty.
"I can only account for this omission from the fact that the
lamented lady was cut off suddenly, in the very prime of womanhood,
and that women are ever slow to consider the necessity of legal prepa-
ration for that uncertain hour which cometh as a thief in the night.
The dear lady left no will, and her estate thus devolves entirely upon
her husband, Sir Marcus Lestrange, no doubt to the ultimate enrich-
ment of his only son. It is but a new example of that common fate
by which one Pactolean stream flows into and augments another, leaving
the barren plains of earth unfertilised.
:
"Lastly, my dear friend, let me reply to your anxious inquiries on
the subject of your unhappy marriage. I regret to say that you have
been rightly informed a marriage so contracted is valid, and nothing
but death can loosen your bonds. You will see in this fact another
reason for your prolonged residence in India, by which you escape all
the pains and penalties of your position.
"I have taken measures to secure the books and other property left
at your chambers, and will cause them to be forwarded to you at
Calcutta on receipt of your letter to that effect. My paper will permit
me to say no more than that I am
"Your obedient servant and sincere well-wisher,
"H. SWINFEN.
"Temple, January 30th, 1753."
I lay for hours stretched upon the floor of my chamber, with Mr.
Swinfen's letter crushed in my clenched hand, sobbing like a child.
And I had thought that evil Fortune had shot all her arrows at my
devoted head, while this envenomed dart yet remained in her quiver!
It was dark when I rose from the ground, remembering that I had
yet to learn the details of my affliction. I groped for a lamp, and
having lighted it, seated myself at my desk, and began to examine the
magazines Mr. Swinfen had sent me.

In the record of marriages printed in the number for November,
now ten months past, I speedily found the following passage, marked
in the margin by the sender:
"On Tuesday sennight was solemnised, with much splendour, the
marriage of Mr. Everard Lestrange, only son and heir to Sir Marcus
Lestrange, of St. James's-square, London, and Hauteville, Berks (late
plenipotentiary to his Britannic Majesty at the court of Madrid), to
Miss Dorothea Hemsley, a young lady of fortune, whose beauty and
numerous charms of manner and accomplishment have attracted much
attention both at court and in the upper circles during the last two
seasons. Several of the most distinguished members of the Ministry
were present at the ceremonial; and the amiable prime minister himself
honoured the occasion by his presence. The bride and bridegroom are
to pass the fortnight immediately succeeding their union at Thorp-
stoke, in Yorkshire, the seat of a member of Sir Marcus Lestrange's
family. It is pleasant to record a marriage which in its auspicious
circumstances recalls the experience of Arcadian fairy-tale rather than
the harsher precedents of common life. The union of Mr. Lestrange
and his fair cousin is a pure love-match, the young people having
grown up together in a tender and most perfect sympathy of incli-
nations and sentiments, under the approving eyes of their kindred.
A violent fit of hysterics which overtook the bride at the conclusion of
the ceremony testified to the intensity of her emotion. Mr. Lestrange
is designed for a diplomatic career, and will, we believe, be the bearer
of despatches to her imperial highness the Empress of Russia, with a
view to the more satisfactory adjustment of the late subsidiary treaty,
for which distinguished mission his elegant manners and agreeable face
and figure eminently adapt him."
To me what a satire lurked beneath the hackneyed scribbler's florid
paragraph! Love, sympathy!—yes, such love and sympathy as can
exist between the tender lamb and its devourer the wolf, between the
helpless transfixed bird and its fatal fascinator the snake.
Amongst the obituary notices in the December number of the same
magazine appeared a paragraph of more tragic interest:
"LADY BARBARA LESTRANGE, only daughter and sole heiress of
the late Earl Hauteville, and wife of Sir Marcus Lestrange, late
plenipotentiary to the court of Madrid. It is with heartfelt regret
that we record the decease of this lady, who expired on Friday, Novem-
ber 19th, at her husband's mansion in St. James's-square. Her death
was awfully sudden, and occasioned by the rupture of a blood-vessel;
but Lady Barbara Lestrange's health had for some months given cause
of alarm to her friends. She had but sufficient time to bid a hurried
farewell to her family, the principal members of which, namely, Sir

Marcus Lestrange, his son Mr. Lestrange, and his amiable lady, were
with her at the time of the sad event. Lady Barbara Lestrange was
born in 1712, and was therefore only forty years of age at the time of
her lamented decease. She was remarkable for her beauty among the
belles of his Majesty's court some twenty years ago; and was distin-
guished during a long residence at Madrid for the urbanity of her
manners, the charm of her conversation, and the unaffected piety of
her life. Sic transit gloria mundi.”
In another part of the same magazine I found the notice of an
event which accounted but too sadly for the failure of any reply to my
letter from my old friend, Anthony Grimshaw.
66
· Burglary and murderous Outrage at Hauteville, Berks, the Seat of the
late Lady Barbara Lestrange.
"On Saturday, the 20th November, a frightful outrage was com-
mitted by a gang of ruffians upon the person of Mr. Grimshaw, house-
steward in the employment of Sir Marcus Lestrange, who narrowly
escaped with his life from their brutal assaults. A party of three masked
robbers broke into the noble mansion of Hauteville between eleven and
twelve at night, no doubt with evil intent upon the plate-room, which
is situated in a stone vault under the hall. They seem, however, to
have made their entry at an upper window, as it was in an apartment
on the first floor-the morning-room of Lady Barbara Lestrange—that
Mr. Grimshaw appears to have encountered them. What occurred
between the armed ruffians and this unfortunate gentleman is known
but to himself, and he is in no condition to relate the circumstances of
the encounter. But there are ample evidences that the struggle was a
desperate one. A valuable Chinese cabinet of inlaid ebony and ivory
was found shattered into a thousand pieces, while the steward lay to all
appearance lifeless beside it, his skull cruelly battered by some blunt
instrument. The villains contrived to escape by leaping from the
window to a terrace below, unperceived save by a frightened housemaid,
who, not having seen their faces, has no power to describe or identify
them. They were happily disappointed of their hopes of booty, nothing
being missed except a tray of antique coins from the broken cabinet,
where the burglars no doubt hoped to discover valuable jewels, or they
would scarcely have made this their first point of attack. Some faint
hopes of Mr. Grimshaw's life are entertained, but it is considered
doubtful if he will ever recover his faculties, as the injuries done are
likely to exercise a permanent ill-effect upon the brain.
"This event happened, by a strange coincidence, within four-and-
twenty hours after the sudden death of Lady Barbara Lestrange, to
whom the mansion and estate of Hauteville belonged in her own right,
and from whom this noble property devolves to her husband and next
heir, Sir Marcus Lestrange, the lamented lady having died intestate."

"A strange coincidence," I repeated, brooding over this passage in
the report.
"Was this midnight attack upon my lady's private room
no more than a coincidence? I have heard her say that she kept
family papers in that very cabinet; and before she is cold in her
coffin that cabinet is broken open by masked ruffians, who go near to
murder her most faithful servant and my only friend. And
my bene-
factress dies intestate, without care or thought for the orphan youth
she had adopted; she, whose carefulness for others revealed itself in
the smallest things. O God, it is a strange and wicked world; and
I know not whether the treachery of Mahometan revolutionaries in
this Eastern hemisphere is much darker than the plots and stratagems
of so-called Christians at home!"
