CHAPTER XXXIII. ON THE TRACK OF MY ENEMY.
AFTER leaving Mr. Blade, with the certificate of Philip Hay's mar-
riage and Sir Everard's letters safely bestowed in my pocket-book,
I took a hasty dinner at a tavern not far from Little Britain. Here I
lingered some time to read the papers, which were full of laudation of
Mr. Pitt, that master-spirit of statecraft, who was fast doing for Eng-
land what Clive had begun so gloriously for India. For years past our
country had lain in a kind of stupor inglorious and despised abroad,
unprosperous at home, accepting peace at the price of fame and honour,
and studying economy in that miserly spirit which is but too sure to
result in ultimate loss.
Upon this scene of despondency and inaction appeared Pitt, and
these peace-loving politicians found themselves bound to the chariot-
wheels of the very genius of war. Already he had heated his colleagues
and his country with the fire of his own ambition, and so moved his
hearers by a noble panegyric upon King Frederick of Prussia, that an
annual subsidy to this monarch of six hundred and seventy thousand
pounds was voted by acclamation. This had occurred in December
of the year last past, after the victories of Rossbach and Lissa had
elevated the King of Prussia-whom we have since known to be a
declared infidel-into our Protestant hero.
I was pleased to hear from a gentleman with whom I conversed at
this tavern that the prime minister had also offered a handsome tribute
to the genius of my great master, Colonel Clive, of whom he had
spoken to an approving House as a "heaven-born general." Indeed,
this ready recognition of merit in others seemed one of the instincts
of greatness, and one possessed in an eminent degree by Pitt. Nor did
he wait till a brilliant success had revealed the power that achieved it.
In Wolfe he had already discerned the latent spark of heroism which
was to burst into so grand a fire by and by at Quebec.
I left the tavern as the day was closing in, and walked westward
again, moved only by the roving instinet of a stranger to the town, to
whom its commonest sights are new and wonderful. The lamplighters
were mounting their ladders and filling the lamps from their oil-cans
as I walked up Holborn-hill, jostled on every side by that eager, push-
ing throng of citizens, so different from the lounging populace of
Muxadavad. Instead of the cry of the priests calling the faithful to

prayers, I heard the shrill clamour of orange-girls, and small catch-
penny traders offering their strange varieties of merchandise, to the
utter hindrance and obstruction of all traffic. Instead of picturesque
groups of turbaned Moors squatting in the Bengal sunshine, I saw a
throng so diverse in dress and appearance that I might have fancied
myself amidst a concourse of people from all the ends of the earth.
At one point the crowd bearing towards St. Sepulchre's Church
was so dense that I was fairly brought to a standstill, and while wait-
ing for the rabble to pass, inquired of a neighbour where all these
people were going.
"I suppose they are going to see the execution to-morrow," my
neighbour answered civilly.
"An execution ?"
"Yes; three brothers-mere lads-who are to be hung at eight to-
morrow morning."
"And it is now six in the evening. Do you mean to tell me that
this rabble will wait for fourteen hours, standing in an open street, for
the brief delight of seeing three of their fellow-creatures hung?"
"Not only this rabble, sir, but the finest gentlemen in the town.
There is not a window within view of the gallows where you will not
see a group of bloods, drinking and gaming. 'Tis said that Mr. Sel-
wyn, the wit, has a suit of black on purpose for executions."
"And pray, sir, what is the crime of these unfortunates? Is it
murder, arson, or piracy for which they are to suffer ?"
"No, sir; the lads are somewhat to be commiserated. Their sole
offence is the appropriation of three oak-saplings, which they severally
cut and converted into walking-sticks while enjoying a sabbath ramble
in a copse at Edgeware. The law for the protection of timber is some-
what stringent."
I had seen something of the severity of English laws before I was
sent to India, but this formal sacrifice of three young lives for as many
oak-saplings seemed to me more appalling than the cruelties of Suraja
Doulah, which were at least the blind impulses of passion.
"Yes," said my neighbour, perceiving my concern, "it is really a
sad case, for the lads are of respectable parentage-the sons of a small
yeoman and had no idea they were committing a felony."
"It is of a piece with the rest I hear of this country, sir," I replied.
"We frame laws that would have revolted Draco himself by their
cruelty, and then regret their application. It was but last year that a
body of English officers were compelled to condemn a brave man to an
ignominious death, not because they thought him unworthy to live, but
because the act of parliament that provided against his offence left
them no alternative."
"Nay, sir," replied my neighbour; "Admiral Byng was the scape-
goat of a party-a sacrifice to public disappointment. He could never
have been so sacrificed if his judges had not been bound by the letter

of a cruel law. They condemned him to death in obedience to an act
of parliament, and recommended that he should be spared in deference
to the common instincts of humanity. Is this right, sir? Should not
law and humanity go hand in hand? Byng would have been pardoned,
I doubt not, sir, had not his Majesty given his promise to the City that
he would allow proceedings to take their course. He would fain have
saved the Admiral, but was bound hand and foot by that pledge."
"What, sir," I cried, "could a Christian king mortgage his divinest
prerogative-the right to be merciful ?"
The stranger shrugged his shoulders in an evasive manner, as who
should say, "Really, sir, this is no affair of ours ;" and the mob having
by this time passed us, we bowed and parted.
I was glad to turn from the bustle of Holborn into the quiet of
Lincoln's-inn-fields, whence I rambled on to Great Queen-street, and
thence to Long-acre, staring about me as I went along with all the
curiosity of a country bumpkin who surveys the town for the first time.
It was but the random impulse of an idler that took me to this locality,
yet no sooner was I there than it occurred to me this was a place which
of all others I should visit.
It was here the milliner resided to whom Lady Barbara had desired
me to address my letter-a woman of whom she had spoken as a "good
soul," who might be trusted. She would scarce have said this of a
person she was but little familiar with. I knew the intimacy that
must of necessity obtain between a fine lady and her milliner, since the
despotic changes and caprices of fashion must oblige a frequent inter-
course, and it suddenly struck me that from this woman I might learn
some details of the last year of Lady Barbara's life.
"I can at least call upon her," I said to myself. "If the visit.
prove useless, I would take much more trouble than that for the chance
of hearing the smallest tidings of that dear friend."
I looked for the house, and after some time discovered a painted
and gilded doll hanging over a doorway, and on the door below this
sign an announcement to the effect that Mrs. Winbolt, mantua-maker
and milliner to her Royal Highness the Princess of Wales, had corre-
spondents at Paris and Vienna, and might be relied on for the newest
modes in court-robes, sacs, cardinals, petticoats, and mantuas.
I rang the bell, and was speedily admitted by a grinning black boy,
who ushered me into a small oak-parlour at the back of the house,
where he set a candle upon the table and left me without a word.
There was a half-open door between this and another apartment, whence
I heard the animated tones of a female voice.
"Nay, indeed, madam, 'tis the very same material I sold but last
Thursday week to the Princess of Wales. She said, 'I will have that,
or nothing. I protest there's no living without a sac of Lyons brocade
these days.' And for your complexion, ma'am, which is, I need scarce
say, far superior to her Royal Highness's-"

"But the price," remonstrated another voice; "I had thought six
guineas would have bought the finest sac you could make me, and for
one of this material you have the conscience to ask ten."
"Her Royal Highness paid twenty guineas for the same stuff,
ma'am, and found her own point. With a tucker of English lace I
could not do it for sixpence less than eleven guineas, and then 'tis be-
cause I would not disoblige a customer."
"I am vastly afraid your obligingness will end in my ruin," replied
the customer with a profound sigh, and then followed a little more
haggling, which resulted in an order for the garment under discussion.
This conquest achieved on the part of the mantua-maker, and the lady
shown to the door, the black boy condescended to inform his mistress
of my presence, and she came bustling in upon me.
"Upon my word, sir, I know not how to apologise," she exclaimed ;
"that Pompey is the most incorrigible rascal; and if he had not been
given me by a lady of quality, who, I make no doubt, was heartily tired of
his impish tricks, I should have turned him out of my house long ago."
I was pleased with the appearance of Mrs. Winbolt, who was that
kind of person usually described as "a good motherly soul." She dis-
played that comfortable bulk of figure which is generally supposed to
accompany an easy disposition, and her complexion was as fresh as if
she had been the rustic wife of some prosperous farmer.
This matronly person saluted me with a profound curtsey, and
then, as she approached nearer to me, stopped suddenly short, and
regarded me with a closer scrutiny than the occasion warranted. For
the moment some peculiarity in my appearance seemed fairly to be-
wilder her; she gave a little gasp, and then began to apologise for
having stared at me with apparent rudeness.
"I trust you'll be so obliging as to pardon me, sir," she said; "but
I never saw a more startling likeness-but for the darkness of your
complexion it would be perfect-and for the moment I was so foolish as
to take you for a gentleman who has been dead these five-and-twenty
years."
"You took me for my father, Mr. Roderick Ainsleigh," I said.
"Good heavens, sir! are you Mr. Robert Ainsleigh, the gentleman
that was sent to India?"
"I am that ill-used person."
Mrs. Winbolt offered me both her plump hands, and shook mine
with a heartiness that almost took me aback.
“O sir, you must be so good as to excuse the liberty, but I couldn't
be better pleased than I am to see you,-unless, indeed, Lady Barbara
had lived to see this day. Alas, sir, what a loss!"
She wiped some tears from her eyes with an unobtrusive gesture.
"To me an irreparable one. 'Twas the merest hazard that brought
me here; but I am very glad I came. It seems you loved my benefac-
tress? She was something more to you than an ordinary customer?"

Something more than a customer? Yes, sir, indeed, she was
my benefactress; it was her blessed nature to shower favours on all
she knew. I was born on the Hauteville estate, sir. Yes, I'm a Berk-
shire woman; and folks tell me I keep my country looks, though I've
had nigh thirty years' hard work in London. My father was a tenant-
farmer in a small way; and I used to go to the Hall sometimes to
assist with the needlework when Martha Peyton had more on her
hands than she could get through; and my Lady Barbara used to see
me, and talk to me. And in those days-well, sir, I'm getting an old
woman, and may speak out without vanity-I was accounted some-
thing of a beauty. My good looks brought me nothing but trouble,
however; for there was a young squire-Mr. Langdon of Langdon Hill
-lived within ten miles of my old home, and was always riding over
to our place, and talking fine poetical stuff to me; and I was a weak
foolish girl, sir, and thought he was honest, and meant well by me.
Other folks didn't think so, and their talk got to Lady Barbara's ears,
and she came to me and told me what was said, and bade me, as I
loved my own soul, see Mr. Langdon no more, unless he declared
himself willing to make me his wife. If he loves you honestly,
Susan,' the dear lady said, 'he will love you all the better for that
honest question.' And I obeyed her, Mr. Ainsleigh; though it was
a hard thing for a poor country girl to ask such a question; and I
read my answer in my gentleman's face, though he turned it off with
a careless jest, and said 'twas early times to talk of matrimony, which
was apt to be the death of love; and then muttered something about
country wenches being now as cautious and mercenary as any fine lady
in the town. I went to my Lady Barbara that night and told her
what he had said; and I was such a foolish creature in those days that
I was half heartbroken to think that my suitor could be so base. My
lady saw how great a trouble it was to me, and she set to work at once
to get me away from a home where I was miserable and in danger. So,
as I had shown a kind of talent for mantua-making, having worked a
good deal with Martha Peyton for my lady, my lady persuaded my
father to send me to London, and she herself paid the money to ap-
prentice me to a court-milliner and mantua-maker; and I came, and
in a few years set up in business in a small way for myself. My lady
gave me her custom, and I made all her clothes when she married Sir
Marcus Lestrange, and that was the making of me; and here I am.
Heaven only knows what I might have been without my lady's kind-
ness; for my father was an easy-going man, given to drink, and looked
sharper after his pigs than he did after his children. And now, sir,
that's a long story; but I've been obliged to tell you as much in order
that you may understand what reason I had to love Lady Barbara
Lestrange."
"And you knew my father?"
"Yes, sir, I have seen him many a time, when I was working in my


lady's dressing-room at the Hall. I helped with a tapestry-screen that
my lady was doing, you see, sir; and Martha Peyton and I used to sit
at work with my lady herself, and your father used to come into the
room and stand over my lady's chair, talking to her as she worked.
It was but little she used to do at those times. Ah, sir, there were
two hearts broken when your father left Hauteville; for I am sure he
loved my lady as truly as she loved him. And she loved you as well
as if you had been her own son, sir. I have heard her say so; for she
would tell me her troubles, when she would tell them to no one else."
"Put me out of misery by answering one question, if you have
power to do so!" I exclaimed eagerly. "Did Lady Barbara believe
me the wretch I must have seemed when I disappeared from London ?"
"No, sir, she would believe no ill of you. She came to me within
a few days of your marriage. Sir Marcus had shown her the certificate;
but she declared it was a false one, and believed that some evil had
befallen you.
'I will swear he loves Miss Hemsley,' she said to me;
and this paper has been forged to do him mischief. What motive had
he to marry that wretched girl? But from a marriage with Dora he
had everything to gain. O, there is some odious treachery at work,
and the same hidden enemy who caused him to be driven from Haute-
ville has been since working to destroy him.""
"And Miss Hemsley-did she believe me false?"
"Alas, yes, sir; that young lady did believe the story of your
marriage, and upbraided herself for having stooped to let you know
she had loved you. My lady was sorely grieved by this; yet you can
scarce wonder it was so, for all things told against you-above all,
your disappearance. You were advertised for in the Flying Post, and
many times, at my lady's bidding; and one day she came to me in
much distress of mind. 'He is dead, I fear!' she exclaimed. 'Were
he living, I am sure he would have answered those advertisements.' I
told her perchance you were kept out of the way by force, as I knew
what things are done in this town: this she seemed to think probable.".
"Did she suspect Everard Lestrange as my hidden enemy?"
"Yes, sir, I am sure of it, though she never spoke his name. 'He
has one bitter enemy,' she said; 'my poor boy has one unscrupu-
lous, relentless foe.' And then she told me how she had been to Mr.
Swinfen, the gentleman to whom she recommended you, but could
get no tidings of you there, or at your chambers, save that you had
gone out one day never to return. And so things went on; I seeing
a good deal of my dear lady, who had none about her that she cared to
trust. There was a French maid of Miss Hemsley's, whom I always
took for a spy, for she was ever watching and listening when I waited
on my lady."
"Ay, she was the veriest viper," I cried; and thereupon told the
mantua-maker Ma'amselle Adolphine's share in my undoing.
"I thought as much, sir. That French hussy was in the pay of


Mr. Lestrange. She used to watch me as a cat watches a mouse; yet
I don't think she ever got much good from her watching. One day
came your letter from the Indies; but my lady was at that time in
Paris with her husband, and I was obliged to trust the letter to the
post, in a cover which I myself wrote for it. Sure I am there is no
reason it should miscarry; but neither that nor another that came after
it reached my lady. The family only came back to town in time for
Miss Hemsley's wedding. How Sir Marcus prevailed on that young
lady to marry his son, I know not, for sure I am there was no love
between them; but he did so work upon her that she at last consented.
There was a very fine wedding, and I was employed to make the
wedding-clothes, as I had been for my lady's. It was a week after the
wedding that your last letter came. Lady Barbara was now in town,
and I carried it to her with my own hands, and would give it into none
but hers. O sir, I never shall forget her face when she read how you
had been treated. 'O, what a villain!' she cried, starting up from her
chair, with the letter crushed in her hand; but he shall suffer for his
baseness; suffer in that kind of loss which alone can touch his sordid
soul.' 'Twas this she said, or words very near this; for there are some
scenes that take a hold upon one's memory, you see, sir, and it would
not be easy for me to forget this. And then she told me what had
happened to you. He shall come back triumphant,' she said; 'yes, I
will have him brought back to confront that scoundrel;' and then she
sighed and exclaimed, 'Alas, poor Dora! what a fate for thee! and my
arm could not shield thy helplessness!' and so she went on, in a wild
random way, as if she had been alone. Next day she came to my
house in her chair, and told me she wished to draw-up a paper, upon
some business matter, and did not care to do it at home.
'One might
as well live upon the stage of Covent-garden Theatre as in a fine house.
full of servants,' she said; and I knew but too well she was watched.
And then she asked me if I knew of any decent lawyer who could write-
out the paper she wanted. So I sent for old Mr. Sollis, a respectable
attorney in King-street, who had drawn up the lease of this house for
me, and sometimes sued a customer for me that hung back from paying.
He came immediately; and my lady and he were shut in this very par-
lour for nigh upon an hour, at the end of which time Mr. Sollis opened
the door and called me. 'I want you to witness Lady Barbara Le-
strange's signature to this paper, Mrs. Winbolt,' he said; there is no
occasion for you to know what the paper contains; you have only to
attest my lady's signature.' On this my lady signed the paper, and I
after her, and Mr. Sollis put his name below mine."
"Can I see this Mr. Sollis?" I asked eagerly, for I shrewdly sus-
pected that my interests were involved in this paper.
"Alas, no, sir; he lies in the burying-ground by Drury-lane. He
was near seventy years of age, and was carried off by a fever last mid-
summer twelvemonth."


"Has he left any son or successor likely to be familiar with his
business?"
"No, sir; he was an old bachelor. The business passed to a
stranger, Mr. Compit."
Hopeless as it might seem to think of obtaining information from
such a source, I resolved to see Mr. Compit next morning. But, before
bidding my kindly mantua-maker good-night, I had more questions to
ask her.
"How long before her death did you see my benefactress?" I
inquired.
"Never again, sir, after the day she signed the paper; it was but
three weeks after that she died. I shall never forget with what a shock
the news came upon me. She had been to Hauteville for a fortnight,
and came back to St. James's-square to preside at an assembly given
in honour of Miss Hemsley's marriage. Her death was awfully sudden."
"Mr. Lestrange and his bride appear to have been with her?"
"Yes, sir. 'Twas after a grand dinner given in honour of them that
the sad event happened. I had the account from the housekeeper in
St. James's-square. 'Twas just when the visitors had left, and my
lady had gone into a little room behind the drawing-room with Mrs.
Lestrange, when she gave a sudden cry, and the blood gushed from
her lips. Sir Marcus and his son both ran to her, and bells were rung
and doctors sent for; my lady's own maid, that French viper Adolphine,
and the housekeeper, all came with their different nostrums; but it was
all of no use; she lived but to speak a few words.”
"O Mrs. Winbolt!" I exclaimed, "what would I not give to know
those last words!"
66
Ay, sir, she may perchance have spoken of you in that final
moment. I know she loved you dear."
"And that wretch Adolphine was still with Mrs. Lestrange? It
would seem my lady had not told of her treachery."
"No, sir, I do not think my lady told your story to Mrs. Lestrange;
it would have been but to make her wretched. And I believe Lady
Barbara had it in her mind to bring you home, so that you might
appear suddenly, as one risen from the dead, to confound your enemy."
"God grant I may yet so appear to his confusion !" I answered.
After some further conversation of an unimportant nature, I bade
Mrs. Winbolt good-night, and left Long-acre, very grateful to that Pro-
vidence which had conducted me thither by what had seemed hazard.
After careful consideration of all that Mrs. Winbolt had told me, I
arrived at the conviction that the document executed by Lady Barbara
in the mantua-maker's parlour was a will in my favour. Was not this
implied in her declaration that she would punish Everard Lestrange
in the sole manner his sordid nature could feel? How more surely
could she punish him than by depriving him of the wealth which he
had doubtless hoped my disgrace must needs assure to him?


I went early the next morning to Mr. Compit; but that gentleman
could give me no help. The transaction in which his predecessor had
been engaged with Lady Barbara Lestrange was of a nature too trifling
to leave any record, unless it might have been some private entry in
Mr. Sollis's memorandum-book; and of such personal property Mr.
Compit possessed none.
"If Lady Barbara Lestrange had been a regular client of my pre-
decessor's, it would be another matter," he told me; "but, you see, the
occurrence was a mere casualty, on which Mr. Sollis would scarce be
likely to bestow a second thought."
"Yet the rank of the client and the peculiar circumstances of the
case might surely have made some impression upon him ?”
""Tis like enough they did, but not such an impression as would
embody itself in documentary evidence. Mr. Sollis was not the man
to communicate his sentiments in relation to a business matter; he
was an excellent lawyer, and as silent as the grave. If the lady wanted
secrecy, she could not have employed a better man.”
This was all. I left Mr. Compit's office no better informed than
when I entered it.
From thence I went to the Temple, where I was so fortunate as to
find Mr. Swinfen at home. He received me with much kindness, and
made me relate my Indian adventures. I was surprised to discover
how little was known in England of those stirring events in the East,
save the names of the potentates we had been concerned with, and the
battles we had fought. Pitt's laudation of Clive had alone been equal
to the occasion; and indeed I think this great statesman was the only
man in England who perceived the grandeur of that theatre now open-
ing for British enterprise and British valour on the far shores of the
Indian Ocean.
Having satisfied Mr. Swinfen with a full account of my public
adventures abroad, I proceeded to relate my strange meeting with my
father; a piece of news that was most surprising to him; and after that
my conversation with Mrs. Winbolt of Long-acre.
"And you think the paper drawn-up by this Mr. Sollis was a will
in your favour?" asked Mr. Swinfen, when I had finished.
"I do, sir. The fancy may seem presumptuous, but it is founded
on many small circumstances that, to my mind, make a chain of evi-
dence almost conclusive."
"And you would insinuate that such a document has been sup-
pressed or destroyed by Sir Everard Lestrange ?"
66
That, sir, is my suspicion. I know Everard Lestrange to be
capable of any villanous act. Lady Barbara was at Hauteville a week
before her death; she was not cold in her coffin when her own private
apartment was broken in upon, and the cabinet where she kept her
papers-not her jewels, mark you, sir; those I know to have been kept
elsewhere ransacked and destroyed by masked ruffians. A common


burglary, you will say, which by a mere coincidence of time happened
within twenty-four hours of the lady's death. But would burglars
choose this room for their point of attack, and content themselves with
rifling a Japan cabinet, when the plate-room of Hauteville is known to
contain that kind of treasure which alone burglars covet?"
"Your argument is plausible," replied Mr. Swinfen thoughtfally;
"but it is hard to suspect a gentleman of so vile a deed."
"Have I not suffered the vilest usage at that gentleman's hands,
sir? Is there any act so base that I should hesitate to believe him
capable of it? But I will not press this subject upon you; I am bent
on investigating the matter in some sort, though little good can come
of any discovery I may make. Lady Barbara's will is doubtless de-
stroyed; and to prove that such a paper ever existed is perhaps a task
beyond human ingenuity."
After leaving Mr. Swinfen's office, I felt that my business in London
was for the time concluded. Eager as I might be for a meeting with
Everard Lestrange, I wished to make myself, as far as possible, master
of his secret before meeting him. And I was now free to revisit that
spot which I had seen so often in my dreams, and to which my thoughts
had ever turned with inexpressible fondness. I went straight from the
Temple to the coach-office where I had alighted on first arriving in
London, and booked my place for Willborough, in the Bath coach, which
stopped to change horses and refresh its passengers in that small
market-town.

