CHAPTER XXXIV. THE OLD PLACE AND THE OLD FOLK.
THE Bath coach left London at dusk, and travelled all night, much
to the terror of its passengers, who regarded the passage of Hounslow-
heath as a period of imminent peril. Yet I think a dark narrow road
in a woody country is infinitely more appalling than a wide open land-
scape, such as Hounslow or Bagshot; across which, on moonlit nights,
one may see a scudding hare at half a mile's distance, and where at
all times the sound of horse's hoofs travels far to warn the ear of an
approaching foe. Hounslow and Bagshot have, however, the stamp of
fashion; and I suppose it is as much the mode for a knight of the road
to assail his prey upon these particular spots, as for a gentleman to air
his long-skirted coat in the Ring.
The coach deposited me at Willborough before daybreak; and while
breakfasting in the coffee-room of the George by a good fire, I had
leisure to consider how I should approach Hauteville. I was not cer-
tain of one friend in the home of my childhood and youth, and knew
not whether I should be permitted to cross the threshold of the mansion,
or sit once more beside the familiar hearth of the warrener's lodge.
"Yes," I said to myself after a long debate, "it is to the instinct of
my foster-mother I will trust. How ever she may have heard me ma-
ligned, I doubt not I shall soften her. There must be a subtle power
in affection that will prove stronger than lies or treachery. Yes, I will
go straight to her whose tenderness sheltered my childhood, and I
know she will not refuse to believe the truth spoken by her foster-son."
With this resolve I set out for Hauteville, and just as the sun
brightened over the landscape with the promise of a glorious day, I
crossed the little rustic stile which marked the boundary of the estate,
and entered Hauteville woods.
O, how bitter and how sweet, how new and how old, how strange
and how familiar, the scene was to me! Here all seemed unchanged.
On the face of Nature time had set no mark; but those who had made
the place dear were dead or estranged from me, and it was with a stifled
sob that I paused to look around.
The walk from Willborough to Hauteville was a long one; and I
knew that before I could arrive at the warrener's lodge honest Jack
Hawker would in all probability have set out on his daily round.
This was what I wanted. It was upon my foster-mother's affection
I relied, and I meant to make my appeal to her alone. I had occasion


to pass within sight of the house; the shuttered windows looked blank
and dismal as when my childish eyes had first beheld them. The same
air of desolation hung over the place, despite the careful neatness of
gardens and parterres; and I fancied that Sir Everard and Lady
Lestrange came seldom to their country mansion. I turned from
the scene with a sigh, and continued my journey at a quicker pace.
The blue smoke from the warrener's lodge was curling cheerily
upward from among the newly-budding trees, ever so faintly tinged
with a tint of tender green. Here at least there was life; here some-
thing much more like home than was to be found in yonder stately
dreary pile, which Vanbrugh had improved away from its original
gothic splendour. My heart beat fast as I hurried along the path
which little Margery and I had so often trodden hand in hand.
Dear child! Her image came back to me, not as I had seen
it in the hour of my enthralment by a base plotter, but in the gentle
innocence of childhood, fair as the face of an angel.
The outward aspect of Jack Hawker's cottage had changed in no
particular since I last looked on it. The latticed windows twinkled
in the morning sun, the chickens pecked invisible nourishment from
the short dewy grass, and close at hand sounded the comfortable grunt
of satisfied English pigs. The door was fastened only by the latch
with which my hand had been of old so familiar. I paused for a
minute ere I crossed the threshold, and the next moment was stand-
ing face to face with my foster-mother.
She had just emerged from the dairy, carrying a dish of butter.
This she set down hastily, startled by the entrance of one she took for
a stranger. I was standing with my back to the light, and my seven
years' apprenticeship under an Indian sky had doubtless wrought some
change in me. How ever slight this change may have been, my foster-
mother took me for a foreign pedlar.
"Nay, sir," she said, with a furtive glance of apprehension towards
a certain walnut-wood box, in which I had of old known her to keep
the family treasure of plate-six teaspoons, a battered caudle-cup, and
a monstrous silver watch-"I am but a hard-working countrywoman,
that never wore lace in her life, and have no need of your smuggled
foreign stuffs. At the great house you might find a customer, were my
lady at home; but she has not been there this year past, nor is likely
to be there for as long to come."
"What, Mrs. Hawker!" I said reproachfully; "your eyes are bright
enough yet, but it seems to me they will not help your memory to re-
call an old friend."
She looked at me for a moment, and then clapped her hands toge-
ther with a shrill cry.
"Why, Robin," she exclaimed, "how brown thou art grown!"
"Mother," I said, "I left this place an outcast. Did you believe
me guilty of that foul wrong for which Sir Marcus drove me out?"

She hung her head as she answered me:
"Yes, Robin, at first I half-inclined to think my darling's ruin must
needs be your work; I knew she loved you. How he lured her from
her home I know not to this hour; but I have long known it was no
act of yours."
"Yet whence should come my justification, mother, if not from your
own heart?"
"It came from hers. A year after she left us, there came a woman
to me one morning, while my husband was in the woods, to say I was
to call next day-market-day-at the George at Willborough, where
there was one who wanted to see me. It was not strange that I guessed
at once 'twas something to do with Margery, for my lost child was never
out of my thoughts. I questioned the woman, but she would tell me.
nothing. I was to go to the George, and ask for the person who wished
to see Mrs. Hawker. This was all. O Robin, thou art a man, and
knowest not what a mother's heart can suffer! I thought the time
would never pass. I lay awake all night, praying that I might hear
of my child; and next day, setting out on the journey, I felt like one
distraught. The house was scarce up when I went to the George, and
I had to wait a chambermaid's leisure before I was taken upstairs to a
sitting-room, where the shutters were still shut. While the woman was
opening them, a figure wrapped in a white gown came out of a room
adjoining. O God, it is my child!' I cried; and the words were scarce
spoken when Margery was sobbing in my arms. I stayed with her all
day, Robin. There was no stall of mine set in the market that day,
and I had to sell my butter and honey, at a dead loss, to a chap-
woman in the town. We were together all day, my child and I;
but she would tell me scarce anything, save that we had done thee
wrong, and that an enemy had hatched a wicked plot to bring about
thy ruin. 'Twas no act or word of his that tempted me from my
home, mother,' she said. Yet when I pressed her to tell the villain's
name, she would not. You must ask me no questions, mother, as
you love me,' she said. 'I was mad to trust myself here, but I could
not live a day longer without seeing you. I am rich enough to go
where I please.' And she swore there was no shame in the money,
Robin; it was all won by her own honest labour. She lived alone,
with but few friends, and had neither lover nor suitor. She had
sinned and suffered and repented: those were her very words, Robin.
I begged her hard to tell me where she lived, and how; but she would
not. I am lost in the great wilderness of London, mother,' she said;
'but there is not an hour in which I sit alone that my thoughts do not
fly back to my old home and hover around those I love. Would they
were guardian spirits to protect and shelter you!' She pressed money
upon me, but that I refused; and it was but to stop her tears that I
consented to take a locket from her neck."
"
"And have you never seen her since, mother?"

"Yes, Robin, often. The same woman brings me her message, and
we meet in the same room three or four times in the year, and I know
my child loves me. Yet I dare not speak, her name to her father,
unless I could tell him she was coming home to us; and that she will
not do. And so we go on, Robin. I know nothing of my child except
that she loves me."
"And you have never been to London to look for her?"
My foster-mother regarded me with a wondering smile. It was as
if I had asked her whether she had been to Hindostan.
"I was never in London in my life, Robin, nor my husband either,
and I know not a creature in that great city."
"Shall I search for Margery?" I asked.
“Ah, Robin, if thou wouldst !" cried she, clasping her hands.
"Who has a better right than I? Did I not ever love her as a
brother should love his sister? She was made the unconscious instru-
ment in a vile plot against me; but that is cleared up now, and there is
no cloud between us. I will seek her, mother; and, if it is possible, I,
who was accused of luring her away, will bring her back to you."
And now I entreated my foster-mother to tell me all she knew of
that strange event which had happened at the Hall on the night after
Lady Barbara's death, and how it had fared with my old friend An-
thony Grimshaw since that time.
"Alas, poor soul!" she exclaimed, "he lives, and that is all can be
said. His poor wits have gone for ever, the doctor says; and yet there
are times when he knows people, and for a few minutes together will
be quite rational. I doubt he might mend if he lived a different life,
amongst cheerful sights and sounds, and with people that would talk to
him; but to be mewed up for ever with Martha Grimshaw is enough to
drive the sanest folks mad."
"Faith, I have reason to know that. Mrs. Grimshaw is the very
genius of gloom; and these last seven years have not improved her, I
suppose ?"
"Nay, Robin; she has changed for the worse since you left; and yet
she goes more than ever to the chapel in Brewer's-yard. It is not often
I go to the great house, but I never see her that she does not sigh and
groan as if a corpse were in the next chamber."
"Poor Tony!"
"Ay, poor soul! 'tis a dreary life for him. He sits moping by the
fire; and were it not for the comfort of his pipe, I doubt he would have
been dead long ago. "Tis his sole companion and friend."
"Were the scoundrels who made the attack ever brought to jus-
tice?" I asked.
"No, Robin; they were never so much as seen in the county."
"And they were known for no foul work before or after?"
"Never that Jack or I could hear of. No men answering to the
description have been caught by the thief-takers since that time."

"Were no means taken to discover the wretches ?"
"Sir Marcus sent two men down from London-one, an ugly fellow,
that they said was as clever at hunting a thief to the gallows as one
Jonathan Wild that had taught him the trade; but the men could
make nothing of the business."
"And after this no more was done ?”
"What more could be done? Squire Hedges, one of the county
magistrates, was set upon catching the scoundrels, and there was not a
tramp or a vagabond brought before him that he did not suspect as
concerned in the Hauteville burglary; but nothing came of his pains."
This was all my foster-mother could tell me, and it only helped to
confirm my suspicions of foul play. I was determined to see Anthony
Grimshaw and his wife before going back to London; so I bade the
dear soul good-bye, promising to see her again before many months.
"I shall go back to London by to-night's coach," I said. "I have
no purpose in Berkshire but to see you and poor old Anthony."
Before leaving, I asked her one more question. Had she told my
foster-father how cruelly he had wronged me?
"Alas, no, Robin!" she answered, hanging her head. "For two
reasons I dared not tell him that: first, because I must have owned to
having seen the child; and next, because to tell him as much would
have been to set him looking for the wretch that really did the mis-
chief. If my good man doubted Sir Everard Lestrange was the scoun-
drel-I think he is, Robin-he would not sleep another night under
this roof; and I love my home, dear. My child was born in this house.
It would be a kind of death to leave it. And, after all, we know not for
certain that it was Sir Everard stole our girl away from us."
I could but smile sadly at the woman's reasoning. She was the
fondest, tenderest creature I had ever known; yet the finer sense of
honour, which the rugged man had, was wanting in the softer woman.
"Tell my foster-father nothing till I bring his daughter home to
him with a name which is honestly hers," I said; and left the cottage
without waiting to be questioned.
I reflected that, as the widow of Mr. Hay, a soldier slain in Bengal,
my foster-sister might return to her home without shame or scandal.
It must needs be easy enough to prove a marriage performed no more
than seven years ago; and I resolved to visit Paris myself, in order to
obtain due evidence of the fact. It was only by making this first mar-
riage a certainty that I could assure myself from the hazard of any
legal entanglement arising out of the second.
Grimly dreary-splendid as it had seemed to me when I first en-
tered it appeared Hauteville Hall on this the occasion of my revisiting
it after a lapse of years. A strange maid-servant admitted me at a
small iron-clamped door that had been used by the Grimshaws and
myself during the long absence of the family. I was conducted across


the great hall-where the banners looked dingier and more ragged than
of old to eyes that had so lately beheld the blaze of Indian standards
beneath an Indian sun-along the same passages by which I had first
reached Mrs. Grimshaw's dreary sanctum, and so to the door of the
sanctum itself, which the woman opened softly and admitted me.
"A gentleman from London to speak with Mrs. Grimshaw on
business," she solemnly announced in my own words, and retired,
closing the door behind her, leaving me face to face with my old
enemy, who dropped the book she had been reading, and started up
from her chair, staring at me with a ghastly face.
My tutor was dozing in an arm-chair close to the fire, with a hand-
kerchief over his face. My heart yearned to this kind friend in his
affliction, and it was to him I should at once have addressed myself, had
not his wife's awful looks arrested me by a kind of magnetic power.
"Robert Ainsleigh!" she cried.
"Yes, madam," I answered, "and I am pleased that you at last
deign to call me by my right name. During my absence from this
place I have met one who was witness to my mother's wedding, and
am thus able to tell you I never deserved that opprobrious title you
were wont to bestow upon me."
"Indeed, sir; I am glad to hear Miss Lester was not the base
creature folks believed her when she ran away from her home to take
up with your father."
"It is the misfortune of the generous and impulsive to invite the
censure of the malevolent, madam,” I replied. "My mother has passed
to a world where her actions will happily meet a more tender judgment
than they received on earth."
"May I ask what business brings you to Sir Everard Lestrange's
house after these many years? I was not aware that you and he were
on terms of friendship, however you may stand with his lady.”
This was said with a little spiteful shiver. The woman had an
inordinate capacity for hatred, and her manner told me that even
gentle Dorothea was not exempt from her ill-will.
66
"I come to see a very old friend, Mrs. Grimshaw," I replied; "one
for whose kindness I had reason to be grateful at a period when I had
sore need of friendship."
"My husband is in no condition to profit by your politeness, sir,"
replied the pitiless creature; "he knows no one-not even his wife."
"It will be a melancholy satisfaction to me to see him, notwithstand-
ing, madam; and with your leave I will wait till Mr. Grimshaw awakens."
I seated myself without invitation, and Mrs. Grimshaw resumed
her lecture. A glance at the cover of the pamphlet in her hand showed
me that it was one of George Whitfield's innumerable sermons.
"And that woman will account herself justified by faith," I said to
myself," as if she, who has not one Christian thought or impulse, can
with the heart acknowledge Christ. O miserable lip-service!"


For about a quarter of an hour we sat in silence-a silence broken
only by the slow ticking of the eight-day clock, the heavy breathing of
the sleeper, and the falling of the light wood-ashes on the hearth. The
fire was the only comfortable thing in the room.
The striking of the clock awoke my old friend. He pushed the
handkerchief from his face with a tremulous hand, and looked around
him like a child that is newly awakened. Great Heaven, how changed
was that wan white face from the intelligent countenance I had known
so well! It was like a mask moulded from the dead, rather than the
visage of the living.
66
My pipe, mother," he said, stretching his hand towards his wife
without looking at her.
Mrs. Grimshaw filled a clay-pipe that lay beside a brown jar of
tobacco on a little table near the old man's chair, and handed it to him,
assisting him submissively while he lighted it.
"It is not in such vile creature-comforts the benighted soul can
find pleasure," she said, by way of commentary on this small act of
charity. "The bread of life hath no power to nourish or console him.
It is in vain that I read the inspired pages of Mr. Whitfield, or the
learned discourses of the late holy Venn. He doth but stare at me
with a blank unmeaning gaze; and you will have observed that he
calls me mother.' He has by some strange hazard forgotten his later
life, and takes me for his mother, who departed to the rest of the
pious nigh forty years ago. The mind is quite gone you see, Mr. Ains-
leigh."
No, not quite. At the sound of that familiar name, there came a
faint flicker of the lamp which Mrs. Grimshaw thought to be for ever
extinguished.
"Ainsleigh," muttered the old steward, "Ainsleigh! Roderick
Ainsleigh—a wayward lad-proud, but generous; and I think he loved
me. Yes, I am sure he loved me. Poor lad! Dead, they tell me. Yet
who should be master of Hauteville, if not he? There is no one else;
I say
there is no one else."
It seemed as if these broken sentences struck terror to the mind of
Martha Grimshaw. She hastened to the old man, and did her best to
stop his talking.
""Tis your coming has sent him into this fever," she cried angrily;
"he is not fit to be seen by strangers, and cannot bear to see them."
"Strangers! yes, madam, he may be loath to see strangers; but I
am no stranger. I am one who loves him-one whom, I dare venture
to say, he loved.-Come, dear sir," I said, going to my old friend and
kneeling down beside his chair, sorely against the will of his wife, who
lacked only the strength to keep me off by main force, and wanted not
the will to be violent; "come, sir, look at one who has ever loved you;
your friend, your pupil-not Roderick, but Robert Ainsleigh!"
The old steward gazed upon me with a fixed countenance, but the


transient gleam of intelligence that had lighted it a few moments before
was gone; it was a blank.
"Dear sir, do you not remember me?"
"Is it likely he should remember you, when he does not know his
own wife?" Mrs. Grimshaw demanded with a sneer.
I was still kneeling at my old friend's feet, gazing curiously into
his face, with his cold wasted hand clasped in mine. Alas, I could
neither warm that feeble hand into the genial glow of health, nor
awaken one thrill of memory in that frozen brain!
While I thus watched him, the old man suddenly rose from his
chair and tottered with feeble steps towards the door.
"Come, come," he said in a confidential whisper; "I promised-
come, all is safe. I promised to take care. An old man, my lady, but
a faithful servant. Come."
He beckoned to his wife, and then laid his hand, as if mechanically,
upon my arm, and drew me, by no means unwillingly, along with him.
In this manner we left the room, and walked along the narrow passage,
and through the deserted chambers in which I had lived in the brief
period of my gentility. Heavens, how ghastly they looked! with all
their splendour shrouded by holland draperies, and only a glimpse of
the chill March sunlight creeping in here and there through a hole in
a shutter. Mrs. Grimshaw followed us closely, with a countenance
that expressed at once impatience, anger, fear, contempt-a very con-
flict of passions.
My old tutor led me to the foot of the grand staircase and upward
to a room that I remembered with a pang of unspeakable bitterness, a
tenderness that was anguish-that last worst agony the Italian tells of
in his catalogue of hell's various tortures-the memory of departed
happiness. It was my Lady Barbara's morning-room before the door
of which my tutor stopped.
"It is a madness with him to come to this room, where he met
with the accident that lost him his wits," said Mrs. Grimshaw; "he
will come here every day, sometimes twice a-day. The Lord has been
pleased to afflict him grievously in punishment of his sins."
"Nay, madam, I doubt if it were a question of punishment for sin,
my old friend might have kept his wits till others I know of had lost
theirs. I do not believe in that nice scale of earthly reward and pun-
ishment, that debtor-and-creditor account with the Almighty, which
some folks pretend to keep. It has pleased God to afflict a good and
harmless old man in this instance, as He hath often chastised the inno-
cent in days gone by, for some wise purpose of His own."
Mr. Grimshaw rattled the handle of the door impatiently.
"Open, open!" he cried; and his wife, with a most unwilling air,
took a key from her pocket and unlocked the door.
"It is but to encourage his madness to let him come here," she
said;
"and you, sir, who can have no business here, and whose presence

in this house would, I am sure, be displeasing to my master, Sir
Everard Lestrange, will oblige me by leaving me alone with my hus-
band. It can be no pleasure to me that he should exhibit his infirmities
to curious eyes, and I know not at whose invitation you came hither."
"At no invitation, Mrs. Grimshaw. I come to a house in which I
have been grievously wronged." My looks were fixed on her counte-
nance as I said this, and I saw her blench. "And I come chiefly to see
this one old friend; secondly, because I believe this house hides the
secret of a great wrong done to me."
At this her countenance grew livid, and from this moment I was
sure that whatever evil had been done me in my absence, this harridan
was in the secret of it. For the minute my random words had a crush-
ing effect upon her, and she made no further attempt to prevent my
entrance into the chamber where I first heard the story of my birth,
seated at the feet of my benefactress. The room had a disused air, and,
except in the one instance of the ebony cabinet, which had disappeared
from a recess by the fireplace, there was nothing changed since I had
last beheld the apartment. I was very curious to see what purpose,
or what fragmentary memory of some past duty, had brought my tutor
to this room, and I stood apart observing him in silence.
He walked slowly round the room, looking at every article of
furniture with an inquiring gaze, as if he would have demanded of each
inanimate object what it was that he sought. Sometimes he came to a
dead stop, shaking his head with a strange helpless gesture; then with
a faint sigh walked on, and thus completed his round.
"Something missing," he muttered at last. "An old man, my lady,
but a faithful servant. Yet there is something missing. What, what,
what, what?"
No words can describe the piteousness of his tone as he reiterated
this last monosyllable.
"It must be the ebony cabinet he misses!" I exclaimed.
"Likely enough," replied Mrs. Grimshaw, with a carelessness which I
felt sure was but assumed. "He had a childish fancy for taking charge
of this room-the odds and ends of old china, and books, and suchlike;
and the thought of it worries him now his poor wits have gone."
"There must surely have been something of peculiar importance in
this room," said I; "my old friend was too sensible to perform a duty
that might have been better discharged by a housemaid. He must
have had some solemn charge in this room, or the broken memory
would scarce prey upon his mind as it does."
I watched Mrs. Grimshaw as I spoke, and I saw that every word
was a home thrust. Yes, there had been a plot, and the outrage com-
mitted in this room was a part of it. It had been a plot against me,
and this woman was concerned in it, or privy to it. But what
advantage was it to me to know this? and what more than this was I
ever likely to discover?

""Twas strange that nothing was ever heard of the villains who
misused your husband, madam," I said.
"Yes, sir, it was very strange."
"Did his master, Sir Marcus, take no pains to avenge so faithful a
servant ?"
"Sir Marcus did his duty to my husband, sir. All was done that
could be done.”
"And who were the doctors that preserved my old friend's life, and
yet failed to restore his reason?"
"My husband had the attendance of two doctors, sir; Mr. Harris of
Rerton-green, and Mr. Claypole of Willborough."
"What! two country surgeons only? Were no eminent men brought
down from London to pronounce upon his state ?"
"He had every care, sir, and constant prayers. Mr. Whitfield him-
self prayed for him by name during a blessed visit to Willborough."
"And these prayers were to avail instead of medical science! Why,
woman, this is a kind of murder, to let the lamp of reason go out for
want of a judicious breath to coax back the flame."
"I cannot argue with a blasphemer, sir; Elisha went up into his
chamber."
"Elisha lived in the childhood of this earth, when man was still
an infant at the knees of his Creator. The age of miracles is past, and,
instead of His own divine interposition, the Almighty has given us
science. He has taught us to be ourselves the miracle-workers; but
you bundle away the gift in a napkin, and think to save yourself
cheaply and easily by prayer."
"I do not ask your advice, sir, as to the treatment of my husband,
and I am fully satisfied with what was done for him.”
"Ay, madam, I doubt not it suited you that he should lose his wits.
There may be secrets in this house that could scarce be kept hidden
while so honest a man had his senses."
Again I saw that every word went home. And now, having little
more motive for remaining in this house, since my old friend gave me
no token of recognition, I wished Mrs. Grimshaw good-day, and left her,
I felt sure, furious and bewildered, not knowing how much, and cer-
tainly in no wise suspecting how little, I knew of the evil-doings with
which she was acquainted.
