CHAPTER XIII. I BEGIN MY APPRENTICESHIP.

WHAT devil's work is this?" I cried, drawing my sword, and looking towards Everard Lestrange, who stood at some distance from me, and very close to the door, as if anxious to secure a convenient retreat.

"O Robin, they told me 'twas your wish to marry me!"

"And the desperado draws his sword on the prettiest girl in Bucks!" exclaimed Everard Lestrange; "was there ever such a savage?"

"It is upon you that I draw my sword, liar and traitor!" I gasped. "Your life or mine shall answer for this night's work."

"I decline to cross swords with a

Before the foul word could pass his lips, I sprang towards him with uplifted hand, and should have struck him across the face with my open palm, but for Philip Hay and the parson, who clutched at my arm, and held me off by their united strength.

"What a fire-eater this foundling of my lady's is!" cried Mr. Lestrange with his languid sueer. "But why all this outcry? The wife we have given you is young and pretty, and 'twould only have served you right if we had tied you to some wrinkled harridan of the town. True, 'tis not the lady to whose hand and fortune your insolence aspired; but it is scarce six months since you swore you were ready to marry this one at a moment's notice, if her father could find her for you."

"I offered to marry an honest woman," I answered, "not your castoff mistress."

My foster-sister sank to my feet with a stifled groan. God help us both! I had but hit the mark too well.

"No; 'twas my other mistress you wanted, with twenty-five thou

VOL. VI.

II

sand pounds for her fortune. You were welcome to my mistress-wher I had done with her."

"Devil! Will you fight me in this room-this moment ?" I cried huskily.

"No; I will fight you neither here nor elsewhere, neither now nor at any future time, for a reason which I hinted just now, and which you need not force me to state more broadly. You are no mark for a gentleman's weapon.-Hold the fellow tight, Phil Hay; I have but a few words to say, and am gone."

"Let me go, Hay!" cried I; "why do you obey that scoundrel ?" "Because he is paid to obey me, as ma'amselle yonder has been paid for her part in the comedy. Do you suppose a man of the world like myself was to be ousted and cheated by your bumpkinship, without trying to turn the tables on you? I saw how you were playing your cards from the day we came to Hauteville. Your father was my father's rival, and it was natural to me to hate you. And you, my lady stepmother's beggarly foundling, must needs come between me and the girl that was betrothed to me. A pretty gentleman indeed to steal my mistress! I saw through your artifices, and when you came to London, took care to place my spy upon your track."

"What!" I roared, shaking myself free from Philip's grasp.

"Yes, Mr. Simplicity; your chosen friend and boon companion is my led-captain, Mr. Hay, a gentleman who has been in my service for the last five years."

"O God, what a dastardly world!"

"Forgive me, Bob; thou'rt the best fellow I ever knew, and I love thee with all my heart," said Hay, with a strange softness in his tone; "but I am a scoundrel by profession. 'Tis one of the trades poor men live by, you see, and men must live."

"Yes, and vipers too; they plead their privilege to crawl and sting. Great God, this is hard!"

I sank into a chair, touched to the very heart by this hideous treachery. I had grown fonder of the man than I thought. As I sat for some moments, confounded, forgetful of Everard Lestrange, I felt a little hand thrust gently into mine. It was Margery's. The wretched girl had not yet risen from the spot where she had sunk down at my feet.

"Forgive me, Robin," she pleaded; "indeed I did not know it was a trick that was to be played on thee, or I would have died before I had taken part in it. He-Everard-told me it was your wish to marry me; and O, Robin, I have been cruelly deceived, and am not so guilty as I seem. I will never trouble you, dear; you shall see me no more; and the marriage can be undone."

"Yes," cried Everard Lestrange; "by grim death! Pallida mors is the only parson who can cut the knot which my friend yonder has just tied."

"The bride was married under a false name," I said. "Yes; but the true one is in the register."

I turned eagerly to the greasy volume that lay open upon the table. Yes, there, below my own signature, appeared that of Margaret Hawker. I remembered how my attention had been distracted while the bride was writing.

"The ceremony could not be more binding if it had been performed in Westminster Abbey. Mrs. Margery is as honest a wife as Lady Caroline Fox. Ma'amselle Adolphine will go back to her service the richer for a fifty-pound note, and will carry her young mistress the pleasing intelligence of your marriage."

"And do you think I will not carry the truth to Miss Hemsley?" "That will depend on your opportunities. You made an engagement this evening which you may find somewhat inconvenient to you in your character of bridegroom, and which will certainly put a stop to any stolen visits to the ladies in St. James's-square."

"I made an engagement! What engagement?"

"Sure, 'twas an engagement to serve the honourable East India Company over in Bengal, and a glorious career it is for a courageous young man!” cried a familiar voice close at hand, and Sergeant O'Blagg came into the room, closely followed by a couple of ruffianly-looking fellows in military trousers and dingy ragged shirts, while three or four others looked in from the doorway.

Before I could utter so much as one cry of anger or surprise, these two scoundrels had gripped me on either side. What followed was the work of a few moments-a sharp brief struggle for liberty, in which I fought as a man only fights for something dearer than life, striking out right and left, while the hot blood poured over my face from a wound on my head.

I had but just time to see Everard Lestrange and the French woman rush from the room, dragging Margery with them, while a long piercing shriek from that wretched girl rang out, shrill above the clamour of the rest; the floor seemed to reel beneath my feet, a roaring thunderous noise sounded in my ears, and I knew no more.

I opened my eyes upon the semi-darkness of a dilapidated garret, where I found myself lying on a dirty mattress of hay or flock. The atmosphere was thickened with tobacco-smoke, and what feeble light there was came from two small windows in the sloping roof, closely barred, and festooned with cobwebs. It was the most wretched place I had ever seen, and for some time after waking from sleep, or stupor, I knew not whether it was not an underground dungeon in which I found myself prisoner.

I lay for some time but half-awake, staring at the bare walls of my prison with a kind of stupid wonder, as if it had been a strange picturein a book which I contemplated half-asleep, and nowise concerned in

the matter. Then, by slow degrees, came a little more consciousness, and I felt that I was in some remote degree interested in this dreary place, and in this aching mass of flesh and bone lying on a mattress but a little softer than the ground.

I tried to lift my right arm, but found it powerless, and smarting with some recent wound. On this I raised my left, which moved freely enough, but not without some pain, and felt my head, which was bound with wet rags. After this effort I closed my eyes, and was awakened presently by a faint odour of vinegar and a hand pressing a mug of water to my lips with almost womanly softness.

"Who's that?" I asked, opening my eyes.

"One who has deserved your scorn and hatred, but will do his best to merit your forgiveness," answered a familiar voice; and I saw that the face bent over me was Philip Hay's.

"You here!" I cried; "I don't want your services. I would rather perish of thirst than take a drop of water from the hand of such a traitor. Go to your worthy employer, sir, and claim your reward.”

"I have got it, Bob. When a wise man has done with the tool he has used for his dirty work he takes care to put it out of the way. Everard Lestrange promised me a hundred pounds-I have his written bond for the sum-for the safe carrying through of last night's work; but, you see, he finds it cheaper to hand me over to the Honourable East India Company. Dead men tell no tales, you know, Bob; and a man shipped for Bengal is as good as dead; for what with war, and fever, and famine, and hardship, 'tis long odds if he ever sees Europe again. Drink the water, Robert, in token of forgiveness. You and I are in the same boat, and it is best we should be friends. I was never your enemy but in the way of business, and plotted against you for hire just as better men will plot against a king. Say you forgive me, child. We are too miserable to afford ourselves the luxury of resentment. But for my care it is ten to one if your eyes had ever opened on this wretched place, and if you had not been thrust into a nameless grave by night with scarce a prayer said over your poor clay."

"I do not thank you for that," I answered bitterly; "death would be better than to waken in such a place as this."

"Alas, I claim no thanks, Bob; I only ask you to believe that I love thee."

"Is it possible for me to think that after the way you have used

me ?"

"It was in my bond, Bob. You have heard of the honour that obtains among thieves. I had pledged myself to carry through this business; and then there was another inducement-I desperately wanted that hundred pounds. Egad, Bob, I could have sold my own brother for less money. Joseph's brethren did it, you know, and he treated them uncommonly handsomely afterwards. Besides, I was in that reptile's pay."

"And your liberal Mr. Cave, and your history of the Amazons ?" "All purely mythological as those ladies themselves, Robert. I have done an occasional article for Cave; and I know his scrub and hackney writer Samuel Johnson-a man that talks better than Socrates, and is content to toil in a garret for the wages of a hackney-coachman. But the money I spent while I was with thee came from Everard Lestrange."

"And that account of your life and adventures with which you entertained me was as mythical as the rest, I conclude ?"

"No, 'fore Gad, Bob. I gave you a tolerably true account of myself. My sins there were but of omission. I did not tell you that after leaving Mallandaine's service I became henchman and hanger-on of your kinswoman's amiable stepson, Mr. Lestrange, curse him!"

Here a thought flashed across me.

"And you have pandered to his vices, no doubt, as you did to those your first patron. You can tell me how my poor little foster-sister was robbed of innocence and friends and home."

of

"In the usual fashion, Bob," my companion answered, with a sigh. "It is as common as an old street-ballad. The very staleness of the thing makes it hateful to a man of genius. But your man of genius must keep body and soul together somehow. There were all the old hackneyed promises-intentions honourable, family reasons why secrecy must be preserved-the old worn-out pleas; and the poor child was but too easily deluded. Your modern fine gentleman will swear to a lie with the easiest air in the world. Men have always done these things, you know; but there was a time when they did them with a bad grace, and were liable to be sorry afterwards. Shame and remorse are out of fashion now. Mr. Lestrange carried his prize over to Paris, where he introduced her to seven other spirits worse than himself, if that's possible, and was angry with the poor little thing because she sickened at such company. In short, our Don Juan soon grew tired of your little rustic beauty.

"He would have planted her on an elderly scion of the haute noblesse, who wanted something young and fresh and pretty to complete the furniture of his summer pavilion near Choisy le Roi. But against this arrangement the girl rebelled sturdily; and by this time Sir Marcus had begun to urge upon his son the necessity of an immediate marriage with the heiress, who might slip through their fingers at any moment. So Mr. Lestrange hurries back to London, bringing his mistress with him, whom he hides in a shabby lodging hard by Covent Garden; and being well-informed of your movements by my agency, he sees that his case is somewhat desperate, and that only violent measures can serve him. Whereupon he buys over the French maid—a deceitful, abandoned creature, always ripe for treachery—and plans the agreeable plot to which you-and I, worse luck!-have fallen victims."

"And that forged letter, on the strength of which Sir Marcus was

so quick to condemn me? I make no doubt you could give me some enlightenment on that subject."

"Well, yes, I have heard of the forged letter. Sir Marcus Lestrange is a diplomatist; and it is just possible he played into his son's hand. Be sure he never relished the notion of your inheriting the bulk of Lady Barbara's fortune, which it is likely you would have done had father and son not succeeded in blasting your character. They have done their work pretty well this time; and may congratulate themselves on a rare success."

"But do you think I shall not tell my own story, and denounce their hellish stratagems, when I escape from this place ?"

"Yes, friend Bob, when you escape from durance. God grant you and I may live to see the day that sets us at liberty; but I fear me my hair and yours too will be white as silver when that day comes."

"What!" I roared, "do you mean to say that in a Christian land, in this free country, of whose liberty Englishmen boast so loudly, they can make us as close prisoners as if we were clapped in some underground cell of the French Bastille, by virtue of Madame Pompadour's lettre de cachet?"

"I mean to say that the crimping sergeant into whose jaws I introduced you-more shame to me for a treacherous scoundrel!-will swear to an engagement between both of us, which latter turn of fortune but serves me fairly for my wickedness. He will hold us to an engagement never made, Bob-for the difference between crimping and kidnapping is only a distinction of words-and we shall be kept in this loathsome hole with the rest of those unlucky wretches whom you see sprawling yonder, until the Honourable East India Company are ready to draft us on board ship secretly somewhere down the river, and keep us close under hatches till we are out at open sea; and then they will land us among the cobras and tigers, to defend John Company's factories, and fight the yellow-faced Hindoos."

"But is there no such thing as escape, Phil ?" I asked, in a whisper, and with a glance towards one of the small close-barred windows.

"Alas, no, Bob! We are a valuable commodity; and rely on it they keep us in a strong box."

"What! and we are held in durance within a hundred yards of the Mansion House, and can find no means of communicating with the authorities?"

“Nay, Bob, our gaolers will take care to prevent us. We are here in the very heart of savage London; and not that jungle to which we shall by and by be drafted is better stocked with foul creeping reptiles and beasts of prey. Alas, my simple Templar, thou hast heard men talk of Alsatia, but didst not know that in this civilised city there lies a wilderness more dangerous than burning Afric's sands or Agra's pathless mountains, peopled by creatures as deadly, and even more treacherous than tiger or serpent. Thou hast not heard of the ruined

houses of Shoe-lane and Stonecutter-street, and the deeds that are done in the darkness behind those blind-shuttered windows. To thee Black Mary's Hole and Copenhagen House are empty sounds, signifying nothing; but to the citizen of London those names have a sinister meaning. All this part of London is dedicated to infamy and crime; and I know not when the reforming power shall arise to sweep away these dens of iniquity. Sure 'twould take another great fire to purify them, and another plague would be scarce a calamity if it decimated their inhabitants."

"But where are we, Phil?" I asked, addressing him with my accustomed friendliness, and for the moment forgetting what reason I had to hate him. I was indeed, as he had said, too wretched to be very angry. Every other feeling was swallowed up in the overwhelming thought of my misery.

"In the next house to that where you were married. It was Mr. Lestrange made his bargain with the parson, not I. They were lies I told you about the business. My noble patron made his plans, and found the crimping sergeant, and you and I went meek as sheep to the slaughter. We fought lustily for our lives though, Bob, both of us. Half-a-dozen hulking wretches, armed to the teeth, surrounded us, and when you went down I had my battle for liberty. But the odds were too many against me; and when I felt my arms pinioned, and the iron rim of a pistol's muzzle unpleasantly cold against my forehead, I threw up the sponge. 'Tis little good wounding a hydra; and I saw more hulking scoundrels lurking in the doorway. I knocked under, luckily without much hurt, and with all my senses about me, while you, poor wretch, lay like a log at my feet. They picked you up, and carried you through a passage and doorway leading from that house into this-I following. I got a glimpse of other rooms as we were led up to this, which is at the top of a somewhat lofty house; and I saw they were full of poor wretches playing cards, and sprawling on mattresses, and drinking and brawling, by the light of foul-smelling tallow-candles, prisoners like ourselves. Whereby I conclude there is a house full of recruits for the Honourable East India Company's service, waiting till there is a vessel ready on which to draft them. The Company charter ships nowadays; but not long ago they did all their trading on their own bottoms."

It was quite dark by this time; and I asked my companion how long we had been in this dismal place.

66

Something less than twenty hours. It was last night, or this morning, at two o'clock, that we were taken prisoners. There has been an old hag in and out half-a-dozen times to see you. They want you to live, you see, for you are of some value alive, and dead there is the trouble of your burial. Folks have a knack of dying under this kind. of durance. It is not three months since the good citizens about St. Bride's Churchyard were scandalised by frequent funerals that were

performed under cover of night, with maimed rites, and no entry made in the register. 'Twas found on inquiry that the corpses came from a receiving-house for East-India recruits hard by, where a fever had broken out among the unhappy creatures. But this is no cheering talk, Bob, for a sick man."

"Death is the only cheerful thought you can give me,” I answered bitterly. "Death! Sure, I am dead. What can death do more than treachery has done for me?-to cut me off from all I hold dear; and, alas, I die dishonoured, and my darling will be told I was a liar and hypocrite, who never loved her, and married another woman, scorning that sweet girl's affection. Death! 'Tis a thousand times worse than death. It is purgatory, a state of torment dreadful as the inextinguishable fires of hell. Get from the side of my bed, Philip Hay; for the first time I can lift my right arm I shall surely raise it to slay you. 'Tis by your help I lie perishing here."

"I deserve no better at your hands," he answered moodily; "but you will scarcely care to murder a wretch so ready to die. It would be like slaughtering a rotten sheep. What have I to live for more than you, Master Robert? Toil and danger and scanty food, and death from the hand of some tawny heathen. Faith, we are in the same boat; and to fight and throw each other overboard would but be mutual charity!"

I heard a key turn, and the hag of whom Phil Hay had spoken came into the room with a candle and our suppers-a tempting banquet of mouldy cheese and coarse bread.

"If you want beer you must pay for it," she said, with an imbecile grin; and Philip threw her a shilling, for which she brought by and by a quart of liquor which my companion declared to be the vilest twopenny he had ever tasted.

"These places are on the model of sponging-houses," he said; " and if a prisoner has money he is made to bleed pretty freely. The penniless they must feed somehow, to keep life in the bodies, which are wanted as food for gunpowder."

"I have a pocket-book full of notes," said I; "would it not be wise to spend them in bribing yonder hag?"

"Be sure you have the money before you talk of spending it. In such dens as these they are apt to be handy at picking a pocket. Your coat and waistcoat lie under your head for a pillow. The money was in your coat-pocket, I suppose?"

Yes, the pocket-book had been there, and it was gone-stolen in the scuffle, no doubt. I bitterly regretted this money, for I could not but believe it might have enabled me to buy over my gaolers to my own interest; but I think I still more regretted the book, which contained those comforting sentences of Scripture and philosophy hastily scribbled by the hand of my benefactress.

"Is it my fate through life to lose everything?" I asked. "Parents,

before I had ever known them; friends and good name, and money and liberty. Did I enter this world doomed to loss and slavery; predoomed, because of my father's folly? Are my teeth to be for ever set on edge by the sour grapes he ate ?"

Happily and this amidst such utter misery was the solitary consoling circumstance-I had yet the locket with my lady's portrait and hair, which I had long ago hung round my neck by a stout black ribbon, and had worn faithfully every day of my life.

“Even if you had the money I doubt if it would serve you," said Phil Hay, seeing me lost in a gloomy despair. "The crone who waits on us is half an idiot, and too silly to aid you if she had the will. Our gaolers are surly ruffians who would take your money and laugh at you afterwards. "Tis as well to be spared the anguish of a delusive hope. No, Bob, there is no chance for us but to serve our time out yonder, with the chance of coming back some day, if it is our destiny to escape fever and sword, and famine and shipwreck."

66

"What is the period? or is there any fixed period for our slavery ?" Alack, I know not, friend. Were it the regular service to which we were bound, there are rules I could tell you; but of this irregular trader's company I can tell you nothing. It is an accursed monopoly, opposed to all laws of justice and common sense; and its members make their own regulations. There was a sturdy endeavour some ten years since to throw open our commerce with the East to all adventurous merchants; but by specious argument and solid bribery, in the shape of a loan to government, the Company got their charter renewed, and have now a pretty sure footing in that distant world for which you and I have our places booked."

After this I sought no further knowledge. I was weakened by the pain of my wounds, and lay languid, almost apathetic, while Philip Hay watched and nursed me with a tenderness that could not but touch my heart, despite my sense of his late infernal treachery. 'Twas strange to be thus cared for by the man who had destroyed me.

I remained in this half-torpid condition for some days, eating scarce anything, and only nourished by some very vile broth which Phil induced the hag to procure for me on his assertion that I was at death's door, and a little brandy, obtained from the same source, and paid for almost as dear as if it had been melted gold.

Under my companion's care my strength slowly came back, and I was able to rise from my wretched pallet, wash and dress myself, and pace slowly to and fro our dreary dungeon-than which I little thought ever to inhabit a more dismal abode. Then came upon me in all its intensity the agony of despair; and never in all my after career did I suffer pangs so keen as those that rent my heart during my habitation of this loathsome garret. Cut off alive from all I loved, tortured by the certainty that the woman for whom I would have given my life must needs believe me the basest of men, there was no source, save

One to which I had not yet learned to apply myself, whence I could hope for comfort.

"Dora will believe me a hypocrite and a liar," I repeated to myself perpetually; and this one idea seemed to be the beginning and end of all my misery. My noble benefactress's ill opinion, her bitter disappointment in one she had trusted, I could not yet bring myself to consider. My dear love, my plighted wife, forsaken by me without a word, abandoned to the slow tortures of domestic persecution; it was of her I thought, and for a long while of her alone. No, not alone; one lurid image glared red across the sad picture of my love's despair, and wore the shape of Everard Lestrange. I had not yet learned to entreat compassion from the Divine Judge of all mankind, but daily and nightly did I implore the vengeance of Heaven on the head of this consummate villain, and that I might be permitted to become the instrument of that almighty wrath. For a meeting with this man, foot to foot and hand to hand, I thirsted with even a more passionate desire than that with which I languished to fling myself at Dora Hemsley's feet and assure her of my fidelity. Alas, not for years were either of these meetings to take place; and here was I, at twenty years of age, prisoner in a garret, with no hope of change except that which would send me forth to eternal exile; yes, eternal; for what were the chances of future distant years to a wretch who hungered for present relief to his immeasurable woes? It was just possible that some day in the remote future would restore me to liberty and England; but could I live upon the sorry comfort of such a possibility? And I might come back to find Dora's grave, or to know that she was married and happy, and had long forgotten me. It would be the return of a ghost, not a living man, a miserable shadow of past hope and joy restored from the grave to trouble the peace of the living. Great heaven, what an ingenious torment had Everard Lestrange imagined for the gratification of his malice! To have murdered me would have been a poor revenge compared to this hellish conspiracy, which cut me off from all that constitutes life, and yet left me to exist and suffer.

The injuries I had received in the brief skirmish that followed my wretched wedding were severe, and in spite of Philip Hay's care of me I suffered a relapse, and lay prostrate with a low fever, while the garret we inhabited received several new inmates in the person of recruits voluntary and recruits involuntary, like Hay and myself. The former smoked, drank, and played cards, with much contentment and jollity, the latter alternately bewailed their fate, cursed their captors, and joined in the amusements of their happier companions. Of the land to which we were destined to travel, most of these had but a vague and foolish notion. Some confounded the East Indies with the two Americas, others believed the Great Mogul still powerful as in the days of Aurungzebe, and ruler over millions of African negroes. All had a confused idea that the Indians of Asia scalped their enemies like the

copper-coloured natives of Canada, that an Englishman single-handed was a match for about fifty of these Hindoo pagans, that diamondmines and temples amply furnished with jewelled idols accessible to the greed of any European adventurer abounded throughout the oriental continent, and that gold-dust was the staple of the soil. Ignorance so complete, or half knowledge so bewildering, as obtained among these men it would have been almost impossible to conceive, had one not overheard their conversation; and I was amazed to find that a couple of fine gentlemen who had been surprised into an engagement under the influence of a tavern punchbowl were no better informed than the tag-rag and bobtail that formed the rest of the company.

Utterly helpless though I was, I could not shut from my mind all idea of escape. I questioned Philip Hay upon this subject; but he bade me at once dismiss so futile hope from my mind.

"You can't suppose I should omit to reconnoitre our quarters," he said. "I took my survey before those fellows came in, and discovered the hopelessness of our case. If you were strong enough to climb like a cat-instead of which you can but just crawl across the room-there would be no chance for us. We are here at the top of a lofty house; below us a stone-paved yard amply furnished with spikes, and in which half-a-dozen soldier-fellows with a stout bulldog for their companion seem to make their perpetual abode. Nor is this all, for as your own eyes will inform you, our windows are stoutly barred; and our friends, the recruits who have joined of their own accord, would no doubt be prompt to curry favour by giving the alarm and joining against us in any shindy that might follow. No, Bob; so long as we remain here there is nothing for us but patience and fortitude. They must convey us somehow from here to shipboard, and on that passage rests our sole hope. If you see any chance of escape then, snatch it without wasting a moment on consideration; you can't easily be worse off than you are, for once safely shipped our doom is sealed. And now keep yourself quiet, Bob, so that you may the sooner get the better of this foolish fever, which unfits you for seizing any opportunity that may offer."

I did not recover from the fever in time to avail myself of any chance that might have arisen between our removal and our shipment, for within a few days of this conversation we were suddenly aroused in the dead of the night with a summons to prepare for our journey. Our preparations were of the briefest, the wealthiest among us possessing no more than a bundle; and then, amid hurry and clamour unutterable, we descended the steep dilapidated stair, dimly lighted by a single oil-lamp, and guarded by Sergeant O'Blagg and half-a-dozen private soldiers. I was barely able to limp downstairs, leaning heavily on Philip's shoulder.

"O Phil," I cried, as we went down, "I hope they won't part us!" Yes, strange as this may seem, in the utter abandonment of my state I now clung to him who had betrayed me into this misery. In

the living grave to which we had both descended, his was the sole familiar face that linked me with the past and assured me of my own identity; and even the sense of this I might well have lost amidst surroundings so strange, and under circumstances so far beyond the limits of everyday experience.

Myself and two other invalids, whom I had not encountered until this moment, were thrust into a wagon, where we lay helpless upon the straw at the bottom. The wagon was then filled as closely as it could be packed with other recruits, amongst whom I was glad to perceive my betrayer, Philip Hay. Half-a-dozen sturdy fellows, in military dress, and armed to the teeth, sat at the entrance of the wagon, and kept guard over those within. My late acquaintance, the Irish sergeant, took his post beside the driver, whom he directed; and in this order (the wagon holding in all about twenty people) we rumbled along the deserted streets by many windings and turnings, which led I knew not where. I did, indeed, contrive to lift a corner of the covering of the wagon and peer out into the night, but could distinguish Chance of esnothing except that the streets were dark and narrow. cape there was none, had my condition been ever so favourable to the attempt.

After a journey which seemed to me interminable, the wagon came to a stop, and we were taken out in a dreary spot down the river, on the Middlesex shore, and as I believe somewhere opposite Greenwich, for I perceived a steeple and houses backed by rising ground, which I supposed to belong to that place. Here we had little time for looking around us, but were at once huddled into a boat, like a flock of animals destined for slaughter; and as the rowers' oars dipped slowly into the river, I could but think of that other boat in which we were all of us destined to journey, and that it might be better for most of us were we but shadows hastening to the lower world under the grim convoy of Charon. A little way ahead of us we saw the stern of a large vessel, with lights burning dimly in the faint glimmer of early morning. This ship was our destination. We were handed up the ladder, and conducted to a dismal region between decks, where we were ordered to shake down as best we might, and where an allowance of hot coffee and ship-biscuit was served out to such as had the capacity to eat. I had none, nor any inclination to stir from the spot where I had placed myself. I sat in my wretched berth staring blankly before me, with such a sense of anguish as was even yet new to me. Until this period I must have hoped, or the despair of this period could not have been so bitter to me. I listened idly to the perpetual tramp of hurrying feet, the roar and clamour of preparation above my head; and yet not quite idly, for I knew that every movement of those eager sailors speeded the ship that was to carry me from all I loved.

The sun rose as the vessel weighed anchor, and the scene between decks, as the glorious eastern light streamed in upon us through every

cabin-window and open hatchway, would need the pencil of Mr. Hogarth to depict. Women and children huddled in corners, invalided wretches groaning on their narrow mattresses and cursed by the hurrying seamen whom their presence incommoded, soldiers and recruits for the most part half drunk and already bawling for more liquor, while some determined gamblers had contrived to settle to a game of cards, with the top of an empty cask for their table. On every side riot, confusion, squalor, and debauchery; while above us rose the mellow sound of the sailors' voices singing as they heaved the anchor.

"We're off, Bob," cried Philip Hay, as a loud cheer rang out from every quarter of the ship. "Good-bye, mother country, and bad luck to you! No cruel stepdame ever treated her brats worse than you've served me; and I wish you no good at parting, except that you may be rich enough to provide a gallows for one gentleman of my acquaintance. Nay, Bob, cheer up; things mayn't be quite as bad as they seem. There are fortunes to be picked up out yonder by clever fellows, and who knows but you and I may have our chance? We're beginning the world like new-born babes, and it may fall out we have silver spoons in our mouths."

I turned from him, sick at heart, and flung myself face downwards on my mattress, sobbing aloud. Yes, I had hoped until now. I had believed that some event-nay, even a miracle from Heaven itself— must befall to save me from this hapless fate; and now I knew that hope was gone, and Dora, reputation, friends, and country were alike lost to me!

And thus, for the second time, I began the world.
CHAPTER XIV.

MY HONOURABLE MASTERS.

Now followed a passage of my life so long and dreary, a period of such utter and hideous monotony, that the memory of it is rather like the confused recollection of a procession of nightmare-dreams than of an actual experience in this waking world. For ten months our ship ploughed the waters; for the greater part of a year we wretches huddled together in our dingy quarters, or snatched a brief respite from gloom and suffocation at such times as the captain graciously allowed us to take the air on an obscure corner of the upper deck. No words can tell how we suffered; and if the helpless African bondsmen in the middle passage suffer more than we did, man's cruelty to his fellow-men is indeed an illimitable quantity. Our quarters were of the closest, our food of the roughest; water was doled out to us by the veriest thimblefuls; the atmosphere we breathed was a compound of foulest stenches; the very pigs and poultry-narrow as was the room allowed them-fared better than we. And this slow torture lasted for ten months.

Brief was the excitement which the sight of land afforded to us; 'twas a bitter, desperate kind of pleasure, a very passion of longing and despair, like that of a lover who snatches one fond look at the mistress who can never be his. To this day I can recall the violent throbbing of my heart as, through the thick haze of evening, Madeira rose upon our larboard bow, and we poor wretches crowded together at the narrow porthole and almost fought for a sight of that strange island. 'Twas a month after this that a shoal of dolphins played round the ship; and as these free and happy creatures sported in the sun, I could but remember the legend of Arion, and long for some friendly monster whose scaly back might bear me to the shore. Alas, the days of fable are long gone, and the gods come no more upon earth to rescue man from his fellow-man's oppression!

We had not been long afloat before my fever left me, still very feeble and unlike my former self, but no longer an invalid. The first business of my convalescence was to obtain the means of writingwhich I accomplished with some difficulty, so scant were the accommodations of these dismal quarters. Provided at last with these, I penned a long letter to Lady Barbara, detailing the story of my capture, and describing my present miserable condition. I besought her, by the love she had borne my father, by her Christian pity for undeserved misfortune, to attempt my early rescue from a fate so hopeless. I warned this generous friend that the same treachery which had compassed my ruin would blacken my character, and that slanders the most plausible would be invented to rob me of her confidence; and then followed the incoherent entreaties of despair, passionate lamentations, wild messages of affection for the beloved girl I had for ever lost, which, in some small measure, relieved an overcharged heart and brain.

This letter I directed under cover to the milliner in Long Acre, and having secured it, placed the packet in my waistcoat-pocket in readiness for any homeward-bound vessel with which our captain might exchange greetings. Day after day, week after week, I watched and waited for the friendly sail that was to convey this letter; and my heart sickened as the days wore out, and no vessel came within hail of us. Nor was this all; for on one occasion I endured the sharper agonies of disappointed hope, when, on our captain hailing a tradingvessel, she turned out to be a brig laden with Spanish wine, and bound for the Mauritius.

We had been more than six months afloat when the opportunity I so longed for at last arrived in the shape of a homeward-bound Indiaman, to which the long-boat was speedily despatched with a couple of officers. I was not the only one among the recruits eager to send home some greeting; but when I and half-a-dozen others crowded to the open hatchway and besought the captain to despatch our letters, the kindly gentleman laughed us to scorn. Did we think he could trouble

himself with the whims and humours of such dirt? And what had we to write about, pray? Complaints of our treatment, no doubt, which would only make mischief at home, and rob the Honourable East-India Company of good soldiers.

"No," cried the captain, "I know what a set of lying, ungrateful rascals you are, and you shall send none of your lies to England by my help."

This speech the skipper liberally garnished with such blasphemies as were the salt of his daily discourse, and then roared to one of his men to shut down the hatchway and drive that vermin into their holes.

There is no despot so awful as the tyrant who reigns upon his own quarterdeck. Against his cruel will there is no resistance except crime, and to oppose his hellish tyranny is to be at once involved in rebellion and bloodshed. The spark of mutiny is a fire that spreads swift as flame among the parched jungle-grass of the Sunderbunds, and I knew that it would need but little to stir that idle Pandemonium between decks into an active Inferno. So I crept back to my hole with the other vermin, and lay there as desolate as, and more desperate than, Job; for I needed no tempter to bid me curse God and die. I think at this time my sufferings had banished all Christian feeling from my mind; and if I endured life when self-murder seemed a relief so easy, it was from no faith in the Divine Providence, no fear of the almighty wrath, but from the one savage hope that, in some time to come, when my cup of anguish had been drained to the very dregs, Fate would give me the opportunity of being revenged on the author of my misery.

After the captain's refusal to send my letter I abandoned myself utterly to despair, and fell into a state scarcely less degraded than that of my companions. Like them I no longer kept count of the wretched days; like them I slept a dull dreamless sleep through the dreary nights; like them I ate and drank the scanty portion given to me with the appetite of some half-savage beast; like them I forgot the existence of a better world than this floating hell, and blasphemed the God who ruled above that happier earth. And thus the time went past us somehow; in days that had far less of colour and variety than the waves that rolled by our narrow portholes; in nights that were darker than the storm-clouds that brooded over our vessel in the time of the monsoon; until one dull stormy morning there rose the cry of land, and a friendly sailor told us that the temple of Juggernaut was visible about fifteen miles to the north-west.

Every creature amongst our luckless herd felt a curiosity to behold this first spectacle which our new country offered us. We crowded to the hatchway, and in the confusion of the moment were suffered to gaze our fill. Dimly discernible to the naked eye appeared the dark outline. of a pagoda which, at that distance, seemed not unlike a rude churchtower. Bernier's Travels had made me familiar with the monstrous

worship that prevails in this temple of the Indian Moloch, the road to which for fifty miles is bestrewn with bleaching bones and rotting carrion, and I felt that the shrine of a religion so ghastly was a fitting object to greet my eyes at the end of this fatal voyage.

"Would to Heaven I could believe in the Brahmin's Paradise, and after steeping my senses in some maddening spirit, cast myself beneath the wheels of the monster god's triumphal car!" I said to myself, as I stood among the squalid crowd, gazing at that dim outline in the dis

tance.

We fancied ourselves now at the end of our journey; but we were doomed to lie within sight of Juggernaut for two days and nights, and then made but slow head against the swell and current from the northeast. The coast of Orixa is so low as to be indistinguishable from a very short distance, and our sailors were compelled to feel their way by soundings every half-hour. Meanwhile the situation of the herd. below was, if possible, a little increased in wretchedness, for the ship was being painted in order to make a fair show in harbour; and we, poor creatures, had the worst of the paint, which did much to render an already stifling atmosphere utterly unbearable. Nor did we fare any better by venturing on deck, whence we were driven by execrations from the busy seamen, and had thus no alternative from the misery of our hole below.

I wondered, as I heard the men whistling gaily at their work, to think how brave a thing the vessel would look riding at anchor, and how little any stranger who gazed upon her would suspect the anguish and cruelty that had been suffered between her decks.

On the next day we anchored in Sagor Roads, and from an unoccupied porthole I enjoyed a clear view of Sagor Island—a flat, swampy shore, with tall trees that looked like firs, and beneath them vivid green jungle. Here I saw animals browsing among the swampy grass, and was afterwards informed that these were wild-deer, and that the island is furthermore infested by tigers, who will even swim off from the coast to destroy any imprudent boatman who trusts his bark within their ken, -whence it is that no bribe will induce the natives to approach this savage wilderness.

While I peered from my porthole at this low-lying island, a dark object floated close beside my post of observation, and drifted slowly past with the tide. It was a human corpse, consigned to the sacred river-perhaps ere death had closed the scene-by the pious hands of its dutiful progeny.

"Alas, poor ghost," I said, "art thou the sole friend who dost welcome me to this barbarous shore, where superstition has added her own peculiar horrors to the natural terrors of death?"

While we lay at anchor a crowd of boats surrounded us, laden with fruit and other merchandise, while Sircars-men who practise as agents and money-lenders, and who surpass their fellow-practitioners, the Jews,

in the arts of their profession-exercised their fascinations upon the captain and officers of the ship. Now, for the first time, I had the opportunity of observing the living Gentoo, and in his delicatelymoulded form and finely-chiselled features I saw much to induce the belief that from this oriental stock sprang that flower of antique civilisation, the Greek.

After lying for some hours at anchor we approached the side of the river opposite Kedgeree, and I beheld a dismal shore, thickly wooded, black, monotonous-the very home of all noxious and fatal creatures, from the tiger and the cobra, down to the scorpion and mosquito. Night closed in as I gazed upon this dreary coast, and lightnings flashed incessantly above the fever-haunted woods. The sailors spoke of the place as the grave of all hapless wretches who were doomed to remain many days in its neighbourhood.

At Diamond Harbour we anchored again, and here we recruits were drafted into a smaller vessel sent down from Calcutta for our reception; and on board this we made our voyage up the Hooghly River, a noble stream, across which our vessel tacked as in a sea.

And now the end of our troublous transit had come, or not quite the end, for we were put ashore some miles from the British settlement to which we were bound, and had a weary march through rank woods of oriental foliage, and afterwards by an ill-made sandy road, scarce worthy the name, with ditches of stagnant water on either side. This being the dry season, we tramped through an intolerable cloud of dust, which, together with the heat, well-nigh stifled us; and so onward, with but brief respite, till we came to one of the ill-guarded gates of Calcutta.

Hence we were marched to the fort, and here we found a very meagre force of mixed soldiery-English, Hindoos, and Topases, so called from the fact of their wearing hats, a species of native Christians, a mixed race, produced by the intermarriage of natives with the early Portuguese settlers. I had heard and read so much of oriental magnificence as seen by Jesuit travellers at Delhi and other cities of the East, that I had good reason to be disgusted with the English settlement to which fate had brought me; but it was yet the humble beginning of British rule, and the conqueror who was to trample on the neck of Indian power, and transform a trading company into a splendid despotism, was but upon the threshold of his marvellous career. I look back to this period, remembering that it was then I first heard the name of Robert Clive, and can still but wonder at the obscure commencement of that heroic romance of which this young man was destined to be the protagonist. When I landed on the shores of the Hooghly in February 1751, it was but six years since Clive had arrived at Madras, with no higher hope than belongs to the position of a clerk or writer in the Company's civil service. He came, poor, friendless,

VOL. VI.

KK

and lonely, to the shore of that land which he was fated to hold by a grander power than India had felt since the sceptre of the Moguls slipped from the loosening grasp of Aurungzebe. I, who have drained the bitter cup which stepmother Fortune offers to the lips of friendless youth, can but think with a peculiar sympathy of this unfriended lad, who was sent to India chiefly because his father knew not what to do with him in England, and whose lofty spirit sickened at the common round of daily drudgery, while his warm heart languished in the loneliness of a land so strange.

Nothing could well be more insignificant than Robert Clive's start in life. He whose name was to be in less than ten years the wonder of the civilised world, and the chief glory of Great Britain, had not a single friend, nay, scarce an acquaintance, in Madras, and was of a temper too wayward and reserved to seek introductions by the common arts of society. Studious as he was proud, he esteemed the admission to the Governor's excellent library the highest privilege he enjoyed. I have been told how that constitutional melancholy, which was so near akin to madness, displayed itself even at this early age, and how one day, on a companion coming into the young man's room in Writers'buildings, Clive begged him to take up a pistol and fire it out of the window. The man complied. "Then, by Heaven, I am reserved for something," cried Clive; "for I have twice snapped that pistol at my head." Alas, 'twas but a premature rehearsal of a future tragedy!

When I first saw Calcutta, nothing could well be darker than the aspect of affairs in that presidency. John Company held his ground as yet only on sufferance, and by virtue of handsome payments to the Soubahdar, whose rule was at once nearer and stronger than the somewhat shadowy sovereignty of Delhi. Nor was the Soubahdar the only power our Company had to fear. France had in these days an apparently sure footing in Hindostan, while her interests were well cared for and her power audaciously pushed by Joseph Francis Dupleix, the Governor of Pondicherry. It was but five years since the bombardment of Madras by the French admiral, De la Bourdonnais, ending in the capitulation of that town and the Governor of Pondicherry's infamous violation of the treaty of surrender, whereby the Admiral had pledged himself to restore the settlement on payment of a moderate ransom. This notorious treachery had resulted in triumph to the traitor and disgrace to the honourable man, who strove hard to redeem his word with the English, and who, on his return to France, was flung into the Bastille, and left to languish there for a period of three years, as an encouragement for future honourable-minded admirals. For here I think we may retort upon M. de Voltaire the jest which he afterwards made about our own unfortunate Admiral Byng; since the iniquitous sentence that deprived Byng of life was no more cruel than the slow torture which murdered De la Bourdonnais, a much greater man.

Dupleix, on the contrary, had succeeded in elevating himself to the giddiest summit of power by a series of intrigues with native princes and native usurpers. He was now Governor of the Mogul dominions on the Coast of Coromandel from the river Kistna to Cape Comorin. He affected an oriental magnificence known only to native princes, and displayed amongst his splendid insignia the princely badge of the fish; while his friends boldly affirmed that ere long the Mogul on his throne would tremble at the name of Dupleix. The English beheld these triumphs of a rival nation with an indifference that might proceed from either apathy or despair. They made no attempt to stem a torrent that threatened to overwhelm them, and Major Laurence, the commander of the troops, chose this critical juncture as a fitting time for his return to England.

The fort at Calcutta was ill-defended, and worse garrisoned. The wide ditch, dug in 1742 by the Indian inhabitants of the colony, at their own expense, and under a panic-like terror of a Morattoe invasion, had never been completed. It was designed to completely encircle the Company's bounds, and would have been, when perfect, seven miles in extent; but when three miles had been completed, after a labour of six months, the Bengalese, with true Indian supineness, desisted from the work, nor did the Company care for its completion, seeing that no Morattoes had ever been on the western side of the river within sixty miles of Calcutta, and that Allaverdy, the Soubahdar of Bengal and Orixa, exerted himself vigorously to prevent their incursions into the Island of Cossimbuzar.

When I first entered Fort William, I was completely ignorant of the present condition of the country in which I found myself. Hakluyt's voyages and Bernier's pleasant book had made me tolerably familiar with the splendid court and city of the Mahometan conquerors of Hindostan, but of Indian history since the death of Aurungzebe and the decline of the Mogul power I knew scarcely anything; and I cannot but wonder at the small degree of interest which Englishmen at home felt in the adventures of their countrymen in this strange land.

When Philip Hay and I, with some twenty other recruits, reached our destination, we found the meagre garrison of Calcutta commanded by five captains, with corresponding subordinate officers, who agreed in nothing so heartily as their contempt for the station to which they were appointed, and their neglect of all duties connected with it. To drink, to sleep, to gamble, to intrigue with loose-lived native women, and to absent themselves from their quarters on every possible occasion, in order to indulge their fancy for the field-sports of the adjoining country, formed the rule of their lives. They had indeed sorry inducement for fidelity to their posts. Nothing could be more dismal than life in the fort, and in the town of Calcutta, where the few European

houses scattered amongst the ruder native habitations were in the occupation of British traders and merchants, who thought of nothing but the rapid increase of their wealth, or were absorbed in the discussion of their petty disputes with the managers of the Company at home.

And thus did Sergeant O'Blagg's florid promises of oriental glory and plunder result in the guardianship of a factory, or storehouse for cotton-stuffs; and I found myself at twenty years of age the companion of a mixed assemblage, and subject to the tyranny of the Irish sergeant, who proved himself a truculent scoundrel, before whom the Topases and native soldiers-spahis, or seapoys, as they were called by us-quailed and trembled.

I have little need to linger over this first portion of my Indian experiences. My life for the space of one year was a blank, the monotony of which was broken only by some petty variety in the details of my suffering. I, whose youth had known only the refined labours of a scholar, found myself working in a ditch with a mixed gang of British recruits and tawny Hindoos, at some necessary repair of our feeble fortifications, exposed to the glare of a meridian sun in a coppercoloured sky, and threatened with the lash at every symptom of flagging industry.

Our military education meanwhile was of a most primitive order. We shared the drill of the sepoys, who wore their native costume of turban, shirt, and loose cotton trousers, and wielded their native arms of sword and target. The number of our officers was in ridiculous proportion to the pitiful handful of troops, not two hundred in all, and but sixty of these Englishmen. They were too lazy to give us much instruction, too indifferent or unexpectant of danger to be interested in their duty; nor did the seizure and French occupation of Madras, with its loss of millions to the Company, arouse the garrison of Calcutta to any extraordinary exertion. It appears to me, indeed, that it has ever been a quality of the British mind to await the imminent approach of a peril before taking measures to prevent it; and it was only in the fatal summer of '56 that the five captains of our garrison discovered how ill we were defended.
CHAPTER XV.

PROVIDENCE SENDS ME A FRIEND.

DURING my first dismal year at Calcutta, the native magistracy of that presidency was chiefly in the hands of a black zemindar, or magistrate, one Govindram Metre, who acted as subordinate of the English zemindar, and deputy during the intervals that frequently occurred between the lapse of one appointment and the commencement of another. It is not to be supposed that a government which depended

upon the instructions of a committee at fifteen thousand miles' distance, and was subject to the caprices and often ignorant errors of private individuals, actuated sometimes by private interests, and frequently by private dislikes, could be exempt from abuses; and this frequent change of zemindars, who rarely held the appointment long enough to learn the least of its arduous and numerous duties, was one of the worst among them.

Before Govindram Metre, all native causes, civil and criminal, were at this particular period adjudged in a tribunal entitled the Court of Cutcherry. In common with most Hindoos, his ruling passion was avarice, and his mercy was only to be propitiated by gifts, while his power extended to the dispensation of the lash, fine, and imprisonment. The luckless wretch who had not so much as a handful of pice to offer as tribute could expect but scanty grace from this functionary; and before the first year of my residence was ended I had seen many among my coloured comrades writhing under the lashes administered by Govindram's subordinates. I had seen a good deal of the black zemindar, and had heard many scandals concerning the supposed sources of his reputed wealth, when it was my own ill fortune to become subject to his tyranny.

The Hindoo year, which commences in April, was not quite three months old, and the summer solstice was still at its height, when I began to suffer from a low fever resembling that which had chained me to my mattress in the Fleet-lane crimping-house. The damp enervating heat of the Bengal climate was in itself enough to cause sickness amongst Europeans, who were compelled to labour without regard to the conditions which only render residence in this country tolerable to the foreigner. Joined to this, I suffered from inadequate food, miserable lodging, a fitful indulgence in spirituous liquors, that were only agreeable to me because they enabled me for the moment to forget my wretchedness, and a constant depression of mind, unrelieved even by hope for the letter of appeal which I had contrived to despatch to Lady Barbara soon after my arrival was yet unnoticed. It is not to be wondered, then, that my health languished and my strength declined. The repairs of the fortifications, trifling as they were, were not yet complete; for an absolute want of system prevailed at this station, whereby no necessary work was ever finished; and, ill as I was, I was made to perform my share of the arduous labour-now employed in digging the foundations of a wall, now in wheeling barrows of rubbish for the construction of an earthwork.

I was like to have dropped one day under this work, when Sergeant O'Blagg, who was superintending our labours, attacked me with a sudden fury that for the moment wellnigh took away my breath.

"Look at that rascal, now," he cried to a young ensign who was lolling beside him on the curtain above us. "Did your honour ever

see such a lazy vagabone? Oi've had my oi upon him for the last tree days, and divil a bit harder has he worked than ye see him now. -Don't dhrag the barrow along like that, ye scoundrel, but put your showlther to it with a will, or oi'l know the raison whoy, ye idle omathawn!"

For the moment I was too weak to answer him.

"Don't you see that the lad's ill?" roared out a voice from the distance (Philip Hay's), while the tawny wretches digging near me looked on and grinned.

"Ill! yes," cried the sergeant; "he shams ill to skulk his work, the idle beggar!" and, leaping down from the curtain, he ran forward as if about to hit me. But I had just mustered strength to wheel my barrow of rubble to the summit of the mound, and the position of advantage was now mine. "You unconscionable skulk!" roared O'Blagg, shaking his clenched fist at me; "this comes of enlisting a sham gentleman. I might have known you'd make no soldier, and never earn the cost of your passage; and if it hadn't been to oblige a gentleman who wanted to be rid of his stepmother's bastard cousin, I-"

He had no opportunity of finishing the sentence, for anger lent me a spurious kind of strength, and I hoisted my barrow of sand and rubbish aloft, and emptied its contents upon the head of my assailant in a suffocating shower.

A dozen fellows seized and dragged me up to the little terrace on the top of the curtain, where the ensign lolled with folded arms, grinning at his subordinate's discomfiture.

My outrage upon my superior was sufficiently obvious. The ensign, who was about my own age, and obviously amused by O'Blagg's stifled execrations and frantic efforts to get rid of the earth and sand that covered his head and shoulders, felt it nevertheless his duty to punish me.

"Upon my word this is too bad," he said very mildly; "though that fellow O'Blagg deserves to get into trouble with his long Irish tongue. But insubordination of this kind won't do, you see, my lad; and as the captain's out of the way-in point of fact, so uncommonly cut last night that he can't show to-day; and the senior-lieutenant has gone up the country pig-shooting-I think you'd better take him to the Black Hole."

"In irons; ye'll put him in irons, your honour ?" remonstrated O'Blagg, in a suffocated voice.

"O, very well, put him in irons if you like," cried the ensign, with a merciful wink at the men, which plainly meant no irons.

On this I was conveyed to the Black Hole, that too famous prison, which I was doomed once again to occupy under circumstances that were to make that occupation distinguished among the darkest records of man's cruelty to the end of time.

The dungeon itself was in no manner alarming of aspect. It was the common prison of the fort, in which European or native delinquent was indiscriminately cast for any military misdemeanour.

I found myself in a square chamber of some twenty feet by eighteen, with two small windows looking westward, a direction from which no breath of air is to be expected during this summer season. To say that the dungeon was somewhat close and airless in the occupation of one person is perhaps to be fastidious; but I would gladly have preferred a more airy apartment for my night's repose; and I lay down in a corner of my cell with a supreme distaste for my strange quarters; though Heaven knows the great barrack chamber where I ordinarily spent my nights with the rest of the private soldiers on a wooden platform, was no Sybarite resting-place.

Great God, could I but have conceived the horrid sufferings that were by and by to be endured in that very dungeon, what nightmarevisions must have broken my fitful slumbers, what hideous cries and groans must have sounded upon my sleeping sense, prophetic of agonies to come! But this one exquisite anguish of foreknowledge being spared to mankind, my feverish slumbers were undisturbed by painful dreams. I was awakened soon after daybreak by a jemmautdaar, or coloured sergeant, who came, attended by a couple of peons, to carry me before the Black Zemindar.

To this I immediately objected, as I had been given to understand that the Court of Cutcherry had no authority over Europeans, and was a supreme tribunal only for the subjects of the Mogul. The jemmautdaar answered with the usual slavish stolidity of these people. He knew nothing except that he had been ordered to convey me before the Black Zemindar. In vain I remonstrated, and asked to see the captain, or one of the junior officers of my company. The jemmautdaar was bent on executing his orders, which I afterwards discovered he had received from no one but my enemy, Sergeant-major O'Blagg, who enjoyed an extraordinary power in consequence of the prevailing supineness among his superiors.

I was taken to the Cutcherry, and there found myself accused of a murderous outrage upon my superior, with intent to do serious bodily harm; in proof of which Sergeant O'Blagg showed the somewhat inflamed condition of one eye, which had suffered from the shower of rubbish I had discharged upon my enemy's head.

I had seen something of English courts during my brief residence in London, curiosity having led me to Westminster and the Old Bailey on more than one occasion; but although I had there beheld enough to shock my sense of the sacredness of justice, I was completely unprepared for the flagrant iniquity of a tribunal presided over by an almost irresponsible despot. Enough that I, a subject of his Britannic Majesty King George, was condemned to receive a hundred lashes at the

hands of a gentoo, whose national skill in the administration of this punishment I had heard and seen too much of. The Mahometan abhors our British mode of capital punishment by the gallows, and hanging is therefore forbidden by the Mogul; but, on the other hand, the ruler of Delhi has no objection against his subjects being whipped to death, and the gentoo flagellant will lash his victim with a diabolical dexterity, the exhibition of which would have afforded a new sensation to Nero or Caligula.

The sentence was pronounced, and half-a-dozen black fellows advanced to lay their skinny paws upon my shoulders, in order to convey me to the compound, or open yard, behind the court, where summary justice was to be executed; but as they were in the very act of doing this the sound of a cannon booming across the Ganges arrested them as if spellbound, while a sudden unnatural stillness fell upon the court. A Hindoo cooley entered in the next moment, and prostrating himself slavishly before the Zemindar, informed him that a British vessel had arrived off Govindpore, and that Mr. Holwell had just landed, having come on to Fort William in a boat.

I had heard of this Mr. Holwell as a civil servant of some importance in the presidency. He had returned to England between two and three years before, there to end his days, as it was supposed, and nothing could have been more unexpected than his reappearance in Bengal.

My eyes happened to wander towards Govindram Metre at this moment, and never did I see terror more vividly painted upon the human countenance. That dusky change which is more ghastly than pallor spread itself over his copper-coloured visage; but the man was past-master of all dissimulative arts, and when Mr. Holwell himself, three minutes afterwards, came into the court-house, Govindram Metre received him with florid oriental compliments and servile smiles.

The Englishman accepted these greetings with exemplary coldness. "What are you doing here, Govindram ?" he asked, looking at me; "and how comes a dispute between British soldiers to be submitted to the Cutcherry?"

"If it will please the most distinguished and favoured among the deputies of our honourable masters to hear the matter, he will perceive that it is a case of extraordinary character, which called for—"

"Not for your interference, Govindram," interrupted Mr. Holwell. "This young man is a military servant of the Company, and can only be punished in accordance with military law. -You ought to have known better, sergeant, than to bring your complaints here."

Mr. O'Blagg, whose importance shrivelled into nothing before this new arrival, muttered some excuse.

"Were they going to flog this young soldier?" asked Mr. Holwell. The gentoos assented; and Govindram Metre began a rambling justification of his proceedings.

66

Upon my life, it is shameful!" cried Mr. Holwell indignantly. "But it is of a piece with all the rest. The president is absent at his country-house, and the five captains of the garrison are asleep under shelter of their mosquito-curtains, or away at their sports up the country, and this poor sick lad is brought hither in order that public justice may be prostituted to private malice. Why, the young man looks fitter for a sick-bed than the lash." And then, turning to me, he said, "You are free of this tribunal, but will have to answer to your captain for your offence against the sergeant-major. Have you been ill?"

"I have been ill of a low fever for the last three weeks," I answered; "but they have made me work all the same, since I have just the strength to crawl about under threat of the lash."

"You shall be put upon the sick-list. How long have you been in Bengal ?"

"A year, sir. I was kidnapped by the sergeant-major yonder."

"Kidnapped! Pshaw! There is no such thing as kidnapping allowed in the Honourable East India Company's service. You mean that you enlisted, and were sorry for it afterwards, and were held to your bond, as all recruits are."

"I mean that I was betrayed into a house in Fleet-lane, sir, and there detained close prisoner, in company with others, till we were shipped secretly, under cover of night, on board the Hecate. I mean that I could not have escaped from that crimping-house but at peril of my life, and that men have lost their lives in the attempt to escape from such houses."

"Humph!" muttered my new friend; "you speak as if you were telling truth. I know nothing of abuses in England. Abuses here are so many that the study and investigation of them would occupy a life. as long as that of Nizam-al-Mulk, lately deceased at the venerable age of one hundred and four."

This was said with a somewhat ominous glance at Govindram Metre, who gazed upon the newly-arrived Englishman with upturned eyes, expressive of such veneration as he might be supposed to entertain only for the gods of his fathers.

"What is your name, young man ?" asked Mr. Holwell. "Robert Ainsleigh."

66

'Ainsleigh! That is a good name, and one I am bound to honour. From what branch of the Ainsleigh family do you come ?"

"My father was Roderick Ainsleigh. My grandfather was a colonel of dragoons, who married Lord Hauteville's daughter, Lady Susan Somerton. I was brought up at Hauteville, in the county of Berks; entered at the Temple as a student, and intended for the law, when it was my ill fortune to fall in with that kidnapping scoundrel yonder." "Not so fast, Mr. Ainsleigh. You must not call names, though do come of a good English family, and a family that I have reason to respect. If what you tell me be true, I am in duty bound to befriend

you

you; for your grandfather, Colonel Ainsleigh, served with my father under Marlborough in the Low Countries; and at the bloody battle of Malplaquet the colonel carried my father, then a lad, from under the enemy's batteries. So you see, sir, I have to thank your ancestor for my entrance into this world, since, had the French cannon made an end of Ensign Holwell on that famous occasion, there could be no such person as your humble servant.-What say you to this gentleman's story, sergeant-major? Did he go by the name of Ainsleigh when you picked him up in London ?"

"Sure he did, your honour; but divil a bit of an Ainsleigh is he for all that, but the bastard son of Roderick Ainsleigh, a profligate scamp that got himself stabbed to death in a tavern quarrel; and my Lady Barbara Lestrange, wife of his Majesty's plenipotentiary to Spain, adopted the young scoundrel and brought him up in charity, and he turned upon her like an ungrateful varmint as he is, and wanted to elope with Sir Marcus Lestrange's niece-a great fortune, and a beauty into the bargain; but luckily for his family, that he was nothing but a disgrace to, he enlisted himself to me in a drunken fit, whereby the Lestranges got rid of him."

"If you will let me tell you my story, sir, I think you will believe me," I said, addressing myself to Mr. Holwell.

“I think I shall, Mr. Robert Ainsleigh," he answered kindly. "Your face is hardly the countenance of a liar; and if the blood of my father's friend does but flow in your veins, I care little in what illegal manner you came by it."

"On my honour, sir, that fellow has no warrant for his foul assertion, except the one fact that the obscurity of my father's death and latter days left me without the means of proving my legitimacy."

After this Mr. Holwell ordered me to be placed on the sick-list, and I was taken to a somewhat dilapidated building on the outskirts of the fort that served as an infirmary.

"I will make it all right with your captain," he said; “and you, Mr. Sergeant-major, must look over the lad's delinquency on this occasion, to oblige me."

Mr. O'Blagg replied with extreme obsequiousness, and I began at once to discover what it is to have a friend at court.

The doctor pronounced me suffering from a low intermittent fever, and sorely in need of rest; so I lay at the infirmary for several weeks, during which Mr. Holwell frequently visited me. He questioned me very closely upon the subject of my education, and appeared much surprised to find me possessed of several languages, amongst these Sanscrit -which I owed to the scholarship of my old friend Anthony—and a tolerable proficient in Hindoostanee, the acquirement of which, rivâ voce, from the native soldiery, and from such meagre books as I could obtain, had been my sole recreation during the last dreary year.

"Why, you are just such a fellow as I want for a clerk and secretary," he said; "the young writers they send out are for the most part raw ignorant lads, who are despatched here only because their friends know not what to do with them at home. You have but to improve yourself in Hindoostanee, and to thoroughly master the native character in which their business documents are written, and you would be invaluable to me. Would you like to exchange the military for the civil service, if I could effect such a transfer?"

"To exchange the ignoble slavery I have endured here for your service would be to pass at once from the depths of Onderah to the Mahah Surgo; or, in plain English, to exchange hell for heaven."

"I see you have been studying the Shastah," said Mr. Holwell, who had already revealed to me that taste for oriental research which was afterwards usefully displayed in his numerous pamphlets. "You cannot do better than pursue such studies, for the gentoos will respect you so much the more for being acquainted with the Sanscrit language, the knowledge of which is confined to their Brahmins and learned Pundits. And you would really like to be my secretary, Robert ?"

"Nothing would please me better."

"I warn you that the work will be of the hardest, and tax your powers of accountancy. I am now engaged in the investigation of a series of frauds committed by that, scoundrel, Govindram Metre, which involve the conduct of our finances for the last ten years, and by which that black rascal has pocketed thousands. Do you feel yourself capable of performing the mere mechanical drudgery of such a work?"

"I feel myself capable of making any endeavour to serve you, sir. I was well drilled into accountancy by my lady's house-steward, who had an old-fashioned veneration for figures; and with a little direction from yourself, I doubt not I should soon master the mysteries of finance.”

Mr. Holwell was contented with this assurance, and set to work immediately to redeem me from my hateful bondage. He was a person of considerable influence in the presidency; and amongst a supine and indifferent community his industrious and energetic habits multiplied that influence tenfold. So, by the time I was sufficiently recovered to leave the infirmary I found myself a free man, and went immediately to Mr. Holwell's house, where I was provided with suitable clothes, a decent chamber, and began life for the second time in the character of a gentleman.

It is not to be supposed I was so base as to forget my companion in misery, Philip Hay, in this happy alteration of my own fate. I tried to enlist Mr. Holwell's sympathy for that reckless scoundrel, and carefully suppressed his share in my betrayal. My new friend promised to do his best to serve my late brother in arms; but he remarked that Mr. Hay bore his lot with supreme equanimity, and was a fellow who would doubtless fall on his feet, tumble from what pinnacle he might.

66 We may have some fighting by and by," said he; "for at the first hint of a war between the two countries Dupleix will be down upon us here. It is not to be supposed that the French will let us alone for ever after their good luck at Madras. In the event of an attack upon this place, your friend will have an opportunity of distinguishing himself; and be sure the fight would be a desperate one, for while I have a voice to raise in council, the motto of Fort William shall be no surrender."

I lived to see this promise kept, and against a more cruel foe than the French. I lived to witness the base abandonment of Fort William by its chief military protectors, and its heroic defence by a civilian.
