CHAPTER XXX. TREACHERY RECOILS ON THE TRAITOR.
I STOOD by Philip Hay's grave at midnight on the 23d-24th of June,
the night after the most important victory which English arms have
yet achieved in Hindostan. Short is the interval between death and
burial in the summer solstice, and my poor companion's funeral rites
were a little more hurried than they would have been had he died
a natural death in time of peace. We buried him under the mango-
trees, in that grove which has now an almost classic renown; and in
default of a parson my own lips read the funeral service above his
grave. This done, and a few silent tears shed for a companion whose
conduct towards me had been such a strange mixture of affection and
faithlessness, I went back to the business of life, which was at this
crisis a most feverish excitement.
The army had gone on to Daoodpore.
At daybreak Mr. Watts and Mr. Scrafton arrived from Cutwah,
and roused me from a troubled slumber.
"Dress yourself in your civilian's costume without loss of a minute,"
cried my patron. "I have just received a message from the Colonel,
bidding me wait immediately upon Meer Jaffier, to conduct him to
Daoodpore. Scrafton is to go with me, and you had better come too."
I obeyed this summons with delighted eagerness, for I knew that
my attendance upon Mr. Watts would most likely introduce me to the
side-scenes of the theatre in which this stirring drama of British
conquest was being enacted. We went at once to the tent of Meer
Jaffier, whose haggard and careworn face denoted a night spent in
anxious thought, rather than in slumber. He received us with a
singular air of reserve; and if we had been doomsmen sent to conduct
him to the scaffold, instead of the emissaries of a victorious ally, he
could scarcely have betrayed more apprehension. The fact was, that,
fully conscious of his own cowardly vacillation up to the very hour
of victory, he dreaded some retribution at our hands now that we had
raised ourselves to power.
We conducted him with all pomp to the English camp at Daood-
pore, accompanied by his son Meeran, and mounted on his elephant.
At the entrance to the camp he alighted from this stately charger, when
the guards drew out and saluted him with grounded arms. This com-
pliment the craven evidently took for a movement of threatening


import; for he started back, and only recovered himself when Clive
ran forward and embraced him, saluting him Nabob of Bengal, Behar,
and Orixa.
This meeting was followed by a private conference in the Colonel's
tent; after which Meer Jaffier returned to his troops, and hastened
with them to Muxadavad, to prevent the escape of Suraja Doulah, or
the plunder of the royal treasuries, which the fallen tyrant, knowing
matters to be desperate, would doubtless endeavour to empty of all
portable wealth.
Colonel Clive did not advance his troops immediately to Muxa-
davad, eager though they were to enter the royal city. The army
marched in the afternoon of the 24th, and halted in the night at a
place called Sydabad, about six miles from Daoodpore; while Mr.
Watts and myself went on with our attendants to the capital, where
we were charged with the delicate duty of inquiring into the state of
the treasury, and keeping our eyes generally open to the aspect of
current affairs in the interests of our honourable masters.
We arrived shortly after midnight, and found the city in extreme
confusion. On going at once to Meer Jaffier's palace we heard that
Suraja Doulah had fled just two hours before, under circumstances as
ignominious as those that attended the flight of that parallel monster
who fled from imperial Rome before the prætorian guards of Galba.
Disguised in a menial's dress, and attended only by a couple of venal
favourites, male and female, the late sovereign of Bengal, Behar, and
Orixa had let himself out of a window, and stolen secretly away, carry-
ing a casket of jewels in his bosom. He did not thus abandon himself
to ignominy without some waverings. A midnight council had been
held after the battle, and the Lamp of Riches had sought the advice
of his servants. Some had bid him throw himself upon the honour
of the English; but these he set down as traitors. Others urged that
he should encourage the army by great rewards, and appear again at
their head in the morning. This he seemed to approve, and ordered
an instant distribution of three months' pay to the troops; but the
craven wretch had no sooner returned to his seraglio than panic again
seized him, and at daybreak next morning he sent away his women,
and fifty elephants laden with their furniture and necessaries, and a
considerable portion of his jewels. There is little doubt that he had
ere this resolved upon flight, and waited only for nightfall to cover his
departure.
The tidings of Meer Jaffier's arrival in the city struck the last blow
to this dastard spirit, and at ten o'clock the grandson and grandnephew
of that dauntless soldier Allaverdy had crept in secret from the capital
where his predecessor had reigned so prosperously.
Next morning beheld the city in supreme confusion. The hapless
Lamp of Riches was not permitted to depart to safety. Meer Jaffier,
who owed his advancement in life to the favour of Allaverdy, was quick

to despatch pursuers on the track of his dead benefactor's adopted son.
Mohun Lall and other low favourites of the fallen despot were seized
at noon while trying to escape from the city, where their profligate
pleasures and undeserved exaltation had been so vile a scandal. The
women and the elephants were stopped next day, some fifteen miles
from the capital.
On the 25th, Colonel Clive entered Muxadavad, attended by a hun-
dred sepoys, and paid a state visit to Meer Jaffier, on which Mr. Watts
and I had the honour to accompany him. The inhabitants of the city,
who until now had been doubtful to whom they should look as their
ruler, perceived by this visit in which quarter the wind lay; and Meer
Jaffier, supported by his British allies, now ventured to proclaim him-
self Nabob. Early next day was held a solemn conference between
Meer Jaffier, Roydoolub, and Mr. Watts, attended by me, at the house
of those great Gentoo bankers, the Seths. And now was revealed to
us the somewhat unpleasant fact that the entire contents of the
Nabob's treasury would not suffice for the performance of those splen-
did promises which we had obtained from our Mahometan ally. The
restitution of confiscated fortunes at Calcutta, with the donations to
the squadron, army, and committee, amounted to near three millions
sterling; a heavy demand upon even a princely treasury.
A period of doubt and some apprehension followed this discovery,
and next day a rumour reached us that a midnight council had been
held between Roydoolub, Meer Jaffier's son Meeran, and an officer
of distinction, in which it had been proposed to assassinate our colonel.
Whether this dark report was true or false I dare not say; but as
it was in no manner inconsistent with the oriental character, I rode
off at once to Mandipoor, where the army had halted on the 25th, and
went straight to the commander's tent, where I related the story.
Clive heard me with a smile of contempt.
"Upon my soul, Mr. Ainsleigh, I believe these fellows capable
of anything. Now that our arms have won Meer Jaffier a throne,
I have no doubt he is inclined to grumble at the price he has to pay
for it, and would perhaps consider a bullet through my brain the
shortest way to cancel his debt to us. You did wisely in bringing
me this news. I was to have entered the city to-morrow, but will now
defer my visit for a little, in order to discover whether there is any
plot hatching against me. That youth Meeran has a brutal truculent
countenance that indicates a natural bent for murder."
The next day brought us no further hint of the plot, though we
had our spies on the watch for any indication of danger; and on the
morning of the 29th our English hero entered the city with an escort
five hundred strong, and rode at once to the palace that had been
prepared for him, which, with its gardens, was spacious enough to
accommodate all the troops.
Here came Meeran to visit and welcome our conqueror, and im-

mediately conducted him to Suraja Doulah's palace, where Meer Jaf-
fier awaited his ally, surrounded by his officers of state, and with all
imaginable pomp and splendour. To assist at such a scene seemed
to me like a dream of the Arabian Nights, rather than one of life's
realities; and as I stood amongst the little knot of civilians, at a
respectful distance from the hero of the day, I could scarce convince
myself that I was awake.
The musnud or throne was fixed in the hall of audience, and this
seat of power Meer Jaffier avoided with somewhat demonstrative
humility until Colonel Clive, perceiving this, conducted him to the
spot where it stood, and in a manner installed him in his royal office.
This done, he beckoned to me, and bade me speak to the great men
in Persian, bidding them rejoice in the downfall of so black a tyrant
as Suraja Doulah, and the elevation of so good a prince in his stead.
So here stood I, Robert Ainsleigh, the waif and castaway of cruel
Fortune, by the side of a throne, interpreting the desires of this modern
king-maker, Robert Clive; and I could but think, as this great Eng-
lish soldier installed the Moorish usurper on the throne our arms
had won, it would have been as easy for him to have seated himself
there, a new Tamerlane, conqueror and ruler of this Paradise of nations,
Bengal, a wealthy centre from which he might have extended his
power wide as the dominions of Aurungzebe.
Sure I am that no such ambitious thought ever flashed across the
brain of Robert Clive. From first to last he was a faithful servant
of those obscure English traders whom he called his honourable mas-
ters. The time came when he told them that the hour had arrived in
which they might sweep away the shadowy royalties that were sup-
ported only by their arms, and reign by themselves alone; but of per-
sonal aggrandisement, or the brilliant possibilities of an independent
career as ruler of those native forces he so well could wield, I am con-
vinced he never thought. As an apostate to Leadenhall-street, he might
have been the Cæsar of this eastern world; as a faithful servant, he
was the object of malignity and suspicion to the end of his days.
On the day after this installation of Meer Jaffier another meeting
was held at the house of the Seths. Colonel Clive, Jaffier, Meeran,
Roydoolub, Mr. Watts, Mr. Scrafton, and myself were all present; and
with us came Omichund, who had hastened back to the city on hearing
of our success, and who hung with fawning affection upon the steps of
the Colonel, in whose favour the fond, deluded wretch believed himself
firmly established. Arrived at the banker's house, however, he found
himself excluded from the carpet where Clive and the rest sat in con-
ference, and perforce withdrew to a distant seat, whence I saw him
watch us with eager eyes throughout the council. All went smoothly.
The treaties, in English and Persic, were read; and after some little
discussion it was agreed that one-half of the money-stipulations should
be paid immediately,-two-thirds of this half in coin, and the remaining


third in jewels, plate, and effects, at a valuation, and that the other
half should be discharged in three annual instalments.
This concluded, there remained nothing to do but to undeceive
Omichund, whose looks I had observed to grow more restless and
eager as the conference proceeded, and whom, despite his falsehood, I
could not but pity. Colonel Clive was the first to refer to this matter.
"O, by the bye, Mr. Ainsleigh," he said, looking suddenly up at me
as I stood behind my patron's seat, "there's Omichund waiting yonder.
Doubtless the poor wretch is eager to know his fate. You had best tell
him the truth."
"O, sir," I exclaimed, "there is no task I would not sooner per-
form."
"What, are you so squeamish as that? I thought you had better
sense than to compassionate such a scoundrel.-Here, Scrafton, you
can tell him."
Mr. Scrafton bowed, and rose to do the Colonel's bidding, but with
no willing air. It was indeed a task which no man could perform
without repugnance, however convinced of its necessity. He crossed
the spacious chamber, we all following, towards the spot where Omi-
chund was now standing, in an attitude of profoundest humility, yet
with eager expectancy gleaming in his sharp black eyes. Alas, poor
wretch, he fancied we were coming to congratulate him on the wealth
which the treaty assured him.
I am fain to confess that Mr. Scrafton fulfilled his mission some-
what awkwardly. For a few moments he stood silent, looking at the
old Gentoo, and but too evidently utterly embarrassed by his obnoxious
task. Then with a clumsy abruptness he stammered out, in Hindoo-
stanee,
"Omichund, the red paper is a trick. You are to have nothing."
Never shall I forget the awful effect of these words. For some
moments the Gentoo stood transfixed, regarding us with a questioning
stare, as if he sought to discover whether this abrupt announcement
might not be some foolish joke, planned for the amusement of the
English. Then, suddenly convinced by the seriousness of our counte-
nances, he flung his arms above his head with a sharp cry as of mortal
agony, and fell back senseless into the arms of his attendants.
"May I go with him to his house, sir?" I asked of Mr. Watts, as
they carried this martyr of disappointed avarice away to his palanquin.
My patron nodded assent, and I hastened to accompany the dismal
procession, for on my poor Tara's account I was anxious to discover how
the old man would bear this bitter blow. He was taken to a luxurious
chamber, shaded from the noontide heat, and cooled by blinds which
were kept constantly watered. Here he was laid upon a pile of cushions,
beside which I sat for several hours; but he remained in a kind of
stupor during all that time, and when I left him there were yet no
signs of improvement in his state.

Juggernaut Sing, the husband of my Gentoo maid, came to look
upon his lord, and standing by the prostrate figure, pronounced a
bitter invective against the English traitors who had thus abused his
confidence. I made no attempt to dispute with this wretch, with whom
hatred of the English was a sort of monomania, but quietly departed,
convinced that I could have no chance of seeing Tara while her tyrant
husband was in the way.
It was two days later than this that the tidings of Suraja Doulah's
capture reached Muxadavad. The rowers of his boat, failing from
fatigue, stopped in the night at Raj Mahal, where the wretched fugi-
tive and his female companion had taken shelter in a deserted garden.
Here he was discovered at daybreak by a man whom he had ill-treated
at this very place more than a year ago, and who ran at once to Meer
Jaffier's brother, a resident in the place, to betray his fallen persecutor.
The cry of pursuit was instantly raised, the soldiers rushed to seize
their victim, and hurried him back to the capital, beguiling the
tedium of the journey by the infliction of all imaginable insult and
indignity upon their helpless charge. The poor wretch survived even
this last ignominy, and was brought at midnight to the palace, where
he had so lately played the despot, bound like a common felon, and
trembling before the usurper.
I was told that Meer Jaffier seemed somewhat touched by this piti-
able sight; and indeed it would have been hard for humanity to behold
unmoved a creature so fallen. Suraja Doulah humiliated himself to
the dust before his enemy's feet, imploring for life, and life alone; and
I think this scene can scarce fail to recall a picture in our own history,
when Monmouth, a youth of about the age of this Indian prince, sued
to his uncle, James the Second, for the bare privilege of existence.
Both James and Meer Jaffier refused the boon that might so safely
have been granted; both lived to forfeit the power which their incle-
ment natures had abused.
Whether the usurper was really moved by his helpless kinsman's
humiliation, it is hard to say, so skilled in hypocrisy is this people. If
he were inclined to melt, there was one at hand who knew not mercy,
-Meeran, a youth of seventeen, who urged the instant slaughter of the
fallen despot. Meer Jaffier, apparently reluctant to adopt so severe a
course, dismissed his late master to a convenient dungeon, and retired
to take counsel of his officers. Some, with a touch of humanity, argued
against the murder of so mean a foe, and advised that the late Nabob
should be allowed to end his days in the peaceful solitude of a prison;
others, more anxious to flatter their new lord than to obey the dictates
of compassion, agreed with Meeran that there could be no safety for
the state while this wretch breathed. Jaffier wavered between these
two opinions, but expressed none himself, too cautious to betray a wish
that he would fain see realised without his bidding.
Meeran in this critical situation read his father's mind aright, and

with tender solicitude urged him to retire to rest, assured that he,
Meeran, would take care of the prisoner. To this Jaffier assented,
pretending to be relieved by an assurance conveyed in words of such
doubtful meaning. He had no sooner departed than the word was
given for slaughter. A gang of ruffians burst into the dungeon where
Suraja Doulah tremblingly awaited his doom. In an agony of terror
he grovelled at the feet of his doomsmen imploring a brief respite, only
sufficient time to say his prayers, to perform his pious ablutions; but a
jar of water happening to stand near, one of the assassins flung it rudely
over the victim, and thus gave the death-signal to his colleagues, who in-
stantly set upon their unresisting quarry and hacked him piecemeal.
His mangled remains were paraded through the city next morning
upon an elephant. I chanced to meet the dread procession, and never
did these eyes look upon a more odious spectacle. It struck terror
even to the hearts of an oriental populace, accustomed as they are to
horrors, and an awful silence reigned that day throughout the city of
Muxadavad.
Thus violently was extinguished the Lamp of Riches, after having
illuminated this world for just twenty years. It was but a brief life
in which to illustrate all the vices of man; but I think Allaverdy's
favourite had left few species of wickedness unexemplified in his short
career.
CHAPTER XXXI.
I MAKE A STRANGE DISCOVERY.
AMONGST those who entered Muxadavad with the English troops
was our prisoner of war, the French captain, Sinfray, whose wounds
proved to be very slight, and who was lodged in a large building near
the river used as a hospital for our own sick. Here he was detained
as a prisoner until Colonel Clive and his counsellors should decide what
to do with him. He had small claim upon our kindness except the
common claim of a brave soldier, for he and his little band had given
us nearly as much trouble as all the rest of the late Nabob's army.
We heard about this time that Mr. Law, with a party of French-
men, had advanced from Boglipore in response to Suraja Doulah's
summons, but had been stopped on their way by a vague report of
our victory at Plassy. Had they pushed on despite these ill news,
they might have met and saved Suraja Doulah; but while they
lingered irresolute, arrived the tidings of the tyrant's capture, on
which they marched back to Behar, there to ally themselves with Ram-
narain, vice-nabob of the province, a Gentoo, and a notorious enemy
of Meer Jaffier. Such an alliance, which threatened danger to the new
Nabob, must needs be distasteful to us; and Colonel Clive was by no
means disposed to regard Monsieur Sinfray with an indulgent eye.
The man's desperate valour in the defence of one post after another

had impressed me, even in that hour of confusion. I had beheld with
amazement the almost superhuman activity of his movements, the de-
moniac fire of his eyes, as they flashed vivid lightnings on his assail-
ants. Strangely had his image haunted me as I saw him standing high
above the crowd on the summit of an earthwork, waving a sword
above his head, and urging his men with wild cries and frantic oaths.
Some association of the past, some recollection vague as the me-
mory of a dream, had flashed upon me as I saw him thus. Yet what
association could this man convey to my mind, what memory of mine
could be linked with the image of this stranger?
The man's face had haunted me even in the busy days that suc-
ceeded our return to Muxadavad; and I was at once startled and
pleased when Mr. Watts intrusted me with a mission that would bring
me into immediate contact with the stranger who had thus occupied
my thoughts.
Monsieur Sinfray was to be released from the close confinement
of the hospital, and be suffered to do what he pleased with himself
within the boundaries of the capital, provided he were willing to give
his parole against any attempt at escape. I was sent to act as inter-
preter for Captain Hammerton, one of the officers in Clive's command,
who went to announce this favour, and to exact the usual formalities;
but whose English prejudices had hindered his acquirement of Monsieur
Sinfray's native tongue. We found the Frenchman standing at an
open window, gazing out on the broad river and green expanse of rice-
fields with a most impatient expression of countenance. He was a
man of from forty to forty-five years of age, tall, slim, muscular,
and with a face which indicated a surprising energy of mind, a very
fever of mental vitality.
He turned upon us suddenly as we entered the room, his face
lighted with animation, as if relieved by any interruption to the dismal
monotony of his confinement. He invited us, with a careless wave of
his hand, to be seated, and then flung himself on a couch opposite to
our own. In all his movements I observed a kind of savage grace,
which resembled rather the inborn dignity of an Arab chief than the
acquired polish of a European gentleman.
"The solitude and
"I am glad to see you," he said in French.
confinement of this place have almost driven me mad. Great Heaven,
what a fool and a craven Bussy must be to let you English win so easy
a victory, while he dawdles in the Northern Circars! Had Dupleix
remained in India, this could never have happened; I congratulate
the French Government on the wisdom that recalled him."
He kissed the tips of his fingers and waved them westward with a
contemptuous motion.
"What the deuce is the frog-eating scoundrel jabbering ?" asked
my companion angrily.
I took no notice of Monsieur Sinfray's rhapsody, but proceeded to

explain our mission and my own office as interpreter to his military
visitor.
"Tell him he can say what he has to say in English," replied
Monsieur Sinfray, still in French. "I understand that language, but
do not speak it."
I interpreted this to Captain Hammerton, who seemed to regard the
fact as an almost incredible phenomenon. He consented, however, to
address the prisoner in his own tongue, and the parole was given and
accepted with all due formality on both sides.
This being done, Captain Hammerton was in haste to be gone.
66
'Come, Ainsleigh," he said, "I've half a dozen other duties to get
through this morning."
I rose to follow him, with a parting bow to the Frenchman; but as
I thus saluted M. Sinfray, I saw him gazing upon me with a fixed
amazement that was most startling.
"Ainsleigh!" he exclaimed; "do you call yourself Ainsleigh?"
"I have the honour to bear that name," I replied, not without a
faint blush, for, alas, I knew not how just was my legal right to it.
"O, come, I say," cried the Captain, "I must be off. I can't stay
parley-vooing here all day."
"Let me not detain your too courteous companion," said Monsieur
Sinfray; "but you, Mr. Ainsleigh, be good enough to remain
with me for a few minutes."
"I am in no hurry to be gone, sir," I replied; and having explained
his desire to the Captain, that gentleman departed, leaving me tête-à-
tête with M. Sinfray, whose countenance seemed to grow every instant
more familiar to me, and about whom there still hung that indefin-
able association which had attracted and perplexed me even amid the
tumult of battle.
"Ainsleigh! And your name is Ainsleigh!" he said, now address-
ing me in excellent English, though he had but a few minutes be-
fore declared himself unable to speak that language. "To what
branch of the Ainsleighs do you belong? It is a good old name,
and no doubt the family tree has put out many a new bud since I lost
count of its blossoming."
I could not repress a movement of surprise at his English, which
was exceptionally good.
"You speak my language like an Englishman, Monsieur Sinfray," I
said.
"That is quite possible," he answered, with a smile. "I am of no
race, and of no nation; a cosmopolitan, soldier of fortune, citizen of
the world, what you will. But you do not answer my question. I
had-well, a kind of interest in this Ainsleigh family many years ago.
To which of them do you belong?"
"My grandfather was a Colonel Ainsleigh, who married Lady Susan
Somerton. My father was their only son-Roderick."


To my utter astonishment Monsieur Sinfray burst into a loud
laugh, then crossing the room suddenly, he planted his hands upon
my shoulders, and looked me in the face with a more searching gaze
than I think I had ever encountered before.
"Am I mad, or are you a rogue and a liar?" he cried. "Roderick
Ainsleigh's son! Do I hear aright? You call yourself the son of
Roderick Ainsleigh?"
"I have never known any other name, sir."
"Great heavens, can this be true? Yes, your face tells me that it
is! You are an Ainsleigh!"
“AND YOU?” I cried, overwhelmed by a sudden conviction. “”Twas
that I saw in your face yonder, at Plassy, when you stood on the
breastwork of the tank fighting as if possessed by a hundred devils ;-
'twas that I saw-the likeness to a picture at Hauteville-the portrait
of
my father. O, sir, you are my kinsman! The word chokes me. I
thought myself quite alone in the world."
I grasped his hand and kissed it passionately. Renegade, adven-
turer, whatever he might be, it was with rapture I welcomed him
to my affection. This foolish eagerness may well surprise those who
boast a long list of blood-relations; but to me, for whom the word
"kindred" had been no more than an empty sound, the revelation of
any family-tie was delightful.
"Heavens, what a fool the boy is !" exclaimed my new-found kins-
man, not without a touch of softness. "And you kiss my hand like
a lover, and offer me your honest young heart, and never stop to ask
whether I am a scoundrel."
"I cannot believe you that, sir; you are of my father's blood.
And now pray tell me the tie between us. My father was an only
son, but Colonel Ainsleigh may have had brothers of whom I never
heard. You must needs descend from one of them."
"'Sdeath, how fast the boy talks! I have not yet confessed myself
an Ainsleigh. My name is Sangfroid, which you ignorant British
corrupt into Sinfray; and I am a captain in the service of his most
Christian Majesty Louis the Fifteenth."
66
Nay, sir, whatever name it may have suited your convenience to
adopt in your adopted country, you are by birth an Ainsleigh. It
is written upon your face. Due allowance made for the difference in
ages, you are the image of my father, whom I know only by his
portrait at Hauteville."
"His portrait at Hauteville," repeated my kinsman, with a won-
derful softness of tone. "Did that still hang in the post of honour
when you saw it ?"
"Alas, no, sir; it had been thrust out of sight long before I looked
upon it. But it seems you know Hauteville?"
"I knew your father. You speak of him with a kind of tenderness.
Have you any reason to love him?"

"I have much reason to pity him, sir."
"Ay, that is truly spoken; for if ever evil Fortune discharged her
bitterest storms on one ill-fated head, 'twas that of Roderick Ains-
leigh."
"Yes, sir, his life was a mistaken, an unhappy one; his fate most
tragic."
"His fate a tragic one, was it?" asked my kinsman, with that
eager look of scrutiny so natural to him. "I do not know the cir-
cumstances of his death."
"He was stabbed in a tavern brawl, sir, while my mother lay on
her deathbed. It is the saddest story. The particulars of his murder-
for murder it doubtless was-were not known till a fortnight after the
event."
"How was he identified ?"
"Only by a letter addressed to my mother which was found upon
him. He lies in a nameless grave; but my cousin and benefactress,
Lady Barbara Lestrange, erected a small tablet to his memory in the
Church of St. Anne, Soho."
"She did that, did she? Barbara Lestrange did that? Bless her
for that tender humanity! she is a noble soul."
"There is no purer spirit among the elect in heaven, sir. But,
alas, she lives no more on earth."
"Dead!" he cried, with profound emotion. "Is Barbara dead?"
"She has been dead some years. You knew her, sir ?"
"Yes, I knew and loved her-loved her passionately, truly, fool-
ishly, jealously, unreasonably; was loved by her, and forfeited her
love; played fast-and-loose with high fortune; was too proud to try to
recover the affection my folly had forfeited; went my own headstrong
way and lost her; and so deserved to become the wretch that loss
made me. Look you, Robert,-I am not good at mystifications,—your
face is an honest one, and draws me to you. The man who fell in that
tavern-brawl was not Roderick Ainsleigh. Your father gave his fare-
well letter to a low acquaintance, to carry to your mother; and having
done this went to seek his fortune abroad, confiding the poor sick
creature in Monk's-alley to Providence, which would do nothing for his
pleading, and yet might save so harmless an unfortunate as she. He
went, and for nigh a year Fate was against him; then came a gleam
of sunshine. Fortune flung a handful of guineas into his lap, and he
went back to the lodging where he had left his wife and child.
were gone. The mother to the graveyard, the child to a prosperous
home, and honourable adoption by the woman he loved best in the
world. He himself was thought to be dead. What motive had he to
proclaim himself among the living? His wife was gone beyond his
help. His child was in a better home, and amongst more powerful
friends than he, who was at best an adventurer, could hope to give
him. So Roderick Ainsleigh went back to France, an exile for life,
Both

took a strange name, and was lost among the crowd of absentees whom
your Hanoverian dynasty had driven thither. Do you understand me
Robert?"
now,
I was on my knees at his feet.
“I do, father!”
He bade me rise, and took me to his breast, in a brief soldier-like
embrace.
"My only son!" he said. "What can I seem to you but the basest
of men? Yet even when I went back to France I did not mean to de-
sert you. If ever Fortune had favoured me, I should have reclaimed
my own flesh and blood. Fortune never has favoured me, or those on
whose side I have fought.
I have lived that is the most I can say
for my prosperity."
:
“O, sir,” I cried, "to me it is the truest, purest joy to find you.
I have been so long alone in the world, the sport of enemies so bitter.
Let me not malign Providence: I have found friends and patrons, and
have been in more ways favoured by Fortune. But I will tell you my
story by and by. And now, father, let me ask you one question-it
is of all questions nearest my heart. Bitter words have been flung
at me taunts that have stung me to the quick; and though I have ever
resented, I could not always gainsay, them. Among the papers Lady
Barbara found in Monk's-alley, there was no certificate of my mother's
marriage. Her stepson, Mr. Lestrange, doubtless knew this fact, and
has taken advantage of it to call me-"
"Stop!" exclaimed my father. "If he called you by any foul
name, or slandered your dead mother by so much as one reproachful
word, he was a liar. You are my legitimate son. When my fortune
was at its highest, a chance acquaintance with old parson Lester threw
me in the way of his pretty daughter. I was scarce more than a boy,
and it was natural to me to pay a kind of court to every pretty
woman who fell in my way. Miss Lester was rustic simplicity itself.
She took my compliments more seriously than I meant them. Barbara
was told of our acquaintance, and resented it; not by open jealousy,
which would have brought about an explanation, but by haughty avoid-
ance that galled my soul. Provoked by this, I paraded my admiration
of Miss Lester, never meaning, so help me, Heaven! that it should go
beyond common gallantry. And thus matters went on until my uncle
and I quarrelled, and I was banished eternally. 'Twas a year after this,
when I had fallen into a state of the direst poverty, and was lying sick
in a low London lodging-house, that Miss Lester, having heard by a
strange accident of my condition, abandoned her home and came to
succour me. It was a wild and foolish act, doubtless, in the opinion of
the worldly-wise; but if it were so, the angels who descend to comfort
fallen man are wild and foolish. For several weeks I hovered betwixt
life and death, and my faithful Milly watched my sick-bed. When I
was strong enough to crawl out into the sunshine, I took her straight


to an old city church, where we were married. Heaven knows what
became of the certificate. It never struck me that the document could
be of use to anyone. But O, Robert, how could you believe your father
such a scoundrel as to betray the woman who trusted him ?"
"Your enemies and my own persuaded me to think ill of you,
sir. Thank God, I wronged you! You can never comprehend what a
burden you have lifted from my soul. And now, sir, command my
duty; I am your son, and obedient humble servant. Tell me what I
can do to prove my fidelity. It is hard that we should be fighting on
opposite sides."
"I shall never fight on your side, Robert; be sure of that; though
I have little feeling for or against your trading companies of either na-
tion. But for George of Hanover my sword shall never be drawn. I was
with Charles Edward Stuart through the campaign of '45; and but for
that fatal wavering of spirit which made him yield to evil counsel at
Derby, I might now be serving him at his court in London. Fortune
favoured my escape after Culloden, where I fought as captain of a
company. I was left among the dead upon that fatal field, and woke
at daybreak from a state of stupor to find my arm pierced by a
bullet, and to crawl as best I might to the nearest shelter, a shepherd's
cottage, where I was taken good care of, and whence I departed, a
month afterwards, in the guise of a travelling hawker. In this cha-
racter I got back to France, and here began my military career under
Saxe, with such good fortune that I came to India several years ago a
corporal, and have since won my captaincy. I am a Jacobite to the
core of my heart, Robert; and if ever Fortune favours me here, I shall
send her golden fruits to Rome. England has not seen the last of her
rightful king, though the white horse of Hanover has ridden rampant
over your liberties for the last twelve years. Do not think that the
old loyal spirit is extinct there. I have friends at Rome who write me
news of England."
"English news that comes to you through Rome may scarcely be
trustworthy, sir. It is pretty sure to take a Jacobite flavour in that
city."
"What, Robert, are you so determined a Whig?"
"I have scarce any politics, sir. I had my Jacobite fever, and
survived it. I think it is a natural disease of youth, like measles.
But I do not believe the English nation will ever again welcome an
invader, let him come with what pretensions he may. The age of
adventure is past, sir, and we are become a trading nation. We have
too much to hazard by rebellion. Where idle townsmen and rabble
turned out to welcome the Chevalier and his Highlanders, looms are
humming and whirling, and cotton-spinning. Be assured, England's
loyalty will never endanger her trade interests. We are a nation eager
for peace at any price, and value commercial prosperity above the
divine right of kings."

My father heard me with a gloomy countenance.
"You talk like a draper's apprentice, Robert," he said.
"I belong to a trading company, sir; and I do not believe in the
Stuarts. A man who could turn back at Derby was never created to
govern a great nation. Imagine Cæsar turning back on the Roman side
of the Rubicon, bidding his legions recross the stream, because some
weak-souled counsellor assures him success in Rome is impossible. And
you were in the struggle of '45, sir? I am proud to hear that, though
I am no Jacobite."
"Yes, Robert, I came over with Charles Edward, and was through
it all."
"Unhurt?"
"Not quite. I got a wound, as I told you, at Culloden. That dis-
abled me for months; and I had my share of peril and hardship before
I got back to France, which was henceforward in a manner my native
country. I fought at Fontenoy, and in many another skirmish, and only
came to this country a year ago, after the recall of Dupleix. Sangfroid
is a kind of nickname my comrades chose to bestow on me when I was
a corporal, and I have stuck to it ever since, for one name is as good as
another for a man who has neither kindred nor estate. Yet had you
changed your name, Robert, the chances are we should never have
known each other. Father and son would have met, and passed on
their several ways unconscious, and the voice of Nature would have said
nothing."
"Pardon me, sir; Nature cried very sharply to me when I saw you
defending the tank."
And hereupon I described to him that strange feeling which had
seized me in the moment of first beholding him, and had haunted me
ever since, even amid scenes of excitement calculated to extinguish
every common feeling. Then followed a long conversation, in which
my father opened his heart to me. I showed him Lady Barbara's
picture, which he kissed and wept over. I told him my own story, and
the motives that urged my return to England; and when the history of
the past had been related, I ventured to question him as to the future.
"Are we but to meet and part, sir, like travellers journeying in
opposite directions?" I asked.
"Alas, yes, Robert; I must go where duty calls me."
"And if I can persuade my friends to set you at liberty, you will
rejoin Mr. Law?"
"Yes, Robert, such would be my duty."
"And if I accept the rank of ensign in the Company's service,
which Colonel Clive has promised me-I was but a volunteer at
Plassy-we may meet again as enemies."
"It is the fatal chance of our lives, Robert. But why not remain
in your present position, where you are more likely to make a fortune?"
"I have acquired a taste for powder, sir, since Plassy; and-and

there is something more honourable in military service than in the
most trusted capacity a civil servant can occupy. Mr. Everard Le-
strange might refuse to cross swords with a clerk; but he cannot with-
hold satisfaction from a junior officer of Clive's. And I am bent on
going back to England whenever I can obtain leave."
"To fight Everard Lestrange ?"
“I think, sir, mine is a case in which it would be worse than
cowardice to forego revenge."
"By Heaven, I believe you are right, Robert! That Everard Le-
strange is a consummate scoundrel, and I doubt his father is little
better. O Barbara, my divinity, my angel, why didst thou throw thy-
self away upon a cold-blooded, time-serving diplomatist! And she is
dead! Good God, how often in the darkness of the midnight halt I
have conjured her image from the mist of a swamp, or the smoke of a
watch-fire, and fancied her radiant, and smiling on me! And she is
dead! In my farthest wanderings, in my most despondent moments, I
have always believed in the coming of a day when she and I would
meet, hand to hand and heart to heart, with no cloud of pride or
jealousy between us."
"And you may yet so meet, sir, in a better world."
"Hush, Robert! Am I fit for a better world ?"
There came a silence after this, during which my father paced the
room with a mournful shadow upon his countenance. It needed no
words to tell me his thoughts had gone back to the past.
We had been for some hours together, and I knew not what need
Mr. Watts might have had of my services in the interval. I rose softly
to depart, and stood looking at my watch, when my father roused
himself from that long reverie.
"You are going to leave me, Robert ?"
"Yes, sir; I am bound to return to my duties. But I will come
back in a few hours; and I will do my uttermost to procure your
liberty. Yet I wish to Heaven you were in our own service. Do you
set much value on your captaincy in the French army?"
"It is all that forty-seven years of existence have earned for me,
Robert; and again I tell you I would not enter the service of your
Hanoverian Elector. I have served my rightful king, and am serving
his friend and ally. Yes, his secret ally; in spite of that shameful
arrest, which was but a sop to your Hanoverian Cerberus. I am too
old to turn my coat."
"And have you no thought of returning to England ?"
"For what should I return ?"
"To revisit the old scenes."
"To revisit the old scenes! Do you think the sight of them could
ever cause anything but bitterness of heart to me? The old scenes!
Shall I go there to meet the ghosts of the dead, the phantom of my
own youth? I did once revisit Hauteville."


"On the night of your uncle's funeral?"
"What was my visit known?" he asked, surprised.
"It was suspected; Mr. Grimshaw told me as much."
your
"Tony Grimshaw, a faithful soul who was ever true to my interests!
But, Robert, answer me this. When I heard that Barbara Lestrange
had carried you to Hauteville as the child of her adoption, I thought
fortune secured for life; for I knew her to be rich, and generous
as the sun itself. How is it she left you unprovided for?"
"I know not. She died intestate, and all her wealth went to her
husband. It is possible that, when I had been safely put out of the
way, she was taught to believe me a villain, and for that reason
destroyed any will in which she may have provided for me. Again,
it is possible that death took her by surprise, ere she had considered
the destination of her wealth; or she may have left a will, to be de-
stroyed by the agents of my deadly foe."
And then I told my father the history of the burglarious attack
upon Hauteville, which, happening within twenty-four hours of Lady
Barbara's death, I had ever considered an inexplicable circumstance,
that was likely to involve a deeper mystery than commonly belongs
to such deeds.
"The occurrence at such a time was a strange coincidence,” said
my father; "yet it may have been no more than a coincidence. The
matter will be worthy of investigation whenever you return to Eng-
land."
"I mean to investigate it, sir. The possible loss of a fortune
would affect me little; but I would fain fathom the uttermost depth
of Everard Lestrange's iniquity."
Soon after this I left my new-found father, with a most affectionate
leave-taking; but not till I had obtained his consent to Mr. Watts
being admitted to the secret of our relationship. How novel were my
feelings as I walked homeward after this strange interview! A father
found, whom I had thought buried in an obscure grave twenty years
ago-found, and to be lost again, perhaps, in a few days; since what
possibility of frequent communion could there be between us two sol-
diers of fortune in the service of different and unfriendly nations?
Even this meeting lacked the joy that should have belonged to it.
It was sweet enough in the present, but offered no promise of happi-
ness in the future. To such a mere waif and stray as myself, life was
but a tangle of broken threads, a thing without sequence, a labyrinth
of petty winding ways that led I knew not whither. For me existence
had no fair highway on which I might hope to meet my father again.
Nor was his career a more settled one. The reckless spirit of the
adventurer was stronger in him than in me; and he had no sense of
loss in his homeless, friendless state. On him the past had lost all
hold; and that rudder of memory by which some men steer their
course over life's troubled ocean had by him been cast away, leaving

him to drift upon his careless course, the veriest plaything of the wind
and waves.
I told my story to Mr. Watts, who was at once surprised and
interested by so romantic an occurrence.
"You are quite convinced this Captain Sangfroid is no other than
Roderick Ainsleigh," he asked, "and that you have not been made
the subject of an imposture ?"
"What motive could there be for imposture, sir? My father desires
nothing from me; it was I who volunteered to ask for his liberty.
None but my father could be familiar with the events of which this man
spoke to-day. Truth has a language of its own, sir, that the veriest
blockhead understands. Nor do I depend on words alone; Nature has
set her mark upon us. I think, could you but see us together, you
would have little doubt of our relationship."
Upon this my kind patron promised that he would do his utmost
to secure the prisoner's release; a task which would be far from easy,
since Clive was much provoked against the late Nabob's French con-
tingent, who were thought to be fugitives from Chandernagore, by whose
hands the English factory at Cassimbazar had been burned and de-
stroyed some short time before.
I went on the same day to make inquiries about Omichund, whom
I had left in so piteous a condition. On entering the house he occupied
when resident in this city, I was told that he was no better. Native
doctors had been in attendance upon him for some days and nights,
and an English surgeon sent by Colonel Clive had also been with him.
I begged to be allowed to see him, and the servants conducted me
to a room which I judged to belong to the women's apartments, where
I found the unhappy wretch sitting on the floor, with Tara standing
over him, her hands clasped, her eyes fixed upon him with mournful
solicitude. Juggernaut Sing was absent from the city, or I should
assuredly have been refused admittance to this chamber.
The old man's countenance and attitude most perfectly embodied
the idea of despair. I think, could David Garrick have seen him at
this moment, the picture might have afforded some suggestion even to
that great artist, who has perhaps little need to copy reality, having so
profound an imagination from which to draw the correct image of every
passion. I stood lost in the contemplation of that awful figure-the
fixed and death-like countenance, in which the eyes alone seemed yet
alive, and these flashed a preternatural fire, an unholy brightness, as
of a spirit in hell-the attenuated hands lying open on the carpet, the
palms upwards, the fingers slowly closing and opening every moment,
as if in the act of clutching that sordid dross for which this mean soul
so hungered.
For some minutes I gazed at him in silence; then, turning to
Tara, I inquired how long he had remained in this condition.

"From the hour in which they brought him home, on that miserable
day. Ah, saheb, was it well to deceive the old man?
too much, you could surely have refused his claim.
brave, or noble, to use him thus ?"
If he claimed
Was it wise, or
"State policy has cruel necessities, Tara; your grandfather threat-
ened us."
"But he would never have fulfilled his threat. His fortunes were
bound up with yours. It was but an old man's foolish anger."
"And the doctors can do nothing for him?"
"Nothing, saheb; it is the mind that has gone. Their medicines
cannot bring that back. They come and gaze upon him, watch and
listen, and then leave us, shaking their heads mournfully. They give
him medicines to make him sleep; but the relief of slumber is not
granted to him. His eyes have never closed in sleep since that day."
"Is he always thus ?"
"With but little change. He has never been his old self, not for
one moment, since they brought him home. He talks sometimes to
himself, not to us. His thoughts are always on the same subject."
My eyes were upon him as she told me this. Though we stood
close to him, it was but too evident our voices produced not the
faintest impression upon his sense. The bony fingers still continued
their unvarying motions, now spreading themselves wide, now clutched
convulsively, as if they held the wealth of an empire. Looking upon
the old man thus, I was struck by something which I had not before
observed, namely, the richness of his dress, which was such as I had
never seen him wear before. The costliest embroideries of gold and
gems covered his loose robe; his habitual skull-cap of greasy silk was
exchanged for a jewelled head-dress which the proudest of India's
rajahs might have worn at a royal wedding-feast; and wherever it
was possible to place a jewel about the old man's dress, there shone
a gem of imperial splendour.
Nothing could have been more ghastly than the contrast between
this splendour of apparel and the cadaverous visage of the wearer.
Idiotcy in its rags and crown of straw may present a deplorable pic-
ture; but madness in royal state has a surpassing awfulness not to be
described.
"Why have they decked him with these gewgaws ?" I asked of
Tara.
"By his own wish. He insisted upon wearing his richest robes,
and would not rest until they were brought to him. We are but too
glad to humour every whim, in the hope of improving his condition."
"He must have some fancy in connection with these robes," I said.
"Yes," answered the girl, with a reproachful gaze; "he fancies that
the English have kept their promises to him. You will hear him say
he talks. He believes
so presently, doubtless, for it is of that alone
himself rich, and wears these garments as a token of his state."


"And he is rich, Tara; he must be a wealthy man without the
exorbitant price which he would fain have exacted from the English
for a fidelity which we had a right to expect without payment. Your
grandfather is still a rich man. He has obtained restitution of his
losses at Calcutta, he has obtained the payment of moneys lent by him
to the Rajah of Purneah, and I know not what hoards he may not have
besides. Why, those very jewels with which he has decked himself are
worth a fortune. Are the English to blame because his greed of gain
is insatiable?"
"They are to blame for having deluded him with a false promise.
They are to blame for this."
She pointed at him with an expressive gesture, as if she would have
said, "O England, behold this wreck of humanity! It is your work."
At this moment the old man's eyes rolled slowly towards me, and
for the first time since I had entered the room he seemed conscious of
my presence.
"Yes," he said, nodding at me with an idiotic smile; "the English
are a just people. They keep faith-they keep faith! Omichund
trusted them, and he has his reward. A whisper, a look from him
might have ruined all; for the Nabob's suspicions never slept. A look
from Omichund might have been ruin and death to the English. But
he was true; and they-they have been true!"
After this came a pause, during which he looked downward at a
necklace of pearls and uncut garnets that hung upon his breast.
"These robes and jewels are not rich enough for a man of my
wealth," he said; "they are paltry. Let me have embroidery of gold
and diamonds only, rich as the Mogul wore when Delhi was great.
What, you do not know how rich I am! You cannot guess the re-
ward these English have given me. Crores of rupees! 'Twas written
in the sealed treaty. I swear by God, and the Prophet of God!' so
runs the Persian oath. I say it was in the treaty. I made them pro-
mise that, lest by some chance I should be cheated at the last. It was
written on red paper, the colour of the English blood that would have
been shed if the old Gentoo had turned traitor. Blood! I could have
flooded the streets of Muxadavad with blood, had I betrayed the Eng-
lish and their ally, Meer Jaffier !"
Thus he rambled on at intervals as long as I remained with him,
always harping on his wealth and the good faith of the English. I
need scarce say that every word struck a sharp blow to my heart; for
whatever justification there may have been for the act that had over-
thrown Omichund's reason, this melancholy result was none the less to
be deplored. Strange that the massacre of his household should leave
his intellect unimpaired, and the disappointment of his avarice reduce
him to idiotcy! He was indeed a creature in whom the love of gold had
ever been a passion but one step removed from madness.


