CHAPTER IX. I GO TO LONDON.

T was at the George Inn, Warborough, that I spent the wretched night of my departure from Hauteville; but not in sleep. Slow and dreary were the hours of that hopeless night, as I lay in a small room of the inn, thinking of all I had lost, and the utter loneliness of the life that lay before me. I had opened and kissed Miss Hemsley's little Spanish volume, and had striven to pin my mind to those pious sentences of Kempis, or Gersen, or whoever was the saintly creature that composed them. But my spirit was too wide of that calm mystic region which the recluse inhabited, and I could not yet bring myself to take comfort from a consoler whose experience had so little in common with my own sorrows. I could but lay the precious volume under my pillow, as a charm or talisman, and then lie broad awake thinking of my hard fate, which had from my very cradle-nay, before my birth itself-made me a mark for the poisoned arrows of hate.

I had not even so much curiosity as to open the note-book thrust upon me by my generous mistress. What cared I how rich or how poor I was to enter on my strange, friendless life? It was enough for me to know that my dear benefactress still loved and trusted me; and this knowledge was more precious to me than all the wealth of the Great Mogul, of whom I had lately read in the Jesuit Bernier's travels.

Before leaving Warborough I made all possible inquiries about the missing girl for whose absence I had been so unjustly blamed. After much questioning, and going from one person to another, I found one of the hangers-on of the coachyard, who remembered to have seen Jack Hawker's daughter leave by the night mail, so close-hooded that it was only by accident he had caught a glimpse of her face, which he remembered by having seen her at market with her mother. He wondered.

VOL. VI.

Y

what should be taking the girl to London, and made bold to ask her whether she was going out to service; but she had answered only by a shake of her head.

On this I went to the coach-office and questioned the clerk who booked the passengers' places; but here I could discover nothing to cast light upon Margery's departure. The places had all been engaged by persons of the male sex, but the clerk remembered one of these persons saying that the single place he engaged was wanted for a young woman. I sought in vain to obtain a description of this man. The clerk could only tell me that he looked like a gentleman's servant.

"I suppose you know all the servants at Hauteville Hall by sight?" I said; but the young man replied in the negative.

"Was the man who took the place short and stout, with reddish hair?" I asked.

"I rather think it was some such person," replied the clerk; "but as I didn't observe him closely I would scarce venture to be positive. He seemed in amazing haste to be gone."

The person I described was Mr. Lestrange's valet and confidential follower; for I could not but think that gentleman was at the bottom of my foster-sister's flight, and had forged-or ordered the forging ofthe letter which flung the guilt on me. I had good cause to know him as an unprincipled profligate, by the witness of his own lips; and I had heard his broadly-declared admiration of Margery's beauty. Nor could I forget the malignant look which he had given me when he surprised me on my knees at Miss Hemsley's feet. To gratify his own wickedness, and at the same time to ruin me in the estimation of my Hauteville friends, would be a double stroke of mischief to delight that cruel and treacherous nature.

I arrived in London at dusk, and great was my wonder at the vastness of the city; the noise and riot; the gaudy, painted signs of merchants and chapmen swinging across the street; the sedan-chairs with running footmen carrying flambeaux, which we met at the court-end of the town; the stark, ghastly heads of the Scottish traitors rotting on Temple Bar; the roar and turmoil; the noisy hucksters and impudent beggars who assailed the coach-door; the newsboys bellowing and blowing horns with as much excitement as if the Pretender had again landed on our shores, or the king been stabbed in his coach by some Jacobite desperado. At any other time I should doubtless have been both amused and delighted by the strangeness of these things; but my heart was burdened with too many cares and troubles, and I looked upon all I saw as on the scenes that pass before one's eyes in a dream-mere confused pictures in which one has no part.

It was of course too late to deliver my letter of recommendation to Mr. Swinfen, so I lay at the inn where the coach stopped, and spent another sleepless night in a stifling chamber, the one small window

whereof opened upon a covered gallery that ran round the inner quadrangle of the house. The strange noises, the brawling of some drunken revellers in an apartment below, the arrival of ponderous wagons and coaches which lumbered into the court-yard long before cock-crow, would have deprived me of slumber even if my own uneasy thoughts had not been sufficient to keep me awake; and at cock-crow began shrill cries and bawlings of hucksters in the street without, mingled with a constant rumbling of wheels.

Never, I think, had I known the meaning of the word solitude until that bitter morning when I seated myself in a darksome little den, or partitioned corner of the coffee-room, called a box, and breakfasted alone in London. Crusoe on his desert island had at least the animal creation wherewith to consort; but I, in all this vast metropolis, knew not so much as a dog. Nor did the friendly looks of strangers invite my confidence. Roughness and impoliteness marked the manners of all I had hitherto encountered. Even the waiters seemed to regard me with suspicious looks; and I doubt not that my gloomy face and dispirited manner were calculated to inspire curiosity and disgust. The man who cannot face the world with a smile is likely to be suspected of having some sinister cause for his despondency. I breakfasted quickly, and it was but eight o'clock when I had finished-too early an hour, most certainly, for a ceremonial visit to Mr. Swinfen. Nor had I the smallest inclination to explore the town, of whose wonders I had heard so much. What are sights and wonders to the man who has just been abruptly torn from all he loves? St. Peter's of Rome may be at his elbow, and he will scarce raise his weary eyes to look at it. The shadow of Pisa's leaning tower may slope across his pathway, and he will not take the trouble to glance from the shadow to the substance. I sat listlessly, with my arms folded on the little table before me, listening idly to the talk of customers ordering breakfast, and waiters attending upon them.

I had sat thus for nearly an hour, when I bethought myself of Lady Barbara's note-book, and, to while away the time, set myself to examine its contents. It was a little memorandum-book, originally of some twenty pages, but all except three of these had been torn out. One little silken pocket was crammed with bank-notes, which I unfolded, and found to amount to near three hundred pounds. But in another pocket there was something more precious than these bills on the directors of the Bank of England. This was an oval crystal locket, with gold rim, containing a miniature likeness of my dear lady, and a lock of dark hair, which I knew for hers. Nor was this all the comfort hidden in the tiny volume. One of the pages was inscribed with sentences of hope and counsel in Latin and English, hastily written for my consolation by the hand of my dear benefactress:

[blocks in formation]
The Lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble.

Commit thy way unto the Lord. patiently for Him.

The wicked plotteth against the just.

Rest in the Lord and wait

The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord: and he delighteth

in His way.

Though he fall he shall not be utterly cast down: for the Lord upholdeth him with His hand.

Tu fortis sis animo, et tua moderatio, constantia, eorum infamet injuriam."

I was thus rich in money and in friendship; and I began to feel that to persist in a dull and obstinate despair when so much yet remained to me would be beyond measure sinful. How different must have been my feelings if Lady Barbara and Dora Hemsley had believed in my guilt! as they might reasonably have done, considering the ingenious evidence that had been contrived against me. Revolving this in my mind, I resolved to face my position boldly, supported by the hope that my own actions might be made to prove the falsehood of my enemies. "I have my future all before me," I thought; "and am my own master. Hitherto I have been a child in leading-strings; my manhood dates from to-day, and it shall be my study so to plan my life that treachery itself cannot assail it. I am not of so proud a nature as my father, and I freely accept this money from the hands of the dear lady to whom, under Providence, I owe my very life; nor is there any painfulness in the knowledge that I am so much indebted to her. I have youth, strength, and an excellent education; and it must go hard with me if with these weapons, and a resolute fortitude, I do not conquer in the battle of life. But I have first to learn something of the battleground, of which at present I know no more than a baby."

I called for a newspaper, hoping therefrom to learn something of what was stirring in this busy city, to which I was so utter a stranger; but the Daily Courant-a sheet which the waiter brought me―gave little information on this head. It was chiefly taken up by our foreign politics, the enormous subsidies or gifts granted to the Empress Queen and certain German princes; by which it appeared that Britain had been made to pay very dearly for a peace that was worse wanted by her allies than by herself. One paragraph that attracted my attention was an account of a new colony that had just been formed in Nova Scotia. Four thousand persons, with their families, had lately embarked for this wild, unknown region, tempted by the liberality of the Government, which offered a free passage out, and a freehold of fifty acres to each settler, with ten years' exemption from all taxes.

"Why should I not go thither," I thought, "and flee like a new Eneas from the ashes of my Troy? In that new world, if I had no

friends, I should have at least no enemies, and I might make myself a name and a home amongst settlers as friendless as myself."

The thought was but for a moment. What would home or friends or name be to me without Dorothea Hemsley?

"Perish the thought of new lands across the sea," I said to myself; "I will stay in England and be near the dear girl I love, perhaps to serve her in some hour when she may need the strong arm of a faithful friend."

To this bold outburst followed sudden despondency. Alas, poor wretch; should I be any nearer Dora at London than at Nova Scotia ? She was severed from me by a gulf more impassable than that sea which the American emigrants had traversed under command of Colonel Cornwallis.

At noon I left the inn, and inquired my way to the Temple. Being now in a somewhat more hopeful frame of mind, I regarded the bustle of the streets with curiosity, and was even amused by the strangeness of all I saw. My way took me again beneath the gloomy arch which I had ridden under in the coach, and I looked up with a shudder towards those ghastly severed heads which were impaled there as bloody memorials of a nation's severity. I could but think this dreadful exhibition eminently calculated to keep alive the Jacobite feeling which Lady Barbara had told me was by no means drowned in the blood that had been shed since '45, and I wondered much at the foolish policy which had elevated traitors into martyrs.

I was much pleased with the tranquil and studious air of the Temple, whose shadowy courts and solemn squares seemed to me to bespeak it a retreat for learning. I had yet to discover how such appearances may deceive, and how many a shallow pate idles and drinks. and games away existence in a suite of chambers, the very atmosphere of which whispers of a Bacon or a Selden.

Mr. Swinfen's apartments I discovered in a handsome row of houses commanding a view of the river, on which I saw innumerable boats plying, and all the pleasant water-traffic I had read of in the Spectator. Towering grandly above all meaner roofs I saw the noble dome of St. Paul's, and beyond many spires and steeples dimly blue in the hazy distance, for there was a notable difference between the sky that overarched this city, and the clear ether above Hauteville Woods.

The gentleman to whom I was recommended was happily at home, and received me with much graciousness.

"I would do a great deal to serve any relative of Lady Barbara's,” he said courteously, after he had read my patroness's letter; "I knew her father, and I remember her ladyship before she married Lestrange. She spent but one short season in London before her marriage, and would have been one of the reigning belles of that season but that she was too modest to assume so public a position. And so you are an

Ainsleigh? Are you nearly related to that Roderick Ainsleigh of whom Lord Hauteville was so fond ?"

"I am his only child, sir."

"Indeed! I did not know he lived so long as to marry."

I felt my face flush at this.

"His marriage was an obscure one, sir, and he died in poverty. But for Lady Barbara's goodness I doubt if I should be living to tell as much. I owe everything to her."

"And I am glad to see that you are proud to acknowledge your indebtedness," replied Mr. Swinfen kindly.

After this he talked much to me, examining me as to my education, and directing me in the course which I should have to take in order to prepare for entering the profession that had been chosen for me. I will not linger over the details of this period of my life, since the labour I devoted to the study of the law was wasted work. The career which I thus begun was destined to have neither middle nor end, but to be abruptly cut short almost at the outset. Fate called me to a harder life than that of a law-student, and it was my lot to play my humble part in a more stirring drama than was ever enacted in that grave sanctuary of legal lore in which I now took up my abode.

My patron kindly sent one of his clerks with me to hunt for a set of chambers suited to my purse and position.

"You cannot practise too much economy at the outset of your career," said Mr. Swinfen, just before he dismissed me. "Advancement at the Bar is a plant of slow growth, and the man is lucky who, after some eight or ten years' patient industry, can command bread and cheese, and wear a decent coat. But if the struggle be a hard one, the prizes are splendid; and the man of parts who can dine on a red herring and a dish of tea, or a fourpenny plate of beef from the eatinghouse, may hope to mount the woolsack. I trust you have an inward conviction that you are destined to be Lord Chancellor, Mr. Ainsleigh?" "Indeed no, sir," I answered, smiling.

"Then I am sorry for it. Every man who passes the Temple gate should say to himself Bacon, or nothing!"

[ocr errors]
"And suppose it is nothing, sir?"

"For such a man there is no possibility of utter failure. In trying for the highest rung of the ladder he will at least contrive to scramble to the middle. But for the fellow who enters his name at the Temple because it is a genteel thing to do it, who spends his nights at Vauxhall, and wastes his substance at cards and in cock-pits, and brings loose-lived women to his chambers, and cheats his tailor to sport a suit of cut velvet in the Ring, the road he travels is the highway that leads to the dogs. I hope you are not come to London to be a man of pleasure, Mr. Ainsleigh."

"I have little inclination for pleasure, sir, and not a single acquaintance in this city."

"So much the better," growled Mr. Swinfen; "and now go along with you, for I have half-a-dozen attorney fellows waiting in the next room. My clerk will find you decent chambers, and will see you safely through the formalities of your entrance. Good-day. Dine with me on Tuesday next, at four o'clock. I have a haunch from a ducal demesne that will be in prime order by that time, and you will meet some gentlemen from whom a nod in public is a patent of social standing for a youngster."

I thanked Mr. Swinfen for his kindness, and departed in company of the clerk, a decent elderly person, who quickly found for me a couple of small rooms in a house in Brick-court, which was afterwards destined to become famous as the abode of genius and poetry. The rooms were at the top of the house, and commanded an extensive view of roofs and chimney-pots; but they were cheap, and of this advantage I was fully conscious, as I was bent on extreme economy in my management of Lady Barbara's handsome gift.

When all preliminary ceremonies had been duly gone through, at an outlay which absorbed a good deal of my dear benefactress's money, Mr. Swinfen's clerk left me, and as I stood alone in my somewhat cheerless garret I felt that now I had begun the world in real earnest.

I sent to the city inn for my portmanteau, and went out myself to purchase certain books which Mr. Swinfen had informed me were necessary for me to possess, at the same time that he offered me free use of his own noble library of law-books, which he bade me convey to and fro from his chambers to my own, as I needed them.

On the following Tuesday I dined at my patron's chambers, amongst a party of gentlemen, the youngest of whom was at least twenty years my senior. The talk was of politics and of legal matters. I heard much of the Duke of Newcastle and his brother, Mr. Pelham, and of that rising politician Mr. Pitt, then only paymaster of the forces, but already exercising considerable influence in the senate. There was also much discussion of the great will-case of Barnsley versus Powell and others, that had been decided in the previous year, and the details of which had lately been published by a bookseller in Fleet-street. To this and all other conversation I listened with respectful interest, pleased to hear the discourse of clever members of that profession in which it was my earnest desire to prosper.

And now began for me a life of the extremest loneliness. Secluded day after day in my garret-chambers, waited on at rare intervals by a deaf old woman, who came and went with a stolid mechanical air, and looked at me with a dull unseeing gaze as she flourished her well-worn broom or knelt to light my fire, as if scarce conscious of my existence, I was little less remote from the world than if I had been the pious inmate of some cave hewn in the solid rock by one of Iona's early bishops. On the days when I dined in hall I did certainly exchange some civil commonplaces with my companions at table, but these were would

be beaux, who knew the town, and boasted loudly of their acquaintance with fine gentlemen and their conquests among fine ladies. I was indeed at once horrified and disgusted by the tone in which these scoundrels talked of women of quality, whom I have since discovered they knew only by name. Sometimes towards evening I found my spirits oppressed by an almost painful sense of solitude. I felt a desire to hear my own voice, nay, sometimes even a panic-stricken notion that I had lost the faculty of speech, so strange sounded the syllables when I tried to roll out a few lines of Demosthenes, or demanded with Cicero how it came to pass that, for the last twenty years, no man had been my enemy who had not also shown himself a foe to the republic.

On these occasions, when my eyes ached with long hours of reading, and my head was heavy from the continuance of study, I snatched up my hat, ran downstairs, and went out in the fog and drizzling rain, or in the bleak winter wind, to loiter in the crowded streets, and amuse myself with the busy life about me. And in this the hermit of London has a supreme advantage over the rustic solitary. Friendless he may be, but never quite companionless, for in every coffee-house or city tavern he can find company which, if not select, is by no means uninstructive. While my legal education progressed steadily in the solitude of my garret-chamber, the streets and the humbler class of coffeehouses enlightened me as to the ways of the world. I learned to talk politics, became vastly familiar with the affairs of the Prince of Wales and his party, railed against the old king for his devotion to ugly women, reviled the Duke of Cumberland, growled at the money taken from us by the Prince of Wolfenbuttel, and eagerly perused the adventures of the young Ascanius, a romantic history of the Chevalier Charles Edward's adventures in the year forty-five. I purchased this luckless prince's bust in plaster, which was at this time much sold in London; while a wealthy squire in Staffordshire went so far as to clothe a fox in scarlet military coat, and hunt him with hounds clad in tartan.

I remembered what Anthony Grimshaw had told me of my father's sentiments on this subject, and was already at heart a stanch Jacobite. Nay, I think the frequent sight of those ghastly trophies on Templebar would in itself have been sufficient to inspire me with sedition. But in the character and fortunes of the Pretender there was an allpowerful magnet which drew to him the youth of the nation. What generous lad or sentimental woman would be faithful to an elderly German ruler while the brave young heart of an exiled prince was pining in obscurity, dependence, and banishment; and while the country from which he was excluded seemed to have gained so little by its ill-treatment of him?

I had lived in London three months, and had eaten my Christmas dinner at a tavern in Fetter-lane. Once only had I heard from Lady Barbara, though I had written to her at the milliner's address

several times. Her letter was long and kind. She gave much comfort and wise advice, but, alas, little news of her whose name alone would to my eyes have shone upon the page as if written in starlight. Of my foster-father and his wife the charitable lady wrote with deep tenderness. Nothing had been heard of the poor runaway, and the hearts of father and mother were all but broken. Lady Barbara had been many times to see them. Sir Marcus and his family were to come to London in January, and then my dear benefactress said she would contrive to see me, though it must needs be by stealth.

From this letter I derived new comfort; to this promised meeting I looked forward with eager hope. Should I see her as well as Lady Barbara? Alas, I knew that no good could come of any meeting between us two. But none the less eager was my longing-none the less sweet the dreams in which sleep restored my lost happiness, and I fancied that Dora and I were seated side by side in the sunny window at Hauteville, with our books about us, as we had sat so often in the summer days that were gone.

It was while I was looking forward to the arrival of the family in St. James's-square, that a change took place in my mode of life, and the loneliness of my humble chambers was exchanged for company which I found sufficiently agreeable.

I had returned to my chambers late after treating myself to a sight of Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet, which was then being played at the rival houses, at one Garrick and Miss Bellamy, at the other Barry and Mrs. Cibber, on which the wits declared that one saw at one house Romeo and Juliet, at the other Juliet and Romeo. Several distinguished members of Mr. Garrick's company had withdrawn themselves to Covent Garden, and there had been complaints made of him in a prologue, whereon Mrs. Clive replied sharply in an epilogue spoken by her at Drury Lane, and there was thus war between the patent theatres. It was to see Garrick that I had spent my shillings, and the delight afforded me by that great man's genius had amply repaid me for my extravagance.

It was black as Erebus on the staircase leading to my garret, but I was accustomed to the crazy old stair, and mounted quickly without tripping. But close by my own door I stumbled against some heavy body.

"Who is this?" I called out, surprised.

"A wretch who would be lying on a door-step in the open street if he were not sheltered here. You are new to London, Mr. Ainsleigh, and should have some spark of charity's divine warmth yet left in your heart. I crept here at dusk, thinking to find you at home, and have lain here in hiding ever since. Will you give me a supper and a night's shelter ?"

"I would rather give you the money to pay for them," I answered, "since you and I are strangers."

"That is your true London charity-alms given at arm's length," replied the stranger with a sneer. "I don't want your money, I want your friendship."

I could see nothing of the man's face or figure in the darkness, but he spoke like a gentleman, or at least a man of some education.

"Come, Mr. Robert Ainsleigh," he continued, "you had best take me into your chambers, and strike a light. We shall understand one another better when we see each other's faces. I do not come to you as the first that offers, and a crown from you is not the same to me as another man's five shillings. For the last week I have been hanging about the Temple, where I was once a student-at-law, and have watched you come and go. I like your face. I feel an interest in you that I don't feel in other men, because you are beginning life pretty much as I began it, and with the same chances before you. You stand almost alone in the world, as I did, and you belong to a good old family, as I do."

"How do you know all this?"

"From a clerk of Swinfen's, who remembers me when I was a gentleman. Come, Mr. Ainsleigh, you had better unlock your door and strike a light."

I had no inclination whatever to admit this forward stranger into my rooms, but yielded weakly because I knew not how to refuse. I opened my door, and the unknown followed close upon my heels, as if determined I should have no time to change my mind. When I had managed to light my solitary candle I turned and scrutinised this new acquaintance as closely as the feeble glimmer of the tallow candle would allow me.

He was a man of from thirty to five-and-thirty years of age, with a face that had once been handsome, but which was prematurely worn by care or dissipation. He wore no wig, but his light-brown hair, plentiful at the back though his brow was bald, was tied with a greasy black ribbon. His clothes were of the shabbiest, but had once been fine. His eyes were large, gray, and penetrating; but I was at this time too bad a judge of countenance to perceive their sinister expression. As it was, however, his face did in nowise prepossess me, and when I too weakly yielded to him I was influenced by his conversation alone. He had groped for a chair while I lighted my candle, and sat by my cheerless hearth, shivering.

"Let me light your fire," he cried, espying the fuel in a box by the rusty fender. "I can make a fire as well as any Temple laundress, and cook a steak better than most of them."

He suited the action to the word, and was on his knees piling up coals and firewood in the little grate before I could object.

"And now, Mr. Ainsleigh," he said, flinging himself into a chair when the fire was lighted, "let us talk reasonably. You are a solitary young man, just beginning the world, with fair prospects of success,

Alfred Thompson, del. 
                I MAKE ACQUAINTANCE WITH PHILIP SARGENT 

and with, I have no doubt, a decent allowance from your aristocratic kinswoman."

"What right have you to be so certain of my business?" I asked angrily.

"The right which knowledge of the world gives to every man who is not an arrant blockhead. I know you are living on money from your kinswoman by the left-hand

"Sir !"

[ocr errors]
"Pshaw! let us have no affectation of anger. What if I knew your father? I'll not say I did, but I know those who knew him. I know you are a dependent on the bounty of Lady Barbara Lestrange, and that you were turned out of doors by her husband.”

"Oblige me by carrying your knowledge elsewhere, sir. It is close upon midnight, and I do not care to be entertained with your version of my biography."

"I want to show you that I am no flatterer, and that I can beg without licking the shoes of my patron. Come, Mr. Ainsleigh, you want a servant, and I want a master. Give me a closet to sleep in, or let me lie on the mat at your door. You pay your laundress something, and I will do her work for nothing. I know more law than many a prosperous counsellor, and can give you some help in your studies in you will consent to take it from such a vagabond as me. I can valet you, and cook for you, run on your errands, and show you the town, which I know by heart, and which is a profounder science than you may fancy. I want shelter-and a friend."

"Friendship is scarcely won by such means as you employ."

66

'Say, then, an acquaintance, a companion. Someone fresh and young and true, with whom a battered wretch may consort to the profit of his soul and body. Mind you, Mr. Ainsleigh, I am a beggar to-night, but not a beggar always. I suppose you have heard of that notorious beast of burden, the bookseller's hack? That is my species. I have a prose translation of Homer that I hope yet to turn into cash, in a portmanteau in pawn at my last lodging."

"From the Greek ?"

"No; from Chapman. I know something of Greek too, but we bookmakers prefer adapting the labours of a predecessor. I have also a history of that strange extinct race the Amazons, which I think might tempt Mr. Cave, could I but approach him in a decent coat."

It is needless to dwell longer on my conversation with this gentleman, whose persuasion ultimately prevailed with me. That he was a man of some education and had fallen from a better estate was very obvious; and this touched me, for I remembered that my father's condition must have much resembled that of this penniless stranger. And then common humanity pleaded for this unfortunate. Could I, who had been reared by charity, refuse a shelter and a crust to another? True, the man might be a rogue, but true compassion first feeds and

clothes the reprobate, before it essays to reform him. Swayed by these considerations, I consented to share my lodgings with the stranger. I assisted him to make up a bed on the floor of my sitting-room, selected for him a few articles from my well-stocked wardrobe, and promised that, so long as he proved honest and I had money, he should not starve. And thus, on the very threshold of manhood I suffered myself to be coaxed into an alliance with a vagabond, of whom I knew nothing save that he was impudent and persevering.
CHAPTER X.

A DANGEROUS COMPANION.

WHEN I arose next morning, I found my breakfast comfortably prepared, the room swept and dusted, and the charwoman who had hitherto attended me dismissed, while my new acquaintance, dressed in the clothes I had given him, presented a decent, and even gentlemanlike appearance. He certainly had not exaggerated his handiness, for my room looked cleaner than ever it had done under the régime of my deaf laundress; and the steak which he had cooked for my breakfast might have gratified the senses of a Lucullus.

He would fain have breakfasted off the fragments of my own meal, but this I refused. If he was good enough to live with me, he was good enough to eat with me. I had a lurking consciousness that I had done a foolish thing, but felt that I could not amend my folly by a haughty treatment of my unknown companion. While we breakfasted, he gave me a brief sketch of his career and fortunes.

"My name is Philip Hay," he began; "and I am the son of a parson, a man of great learning, but a poor spirit, who spent his life in the seclusion of an agricultural district, neglected his flock while he read the classics, and brought up his family on the produce of his garden and pigstye. I can hardly remember wearing a shirt that was not ragged, or a coat and breeches that had not served my elder brother faithfully before they fell to my share. At our table butcher's meat was not the rule but the exception; and I am somewhat inclined to attribute my want of moral stamina to that deficiency of beef from which I suffered in my boyhood. Butcher's meat is the foundation of your true Englishman. I will not say that my father gave me a good education, for he suffered me to pick up the crumbs of his learning very much as the cocks and hens that stalked about our carpetless parlour at meal-times were accustomed to pick up the fragments of each repast. I may say without boastfulness, since my education has never been of the smallest use to me, that I had a natural aptitude for learning. Nothing in the way of scholarship came amiss to me. knew my Greek alphabet before I was breeched, and read Erasmus in the original while other lads were blundering over their first declension. This early proficiency soon attracted the notice of neighbours, who, entirely unlearned themselves, were disposed to regard me as a juvenile

prodigy; very much as they would have done had Nature gifted me with two heads, or enriched me with a superfluous arm. My reputation at twelve years old spread as far as the mansion of a wealthy nobleman, who sent for me one day when he had a house full of company, and bade me repeat an ode of Horace, and specimens of other classic poets, for the amusement of his guests. The result of this exhibition was an invitation to spend the holidays with my lord's son, an idle but by no means stupid young jackanapes, whom my learned example might possibly convert to industry. My father was but too glad to accept such an invitation; friends and neighbours declared that my fortune was made; my mother patched and turned the soundest of my old clothes, and my father pledged his credit to procure me the first suit of new ones I ever owned. I left home in high spirits, ingratiated myself at once with my patron's son, Viscount Escote, whom I was so fortunate, or so unfortunate, as to amuse, and whose friendship or fancy I was soon master of. With this young gentleman I spent the merriest, and indeed the happiest, period of my life, and the acquaintance thus begun was not destined to lapse. The boy had a warm heart, and I had perhaps reason to love him even better than I did.

"Lord Escote's tutor, a very grave and pompous gentleman, was at first inclined to object to his pupil's affection for my society, but as I speedily discovered his own incompetency, and was able to pose him at any moment by a seemingly-innocent inquiry about a crabbed sentence in Juvenal, or an obscure verb in Eschylus, he soon became more amiable, and permitted me to enjoy my share of the good things which he obtained by the exercise of grave humbug and sanctimonious imposture. When his lordship went to the university, some four years. after our first meeting, nothing would please him but I must go also; and his father, Lord Mallandaine, being by this time deceased, and he succeeded to the title, with no one but a foolish, indulgent mother to govern him, he of course had his way, and I enjoyed the education of a gentleman at my patron's charge.

"I could tell you rare stories of those wild days, Mr. Ainsleigh, stories of exploits that redound rather to my cleverness than to my patron's morality or my own sense of honour. To sum up the whole, we were both expelled the university under circumstances of peculiar disgrace; and Lord Mallandaine, not caring to face a doating mother, proposed a continental tour, with me for his companion. Together we visited France, Italy, and the Low Countries, intrigued with Venetian courtesans, and gamed with Parisian dandies, got up cock-fights in the Colosseum at Rome, and sparring-matches in a Florentine palace, returned to England low in pocket and broken in health, discontented with each other and disgusted with the world. I happened fortunately to be master of more than one important secret of my patron's, and in consideration of this fact, rather than from any remnant of his early

friendship for me, my lord presented me with a few hundreds, and bade me make my fortune at the Bar, for which profession, he was good enough to observe, my natural impudence and capacity for lying eminently adapted me. I thanked him in my politest manner, and, cursing him in the spirit, wished him good-day. Since then we have met rarely, and then only by accident, and my chief consolation whilst going to the dogs has been to know that he is treading the same road."

"That is scarcely a Christian sentiment," said I, "since, by your own showing, Lord Mallandaine was kind to you."

"Kind? yes! He kept me about him so long as I amused him, and kicked me off when he tired of me. You do not know-your simplicity cannot conceive-the things I have done for that man, the degradations to which I have submitted, the perils I have encountered. Believe me, your Sganarelle's situation is no sinecure. And some day, in a brief fit of virtue, Don Juan turns away his faithful servant." "How came you to succeed so ill at the Bar?"

"You will understand that better ten years' hence. I began steadily enough, and for the first two years ate my dinners and studied with a pleader; but the habit of dissipation was too strong upon me. I took to spending my nights in gaming-houses, and even worse places of entertainment, brought discreditable company to my chambers, got into ill-repute with the Benchers, and it ended by my being kicked out of the Temple, as I had been kicked off by my patron, and as I had been expelled from my university. You perceive I have a genius for getting turned out of doors."

"And since this time you have lived by literature ?"

"I have lived by writing for the booksellers, if you call that literature: I don't. I have composed more biographies of lately-defunct celebrities than I can count; have written a history of the Greek and Roman heroes, adapted for schools, and stolen from Plutarch; have composed metrical translations of such Latin poets as are least fit for publication; have invented a scandalous history of the Princess of Wales, whom I have no grounds for supposing anything but a very estimable matron; and have written pamphlets for and against every party. And now, sir, you know the worst of me. Upon my merits I have not presumed to touch; but even my enemies admit that I have an easy temper and a daring spirit, and that I can be a firm friend to the man who wins my regard. I have flung myself upon your charity, because I like your face; and it is for you to decide whether you will turn me out of doors, or allow me to remain as your faithful drudge and servitor until my luck turns, as it is sure to do in a week or two, when I will freely pay my share of our expenses, and continue truly grateful for your company."

And now came my fatal moment of weakness. I was but just twenty, and easily won to pity the misfortunes of my fellow-men, however welldeserved might be their woes. The man's story was in every manner

calculated to prejudice me against him; but I reflected that this very fact told in his favour, and was at least evidence of his candour, since it would have been easy for so clever a rascal to give a plausible account of himself. There seemed a reckless honesty about the fellow that fascinated me in spite of myself. How often had I felt the solitude of my chambers intolerable, and here was a learned and jovial companion eager to share them with me. True, that his character might be against him; but I had now begun the world, and must expect to encounter strange characters. And then, I doubt not that my vanity was tickled by his avowed fancy for me; and I suffered this adroit flattery to influence me in his favour. What chance has rustic youth against a citizen of the world such as this? The snare had been ingeniously prepared, and I walked blindfold into the meshes.

"I'll not turn you out of doors!" I cried heartily; "and if you possess the learning for which you give yourself credit, I shall be very glad of your company."

"Your hand on that," said Philip Hay; "and now that I am provided with a decent coat I'll go and look up Mr. Cave, and see if I can strike a bargain with him for my Amazons."

On this he departed, and was no sooner gone than I began to ponder seriously whether this Mr. Hay would ever return, and if I had not been cheated out of a substantial suit of clothes by this eloquent adventurer. I had been warned against the tricks of the town, and this might be one of them. I laughed aloud as I thought how easily I had been cheated.

In this matter, however, I was agreeably disappointed. At five o'clock in the afternoon in comes my gentleman, with his hat cocked on one side and his face triumphant.

"Look you there, Mr. Robert Ainsleigh!" he cried, flinging a purse of guineas on the table. "Your clothes have brought me luck. Mr. Cave happened to be in rare good-humour to-day, and I have struck a very fair bargain for my history. There was a great hulking fellow, with a queer twitch of his face and limbs, hanging about the shop, who went near to spoil my market by the display of his learning. He cried out that the Amazons were fabulous females, and that I could know as much of them as I knew of Achilles-just what was told in Homer, and fragmentary snatches of the Cyclic poets. But I extinguished my twitching friend-who wore a coat that was patched at the elbows and ragged at the cuffs, showing at once premeditated poverty and natural slovenliness-and talked Cave into an affection for my Amazons. Here are ten guineas earnest-money, and by your leave, Mr. Ainsleigh, we'll spend a pleasant evening. Shall it be at Marylebonne-gardens or Don Saltero's, Ranelagh or Vauxhall? Under which king, Bezonian?"

I would fain have avoided appearing in public with my new acquaintance, of whom I knew nothing that was not to his discredit;

VOL. VI.

Ꮓ

but his good-humour and joviality soon vanquished my scruples. I had a natural curiosity about the pleasures of the town, those dazzling scenes of riot and delight which I had heard so praised by my fellowstudents in the dining-hall- the places not to know which was to be in some manner behind the age. In a word, I suffered Mr. Philip Hay to lead me where he pleased; and those evenings which had hitherto been spent in the studious quiet of my chamber, or the grave gossip of an obscure coffee-house, were now given entirely to the pleasures of the town.

I might perhaps have continued to regard Philip Hay's assumed affection for myself with doubt and suspicion if that reprobate individual had required anything from me. But his fortunes revived from the first day of our acquaintance, and he was more extravagant in his expenditure than myself, notwithstanding that my purse had been replenished by a bank-note enclosed in Lady Barbara's last letter. He reproached me loudly for my parsimony when I refused to drink or game in the vivacious company to which he introduced me at Vauxhall and other public places; and on more than one occasion, by his somewhat scornful offers to pay my score, drew me into an outlay which I afterwards regretted, for I never forgot that I owed all to my benefactress; and the natural pride of manhood was only sus tained by the hope that I should one day be able to repay all.

Nor were my nights spent in noisy pleasure at Don Saltero's, or wasted in the Ranelagh Rotundo, unattended by the after-bitterness of remorse. From scenes so frivolous, from company so loose and unprincipled, my thoughts went back to Hauteville, the calm days and happy evenings, the pleasant conversations over my lady's teaboard, the summer sunsets Dorothea Hemsley and I had watched from the Italian garden, when the night-dews hung heavy on the roses, and the last of midsummer's nightingales sang loud in the dusky distance of the wood. But, in spite of these better thoughts, the pleasures into which my companion plunged me were not without their charm. The restraint in which my boyhood had been spent especially fitted me to be the fool of such frivolous temptations; and my Mephistopheles contrived his snares with a rare genius. Seldom did he suffer weariness to mar my amusement. A skilful courtier, set on by wily ministers to lure a crown-prince from thoughts of statecraft into the vile slough of dissipation, could not have acted his part with greater care or wisdom. In a word, my tempter played upon me as Prince Hamlet bade the courtiers play upon "this pipe;" and it was only afterwards, when I saw the other side of his cards, that I knew the subtlety of his game, and how utterly helpless I had been in his hands.

I had enjoyed the privilege of Mr. Hay's society for six weeks before Sir Marcus Lestrange and his family came to London. I had ventured to call more than once in St. James's-square, where the houseporter informed me that his master was suffering from an attack of

gout, which detained him at Hauteville, and that Mr. Lestrange was in Paris. I was relieved to hear of Everard's absence, and to know that Dora was for the present free from the attention, or persecution, of her enforced suitor.

We came through St. James's-square one night, after an evening spent at Vauxhall, whence it had pleased us to return on foot. I have since had reason to believe that Mr. Hay had his own special purpose in bringing me this way on this particular night. We had supped with some of his rackety acquaintance at the gardens, and he had induced me to drink a little more than usual. The punch, the company, and the long walk in the night-air had combined to excite my brain, and for the first time during our acquaintance I had spoken freely of my friends at Hauteville; nor did I perceive until afterwards, when considering my night's folly in the sober reflections of the next morning, how artfully my companion led me on to the revelation of my most secret thoughts.

The windows of Sir Marcus's house were blazing with the light of numberless candles as we came into the square. The family had arrived, and Lady Barbara was holding a reception. The great halldoor was open, and we saw the splendour within, with guests ascending and descending, and footmen bawling in the hall and on the staircase. Without there was a crowd of chair-men, footmen with flaring torches, link-boys, and lantern-bearers, though it was a fine spring night, and the stars shining high up in the clear cold gray. We stood to watch the company passing in and out, powder and diamonds, rustling trains. of gorgeous hues, and gold and silver brocade, that flashed in the glare of the torches. The crowd proclaimed the names of beaux and belles, soldiers and statesmen. Now there was a hush and murmur in the crowd as Mr. Pelham descended from his chariot, with ribbon and star upon his breast, and a smile upon his florid countenance. How soon was that respected head to be laid low! And here, close behind him, came the Duke of Newcastle, looking right and left. with his glass held affectedly to his eye, challenging the plaudits of the crowd.

"What a grinning baboon goes yonder!" cried my companion, who knew everyone; "it is a monkey that clambers into power on the shoulders of better men."

A thick-set, clumsy-looking man, with a dark scowling face, came presently through the crowd.

"Yonder goes the Secretary of War, Henry Fox," said Mr. Hay; "one of the greatest statesmen we have, but not eloquent as a speaker. Did you ever see such a hang-dog countenance? One would say 'twas a fellow that had just committed murder and hid the body in a ditch. But the man is a genius! If he and Pitt could but combine their forces, the brotherhood of Pelham must bow their diminished heads. Sir Marcus is well in with the Ministry, you see, and I doubt not will get some new berth abroad or at home. Why, with

such interest, you ought to be in the House of Commons, instead of slaving for the reward of a shabby stuff gown, and the right to cross-examine the witnesses for the crown against a sheepstealer! But come away; it is sorry pleasure hanging about the door when we feel ourselves good enough for the best company in the drawing-room."

"I am not so sure of my own merits as you are of yours, Philip," I answered, laughing; "but there is one in that house I would give a great deal to see."

"And that one is Miss Dorothea Hemsley, a young lady with fifty thousand pounds for her fortune, who is engaged to her cousin Everard Lestrange, and who would marry you to-morrow if you had the courage of a mouse!" said my companion.

We had now drawn a little aloof from the crowd; Philip Hay had thrust his arm through mine, and was leading me homewards.

"What do you mean?" I cried, aghast at such sacrilege as this light mention of a name that was, and has ever been, sacred to my ears.

"I mean that I am a man of the world, and know what stuff women are made of. You tell me that Miss Hemsley is plighted, or all but plighted, to young Lestrange, as hardened a sinner as my late patron Mallandaine, from whom I have heard his character. And you have watched her, and seen her unhappy; and you surprised her once in tears; and she owned that the burden of her sorrow was hard to bear. Yet with all her sorrow she found time and patience to teach you Spanish, and was pleased you should polish her Italian; and sang with you, and walked with you, and watched with a face white as a corpse while Sir Marcus reviled and banished you, and sent you a little pious monkish book for your comfort. Why, man alive, the woman loves you—it is as plain as the nose on your face-and would marry you out of hand if you had the spirit to ask her."

"That is impossible-even if I could do such an act of dishonour against Lady Barbara, which I could not. Those who have authority over her would take care to prevent such a marriage."

"Yes, if you were so dull a blockhead as to ask their permission. But I don't suppose even your rustic simplicity is simple enough for that. There are parsons by the score in May Fair and the Fleet who will marry you without leave or license from parents and guardians; and you will surely not let the young lady be sacrificed to a man she hates for lack of a little courage on your part."

"If daring of mine could secure her happiness, there are few perils I would not dare," I answered boldly.

"Pshaw! thou art a creature of ifs and buts. Had I such good fortune as to win the heart of an orphan heiress, I would not stand shivering on the door-step while my lady-love was pining for me within."

The cold night and the walk had sobered me by this time, and the

man's tone offended me. I begged him to trouble himself no more about my business, which I assured him I could conduct without his advice. He received my rebuff with his usual good-humour, and for some time forbore to offend by any mention of Dora's name.


CHAPTER XI.

WE PLIGHT OUR TROTH.

On the following day I received a note from Lady Barbara. It had been written before the assembly of the previous night, and it informed me that the writer would walk in the Mall in St. James's Park at three o'clock on that afternoon, attended only by a footman, and would be pleased if I could join her there, as if by accident.

Philip Hay was present when I received this letter, and soon after proposed an expedition that would occupy the afternoon and evening. When I declined this he questioned me so closely that I confessed I was going to meet my patroness. He congratulated me on being so high in her favour, and went out upon his own business.

My heart beat high as I entered the Mall. If Dora should be with Lady Barbara!-if!—but I knew this could not be. My lady herself had been anxious to banish me from that sweet society, and would she again expose me to the danger which had already well-nigh wrecked my peace? No; I felt sure my benefactress would be alone; and yet it was with a pang of disappointment I saw her solitary figure approach me.

It was not the fashionable hour for promenaders, and except for an occasional passer, or a strolling nurse-girl with her brood of children, we had the walk well-nigh to ourselves.

Lady Barbara dismissed her footman, bidding him return for her in half an hour. She led the way to a retired seat under one of the newly-budding elms, and here we sat side by side, my lady for a few moments silent with emotion, and I no less deeply moved.

Presently she took my hand and kissed it.

"Dear Robert! dear adopted son!" she murmured gently, "it is hard to meet you thus by stealth."

"Nothing is hard to me, dear madam, except the loss of your affection."

"And that loss can never happen to you. I have only to look in your face, and the past comes back to me, and I fancy you are your father, and I am young, and jealous, and wicked, and miserable once more. No justice that I can do to you will atone for that old wrong to him. O, if it could! But that is a vain wish; a wrong done to the dead is done for ever. How well you look! how manly you have grown! You had never much of the rustic air, but even that you had is gone, and you are a courtier, a man of the world. In what school have you been graduating?"

I blushed as I bethought myself that it was in those notorious

seminaries of Ranelagh and Vauxhall I had acquired the manly air on which my dear lady was pleased to congratulate me.

"Speak to me of yourself, dear madam," I said, "and of-"

"And of Dora!" said Lady Barbara, as I paused confused. "Ah, Robert, that is a business which sorely troubles me."

"What business, madam ?"

"Dora's marriage with Everard. As the time draws near I begin to doubt the wisdom of my husband's conduct in this matter."

"As the time draws near!" I cried, my heart beating painfully. "What do you mean by those words, madam?"

66

"Ah, I forgot! You know nothing of what has happened since you left Hauteville. Sir Marcus has hurried on this marriage between his niece and his son. I fear he has pressed his suit somewhat too persistently. The dear child yields, but I am sure she is unhappy; and O, Robert! I sorely fear it is for her fortune Everard is so eager."

"I know as much, Lady Barbara," replied I, and proceeded to repeat the remarks on this subject with which Mr. Everard had favoured "No man who loved a woman would speak of her thus,” I said in conclusion,

me.

On this my lady became very thoughtful.

"O, Robert, would to Heaven I knew what is best to be done!" she cried after a pause.

66 Anything is better than that Miss Hemsley should be unhappy," said I; "and I do not believe that marriage can result in her happiness. O, madam, believe me, this is no selfish argument. It is not because I love her that I say this. Alas, what hope have I? Sever her from Everard Lestrange to-morrow, and she is no nearer me. But why should her peace be sacrified to any ambitious design of her guardian's?"

"It was her father's wish also, Robert. Mr. Hemsley was a rich city merchant, who owed his position in society to his alliance with the Lestranges. He had a great friendship for my husband, and it was he who first mooted the idea of Dorothea's union with her cousin. His will was made with a view to this; and if Dora marries without her guardian's consent, she forfeits half of her fifty thousand pounds, which sum goes to Sir Marcus."

I was inexpressibly glad to hear this; it seemed to lessen by onehalf the distance between the heiress and me.

"Ah, madam, how happy the lover who should win her against her uncle's will!" cried I.

"Even then she would have no despicable fortune. The stringent terms of Mr. Hemsley's will are by no means singular in days when clandestine marriages are so common, and an heiress the mark for every adventurer. There is some talk of a bill to stop Fleet marriages; but they say Henry Fox will oppose it with all his might, since he owes his happiness to a stolen match."

"You spoke of Miss Hemsley's marriage as near at hand, madam. When is it to be?"

I faltered, and felt myself cowering like one who waits his deathblow.

"Alas, Robert, very soon; in a few weeks."

"That is indeed soon. But surely, madam, if this young lady does not love her cousin you will interfere to prevent her misery? If Sir Marcus be the guardian of her fortune, you are as surely the proper guardian of her peace; you cannot consent to see her sacrificed.”

"I know not what I ought to do, Robert," replied my lady helplessly; "I wish I better knew the dear girl's heart; and yet I dare not question her. I have tried my uttermost to dissuade Sir Marcus from this hasty marriage; but he is inflexible. And Dora is his niece and ward, not mine. Everard is in Paris, where he is appointed Secretary of Legation; but he comes back to-morrow night. He is on the road at this moment, and the preparations for the wedding are already begun. The milliners are busy with the bride's finery; but the poor child takes no pleasure in laces and brocades. I remember the fuss about my own wedding-clothes, and what weary work it all seemed to me. Ah, Robert, these loveless, joyless marriages must surely be displeasing to Heaven. But I see my servant coming back to us. You must go, dear; I shall write to you soon. Good-bye, and God bless

you!"

So we parted; I to return to the Temple, sorely depressed in spirits. Nor were Mr. Hay's persuasions of any avail with me for some time after this. The very thought of crowded public gardens filled me with aversion; I sickened at my comrade's boisterous jokes; I buried myself in my books, and would have given much to be rid of this old man of the mountain, who had contrived to fasten himself upon my shoulders. I think Mr. Hay's tact enabled him to perceive this; for he left me to myself for upwards of a week soon afterwards, absenting himself upon his own business, as he said.

Days and weeks passed, and brought me no letter from Lady Barbara. I suffered tortures of anxiety, and every evening after dark stole away from my books and walked to St. James's-square, where, under cover of the friendly night, I reconnoitred the mansion that sheltered Dorothea Hemsley. The lighted windows, more or less brilliantly illuminated, told me nothing of her who was perhaps sad and sorrowful within. Sometimes the thought that she was being forced into a hateful marriage went nigh to drive me to desperation. I remembered what Philip Hay-that soldier of fortune and citizen of the world-had said to me. The great doors of the diplomatist's house stood open before me. Why should I not rush in and rescue my darling from her oppressors by force of arms-my own strong arms, which should be able to shield and save her from all the world? Why should I not do this? Why indeed, except that I had no right to suppose such a pro

ceeding would be agreeable to Miss Hemsley. Could I have been assured of her love, there would have been little need of hesitation. But how was I, the least-learned of students in the science of woman's heart, to interpret with any certainty tender looks, and gentle blushes, and downcast eyelids, and faint fluttering hand, and low tremulous voice? Those sweet signs of maiden bashfulness might mean so little, or so much.

One night that I found the house in St. James's-square dimly lighted, and the porter standing at the open door tasting the evening air, I made so bold as to ask that functionary whether there was not soon to be a marriage in the family he served. The man had not been at Hauteville, being no doubt too burly and ponderous a person for removal from his leather-hooded chair in London, and I therefore ran no hazard of recognition.

Yes; he informed me that on Thursday fortnight the young lady of the house was to be married. The blow struck hard. Thursday fortnight! It was now Tuesday; in sixteen days Dora would be gone from me for ever.

I returned to my chambers with a distracted mind, but happily found a brief note from Lady Barbara awaiting me.

"We shall be at Vauxhall to-morrow evening," she wrote; "be sure to be at ten o'clock in the dark walk to the right of the statue of Neptune, and be cautious. We shall not be alone."

"We." Did "we" mean my lady and Miss Hemsley? I thought as much; and I know not how I lived till the next night. Philip Hay's presence and lively interest in my welfare seemed at this time particularly obtrusive. He questioned me closely as to where I was going to spend my evening, and said he had made a special appointment for me with some friends of his own at Vauxhall.

I doubt not that some movement of vexation at this intelligence betrayed where I was going, if he had not the knowledge already from another source.

Evening came, and I found myself for the first time alone in the gardens, fluttered with unspeakable hopes, and very anxious to avoid any encounter with Mr. Philip Hay. Though I had meant to arrive only a few minutes before the hour named by Lady Barbara, it was but nine o'clock when I entered the gates, so swiftly did my desires outrun time. I kept entirely to the dark walks, and looked at my watch every time I came to a solitary lamp. Every footstep fluttered me, every rustle of brocade set my heart beating with a sudden tumult. I thought the gardens could never have been so full of fops and belles, the dark alleys never so affected by the company.

At last the clock struck ten; the distant music grew confused in my ears; placid stars above and twinkling lamps below swam before my eyes. Two ladies in hoods and masks approached, and in another moment Dora was at my side.

"Dora-Miss Hemsley!" I faltered; and then I know not what impulse possessed me, but, forgetful of all except the delight of this meeting, I clasped the dear girl in my arms. "My love, my darling!" I cried, "this hateful marriage must not be."

"No, Robert,” she murmured, gently withdrawing herself from my embrace, "it shall not be. I have been very weak and cowardly; but when the time drew near, despair made me bold, and I cast myself upon Lady Barbara's mercy. Dearest aunt! she is all goodness, and she will not suffer me to be wretched for life, as I should be if I married one I cannot love, whom I cannot even respect."

"Yes, Robert," said my lady, "we must save this dear girl. I knew not her heart till the night before last, when some tearful words she let fall tempted me to question her. We must save her-but how? I cannot openly oppose the will of her guardian, my husband; and I know nothing against my stepson. It is a faithful lover must save her, Robert."

My lady and Dora had both removed their masks. The sweet girl stood before me, one moment pale as a lily, and in the next blushing crimson.

"There is one, madam, who would shrink from no dangerous service if he might be permitted to save her, and who would take her for his wife penniless more proudly than as heiress to a great fortune. But he is obscure, dependent, almost nameless.-Would you not despise such an one, Dora?"

"Despise you!" faltered my angel tenderly; and she gave me a divine look from her blue eyes.

"I begin to think I am not wanted here," cried my lady, laughing; "I will go and pay my respects to Neptune.-Ah, Dora, will you hang your pearl necklace on the sea-god's trident if you escape shipwreck on life's troubled ocean?"

She was gone. I led my darling to a bench, and we sat down side by side. She put on her mask again; was it to hide those maiden blushes? And then, emboldened by sudden joy, I spoke to her of my love, and implored her to consent to a speedy clandestine marriage.

"I would not offer you a name so obscure, Dora," said I, when I had pleaded in swift passionate words that came from the very depth of my heart; "I would rather wait and work patiently till I was worthier so dear a partner. But by this way only, or by a resolute refusal on your part, which would expose you to all the tortures of domestic persecution, can your union with Everard Lestrange be avoided; and O, my darling, I think I would sooner see you dead than united to that man, for I know he is a villain. Who else should have forged the vile letter that banished and disgraced me? Who else should be privy to poor Margery's flight? Ah, Dora, you know how little of my time was spent at the warrener's lodge after one dear

person came to Hauteville. I was but too forgetful of my old humble friends. No, darling, you must not marry Everard Lestrange; but can you consent to share a lot so lowly as mine?"

"Yes, Robert," she whispered; and for a few blessed moments we sat silent, with clasped hands. This was our betrothal. A faint rustling of the bushes behind startled us. my feet.

I sprang to "Who is there?" I cried, with my hand on my sword-hilt, for I was inclined to suspect an eavesdropper.

Again I heard a stealthy rustling, and swift footsteps in the next walk. I examined the hedge, which grew thick and high; but the listener, if there had been one, was gone. Those rapid retreating footsteps were his, no doubt.

Lady Barbara came hurrying towards us.

"Come, children," she cried, "is all settled?"

"There is nothing settled, dear madam, except that Miss Hemsley has blessed a most unworthy creature with her love."

"O, Robert, if I can read you aright, she will have no cause to repent her confidence. Dear children! But there is not time for another word. We are here with a party, you know, Robert, and have stolen away from them. Our friends will be looking for us. Am I to arrange everything? Yes, I suppose mine is the only cool head among us. I will write to you, Robert."

66

Lady Barbara!" called a gentleman, running towards us.

"See, here comes Mr. Dolford, one of our beaux! Away with you, cousin, away!"

I pressed Dora's hand, murmured a blessing upon my cousin and my love, and vanished as my lady's cavalier approached her, complaining bitterly of her absence.

"We have all been hunting you, ladies. Calcavanti, the conjuror, is just beginning his wonderful performance. It is the best thing to be seen this year, and I would not have you miss it.-Lestrange has been positively distracted, I protest, Miss Hemsley."

I felt like a creature in a dream after leaving Dora. My head swam with the sweet intoxication of so much happiness. I could not tear myself from the garden, but hung about the darker walks in the faint hope of seeing her again. It was not till after midnight that I left the pleasure-haunt and walked eastwards under the pale April stars.
CHAPTER XII.

I AM CHEATED INTO RUIN BY A TRAITOR.

AFTER that too happy meeting at Vauxhall my spirits were too much distracted for the common business of life, and I found the society of Mr. Hay far from agreeable. I longed to be alone with

my hopes and anxieties, but knew not how to get rid of a companion who cost me nothing, and took pains to make himself useful and necessary to me. In telling him what I had told him of my secrets, I had given him some right to be interested in my affairs, and this privilege he used with much freedom, and to my extreme annoyance, until I lost temper one day, and informed him that I preferred to manage my own business without his advice or interference.

If I had hoped to rid myself of him by this means I was doomed to disappointment. Mr. Hay was blessed with an imperturbable temper, and an easy impudence not to be disconcerted by any rebuff.

"That's wrong, Bob," he replied; "the advice of a man of the world is always worth having; and I'll wager I could help you to a wife and a fortune if you'd let me."

"I have no doubt of your genius for intrigue," I answered coldly; "but how is it you have not found those blessings for yourself?"

"How do you know that I have not had and lost them? A man of my stamp runs through a fortune, and quarrels and parts company from a wife, while a fellow of your icy nature is deliberating a love-letter."

During this period of anxious expectation I found it impossible to rid myself of my companion's observation. If I went out after dark to watch the house that held my treasure, as I did every evening, he guessed my errand, and upbraided me for my pusillanimity. I tried to quarrel with him; but, as it did not suit the gentleman's purpose that we should part, I found this impossible.

It was a week after my meeting with Dora, and it seemed an age, when a visitor came to my chambers, and the door being opened by Mr. Hay, that person appeared before me in high spirits, to announce that a young woman wanted to speak to me.

"She is dressed like a milliner's girl or a lady's-maid," he said; "but I'll wager it is thy inamorata in disguise."

I flew to the door, and found Miss Hemsley's maid, a young Frenchwoman, whom I had seen often at Hauteville, and who was no especial favourite of mine. She had a pinched, sallow countenance, with small piercing black eyes. She spoke English very tolerably, but with an unpleasant nasal twang, and I had heard Lady Barbara extol her as a model of industry and fidelity. I felt, therefore, that my own dislike of the girl was an unworthy prejudice of the masculine mind, which is ever apt to associate an unpleasing face with an inferior nature. Today I could have hugged Ma'amselle Adolphine, so delighted was I to welcome anyone who brought me tidings of Dora. I led her into my sitting-room, where Mr. Hay was lounging over a newspaper.

"As this young woman has come to speak of private business, I should be very glad to have the room to ourselves for half-an-hour, Hay," said I.

"With all my heart, Bob; I can read the news at a coffee-house as well as here.-Your servant, madam."

Mr. Hay saluted my visitor with a profound bow, and favoured her with a significant glance which I at the moment took for a simple fashionable leer, much affected at a time when your spurious fine gentleman's language to women was always spiced with double meaning, and his every look a declaration. I saw Mr. Hay safe outside my door, and then turned eagerly to the Frenchwoman.

"Now, Adolphine, what news from your mistress?" I cried. "Have you brought me a letter?"

"Ah, but no, monsieur!" shrieked the girl; "mademoiselle is too well watched for that. She cannot run the hazard of writing. It is nothing but drums, and dinners, and masquerades, and picture-sales, and parties to Ranelagh all the day and all the night, and he, Monsieur Everard, is always there-always upon her steps. It is my Lady Barbara who sends me to-day. The marriage that you know of is to take place at once, at the Fleet, at May Fair, anywhere that they will ask no questions. And if you have a friend who can help you to arrange the things, my Lady Barbara says-ah, let me not forget what it is she has said—since you know not the town, you are to confide in your friend, pourvu that you care to trust him."

A friend? What friend had I? There was my companion, Mr. Philip Hay, clever, unscrupulous, practised in intrigue, and only too eager to be useful. But could I venture to trust my happiness to him? "What next, Adolphine?" I cried.

"The marriage must be immediately, see you, Monsieur Robert. This day-week is fixed for the wedding with Monsieur Everard. Tonight there is a masquerade at Ranelagh. Mademoiselle will be there, with my Lady Barbara and Monsieur Everard. At half-past twelve o'clock, when the rooms are most crowded, she will complain of the heat, and will retire to the cloak-room with her aunt, where she will slip a black-silk domino over her dress and will come out to the portico, always with her aunt. You must be upon the spot with a hackney-coach ready to carry her away. It must all be done quick like the lightning, for Monsieur Everard will not be slow to take alarm; and then you will drive at once to your parson, and he will marry you sur-le-champ. And after, you had best to leave the country with your bride, says my Lady Barbara, if you would not have bloodshed between you and Monsieur Everard."

"I can protect my wife and my honour in England or elsewhere," I answered proudly; and then with a throbbing heart I sat down to write to my dear girl, assuring her of my gratitude and love, and thanking her a thousand times for her confidence; a long, wild, rambling epistle I doubt not. I had not time to read it over, for the Frenchwoman was in haste to be gone, so I crammed the letter and a couple of guineas into her hand and dismissed her.

When she was gone I paced my chamber thoughtfully for some time, debating the prudence of confiding in Philip Hay. After serious

reflection I decided in his favour. True that I knew him to be a rascal, yet if well paid for his fidelity he would surely be faithful. And what interest could he have in betraying me? Some help in this matter I must assuredly have. I knew nothing myself of Fleet marriages or the law relating to them; and there was no time for me to obtain such knowledge from strangers. I had often enough been hustled in Holborn and on Ludgate-hill by the low wretches who touted for those reprobate parsons who made a living by such clandestine unions; but I could at least trust Philip Hay rather than one of these vulgar adventurers. To arrange a marriage between midnight and sunrise might be, nay, no doubt would be, a matter of some difficulty; and for this I needed just such help as my companion could give me; while in the event of any pursuit on the part of Everard Lestrange, the assistance of such a sturdy henchman would be of no small service. It was already late in the afternoon, and there was little time for indecision; so I decided on trusting Mr. Hay with this precious secret, and on his return hastened to make him my confidant.

"It is just such an adventure as I love!" he cried gaily. "Leave all to me, and I will engage that the soberest parson in the purlieus of the Fleet prison shall be in waiting with book and gown to unite you to your heiress at the unearthly hour of one to-morrow morning. He will ask an extra fee for the unusual hour, though it is scarcely so uncommon as you may think; but of course you'll not object to that."

"And will such a marriage be strictly legal?" I asked.

"Faith yes, Bob; the Gordian knot shall be as tight as if an archbishop had the tying of it-unless, indeed, you give special notice to the parson beforehand, when these ecclesiastics have a way of forgetting to read some essential bit of the service, which omission enables Signor Sposo to bid Signora Sposa good-morning some fine day when she grows troublesome. O, they are rare obliging fellows, I assure you, these parsons; but though these marriages are legal enough, it is a felony on their part to perform them, for which they are liable to prosecution. But they snap their fingers at Mr. Justice, and contrive to live a jolly life. There was Dr. Gainham, for instance, playfully entitled Bishop of Hell, a rare impudent dog; and the famous Keith, who made a handsome fortune by his chapel in Mayfair; and when there was some talk of his brother ecclesiastics putting down his traffic, vowed if they did he would buy a piece of ground and outbury them."

While my companion rattled on thus, I was meditating my plans for the night. Yes, Lady Barbara was right. It would be best to carry my bride from England, and place her where she would be safe from Everard Lestrange's persecution. I could come back to my native shores to fight him, if my honour should demand such an act; but my first thought must be of Dora.

I had luckily upwards of a hundred pounds in hand; and this, after feeing Mr. Hay with a twenty-pound note, would leave me plenty for a

journey to France, and a month or two's living in some pleasant rustic retreat, which Dora, who knew the Continent, should choose. "And I will be her slave, and lie at her feet, during the brief happy holiday of our honeymoon," I thought; "and then I will come back to London and work for a position at the Bar, and redeem my name from the stigma of the fortune-hunter, and every penny of the income from her five-and-twenty thousand pounds shall be spent on herself, so that she may forget she is married to a poor man."

My fancy flew to a pretty rural cottage I had seen to let in one of the lanes beyond Kensington, during a recent pedestrian jaunt to that quarter, and which I imagined just such a simple paradise as my love would like.

"I will send Hay to secure it to-morrow," I said to myself, "while Dora and I are posting towards Dover, and I will ask Lady Barbara to furnish it for us.

Mr. Hay departed in search of a sober parson, and to order the posthorses and chariot to convey us to Dover; while I busied myself with the packing of a trunk to take with me on my journey. Never had I been so particular about my toilette. I deliberated solemnly between a blue suit and a chocolate one, and no elegant trifler of Pall Mall could have been more particular than I in my selection of cravat and ruffles.

By the time I had made my arrangements and counted my money, Mr. Hay returned. He had settled everything most pleasantly-found an exemplary parson, a real Oxford man, without a fault except a capacity for losing money at faro, at the tavern of the Two Sawyers, Fleet-lane. The chaise and horses were ordered, and would be in waiting close to this place of entertainment.

"And by to-morrow noon you will be in Dover," said my coadjutor, "in time for the packet that sails at four in the afternoon, wind and weather permitting. And now let us go and dine together. What, man alive!" he cried, in answer to a dissentient look of mine, "will you refuse to crack a bottle with a faithful friend at parting? By Mr. Bob, unless I am used as a friend I will have no hand in this busiI am no dirty tool, too base to touch but not too vile to use!" "It was no want of friendship that made me hesitate, Phil," I replied; "but I am in too anxious a mood for pleasure, and shall be poor company. We'll have a bottle together, notwithstanding."

ness.

I looked at my watch, a bulky Tompion with a clumsy outer-case of leather, that had belonged to my grandfather the colonel, and had been flung aside as old-fashioned by my father when he went to Cambridge, and left in a drawer at Hauteville, where Lady Barbara found it, and gave it to me. It was early yet, and indeed, but for Mr. Hay's invitation to dine, I know not how I should have got rid of the hours that must pass before my appointment at Ranelagh.

My officious friend took me to a tavern that was strange to me, a house in Chelsea, where he ordered an excellent dinner, and so much

wine that I remonstrated with him for his folly. But he informed me that we were not going to dine alone, and presently arrived a person of military aspect, in a uniform which I had never seen before, whom Mr. Hay introduced as Sergeant O'Blagg of the East India Company's service, a gentleman who thought no more of storming a Mahratta fortress than of cracking a bottle of burgundy, and who stood high in the estimation of Major Lawrence.

This brave warrior, whose Hibernian accent was in nowise modified by long service in the East, favoured us during dinner with many wonderful stories of his adventures in those distant lands, and dilated with a somewhat florid eloquence upon the wealth and glory to be won there.

"You gentlemen who know no more of war than those petty European skirmishes about which you kick up such a row, with firing of big guns and ringing of big bells, bedad, for a victory that you're neither better nor worse for, except in the matter of a new tax on your boots, or your wig, or your tay, ye've no notion of our conquests out yonder, where, at the sack of a town, there's diamonds as big as beans to be picked up in the streets, and the pearls fly as thick as hailstones about our soldiers' heads; and there's big brazen idols in the temples with their stomachs full of rubies and emeralds and such-like, just as you stuff a Michaelmas goose, sir, and him as splits the haythen image asunder with the butt-end of his bayonet gets the stuffing for his pains. Why, the Great Mogul has seven golden thrones-or maybe some of 'em's silver-covered with jewels"-the sergeant called them "jools"-"every one of 'em handsomer than t'other, except the one that's called the paycock throne, and that whops the lot, and is valued at forty millions of rupees."

So he ran on, to the apparent delight of my companion, but to my own unutterable weariness. What were the jewelled thrones of the Great Mogul to me, who knew but one treasure, and sighed but for one dear prize? The sergeant's company vexed me; but Philip Hay explained to me in an undertone that he had met this old friend by accident in the street, and could not well avoid asking him to join us at dinner. I observed that the soldier drank ferociously, and both he and Hay pressed the wine on me; but this kindness I resolutely declined. I would have given much to have been away from these boisterous boon-companions, and heartily repented my confidence in Mr. Hay, which had placed me in such an unwelcome position.

I gave but little attention to the sergeant's stories, which he told in a noisy, uproarious manner peculiar to the lower orders of his countrymen, and garnished with military oaths. My thoughts were far away from that boisterous table. When the bottle was pushed towards me, with clamorous protestations against my abstinence, I filled my glass mechanically, and in this manner when the night grew late I had drunk some three or four glasses of a claret which seemed to me a thin poor

wine, ill-adapted to steal a man's brains. Yet by ten o'clock I felt a kind of stupor creeping over me-a confusion of the brain, in which the strident voice of the Irish soldier roaring his florid stories of Indian conquest and loot, of Dupleix and the Great Mogul, peacock thrones, and royal elephants in jewelled harness, seemed strange and distant to my ears.

In this condition of my mind I was perpetually troubled by the idea that I had no right to be here. It was in vain that I looked at my watch, which showed me that I had nearly three hours to wait before my presence would be required at the gates of Ranelagh. At last I started up from the table in haste, telling Philip Hay that I could stay no longer, and if he was not ready to accompany me, would go alone. He pointed to an eight-day clock in a corner of the room.

"Art thou mad, Bob?" he cried; "it has not yet gone the half-hour after ten. Drink a glass of this rare old Hollands, and take things easy."

He forced a glass of spirit upon me, which I drank unwillingly enough. It had a strange burning taste, and I had reason afterwards to know that it was no such simple liquor as Hollands I was thus made to drink, but a dram doctored with an Indian spirit that maddens the brain.

"We can get rid of the sergeant in half an hour, and then go out and get our hackney-coach," whispered Hay close in my ear. "There is no need for him to know our business."

I acknowledged the wisdom of this, and tried to listen with some degree of patience to the soldier's long-winded stories, and my friend's comments upon them; but before I had listened long, the voices of the two mingled confusedly, then grew to a buzzing sound, and at last died away into a low murmur, like the pleasant rustling of trees on a summer afternoon, as my head sank forward on the table, and I slept.

I was awakened suddenly by a violent slap on the shoulder, and a loud voice crying:

"Twelve o'clock, Bob; the landlord is shutting his doors, and 'tis time we went in search of our coach. Why, what a dull companion thou hast been !"

I staggered to my feet. My eyeballs burnt, and my head ached to splitting; for a moment I scarce remembered where I was, or the events of the day.

"Heavens, I have slept !" I exclaimed at last; "and Dora waiting for me, perhaps. Why, in perdition's name, did you make me drink?" "You must have the weakest head in Christendom, child, if three glasses of French wine can muddle it. Come, the reckoning is paid, and a long one, for that Irishman drinks like a fish; we can settle that between us by and by. Allons!"

He slipped his arm through mine, and led me from the house. The feeble street-lamps swam before my eyes, and I could hardly have

walked without my companion's support. Not far from the tavern we found a hackney-coach that had just brought a family-party from the theatre, and this carried us at a good pace to Ranelagh, before the doors of which pleasure-place we alighted.

Here all was confusion and riot-torches blazing, chair-men bawling, footmen squabbling, ducal chariots stopping the way, and a crowd of finely-dressed people going in and out of the lighted doors.

My companion held me tightly by the arm, and it was as much as we could do to keep our places in the crowd. Standing thus, hustled and pushed on every side, we waited for a time that seemed to me very long, but no black-robed mask approached us. Maskers in red and blue and yellow, Great Moguls and Turkish princesses, shepherds and shepherdesses, sailors, sultans, chimney-sweeps, harlequins, Punchinellos, Sir John Falstaffs and Abel Druggers, passed and pushed us, but she for whom I waited with throbbing heart and burning brain did not appear.

At last I felt myself tapped on the shoulder by someone amongst the crowd behind us, and turning, found myself face to face with two women in black dominoes and masks. One removed her mask instantly, and I recognised Mademoiselle Adolphine.

"Get us to a coach as quick as you can, Mr. Robert,” she entreated hurriedly; "my young lady is like to swoon herself.-O, but I pray you to sustain yourself, mademoiselle! The coach is all near, and monsieur will lead us there. Lean you on his arm, mademoiselle, and on me.-And you will tell the coachman where to drive, and follow us in another coach, is it not, monsieur? Ah, what of dangers, what of hazards we have run to rencounter you! Monsieur Lestrange is yonder in waiting for mademoiselle, who has gone away with her aunt to the cloak-room; and Miladi Barbara goes to monsieur to say that mademoiselle is too ill to return to the dance. Word of honour, it is a pretty comedy!" and chattering thus, the French maid hurried and bustled us to the door of a coach, into which she pushed her timid companion, who did indeed seem half-fainting.

I pressed the poor little trembling hand, which clung convulsively to mine.

"Shall I not come with you, Dora?" I asked.

"Great heaven, no!" the French girl shrieked almost hysterically; "and if one pursues us, and Monsieur Lestrange came to overtake us,—the beautiful affair! Go you into the other coach, monsieur, with your friend, and tell to our coachman to follow yours. Go, then. Is there the time to lose in follies?" cried Adolphine, as I kissed the little hand that still clung to mine, alas, with but too natural fear.

Philip Hay pulled me from the carriage-door, directed the man where to drive, and thrust me into our coach before I had time to remonstrate.

"Drive like ten thousand devils!" he shouted to our Jarvey, who,

VOL. VI.

ᎪᎪ

no doubt used to such clandestine errands and the double or treble pay attendant on them, whipped his jaded horses into a gallop, and in another minute we were tearing, rattling, jolting eastwards at a pace that shook every bone in our bodies, and precluded any attempt

at conversation.

I looked out of the window several times on the journey, to satisfy myself that the other coach was following. I think we could scarce have left Ranelagh an hour and a half when we pulled up in a wretched dirty lane, before the dreary entrance of a tavern, whose dinginess was but just made visible by an oil-lamp hanging over the threshold.

"Is this the house?" I asked with a shudder. place!"

"What a horrid

"Zounds, Bob, what a fool thou art! Does it matter by what gate a man goes to heaven? Quick, man! here are the ladies; there is no time for dawdling. My parson will be drunk or asleep if we're not quick; 'tis an hour after our time. This way, mademoiselle; support your mistress. The stairs are somewhat rotten, and might be cleaner. The chapel is an ugly one, miss; but this dirty stair is like Jacob's ladder, for here are seen angels ascending and descending. -Come, Bob."

--

He opened a door and ushered us into a chamber lighted with two tallow-candles in brass candlesticks. These stood on a table covered with a dirty cloth, and surmounted by a greasy, dilapidatedlooking prayer-book, upon the cover of which, in tarnished gilding, appeared the arms of one of the colleges. A man, dressed in a grimy surplice, and with a red cotton-handkerchief tied round his head in lieu of a wig, was nodding half asleep over an empty bottle; but he was broad awake in a moment at our entrance, saluted us briskly, clapped himself behind the table, opened his book, and began to gabble the marriage-service, as if for a wager.

The irreverence of the whole affair shocked me inexpressibly. Was this, save one, the most solemn of all ceremonials, to be thus rattled over by a drunkard?

[ocr errors]
'Stop, sir!" I cried; "let the lady at least remove her mask."

"Mais tu es bête!" roared Philip Hay. "Veux-tu que tout le monde saurait demain ce que se fait ici ce soir? The lady will keep her mask; 'tis the custom with people of her rank.-Go on, parson, and let us have none of your clippings of the service. This is a bona-fide marriage, remember; but you'll be paid as well as if we wanted to play fast and loose by and by."

The

I took the little hand in mine. It trembled no longer, but was now icy cold. The parson rattled on with the service. Mr. Hay stood grinning at us, with his arms akimbo and his hat on. bride's responses were given in a faint murmur that was almost a sob. The ring was slipped upon the slender finger, and the ceremonial

being concluded, a greasy book was produced, in which I signed my name, and the bride after me. As she took the pen, Mr. Hay gave a loud huzza, which withdrew my attention from the register. It seemed the signal for a fresh arrival. The door of an inner room opened, and a gentleman entered, who took off his hat and saluted me with a bow of mock ceremony. This new-comer was Everard Lestrange. His ironical courtesy, and the sardonic grin upon his hated face, told me that I was undone. Till this moment my brain had been dazed and muddled by the stuff that had been mixed with my drink; but my enemy's presence sobered me.

"Let me be first to salute the bride," exclaimed my lady's stepson. "You may remove your mask now, Mistress Ainsleigh, and let your husband imprint a hymeneal kiss upon the prettiest lips in Christendom."

She, my wife,—bound to me irrevocably by the ceremonial just gabbled over by a half-drunken parson,-took her mask from her face, and looked at me pleadingly, piteously, tenderly, with her soft brown eyes.

It was my foster-sister, Margery Hawker!
