CHAPTER V. I RISE IN THe World.

F in my childhood I had regarded Hauteville Hall as a kind of enchanted castle of fairy legend, I had still better ground for the pleasant fancy after the coming of Lady Barbara Lestrange; for my life underwent a transformation as sudden and complete as that which befalls the prince who, after pining for years in the guise of some repulsive beast, is once more restored to his own image, and finds himself a prosperous and comely gentleman. As Robert the Nameless, dependent on an absent lady's bounty, I had endured extreme humiliation; as Mr. Robert Ainsleigh, my lady's cousin and favourite, I was courted and flattered in a manner which at once confused and amazed me. My late tyrant, Martha Grimshaw, was of all people most obsequious; and I perceived that, in her fear of my lady's anger, she would have stooped to any degradation in order to conciliate me. I received her advances with supreme coldness, and took occasion to inform her that she had nothing to fear from my malice or to hope from my regard.

"It was my misfortune to live with you for ten years," I said; "and it is difficult for any man to beat out the memory of so long a period; but, so far as it is possible, I will forget the slights you have inflicted upon me, and the petty spite which has influenced your conduct towards me from the day of our first meeting. Your husband's kindness to me has, however, been as unvarying as your own harshness, and you may be secure that my respect for him will prevent me from injuring you."

Mrs. Grimshaw's dull gray eye shone with a pale fire as she answered me.

"I am much beholden to you, sir," she said in slow, measured tones, "that you should condescend so far as to refrain from injuring

VOL. VI.

M

me in the opinion of my mistress, whose last caprice inclines her to patronise you. You are as yet a stranger to the whims and humours of a lady of rank, and I scarce wonder that your sudden elevation has turned your head. It is a new thing for a penniless dependent to be raised from the society of such low persons as my husband and myself to the company of an earl's daughter and an ambassador's son; but I would have you remember that it is easier to come downstairs than to go upwards, and that you may some day find yourself turned out of doors, as Mr. Roderick Ainsleigh was before you."

"My father was not turned out of doors !" I cried angrily.

"Your father! Who gave you an earl's nephew for your father? Pray where is your certificate of birth, or your mother's marriage-lines? You are quick to boast of your father; and I doubt not, if he has bequeathed you his face, you have inherited his wicked heart also."

"Why do you malign him?" I exclaimed; "he never can have injured you."

"Of course not," cried Mrs. Grimshaw bitterly; "what should there be in common between low-born dirt like me and such a gentleman as that? Why, nothing. But I tell you this, Robert Ainsleighsince it pleases you to borrow a bad man's name-your father brought sorrow wherever he came, and there were few who looked on his face who did not live to rue having seen it."

The inconsequence of this speech mystified me, but I did not question Mrs. Grimshaw, who departed malevolent as ever, more malevolent, if possible, since I had repudiated her civilities.

In my new phase of existence, however, I saw but little of the severe Martha. For me there was to be no more of Mr. Whitefield's Calvinistic discourse, no more tracts of alarming import, no more prim one-o'clock dinners in the oak parlour, no more silent, comfortless meals beneath the baleful gaze of my persecutor.

From the little whitewashed chamber at the top of a narrow wooden staircase, where I had slept ever since my first coming to Hauteville Hall, I found myself transferred to an airy and spacious tapestried apartment over the library, with an oriel window opening on the Italian garden. A tailor from Warborough came to take my orders for several suits of the prevailing fashion, and Lady Barbara herself assisted me to select patterns and colours, while Mr. Snip waited respectfully with his pattern-book across his arm. My mornings were still given to the classics with my kind master Anthony Grimshaw; but after we had read an act of a Greek tragedy, or the funeral oration of Pericles, or a dozen pages of Tacitus, or dipped into the wicked romance of Petronius Arbiter, my tutor and I parted company; and unless I made it my business to join him as he took his after-dinner pipe on the terrace, we saw no more of each other till the next day. In short, I was now a gentleman, and my sphere was the drawing-room, where I sat by Lady Barbara's tambour-frame, or hung over Miss Hemsley's harpsichord, as

if I had been to the manner born. How shall I describe the kindness of my kinswoman, who, having chosen to assume the care of my fortunes, was determined to fulfil her duty to the uttermost !

"It seems cruel to have left you so long to languish in this lonely place," she said, during our first tête-à-tête; "but I could not get Sir Marcus away from Madrid, and it would have seemed ungracious to leave him; so I waited, almost hoping for some breach between England and Spain, in order to bring about my husband's recall. And then the years slipped by so quickly. I knew Anthony would be kind to you, and I did not think Martha would be unkind, which I fear she was, though you refuse to admit as much. In short, dear cousin, believe me, I was not so cruel as I must needs have seemed."

"You never seemed to me anything but my bountiful benefactress and friend," I replied; "I knew that I owed everything to you, and must have perished but for your charity."

"No, Robert, I will not have that word."

66

Nay, dear madam, there is no other fits your goodness.”

And again my lady gave me her hand, which I once more raised to my lips in grateful homage.

I was now installed as one of the family, with as little sense of dependence as it is possible for a dependent to feel.

I was agreeably surprised by the conduct of Mr. Lestrange, who treated me with a cordiality which I was far from expecting to receive from him, after his supercilious tone on the night of our first meeting. He was something of a fop and fine gentleman; but pronounced himself, nevertheless, delighted with the park and woods, the noble troutstream which intersected the estate, and in which I was able to show him the deeps and shallows, the shadowy inlets where his fly might do most execution, and the reedy margins where he might be sure of a gigantic jack. He suffered me to do the honours of Hauteville, and entertained me agreeably with his own adventures at home and abroad, which he was never tired of relating, and which were of a nature to induce me to believe that the descriptions of Petronius were not so entirely fabulous as I had hitherto supposed them. In plain truth, I discovered by and by that this gentleman, who was yet on the sunny side of his twenty-seventh birthday, was past-master of the knowledge of evil, and had long outlived his abhorrence of the vices and his respect for the virtues of his fellow-men.

I did not, however, make this discovery immediately, being too much unused to the society of fine gentlemen, and to the world in general, to be a skilled observer. Little by little these things revealed themselves to me; and I had been some months in Mr. Everard's company before I had learned rightly to estimate his civilities. or to appreciate his value.

His father arrived at the Hall within a week of Lady Barbara's advent; and I was presented to that important personage with all

due ceremony. He received me with a somewhat cold courtesy, and I was quick to discover that my presence gave him little pleasure. Toleration was, evidently, all I must expect from him; but the kindness of my benefactress would have compensated me for worse treatment from Sir Marcus, and while I took care not to intrude myself upon that gentleman, I rigidly refrained from any attempt to conciliate his good graces. My grateful affection for my protectress might be misinterpreted; but I was determined to eat no toads for Sir Marcus Lestrange.

Happily for me, however, the diplomatist was by no means a domestic character. He spent the greater part of his day in his study, and of an evening played piquet with my lady in her dressing-room, while Everard Lestrange, Miss Hemsley, and myself amused ourselves in the saloon, or strolled on the terrace and in the garden. He paid numerous visits to the seats of the neighbouring nobility and gentry, travelling sometimes as many as thirty miles to a dinner, and altogether troubled us but little with his company. He was an elegant and accomplished gentleman, of about fifty years of age, in person much resembling his only son, but of more perfect although colder manners. Between himself and Everard there obtained a stately politeness which did not betoken a very warm affection. It was rather the manner of skilled fencers on guard than of a loving father and son. My lady told me in confidence that Sir Marcus desired to see his son united in marriage with Dorothea, or Dora, Hemsley, not only the most amiable of women, but a considerable fortune.

"Whether this will ever come to pass I know not," she said in conclusion; "but I am bound to assist my husband's projects. Dora is a very sweet girl, and my only fear is that Everard should prove unworthy of her."

"They are not betrothed to each other, are they, madam ?" I asked, perhaps more anxiously than the circumstances warranted.

"No, there has been no formal betrothal; but Dora can hardly be ignorant of her uncle's wish. She was left an orphan five years ago, and since that time has lived with me. I do not know what I should do without her. I have no children of my own, you see, Robert. There is a little grave in Spain that I cannot think of at this day without a heartache, though it is fifteen years old; but no child of mine lived to call me mother. Yes, Dora is very dear to me," she added, abruptly changing the subject.

This confidence occurred within a week of Lady Barbara's arrival. In after-days, when I had suffered a bitter pain and languished under the burden of a secret sorrow, I could not help thinking that my benefactress had told me these things thus early in order that no peril might arise from my daily companionship with Dora Hemsley. But there is one disease against which antidotes and preventives are administered in vain, and from this cruel fever I was doomed to suffer.
CHAPTER VI.

I FALL IN LOVE.

DURING one of our earliest rambles in Hauteville woods, I introduced Mr. Everard Lestrange to the warrener's lodge, where the travelled gentleman soon contrived to make himself agreeable to honest dame Hawker and my sweet Margery, who had blossomed into rare beauty in the calm solitude of her woodland home. She was but just seventeen years of age, slim and graceful as the young fawns who had frisked around her and eaten from her rosy palm. Her beauty was that of a true wood-nymph, and had nothing in common with Dorothea Hemsley's white loveliness. Margery's skin was a pale olive, charmingly relieved by the deep crimson of cheeks and lips. Her eyes were hazel-brown, large, bright, and sparkling with the innocent. vivacity of a pure and fearless soul; her hair also a rich nut-brown, tinged with gold-waving rippling hair, which defied her girlish vanity when she would fain have pinned and pinched it into some semblance of the two or three fashionable heads which she saw at church.

I had happened to tell my new acquaintance that Jack Hawker was an excellent angler, and his daughter skilled in the fabrication of a famous trout-fly, whereupon Mr. Lestrange expressed himself eager to see my foster-father.

"A very bower of Arcadia!" he cried, as we approached the dear old white-walled cottage. "And so this is where you were reared? I declare, Ainsleigh, you were a lucky dog to have a scoundrel for your father."

"Scoundrel or no scoundrel, as he was my father, I would rather you called him no hard names," I answered somewhat sullenly; for I had no idea of suffering this gentleman to throw dirt at Roderick Ainsleigh's grave.

We found the cottage tenantless. Jack Hawker was doubtless absent on his rounds, and it was market-day at Warborough, whither

my

foster-mother went every week to make her purchases, and dispose of small produce in the way of honey and eggs, and vegetables from the fertile rustic garden. The doors being all opened, in the sultry midsummer weather, we went into the kitchen, whence we beheld as fair a vision as painter ever perpetuated by the work of his brush.

At the end of a narrow garden-path, overarched by the straggling boughs of elder, quince, and hazel, stood Margery, in the centre of a little grass-plot, with the sunshine on her loose uncovered hair and light chintz petticoat. She was feeding her poultry, which swarmed eagerly round her, and did sturdy battle amongst themselves for the barley which her pretty hands shook down on them from a well-filled sieve. So busily was she occupied as not to be aware of our approach till we stood within a few yards of her; and then it was a pretty sight to

see her bashfulness and sweet blushing confusion when she glanced suddenly upward and perceived us watching her.

She came and shook me by the hand, and dropped a low curtsey to my companion. Her manner towards myself had much changed during the last year. She was no longer the familiar foster-sister who had been wont to hold up her rosy lips to receive the fraternal kiss, but a bashful maiden, whose eyelids drooped when we met, and from whom I had sometimes trouble to extort more than murmured monosyllabic replies to my talk, yet who would by fits and starts be vivacious and animated, playful and capricious, as some forest elf.

This I took to be the natural shyness of maidenhood, that tender early dawn of life in which a woman is wholly surprised and halfashamed to find herself beautiful and admired.

I requested Margery to show us some golden pheasants of her own rearing, the feathers of which were of inestimable value to the angler; and she conducted us to a roomy, rough wire cage, embosomed among roses and seringa, proud to exhibit her favourites.

After these had been duly admired, Mr. Lestrange complained of thirst, and I begged a bowl of milk for him; whereon Margery led us to her mother's dairy, a cool shadowy chamber paved with stone, and odorous with the perfume of eglantine and honeysuckle.

Here she made us welcome to such refreshment as the place could offer, and we loitered for some time drinking milk and eating cheesecakes of a substantial quality. I was surprised to discover how quickly Everard Lestrange made himself agreeable to the rustic girl, contriving speedily to engage her in familiar conversation, and to amuse her by his talk of London, that marvellous city of which she knew less than she knew of fairyland.

We bade Margery good-bye after she had promised to make us some flies against our next visit; and as we walked away from the cottage, my companion complimented me upon my good fortune in owning so lovely a foster-sister.

"Methinks thou wert born under a lucky star, Robert,” cried the gentleman, in that affected style which I found afterwards to obtain between young men of his class.

"I do not know what you mean by good luck," I replied. "I love my foster-sister dearly; but I consider it no special good fortune that she should have grown up so handsome. Indeed, I doubt if beauty is the best of gifts for a cottager's daughter."

"Spoken like a true disciple of the saintly Noggers of Brewer's Yard, Warborough," cried Mr. Lestrange with a sneer. "Beauty is a delusion and a snare, brother Jumper, do you jump in Brewer's-yard meeting-house, by the way, or do you belong to the quieter folks who only preach and pray?-yea verily, comeliness of visage is but a snare to the wicked and a bait for fools; and 'tis better to be a flat-faced and pug-nosed damsel than a bright woodland siren, with great hazel eyes

in which the sunshine plays at bo-peep, and lips like ripe crimson rosebuds."

I did not care to hear these florid compliments; and though at this time I knew but little of Everard Lestrange, I resolved that I would take him to Jack Hawker's cottage as seldom as possible.

"One would think, by your raptures, you had fallen in love with my pretty sister," I said somewhat coldly.

"Why, thou simplest of rustics, such raptures are the common language with a man of the world where women are in question. We think and talk of them in hyperbole, and the homeliest among them is angel or goddess before marriage. It is only after the honeymoon that we descend to the regions of fact, and confess that Lesbia is a slattern and Marcella a scold. As for your pretty woodland nymph yonder, it would fare ill with me should I lose my heart in that quarter; for so surely as I am a skilled observer of womankind, hers is already forfeited."

"To whom, pray?"

"To you, Mr. Demure; to you, who pretend to be unconscious of your power. Did you mark how ready the sly puss was to converse with me, and how bravely her beautiful eyes met mine, stranger as I am? But at a word from you the dark lashes droop, and the gipsy face reddens with a sudden blush. I would forfeit my chances of favour with the Duke of Newcastle to be in your shoes, were I free to wish."

I understood these last words to allude to his relations with Miss Hemsley. I hastened to assure him that he was mistaken as to Margery's sentiments.

"We regard each other as brother and sister, but no more," I said. "I have watched her cradle many a day when I was little more than a baby myself. We were together for nearly eight years,―constant playfellows and companions,--and the friendship between us has never been interrupted."

"And is that any reason that she should not love you?"

"The strongest. I don't believe that love is ever born of custom and affection. "Tis the sudden sight of a sweet strange face that first tells a man he has a heart."

Mr. Lestrange stared hard at me, and I felt my cheeks crimson under his gaze.

"And what sweet strange face has Mr. Ainsleigh seen of late that has made him so wise ?" he demanded with a sneer.

"I speak of love in the abstract," I answered, and hastily turned the conversation; but on several occasions after this I caught Everard Lestrange watching my face with a somewhat unfriendly expression upon his own.

"The sudden sight of a sweet strange face." The words had escaped me unawares, and they hinted at a secret scarce known to myself.

'Twas the pale, wild white-rose face of Dorothea Hemsley that was in my mind.

And she was to marry this cold, cynical, supercilious worldling, with his sneers and affectations, because she had a fortune, and could advance her cousin's prospects! Remote and impossible a creature as she must ever be for me, I could but lament that family interests should assign her to so unfitting a partner; and I feared that so gentle a nature would never sustain any contest with the will of others, should the young lady's inclinations be opposed to the match.

This I had some reason to conclude was the case. I had seen Miss Hemsley and her suitor together, and had seen on her part an avoidance which was something more than maiden modesty. She was polite and gentle in her demeanour towards her cousin, as she was to the lowest servant in the house; but I observed that she artfully eluded all occasions of being alone with him. In order to do this she sometimes invited my companionship, and I was thus at an early stage of our acquaintance drawn into a dangerous intimacy with her. She volunteered to teach me chess, and instructed me in the performance of the simple symphonies and accompaniments in two or three easy bass songs by Handel and Gluck.

That these favours bestowed on me were displeasing to Mr. Lestrange, I had, even at this period, no doubt; but he contrived to conceal his anger, and treated his cousin and myself with perfect amiability.

I found it no easy matter to keep my lady's stepson away from the warrener's lodge, where he managed to make himself vastly agreeable to simple Jack Hawker and his simpler wife, who thought this townbred gentleman the most perfect specimen of courtesy and goodmanners. Margery brightened at our coming, and seemed always alike delighted to receive us; nor was I well pleased to perceive the rapid progress which Mr. Lestrange appeared to make in her favour, since I had by this time become acquainted with the loose ideas and contemptuous opinions which he entertained of all womankind, from the duchesses whose favours he hinted at to the dairy-maids whose destruction he boasted. Towards me my foster-sister's manner was. shyer and more subdued every time we met, but with Everard Lestrange she gossipped and laughed with perfect freedom.

This gentleman often rallied us upon our secret attachment, and his jests covered the poor girl with blushes and confusion, much to the amusement of Jack Hawker, who saw no reason why his daughter should be an unworthy alliance for Lady Barbara's penniless protégé. I had told my old friends at the warrener's lodge nothing of my cousinship with the mistress of Hauteville, and they still regarded me as a nameless waif, dependent on the charity of my noble benefactress.

I did not, however, continue to afford Mr. Lestrange occasion for his broadly-expressed insinuations, which were embarrassing to Mar

gery, and to the last degree painful to myself. As the summer advanced I spent less time in the woods, and left my lady's stepson to go fishing by himself, while I read with Lady Barbara and Miss Hemsley in the Hauteville library. My benefactress was well pleased to resume her studious habits, and we formed a little company of students, with Anthony Grimshaw for our preceptor. Together we read Virgil, Dante, and Tasso, and my lady was so good as to express herself much pleased with my progress as a linguist.

"The dear boy has a rare talent for languages," said my gratified master, "and we have worked hard at the cultivation of foreign tongues, which of all accomplishments is the most valuable for a man who has to make his way in the world. For Greek and Latin I will match Robert against any lad of his age; he knows Italian thoroughly, and is a fair Frenchman; and he has, moreover, a smattering of Sanscrit, which may some day be useful to him."

"I doubt whether his knowledge of Sanscrit will ever serve him for much," my lady answered, smiling, "unless he should have a fancy for extending his travels as far as the court of the Great Mogul, or should turn Jesuit missionary and convert the heathens of Birmah or Thibet. But the habit of study is a good one, and I am proud to think my cousin has been so diligent a pupil."

While I did my best to improve Miss Hemsley's Italian, which was far from equal to the obscurities of Dante, that young lady was so kind as to instruct me in the Spanish tongue, of which she had made herself mistress during her five years' residence at Madrid. With this gentle instructress I speedily mastered the soft, sleepy syllables of that harmonious language, and read Don Quixote in the original before our studies were concluded.

For these studies Mr. Lestrange did not scruple to avow his contempt. He quoted Molière's Femmes Savantes, and christened my lady Bélise, and Dora Hemsley Armande. He spoke of us as the Hauteville Blue-stocking Club, and suggested that we should invite Lord Lyttleton and Mrs. Montague to join the party.

I for my part was too happy to heed his sneers; days, weeks, and months slipped by, and I well-nigh forgot that I had ever been solitary and almost friendless in that house where my life was now so pleasant. My acquaintance with Dora Hemsley had ripened into friendship. She talked to me of my lonely boyhood, of her own happy youth surrounded by friends so dear, and of the bitter grief that fell upon her with the loss of them. She told me of Lady Barbara's tender kindness, and of the affection which had gone so far to supply the place of the lost. But of her uncle's desire to bring about a marriage between herself and his son she never spoke; nor was she ever betrayed into expressing any opinion respecting Everard Lestrange. One day when Everard and she had been by chance alone together for some minutes, I surprised her in tears. Mr. Lestrange quitted the room by one door as I entered by

another, and I found Dora seated on one of the window-seats, with her arms resting on the broad stone sill, and her head and face hidden in her clasped hands. I saw the tears trickling between the slender fingers, and had not sufficient command of myself to refrain from questioning her.

"Dear Miss Hemsley," I cried, "for God's sake tell me what distresses you!"

She lifted her head and turned her sweet face towards me, bathed in tears.

"That I can tell to no one," she answered; "I have my secret troubles to bear, Mr. Ainsleigh, though I am but just eighteen years of age, and I must endure them with patience."

I knelt at her feet, and begged her to believe that if the sacrifice of my life could have served her I would have freely given it. She turned her tearful eyes towards me.

"Yes, Robert," she said, "I think you would do much to save me from sorrow. But you cannot. I must bear my burden."

The sound of my Christian name spoken by her lips thrilled my soul like a strange sweet music. But at the same moment there came another sound that startled me. 'Twas the stealthy opening of a door. I looked up and saw Mr. Lestrange peering in at us through a narrow opening from the doorway by which I had seen him leave the room. Our eyes met, and he clapped-to the door; but in that one instant I had seen the expression of his face, and never did I behold more malignant hate upon the human countenance.

I would fain have pressed Miss Hemsley further, but she entreated me to refrain, and I left her, sorely distressed by her grief, and only able to guess at its cause.

"Everard Lestrange has been urging his suit with her," I thought; "'tis clear she does not love him."

And then I suffered my fancy to beguile me with a bright dream of what might have been if I had not been a penniless dependent, and Miss Hemsley a fortune; and I cursed the wealth which made an impassable barrier between us.
CHAPTER VII.

HOW I BECAME AN ORPHAN.

I WAS pacing the long corridor of the upper story in a despondent frame of mind, when the door of my lady's dressing-room opened, and Mrs. Grimshaw emerged, more than usually sour of visage.

"You are wanted by my lady," she said on seeing me. "I have been urging upon her that such an idle life as you are leading is not the way to fit a young man for earning his living, and she is so good as to acknowledge the wisdom of my remarks."

"You are very obliging with advice that has not been invited," I

answered; "but since I doubt if you have ever wished me well, I should be grateful if you would abstain from all interference with my affairs."

I knew that whatever influence this woman brought to bear upon my fate would be of an adverse nature, and I could not patiently brook her calm tone of patronage and superiority. She gave me a malignant glance, muttered something about a beggar on horseback, and passed on, while I went to Lady Barbara's dressing-room, a spacious and cheerful apartment, hung with prints and chalk drawings, and furnished with japanned cabinets containing shells, dried flowers, Indian china, and many valuable curios of the monster tribe. It was the room my lady had occupied as a girl, and which she preferred to any other apartment at Hauteville. A large embroidered screen in tent-stitch, representing the meeting of Joseph and his brethren, testified to Lady Barbara's girlish industry; and half-a-dozen dogs of the pug species sprawling on a rug before the sunniest of the windows, revealed the hobby of her childless matronhood.

She was writing as I entered, but closed her desk immediately, and looked up at me with an affectionate smile.

"Sit you down here, Robert," she said, pointing to a stool at her feet; and I seated myself there, and took the hand which she offered me. Thus seated, we seemed like mother and son.

"Robert," she began presently, "I think you know that I love

you."

"Yes, indeed, dear madam; and your affection has made me very happy."

"Will you cease to believe in that affection if I should be obliged to make you unhappy?"

"I cannot believe that you will ever act unkindly."

[ocr errors]
"Not willingly, Robert, God knows. But you remember what Shakespeare makes his Hamlet say we must sometimes be cruel, only to be kind.' Dear boy, I think we have all been too happy here; you and I and Dora Hemsley. Do you remember what I told you about Dora when we first came ?"

"I am not likely to forget it," I answered gloomily.

"It was my manner of warning you, Robert. I cannot thwart my husband's wishes with reference to his niece and ward; I cannot, Robert, even to serve you. He was very generous when I asked leave to adopt you, poor orphan child; and it would ill repay his goodness if you became the instrument to bring about the disappointment of his favourite scheme. He has set his heart upon his son's marriage with Dora, and it must take place; or, at least, you and I must do nothing to prevent it."

"God forbid it should ever come to pass!" I cried.

"Why, Robert, have you anything to say against Everard Lestrange?" "Not much, except that I do not like him; and I can scarce tell you wherefore. Non amo te, Sabidi, nec possum dicere quare—"

"Heavens, how like that was said to your father! Ah, Robert, I doubt you inherit his headstrong, impetuous disposition."

I smiled, remembering how quiet and submissive had been my youth; and yet I was inclined to doubt whether under certain exceptional circumstances a fiery spirit, to which I was at present a stranger, might not reveal himself as my master. Surely if for every man there watches and prays a good angel, so each has his familiar demon, an invisible director stronger than himself, who leads him where he would not go, and urges him to deeds he would fain leave undone.

"Robert," said my benefactress suddenly, after a little pause, "I have watched you and Dora together, and I think it would be well for the peace, nay, indeed, for the honour of both, that you should part."

Send

"I am ready, madam," cried I, springing to my feet with a start. "I know that there is a gulf between that bright angel and me. me away this day, this minute. I am ready to go."

I dashed a tear from my eyes as I spoke. My lady watched me with a sad, perplexed face.

"O Robert," she cried, "has it come to this?"

"Yes," I answered. "Your warning has been forgotten; I love her. I will not come between your stepson and his fortune. I love her; but I am not so base a viper as to sting the breast that has warmed and sheltered me. I will not bring trouble on you, dear lady. From these lips Dora Hemsley shall never hear that she is beloved. me go; let me leave this dear place, where for the last few months I have tasted such dangerous, such fatal happiness."

[ocr errors]
O, let'

Yes, Robert, you must go. It will be wisest and best that you should begin life at once; and your future will be my care, dear boy, do not doubt that. And so my gentle Dora has won your heart? "Tis but a boy's love, a brief fever, more easily cured than you can believe while the disease rages. But do you know, Robert, that I have heard of another passion of yours?"

[blocks in formation]
"That pretty brown-eyed girl at the warrener's lodge, Margery Hawker-what of her, Robert ?"

"She is my foster-sister, and as dear to me as ever sister was to brother; who told you she was more than that, Lady Barbara ?"

"I have been told nothing; but I have had hints."

"Shame on the hinters, madam! People who mean well can afford to speak plainly. I can guess who is at the bottom of this."

"Perhaps there are more than you think, Robert. Do not be so angry. If you have pledged your heart to poor little Margery, keep your faith with her. Better to have a peasant-girl for your wife, than a guilty conscience and the bitter memory of having broken an honest woman's heart."

"I swear to you, dear madam, that Margery has never been more to me than my foster-sister, and never will be. I know that she is

beautiful-lovelier than Miss Hemsley; but she has never touched my heart, as one look of that young lady's touched me on the first night of her coming here. I think there must be some element of magic in such spells, innocent as they seem."

"I cannot doubt you when you speak so boldly. But O, Robert, let there be no broken hearts-no ruined lives. There has been too much of that already."

I looked at her wonderingly, and she answered my inquiring glance. "Your father's heart and mine, Robert-your father's life and mine -both broken, both ruined, for want of a little more candour, a little more patience, a little more constancy. I loved him so dearly! Yes, that is why you are as dear to me as ever only son was to doting mother. I cannot tell you how happy we were as boy and girl together, or how devoted he seemed to me. I know that in those days he was all truth, all goodness. There was no hidden evil in that proud young heart. He had his faults, perhaps, but they were the failings of a knight-errant. Who can say that Sir Philip Sidney was faultless? and we know that Raleigh was a sinner. His errors were ever those of a great mind. O God, how easy it is for me to pardon and pity him now, I who was so unforgiving then, when my pardon could have saved him! When he came from the University I thought him changed, and there was one about me who took care to call my attention to the change, and by and by to assign a cause for it. Martha Peyton, now Martha Grimshaw, my conscientious, confidential, trustworthy maid, discovered an incipient intrigue of my cousin's, and brought me speedy news of it. Mr. Ainsleigh was always hanging about Parson Lester's vicarage, she told me. Mr. Lester was a hunting-parson, renowned for his knowledge of horses and his veterinary skill, and this might fairly be the magnet that drew Roderick to his house. But my confidential maid would not have me think this. Mr. Lester had an only daughter, a pretty, empty-headed girl, and Martha hinted that it was for her sake my cousin haunted the vicarage. I had seen the girl at church, and had invited her to tea in my dressing-room, and given her a cast-off gown now and then, to the aggravation of my confidential Martha, who was inclined to be jealous of intruders. I knew that Amelia Lester was weak, and frivolous, and pretty, and I believed my informant. I had no civil word for my cousin after this, and would hear neither explanations nor apologies, which at first he fain would have made. The breach grew wider day by day. O Robert, I was madly, wickedly jealous. I hated my rival, my false lover, myself, the whole world. One day I met Roderick and Amelia together in the park, the girl simpering and blushing under her hat, my cousin with the conqueror's easy, self-satisfied air. He did not even blush on meeting me, but passed me by with a cool nod and smile of defiance, while Miss Amelia dropped me a low curtsey, with her eyes cast modestly to the ground. After this meeting I scarcely deigned to speak to my cousin, and suffered un

speakable torments with a haughty countenance. Women have a genius for self-torture. I would have given worlds to bring Roderick to my feet, to be assured that I alone was beloved by him. Yet I obstinately repelled his advances, and neglected every opportunity of reconciliation."

"Your mind had been poisoned, dear madam," I said; for I knew but too well Mrs. Grimshaw's hard, cruel nature, and could now perceive that her hatred was a heritage that came to me from my father, whom she had pursued with that fury which the poets tell us to be worse than the hate of hell.

"Yes, my mind had been poisoned," replied my lady; "my confidante, from pure conscientiousness, no doubt-but there are no people can wound like these conscientious friends-kept me informed of my cousin's doings. His visits to the vicarage were notorious. Miss Lester had boasted everywhere of her conquest. Everywhere' is a

vague word; but I was too angry, too miserable, to insist upon particulars. And then, was I not heiress of Hauteville? and should my cousin affect the most ardent devotion, how could I believe him? My confidante took occasion to remind me of my wealth; these prudent people have such sordid notions. Had I known the world then as I know it now, Robert, I should have valued your father so much the more for the pride that held him aloof from me after my numerous repulses had chilled and wounded him. But I believed myself deserted and betrayed for a person whom I considered my inferior; and when my father's anger was aroused by the discovery of certain debts which Roderick had concealed from him, I made no attempt to act as peacemaker. Then came a long and stormy interview, which resulted in my cousin's abrupt departure from Hauteville, never again to sleep beneath this roof. He went without a word of farewell. My father declared he would return, and I too hoped long in the face of despair. O Robert, for me those were the days of retribution. What a long heart-sickness, what weary agony! For a year I listened and watched for Roderick Ainsleigh's return. Every sound of a horse's hoofs in the distance, every sudden stroke of the great bell, every messenger or lettercarrier who came to this old place, raised a hope that was awakened only to be disappointed. My confidential maid fell ill of the small-pox soon after my cousin's departure, but that fatal malady passed me by, though I would fain have courted any death-stroke. Within six months of Roderick's disappearance Amelia Lester left her father's house, secretly, as it was rumoured, though the parson affected to know where she was. She had gone to some relations in Somersetshire, he said, and as no one but he had any right to be angry the assertion was suffered to pass unchallenged; except by Martha Peyton, who contrived to extort the truth from a servant at the vicarage. The young lady had been missing one morning, and the father had raged and stormed for a while, and then had cursed her for a worthless hussy, saying that no doubt she had

run after Roderick Ainsleigh, about whom her head had been turned for the last three years. This was the story Martha told me, and she wanted to bring the vicarage servant to confirm it. I told her I required no confirmation of my cousin's baseness, and that she need trouble herself no more about my affairs. But the blow struck none the less severely because I was too proud to show the pain. I was so steeped in misery, that my father's sudden death shocked me much less than it would have done at any other time; and when it was suggested that I should visit an aunt in London, I consented listlessly, with some faint sense of relief in the idea of leaving Hauteville."

"And there came no tidings of my father, even on the death of his benefactor?"

"No; but I have since had reason to believe that Roderick attended his uncle's funeral. A black-cloaked figure appeared among the group around the mausoleum in the park. The funeral was celebrated at night, and the stranger, who kept aloof from the rest of the mourners, drew upon himself the notice of the torch-bearers. One of these afterwards declared that he had seen either Mr. Ainsleigh or his ghost."

"And did you never see him again, Lady Barbara ?”

"Never, Robert, never. No sign reached me to tell if he were still amongst the living. I will not enter into the manifold reasons that prompted my marriage, which was never in any sense a lovematch. Sir Marcus knew that I had no heart to give, and was content to accept my esteem and obedience. Nor have either of us, I believe, had reason to repent our union. Sir Marcus has ever proved a kind and indulgent husband, and my life has been happier than that of many a woman who marries for love. But I have not forgotten my girlhood, Robert, and all my old hopes and dreams and troubles come back to me when I look upon your face."

She opened her desk and handed me an oval morocco-case, containing a miniature. I recognised the countenance I had seen in the oil-painting shown me by Anthony Grimshaw, that dark stronglymarked face which bore so close a resemblance in feature and complexion to my own.

"You grow more like him every day," said my lady. "That miniature was his only gift to me. "Twas taken before doubt or anger

had arisen between us."

"And did you never hear more of him, madam ?"

"Yes, Robert. Six months after my marriage a letter reached me -a letter from my cousin Roderick. It was long and wild, telling me how I had been beloved, and how my coldness had angered that proud heart. I have the letter in this desk, but every word of it is burnt into my memory, ineffaceable as the graver's work upon metal. 'If I could not be happy with her I loved, I could at least be wretched with one who loved me,' he wrote; and I found a faithful creature,

VOL. VI.

N

Barbara, who was gladder to unite herself to my broken fortunes than a wiser woman would have been to follow a better man.' And then my poor proud Roderick went on to confess that he had fallen very low, so low that his sole hope for the partner of his wretchedness rested on my compassion. And you showed a great contempt for this poor creature once, Barbara,' he added."

"He had married the parson's daughter, then?"

66

'Ay, Robert, she was the sharer of his sorrows."

"Will you let me see my father's letter, madam ?"

My lady hesitated for some few moments, and then took the paper from a secret drawer of her desk.

"I know not whether I am wise, Robert," she said, "but perhaps it is best you should learn all that I can tell you."

She handed me the letter, written on tavern paper, in a bold clear penmanship, which was not without some family resemblance to my own. Together Lady Barbara and I read the faded lines:

"I stood amongst the crowd that watched your wedding, cousin," continued the writer, "as I had watched unseen on a former occasion. I needed not the confirmation of that ambitious alliance to prove that you had never loved me. You but yielded to your father's wish that his sister's son should share his daughter's fortune, and were but too glad to find an excuse for breaking my heart. Great heaven, what a wretch am I to reproach you!-a tavern-haunting, plotting reprobate to dare upbraid my lord ambassador's lady because she is cold and cruel, and severed from me by a gulf that fate, or her pride, or my folly has dug between us! Ah, Barbara, I am very tired of this wearisome struggle, this muddled dream of a drunkard, called life. If I should make a sudden sinful end of it, wouldst thou have pity on a poor faithful wretch starving in a lodging near St. Bride's Church, Fleet-street? 'Tis at a dyer's, 17 Monk's-alley, a narrow court betwixt the church and the Temple-hard for a fine lady's footman to find, but not beyond the ken of charity. Go to her soon, Barbara Lestrange, if thou wouldst have one poor woman and her infant snatched from the many who perish unknown under the gracious sway of our beneficent Hanoverian ruler. A helpless woman and an infant cry to you, cousin. The child is of your own blood. But the messenger waits, and my paper will hold no more. I bribe him with my last sixpence to carry this letter to St. James's-square. God grant he may be faithful! God grant Amelia and my child may find you kind! "Tis perhaps the last prayer of your wretched humble servant,

"RODERICK AINSLEIGH.

"Rose and Crown Tavern, Soho, November 15th, 1731.

"N.B. Inquire for Mrs. Adams. I have spared the pride of my family, and am only known to the companions of my poverty as Robert Adams."

"As our evil fortune would have it-and there seemed ever to interpose a cruel fate between Roderick and me--I was away from London when this letter was brought; and the shabbiness of the messenger bespeaking no respect from the porter who received it, the poor letter was laid aside with bills and petitions, and other insignificant papers, to await my return. The date of my cousin's appeal was a week old when I received it, and prompt as I was to seek Monk's-alley, I was too late to see him whose face I so longed to look upon once more. I found only a dying woman-the very ghost of that vain village beauty whom I had known as Amelia Lester-and a sickly child. This poor wretched soul was too far gone in fever to recognise me. She raved deliriously of her Roderick, and it was piteous to hear her imploring him to come back. Even in this dying state she tried to nourish her child; but the dyer's wife, a decent charitable creature, who had received no rent for many weeks, took the babe into her care. For a week your mother lingered, Robert, and I visited her daily, and gave her such succour as was possible. She was past cure when I found her."

"And my father, had he deserted her?"

"No, Robert. From the dyer's wife I learned that your father had ever been kind to his companion in misery. He had come home intoxicated sometimes, roaring tipsy songs about wine and women, but had never been harsh to the poor soul, who watched and waited for him and loved him with unchanging fidelity. Sometimes he had stayed at home gloomy and brooding for days together. The woman believed that he had lived by writing political pamphlets for the cheap booksellers. Once he had written something treasonable, and had been threatened with a prosecution, and had lain in hiding for several weeks. For a year and a half he had lodged in this mean stifling alley, in this bare wretched garret, while all Hauteville, of which he was to have been master, lay dark and empty and desolate for want of him. There never was a stable-help in my father's service lodged so meanly as this oncebeloved nephew. Ah, Robert, the thought of this stung me to the quick. Let him come back, and I will share my fortune with him,' I said to myself, forgetting that my fortune was no longer mine alone, and that I had given another the right to counsel, if not to dictate, my disposal of it."

"And he never came back?" I asked breathlessly.

He

He

"Never. He had been missing a week when I found Amelia. must have disappeared on the very night when his letter to me was written. But the dyer's wife was not alarmed. He had often absented himself for two or three days at a time, it appeared. Yet 'twas strange, she owned, so kind a gentleman should desert a dying woman. might have been taken to some prison, for debt, or libel, or treason. I caused the lists of every prison in London to be examined, but did not find my cousin. I sent my agent to the booksellers to inquire for such a pamphlet-writer. One among them knew him well as Mr. Adams of

Monk's-alley, and had given him frequent employment, but had of late found no work for him. The town was beginning to tire of patriotism spiced with treason; Church and State had been reviled and ridiculed till not a rag was left from which to spin an essay. If a new Butler had arisen to write a new Hudibras, the book would scarce have sold. I knew by this that Roderick's means of livelihood had failed him before he had written to me; and taking this in conjunction with that hint of a sudden sinful end to his wretchedness, I could but fear that my unhappy cousin had destroyed himself."

"Was he so miserable as to commit that sin?"

"No, Robert, he did not perish by his own hand; yet I know not if his end were less sinful. He fell in a midnight brawl at the tavern where his letter was written, and on the very night on which it was dated-a most wretched, profligate haunt near Soho-square. He had been buried ten days when my agents traced him; and so wretched is the manner in which the poor and friendless are buried in that vast wealthy city, that when I fain would have had the corpse exhumed, that I might look on the familiar face once more, and convey the remains to some more fitting resting-place, I was told that this was impossible. Into those festering charnel-houses where the obscure dead are thrust it is death to enter; nor could the men who buried the nameless stranger remember into which grave they had flung his unknown remains. It was only by means of a letter found upon him that my wretched cousin was traced. This letter-addressed to Mrs. Adams, of Monk's-alley had been preserved by the keeper of the dead-house where the corpse was carried after the miserable drunkards' brawl in which your unhappy father perished. The man who slew him escaped in the confusion that followed his death. I doubt not that in such places they favour the escape of a murderer rather than be called to bear witness at his trial."

"And the letter, dear madam-did that tell you much?"

"But little. 'Twas only a few lines of farewell to the unhappy Amelia. It convinced me, however, that my cousin had left her with the intention of never returning. He bequeathed her and his child to my compassion. Whether he had indeed meditated self-slaughter, as his letter hinted, or whether he had intended to seek new fortunes abroad, when death by an assassin's hand overtook him, I know not. His ashes rest among the bones of paupers in St. Anne's churchyard, Soho, in which parish is the tavern where he fell; and all that affection could do for his memory was to put up a little tablet in the church, inscribed with his name and the date of his death."

"Affection for his memory has done more than that, dear lady; it has cherished his orphan son."

"That is but a poor atonement, Robert, from her whose pride helped to destroy him. If I could have brought him back to life by the sacrifice of my own, I would have done it; but I could do nothing.

for him, though but two short years before one word of mine might have saved him. This is what makes the burden of our sins so heavy -there is no undoing them. Pride is a luxury that is apt to cost us dear, cousin."

"Did you find a certificate of my mother's marriage amongst my father's papers, madam, which I presume you examined?"

"No, Robert. I did indeed ransack an old leather portmanteau crammed with papers, and poor ragged clothing, and tattered books. The papers were for the most part rough proofs of pamphlets, and odd pages of manuscript, so scored and blotted as to be almost illegible. Scattered amongst these were a few tavern-bills, and notes from boon companions, signed but with Christian names or initials, and all bespeaking the wild reckless life of him to whom they were addressed."

"And there was nothing more?"

"Nothing. Any more important papers your father had doubtless destroyed, not caring to leave the evidence of his former estate behind him. As he had suppressed his real name, it was natural he should do away with all documents revealing it."

"I am sorry you can give me no record of my mother's marriage," I answered sadly.

Lady Barbara was silent, and I knew thereby that she doubted whether any religious ceremonial had ever sanctified the luckless union. to which I owed my birth.

I inquired presently where my mother was buried.

"In the graveyard of St. Bride's Church, near which she died," replied Lady Barbara. "Her father had been dead six months when I discovered the poor creature; and to have carried her remains to Pennington, where he had lived, would have been only to cause scandal. It was better that the poor soul should rest in the great city, where all private sorrows and domestic shipwrecks are ingulfed and hidden beneath the stormy public sea."

"All that you did was for the wisest, dear madam," I replied, kissing the beautiful white hand which was the bounteous giver of all my blessings.

"And now, dear Robert, I want to act wisely in the planning your future," my lady said gently. "I cannot give you a fortune, but I hope I may help you to make one. I have concluded that with your learning the Bar would be your best profession; and I would have you proceed to London without delay and enter yourself at the Temple, where you can study at your ease under the direction of a respectable gentleman to whom I can recommend you, and of whose kindness I have no doubt. I shall give you a starting sum of two hundred pounds, and will give you as much every year until your profession shall afford you a comfortable livelihood, since I wish you to live like a gentleman, yet with strict economy. I will not weary

you with the hackneyed warnings against the perils of London life, but I will only bid you to remember the sad end of your father's reckless career. If you will not take counsel from that awful lesson, you will be warned by nothing. But I hope much from your love of learning and the natural steadiness of your disposition."

How could I find words to acknowledge so much goodness! I knelt at my cousin's feet and kissed the dear hands, which I bedewed this time with grateful tears.

"Come, come, Robert, you my lady with affected gaiety.

take these things too seriously," cried "Let us talk of your journey. Foolish boy, I am in haste to be rid of you! Shall you be ready to leave us in a week?"

"It is my duty to be ready whenever you please."

"Ah, Robert, do you think it pleases me to banish you? But Sir Marcus would have no mercy if you came between him and his ambition. Yes, in a week, dear child; it will be best and wisest."

I was still kneeling at the generous creature's feet. She laid her hand lightly upon my hair, and bent her stately head until her lips touched my forehead; and with a tender motherly kiss she dismissed

me.
CHAPTER VIII.

I FALL INTO DISGRACE.

'Twas now late in October, and bleak autumn winds were fast stripping the park and woods of summer foliage. For some time past I had seen but little of Mr. Lestrange, who spent the greater part of his time out of doors, and left Miss Hemsley free to follow her own pursuits, and to give as much of her company as she pleased to Lady Barbara and myself. She seemed happy with us, after a subdued fashion of her own, but was never beguiled into gaiety; and I could not refrain from the idea that her spirits were oppressed by the sense of a bondage which she had not the courage to shake off.

Mr. Lestrange, for his part, appeared to take little trouble to secure her good graces. He treated her sometimes with a free-and-casy politeness, sometimes with an ill-concealed anger; and bitter and biting were the speeches which he occasionally addressed to her. His insults she received with a noble dignity; and nothing could be more cold than her acknowledgment of his compliments.

One day, in a moment of vexation against this dear young lady, the gentleman was so ill-advised as to betray his anger to me.

"She hates me," he cried savagely, "and lets me see that she hates me, and knows that I see it. But what of that? she will marry me all the same. My father means it, and I mean it, and when the time comes her whims and caprices will serve her no more than the fluttering of his wings serves a snared bird. Do you think that weak, timid creature would dare set her will against my father's-her legal guardian,

and trustee to her fortune-and say no when he says yes? 'Tis all very well to give herself airs and graces with me, but she knows that her fate is as fixed as if she had been bought in the slave-market of Ispahan."

"That is a hard way to talk of a woman whom you pretend to love," said I.

"Who says I pretend to love her? I make no pretence; but I mean to marry her. Mark that, Mr. Ainsleigh, and let no puppy-dog who values his ears come between her and me."

Upon this we came to high words, and might have perhaps proceeded to blows, but were happily interrupted before we came to that extremity.

I cannot describe the contempt which I entertained for Everard Lestrange after this revelation of his character. I held myself as much aloof from him as possible, whereupon he affected to treat me with a haughty distance, and took no pains to conceal the fact that he considered me infinitely his inferior.

He had been absent from Hauteville several times during the summer and autumn, having business which compelled him to go to London, as he informed us; though I judged from his father's offended manner on such occasions, that these visits were by no means so necessary as Mr. Lestrange pretended.

He was absent at the time of my confidential conversation with Lady Barbara, and did not return until the next day, when he affected extreme surprise on hearing of my intended departure.

"And are you going to mount a stool in a scrivener's office, or to try your fortune in trade, Master Bob ?" he asked, with a supercilious grin.

"Neither," I replied; "I am going to read for the Bar."

"Indeed! with a view to becoming Lord-Chancellor, I suppose?" "With a view to doing my best to prove myself worthy of the kindness I have received," I answered.

"Heavens! what a starched prig thou art!" cried Mr. Lestrange; "but I'll warrant when once thou hast thy liberty in London thou wilt waste more time in taverns, and run after more milliner-girls than the wildest of us. For a thorough-going rakehell I will back Tartuffe against Don Juan, with long odds."

Miss Hemsley also heard of my plans with surprise; and I could not but think that her manner betrayed despondency. Our Spanish studies were abandoned.

66

"It is not worth while going on," she said; a week is so soon gone, and you must have so many preparations to make. will soon forget your Spanish."

I fear you

"Never; nor yet the kind mistress who taught me," I answered warmly; and then we both stood silent, confused, and downeast.

"I hope we shall see you sometimes in town; we are to spend the winter there, you know," she said at last.

"I hope so, dear Miss Hemsley."

"But surely you will come often to St. James's-square?"

"If Lady Barbara bids me, I shall be only too happy to come." "And you-my aunt's cousin-will wait to be bidden? How ceremonious you have grown all at once!"

"Life has pleasant dreams, dear young lady; but sooner or later the hour comes in which the dreamer awakens."

"What does that mean, Mr. Ainsleigh?" she asked, with a timid, half-conscious smile.

"It means that I have been too happy here, that I have forgotten that the world is wider than this dear place, and that the time has come in which I must bid beloved friends farewell and go out to fight life's battle."

With this I left her, having already said more than I cared to say. The first half of my last week at Hauteville passed only too quickly. I packed my trunks, which were amply furnished with the clothes supplied by the Warborough tailor, and a box of books, chiefly neat duodecimo volumes of the classics, which Lady Barbara bade me choose. from the library.

My good Anthony assisted me to select these, and showed much regret at my approaching departure; while his sour wife expressed only one sentiment, and that a contemptuous surprise that a learned profession should have been chosen for me.

"I suppose you would rather starve as a fine gentleman than grow rich in a city warehouse," she said.

"I prefer a profession which befits my parentage, but have no more desire to become a fine gentleman than I have present fear of starvation," I answered coldly.

"You carry yourself with a high spirit, Mr. Robert; but I have seen prouder spirits than yours brought to the dust."

As the time for my journey drew near, I bethought me that I must bid good-bye to my old friends of the warrener's lodge, and I blushed as I remembered how small a place those kind, honest creatures had of late occupied in my thoughts; nor had I seen them many times during the last few months, since I had preferred to absent myself altogether from the cottage rather than to go thither accompanied by Mr. Lestrange, whose manner of "smoking" me, as he termed it, on a supposed secret attachment between myself and Margery was to the last degree unpleasant.

When my trunks were packed, and while Everard Lestrange was in London, whither he had gone suddenly and in hot haste a day or two before, I walked down to the dear old cottage where my childhood was spent. I found my foster-mother alone at her spinning-wheel, from which she rose to greet me. One glance at the familiar face showed

me that its natural cheerfulness was exchanged for an anxious gravity, which at once puzzled and alarmed me.

“O Robin, what a stranger thou art!" she cried, as we shook hands.

"And now I have come to bid you good-bye, dear mother."

The good soul was grieved to lose me, little as I had of late done to prove myself worthy her affection. She talked of the wonderful change of fortune that had befallen me, and rejoiced in my altered prospects, even though good fortune was to carry me away from old friends.

"I shall always remember thee a babe in my arms, Robin," she said tenderly. "I may call thee Robin still, may I not? though they tell me thou art called Mr. Ainsleigh at the great house. Jack and I always suspected as much."

66

"Suspected what, mother?"

That thou wert Roderick Ainsleigh's son. Why, thou hadst his very face from a baby; and others suspected the same, or knew it, maybe. That is why Martha Grimshaw has always hated thee."

"Why should she hate me for being Roderick Ainsleigh's son ?" "Because she loved Roderick Ainsleigh. Yes, Robin, I was housemaid at Hauteville Hall in those days, and servants sometimes know more than their betters. Martha Peyton was mad for love of Mr. Ainsleigh, and was fool enough to fancy he loved her. I'll not say that he did not make her a fine speech now and then, or steal a kiss when he chanced to meet her in the corridor, but 'twas no more than such court as any fine gentleman may pay to his sweetheart's waiting-maid; and Roderick Ainsleigh had neither good nor evil thoughts about Martha, who was no beauty at the best of times. But she took it all seriously, and was always hanging about wherever her lady's cousin was to be met, and would run a mile to open a door for him; and when his marriage with Lady Barbara was talked of in the servants' hall Martha would laugh and say nobody would ever dance at that wedding. But one day she said something to Mr. Ainsleigh that let him know she thought he was paying serious court to her, and he burst out laughing, and told her the truth,-that he had given her kisses and compliments and guineas because he wanted her good word with her mistress. I came upon him in the corridor as he was saying this, and saw Martha's face; 'twas black as thunder. She stood fixed like a statue on the spot where he left her, staring like one that was struck blind or foolish, and after this time I never saw her speak to Mr. Ainsleigh. If she met him she dropped him a low curtsey, and passed on. And I think from this time she began to plot mischief against him. she found she couldn't have him herself, she was determined nobody else should have him."

"Why didn't you warn Lady Barbara ?"

When

"I warn her? Do you think she would have suffered me to talk of her business? and could I turn informer against a fellow-servant? You

don't know what the servants' hall is.

Besides, I didn't think Martha

could do much mischief, though I knew it was in her heart to try it. 'Twas only when Mr. Ainsleigh went away that I knew there was real harm done. Ah, Robin, 'tis a hard world we live in, and full of trouble."

She gave a heavy sigh, and I saw her eyes fill with tears.

"Yes, dear mother, for some of us; but God forbid trouble should come to you."

"It has come, Robin," she answered, gazing at me with an eager, scrutinising look that I had never seen in her face before. "I have but one child, and to see her sad is the worst of sadness to me."

"Margery sad!" cried I; "when last I saw her she was as gay as a woodland fairy."

66

[ocr errors]
"When last you saw her? Do you see her so seldom, Robin ?" Except at church, I have not seen her for weeks. You must not take it unkind that I have stopped away; I have had good reasons." 'Ay, Robin, good reasons I doubt not. But have you never met Madge by chance in the woods all this time? She spends much of her time in the woods. 'Tis hard to keep her indoors in fine weather, and she is not as easily managed as she once was. O Robin, my child is wretched, and I cannot find out the cause; and 'tis breaking this poor heart."

And here the good creature burst into tears. I tried to comfort her, but her tears flowed only the faster.

"She is wretched, Robin, and will not tell her mother the cause of her grief. O, if thou didst not love her, why didst beguile and deceive her with fine words and promises?"

"I beguile! I deceive! Mother, as God is my judge, I have never spoken to Margery but as a brother should speak to his sister. I have never loved her with more or less than a brother's affection, and I would not let the man live that should deceive or wrong her."

“Ah, Robin, thou speakest fair, but I know the child loves thee. Her father and I have joked her about thee many a time, pleased to see her blushes and smiles. We did not think thou couldst fail to love her, and we did not know they would acknowledge thee for Roderick Ainsleigh's son, and make a fine gentleman of thee. Yes, Robin, she loved thee better than a sister loves a brother, and I thought she was loved in return; others said as much."

"What others?"

"Martha Grimshaw and Mr. Lestrange. He told me thou wert mad for her."

"He told a lic. Those two are my enemies both, and would be glad to do me a mischief. But, mother, I do love my little fostersister, and if it will ease your mind to see her my wife I will marry her when you will. She is the loveliest creature I ever saw, and might turn the heads of wiser men; but 'twas my fate not long ago to see a

face that bewitched me, and to give my love where it can never be returned. Shall I waste my life in weeping for a shadow? No, dear mother; give me Margery for a wife, and I will work for her honestly, and be as true a husband as ever woman had."

"Nay, Robin, I will not beg a husband for my daughter. Thou dost not love her as we thought thou didst. 'Tis ourselves we must blame for judging amiss. All I know is that the child has some trouble on her mind, and I thought thou mightst be at the bottom of it."

Again she scrutinised my face with anxious looks, and then turned away, shaking her head sorrowfully.

"There is something amiss," she said, "but I know not what." "You spoke just now of Mr. Lestrange," said I. "Has he been hanging about this place of late ?"

"No, Robin; I'll have no fine London gentleman about my place. He came two or three times without you, but I gave him sour looks that told him he wasn't wanted; and the last time he was here, full two months ago, he told me he was going to London for the rest of the year."

"And since then you have seen him no more?" "No."

"Yet he has not been all the time in town.

He has run backwards and forwards, but has spent most of the time at Hauteville."

I remembered his broadly-declared admiration of the rustic beauty; I considered his hideous code of morals, and trembled for my little innocent foster-sister.

"God defend her from such a libertine!" I thought, and blamed the selfishness that had kept me so long away from the warrener's lodge.

I would fain have seen and talked to Margery before leaving Berkshire, and so waited for some hours in the hope that she would return, but she did not come. Jack Hawker came home to his supper, but his manner was cold and sullen, and I perceived that some dark suspicion had turned the hearts of these two friends against me. I left the cottage at last, disheartened and uneasy, and returned to Hauteville, there to spend a somewhat melancholy evening with my patroness and Miss Hemsley.

The next day returned Mr. Lestrange, and soon after Sir Marcus, who had been on a visit to a nobleman's seat in the adjoining county. I spent the morning lête-à-tête with Anthony Grimshaw, while Lady Barbara and Miss Hemsley drove to the nearest town to pay visits and make purchases. It seemed sad to me to lose their company on this, almost the last day of my residence at Hauteville; but I felt it was a fortunate accident which divided me from Dorothea Hemsley. In her presence I found it hard to fetter my tongue, and Lady Barbara's reproachful looks often reminded me of my imprudence. Soon, too soon, was I to be separated from her for ever; for I felt that, once

away from Hauteville, I should be as remote from her as if we had been inhabitants of different planets.

The day wore on; we dined in stately solemnity; and I was pacing the terrace alone, awaiting a summons to take tea with the two ladies in the long drawing-room, when I was accosted by a footman, who came to inform me that Sir Marcus Lestrange wished to speak with me in his study. It was the first time he had ever sent for me; but I concluded that he was about to offer me some parting advice, or to bestow upon me some farewell benediction. I therefore obeyed without any sentiment of uneasiness, regretting only that if the diplomatist should prove tedious, I might lose my privileged half-hour with the ladies.

The study in which Sir Marcus spent so many hours of his life was a dark and somewhat gloomy oak-paneled apartment, furnished with bookcases containing ponderous folios, and with numerous oaken chests and iron cases, which I supposed to contain papers. A carved-oak desk occupied the centre of the room, and on this, though it was not yet quite dark, some half-dozen candles were burning in a brazen candelabrum.

My patron was not alone; a solemn assembly had been convoked in haste, and I found myself placed before these as a prisoner at the bar of justice. Lady Barbara sat opposite her husband, pale as death; Miss Hemsley close beside her, with an anxious, distressed countenance. Next to his father stood Mr. Lestrange, and I thought he greeted me with a glance of triumph as I entered the room. respectful distance from the rest appeared Mrs. Grimshaw, and I knew her presence boded ill to me.

At a

"Mr. Ainsleigh," began Sir Marcus, in a severe magisterial voice, "you have been rescued from abject poverty; you have been received into this house and liberally entertained for the last ten years of your life; you have enjoyed the education of a gentleman, and, finally, you have been admitted into the bosom of this family on a footing of equality, much to my regret, and all by the charity of Lady Barbara Lestrange yonder."

[ocr errors]
"No, Marcus," said my lady, "I will not have it called charity." By what other name would your ladyship call it? What claim, legal or social, had your cousin's bastard upon you?"

At sound of that bitter epithet, my lady winced as if she had been struck. "It ill becomes you to call him by so cruel a name," she said; "we have no knowledge that his mother was not lawfully wedded to my cousin Roderick."

"Have we any proof that she was? Mr. Ainsleigh's reputation is against the probability that he would make an honest woman of a parson's runaway daughter, who left her home to follow him."

"I cannot stay here, sir, to hear my mother belied." 
"You will stay here, sir, as long as I please." 

"Not to hear you speak ill of the dead; that I will not suffer. I am fully conscious of the benefits I owe to Lady Barbara, and thank her for them with all my heart, and in my prayers morning and night; but I know not why I am called hither to be reminded of my obligations, or what I have done to deserve that they should be cast in my face with so much harshness."

"You know not what you have done!" cried Sir Marcus. "I suppose you are impudent enough to pretend not to know that John Hawker's daughter has left her home secretly, as your mother left hers?"

"Indeed I know nothing of the kind, nor do I believe that it is so. I was at the warrener's lodge yesterday afternoon, and heard nothing of this."

"And the girl ran away last night. O, no doubt you laid your plans wisely, and now you act astonishment as naturally as Garrick himself. But Hawker is in the steward's-room; you will look otherwise when you see him."

Here Miss Hemsley would fain have left the apartment, but Sir Marcus forbade her.

"Indeed, sir, I have nothing to do with this," she said; "I beg to be allowed to retire."

"No, Dorothea, I must bid you stay. This gentleman has been a favourite of yours, I hear; it is well that you should discover his real character."

"O sir, you are very cruel," the girl murmured tearfully.

"If Margery Hawker has left her home, Sir Marcus," I said, "there is no one will regret it more than I; and there is no one less concerned in her leaving."

"What, you will swear to that, I suppose?"

"With my dying breath, if needs be. Yes, at the very moment when my soul goes forth to meet its God."

"I believe him," cried Lady Barbara. "It is not in my cousin's blood to tell a lie."

"You will have cause to change your opinion presently, madam," replied her husband coldly; and then, turning to me, he went on, "You are a perjurer and a blasphemer, sir, and your own hand is the witness against you. Have you ever seen that before?"

He handed me an open letter, written in a hand so like my own, and with a signature so adroitly counterfeited, that I stood aghast, with the paper in my hand, staring at it in utter bewilderment.

"Come, sir, the play has lasted long enough, and 'tis time you answered my question. I think you'll scarce deny your knowledge of that handwriting."

"I know the handwriting well enough, Sir Marcus, for it is the most ingenious forgery that ever was executed; but I never looked upon this paper before."

"Great heaven, was there ever such an impudent denial! And you protest that you never saw that letter till this moment ?"

"Never, sir."

[ocr errors]
'Perhaps you will be so good as to read it aloud for the benefit of the company, and for Lady Barbara, who believes in your innocence ?" "I am quite willing Lady Barbara should hear this vile forgery, sir," I replied; and then read the letter, which ran thus:

"DEAREST MARGERY,-For fear there should at last be some mistake about the coach, I write in haste to bid you remember that it leaves the George at Warborough at nine o'clock at night. Your place is taken, and you have nothing to do but alight at the Bull and Mouth in the City, where you will ask for Mrs. Jones, who will meet you there without fail. She is a good motherly soul, and will take care of you till you are joined by one who loves you better than life, which will be in three days at latest. And then, beloved girl, far from those new grand friends who would divide us, I will teach thee how faithfully this heart, which has long languished in secret, can love the fairest and dearest of women.-Ever and ever thy fond lover,

"ROBERT AINSLEIGH.”

"What think you now, Lady Barbara?" asked Sir Marcus.

"As I have a soul to be saved, madam," cried I, "no word of that vile letter was ever penned by this hand!"

"There are some folks to whom perjury comes easy, sir," said the baronet. "You did not think that letter would fall into my hands; it was intended for your victim, who would have cherished the precious paper, and hidden it against her heart, I dare swear. Unluckily for you, the post played you false, and the letter was delivered this morning, twelve hours after the bird had flown. The wretched broken-hearted father of this weak and wicked girl brought it down to me, and calls upon me to punish the traitor who has ruined his child."

"That, sir, I trust you will do, if Providence helps me to find him,” I answered, looking straight at Mr. Lestrange, who received my gaze without flinching. Was he not, by his own account, steeped to the lips in vice, and past-master in the art of dissimulation? "But as for that letter," I continued, "I again protest, and for the last time, that it is a forgery."

"And pray, sir, is there anyone so much interested in your insignificant fortunes as to take the trouble to counterfeit your handwriting?"

"It is always the interest of an enemy to work mischief, sir; and there are few creatures so insignificant as to escape all enmity. Again, sir, self-interest may have prompted the forging of that letter. The traitor who is really concerned in the flight of this dear girl would best escape the consequences of his crime by shifting it upon the shoulders of an innocent person."

"I have not condemned you hastily, sir," said Sir Marcus. "Here is a sheet of Spanish exercises in your hand, with your signature scribbled at the bottom of the page. I have carefully compared the letter and the exercises, and I find the signatures agree to the most minute

curve."

"Conclusive evidence that the letter is a forgery, sir," I replied boldly. "Experts in handwriting have agreed that no man ever signs his name twice alike; there is always some minute difference. A will was once pronounced a forgery upon that very ground-the several signatures at the bottom of the several pages were all precisely alike."

"I see, sir, you have already learned to advance precedents and argue like a lawyer. Perhaps you will be less eloquent when confronted with the father of your victim."

Sir Marcus rang the bell, and ordered the servant to send John Hawker. There was a dead silence while we waited his coming. I heard the slow, shambling step of my foster-father on the stone floor of the passage, and my heart bled for him in his trouble.

He came slowly into the room, and stood amongst us, with his bare head bent by the first shame that had ever bowed it.

"Your foster-son denies that he wrote the letter which you brought me this morning, Hawker," said Sir Marcus, in his hard magisterial voice.

"I know naught of that, sir; I can't read writing myself. I took the letter to the parson at Pennington, and he read it to me; and when he came to the name at the bottom, I'd as lieve he'd put a knife through my heart as have read that name to me."

"It is clear that some person has tempted your daughter away. Is there anyone except Robert Ainsleigh whom you could suppose concerned in her flight?"

"Nay, sir, the poor child had no acquaintance except Robin yonder, and your son."

"My son! Do you pretend to rank my son amongst your daughter's acquaintance?"

""Tis likely enough he'll do so," cried Mr. Lestrange, with a contemptuous laugh; "Ainsleigh took me to his cottage once or twice to get some artificial flies for our trout-fishing."

"Ay, sir, and you came many times afterwards without Robin, and won all our hearts by your pleasant, affable ways, till my wife bethought herself 'twas a dangerous thing to have a fine gentleman hanging about the place, and let you see that you wasn't welcome any longer.".

"Why, fellow, it is three months since I crossed your threshold."

"And if you had crossed it but yesterday, Everard, I do not suppose this man would dare accuse my son," exclaimed Sir Marcus indignantly; "and that in the face of a letter which proclaims the real delinquent."

"I accuse no one, sir," replied Jack Hawker; "I only know that my child has left me and her mother, and broken two loving hearts." On this I turned to my foster-father.

"John Hawker," said I, "you yourself have had as much hand in this miserable business as I have. I have ever regarded your daughter as my dear foster-sister, and my conduct to her has always been that of a brother. I told your wife as much yesterday, before this trouble arose; I tell you so to-day. But if you can find her, and bring her to me, an honest woman, I will make her my wife, and cherish and honour her as such so long as I live; though I will hide from no one here that I have bestowed my heart elsewhere, where I have no hope that it can ever be accepted, and can never give her a lover's passionate affection."

"I protest that is an honest man's offer," cried Lady Barbara. "Ay," sneered her husband, "your hopeful protégé promises to marry the girl if her father can find her; rely on it, your honest man will take care she is not found; that good motherly soul, Mrs. Jones, will know how to guard her charge.-And now, sir," he continued, addressing himself to me, "understand that you are found out, and stand convicted under your own handwriting, and that no cry of forgery will serve you, however impudently persisted in. You will therefore oblige me by quitting this house to-night at your earliest convenience, and you will further comprehend that Lady Barbara washes her hands. of you, and that any communication which you may hereafter take the trouble to address to her will be returned to you with the seal unbroken."

"Honoured madam, my dear kinswoman, does this gentleman speak your will ?" I asked, looking straight at my benefactress.

"There are circumstances, Robert, in which a woman's will must needs be that of her husband," Lady Barbara replied.

"In that case, dear madam, I submit. No unconscious wrong which you may do me in the present can cancel my debt of gratitude for the past. I was doomed to leave this dear place. That I leave in unmerited disgrace can add but one more pang to the anguish of parting."

I bowed low to my lady and to Miss Hemsley, and turned to quit the room; but before going I approached my foster-father.

[ocr errors]
Jack," I said, offering him my hand, "you cannot think me so base a wretch as this vile counterfeit letter would make me? Shake hands, and bid me God speed; and if it is possible for a man that's ignorant of the town, I'll find your daughter."

"Ah, Robin, thou know'st but too well where to find her. "Tis thy name that's wrote at the bottom of the letter. The parson said so, and he'd not tell a lie. I'll never shake thy hand again, Robin, for thou'rt a villain !"

This stung me more sharply than the abuse of Sir Marcus. I left the room hurriedly, ran to my own chamber, and packed a portmanteau

in haste with my immediate necessaries. The rest of my luggage was ready packed; but this I left to be sent after me, leaving it to Lady Barbara's pleasure whether I had the things or not.

With the small portmanteau in my hand, I ran downstairs. It was now dark; the lamps were not yet lit, and the great hall but dimly lighted by a wood-fire. I was leaving the house, when a door in the hall was softly opened, and I heard my name whispered.

It was Lady Barbara who called me. She was standing just within the door of a small waiting-room near the grand entrance, which was ordinarily used by footmen and humble visitors. She took my hands. in hers and drew me hastily into the room, which was lighted by one wax taper. Even in that dim light I could see she had been weeping.

"Dear child," she cried, "it is hard to part with you thus; but our enemies are too strong for us, and we must submit. My little child lies in the cemetery at Madrid, and I am not allowed to cherish my cousin's orphan son."

"O dear madam, you do not think me guilty? Say but that, and I am happy."

"I say it with all my heart, Robert. The letter is a forgery, and it is all a base plot against you, because I am mistress of my own fortune, and might bequeath it to you. What do I say? My husband is incapable of such infamy; but there are those who would hesitate at no villany that would bring them wealth and power. You are my adopted son, Robert; remember that. Nothing can sever that tie between us-no, not even ill-conduct or ingratitude of yours-for I am more charitable now than I was when my pride slew your father. Do not answer me, I have but a few stolen moments to give you. Take this note-book; it contains all the ready-money I can command tonight, and there is a letter in it, a few hurried lines of recommendation, which you will carry to Mr. Philip Swinfen, of Paper-buildings. You will go straight to London, and you must write and tell me how things prosper with you. Write to me under cover to Mrs. Curtis, at 49 Long-acre-she is my milliner, and a good soul. And now, good-bye. Stay, I am to give you this from Dora: it is a book she has used for the last five years."

It was a shabby duodecimo volume, which I put in my breast, too much moved for words. If it had been some jewelled box containing the relics of St. Peter, it could scarce have exercised a more healing influence upon the sore heart that beat against it.

"God bless her and you, dear cousin, and farewell!" and with this I wrung my kinswoman's hand, and left her.

The autumn night was chill and bleak, and the full moon rode high above the sombre leafless woods as I left Hauteville. The little book in my bosom a Spanish translation of the Imitation of Christ—and the memory of Lady Barbara's goodness were the only consolers that I carried with me into the world of which I knew no more than an infant. VOL. VI.

0

Once, and once only, did I look back at the old Elizabethan mansion, with lighted windows glowing in the distance. O God, how long before I was again to look upon those walls! What perils by land and perils by sea, what agonies of hope deferred and dull despair, was I to suffer before I revisited that familiar spot!
