ON GOLDEN HINGES. 



CHAPTER I. 



TWO WOMEN. 



It was bitter winter weather; a wmtc 
mist floated over the half-frozen river Dill, 
and the bleak Northumbrian hills from 
which it flows were snow-capped. The air 
was dense and chill, yet down by the river . 
bank, where the dark water ** flowed and 
moaned," just as the short day closed, a 
young girl stood waiting impatiently in the 
twilight. 

It was a wild and lonely trysting place. 
Here the Dill sweeps into a narrow and 
secluded glen, where in the summer time 
the green boughs wave over the deep 

VOL. I. 1 



2 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

Stream. But now on the over-hanging, 
craggy banks the leafless trees stood gaunt 
and bare, stretching their black arms 
against the darkening sky. The girl grew 
frightened as the gloom increased, and the 
wind passed and waved the branches to 
and fro. Suddenly a fiercer blast swept 
overhead; the trees rocked and moaned, 
the Dill responded with a sullen roar, and 
big, sharp hailstones came pattering to the 
ground. 

They fell on the girl's pale upturned face, 
they cut the delicate skin. She gave a 
little cry, and drew the hood of her cloak 
over her hat, and then after one long and 
lingering glance around, she turned un- 
willingly to quit the glen. 

Up the river bank through the faded 
bracken, and the dank, frozen moss, and the 
bare trunks lying here and there, she now 
made her way. At the head of the ravine 
was a narrow pathway, with tall slender 
trees on either side, and beyond this path 



TWO WOMEN. 3 

was a stretch of bleak moorland, cold and 
dismal under the gloomy sky. 

As the girl left the shelter of the trees, a 
whirling storm of snow and hail swept 
right in her face. It almost blinded her ; 
her grey cloak flapped and flew in the air, 
and she was nearly carried off her feet by 
the violence of the wind. 

She stopped to breathe, and as she did 
so gave a short and joyful cry, for through 
the white blinding blast around her she 
now perceived approaching her the figure 
of a man. 

" Graham ! " she cried. "Graham ! " 
and ran forward panting into a pair of 
outstretched arms. 

" My poor little woman," answered Gra- 
ham, with some tenderness in his voice and 
manner, "I never expected to see you out 
in a storm like this." 

" Oh ! why have you been so late ? " said 

the girl, still clinging to him, and looking 

up appealingly in his face. "I have 

1—2 



4 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

waited nearly an hour in Dill-dene, in the 
bitter cold." 

" I am so sorry, Winny, but I could not 
get before ; my mother has a lady staying 
with her, and she asked me to take her out 
for a drive this afternoon, and it was past 
four when we got back to Dillford, and I 
thought by that time you were certain to 
have gone home on a night like this — yet I 
came to see." 

The girl's head drooped, but still she 
rested it against his breast. 
' " You think of every one before me," she 
said, in a low tone. 

" What nonsense, Winny, don't take such 
folly into your head. Why, you foolish 
little girl, you are not crying surely, are 
you ? " he added quickly, and he lifted up 
her pale pretty little face by putting his 
hand under her soft chin. "Winny! you 
silly child," and he kissed her, " you know 
I would come to you always if I could." 

** I don't know that," she answered, but 



TWO WOMEN, ' 5 

his kiss and his tenderness dried her tears. 
She began to smile ; to tell hira how she 
had been nearly blown away, how she had 
been frightened and half-frozen " down 
yonder in the cold dene." 

"But why did you stay, dear?" he 
asked. 

"I wanted to see you, Graham," she 
said. " Oh ! so much — so much ! " and 
she clung yet closer to his breast. 

He was not a man to turn coldly away 
from such tender, pleading love. He looked 
down at her sweet face — he smoothed back 
the soft, fair hair — he kissed her white 
brow. Yet, standing there with this young 
girl nestling in his arms, his heart was ill at 
ease. Her sweetness and her beauty could 
not make him forget a certain pain and 
shame at his own wrong-doing. But Winny 
was too innocent, too devoted to him to 
understand this. One absorbing, over- 
powering feeling filled her whole being. 
She was near him, she was happy, and, 



6 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

for the moment, at least, she forgot that 
between her Ufe and the life of her lover, 
Graham North, lay a wide, almost im- 
passable gulf. 

Presently she lifted up her head. 

" If I go home now, Graham," she said, 
" because Dorothy will scold so if I don't, 
will you come to meet me to-morrow ? " 

" Not to - morrow, Winny," answered 
Graham North ; " to-morrow I have a whole 
host of things already on my hand — ^but 
on Friday perhaps " 

"Friday," interrupted Winny in a dis- 
appointed tone, " why, Graham, Friday is 
three whole days off — surely you can come 
before then ? " 

" Well, let me see — Thursday — will that 
suit your ladyship ? " 

"Ah, don't talk like that, Graham — don't 
jest." 

"I'm not jesting, Winny. I'm in no 
humour for jesting. Very well, on Thurs- 
day, then — in the glen by the river, 1 



TWO WOMEN. 7 

suppose, the old place^ at-nshall we say 
half-past three ? " 

" And you will come ? " she said fondly, 
b^kli^J^inhisface. 

*Of course I shall come. And now, 
Winny, my child, had you not better be 
going home ? I will see you safely to the 
farm." 

" Only go across the moor with me, 
Graham," whispered Winny close to his 
ear. " You see, Dorothy " 

" Very well, come along then." 

The storm was still blowing fiercely, but, 
somehow, neither of the two seemed to feel 
it. Winny was absorbed in her great joy 
— she was with him, she would see him 
again after one more dull day was past — 
and Graham North was thinking of many 
things, of his pride, of his poverty, of his 
folly, and of another woman, too. 

The country girl clung to him, and her 
whole world was near her. But Graham 
North's world was not her world. He was 



8 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

• . ■ 

a man close on thirty ; a man well-born 
and well-educated, and not love, but pity 
and self-reproach were at this moment the 
strongest feelings in his heart. 

Yet they parted like lovers. They stood 
there by the edge of the moor, hand- 
clasped ; they spoke in whispers, though 
there was none to hear, and they looked 
into each other's faces, and Graham North 
sighed deeply as he read the simple tale 
told on the girl's. 

" And you will come, dear — you will 
come ? " she repeated. 

They were her last words. He kissed 
her, and went striding away in the dark, 
ness, with his brows knitted, and his head 
bowed on his breast. But Winny went 
forward with a light step, and a smile on 
her rosy lips. She had seen him. She 
would see him again in another day, and 
that was enough for her fond and foolish 
heart. 

She never heeded the hail pattering 



TWO WOMEN. * 9 

down on her head now, nor the wind driv- 
ing in her face. But she went quickly on, 
she almost ran, and presently she came to 
a long, low house, standing amid wide and 
spreading fields. 

This was her father's house on Thornley 
Farm. Her father, Eichard Eiddell, rented 
Thornley from old Graham North, the 
Squire of Dillford. The Graham Norths 
had lived at Dillford for two hundred 
years. But they had never got rich. From 
sire to son the heavily-mortgaged acres 
had descended, and now there were two 
Graham Norths living, and people said 
when the old matn: died the whole place 
would go to the hammer, and the family 
pass away from the land. 

Thornley Farm was the best farm on the 
estate, and Eichard Eiddell, the tenant, was 
a man fairly well off in the worlds and 
Winny Eiddell was his youngest child. He 
had one other daughter, Dorothy, who was 
fifteen years older than Winny, and it was 



lo ON OOLDIlN hinges. 

for fear of Dorothy that Winny now 
hurried homewards as fast as she could 

go. 

Dorothy was standing at the back door 

of the house, as Winny, wet and some- 
what breathless, approached. Dorothy was 
sharp-tongued, and she was very angry. 

" Well, I must say," she began in stroog 
Northumbrian accents, " thiB is a voce time 
o' day, and a nice day fcr a young girl to 
be wandering in the dark alone ! Where 
have you been, Winny ? But I need not 
ask," she added bitterly ; " you've been 
seeking a fine gentleman who never seeks 
you, or if he does, only to make a fool of 
you ! " 

Winny made no answer. She passed 
her sister and went into the farm-house 
kitchen, where a bright fire was burning 
in the big grate. Here she took off her 
long grey cloak, and shook off the hail- 
stones. But Dorothy had followed her. 

" Look here, Winny," she said, " I won't 



TWO WOMEN. II 

have you spoiling the girl's afternoon's 
work, and dirtying the fresh-scoured floor 
with^ tramping in the snow and hail ! And 
I won't have you going on as you do. 
Have you no pride about you ? They say 
your fine gentleman's after Miss Despard, 
and that if she will have him, he's ready 
to take her and her money any day." 

" It's a lie ! " said Winny, looking up 
indignantly in her sister's face, " an utter, 
horrid lie." 

Well, you'll see," taunted Dorothy; 

but lie or no lie, I won t stand your 
goings on any more. I'll tell father this 
very ni^t whisn h& comes from mBrket, 
aBiAjBayoa-andHr. Graham North may 
take the consequences." 

"Tell who you like," retorted Winny, 
and she lit her bedroom candle, and carried 
it, upstairs, and locked her room door to 
escape from her sister s reproaches. 

Let us follow her for a moment into the 
simply furnished room, and stand behind 






12 ON G OLD EN HINGES. 

her as she looks at herself in the dim, 
discoloured glass. 

A fair image is reflected there. A girl 
with a softly-tinted, harmonious face, and 
a tall slender form, and a great quantity 
of beautiful light-ruffled hair. An un- 
doubtedly pretty girl, and yet Winifred 
Eiddell had features more charming than 
perfect. It was the whole colouring that 
was so lovely, so soft, so tender, and the 
pleased smile with which she stood regard- 
ing her own beauty, was only natural. 
But she was not thinking of that beauty 
for its own sake, nor for vanity's sake. 
She was pleased with her face for the sake 
of Graham North! She indeed lived for 
this young man, and now let us look at 
him at the same moment, and see how 
much he deserved her fond and foolish love. 

Wliile Winny was admiring herself in 
the looking-glass at Thornley Farm, Gra- 
ham North was just entermg his mother's 
drawing-room at Dillford Hall. 



TWO WOMEN, 13 

Two ladies were seated in this dra'^ing- 
room — Mrs. Graham North and Miss 
Katherine Despard, of Castle Hill. Mrs. 
Graham North must Have been fifty, since 
she had a grown man nearly thirty for her 
son. But she certainly did not look fifty. 
She was remarkably handsome ; very tall, 
finely-formed and stately, with her thick 
hair, scarcely touched with grey, dressed 
high, and her well-shaped figure perfectly 
and expensively attired. 

The other lady, Miss Katherine Despard, 
of Castle Hill, was also a very striking- 
looking woman'. She was a woman, more- 
over, that every one talked of and looked 
at, for she was a very great heiress, and 
her wealth had only recently come to 
her. 

She had a very noble face, and as the 
sound of Graham North's footsteps reached 
her ears, as he crossed the front drawing- 
room and entered the inner room where 
his mother and her guest were sitting. 



14 ON G OLDEN HINGES. 

there flitted a rosy blush over Miss Des- 
pard's smooth skin. 

" We were just talking of you, my dear," 
said his mother, addressing him as he came 
forward. 

" I am very much honoured," he an- 
swered smiling. " I hope you were not 
abusing me," and he looked at Miss 
Despard. 

'' Could that be Graham ? '' said his 
mother, with a proud fond smile, looking 
at her handsome son. 

For women thought Graham North 
handsome and admired him, and Mrs. 
Graham North who was proud of many 
things was proudest of her only son. He 
was tall and dark, with a broad square 
clever brow, and strongly marked features, 
and he had a well-shaped head, and bore 
himself with singular grace. He was like 
his mother, and yet unlike her ; a truer, 
stronger soul than hers looked out from his 
grey and somewhat sombre eyes. 



TWO WOMEN. 15 

" Your mother was praising you, Mr. 
North," smiled Katherine Despard. 

Graham North gave a good-natured 
little shrug. 

" We take in one woman all our lives,*' 
he said ; " one woman at least faithfully 
believes in us ! " 

" What ! only one ? " laughed Katherine. 

" Only one that is to be quite depended 
upon," answered Graham ; " the rest may 
be fickle or false, the mother never is." 

"And I never knew a mother's love," 
said Katherine, and over her mobile face 
crept a soft wistful look which made her 
charming. 

" Your mother died when you were a 
child then?" said Graham, looking at her. 

" She died when I was born," answered 
Katherine ; " died in India, and I was left a 
helpless babe on my poor father's hands." 

" The helpless babe has turned out very 
well," said Graham smiling; . '.^'" 

At this moment a rap came to the 



i6 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

drawing-room door, and a servant entered 
with a letter on a salver for Graham 
North. 

" Will you excuse me ? " he said to 
Katherine as he opened it. But as he 
read it his brow darkened. 

" Where is the person," he said to the 
servant, " who has brought this ? " 

"He is waiting in the court-yard, sir," 
replied the man. 

"Tell him to go; say I will see about 
it," said Graham North impatiently. 

The servant cast down his eyes and 
looked uncomfortable. 

" Perhaps I could speak to you outside, 
sir ? " he said at length. 

" Of course," said Graham North, and 
he walked out of the inner drawing-room, 
followed by the servant. When they were 
in the large drawing-room the servant 
lowered his voice, and said a few words 
in his master's ear. 

"Please sir, he says he won't go," he 



TWO WOMEN, 17 

said, and as he spok^ an angry exclamation 
rose on Graham's lips. 

" I will speak to him," he said the next 
moment ; " tell him to come into the 
hall." 

The servant bowed, and Graham went 
into the hall, where a fire was burning, 
and casting its flickering rays on the old 
oak carvings, and the stag's horns, and 
all the pther paraphernalia suitable to 
the home of a man of fortune. 

A strange place to receive a dun in 
was this lofty hall, yet a minute later an 
unmistakable and very insolent dun entered 
it, and a flush rose on Graham North's 
face when he recognized this man as the 
master of a saddler's shop in Normanton, 
the country town nearest to Dillford. 

"Good evening," said Graham North 
haughtily enough ; but the saddler only 
gave a surly nod in reply. 

" I've called about my account, Mr, 
North," he said. 

VOL. I. 2 



1 8 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

" Very well, you can leave it, and I 
will see about it." 

" That won't do, sir ; the truth is, Mr. 
North, I'm sick of sending it in, and 
waiting for my money. In fact, I must 
have it settled ; I've come to Dillford 
for it, and I won't go home without 
it." 

The angry red flush on Graham North's 
face had deepened considerably as the man 
spoke, but he answered him very calmly 
and coolly. 

" Have you it with you ? " he said. 
"How much is it?" 

"It's thirty-nine pounds," answered the 
irate saddler, "and it's been owing over 
five years, and the- long and the short of 
it is, Mr. North, I'm a poor man, and I 
can't afford to lose my money." 

"If you will give it to me I will pay 
it to-morrow, for I shall be in Norman- 
ton." 

" That won't do, sir," said the man 



TIVO WOMEN, 19 

rudely; "there are ugly stories about, 
and I must have my money before I 
go, for I won't leave Dillford till I 
get it." 

" I will bring it to you," said Graham in 
his proudest manner, and he went to the 
drawing-room door, and called to his 
mother. 

Mrs. Graham North at once hurried to 
her son when she heard his voice. 

" What is it my dear ? " she asked 
anxiously. 

"A man wants some money, in fact 
won't go away without it," answered 
Graham in a low annoyed tone ; " really 
mother, these things are unendurable ! " 

"But, my dear, what can I do?" 
answered Mrs. Graham North. "We have 
no money, the bank won't advance another 

penny — in fact, in fact Graham " and 

she shrugged her shoulders and looked 
at her son. 

"The question is, what can be done?" 

2—2 



20 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

said Graham "North, and he began to walk 
slowly up and down the room, with his 
head bowed on his breast. 

" You saw old Mr. Dixon a day or two 
ago, did you not ? " continued Mrs. Graham 
North. " Indeed he told me yesterday that 
he had seen you, and given you some idea 
of the state of our affairs. They are 
hopelessly involved, that is the truth — 
hopelessly — and Graham, we have only you 
to look to now." 

Graham North did not speak; he still 
kept walking up and down the room, 
and never raised his eyes. 

"I have long wished to speak to you 
about these things," said Mrs. Graham 
North, with some excitement in her voice, 
and with her eyes fixed anxiously on her 
son, "for this wretched man's imperti- 
nence in coming here for his money is 
only on a piece with the rest; even my 
milliner says she won't wait! There are 
thousands and thousands owing for mere 



TWO WOMEN. 21 

household accounts — ^in fact, Graham, 
something mitst be done !" 

" It's easy talking, mother." 

" Graham," said Mrs. North impressively, 
approaching her son, and laying her hand 
upon his arm, " you have it in your power 
— ^I am sure you have it in your power." 

" What utter nonsense, mother," answered 
Graham, moving uneasily at her touch. 

"It is not nonsense, and you know it. 
But this is no time to discuss it —get this 
man away " 

" I tell you he won't go," interrupted 
Graham angrily and impatiently. " Surely, 
mother, we can raise this little sum between 
us ? " 

" How much is it ? " asked Mrs. North. 

" Thirty-nine pounds, he says," answered 
Graham ; " if you can lend me twenty, I 
think I have the rest." 

Mrs. North hesitated ; again she looked 
anxiously at her son's gloomy face, and 
then bit her lips and knit her brows. 



22 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

evidently taking some idea into considen^- 
tion. 

"I will try," she said a moment later, 
and she left her son, who went to gather all 
the ready money he possessed together. 
He had not half the sum required, and 
in a state of deep annoyance he returned 
in about five minutes to the room where 
he expected to meet his mother. 

» 

She Avas already there, and came forward 
to receive him with a smile, holding a roll 
of bank notes in her hand, which she held 
towards him. 

"Here is thirty pounds for you," she 
said, to her son's surprise, " pay this horrid 
man and send him away, and then come 
and have some tea with us, Graham, in 
the drawing-room." 

Graham North took the notes, counted 
til em over, and looked at his mother. 

"How did you get these notes?" he 
said. 

I had them by me to pay a bill," she 



(( 



TWO WOMEN. jj 

answered, turning away her head. "Ccwne 
my dear, get rid of the man, and tben we 
shall expect to see you." And with a smile 
and a nod she went away^ 

Graham North did ** get rid of the man," 
paying him his bill in full, to the man's 
great surprise, who no sooner saw the 
money %b:ak tis whole manner and expres- 
sion changed. 

** Fm sure, sir, I hope you'll excuse me 
troubling you," he said, " but you see I'm a 
poor man, and " 

" I want no apologies," interrupted Gra- 
ham North almost harshly ; so the saddler 
gathered up his notes and went away, 
hoping he had not made a mistake, and 
perhaps offended a customer who some day 
might have been worth keeping. 

But Graham North did not rejoin his 
mother and Miss Despard after he was 
gone. Graham went out and walked in 
the dark shrubberies with the storm 
drifting overhead, trying to solve the per- 



24 ' ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

plexing problems; of. his life. He was 
thinking of" two women— one, the girl 
looking at her sweet face in the dulled 
glass at Thornley Farm; the other, the 
bright handsome Katherine, who held in 
her small hands fortune's gracious gifts. 




CHAPTER II. 



A mother's warning. 



The same night when all the rcvst of the 
inhabitants of Dillford Hall were supposed 
to have retired, Graham North was sitting 
alone smoking in the library of the house, 
when he was disturbed by a little rap on 
the door of the room. 

" Come in," he said, and as he spoke 
his mother entered, and when he looked 
quickly up, he saw by the expression of 
her face that she had come to speak on 
some serious matter. 

" I want a few words with you, Graham," 
she said. She was pale, she looked tired, 
and Graham rose and drew an easy chair 
for her near the fire, but Mrs. North did 
not sit down. 



26 ON GOLDEy HIXGES. 

She stood there for a moment silent, apd 
then laid her hand on Graham's shoulder. 

"My dear," she said, "can you guess 
what I have come to say — can you guess 
some of the miserable anxiety of my 
heart?" 

" JJow can I guess, mother," answered 
Graham, with an uneasy eflTort at a smile, 
" but it's too late to-night." 

"No, no, Graham," interrupted Mrs. 
North, "I must speak, I must point out 
to you the folly, the absolute madness of 
delav. You know what I mean — ^Katherine 
Despard is rich, she is handsome, she is m 
love with you, why don't you marry her, 
and end all such miserable scenes as 
occurred to-daj.** 

Graham frowned and bit his Ups. 

**Will you allow some folly," continued 
Mrs. North almost passionately, "at best 
folly, Graham, to stand between you and 
fortune, between you and honour, and 
everything that makes life worth living 



A MOTHERS WARNING, 27 

for? I will not say anything more — i do 
not care to say so much — but surely you 
admire Miss Despard ? Every one admires 
her." 

"'Of course I admire her, and I like her 
exceedingly — but mother," and Graham 
cast down his eyes, "there are other 
considerations." 

"I know! I know! a girl's folly, your 
folly! Graham, you talk of other considera- 
tions, do you never consider your poor 
invalid father, your sisters, your mother ! 
Are we nothing to you ? I ask no sacrifice. 
Miss Despard is a noble, charming, hand- 
some girl, a girl any man might be proud 
to marry, and she loves you." 

"How do vou know. that, mother?" said 
Graham, and he looked up with a half 
smile. 

"By a hundred signs," answered Mrs. 
North eagerlj, " a hundred Bigm that ooly 
women can understand ; men are so coarse, 
their finer instincts get blunted, for they 



28 Oy GOLDEN HINGES. 

seer so much, they think they know so 
much, but thev don't know much about 
girls like Katherine Despard. I have 
watched her; she is smiling, calm, and 
pleasant to you, just as a lady ought to be 
to a man who has not proposed for her, or 
at least, given her to understand that he 
really means to do so. But I have watched 
her closely — she would give her little finger 
for you, Graham, ay, her little hand ! " 

"Mother," began Graham very earnestly, 
and he rose. 

"I won't hear a word," interrupted his 
mother, putting up her hand. "I know 
quite enough, I don't want to hear any 
more ; but it has come to this, for we may 
as well speak plainly, that if you don't, or 
won't, marry Miss Despard, we shall at 
once have to leave Dillford — drag your 
poor father away to die, to starve in some 
foreign watering-place." 

" You drive me hard, mother," muttered 
Graham slowly. " very hard." 



A MOTHER'S WARNiyG. 29 

Mrs. Graham North went up to him and 
took his hand with evident emotion. 

" You are my son," she said in a broken 
voice, " my dearest son, of whom I have 
been so proud, and Graham, Graham, I 
implore you, do not add shame to poverty, 
do not bring disgrace on our old name. 
And where will you have such another 
chance ? Miss Despard is in the house, you 
have it all your own way ; in town you 
would have a hundred rivals, and as I told 
you before, she is absolutely in love with 
you ! " 

"I do not know tha^., mother," said 
Graham, now half smiling. 

" But / know, you were her first love — 
why from the time she came to Castle Hill, 
when she was a young girl, and you had 
just left college, I noticed she was fond of 
you. Graham, I have hoped and prayed 
for this for years. The thought has kept 
me up through a hundred humiliations and 
annoyances. But I will say nothing more — 



so ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

think of what I have said — ^even to-day 
when that wretched man would have 
his money, I had only to hint to 
Katherine " 

"What, mother!" interrupted Graham 
sharply and angrily, " you do not mean to 
say you borrowed that money of Miss 
Despard ? " 

" But I do mean to say so, Graham. It 
is all very fine talking, but if this miserable 
man would not have gone quietly away, a 
dozen other wretches would have been upon 
us like vultures. This is no fiction — stern 
facts are staring us in the face — if things 
are not arranged at once " 

" It is late, mother," again interrupted 
Graham impatiently, and he looked at his 
watch. 

Mrs. North took the hint ; she kissed her 
son, and murmured some tender word as 
she did so, but she went away and left 
Graham once more alone with his own 
miserable and self-reproachful thoughts. 



A MOTHERS WARDING, 31 

And the shadow of these thoughts was 
still on his face when he entered the break- 
fast-room the next morning, and found 
there his father and mother and Miss 
Despard. 

The two ladies were seated at the table ; 
Mrs. Graham North looking as smiling and 
gracious as if there were neither debts nor 
duns in the world, and Katherine Despard 
also looking smiling and handsome. But 
by the fire, crouched in a big old-fashioned 
chair, stretching out his bony hands to- 
wards the welcome blaze, was a very 
difierent object. This was old Graham 
North, the Squire of Dillford — once stout 
and comely, a keen sportsman, a jovial 
hearty gentleman — now broken-down, blear- 
eyed, and paralyzed. 

His mind had withered with his body. 
Yet gleams of memory still flashed across 
that darkened page, and even now, as his 
son went up to him, and took one of his 
cold shrunk hands, and asked him how he 



32 ON GOLDEN HINQE8. 

was, the old man began to murmur and 
show some knowledge of the cloud that 
rested over the house. 

*' Fresh troubles ! " he muttered ; " fresh 
troubles." 

Graham dropped his hand with an im- 
patient sigh. He sat down to breakfast 
and tried to talk cheerfully, but he was a 
bad actor. Then the smiling gracious 
mother rose, and went to have an inter- 
view with her cook, labouring under the 
disadvantage that she carried in her hand a 
letter which the early post had brought 
her from her butcher, declining to allow 
her any more credit unless some portion of 
his bill were paid. Mrs. North glanced at 
her son's moody face as she passed him, 
and a sudden idea occurred to her mind. 
She made a step backwards, and she put 
the butcher's letter into his hand. 

" Eead that," she said significantly, and 
Graham opened it, and a dark red blush 
spread quickly over his face as he read. 



A MOTHER'S WARMSG. 33 

But he returned it to his mother without 
a word. Mrs. North then left the room, 
and Graham rose from the breakfast table 
and went to one of the windows, and stood 
looking with visible care on his brow at 
the frozen world outside ; the white frost 
fringing each leaf on the evergreens, each 
blade of grass on the lawn. 

His evident mental disturbance, his 
gloom and annoyance, had been all noticed 
by Katherine Despard. She was a sympa- 
thetic woman, and she knew very well the 
Graham Norths were deeply embarrassed. 
People who live near each other in the 
country generally do know something of 
their neighbour's affairs, and old Antony 
Despard, who had left Katherine his great 
fortune, had talked many a time to her 
about the troubles of the old Squire oi 
Dillford. 

For a moment or two Katherine hesi- 
tated. Her breath came a little short, 
her fine colour deepened. Then she, 

VOL. T. 3 



34 ON GOLDEy HINGES, 

too, rose, and went up to Graham by the 
window. 

"Mr. North," she said in her frank 
pleasant way, and she put her hand timidly 
on his arm, and looked at his moody face 
with her shining trustful eyes, " will you 
forgive me — ^but we are old friends — is 
there anything wrong ? You look annoyed 
— surely if it is anything about money you 
will not hesitate " 

"I'm worried and bothered to death, 
that's the truth. Miss Despard," answered 
Graham, turning round. 

" Is it anything about money ? ** con- 
tinued Katherine in a low voice. " As I 
said before, you know we are old friends, 
and about money I can help you if you 
will let me, for my poor uncle left me so 
much." 

"You are a noble, generous girl," said 
Graham, much moved, "but, of course, 
I cannot take your money." 

*- But, why not ? " urged Katherine. 



A MOTHERS WARNING. 35 



<( 



Do, please, it will make me very happy 
if you will. My uncle left me a lot of 
ready money ; a great many thousands 
lying at the bank, and you are most wel- 
come to it." 

Graham cast his eyes down, and stood 
there embarrassed — thinking. There was 
indeed passing through his mind a tempta- 
tion ; he was remembering his mother's 
words. 

"Do treat me as a friend," said Kath- 
erine, and as she spoke she softly put her 
hand in his. 

At her touch he slightly started, he 
looked up, and a sudden colour flushed 
into his face. 

" I could treat you as much more," he 
said, grasping her hand in his nervous 
clasp, " but — poverty makes it impossible." 

" Poverty can make no difference," 
began Katherine, falteringly, and- with 
heaving breast ; " surely poverty " 

But here she was interrupted by a most 

3—2 



36 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

extraordinary noise proceeding from the 
old squire. Both Graham and Katherine 
glanced quickly round. The old man 
had turned in his chair ; he was looking 
at them, and his blue lips were distorted 
with a sort of spectre of a smile, while 
they moved with a strange convulsive 
movement. 

"What is the matter, Mr. North?" 
said Katherine, crossing the room. 

Again the poor squire gave forth an 
indescribable sound, which he probably 
intended for a laugh. 

"You — you — should marry him," he 
gasped out at last, and his indistinct 
words overwhelmed Graham and Kath- 
erine alike with confusion. 

They tried to laugh ; they both blushed, 
and were both considering what to say, 
when a loud rap came to the breakfast- 
room door, and a stout, red-faced woman 
entered. This was the squire's attendant, 
and she at once advanced up to her charge. 



A MOTHERS WARNISO, 37 

" I am going to wheel him for half-an- 
hour on the terrace," said the nurse, 
seizing on the back of the squire's wheeled 
chair and looking at Katherine as she 
spoke. But the old man did not want to go. 

"Get — away," he said, in his imperfect 
speech ; " get — ! " But the nurse took 
no notice. 

" He sleeps better after his airing, poor 
man," she said ; and so she wheeled hira 
off for his airing, and Graham and Kath- 
erine were left alone. 

"It is very sad," said Katherine, ner- 
vously ; "he — he says such foolish things." 

" I suppose you think that was a very 
foolish thing he said just now. Miss 
Despard ? " said Graham half bitterly, 
looking straight at Katherine's blushing 
face. 

" I — I — hardly kuo\f ," murmured Kath- 
erine ; but her eyes fell and her hands 
trembled, and as Graham looked at her, 
a sudden resolution came into his mind. 



38 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

**Yet it is a foolish thing, Katherine, 
that I too have often thought of," he said, 
taking one of her smaU nervous hands, 
while his own voice also betrayed emotion ; 
'' I thought of it last night, and I thought 
of it this morning — ^but miserable poverty- 
stands in the way." 

" Oh ! no, no," said Katherine ; and now 
she lifted her beautiful eyes, soft, and full 
of love, and looked in Graham's face. 
" Do not talk about poverty, Graham — I 
am but too happy to think " 

Graham North hated himself as Kath- 
erine paused. It seemed to be taking ad- 
vantage of her generous, trusting nature, 
he thought, and he, a proud man, felt he 
was acting a mean part. 

" I am not worthy of your goodness," 
he said. "And — and — Katherine, I will 
not deceive you ; I will not ask you to be 
my wife until I have told you the ruinous 
extent of our embarrassments. I dare say 
you know we are poor, but it is worse 



A MOTHER* 8 WARNING. 39 

than that — thid place is heavily mort- 
gaged " 

"Hush, Graham, please do not talk of 
money. As I told you, dear uncle left me 
very rich, and there is a lot of ready 
money — so if you will have me," and 
she smiled, "I shall only ask one ques- 
tion." 

"And what is that, Katherine?" he 
said, and his eyes fell. 

" Graham," and the hand he held trem- 
bled and clasped his, " do you really love 
me ? Do not talk about being poor — that 
is nothing — not if you were the poorest 
man on earth! But — but, unless you 
really love me " 

"I do Katherine — more than I should, 
perhaps," and again his eyes fell; "I am 
not a good man ; I want you to remember 
this, as well as my poverty — my life has not 
been as your life — but if you will forgive 
all this — if you can love me " 

Katherine looked up in hig face, and he 



40 Oy GOLLEy HISGES, 

needed no other answer. He took her in 
his arms ; he kissed her lips. 

"I will try to be worthy of you," he 
said, with emotion ; " from this hour Kath- 
erine, I will try." 




CHAPTEE ni. 

KATHERINE DESPARD. 

Thus Graham North left the breakfast- 
room engaged to a very rich woman, and 
to a woman, moreover, whom it was almost 
impossible not to love and admire. 

Yet he left it an unhappy man. This 
bright, handsome Katherine Despard, who 
had just promised to be his wife, was a 
prize any one might have been proud to 
win, yet Graham frowned and sighed as he 
went up the staircase to his own room, and, 
having entered it, shut the door, and sat 
down full of gloomy thought. 

He had been driven to do this, he told 
himself, and yet he had no right to have 
done it. He had acted on the impulse of 
the moment, led away by Katherine's 
generous offer of money ; by her sweetness 



42 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

and beauty, and by her strong interest in 
himself. And then, no doubt, his mother's 
words had also influenced him. She had 
assured him that Katherine loved him, 
and had pointed out the escape from over- 
whelming difiiculties that lay in his power. 
But he had certainly not made up his 
mind to act on her advice when he had 
entered the breakfast-room. He had been 
uncertain, he had not known what to do ; 
but it was done now, and he knew he must 
prepare himself to face the consequences. 

So he sat there and thought of the past 
year, and of the cares and troubles its 
revolving months had brought him. Could 
he but have blotted it out of the calendar 
he might now have been a happy man. 
But it remained — mute, yet immutable — 
and the silent shadow of its ill-spent days 
lay heavy on the young man's heart. 

This past year had also brought great 
changes to Katherine Despard, for, during 
it, her uncle, Antony Despard, had died, 



KA THERINE DESPABD. 43 

and left her heiress to his enormous fortune. 
And this had been somewhat unexpected. 
Katherine, indeed, was known to be much 
beloved by her uncle, but his nephew, 
Captain Despard, was generally supposed 
to be the proper heir. 

And there is little doubt that the old 
man had at one time also thought this. 
But he had made his own money in trade 
in London, and he was shrewd, and a very 
good and just man, and he had chosen 
Katherine to inherit his great wealth from 
a deliberate conviction that she would 
make the best use of it. 

Captain Despard was the only son of his 
eldest brother, who had been killed in 
action in early life, and Katherine Despard 
was the daughter of his youngest brother, 
who also had been a soldier, and who had 
died in India some years ago, leaving his 
portionless girl to her uncle's kindly care. 

The rich man had no children of his 
own, for his young wife had died in cour 



44 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

sumption a year after their marriage, and 
Antony Despard's love was buried in her 
grave. He therefore gladly adopted his 
brother's children, and Francis Despard, 
having chosen his father's profession, his 
uncle defrayed all the necessary expenses, 
and Francis entered the Eoyal Artillery. 

He was ten years older than Katherine, 
an enthusiastic soldier, and a brave, daring, 
and somewhat distinguished man. Yet in 
spite of all this, the old trader chose to 
put his wealth in the slender hands of a 
girl. He left Francis Despard ten thousand 
pounds, but he left Katherine over twenty 
thousand a year, and he left this great 
fortune entirely at her own disposal. No 
wonder, then, that his mother had urged 
Graham North to try to win so great a 
prize, particularly as she was quite satisfied 
in her own mind that Katherine had already 
fixed her afiections on her good-looking son. 

But men have wayward fancies. A 
lovely country blossom, half-child, half-girl, 



KATHERINE DESPARJD. 45 

had already attracted Graham North, and 
on many a summer -afternoon, before Miss 
Despard became an heiress, he had stood 
fishing in the Dill, with fair Winny Eiddell 
by his side. 

Winny had a charming, picturesque little 
face, and she made Graham North's ac- 
quaintance nearly ten months before we 
find him sitting thinking so moodily of the 
past. Graham had been abroad over a j'-ear 
just before he first met Winny, returning 
to Dillford in the April of 1883, and it 
chanced on the very day after his return 
he was fishing up the stream when he came 
on a pretty picture. 

A girl, fair-haired, bare-headed, and 
eager, was bending over the water hold- 
ing on by a willow that drooped into the 
river. She did not see Graham, who was 
behind her, and he stood for a moment 
amused watching her, wondering if she 
were admiring the shadow of her fair face 
on the sun-lit stream. 



46 ON GOLDEN HjyGES. 

But she was not. She was trying to 
reach a poor little fluttering bird with a 
broken wing, that the current was sweeping 
downwards, in spite of its despairing and 
miserable eflbrts to rise. Wlien Graham 
saw this he advanced in his long fisherman's 
boots, and addressing the country maiden 
with a smile, asked if he could help her. 

He rescued the poor bird, which was 
a young blackbird, and had either fallen, 
or been flung by some cruel lad into the 
stream, and he made the acquaintance of 
the prettiest girl, he told himself, that his 
admiring eyes had ever looked on. 

He soon learnt who she was — the flaxen- 
haired little lassie he remembered seeing 
so often trotting by farmer Eiddell's side. 
But Winny had been away at school since 
those days, and now stood before him in 
her- fair slender maidenhood. 

"You have grown into a tall young 
lady," smiled Graham, and the girl smiled 
and blushed her reply. 



KA THEIiiyE DESPAIU), 47 

They met again and again after this/ 
Graham in fact fell in love with her ; in 
in love with her beauty, in love with her 
youth and sweetness, but his love for 
Winny did not make him a better man. 

It was a sad story — as months passed 
on there were tears sometimes in Winny's 
soft eyes when she used to meet her lover ; 
tears, and sighs from the pretty lips, where 
not so long ago, only sweet smiles had 
lingered. She in truth had nothing in 
common with Graham but love. He was 
a man who had seen much of life, he was 
well-educated and well-read, and she was 
but a country girl who had no more know- 
ledge of the great world than the wild 
bee that passed her on the moor, carrying 
its honey to its cell. 

And there stole over Graham North's 
heart a weariness, a remorseful weariness, 
that combat as he might, grew stronger and 
stronger, sweeping away the unstable love 
whose foundation was but of clay. Yet he 



48 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

was very fond of her — the easy half-pitying 
fondness, with which a woman speaks of 
" poor Harry," or " poor Ted ; " and with 
this feeling alone did Graham now regard 
his "poor httle Win." 

A much more easy companion this to 
carry about with us, than the overwhelm- 
ing tide that makes a world of happiness or 
misery dependent on another's smile ! Poor 
Winny Eiddell lived but for her lover ; the 
lover who gave an impatient sigh whenever 
he thought of her tearful imploring face. 

And now in the first hour of his engage- 
ment to Katherine Despard, that sad sweet 
face rose reproachfully before him. He 
was remembering the quiet nook by the 
sedgy shores of the Dill, where he had first 
met her ; the quiet nook which had become 
their trysting place. The yellow flag grew 
there, and the great tall reeds, and the wil- 
lows almost to the water's edge. How many 
a time Graham had lain in the summer in 
the long . grass, with the sunshine dancing 



KA THEBINE DESPA RD. 49 

on the stream. There were days when it 
was too bright to fish, but the fisherman 
had still carried his rod and creel to the 
cool sheltered river side* And he thought 
of those past hours now, and of the spot 
where he used to meet his young love. It 
all came back to him — the sunshine, the 
girl's bright face — but now the long reeds 
lay low, the grass was dank and frozen, 
and as great a change had passed over the 
man's chilled heart. 

Graham started up almost with a groan. 
" Fool that I have been," he thought, 
" selfish insensate fool ! " 

But he must face the consequences of 
that selfish folly. He must write to " little 
Win;" tell her what he feared, what he 
knew, would be so completely bitter to her. 
He went to his desk for that purpose, 
and then could find no words in which to 
break the poor girl's heart. He flung 
down his pen ; again he almost groaned, 
and then he decided he would put off the 

VOL. 1. 4 



so ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

evil hour. He had promised to meet her 
on Thursday — he would tell her then — it 
would be easier to tell her than to write, 
and having come to this resolution, he tried 
for the present to forget her. 

He had arranged with Katherine before 
he parted with her, that during the after- 
noon he would drive her over to her own 
house at Castle Hill. But this morning he 
intended to devote to another purpose ; he 
meant to go over and see their lawyer at 
Normanton, and endeavour to raise some 
money to pay their most pressing debts. 

He did not see Katherine again before he 
left Dillford, but he saw his mother. Mrs. 
Graham North was still unaware of the 
great good fortune (as she would call it) 
that had suddenly befallen her son. She 
met him, indeed, with a gloomy brow, and 
with overwhelming care in her heart. 

" I am going to Normanton, mother," he 
said, *' I will see Mr. Dixon, and try what I 
can do." 



KATHERINE DESPARD. 51 



« 

«( 



I fear not much, Graham," she answered; 

in fact, I do not know where to turn for 
money actually to provide necessaries — 
you read that bill ! " 

" Yes," said Graham, briefly. 

" If you could get a. hundred pounds 
even," continued Mrs. Graham North, "we 
might try to get on for a little while — ^and 

then, surely, Graham " And Mrs. North 

paused, and looked imploringly at her son. 

" Well, what then, mother ? " he answered, 
with a cold smile. 

"You remember what I. said last night. 
Oh ! Graham, don't let my words fall on 
deaf ears ! If it were not necessity, absolute 
necessity, I would not urge it, but you know 
that it is." 

"Yes, I know," said Graham, almost 
sullenly; "a good, dear beautiful woman 
is to be sacrificed to pay our debts." 

"How sacrificed, my dear? Is it a 

sacrifice to a woman, do you think, to 

marry the man she is in love with ? And 

4—2 



it 
it 



52 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

Katherine Despard is in love with you — 
you ask her, and you will see I am a true 
prophet." 

I quite believe you, mother." 
Then why hesitate ? A beautiful, 
wealthy girl will have you for the asking, 
and yet you allow us all to live in this 
miserable state ? " 

Graham gave a bitter little laugh. 

" Make your mind easy, mother," he 
said, " I have taken time by the fore lock; 
npt lost a moment in following your prudent 
advice — I am engaged to Miss Despard ! '' 

Mrs. Graham North's handsome face 
flushed, and her eyes grew moist. 

"Are you jesting?" she said, looking 
eagerly in her son's face, " or is it true, 
true Graham ? " 

" It is true," he answered more seriously, 
"for better or for worse, Katherine has 
promised to marry me." 

Mrs. North could not restrain her tears, 
but they were tears of thankfulness and joy. 



KATHERINE DE8PARD. 53 

" My dear, my dear," she said, taking his 
hand and kissing his cheek with her fond 
maternal love, " I am too happy — Graham, 
you have made me too happy." • 

Graham was touched by his mother's 
emotion. 

" Well, you have got your own way you 
see," he said with a smile ; '* and Katherine 
is all that you say — a handsome, generous- 
minded girl — but " 

" I will listen to no buts," interrupted 
Mrs. North, " Katherine is simply perfect, 
and you are a most happy man." 

" Then let the happy man go, please, to 
try and borrow some money," said Graham, 
trying to speak lightly ; " let me see — how 
much do you say will do for the present ? " 

" There will be no difficulty now," said 
Mrs. Graham North proudly ; " tell Mr. 
Dixon what you have told me, and he will 
let you have a thousand as easily as a 
hundred — the future owner of Castle Hill 
need be no niggard." 



54 ON G OLDEN HINGES. • 

Graham gave a little shrug. 

"It's an honourable position," he said> 
" trading on a future wife's credit ! " 

"Do not be foolish Graham — but now 
good-bye, my dearest — tell Mr. Dixon your 
news, and you will see." 

So Graham rode away from Dillford, 
and two women watched him as he went. 
One was the proud delighted mother, the 
other the woman who had promised to be 
his wife. Katherine looked very happy. 
She had long loved, or at least certainly 
liked Graham North, and she had been 
thrown constantly into his society. Mrs. 
Graham North had indeed, before Kath- 
erine became a great heiress, planned this 
match. Mr. Antony Despard was known 
to be very rich, and Mrs. North had made 
sure that his favourite Katherine would 
have a large fortune. This fortune had 
far exceeded her expectations, and ever 
since she had heard of it, she had con- 
stantly thrown Katherine with her son/ 



KA THERINE DE8PASD, 5 $ 

And now she had won her heart's desire, 
and the most intense joy filled her being. 
She was not a religious woman, yet she 
felt tempted just now to go down on her 
knees, so thankful did she feel, that this 
great fortune had come to her beloved son. 






CHAPTER IV 

WHAT THE LAWYER SAID. 

Graham rode into Normanton and went 
straight to Mr. Dixon's office. Mr. Dixon 
was the Graham Norths old family lawyer, 
and he had known the father of the pre- 
sent squire. Graham North was the third 
of the same name that had come to him 
with the same story. Want of money ! It 
might have been the family motto, for the 
lawyer remembered nothing else. They 
had always wanted it, and when Mr. Dixon 
saw Graham enter his office, he knew before 
he spoke for what purpose he had come. 

Yet the old man rose and received his 
visitor with respect, though with rather a 
melancholy smile. 

*'Well, Mr. Graham," he said, holding 
out his lean hand, " and how are you this 



WHAT THE LAWYER SAID, 57 

cold morning ? Cold, but seasonable — and 
how is the old squire? " 

Mr. Dixon was a tall, spare, aged man, 
with a shrewd, kind face, and was a man 
moreover of some iijdependent means. He 
knew the Graham Norths were ruined, but 
still they were the Graham Norths in his 
eyes, and he had not been among their 
importunate creditors, though he had acted 
professionally for them over forty years. 
He felt sorry indeed for the handsome 
young man now standing before him, 
knowing well the almost hopeless embar- 
rassments to which he was the heir. 

" And what can I do for you this morn- 
ing ? " he said, after a moment's uncomfort- 
able pause, while Graham North stood 
uncertain how to beo;in a conversation so 
intensely disagreeable to his feelings. 

" It's the old story, Mr. Dixon," he now 
answered, " want of money." 

Mr. Dixon sank back on his chair with 
a gentle sigh. 



58 OX GOLDEN HINGES. 

"A bad want, Mr. Graham," he said, 
" the worst want." 

" That indeed it is ! " answered Graham 
gloomily. 

" And you can't do anything ? " said the 
old lawyer, drumming his fingers on the 
desk before him, and looking somewhat 
curiously at the young man's pale agitated 
face. 

" I am ready to do anything," said Gra- 
ham, " but the question is, what can a man 
do close on thirty, who has been brought 
up to no profession ? " 

" Ay, that's true," said Mr. Dixon. 

"If I could raise a few hundreds just 
for the present," began Graham, casting 
down his eyes. 

"Just for the present?" repeated Mr. 
Dixon inquiringly. 

" Yes," said Graham, without raising his 
eyes, "for a month or two, and then — I 
think matters could be arranged ? " 

Mr. Dixon did not speak for a moment. 



WHAT THE LAWYKB SAID. 59 

and then a smile broke over his kindly 
face. 

"You should get married, Mr. Graham," 
he said. 

Graham North had been very pale before, 
but he now suddenly blushed a dusky 
blush. 

" Why don't you marry your handsome 
neighbour ? " continued Mr. Dixon, still 
smiling. "That would make thingrs all 
square, and your mother I am sure would 
like it." 

" I — am engaged to Miss Despard," said 
Graham North slowly, still without looking 
in his old friend's face. 

" What ! " cried Mr. Dixon in sudden 
excitement ; " why, my dear lad, why 
didn't you tell me this at once ? I've not 
been so pleased for years — it's a famous 
thing ! " And the old lawyer got up and 
warmly shook Graham North's hand. 

" It's a splendid thmg," he repeated with 
genuine pleasure ; " she's a splendid girl. 



6o ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

Mr. Graham, and — a magnificent fortune." 
And he laughed. 

"She is a very generous, noble-minded 
woman," said Graham gravely; "she knows 
our position ; I did not deceive her, Mr. 
Dixon." 

" No ; that was quite right, but what is 
it to her? I am told as an absolute fact 
that old Antony left her over twenty thou- 
sand a year, and some spare cash into the 
bargain. He left her in fact everything, 
except ten thousand pounds to that soldier 
nephew of his, who at one time was sup- 
posed to be the heir." 

" Yes," said Graham North, " but " 

" Come, we must have no * buts,' " said 
Mr. Dixon heartily, using almost the very 
words his mother had done as Graham 
paused ; " and as for some ready money, 
why, my dear boy, you need not go far 
to raise that now ; in fact, I'm an old 
bachelor you know, and don't spend much, 
and 111 give you a cheque on the bank 



WHAT THE LAWYEH SAID. 6i 

here for five hundred poimds if that will 
be any accommodation, and you can repay 
me when it is quite convenient." 

" You are very good," answered Graham 
gratefully ; " most good — and five hundred 
will settle the most pressing accounts." 

" You won't find them so pressing now," 
said Mr. Dixon, with a little laugh and a 
shake of his bald head ; " no, my dear lad, 
they'll be pressing you for your orders 
now ; you won't be troubled with duns at 
Castle Hill." 

"No," said Graham bitterly, "but it 
seems so degrading to a man." 

" If she were a woman you could not 
love, Mr. Graham, so it would be, but 
Miss Despard is a girl any man could love, 
and respect into the bargain. You are a 
fortunate lad, a most fortunate one, that 
is the truth. Ah ! ah ! and the poor old 
squire, hell hardly understand it all!" 
And Mr. Dixon sighed. 

" He seems fond of her in his childish way.'* 



62 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

"Any one would be fond of her — and, 
Mr. Graham, take an old lawyer's advice — 
don't let the*grass grow under your feet, 
strike when the iron's hot, for I'm given 
to understand there's many a young fellow 
after Miss Despard — that soldier cousin 
among the rest." 

" Captain Despard ? " 

Mr. Dixon nodded his head. 

" Ay, so I understand," he said ; " but 
never you mind, she's not a girl to go 
back from her word. Well, I heartily 
congratulate you. Why, the two estates 
joined and Dillford cleared will make a 
splendid property ! You'll be the gre^-test 
magnate in the county after all, Mr. Gra- 
ham ! " 

Graham North shook his head. 

" I am very unworthy to be so, then," 
he said. 

" Nonsense, nonsense," answered the 
kindly old man ; " you are going to begin 
a new life, and leave the old one behind. 



WHAT THE LAWYER SAID. 63 

You are a young fellow yet, and I hope 
you'll live to a great age to enjoy your 
good fortune." 

After some further conversation, Mr. 
Dixon gave Graham the cheque for five 
hundred pounds, and Graham shook hands 
heartily with his old friend, and then went 
to the bank to get it cashed, and after- 
warda proceeded to pay some of their most 
pressing creditors in the town. 

Presently he rode back to Dillford, still 
with care upon his brow. He was think- 
ing of what his mother had said, and what 
the lawyer had said, but they did not know 
what he knew. Amid all their congratu- 
lations he had seen one face — the face of 
the poor girl who had loved him too well. 




OHAPTEE V. 



FRANCIS DESPAKD. 



When Graham arrived at the hall he found 
his mother, Miss Despard, and a country 
neighbour, Mr. Selbrooke, already seated at 
lunch. Mr. Selbrooke was a well-endowed 
young man, and Mrs. Graham North 
esteemed him accordingly. Her two girls, 
Lucy and Ethel, were to be considered, 
though they were at present absent from 
home, and when Graham entered the 
dining-room he found his mother listening 
complacently to a very badly-told anecdote 
from Mr. Selbrooke's lips. 

But though she was a good mother to 
her daughters, they held a very second 
place in her heart to her son. And now 
the moment that she saw Graham's face she 



FRANCIS DESPARD, 65 

recognized with the subtle instinct of love 
that his mind was still ill at ease. 

" How late you have been my dear ! " 
she said, rising and forgetting all about Mr. 
Selbrooke. " Have you seen Mr. Dixon, 
and have you settled anything ? " she added 
in a low tone. 

" Yes, I have seen him ; it is all right," 
answered . Graham, and Mrs. North 
breathed a sigh of relief. 

" Come and sit by Katherine," she said 
the next moment, smilingly pointing to a 
vacant chair by Katherine's side, and as 
Graham complied, Katherine looked at him 
in her bright way. 

" I was afraid you were not coming in 
time to drive me to Castle Hill," she said. 

"I was quite sure to be in time," he 
answered, and as he spoke he was thinking 
how handsome she was, and also that he 
had never seen her look so well. 

" I have had a telegram from my cousin 
Frank," continued Katherine, " and he 

VOL. I. 5 



66 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

expects to be able to get leave either 
to-day or to-morrow, and he will stay two 
days on his road to Scotland with me, so I 
must go over to Castle Hill this afternoon 
to hear if there is any further news from 
him." 

As Katherine said this, Graham remem- 
bered Mr. Dixon's words about Captain 
Despard, with an undefined feeling of 
jealousy. 

" I am ready to take you whenever you 
wish to go," he said ; " but you must wrap 
yourself up very warmly, for it is bitterly 
cold ; the Dill is freezing." 

" Please eat some lunch first," smiled 
Katherine ; but Graham had no appetite, 
and presently (their visitor, Mr. Selbrooke, 
having taken his leave) the betrothed pair 
started on their way to Katherine's beau- 
tiful home. 

Castle Hill was but three miles from Dill- 
ford, the old squire's mortgaged acres 
joining the extensive property purchased 



FRANCIS DE8PASD. 67 

by the late Antony Despard. Thus from 
t the time of Antony Despard's death the 
most passionate wish of Mrs. Graham 
North's heart had been that her son should 
marry Katherine, and so join two great 
estates, and bring her ready money to clear 
off the overwhelming swamp of debt that 
for two generations had hung over Dillford. 

It was a bitterly cold day, as Graham 
had said, as these two drove along the 
frozen lanes that were to be his and hers. 
A bright cold frosty day, the ground hard 
as flint, the fallows whitened on each up- 
turned ridge, the birds shivering among the 
leafless thorns, while the rough herbage 
below each hedge was stiffened, and each 
blade fringed with a crystal rim. 

" Well, it is cold ! " said Katherine with a 
httle shiver, drawing closer to Graham's 
side. 

Again he looked at her charming face. 

"And you don't regret, Katherine," he 

said in a low tone ; " you are quite sure 

5—2 



68 ON QOLDEN HINGES, 

you don't regret the promise you made this 
morning ? " 

" I am quite sure," answered Katherine, 
with much earnestness. " I — I — am happy 
Graham to think — that — that it is settled/' 

And she blushed. 

She looked very handsome at this 
moment. Her fine complexion was im- 
proved by the clear frosty air, and her 
eyes were full of feeling. She was very 
happy ; happy to think that she could do 
so much for the man she cared for, and 
put all trouble away from him. This was 
her nature — a noble generous nature which 
never gave with a niggard hand. 

Her uncle, Antony Despard, also had been 
a very noble character. Whatever he had 
been in youth, when he entered the haven 
of old age, the storms and struggles of life 
were all left behind. And he was a clever 
man, too, shrewd and liberal-minded, and it 
was his knowledge of Katherine's nature 
and his great love for her that had induced 



FBANCI8 DESPARD. 69 

him to make her his heiress. He knew 
that his nephew Frank had the most claim ; 
he was the natural heir ; but old Antony, 
with his gentle grey eyes saw more than 
most people imagined. He was quite ready 
to acknowledge Frank's good qualities ; 
the brave, fearless spirit that would face 
death and danger with a smile. But under- 
lying this almost savage daring what else 
did he see? Not at all events the pure 
soul of Katherine. Frank Despard might 
be no worse than his fellows, but with great 
wealth in his power what would he become ? 

The old man asked himself this question, 
and the answer was not satisfactory. It 
lost his nephew. Castle Hill, and a great 
income. He left his wealth where he knew 
at all events it would do no harm, and he 
left it to Katherine. 

"If she likes to marry Frank," he 
thought, " she will have more influence 
over him as a rich woman than a poor one, 
and her influence will always be good." 



70 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

He died with his hand in Katherine's, 
and died as only a good man can die. 
There were no pale, miserable ghosts by 
this death-bed, haunting shadows of ill- 
deeds wrought long ago. Memories there 
were — the sweet face of his dead wife, of 
friends, but gone before; sweet memories 
of love and kindness and silent charities — 
these shone out of the darkening mists, and 
their reflection lingered on his face after 
he had ceased to breathe. 

Long ago he had lifted up his eyes and 
beheld Eternity before him ; long ago, 
while yet amid the shallows, he had 
stretched out his arms to the great vast 
sea, and lived as a man lives who realizes 
that he shall exist for ever. 

Eound the pale cold clay of such a man 
there are many mourners, and the girl 
who wept by his side, in whose hand his 
lay when his spirit flitted into Light, felt 
so crushed down by her grief, that she 
scarcely heeded at first when they told her 



FSANCI8 DE8PARD. 7' 

that all her uncle's great wealth had been 
left to her. 

No doubt the nobleness of his character 
had influenced her, for Katherine had 
grown graver and more thoughtful since 
his death, and was always trying to do 
good, and carry out schemes that she 
thought he would approve of. One person, 
however, did not like to hear of her great 
generosity about money, and this was her 
cousin, Francis Despard. 

Francis Despard had been disappointed 
about his uncle's will, but not made miser- 
able by it. He had, in truth, made up his 
mind to marry Katherine, and, to do him 
justice, he would have married her had 
their positions been reversed ; that is, had 
Katherine been bequeathed the ten thou- 
sand left to him and he the twenty thousand 
a year of which Katherine was the heiress. 
But Katherine had not given her heart to 
her cousin Frank, though he never seemed 
to realize that this was so. 



72 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

She had chosen Graham North, and his 
very poverty made him a hundred times 
dearer to her. She was thinking, as she sat 
by his side, how she would put everything 
into his hands, how glad and happy she 
was that this great fortune had come to 
her, and that all Graham's troubles would 
be ended now. 

And of what was Graham thinking ? He 
was thinking how he could love this woman, 
how he could make a friend and companion 
of her as well as a wife. She never wearied 
him ; her bright intelligence, her warm, 
sympathetic heart delighted him, and yet — 
and yet 

" Why are you sighing, Graham ? " she 
said, looking up in his face. 

" I was thinking how unworthy I am of 
you," he answered, with a somewhat forced 
smile. 

" You ought to leave me to find that 
out," laughed Katherine. 

But now they had almost reached Castle 



FRANCIS DE8PARI). 73 

Hill. The house stands on an eminence 
thickly planted with trees and evergreens, 
and a winding drive through these planta- 
tions leads to the gateway. The house 
itself is most picturesque. It is completely 
covered with ivy on one side, and below, 
through the trees, you see glimpses of the 
winding Dill. 

Antony Despard had erected a handsome 
stone bridge over the river after he had 
bought the property, and, as they crossed 
the bridge, some men below were breaking 
the ice for the cattle to drink. The Dill 
at this point frequently overflows the flat 
meadow-lands, and, in winter, or when the 
floods came down from the hills, rushes 
with great force through the arches of 
the bridge. But the severe frost of the 
night before had now almost frozen it 
over. 

" We shall have some skating to-morrow, 
Katherine," said Graham. 

But unfortunately I can't skate," she 



(C 



74 Oy GOLDEN HINGES. 

answered smilingly. "You forget I was 
brought up in India." 

As she spoke they neared the lodge, and 
the lodge-keeper's wife ran to open the 
gates with a pleased smile on her face at 
the sight of Katherine, who had always a 
kindly word for every one around her. 
Katherine nodded to the lodge-keeper's 
wife, and then as Graham drove up the 
avenue they came suddenly upon a tall 
soldier-like looking man, who was walking 
leisurely down it. 

"Why, here is Frank himself!" cried 
Katherine, and so Graham pulled up the 
ponies, and Captain Frank. Despard ad- 
vanced with a smile to shake hands with 
his cousin. 

" Well, Katie," he said in a loud pleasant 
voice, " you see here I am ! My battery is 
on the wing, but I found I could get two 
days' leave, so I thought you wouldn't turn 
me out, but when I got here I found you 
flown." 



FRANCIS JJE8PARD, 75 

"Yes," said Katherine, blushing and 
smiling, " I am staying for a few days 
with my neighbours at Dillford. I think, 
Frank, you know Mr. Graham North?" 
And Katherine looked at Graham. . 

" To be sure ! " said Captain Despard, 
" I thought I remembered the face." And 
he held out his hand to Graham ; a big, 
strong, bony hand, with a purple slash 
across it that he had got in action. 

He was indeed in appearance the very 
beau-ideal of a soldier; tall, strongly and 
broadly formed, with short, light curling 
hair cut close, and a heavy reddish mous- 
tache covering his full lips. His features 
were good, his complexion originally fair, 
tanned a deep brownish hue, with a dash 
of red in it, and he had wild, light-grey, 
daring eyes. 

He was past thirty, and had seen service, 
and had justly earned the reputation of a 
cool, brave soldier, but he was unfortu- 
nately slightly deaf. Not very deaf, but 



76 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

Still it was a drawback to him in his 
profession, to which hq was devoted, and 
this bodily infirmity was therefore a bitter 
pill to him. 

He stood now leaning on the pony- 
carriage, and looking admiringly with his 
grey eyes in his cousin's face. 

" You are looking remarkably well. Miss 
Katie," he said. 

He always called her Katie. Old Antony 
Despard had given her this name, and his 
nephew had got into the habit of calling 
her by it, for during his uncle's lifetime 
he had spent all his leave at Castle Hill. 

So he leaned on the pony-carriage, and 
thought what a handsome woman she was, 
and also thought what a remarkably nice 
place Castle Hill was. Not that he wished 
to retire from the service and live a life of 
ease. He was too fond of his profession, 
too ambitious and stirring by nature to 
settle down to a quiet domestic life by 
his wife's side, however fair she might be. 



FRANCIS DE8PARD, 77 

*' Grim-visaged war," the stern fierce shout 
of battle and triumph, thrilled his heart 
with deeper passion than the love of 
woman. But though heart and soul a 
soldier, he yet had other strong feelings, 
and he had given all the sentiment of his 
nature (or what he called the sentiment) 
to Katherine Despard. 

He did not care, therefore, to see her 
by the side of another man, yet no one 
could have told this by his manner. He 
was courteous and agreeable to Graham 
North, and he turned and walked by the 
side of the pony-carriage to the hall-door 
of the house, chatting pleasantly to his 
cousin and her friend. Katherine led the 
way into the library, which was her 
favourite room, and when Captain Despard 
got there he looked round approvingly. 

" What a jolly den you have here, 
Katie," he said. 

Katherine held up her hands in mock 
dismay. 



78 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

" Den, indeed ! " she cried, " and all my 
beautiful books ! " 

" You have some nice books, Katherine," 
said Graham North, going up to the shelves, 
which were all white, the leather-work 
white also stamped with gold. 

The word " Katherine " fell unpleasantly 
on Captain Despard's somewhat dull ears. 
He glanced quickly from Katherine to 
Graham ; he gave an impatient rub at 
one of his defective organs, but after a 
moment's reflection he came to the con- 
clusion that he had probably missed 
hearing the whole of Mr. North's words, 
and that there was likely nothing in it. 
Then Katherine rang for tea, and the two 
men began to talk of sport, and after 
a while Katherine left them together, and 
went to have a conference with her house* 
keeper. 

When she came back Graham looked 
at his watch, and told lier that if she 
wished to be back by daylight she must 



FRANCIS DE8PARD. 79 

go. Again, Despard glanced sharply at 
Graham and Katherine. 

" But Katie," he said, " you are not 
surely going back to Dillford, are you ? 
You won't leave me ? " 

Katherine blushed deeply as she an- 
swered. 

"Mrs. North expects me, Frank," she 
said, " I — I could not disappoint her — but 

I am sure " And she looked at 

Graham, who took the hint. 

" We shall be delighted if you will dine 
with us. Captain Despard," he said, " my 
mother I am sure will be delighted, and 
she would be very much disappointed if 
Miss Despard did not return." 

" You are very good," answered Captain 
Despard ; " thanks, I shall be very pleased 
to dine with you — at what hour ? " 

" We dine at eight," said Graham, " and 
now I think I had better go and look after 
the ponies — and as soon as you are ready, 
Katherine ' ' 



8o ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

He preceded her for a moment, and 
crossed the hall, and went to the front 
entrance, and the cousins were thus vir- 
tually alone. It was getting dusk, and 
Katherine suddenly took courage to tell her 
secret. 

"Frank," she said, going up to her 
cousin, and speaking in a loud whisper in 
his ear, " do not be offended by my leaving 
you — ^but — but you know I am engaged to 
Graham North." 

It was almost too dark for her to see 
the sudden change of colour which in a 
moment passed over Captain Despard's face. 
It was a peculiarity of his that under the 
influence of strong excitement his upper 
lip grew rigid and white, and indeed the 
whole of the lower part of the face un- 
accountably blanched. She did not see 
this, but she felt the sudden and fierce grip 
of his hands, one on her wrist, the other 
on her arm. 

" What ! that fellow ! " he hissed out. 



FRANCIS DESPARD. 81 

"I have known him a long time," fal- 
tered Katherine nervously. 

For a moment or two Captain Despard 
did not speak, and then his hands relaxed 
their grasp, and when he spoke it was 
quite in a different tone. 

" Ah, well, my dear," he said, " ah, well ! " 

" I hope you will like him, Frank ? " said 
Katherine, relieved by his change of manner. 

" No doubt I shall, Katie," said Captain 
Despard. "But I suppose you know he's 
a bit of a gay Lothario ? " he added. 

" How can you say such a thing, Frank?" 
said Katherine quickly and angrily. 

" Common report, my dear ! " answered 
Captain Despard lightly. " But come, we 
must not keep the gay youth waiting." 
And he led his cousin across the hall, and 
handed her into the pony-carriage b)^ 
Graham's side, and parted with them with 
a jest and a smile on his lips. But he had 
left his sting with Katherine, and the drive 
back to Dillford was not a happy one. 

VOL. I. 6 



CHAPTER VI. 



ben's gossip. 



No sooner, however, had Graham and 
Katherine disappeared, than Francis Des- 
pard returned to the house in a most 
terrible passion. The fierce savage vein in 
the man's heart blazed out. He gnawed 
his pale lips, he clenched his hands, and 
there was a dangerous gleam in his pale 
grey eyes, and muttered curses on his lips. 

Yet not for long did he abandon himself 
to useless rage. He could put a curb on 
that lower nature of his, and he did this 
now. He lit a cigar and tried to calm 
himself, and after a while he went dowm to 
inspect Katherine's stables. 

Every man about the place liked him. 
They had talked of him a hundred times. 



BEITS GOSSIP. 83 

and read of him when his valour was men- 
tioned by special correspondents, and they 
knew the battle where he got that ugly 
thrust, and how out in India he had been 
terribly mauled by a tiger, and yet had the 
courage to shoot the br^ute when its cruel 
fangs were in his flesh. His bravery had 
won their hearts ; they were proud of him^ 
and had always reckoned that Katherine 
would marry their hero. 

He was a first-rate rider, a dead shot, 
and a keen fox-hunter. With such at- 
tractions men in the ranks were sure to 
admire him. The qualities he possessed 
they could understand, and they did not 
miss the finer ones, the lack of which had 
lost him Castle Hill. 

Katherine's old coachman was particu- 
larly fond of him, for " Ben " had been a 
soldier, and had served under Katherine's 
father, and had been " hit" in the self-same 
battle when Francis Despard's own father 
had been shot dead leading on his men. 

6—2 



84 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

Ben adored Frank Despard. He was a 
child of his own as it were, " a soldier to 
his back-bone," Ben would say, and he had 
no words of higher praise. Frank Despard 
knew very well that Ben wished him to 
marry " Miss Despard," for Ben had fre- 
quently hinted to " the Captain " that he 
wished he would make haste about it. 

" Some of those civilian fellows, Captain, 
will be persuading her to have him I'm 
always afeared on," he had said as "a 
hint," only a short time ago. " It would 
be a mighty pity if such a handsome young 
lady and her great fortune should go out 
of the service " 

So Captain Despard strolled down to the 
stables to hear what Ben had to say about 
Mr. Graham North, of Dillford. The old 
soldier was sitting in the harness-room on a 
step-ladder, telling two admiring stable lads 
who were rubbing harness some old-world 
stories "of hair-breath 'scapes," and he 
jumped down from his perch with almost 



BEN'S GOSSIP, 85 

youthful alacrity, when he saw the face of 
" the Captain," and made a miUtary salute. 

He was a little man, with a shrewd face, 
brown and weather-beaten, and he guessed 
at once that something unusual had brought 
Captain Despard to the stables at this time 
of day, so he dismissed his satellites with a 
nod. 

" I want to see you, Ben, about that 
brown horse the fellow has to sell at 
Normanton," began Despard, and again 
Ben saluted " the Captain,'* and commenced 
discussing the merits and demerits of the 
brown horse with professional interest. 

" He was reared in tlie Dillford stables, 
wasn't he ? " presently asked Despard. 

"Yes, Captain, he belonged to the old 
squire once, but they sold him to Jobson 
these three years gone March," answered 
Ben. 

"Pretty hard up, aren't they in that 
quarter?" said Despard, puffing out the 
smoke of his cigar. 



86 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

" Awful hard up, Captain ; I'm told the 
whole place will come to the hammer the 
moment the breath is out of the old Squire's 
carcase, unless the young chap marries tin." 

" Which he most probably will do," said 
Despard coolly. 

"Don't know, Captain; there's queer 
stories about him and a young lass that 
belongs to these parts," said Ben, and he 
now guessed why the Captain had paid 
this visit to the stables at such an unusual 
hour. 

" What sort of stories ? " asked Despard, 
turning his back on Ben, and lifting up a 
snaffle-bit, and carefully examining it. 

" Well, Captain, folks say if they aren't 
married they ought to be," replied Ben ; 
" they say the lass is nigh broken-hearted 
about it, and wanders all over the place 
seeking him, and I'm told — but it may be 
gossip " 

" Well ? " said Despard, sharply, as Ben 
paused. 



BEN'S GOSSIP. 87 

"I'm told, anyhow," continued Ben, 
" that farmer Eiddell, that's the lass' father, 
swears hell ha' it out with the young fellar, 
and that hell make him marry her — so how 
it ends — " And Ben shook his head. 

" And what is the name of this deluded 
young female ? " asked Despard. 

*' Winny Eiddell's her name, Captain, and 
an uncommon pretty young woman she is," 
answered Ben ; " uncommon pretty ! " And 
the old soldier smacked his lips. 

" Young idiot ! " said Despard con- 
temptuously, who had now heard all he 
wanted. " Well, Ben, go into Normanton 
in the morning, and offer eighty for the 
brown horse, and send one of the lads over 
now to Dillford with a note I am going to 
write to Miss Despard. She's staying there 
for a day or so, and they want me to dine 
with them to-night, but I cannot be bored. 
I'll have the note ready in five minutes." 

After giving his orders Despard walked 
out of the harness-room with his hands in 



88 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

his pockets, and Ben looked after him 
admiringly. 

"He's the proper stuff," he thought; 
" ay, many a lass would have a sore heart 
if he turned his back upon her, whatever 
Miss Katherine may think." And having 
thus mentally expressed his opinion, the 
old soldier began to rub his harness, 
whistling softly to himself as he did so. 

In the meanwhile Francis Despard was 
writing his letter to Katherine. His visit 
to the stables had quite calmed him down. 
He lit another cigar, and then wrote a 
few lines to his cousin. 

"Dear Katie," he wrote, "you had 
scarcely left when one of those horrid, 
nervous head-aches, to which I am subject, 
came on, and, therefore, it will be im- 
possible for me to dine with your friends 
this evening. Please make a proper 
apology for me, and if the lover can be 
got out of the way for half-an-hour 



BEN'S GOSSIP. 89 

to-morrow, at any time that is convenient 
to you to see me, I should very much like 
to call upon you, as I have a little matter 
of business to discuss. Send me a line to 
tell me the hour, and in the meanwhile I 
am sure you will allow me to remain your 
guest. 

" With love, yours affectionately, 

" F. Despard." 






CHAPTEE VIL 



AT THE FARM. 



While Graham North was driving Kath- 
erine to Dillford, in the dusky winter's 
twilight, and Francis De*spard was stand- 
ing in the harness-room, at Castle Hill, 
listening to Ben's gossip, the young girl, 
of whom the old soldier was talking, 
was gazing dreamily into the fire at 
home. 

She was sitting in the parlour at Thorn- 
ley Farm. A comfortably furnished room 
this, with heavy, old-fashioned mahogany 
chairs, and a long black sofa, with hair- 
seating covers, all of which had belonged 
to the farmer's father before him. The 
room was low, and the ceiUng smoky, 
but the Brussels carpet, with its square 



AT THE FARM. 91 

formal pattern, was good, although it 
had been in use more than ten years, 
and on the high ornamental wooden 
mantelpiece was some valuable blue china, 
which had also stood there in the days of 
the farmer's parents. 

A stiff, old-world comfortable little room, 
but the fair, picturesque looking girl, who 
was gazing into the fire, seemed somehow 
unsuited to it. She was a graceful crea- 
ture, this Winny Eiddell, with her tall 
slender form, and her small head, with its 
crown of soft light hair, curled low down 
upon her white brow, but rolled up high 
at the back. 

Her dress also diJ not seem in keeping 
with her homely surroundings. She wore 
black velveteen, with deep lace ruffles 
at her throat and wrists, and a little 
jewelled clasp fastened the velvet band 
round her white throat. People said she 
was like a picture, and sitting there with 
her fair, dreamy face lit by the fire-light. 



92 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

she might have been a beauty of bygone 
days, whose charms some famous hand 
had made to live. But, presently her 
lips parted with a little sigh ; she rose, 
and began walking slowly up and down 
the narrow room, with her right hand 
pressed tightly to her breast. 

In that hand she held a picture ; the 
picture of a face that was always before 
her. She did not need the sun's aid, nor 
man s aid, to recall those features. She 
knew every line, every look. She saw 
the black brows, the kind grey eyes, 
wherever she went. And she would see 
them really, she was thinking ; really to- 
morrow, and to-day was nearly done! 
To-morrow would soon be here, and then 
she would see Graham North. She would 
touch him, look in his face, kiss his ilips. 

So up and down the room she went, 
holding his picture to her breast. She 
could think of nothing else. She vaguely 
heard her father come in and swear in his 



AT THE FARM, 93 

loud voice at the servants ; but lie did not 
come near her. Farmer Eiddell was essen- 
tially of the old rough school of northern 
farmers, and was not above working with 
his own hands, and his language and 
nature were alike strong and coarse. How 
this woodland flower could be his child was 
a marvel. But his wife had been a pretty 
woman, and Winny was supposed to have 
taken after her mother. Dorothy, the 
eldest daughter, was like her father. She was 
spare, reddish-skinned, and with darker hair 
tjian Winny's. But Dorothy was not ugly ; 
she was a strong, sensible, healthy young 
woman, nearly fifteen years older than her 
fair sister, with straight features, like the 
farmer's, and round, staring grey eyes. 
The farmer's eyes were blood-shot and 
Dorothy's were not, but that was about all 
the difference between them. But Dorothy 
was a useful woman. While Winny was 
dreaming of her lover, Dorothy was seeing 
the milk served out to the customers, and 



94 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

keeping her round eyes fixed on the girl 
viho was measuring it. 

Dorothy did this every night and morn- 
ing. The milk was sold in the porch of the 
farm-house, and the farm servants' children 
generally came to fetch it. They tramped 
in now from the farm cottages and the 
adjoining hamlet ; the girls blue-nosed and 
starved with cold, but neat and tidy ; the 
boys rosy and dirty, and ready to pick up 
a stray turnip as they passed through the 
farm-yard for the purpose of making turnip 
lanterns, or to eat. 

The cold air blew in at the open porch 
door, but Dorothy kept to her post. The 
girl who was serving out the milk had a 
round, good-natured looking face, and a 
pair of merry dark eyes ; but she had a 
lover, and, therefore, Dorothy did not 
trust her. Dorothy, who had no lover, 
always considered girls who had " flighty." 
So she kept her eye on Susan, and saw the 
pints and the quarts properly entered on 



AT THE FARM. 95 

the slate where the weekly account was 
kept. 

Presently, among the young customers, a 
very old woman came in, Dorothy nodded 
her head. 

"Well, Nannie, how are you to-night?" 
she said. 

The old woman nodded her head in 
reply. Her face was scored with a thou- 
sand wrinkles, brown and weather-beaten, 
and her eyes were sunk and dim. She was 
the mother of one of the farm-servants, and 
was over seventy years of age, but she 
liked what she called ''a crack "still, and 
was always well posted up in the affairs of 
her neighbours. 

" I've had my gran' dawter down from 
the Hall to-day. Miss Dorothy," she began 
in her thin voice. " Eh, what gran' doings 
they are going to have there? " 

"Grand doings," said Dorothy sharply. 
*'I thought there was no money to have 
any grand doings there ? " 



96 OX GOLDEN HINGES. 

" Eh, well, but a fine thing happened 
surely ; the youiig squire is going to be 
wed, and the young lady has a host p' tin, 
and madam herself is like to burst for joy 
about it. It's Miss Despard, o' Castle Hill, 
her that got the great fortin'." 

Dorothy's red skin grew redder as she 
heard the news. 

"I don't believe it," she said; "Miss 
Despard was going to marry her cousin, we 
heard the other day. 

The old woman grinned. She knew all 
about Winny Eiddell and Graham North* 
She had seen them meet a dozen times by 
the river in the long summer days; she 
had heard the gossip, the inuendoes, but 
she owed a grudge to Dorothy Eiddell, who 
had pulled her up sharply for not paying 
her score for eggs and milk, and she had 
come this bitterly cold night for the 
pleasure of paying "Miss Dorothy out." 

"Well, Miss Dorothy, I know naught," 
she continues, grinning still, " but me gran' 



AT THE FARM, • 97 

dawter, her that's laundry-i^aid at the Hall, 
ye ken, came down this afternoon full o' the 
news . She said madam had told cook this 
morn her own sel', and that madam was 
like to crack o' joy — eh, 'twill be a gran' 
thing, for there's naught like tin ! " And 
again Nannie distended her toothless jaws. 

" I don't believe it," repeated Dorothy, 
but she was so disturbed by the news that 
she walked out of the porch and forgot all 
about the milk score, and the old woman 
looked after her with the utmost satisfac- 
tion. 

" Miss Winny 'ill lose her fine lad," she 
remarked to the merry-eyed Susan, but the 
good-natured girl gave her no encourage- 
ment, and Nannie having got her milk; 
hobbled away. 

Dorothy Eiddell, who was a sensible 
woman, walked into the kitchen where her 
father was smoking, but she did not at that 
moment tell him what Nannie had said. 
Nor did she tell her young sister. She was 

VOL. I. 7 



98 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

Bharp-tongued but not bad-hearted, and sbe 
knew that Winny loved Graham North 
only too well. If she had been angryshe 
might have told her, but now she felt afraid 
and sorry for the girl. She had heard a 
vague rumour about Miss Despard before, 
but she had never believed it. It was gene- 
rally believed indeed, in the neighbourhood 
that Miss Despard would marry her soldier 
cousin. They had a report that the old 
man had willed it so, and Ben, the Castle 
Hill coachman, generally gave out that he 
was quite sure that " Miss Katherine would 
marry the Captain." 

But Nannie's words had made Dorothy 
feel very anxious, and she determined to 
speak to her father about Winny, after her 
young sister had gone to bed. But now 
she got the tea ready, and presently Susan 
having served all the customers, came into 
the kitchen to fry the bacon and eggs for 
the farmer's refreshment. 

There he sat, a huge man, tall and 



. AT THE TARM. 99 

heavily built, smoking his long pipe, and 
with his round blood-shot eyes fixed on the 
frying-pan. His face was red, and he smelt 
very strongly of sea-weed. A great storm 
had happened on the nearest coast during 
the night, and the farmer had been up be- 
times in the morning and down with his 
men and carts to the shore, to gather the 
brown sea-weed, which is considered valu- 
able manure. 

" Come, lassie, look sharp," he said to his 
daughter, and so Susan caught up the tea- 
tray and carried it into the parlour, and 
Dorothy having made the tea followed her, 
and began bustling about and lighting the 
lamp. 

Winny was still there. They were a 
wonderful contrast these two sisters, the 
children of one father and mother. Dorothy 
was dressed in a plain, neat, well-made, 
brown merino, with her hair parted down 
the front, and platted at the back in the 
old-fashioned style. She wore white cuffs 

7—2 



100 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

and a stiff collar, and she highly disap- 
proved of the way in which Winny dressed. 
But the farmer would not have Winny 
interfered with. 

" Let the bonny lass dress as she likes," 
he would answer to Dorothy's remon- 
strances on the subject ; " thou's got a 
bit stiff in the back, but she's a young thing, 
and is sure to want her falfals." 

So Winny's " falfals " were never grudged 
by the farmer, and he often put a pound 
into her hand that Dorothy never heard of. 
They were supposed to have the same 
allowance for their dress, but Eiddell was 
proud of his " pretty lass," and used to 
boast over his toddy that " none could beat 
her on the country-side." 

Winny was fond of her rough kind, 
father, and went up to give him a kiss 
when he came into the parlour in spite of 
the scent of sea-weed which he brought in 
with him. But the farmer waved her back. 

" Don't come nigh me, my bonny bird," 



AT THE FABM. loi 

he said, " till I've had a good wash, for I'm 
not fit to be beside thee in thy grand 
gown." 

Winny laughed and retreated, and then 
Kiddell sat down to his tea, and the bacon 
and eggs, and huge slices of cold leg of 
mutton, went down his capacious throat in 
rapid succession. He had worked hard and 
he was hungry, but he noticed that Winny 
scarcely ate anything. 

" Thou's off thy feed, dearie," he said 
somewhat anxiously, looking at his fair 
daughter. 

" Oh, no, father," she answered smilingly, 
" I have not been working like you, I have 
been doing nothing." 

The farmer shook his head, and Dorothy 
gave a little token of disapproval. 

" I wish you would employ yourself 
more, Winny," she said. 

Winny pouted. 

" Let the lassie alone," snapped the 
farmer, who would never allow Winnv to 



loa ON QOLDEN HINGES. 

be spoken to ; " she's plenty o' time before 
her to larn to be useful ; she's only orna- 
mental now, eh, Winny ? " 

With such feelings of admiring affection 
for his young daughter as these, imagine 
Riddell's rage, when after Winny had 
retired to bed, Dorothy quietly came down 
stairs, and entered the parlour and shut the 
door behind her. 

'^ What's thou want my lassie ? " said the 
farmer, looking up surprised by her entrance. 
He was in a good humour now ; he had 
already had two strong glasses of whisky 
toddy, and he had got his great boots off, 
and was enjoying his pipe and his weekly 
newspaper. 

"I want to speak to you father about 
Winny," answered Dorothy, determinately. 

"What's thou got to say?" asked the 
farmer sharply. 

" Only this," said Dorothy, " I wish you 
would see after her, and the young man 
Graham North." 



AT THE FARM. loi 

•' Graham North ! " repeated the farmer, 
and he laid down his pipe. 

" Yes father ; Winny has been carrying 
oh with him months and months riow^ a»d 
Tm uneasy about the girl, that's the truth. 
I don't like her looks — her heart's set on 
this young man, I believe, and I don't be- 
lieve he means anything — and I heard to- 
day " 

" What ! " shouted the farmer, jumping 
up from his seat, " anything against my 
girl? Tell me who said it, and I will tear 
his foul tongue from his throat ! " 

" No, no, father, nothing against *Winny ; 
but I heard to-day that this young man, 
Graham North, is said to be engaged to 
Miss Despard, of Castle Hill, and if there is 
any truth in this you should see after it^ 
for I believe it will just break Winny's 
heart." 

The farmer's face turned purple. 

"If I thought," he said, choking with 
rage, ** that this young fellow dare- ^" 



104 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

. " It's most likely all nonsense," said the 
sensible Dorothy.; "I've heard a dozen 
times Miss Despard was going to marry her 
cousin the Captain. But something should 
be done about Winny. She's not the girl 
she was ; she's lost heart in everything, and 
she goes wandering about in the dusk till 
I'm just sick of seeing her, trying to meet 
this young man, and it's quite time her 
father looked into it." 

The farmer sat down again and took up 
his pipe, and stared into the fire comtempla- 
tively. He was not quite unaware of the 
intimacy between Winny and Graham North ; 
nay, he had often indulged in secret hopes 
that his " bonny lass " was the chosen bride 
of the young Squire. He knew, of course, 
of the Graham North's embarrassments. 
But his family had been their tenants for 
two generations, and the farmer was a man 
who had saved money, and he did not mean 
his "lassies" to go portionless to their 
husbands. He was proud of Winny, and 



. AT THE FARM. 105 

he wanted her to be a lady, and, therefore, 
he had never interfered with her acquaint- 
ance with Graham North. 
' "And you think " he said pre- 
sently, puffing vigorously at his pipe, and 
looking round for advice from his eldest 
daughter. 

"I think you should just go up to the 
Hall and see the young man, and ask him 
straight out what he means," replied 
Dorothy to the unspoken question. " I 
would have it out one way or the other, 
and you may tell him from me, he is just 
breaking the girl's heart." 

" He'd better not ! " interrupted the 
farmer, with a savage oath. 

"He just is then," said Dorothy, passion- 
ately, " breaking her heart, and losing her 
character into the bargain. He has no 
right to go after Miss Despard; he chose 
to pick up with Winny, and he should stick 
to her, and it's your place to see that he 
does." 



to6 ON G OLDEX HINGES, 

The farmer took his pipe out of his 
mouth, and nodded his head twice. 

"I'll see about it to-morrow morning,'* 
he said, and Dorothy knew her father 
would keep his word. 




CHAPTEE Vm. 



AT THE HALL. 



Caftain Despard-s note declining to dine at 
Dillford, was handed to Katherine when she 
was dressing for dinner. The moment she 
read it she knew it was an excuse, for 
Francis Despard was not subject to nervous 
headaches, nor indeed nervous attacks of 
any sort. 

He did not choose to dine at Dillford, 
because she had told him she was engaged 
to Graham North, Katherine naturally 
concluded, and she felt sorry and vexed 
that he would not come. 

For in a friendly, almost sisterly way, 
she was fond of her cousin Frank. He 
had asked her to be his wife, but Katherine 
who was not in the least vain, did not 



io8 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

believe he was in love with her. He had 
asked her, she thought, because their uncle 
had left her the fortune which he had ex- 
pected, yet Katherine did not feel angry 
with Frank Despard for making this pro- 
posal, though she ascribed such an un- 
flattering motive for it. 

But as she went on with her toilet, she 
took herself to task after reading her 
cousin's note for being less cordial in her 
manner to Graham during their drive home 
from Castle Hill. She had allowed Frank's 
words to influence her, and now by his 
note she easily saw that Frank was very 
angry about her engagement. His words 
then had been but stupid jealous words, 
decided Katherine, and it was very unkind 
and wrong of Frank to have spoken 
them. 

So she went down to dinner determined 
to atone to Graham for her slight coldness ; 
she smiled very brightly when he came to 
her side, and the evening passed away 



AT THE HALL. . 109 

without any cloud or shadow between 
them. It indeed seemed a happy little 
family party this, when Mrs. Graham 
North, her son and Katherine, went into 
the drawing-room, and joined the old 
squire there, who never dined with the 
rest, as he required some one to feed him. 

Mrs. North had her arm through 
Katherine's as they entered the room, and 
she led her up to the old man by the fire. 

" Here is your new daughter, Graham," 
she said, addressing her husband, and 
putting Katherine's hand on the poor 
squire's shaking paralyzed one. 

The squire looked up with his sunken 
dimmed eyes at the face of the blooming 
handsome woman before him, and muttered 
some inarticulate words, and tried to lift 
his hands as though to bless her. 

Katherine was afiected, her sweet sympa- 
thetic nature was touched at this spectacle 
of helpless age, and she knelt down and 
kissed the squire's cold hands. 



I lo GN GOLDEy HINGES, 

Then the old man let them fall on her 
shoulder, and as he did so he spoke a few 
words more plainly than usual. 

" God — bless — and keep you," he said, 
*^and — and Graham." 

Tears stood in Katherine's eyes, and now 
Graham came forward and also laid his 
hands on Katherine's shoulders. 

" I — will try to make her happy, father," 
he said, in a tone of much emotion, and 
Katherine put up her hands and clasped 
Graham's as he spoke. 

Perhaps it was the remembrance of this 
little scene that nerved Graham to do what 
he had vainly tried to do the day before. 
At all events, before he went to bed that 
night, he forced himself to write to Winny 
Eiddell to tell her of his engagement to 
Katherine. 

It is almost impossible to describe the 
miserable feelings with which he went 
through this bitter task. But he had 
promised to meet Winny the next day, and 



ATTHEJIALL. iii 

how could lie meet her? At first it had 
seemed more easy to him. to tell her than to 
write to her, but now a strange distaste 
had come over him at the idea of seeing 
Winny again, and, besides, such a meeting 
miirht reach the ears of Katherine. 

So when all the house was still, he sat 
down to his desk and tried to frame in gentle 
words the miserable truth. He could not 
write, " I no longer love you — ^I am weary 
of all this wretchedness — forget me dear 
Winny." What he did write meant as 
much, but he told it as kindly as he 
could. 

** Dear Winny," he commenced, "I can- 
not tell you how unhappy it makes me feel 
to write you this letter, for I fear it will 
mg,ke you unhappy to receive it. But 
something has happened that it is but 
right that you should know, though it 
makes me very misei'able to tell you. I 
am anxious about yoti, and you will, I am 



112 Oy OOLDEN HINQE8, 

sure, believe that I shall always remain 
your friend, and that I can never forget 
our love. 

"You do not know anything about money 
my poor child, but I want you to understand 
that I am poorer than any roadside beggar 
that you meet, nay,' worse, for I am over- 
whelmed with debt, and the estate is mort- 
gaged beyond its value, and at any time 
my father and mother might be left with* 
out a home. This is a miserable position 
to be in, Winny, but I want you to realize 
it, so that you may forgive me; so that 
you may excuse me, and perhaps think 
kindly of me, even when you learn what 
I am about to tell you. 

"Dear Winny, you have heard of Miss 
Despard? She is a very noble woman, 
and she knows how poor I am, and hpw 
unworthy of her in every way, yet she 
has promised to be my wife. My mother 
wishes this very much, and Miss Despard 
is rich, otherwise I could not marry her. 



AT THE HALL. 113 

K I had been rich, things would have been 
very different, but as it is, I ask you to 
forgive me. I will never forget you, dear 
Winhy, but you must try to forget me, 
and be happy with some one more worthy 
of your love. Do not grieve about me, 
Winny; if it were in my power I would 
not act thus, 'but this wretched want of 
money stands in the way of everything. 
I promised to meet you to-morrow, but it 
is better that I should not do so now, 
and once more asking your forgiveness, I 
remain, always, 

" Your friend, 

" G. N." 

Graham North finished this letter and 
then re-read it, and decided he could not 
send it. He was ashamed of it, and, indeed, 
of himself. No, he could not send it ! 
Perhaps he had better see Winny — try to 
break his bitter news by degrees, and not 
write it in this brutal fashion. 

VOL. I. 8 



1 14 Oy GOLDEN HINGES, 

But he did not tear up his letter ; he 
locked it away, and spent a very miserable, 
restless night thinking of it. At one mo- 
ment he decided to keep his appointment 
with Winny, the next shrank back from an 
interview that he knew must be a most 
unhappy one. 

The morning found him still undecided. 
He went down to breakfast looking so pale 
and worn that he was forced to plead 
illness as an excuse for his appearance. 
As he did so his mother looked at him anx- 
iously, and Katherine with the tenderest 
pity. 

For she thought it was want of money, 
and that the family embarrassments were 
the cause of his uneasiness. " Oh ! if he 
were not so proud," she kept thinking, and 
when he rose from the table she also rose, 
and slid her hand through his arm, and 
whispered in his ear she wanted a word 
with him. 

What the word was we may easily guess. 



AT THE HALL, 115 

Katberine entreated liim to make use of 
some of the large sum of ready money that 
her uncle had left her ; pointing out to him 
that his interests were* now hers, and saying 
everything that a generous-minded woman 
could say to lessen the galled pride of the 
man at receiving sabh an offer. 

He thanked her ; he said again how un- 
worthy he was of all her goodness, and 
while he was speaking to her his mother, 
who had left them alone immediately after 
breakfast was over, once more re-entered 
the room. 

*• Graham, my dear," she said, speaking 
not quite in her usual tones of proud self- 
possession, " there is a person wants to 
speak to you for a moment. I desired 
them to show him into the library. 

"Who is it, mother?" asked Graham 
abruptly. 

" Some one on business, my dear, I think 
— some estimate of drainage, I believe," 
answered Mrs. Graham North with affected 

8—2 



Ii6 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

carelessness. But as her son turned to 
leave the room, after saying to Katherine, 
" excuse me for a few minutes," his mother 
followed him to the door, and closed it 
behind her. 

"By-the-by, my dear," she said as she 
did so. But the moment the door was shut 
her voice and her expression changed. 

" Graham," she whispered in his ear, " it 
is that man Eiddell — get him away as 
quickly and as quietly as you can." 

" Eiddell I " repeated Graham North, and 
he grew quite pale. 

His mother nodded her head. 

" Get him away quietly," she hissed 
again into her son's ear. "I will keep 
Katherine here till he is gone." And with 
another nod, Mrs. Graham North returned 
to the breakfast-room. 

As she disappeared Graham drew a deep, 
long breath ; he set his teeth, his hands 
involuntarily closed. He stood still for a 
moment, unable to nerve himself to meet 



AT THE HALL. 117 

his visitor. Then with a strong effort he 
tried to recover himself, and with a forced 
smile on his lips, he opened the library 
door and went in to talk to Farmer 
Eiddell. 





CHAPTEE rX. 



RICHARD RIDDELL. 



As Graham entered the library, the farmer, 
who was staring out of the window, turned 
round, and gave him rather a surly nod. 

" 'Morning, sir," he said ; " it's an un- 
common cold morning." 

"Yes, very cold," answered Graham 
North, "won't you take a seat, Mr. Bid- 
dell ? " 

"Well, sir, I can say what I've got to 
say standing — in fact, Mr. Graham, it's 
come to this — my eldest darter Dorothy 
sent me to speak to ye this morning, and if 
she hadn't sent me I'd ha* come myself." 

As Eiddell made this speech, he put on 
the extra rough air which a generally good- 



RICHARD RIDDELL. 119 

natured man often assumes when he has 
got anything disagreeable to say, and as 
Graham heard his tone the bitter know- 
ledge of his own shortcomings rose grimly 
before him. 

"If you wish to speak to me, Mr. Riddell, 
no one will disturb us here," he said after a 
moment's thought. 

" I do wish to speak to ye, Mr. Graham ! " 
answered the farmer, grasping the collar of 
his own coat, as if to give strength to his 
purpose; "look here now, I won't have 
any more carryings on with my girl Winny, 
that's the honest truth." 

Graham North cast down his eyes deeply 
embarrassed. 

" I am very sorry, Mr. Eiddell," he said. 

" It's no good being sorry, sir — we 're 
often mighty sorry after we 're let the cat 
out of the bag, but that doesn't catch her 
again ! Dorothy said I was to say — you 
see my old woman being gone Dorothy 
naturally takes the management of me, as 



lao ON GOLDEN SINGES. 

women will try to manage every man they 
happen to lay hands on — and Dorothy said, 
* go up to the Hall, father, and tell Mr. 
Graham you are determined to put a stop 
to him.' " 

" Mr. Kiddell " began Graham, but the 

farmer stopped him with a gesture. 

" Wait a bit, Mr. Graham, I'm not done 
yet with what Dorothy said — she said I was 
determined to put a stop to you — and so I 
am, sir. There ! I won't have any more of 
your going's on — that is, of course, unless 
you mean to go on for good ? " 

" You mean " 

" I mean marriage, sir ! If a man goes 
on dilly-dallying and shilly-shallying with a 
young woman, and means nothing but 
dilly-dallying and shilly-shallying, then 
he should be put a stop to, but if he means 
a proper end to his dilly-dallying and 
shilly-shallying, then that makes all the 
difference, and I'm not the man to inter- 
fere." 



mCHASD RIDDELL, 121 

•*I can only say — " said Graham, in 
visible annoyance and distress. 

" That you're sorry ? " interrupted Eiddell 
as Graham hesitated. ** Well, then, Mr. 
Graham, show you're sorry, and act like an 
honest man. You see, sir," and the farmer 
gave a fresh grasp at his coat, " the old 
woman having left us, I'm a kind o' mother 
and father, as well as father to our little 
Win; and then I'll ha' to answer to her 
mother for the girl when I m gone, for as 
sure as fate when I go after the old woman 
to the grave she'll be there ready to call 
me over the coals ! She did it all her life, 
sir, and depend 'ont she'll catch the first 
opportunity she has of making a general 
reckoning." 

And the farmer gave a grim laugh. 

Graham also half smiled. 

"Well, Mr. EiddeU," he said, "I have 
been very much to blame — I — ^I — ^looked on 
Winny as a child I think — ^I — ^I meant no 
harm." 



ia2 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

"But did it for all that! Look h»e, 
sir, there's a kind o' disea:se that gets a 
Vast o' fine names, consumption and the 
like, and which drives the colour from the 
face, and the lightness from the step, and 
the pleasure from everything ! It's a mil- 
dew, eating away the good o' the grain, 
and having what's not worth keeping. 
D'ye see young sir ? My lass is sickening 
o' this disease, and her step is heavy and 
her face is pale, though she used to be like 
the sunshine coming and going about the 
house! And what's done it? What's 
changed the girl and made her life dreary 
and weary to her ? I'll tell ye', Mr. Graham, 
a fine gentleman's amusement —you were 
idle; you had nothing to do, and so to 
spend the time ye' broke the heart o' my 
lass ! " 

"No, no, Mr. Eiddell, not so bad as 
that I " said Graham, in an agitated tone of 
voice, beginning to pace the room. 

"Something very nigh it at any rate. 



BICHARD RIDDELL. 1^3 

Dorothy said, * father^ tell him he's broke 
lier heart,' that was what Dorothy said, 
and Dorothy's a shrewd woman, a bit stiff 
in the back, and good fifteen years older 
than our little Win. But those were her 
very words." 

Still Graham kept pacing up and down, 
evidently greatly distressed. 

" I would give anything," he said, '* be- 
lieve me, Mr. Eiddell, anything, to undo 
what I have done ! " 

" Well," said Kiddell, as if considering, 
and he now plunged both his hands into his 
capacious pockets, " there's one way — I 
know you and the old Squire are precious 
hard up, Mr. Graham — ay, precious hard 
up — but for the little lass' sake, to bring a 
bit o' colour to her cheeks, and the Uglit- 
ness to her steps, I'll make a sacrifice. I've 
two thousand pounds and over lying at the 
bank, and if you'll marry little Win, I'll put 
two thousand pounds into your hand on 
the wedding-day ? " 



124 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

" I cannot, I cannot, Mr. Eiddell ! ** cried 
Graham, terribly distressed. 

" You cannot !" said Eiddell, very loudly 
and angrily. " You mean you won't, you 
young scamp, I suppose ? Cannot marry a 
girl you've been dancing after six months 
and more, and with two thousand pounds 
in her pocket ! I tell you what I think o' 
you, sir — I think you're a sneak ! " 

" You cannot blame me more than I 
blame myself." 

" Then why not act as an honest man 
and get rid of both my blame and your 
own ? The girl's a good girl ; good and 
true as gold, and with a bonny face of her 

own till you came nigh to blight it 

look here, Mr. Graham, if you'll marry 
her " 

Graham put out his hand deprecatingly. 
" I have told you it is impossible," he said. 

"What for?" cried Eiddell, almost 
shouting. " Tell me that, man ? Is it 
because the lass was born at the farm 



BICHABD BIDVELL, 125 

and you at the hall? You should ha' 
thought o' that before — thought of it 
before you came dilly-dallying and shilly- 
shallying, and breaking the girl's heart ! " 

" I am too poor, Mr. Kiddell," said 
Graham, more firmly. 

"Haven't I offered you two thousand 
pounds? A good price to pay, I think, 
for a dilly-dallying shilly-shallying fellow 
like vou!" 

Graham stood silent, frowning. 

" Won't ye' speak ? " said Eiddell, raising 
his voice still higher. " Dorothy said, 
* make him speak,' and I've done my best, 
but you are very contradictious." 

" I have told you, Mr. Eiddell, it is simply 
impossible," repeated Graham. 

" Then I'll tell ye what I think !" shouted 
Eiddell at the top of his rough voice. " I 
think you're a mean contemptible sneak! 
and if you are after Miss Despard, as they 
say ye are " 

But here the library door hastily opened. 



^ 26 ON G OLDEN HINGES, 

and Mrs. Graham North hurried into the 
room, holding up her hand. 

" What is the matter, Graham ? " she 
asked excitedly. "Mr. Eiddell, excuse me if 
I interrupt your conversation, but you are 
speaking so loudly I fear my husband will 
hear you, and you know the state of his 
health? The slightest excitement, the 
slightest noise, the doctors say, will kill 
him ! " 

"I don't want to hurt the old squire, 
ma'am," said Eiddell, lowering his voice, 
but still speaking angrily and sullenly ; 
*' but as for this young man '' 

" Please, Mr. Eiddell," said Mrs. North 
earnestly, " do not speak so loudly. Indeed 
my husband is very ill ! If you have any- 
thing to say to my son, do, I entreat you as 
a favour, say it some other time." 

"Some other time," answered Eiddell. 
" Ay, that's like his sneaking ways ! I tell 
you what it is, Mrs. North, this young man 
has behaved like a scoundrel." 



mCHAUD RIDDELL, 127 

"YOu can settle your dispute after-r 
wards," urged Mrs. North ; " do go away 
just now, Mr. Eiddell, I am in terror lesli 
Mr. Graham North should hear you." 

" Oh ! very well," said Eiddell, " I can go 
away when I'm asked ; " but look you here, 
Mrs. North (and he raised his hand threat- 
eningly), " if this young man dare come 
nigh my girl any more, well then I'll punch 
his head in, that's all, and no mistake, or 
my name isn't Eichard Eiddell !" 

" Please go away," entreated Mrs. North. 

"Oh! I'll go," said EiddeU roughly. 
*' Good-day to ye, ma'am — but as for you, 
sir" (and he shook his fist at Graham), "I 
know how I'll serve you if you come a 
customer any more to my shop ! " And 
with another threatening shake of his 
fist Eiddell at last went. away. 

As he closed the door Graham North 
flung himself on a chair, and covered his 
face with his hand. 

" What is all this about, Graham ? " 



128 . ON GOLDEN HHiGES. 

asked his mother eagerly, and trembling as 
she spoke. " I have suffered agonies, 
absolute agonies, for the last quarter of an 
hour. Katherine Despard would go to her 
own room, it is just over this you know, 
and as she crossed the hall she must have 
heard this wretched man disputing with 
you. Luckily I thought of 3'our poor 
father, or he never would have gone away. 
Oh! Graham, this is dreadful — too dread- 
ful ! " 

" I have deserved it, mother — I am what 
he said — no better than what he said!'* 
answered Graham without raising his head. 

" Oh ! Graham ! " 

" I have no right to speak to Katherine 
Despard," continued Graham ; " none, 
none — mother, I have no right to marry 
her." 

" Are you mad, Graham ! " said Mrs. 
North in strong excitement; "utterly 
mad! You have engaged yourself to 
Katherine " 



RICHARD RIDDELL. 129 

" Yes, mother," interrupted Graham, now 
looking up ; "I was led away — I forgot 
other claims — absolute claims upon my 
honour. I must tell Katherine — I must go 
away " 

" Oh ! Graham," cried Mrs. North im- 
ploringly, going up to him and taking his 
hand, " will you hear me ? Will you break 
your mother's heart? You know ruin is 
staring us in the face, and this generous 
girl loves you ; will give you all she has ! 
What right had you to win her love, to 
seek her love, and then talk thus ? You 
had no right — and — if in some hour o^ 
folly — you have promised what you can 
never do ; well, you must arrange things — 
surely you can arrange matters like other 
men ? You like Katherine, you respect 
her ? " 

" Yes, yes, indeed, mother." 

''Then for her sake, for the sake of a 
noble generous girl who loves you, keep 
this miserable affair quiet, and do not let 

VOL. I. 9 



I30 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

it reach Katherine's ears. Graham, here 
is a girl good, pure, and beautiful, and 
will you cast away her love for what? 
You have no means to marry even if you 
were so mad unless your wife brought you 
a fortune, therefore, what good would you 
do by throwing over Katherine Despard? 
Oh ! my dear, dear boy " (and Mrs. North 
went up to him and clasped his hand) '^ do 
not bring shame and misery on us all! 
Better make any sacrifice — if these people 
want money, surely we can borrow 
some ? " 

Graham did not speak; he knit his 
brows; he was wondering if Mr. Dixon 
could help him. 

" Say nothing to Katherine, at least," 
urged Mrs. North. " Oh ! Graham " (and 
she burst into - tears), " when you were 
born I nearly died — and I would rather 
have died — rather, far die now, than see 
you degraded and disgraced ! And nothing 
degrades a man like a low marriage ; it 



RICHARD RIDDELL, 131 

pulls him down to the dust, and generally 
leaves him lying there ! " 

" I am not going to make a low mar- 
riage, mother," said Graham moodily, " but 
I would rather be alone — I will think what 
it is best to do." 

•' Only promise to say nothing to Kath- 
erine ; if you will promise this, I will go ? " 

"Well for the present, I 'promise — I 
think I shall see Dixon " 

" To be sure," interrupted Mrs. North, 
drying her tears ; " see him at once dear ; 
he is a man to be trusted, and he will 
arrange this for you. I would go now 
Graham ; Katherine wants to see her 
cousin, who has some business arrange- 
ments to make with her, and she asked 
if he might come here to lunch, but if 
you make haste you can be back in time, 
and if you are not it's of no consequence. 
Shall I tell Katherine you are going to 
Normanton on business?" 

"Perhaps it would be best — I don't 

9—2 



132 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

care to see Despard ^yes, mother, tell 
Katherine I am going to Normanton." 

They settled it thus, and Mrs. Graham 
North went to seek Katherine, and Graham 
was left alone with his own miserable 
thoughts. How miserable these were he 
could not have told his mother. He paced 
the room with bitten lips and knitted brows. 
He thought of Winny, loving, devoted 
to him — almost a child — with her Wrecked 
life and her broken heart. But on the 
other hand there was Katherine, and the 
overwhelming embarrassments of his own 
position. He could not marry Winny ; 
he had no money to marry her, and in 
a moment of folly he had bound himself 
to Katherine. What could he do? Turn 
which way he would he seemed to himself 
no better than a villain, and yet he was 
not born to be a villain. He had been 
weak, he had been mad, he told himself, 
but he would have married Winny if he 
could. 



BICHARD BIVVELL. 133 

"Though but misery would have come 
of it," he thought sadly enough ; " a man 
wants something more than a pretty face 
on Jiis long-life journey — but it is impossible 
— and she, poor child, in reality, will be 
far happier without me." 

But he decided to see Mr. Dixon without 
delay. It was no use trying to see Winny 
now, for no doubt her father had forbidden 
her to meet him, but Mr. Dixon might 
perhaps be able to make some money 
arrangement with the farmer, if the old 
lawyer were to point out the absolutely 
ruined condition of the family at Dillford, 
and the utter impossibility of Graham 
North marrying any one unless his wife 
brought him a large fortune. 

With this vague hope Graham tried to 
comfort himself, and before he started 
for Normanton, his mother brought him 
a few lines from Katherine. 



(( 



I hear you are going to Normanton 



134 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

on business," the generous girl had written, 

" so please do not forget the conversation 

that we had this morning after breakfast. 

My interests are now yours, and there are 

many unused thousands lying at the Bank, 

to which you are more t.han welcome. 

I shall think you do not care for me unless 

you take them." 

" K. D." 

So with, this note in his pocket, Graham 
rode into Normanton to see Mr. Dixon, 
and to try what money would do to heal 
a broken heart. 




CHAPTEE X. 



A BAD BUSINESS. 



Katherine Despard was not displeased that 
Graham would be absent when she expected 
her cousin. After Captain Despard's note 
she did not wish these two men to meet 
until Despard had become more reconciled 
and accustomed to her engagement to 
Graham North. She had written to ask 
her cousin to lunch at Dillford, and she 
had added this little postcript after hearing 
from Mrs. Graham North that her son 
was going into Normanton on business, 
" Graham will not be here, so I shall be 
quite disengaged." 

Francis Despard smiled grimly when he 
read this postcript. It was just what he 
wanted ; he wished to see Katherine 



136 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

alone ; and here was the opportunity. 
So he sent one of the stable lads over to 
Dillford to let Katherine know that he 
would have the pleasure of lunching with 
Mrs. Graham North, " and my fair cousin." 

Katherine smiled when she read these 
words. After all she thought it was 
not unnatural that poor Frank should be 
disappointed. But he would learn to like 
Graham ; yes, she was quite sure he would 
like him, and then Frank would be almost 
like a brother to them both. 

In the meanwhile Graham was riding 
sharply into Normanton, with a hard set 
face, like a man determined to go through 
something intensely painful. 

He rode straight up to Mr. Dixon's 
office, but found the old lawyer absent. 
He was unwell, had a bad cold, the head 
clerk told Graham, and did not intend to 
" come into town " that day. 

Graham frowned when he heard this. 
Mr. Dixon lived at a pretty little country 



A BAV BUSINESS. 137 

house, some three miles out of Normanton, 
and there cultivated flowers, beos, and 
black pigs. Graham knew the place well, 
but hesitated to intrude on Mr. Dixon's 
privacy. Still the case was urgent, and 
Mr. Dixon was a friend as well as a lawyer. 
At last he decided to go to Briarfield, 
and soon found himself at the gateway of 
that neat and pleasant home. 

It was a large roomy cottage, standing 
in a big old-fashioned garden, and with a 
couple of fields attached. Everything 
about the place told that the owner was 
well off. His pigs were housed in lux- 
urious comfort, his bees had the choicest 
of hives, and his flowers and trees at this . 
bitter winter time were bassed and pro- 
tected from the frost by every possible 
precaution. 

It was a cosy spot, and presently Graham 
found himself in a cosy dining-room, where 
a splendid fire was blazing. The old 
lawyer was sitting reading the newspapers, 



138 ON GOLDEN BINGES. 

in a great easy chair close to the hearth, 
and a fine collie dog was lying asleep on 
the rug. 

She looked up and growled as Graham 
entered, for Jeanie liked no strangers, but 
the old lawyer looked up and smiled. 

"Why, my dear lad," he said, rising and 
holding out his hand, " whoever expected 
to see- you here! I hope nothing is 
amiss ? " 

" Yes, Mr. Dixon, I am sorry to say there 
is," answered Graham, and he looked down, 
ashamed and agitated. 

" Not about Miss Despard, surely ? " 
asked Mr. Dixon anxiously. 

"No, not about Miss Despard; Miss 
Despard is the noblest, the most generous 
of women — but — I am ashamed to begin 
the story, Mr. Dixon " 

" Come, come, don't mind me," smiled 
the old lawyer ; " take off your coat, Mr. 
Graham, and come and sit down by the 
fire, and let's hear it all. Jeanie, my 



A BAD BUSINESS. 139 

woman, be done that row. I'll ring 
for a glass of sherry and a bkcuit, and 
when you are a bit thawed, you'll tell 
what you've got to say. If it's not about 
Miss Despard we'll manage to put ^it 
straight." 

Graham drank his glass of sherry, and 
Jeanie, after sniffing at his knees and look- 
ing at him with her beautiful sagacious 
eyes, appeared satisfied with his re- 
spectability, and subsided again into 
placid slumber. Still Graham hesitated. 
It is easy enough to decide to do a 
painful thing, but the performance seems 
sometimes almost impossible, and it seemed 
so to Graham now. 

" Come, Mr. Graham, out with it," said 
Mr. Dixon, after glancing at the young 
man's pale, agitated face. 

Then Graham began. 

" I have been a fool, worse than a fool," 
he said gloomily ; " there is a young girl, 
Mr. Dixon " 



140 ON GOLDEN BINGES, 

" Ah, ah," said the old man, shaking his 
head as Graham paused. 

" I only am to blame," went on Graham, 
nervously ; " she is a pretty innocent 
girl — and we have been foolish — too fond 
of each other, in fact — and her father " 

"Her father?" interrupted Mr. Dixon, 
looking sharply up. 

"Yes, Biddell our tenant at Thornley 
farm came this morning, and wants me 
to marry her. You know it is impossible, 
Mr. Dixon ; it is not from any pride or 
folly, it is simply because I am penniless." 

Graham blurted out this explanation 
without ever once looking in the face of 
his old friend, and Mr. Dixon shook his 
head again and sighed when he heard the 
words. 

" It's a bad job," he said — " a very bad 
job." 

" It's a miserable affair — and then about 
Katherine — ^Miss Despard. My mother was 
most wishful for this, and, without thinking 



A BAD BUSINESS, 141 

of the consequences, I asked her to be my 
wife — ^in fact, I am at my wit's end! " 

*^ And did you ask the other lassie to be 
your wife too ? " asked old Dixon. 

" No, I never did — ^how could I? I have 
no means to keep a wife — but this poor 
girl — ^well, I fear she cares for me far too 
much, Mr. Dixon, and I thought perhaps 
some monev arrangement could be made 
with Eiddell. Would you see him? Tell 
him how utterly out of my power it is to 
marry her ; no one knows this better than 
you do, and if he will name any sum — I 
think I can raise it." 

" 1 don't like the business, Mr. Graham," 
said Mr.iDixon, very gravely ; " Eiddell is a 
violent man, and if he thinks you have 
trifled with his daughter's affections " 

" I am quite conscious of my fault, Mr. 
Dixon ; I would give anything to undo the 
past, but there it is ; I thought I would 
come to you ; you are an old friend, and if 
you would help me " 



142 Oy GOLDEN HINGES. 

"I would help you willingly if I could 
lad, most willingly, but this man Eiddell 
isn't an easy customer to deal with. I'm 
told he's a violent man in his cups, and the 
question is, is he a likely . man to take 
money in compensation for what he con- 
siders bad behaviour to his daughter? I 
very much doubt it." 

Graham was silent, and Jeanie gave a 
low, uneasy moan from the rug. 

" She knows we are talking about some- 
thing disagreeable," said Mr. Dixon, point- 
ing to his collie ; " ay, their knowledge is 
wonderful. Well, Mr. Graham, we must 
try to do something ; it will never do to let 
Castle Hill, a handsome young lady, and a 
great income slip out of our fingers without . 
a great efibrt. I'll see EiddeU ; let me see, 
I'd best write him a note, and ask him to 
come over here to-morrow, and I'll try to 
make some arrangement." 

"You are very, very good, Mr. Dixon.'* 

" I'm sorry for you, lad ; ay, ay, things 



A BAD BUSINESS. 143 

begun in jest, meaning no harm, but where 
do they end ? Well, well, the young will 
be young to the end of the chapter. So 
this is a bonny lass, this rustic love of 
yours, is she ? " 

" She is a pretty girl, and a good girl," 
said Graham, affected, "and it is the 
thought of the pain all this will cause her 
that makes me most miserable. I am 
ashamed of myself when I think of her. But 
you know the wretched state of our affairs." 

" And you haven't made them better, Mr. 
Graham, by this business. However, what's 
done is done ; I wish, I'm sure, no further 
harm may come of it." 

Upon this Jeanie gave a most melancholy 
whine. 

"Hear the dumb creature," said the old 
man shaking his head. " Hush, Jeanie, my 
woman, you needn't make things worse 
than they are. Well, I'll do what I can — 
m see this fellow, and Til drop you a line 
as to the result. In the meanwhile keep 



144 Oy GOLDEN HINGES. 

out of his way if you can, and keep as 
quiet as possible. I would have no gay 
wedding down here ; take an old friend's 
advice, get married in London, and let 
things settle down a bit before you come 
iDack. That soldier-cousin is down here, 
Tm told — that's a pity — ^he won't be your 
friend in this matter, you may depend ou't ; 
however, we must do our best." 

As Mr. Dixon was thus giving his advice 
to Graham, the very thing he was afraid of 
was happening at Dillford. 

Captain Despard had duly arrived there 
to lunch, and made himself very agreeable 
during that meal. He had seen much of 
life, and knew how to turn his knowledge 
to account. He was not absolutely clever, 
but he could talk well and amusingly, 
though the slight defect in his hearing was 
no doubt a draw-back. But he got over 
this somehow, and Mrs. Graham North was 
quite charmed with him, until he turned to 
his cousin and said with the greatest coolness : 



A BAD BUSINESS. 145 

"Katie, my dear, I would like a few 
words with you about our affairs, so if Mrs. 
Graham North will excuse us, and if you 
will put on a warm cloak, we might take a 
short walk together ? " 

For a moment Katherine hesitated, for 
she thought of Graham, and Mrs. North 
took advantage of her hesitation. 

"Don't you think it is rather cold for 
you to go out, Katherine ? " she said. " If 
you want any private conversation with 
Captain Despard," — and she looked at him 
with a smile — "there is a fire in the 
drawing-room, and no one is there." 

" Will that do, Frank ? " asked Katherine, 
looking at her cousin. 

Captain Despard gave a little shrug. 

" Just as you please, Katie," he said. 

But Katherine had now made up her 
mind. 

" I think a little walk will do me good, 
Frank," she said, "and so if you will 
excuse us, Mrs. North ? " And as Mrs. North 

VOL. 1. 10 



146 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

gave a good-natured little nod, the cousins' 
rose from the table, and a few minutes 
later were walking together up the avenue 
beneath the leafless trees. 

Not until they were fairly out of sight of 
the house did Captain Despard commence 
the " few words " he intended to say to 
Katherine. Then he began, putting on an 
air of sudden gravity. 

" Katie," he said, " I want you to forget 
for a few minutes that I have ever been 
your lover, for I am not going to speak as 
a lover, but as your nearest male relation ; 
your uncle, your father, anything you like 
— for it is on a serious subject. You 
told me you were engaged to this young 
Graham North; do you know the cha- 
racter he bears ? " 

"Certainly," answered Katherine with 
heightened colour. 

" Then, of course, I've no more to say. 
I'm not a saint, nor anything of the sort, 
but still I scarcely thought that my cousin 



A BAD BUSINESS. 147 

would have married a man of whom the 
whole country-side is talking." 

"What do you mean, Frank?" asked 
Katherine quickly. " If you mean that he 
is poor ; that they all are poor and in debt, 
I know that very well, but this is not 
Graham's fault ? " 

Despard gave one of his little shrugs. 

"My dear," he said, "I know your 
nature too well to mention his out-of-elbow 
condition, except as a means of doubling 
your devotion to him! No, they are all 
head-over-ears in debt, and the property is 
mortgaged up to the front door-mat, but 
this of course is nothing to you ; but I did 
think it might have been something the 
fact that he has lost a poor young woman 
her character, and broken her heart into 
the bargain." 

" Lost a poor young woman her charac- 
ter?" repeated Katherine with kindling 
eyes. " I do not understand you, Frank ! " 

" Ask him about a certain Winny Eiddell, 

10—2 



I4S ON GOLDEN HISGES, 

the daughter of one of his father's tenants, 
and see what he'll answer," replied Captain 
Despard. 

" Winny Eiddell ! what has he to do with 
Winny Eiddell?" asked Katherine indig- 
nantly. 

Again Captain Despard shrugged his 
broad shoulders. 

"My dear, it's not a pretty story," he 
said, "nor one I would have mentioned 
to you except from a sense of duty and 
affection to my cousin; but all the same 
it's true ! You ask him, and you refer him 
to me if he inquires your informant. In 
fact, it's the common talk of the whole place, 
Katie. And I'm told this young woman's 
father intends to kick up an infernal row 
about it, and swears he'll horse- whip 
your Lothario on the very first oppor- 
tunity." 

Katherine had turned pale as he was 
speaking, and a slight sensation of faintness 
came over her. 



A BAD BUSINESS. 149 

" Frank ! I cannot believe it — I will not 
believe it I " she said, deeply agitated. 

"You will find it's true," said Despard 
coolly ; " but talk of the devil — here he 



comes." 



Katherine looked hastily up, and just 
appearing near the lodge-gate at the head 
of the avenue, she now recognized Graham 
North. He was riding quickly, had indeed 
ridden quickly the whole way from Briar's 
field, for he was in no humour or frame of 
mind to linger on the road. 

It was past three o'clock by this time, 
and he could not help remembering as he 
went quickly through the frosty air, that 
almost at this very hour he had promised to 
meet the poor girl who loved him, at their 
old trysting place. But he felt sure that 
by this time her father would have for- 
bidden her to see him any more. For 
Winny's sake, for his own, it was better 
they should not meet again. 

He frowned when he saw Katherine and 



ISO ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

her cousin. He had hoped to have got 
quickly home, and to have somewhat shaken 
off the effects of the terrible annoyance and 
pain he had gone through before he saw 
Katherine. But now there was no help for 
it, and as he neared her he became con- 
scious that her manner was changed to 
him. 

True, she tried not to show this, but her 
eyes did not meet his with the frank look of 
love and affection that had shone in them 
when she had last seen him. Then, he 
glanced quickly at Captain Despard, re- 
membering Mr. Dixon's words. 

But Captain Despard showed no signs of 
any unusual emotion. He was as cool and 
as calm as when they had met him yester- 
day unexpectedly at Castle Hill. 

" Got your shopping done ? " he said, 
addressing Graham ; " Katie told me you 
had gone to that benighted spot, Norman- 
ton, on a business expedition ? " 

" Yes, Tve been there," said Graham, 



A BAD BUSINESS. 151 

and again he looked at Katherine whose 
eyes were fixed upon the frozen ground. 

" I called on my cousin ; I had got some- 
thing to say to her," continued Captain 
Despard, his daring defiant nature gleaming 
in his eyes ; " and as Tve not finished my 
say, I think, Katie, we may as well walk 
on — we won't detain j'-ou from any 
rustic tryst " he added with a smile and 
a little nod at Graham, whose face in a 
moment grew crimson, while an angry 
pang of alarm darted through his heart. 

"I am going straight home," he said 
haughtily ; " won't you turn with me, 
Katherine ? " 

Katherine hesitated ; she lifted up her 
beautiful eyes, she looked in his face. 

" If you wish me to turn with you, I 
will, Graham," she said. 

'*I do wish you. I am sorry to have 
been absent from you so long, but I was 
detained by Mr. Dixon," answered Graham. 

" In that case," smiled Despard, " I will 



152 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

say good-bye, Katie. I must start to-night, 
but I will only be at Edinburgh, you know, 
and I will run down to see you very 
soon." 

*' But must you go, Frank ? " said Kathe- 
rine, who felt ashamed of her want of 
hospitality to her cousin. " Of -course you 
will make yourself quite at home at Gastle 
Hill ? " 

" Thanks, your people are very attentive 
to me. Well, good-bye, Katie ; don't forget 
all my good advice," and with a little laugh 
he shook hands with her. " Good-bye, Mr. 
Graham North." 

The hands of the two men just touched, 
and that was all. Then Despard took off 
his hat, and turned away, and Katherine 
was alone with her lover. 

She felt embarrassed and agitated. Gra- 
ham got off his horse and slipped his arm 
through the bridle, and walked by Kathe- 
rine's side. She glanced nervously at his 
face ; she was trying to find courage to tell 



A BAB BUSINESS. 153 

him the tale that she just had heard, but 
somehow the words died on her lips. She 
said a few common-place sentences, and 
Graham answered them in kind. Then she 
drew a long breath. 

" Graham " she began. 

At this moment a country lad, flaxen- 
haired, ruddy and dirty, appeared on the 
scene. He scrambled over the iron fence 
that parted the plantations from the avenue, 
and loutishly touching his forelock, ad- 
dressed Graham." 

" Please sor, be ye Muster North ? " he 
said. 

"Yes," answered Graham. 

"That's for ye, then," continued the 
boy ; " and please, sor, I was to guv' it 
into your own hands, and get an answor." 

As the lad said this he produced from 
the pocket of his ragged corduroys a 
folded slip of paper, and handed it to 
Graham. A sudden flush passed over 
Graham's face as he took the slip, which 



154 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

was merely a leaf torn out of a pocket- 
book. Then he opened it, and read the 
few words written in pencil, in Winny Eid- 
dell's handwriting that it contained: 

" Come at once, Graham ; I am waiting 
for you where I promised — 1 must see you I 

"W. E." 




CHAPTEE XI. 



A TRYST. 



We must now return to the farmer when 
he left Dillford Hall in a towering rage 
with Graham North. He was a rough, 
passionate man, but honest, and he con- 
sidered he had been insulted. For years 
he had been the old squire's tenant, and 
one of the few tenants that had regularly 
paid his rent. And to think that he had 
been ordered out of the house I " As good 
as ordered out of the house, anyhow," he 
told himself, puffing out his red cheeks, and 
staring with his blood-shot eyes almost as 
if he were about to take a fit. He was 
furious. 

" That shilly-shallying chap, indeed ! " he 
said to himself or to the moorland, as he 



IS6 Oy GOLDEN HIXGES. 

tramped home choking with rage. *' What I 
he wouldn't marry my Winny, wouldn't 
he ? ' It was impossible,' he said ; I'll show 
him something else is possible! I'll break 
every bone in his skin if he comes nigh ray 
lass any more." 

In this strain, mingled with fierce curses, 
he talked almost the whole way to Thorn- 
ley. He had degraded himself and his girl 
he thought, and in his eyes Winny was a 
fit bride for any man. 

" Too good for him ! " he shouted, and 
yet the farmer was bitterly disappointed. 
He had secretly set his heart on this match, 
and he not unnaturally over-estimated the 
money he had offered to give with Winny. 

He had worked himself up to white heat 
by the time he got to the farm. But luckily 
Dorothy was watching for him. She saw 
in a moment by his face that his errand had 
failed, and she went out and pulled him into 
the dairy by his arm. 

" Hush, father ; don't say a word ; don't 



A TRYST, 157 

let the girl in the kitchen hear or she'll 
have it all over the place with her clack," 
whispered Dorothy in her father's ear, and 
Kiddell had the sense to hold his tongue. 

" Come and tell me in the garden," said 
Dorothy, for she knew no one could hear 
them there, and without another word the 
farmer nodded his head, and strode with 
his great strides across the yard down to 
the enclosed plot of ground, that at Thorn- 
ley they called the kitchen garden. 

There amid the frozen cabbages he began 
his story. He swore, he cursed, but he 
ended by giving a pretty fair account of 
what had really passed between himself and 
Graham North. Dorothy listened with a 
knitted brow. 

"He is going to marry Miss Despard," 
she said as her father paused. 

" Like enough," said Eiddell, " but I'll 
put a spoke in his wheel.' 

"It's shameful," said Dorothy, "but I 
always knew how it would end." 



158 OX OOLDEN HINGES. 

*' Oh ! did ye always know ? " said the 
farmer, turning in his rage on his daughter ; 
" then why didn't ye put a stop to it 'afore 
now ? " 

" Father, I've spoke to Winny over and 
over, but she never would listen to me. 
She thinks of nothing else but this young 
man ; her heart's set on him. I'm 
frightened when I think of it ; if he 
marries Miss Despard it will kill Winny." 

"Then he shall never marry Miss Des- 
pard ! " swore the farmer with a great oath. 

" We best let Miss Despard know," said 
Dorothy, after thinking for a few moments ; 
" folks say she is a good woman, and she's 
not likely to marry Mr. North * when she 
knows the truth about Winny." 

" But what is the truth ? " said the farmer 
fiercely ; " ye're not keeping anything back 
from me, are ye ? " 

"I'm keeping back nothing that I know, 
father," answered Dorothy, doggedly. 

" Well, you tell her," said the farmer 



A TRYST. 1 59 

after a pause ; " tell her I went up and saw 
this young fellar ; that I offered him two 
thousand pounds — down mind ye, and the 
times so bad I Tell her I said everything I 
could to him and he stuck out. 'It was 
impossible,' he said — those were his words 
— and the lassie must go nigh him no more. 
But best let Miss Despard know, Dorothy." 

Dorothy nodded her head. She liked 
her advice to be taken, and she began now 
to soothe her father. 

" ril see about it," she said, " and you 
better go after the men now, father, and I'll 
have a talk with Winny after dinner ; only 
keep things quiet ; it's no good making a 
clack all over the country-side." 

The farmer sullenly did as she told him. 
But first he went into the house and swal- 
lowed down, scarcely pausing for breath 
between them, two strong glasses of raw 
whiskey. Then he went to his work, and 
Dorothy began to prepare for the family 
dinner. 



i6o ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

Knowing how her father had been 
worried, she decided to give him something 
better than usual. To the cold round of 
beef which had been intended for the meal 
she added a fat duck, and took pains to 
have the table neatly spread. She was in 
truth a good daughter, and wished to calm 
her father's angry and excited mood. A 
good dinner she hoped would tend to this, 
and she and her servant were soon busily 
enofaged. 

At one o'clock the farmer came in, and 
the duck was not without its effect, washed 
down by the jug of strong beer, in which 
Biddell indulged. But he still looked so 
disturbed that his Winny noticed it, and 
going up to her father gave him a kiss. 

" What a cold nose !" she said, in her 
pretty way, patting his great red face, and 
the farmer turned away his head with some- 
thing like a groan. 

"What's the matter, father?" asked 
Winny kindly, but he made no answer, 



A TRYST, i6i 

only looking across at Dorothy, with a 
strange moisture in his blood-shot eyes. 

Then, after dinner was over, without 
another word to his girls, he lit his pipe and 
went out into the fields. 

" What's vexing father ? " said Winny to 
her elder sister, looking after him. 

*' He's been put out," answered Dorothy ; 
*' ril tell you about it later on." 

Winny nodded, and went singing upstairs. 
She looked very fair in her dark blue dress, 
with fur at her throat and wrists, and she 
felt happy and excited. She was going to 
see Graham, and that to her meant every- 
thing. It was pitiable, thought Dorothy, 
as she heard her sister's fresh young voice, 
knowing the bitter disappointment and pain 
that awaited her. 

Dorothy was a hard, sharp-tongued 
woman, but she shrank from awakening the 
girl from her sweet love-dream. She busied 
herself in the kitchen, scolding the dark- 
eyed Susan because her saucepans were 

VOL, I. 11 



1 62 Oy GOLDEy IIISGES. 

not what they ought to be, but in reality 
trying to find courage to tell her sister the 
hard truth. . It was not till close on three 
o'clock, when Dorothy heard Winny coming 
downstairs, that Dorothy went out of the 
kitchen for the purpose of speaking to her. 

She met Winny in the passage, dressed 
to go out. 

" You are not going out, surely, Winny ? " 
she said. 

"But I am," answered Winny smiling; 
" I won't be long — ^I'll be back for tea." 

But Dorothy laid her hand on her sister's 
arm. 

" Come into the parlour, Winny," she 
said, " I want to speak to you." 

"I have no time," said Winny im- 
patiently ; " it will be dark before I get out 
if you keep me." 

" You 7nust come," urged Dorothy sternly, 
and the unwilling Winny was almost forced 
into the parlour. 

"Do be quick, Dorothy," she said ; "you 



A TBYST. 163 

can tell' me what you have got to say when 
I come back." 

But Dorothy had now shut the parlour 
door, and leant with her back against it, 
looking at her sister. 

" Winny," she began, " where are you 
going to ? Not down to the river, surely, to 
seek Mr. North ? " 

Winny's fair face turned scarlet. 

" What have you to do with where I am 
going ? " she said ; " I won't be questioned ; 
open the door, Dorothy." 

"No, I will not," answered Dorothy 
determinately. " You wondered what vexed 
father at dinner, Winny — 111 tell you. 
Father went up to the Hall this morning, 
and saw Mr. Graham North — saw him about 
you. Folks are talking of you, Winny, and 
it was quite time for your father to see after 
you." 

Winny had grown quite pale as Dorothy ; 
spoke. 

" What ! " she said loudly, trembling 

11—2 



^( 



i64 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

with passion, " you sent father up to him, 
did you ? Then you and I will speak no 
more ; let me out this moment — I will go ! " 

" Stop, and listen to me a moment, girl ! " 
said Dorothy, now also fairly roused, " Yes, 
father went up to speak to this fine gentle- 
man, and he asked him to marry you, and 
Mr. Graham North refused. Father offered 
him two thousand pounds to marry you, 
and he wouldn't take it. There ! that's 
your fine lover — making a fool of you, as I 
always said he was ! " 

"Let me go!" said Winny hoarsely, 
and she tried to pull her sister from the 
door, 

" You won't go to meet him now, surely ? 
Winny, have you no pride left? Do you 
know why father went ? Because folks say 
he is going to marry Miss Despard ! I was 
told as a fact, an absolute fact, that his 
mother says he is engaged to her." 

Even Dorothy trembled at the effect of 
her cruel words. Winny had grown grey- 



A TBYST. 165 

tinted ; her pallid lips parted, but her voice 
seemed gone. 

" Don't fret about him," now went on 
Dorothy, with a rough attempt at consola- 
tion. " Come, Winny, get off your cloak, 
and behave like a sensible girl." 

But with a passionate gesture Winny 
pushed Dorothy away. 

" Don't touch me ! " she panted out ; 
" you've said enough — ^I will soon hear the 
truth ! " 

As she spoke she thrust her sister from 
the door, and Dorothy made no further 
effort to detain her. Nay, for the moment, 
Dorothy thought she better learn from 
the young man's own lips what he really 
meant to do. Perhaps this might bring 
about some arrangement between them. 
At all events, Dorothy let her go, and stood 
watching her young sister's tall, slender 
figure, wrapped in her long grey cloak, 
until Winny had disappeared out of sight 
from the windows of Thornley farm. 



i6o ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

And now let us follow Winny, as she 
almost ran through the dense chill air. The 
most overwhelming emotions filled her 
being. Fear, anger, almost despair, by 
turns swept through her heart. 

"It must be a lie," she told herself, "a 
horrid lie — and yet " 

The unhappy girl was recalling moments 
when there had been a cloud on Graham s 
brow ; when he had seemed changed and 
sad. He had always been kind to her, but 
lately she had noticed how dull he was, and 
how often he did not come to their old 
trysting-place. They had met there all the 
bright summer time, when the sunshine had 
fallen on the shining waters of the Dill. 
Then they had been happy — Gloving and 
beloved — and a vision of these days came 
back now vivid and distinct to Winny's 
miserable, frightened heart. 

She crossed the bleak moorland, she 
reached the glen, where the ice-bound river 
swept on beneath its frozen surface. The 



A TBr$T. 167 

ice was- rough and uneven, and in places 
the water overflowed it. Here and there 
the farmer had broken it for the cattle to 
drink, and a partial thaw had occurred 
during the night, and near the bridge 
below Castle Hill the water was rushing 
down with great force, sweeping the ice 
against the arches of the bridge. 

In the glen all lay cold, frozen, and chill 
The leafless trees, the broken sedges, the. 
rough grass, were whitened with the rime. 
No living thing was there. Winiiy looked 
up and down ; nothing moved, not a foot 
fall ; only the faint gurgle of the river 
beneath the ice ; only the throbs of her 
own panting breath could she hear. 

He had not come, then ! He had pro- 
mised so faithfully ; he had kissed her, and 
said he was sure to keep his word. The 
unhappy girl grew faint ; a deadly chill 
of disappointment and pain overpowered 
her. She sat down on the fallen trunk of a 
tree that the hoar-frost had wliitened, and 



i68 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

tried to recover herself. Something might 
have stopped him ; she would wait ; it was 
not even quite the time perhaps yet he had 
promised to meet her. 

She sat quite still. Over head was the 
leaden sky ; around her the dense chill air. 
She would wait till he came, she told herself, 
and while thus waiting she suddenly heard 
a footstep, and started half-frozen from her 
seat. 

It was not Graham. Emerging cautiously 
from the shelter of the trees, and without 
seeing Winny, one of the farm boys at 
Thornley now made his appearance, and in 
lad-Uke fashion crawled down to the edge 
of the river, dropping one leg over the bank 
with the evident intention of trying the 
strength of the ice. 

As Winny watched him a sudden thought 
struck her, and she felt in the pocket of her 
dress for a little note book that she 
generally carried there. She drew this 
out and opened it, and looked at the blank 



A TRYST. 169 

leaves. Yes, she would send a line ; just a 
line, up to Graham, by Jack, to say she 
was waiting. She must see him to-day, 
and she dare not stay much longer lest 
her father or Dorothy came to seek her ; so 
she made up her mind. 

" Jack ! " she called, and at the un- 
expected sound of her voice Jack nearly 
committed suicide, for he gave such a 
guilty jump that he lost his balance, and 
rolled over upon the ice, which, luckily, 
was strong enough to bear his lightweight. 

But his sudden disappearance frightened 
Winny, who ran to the river edge, but was 
relieved as she did so by seeing his lint- 
white head and grinning face re-appear. 
Jack, in fact, was playing truant, but he 
was not afraid when he saw it was " Miss 
Winny " who had caught him. 

" I'as slipped me fut," he said, grinning 
still, and creeping up the bank by the aid 
of the frozen tufts of grass. 

"You shouldn't have gone so near, 



f 70 ON G OLDEN HINGES, 

Jack," said Winny ; " your grandmother 
does not like you to go on the ice." 

Jack merely grinned again at this piece 
of information, of which he was quite 
aware. He had a sun- burnt, half-sly, half- 
vacant face, a regular country lad, in his 
dirty white smock, his dormant soul not 
yet awakened either by the schoolmaster, 
or the vague aspirations of untaught man- 
hood. 

"Jack," continued Winny, nervously 
twisting her little pocket-book in all direc- 
tions in her twitching hands, " if I give 
you a shilling will you do something for 
me ? " 

"Oh! Miss, I'll do any think for a shillin'," 
replied Jack promptly, and with a delighted 
chuckle. 

" I — ^I — want you to take a message for 
me. Ill write it down," said Winny hesi- 
tatingly, and blushing beneath the gaze of 
those round soulless eyes that were fixed 
on her. "You know Mr. Graham North, 



A TRYST. 171 

jdon't you, Jack? The young squire at 
the Hall you know ? " 

" I knows him," grinned Jack. 

"Well, I want you to take a message 
to him ; you must give it to no one else, 
do you understand ? " 

Jack nodded his linty head. 

"You must ask to see him," went on 
Winny ; " tell some of the servants that 
you want to see him, and when he comes 
give him the note — the letter, you know, 
into his own hands." 

Again Jack nodded, and for a few 
moments Winny turned away from the 
boy, and holding her little green note-book 
in her hand, wrote a few words with the 
small pencil she drew out of the pocket 
in the book : — 

" Come at once, Graham ; I am waiting 
for you where I promised — / must see you t 

" W. E." 

These words were soon written, and she 



172 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

tore the leaf out of the pocket-book and 
folded it. Then she turned again to the 
boy. 

"Now, Jack," she said, "you will be 
sure to give this to Mr. Graham North 
himself?" 

" Yes, miss, I'as sure," replied Jack. 

" Well, then, here is the note, and now 
you can go." 

Still Jack did not move. He took the 
note, he held it in his hand, but stood still 
staring sheepishly at Winny. 

" Why don't you go ? What are you 
waiting for ? " said Winny. 

"Please, miss. Fas waiting for the 
shillin'," said Jack. 

Upon this hint Winny produced her 
purse. She put the shilling in Jack's 
hand, and bade him make haste. 

" If you're quick you shall have another 
shilling," she said. 

" Oh ! my ! " grinned Jack ; but still he 
did not go. 



A TRYST, 173 

"Come, Jack, go," said Winny im- 
patiently. 

" Please, miss, Tas waiting for the 'tother 
shillin'," answered Jack, and when he had 
got what he wanted he scrambled off as 
fast as his legs could carry him. 

And once more Winny was alone. She 
walked up and down now, she sighed, she 
looked at the sullen clouds. Was it going 
to snow, she thought, it had turned so dark, 
or was it the gathering night ? Oh ! no, not 
the night 1 He had promised to come — ^he 
would surely come, and tell her how foolish 
was all their idle talk. 

With such thoughts the poor girl tried 
to comfort herself. She would believe 
nothing. Graham could not marry her 
because he was so poor, but he would 
marry no other. She was sure of this. 
How could she doubt him ? Her noble 
Graham who loved her, and whom she 
loved so deeply. He would not break his 
poor Winny's heart. They did not know. 



174 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

but she knew. She could see the very- 
spot where they used to sit together in 
the long summer eves, when the shadows 
used to darken around them, and all was 
silent but the murmuring stream. 

She remembered one night when the 
stars had come out, and Graham had told 
her their different names. How happy- 
she had been then, leaning on his arm 
and looking upwards at the dark blue sky ! 
Would such hours come again ? Yes, yes, 
somewhere, somewhere — perhaps Graham 
would go abroad, and she would go with 
him, and no one would part them any more. 

So up and down the old trysting-place 
Winny walked thinking of her lover. She 
started at each sound. But still he came 
not. Oh ! how long, long . it seemed to 
wait. Jack must be at the Hall now; he 
had time to be there and back again ; but 
then Graham might be absent — ^^to be sure, 
Graham might be away. 

At last she heard a footstep. She ran 



A TRYST, 175 

forward, breathless and pale, and there 
entering the glen came Jack, who grinned 
as he approached her. 

" Fas seen him," he said, pulling at his 
dirty smock 

"You've seen Mr. Graham North?" 
anked Winny eagerly. "Well, what did 
he say ? " 

Jack paused as if considering, and then 
shook his head. 

" He said — why 'naught," he answered. 

"He said nothiDg! " repeated Winny in 
dismay. " Is he coming then ? " 

Again Jack shook his head. 

" Didn't say," he said. " He guv' me 
half a-crown," he went on, plunging liis 
liands into his corduroys, " and — this'en." 
And as Jack spoke he produced a letter 
from Graham North directed to Winny. 

It was the letter he had written the night 
before ; the letter in which he had told 
her of his engagement to Katherine Despart, 
and in which he had endeavoured to soften 



176 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

his cruel news. He had added a few lines 
after Jack had given him Winny's note. 
Making some excuse to Katherine he had 
left her, and gone into the house, and up 
to his own room, feeling that nothing was 
now to be done but to tell Winny the 
miserable truth. 

He took out his letter, he read it in 
bitter shame. But Katherine was waiting 
for him outside ; he had no time to write 
another — it must go — but he added a few 
words. 

"Your father came this morning, dear 
Winny," he wrote, " and forbade me to 
see you any more. I have just received 
your note, and would go at once to the 
old place to meet you, but I fear to get 
you into any further trouble by doing so. 
Good-bye, and forgive me." 

It was growing dusk ; the girl took the 
letter in her trembling hands, and nervously 
tore it open. Then she began to read it — 
read on and on, the words that were kill- 



A TRY8T, 177 

ing her. She comprehended them; she 
understood Graham had given her up, that 
she was to see him no more ; that his love 
had gone from her, and that he was going 
to marry another woman. She forgot the 
boy was present, she forgot everything 
but her misery. She stood for a moment 
stunned, with her white lips apart, and 
then with a cry fell forward with her face 
upon the ground. 

The country lad was frightened. He 
thought she must be ill, and ran up to 
her, and pulled her by the arm. Then 
Winny lifted her head, and looked at him 
with her despairing eyes, 

" What is't ? " said Jack ; " I'd best git 
Miss Dorothy." 

But pale, stricken and trembling, Winny 
now rose, clinging to the boy's arm for help. 

" No, Jack," she said, in a faint voice ; 
" no — ^I want no one now." 

She looked up at the grey sky as she 
spoke, and then at the river gurgling be- 

VOL. I. 12 



1 78 ON G OLDEN HINGES, 

neath the broken ice. It was all over 
then — ^her life was ended — now she could 
not live. 

She stood still for a few moments, and 
in these moments she made up her mind. 
She felt for her little pocket-book again — 
how stiff her hands were, almost paralyzed 
— but she drew it out. She opened it, 
and scrawled a few words on a blank page. 
They were her farewell words to Graham 
North. 

" I will not live after your letter ; I will 
drown myself, and not trouble you any 
more. My father broke the ice this morn- 
ing ; he little thought he was digging his 
daughter's grave. 

" WiNNY." 

She wrote these wild and miserable lines, 
and folded them with her shaking hands. 
Then she looked at the boy, who was 
staring at her round-eyed. 



A TBYST. 179 

"Take this note to Mr. Graham North," 
she said, in a forced unnatural voice, " tell 
him you have seen me — tell him I got his 
letter, and this is the answer/' 

Even the boy's vacant mind now com- 
prehended, as he listened to Winny's husky 
tones, that there was something terribly 
amiss. 

"I'd best get Miss Dorothy," he said 
again. 

" No, no," and Winny shuddered ; " tell 

father " And for a moment she thought 

of the kind rough father who loved her 
so dearly. But no, she could not live, 
deserted, heart-broken. She was done 
with life, and she grew resolute in her 
despair. 

" Take this note to Mr. Graham North," 
she repeated, " and now, Jack, go." 

The boy took the note, but hesitated. 

" Mun' I bring an answer ? " he asked. 

" It wants no answer," said Winny 
bitterly ; " no, you need not wait." 

12—2 



i8o ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

Jack now left the glen, and Winny 
watched him as he went. Then, when 
he had disappeared, she flung her arms 
above her head, and gave one miserable 
cry. All her past life — its brief fond 
joys — its bitter, bitter pain — seemed in an 
instant to pass before her, and the next 
moment, with a despairing moan, she had 
scrambled down the slippery river banks, 
and was on the thin unstable ice. At first 
it bore her light weight, but Winny ran 
quickly on — on, on, till the ice began to 
crash beneath her feet — till she came to 
where her father had broken it for his 
cattle to drink, and here the water now 
completely overflowed it. 

She sank with a cry into the cold, deep 
stream, and the heavy current caught her, 
and whirled her eddying round. The tide 
was running swiftly down from the hills, 
and the ice was broken from this point into 
thin wedges or blocks, which were hurling 
down the river on the rough and swollen 



A TBYST, i8i 

water, and the miserable girl was swept 
onward with this frozen freight. 

She was still alive. Amid the dusky 
shadows she saw Castle Hill Bridge, and 
now she made a faint effort to sa.ve the life 
she had flung away. She stretched out her 
arms ; she tried to catch at the foundations 
of the bridge as she passed swiftly through 
the arch, but she tried in vain. Again a 
despairing cry broke from her lips — a death 
cry — for the surging stream overpowered 
her, and a moment later fair Winny Eiddell 
had disappeared beneath the black and 
seething tide. 



While the unhappy girl was in her death 
agony, the conscience of Graham North, 
the man who had caused her misery, was 
sorely smiting him. 

He had given his letter for Winny to 
Jack, with the desperate resolution with 
which we force ourselves to face the most 



1 82 ON GOLDEN H1NQE8. 

painful circumstances when they are in- 
evitable. 

He had seen Katherine's expression as 
he received Winny's brief note, and he 
knew at this moment that, in all proba- 
bility. Captain Despard had given his 
cousin some hint, had said some disparaging 
word, and that Katherine's suspicions were, 
therefore, naturally aroused. 

He made some sort of explanation to her 
as calmly as he could — the boy wanted an 
answer, he said — and he asked Katherine 
to excuse him for a few moments, promising 
almost immediately to return to her. 

Then he went quickly upstairs, and 
added the postscript to the letter to Winny, 
that lay already written in his desk. He 
had told Jack to wait for him in the 
avenue, and when he returned he found 
Jack there still, but Katherine had dis- 
appeared. 

Katherine, in fact, had gone into the 
house, feeling both agitated and alarmed. 



JL TKYST. 183 

Her cousin's story still ringing in her ears ; 
Graham's unmistakable confusion on re- 
ceiving the folded leaf of the pocket-book 
filled her with uneasiness, and she deter- 
mined not to wait for Graham, but to go 
to her own room, and try to think quietly 
of what Frank Despard had told her. 

In the meanwhile, Graham, having de- 
spatched his letter to the unhappy Winny, 
went to seek Katherine, his heart also 
filled with uneasiness. As he could not 
find her, he had time to think. He 
pictured to himself the poor child waiting 
down by the freezing river, and her bitter 
disappointment and pain when he did not 
come. Then the letter that he had just 
sent to tell her the truth. He bit his lips, 
he gave a half-groan when he thought of it ! 
She had loved him so dearly, this foolish 
little one, that he hated himself for causing 
her such cruel pain. Oh! could he have 
undone it all — that first meeting, when he 
had laughed to think that he had caught a 



i84 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

pretty girl admiring the reflection of her 
fair face in the stream — and that last meet- 
ing amid the driving hail and snow on the 
moorland, when he had kissed her and 
promised to keep his tryst. 

It was circumstances — the invisible but 
binding chains that gall us all, that clank 
their iron ring in our ears when we sit 
smiling amid the world — that had forced 
him — Graham told himself — to act as he 
had done. 

The more he thought, the more uneasy 
he grew. • Perhaps, after all, he had better 
see her ; it was cowardly to leave her with- 
out a word ; he could explain his miserable 
position better ; it might soften the parting 
if she thought he truly regretted it ? 

So, at last, he determined to go down to 
the dell by the river, and, if Winny were 
still there, to ask her in person, as he had 
asked her by letter, to forgive him. 

Having made up his mind to do this, he 
quitted the grounds of Dillford, and had 



I 

I 

I 

J 

■ 

I 



A TBYBT, 185 



s tarted on his way to the old meeting-place, 
when he saw the boy Jack come running 
towards him. 

Jack was out of breath, and had a 
frightened look, and, almost without speak- 
ing, he pushed Winny's despairing last 
words into Graham's hands. 



-«ii 



J^S5^-^?^-H^SHS|i^ 



CHAPTER Xn. 



A VAIN STRUGGLE. 



He read them, and his sin stood before him, 
face to face. He gave a sharp cry, and 
grasped the trembling boy by the arm. 

" Where is she ? Where did you leave 
her ? " he gasped out. 

"She's in the dene — ^yon down by the 
river," said Jack, pointing with his thumb 
in the direction of the Dill ; " she's awful 
bad." 

Graham asked no other questions. Thrust- 
ing the boy from him, he ran at his fullest 
speed to the lonely dell, where he had pro- 
mised to meet Winny, and failed to keep 
his tryst. 

When he entered the still cold spot, it 
was empty as when she had entered it. 



A VAIN STRUGGLE. 187 

There was no visible presence of the des- 
pairing soul that had left it, ready to face 
death rather than a wretched life. No 
visible sign — yet what was this ? Lying 
on the frozen ground Graham now saw a 
letter. He snatched it up. It was his 
own— the cruel words in which he had told 
her he had forsaken her ! 

This but maturally increased his horror 
and alarm. Flinging himself over the 
banks, he now got on the frail ice that 
cracked beneath his feet. But he ran on ; 
plunging amid the frozen sedges and keep- 
ing close to the banks, he at last came to 
the spot where the farmer had broken the 
ice, and where Winny had first sunk in the 
whirling stream. 

The water here was very turbulent. 
Each moment the river was pouring down 
more rapidly, and driving the blocks of ice 
faster beforei^ it, flooding the low lying lands 
and rushing with a strong fierce current 
towards the arches of Castle Hill Bridge. 



i88 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

Graham knew there was a boat-house on 
the other side of the bridge (Katherine's 
side), and as he stood a moment looking at 
the wild dark river, he remembefred this. 
He would run on and cross the bridge then 
and try to get help at the boat-house. He 
feared the worst now. He did not think, 
but a nameless dread and horror had taken 
possession of him, and he ran on with his 
strained eyes ever fixed on the rushing 
water. 

He could see now the stone foundations 
of the bridge. What made him suddenly 
stop and start and utter one cry as he 
neared it ? There, above the black sweep- 
ing tide pouring through the arch, he saw 
something light move and whirl ! 

He was quick-sighted, and as he looked 
again he tore off his coat, and plunged at 
once into the rough and rapid stream. He 
was a good swimmer, and he swam straight 
and direct to the point he aimed at, though 
the ice struck him and the current was 



A VAIN STBUGGLE- i8q 

very strong. But with his gaze settled on 
that moving thing, he battled with the 
water, and after a few minutes' struggle he 
reached the bridge. 

Again the thing rose, lifted with the tide, 
and Graham made a desperate clutch at it. 
It lapped down, and then once more rose, 
and tliis time Graham seized it. It was a 
woman's cloak — a long light grey cloak — 
and Graham recognizing it, flung forward 
both his arms, making sure that Winny in 
life or death was now close by him. 

Alas 1 he grasped the cloak, but no cold 
form beneath it. It was caught on an iron 
hook on the buttress of the bridge, and 
rose and fell with the eddying tide. 
Graham clutched it to his breast, forget- 
ting self in the miserable knowledge that 
at this moment flashed upon his brain, 
and as he did so, the fierce current swept 
over him, and dashed his head violently 
against the stonework of the bridge. 

He remembered nothing more. There 



190 Oy GOLDEN HINGES, 

was a whirl of water in his ears, and great 
pain, and he was carried rapidly on. But 
he was unconscious. What really hap- 
pened was this. He was swept through the 
arch of the bridge, Winny's light cloak 
still clasped in his rigid hands, and as the 
river bore him onwards he was carried past 
two men, who had just come down to the 
banks, and who were speculating leisurely 
on the probable effects of the flood. 

One of these men was Eichard Eiddell, 
the farmer, and the other Mr. James Gray, 
a neighbour, and a tenant of Katherine 
Despard's. 

Both saw the drowning man at the same 
moment, and Katherine's tenant, Mr. Gray, 
at once sent his dog, a splendid powerful 
retriever, into the water, encouraging and 
pointing out to the sagacious creature the 
helpless human being so sorely in need of 
aid. 

The dog breasted the tide like a brave 
and practised swimmer, and soon reached 



A VAIN STRUGGLE, 191 

Graham, and at once seized him by the arm. 
Then the retriever turned, and nobly strug- 
gling against the flood, drew his unconscious 
burden steadily on towards the shore. 

It was a wonderful sight, the dumb brute 
with his curly brown head raised above the 
stormy stream, and his brown sage eyes 
fixed on the point where he meant to land. 
The men delighted ran down the river 
banks shouting and encouraging the dog, 
and when the noble animal approached 
near enough, they waded into the sb allow, 
and drew the seemingly dead man out of 
the cold and freezing water. 

The dog clambered up the bank, and 
shook his curly coat, knowing that his 
task was done. The men carried up 
Graham between them, and as they did so 
they both recognized him. 

" Why, it's young Mr. Graham North ! " 
said Gray. 

"Ay, sure enough," answered Eiddell 
with a surly nod. 



192 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

They laid him on the rough grass, and 
Gray opened his shirt and put his ear on 
his chest. His heart still beat, and then 
Gray drew out his whisky flask, and tried 
to pour some of the spirit between Graham's 
lips and rubbed some on his hands. To do 
this he had to remove the cloak — poor 
Winny's cloak — that Graham's rigid fingers 
still closed on. In the momentarily in- 
creasing darkness, neither of the farmers 
had yet particularly noticed this cloak, 
thinking probably it was Graham's own 
light overcoat. But as Gray pulled it from 
Graham's hands, he uttered an exclamation. 

" Why, this is a woman's afiair ! " he said 
in a surprised tone, throwing the cloak 
aside. 

" A woman's ? " repeated Eiddell sharply, 
and he stooped down and lifted up the 
cloak and began to examine it. 

The next moment, a cry of alarm, almost 
terror, escaped his lips. 

" It's my girl's ! " he said ; " my Winny's 



A VAIN STRUG GLK 193 

cloak-here's her name written inside by 

Dorothy — where the devil " And he 

stopped abruptly, and actually grew pale. 

The idea that had occurred to him at 
this moment was a very terrible one, 
though not more terrible than the truth. 
He thought that Graham North and his girl 
had agreed to commit suicide together, and 
had thrown themselves into the flooded 
stream. 

"Gray! Gray! she must be drowned!" 
he cried in terrible distress. " I've done it ; 
I forbade her to meet the lad, and 
they've drowned themselves together. I 
see it now ! " 

" Not so bad as that, man, I hope," said 
Gray looking up. But almost in a state of 
distraction Eiddell now commenced running 
wildly backwards and forwards along the 
river banks, calling loudly on his daughters' 
name. 



VOL. I. 13 



CHAPTER Xin. 



GRAHAMS COAT. 



Eiddell's shouts and frantic gestures 
luckily attracted the attention of some 
men crossing Castle Hill Bridge, who came 
running to his assistance. 

His daughter was in the water, he told 
them, with his eyes literally starting out of 
his head. Then one man ran for a boat, 
and another for boat-hooks and ropes, 
while all kept looking eagerly at the stormy 
river. But 'mid the blocks of ice, the 
tangled stakes, and other " waste and 
lumber of the shore," borne down on the 
flooded stream, nothing was to be seen of 
the fair-haired girl, the farmer's pride and 
darling, whose appearance was so familiar 
to them all. 



G BAHAMAS COAT. 195 

In the meanwhile, Gray, who in the 
general excitement about the fate of Winny 
Eiddell had remained by the yet uncon- 
scious Graham North, now also began to 
call out for help, and a sort of extemporary 
stretcher having been procured, Graham 
was carried by Gray and two men to the 
nearest cottage, and laid on the warm 
hearth before the fire. 

The whole hamlet was now roused. The 
women heated blankets, and pulled ofi* 
Graham's wet clothes, and Gray dispatched 
a messenger to summons the village doctor. 
And presently some one ran to tell Dorothy 
Eiddell at Thornley farm, that her sister 
was supposed to be drowned, and that Mr. 
Graham North had been dragged out of the 
river dead. 

But the bearer of ill-news, who had run 
to the farm eager to be the first to tell the 
tragedy, found Dorothy had gone out, and 
therefore could only relate it to the good- 
tempered Susan, who at once began to utter 

13—2 



196 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

loud shrieks, and leaving the house to its 
fate, flung her apron over her head and 
started off to the river banks to swell the 
excited crowd. 

Dorothy in fact had become exceedingly 
anxious about Winny, and as the gloaming 
came rapidly on, she determined to go out 
to seek her young sister. She had only 
proceeded a short way from the house 
when she met the boy Jack, and stopped 
him to ask him if he had seen Miss Winny. 

Jack stood silent for a moment, medi- 
tating in his dimly-lighted mind whether 
to tell a lie, or speak the truth. He pulled 
at his smock, he wriggled uneasily. 

"Have you seen her?" repeated Dorothy 
sharply. 

Jack hitched his corduroys, and heard 
therein the clink of silver, and grinned. 

" Yes-s," he said slowly. 

" Where, then ? " asked Dorothy. 

" Down in Dill- dene ; she's took arful 
bad," said Jack. 



GRAHAM'S COAT. 197 

** 111 ? " cried Dorothy anxiously. 

"Arfiil," said Jack, shaking his head; 
" Fs wants to git ye, but she wadna let me 
— she's took a fit." 

" A fit ! " repeated Dorothy, shocked and 
alarmed ; " come with me at once, Jack, and 
show me where she is." 

Jack nothing loath, at once turned and 
ran on before Dorothy by the shortest way 
to Dill-dene. They crossed the moorland, 
and got down to the river banks as fast as 
they could. They noticed men on Castle 
Hill Bridge, but it was too dark to recog- 
nize them, and as they ran stumbling on, 
they both nearly fell over Graham North's' 
coat, which he had flung off below the 
bridge, before plunging into the river. 

Jack picked up the coat, and as he did 
so, a letter fell out of the open pocket, 
and fluttered to Dorothy's feet. It was 
Graham's letter to Winny, of which Jack 
had been the bearer, and which Graham 
had found in the glen and thrust carelessly 



198 OK ^hOLDEN HINGES, 

into his pocket. Dorothy now stooped 
down and lifted the letter, and in a 
moment, even in the dim hght, she saw 
it was addressed to her sister in the hand- 
writing of Graham North. 

Much agitated, she put it in her pocket, 
and bade Jack take the coat over his arm, 
and then the two ran on to the dene by the 
Dill. Here it was almost dark now, and as 
Dorothy nervously went forward, she again 
and again called out her sister's name. 

A faint echo up the empty hollow glen 
alone answered her. It was a ghostly 
place; white with rime and mist, and the 
black branches of the trees standing out 
gaunt and bare, and the gurgle of the river 
below the breaking ice. 

Jack pointed out the spot where he had 
left Winny. 

" I guv' her the letter," he said, " here^ 
and she fell down of a fit there" And the 
lad indicated with his thumb the two 
places. 



GRAHAM'S COAT. 199 

" What letter ?' asked Dorothy, who was 
now sick and faint with fear. 

"The letter Muster Graham North guv* 
me to gi her," answered Jack; "I guv' it to 
her, and she fell down, and then git up 
agin." 

"And then?", said Dorothy, full of 
dread. 

" Then she scrawled a bit line, and sent 
me away back to Muster North ; and I gi' 
it to he, and he gi' a yell ilike out, and ran 
oflf like mad." 

It was too dark for Dorothy in the 
dusky glen to read the words which with 
trembling hands she now drew out of her 
pocket, and tried to decipher, but the 
miserable truth dawned upon her mind. 
She made out a word or two — ^Miss 
Despard's name — then he had written to 
tell her, this man, thought Dorothy bitterly, 
that he was going to marry Miss Despard, 
and where was Winny now. 

Again Dorothy called out Winny's name 



200 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

aloud, and again the faint echo was the 
sole reply. Then Dorothy ran to the very 
end of the little dene, followed by Jack, 
and it became evident to them both that 
Winny at least was no longer there. 

"She may have gone home," said 
Dorothy, in a low frightened tone to 
the boy ; " we had better go now. Jack, 
and keep by the river-side till we come 
to Castle Hill Bridge." 

A great dread and fear had now fallen 
upon her. How had Graham North's 
coat with Winny's letter in the pocket, 
come to be lying on the river- 
bank? Dorothy dare not, even in her 
thoughts, answer the question that forced 
itself upon her mind. Trembling, and 
feeling sure that something dreadful had 
happened, she quitted Dill-dene and kept 
on the uneven path by the river, until she 
and Jack came once more in sight of 
Castle-hill Bridge. 

A strange sight now presented itself. 



GRAHAM'S COAT, 201 

Over the bridge men were holding lanterns, 
peering down, with eager eyes, into the 
turbulent stream below. Dorothy looking 
up recognized her father ; his face hanging 
over the bridge, his arms gesticulating 
wildly, and his whole bearing betokening 
the most violent excitement. 

Dorothy quickened her steps ; she ran 
on to the bridge, and her neighbours 
recognized her as she did so, and made 
way for her with pitying exclamations. 

She went up to her father, and touched 
his arm. 

" Father, what's the matter ? " she gasped 
out. 

Then her father turned upon her with 
fury in his looks. 

" Alatter ! " he shouted, his over-wrought 
brain finding some vent to shift the blame 
of his darling's death from his own doing. 
" Ay I ye may well ask ! Ye did it — ye 
set me on at the young man with ye re 
curst tongue, and this is the end on't ! 



202 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

They've drowned themselves — Winny's 
drowned, and the young man's dragged 
out by the dog, dead, or nigh dead, with 
my girl's cloak gripped in his arms ! " 

A great sob choked the farmer's utter- 
ance, and Dorothy fell back faint and 
trembling, supported by some kindly 
neighbour. 

But though greatly overcome, her eyes 
chanced to fall on the retreating figure of 
Jack, who had seen his master, the farmer, 
and who was conscious of having played 
the truant, having been absent from the 
fields the whole afternoon. 

As Jack sneaked off the bridge with 
Graham North's coat still over his arm, 
the strong common-sense of Dorothy's 
mind re-asserted itself. She remembered 
what Jack had told her ; she remembered 
the letter which was in her own pocket at 
this very moment, and then she looked 
again at her father, almost maddened by 
his grief as it was. How would it be if 



QRAHAM'8 COAT, 203 

he heard of his ^irl .slriick down after 
reading Graham North's letter ? How if he 
were to hear Jack's story, and perhaps learn 
from Winny's notes, which might be — 
which probably were — in this very coat 
that the boy was carrying, that his daughter 
had been driven to her death by her lover's 
cruel words ? 

As these thoughts flashed on Dorothy's 
brain, she raised herself up, still keeping 
her eyes on Jack. 

" How do you know about Winny, 
father ? " she said. " How do you know 
she is drowned? I will go home — she 
may be there." 

The farmer only swore at her by way 
of answer, and the good-natured Susan 
(Dorothy's servant) ran up to her mistress, 
and clasped her hand, her own round flat 
face wet and scored with tears. 

" She's not at home, mistress," sobbed 
Susan ; but Dorothy made a sign to her to 
say no more. 



204 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

" I will go and see," continued Dorothy, 
and she walked off the bridge as steadily 
as her trembling feet could bear her, and 
then seeing Jack was watching her, she 
beckoned to the boy. 

"Jack, come up to the farm with me," 
she said as the lad approached her ; " and 
don't talk," she whispered in his ear, 
" about Miss Winny to any of them. Hold 
your tongue, and I'll give you half-a- 



crown." 



Jack nodded his linty-head, and proceeded 
to make a delightful mental calculation 
of what he had got during the afternoon. 
Two shillings from Miss Winny, half-a-crown 
from Mr. North, and now half-a-crown 
from Miss Dorothy ! He had become a 
capitalist; his intellects were sharpened 
by greed and gain, and he became at once 
reticent and cautious. 

" What's thou carrying ? " asked a 
companion, eyeing Graham North's coat. 

"Mind thy own business," replied Jack 



GRAHAM'S COAT. 205 

with a self-important air. If poor Bill had 
but known he thought, with the happy- 
consciousness of secret wealth. 

He followed Dorothy up to the empty 
farmhouse kitchen, and by her request 
left Graham's coat in her charge. Then 
Dorothy gave him the promised half-crown. 

" Now, Jack," she urged upon him as 
she did so, "you must promise to say 
nothing to your grandmother, nor your 
father, nor any of them, about carrying 
letters between Miss Winny and Mr. 
Graham North this day. If you do more 
harm may come of it ; father's nigh mad 
as it is, and no good can come of talking 
now. If you hold your tongue, it will be 
all the better for you, for I warrant if 
father knew he'd thrash you within an 
inch of your life." 

Again Jack nodded. " I'll say naught,'* 
he said. 

" That's right ; now be a good boy, and 
go away, and I'll not forget you." 



2o6 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

Jack ran away with a joyful heart. 
He was not thinking of poor Winny as 
he went cheerfully home. He was count- 
ing his money, and considering how he 
could gain any more. 

After he was gone, Dorothy gave a deep 
and bitter sigh. This boy was the grandson 
of old Nannie, who had first told her that 
Graham North was to marry Miss Despard, 
and Jack's own sister was laundry-maid 
at Dillford Hall. 

Would the lad be silent, she thought, 
or would this miserable story be the 
common country talk? for Winny might 
not be drowned after all, Dorothy kept 
hoping against hope. The girl might have 
been saved; some one might bring her 
home yet, and Dorothy ran upstairs and 
lit the fire in Winny 's room, and got hot 
blankets ready, and made every preparation 
for her sister's return. 

But she waited in vain; she grew sick 
and faint ; she was alone in the farmhouse, 



ORAHAM'S COAT. 207 

for Susan had lingered by the river-banks 
in the hopes of seeing ''poor Miss Winny" 
brought to shore, and the whole male 
population of the hamlet had also gone 
down to the Dill, either to look on or 
as iist the " master " in his miserable search 
for his lost daughter. 

Suddenly Dorothy once more remem- 
bered Graham North's coat, and the letter 
which had fallen from it, and which it 
had been too dark for her to read outside. 

She lit the lamp; she drew Graham 
North's letter from her pocket, and in a 
few moments she learned the whole sad 
story. The young man in whom her 
sister's life had been bound up, had written 
to tell her he was about to marry Miss 
Despard! Graham's words came Uke a 
fresh shock on Dorothy's mind, though 
she had again and again said she was 
sure that Mr North would marry the 
heiress. But there was no mistake now 
— with his own hands he had written this 



2o8 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

letter to Winny, and as Dorothy re-read 
it, her face flushed with a burning flush 
of shame and anger. 

She understood it all; he had tired of 
the poor foolish girl, and this was the 
end of it! Dorothy trembled with rage 
now, and if Graham North had been 
present she could have struck him. She 
flung the letter down and seized his coat, 
and plunged her hand into one pocket 
after the other. In one — a side pocket — 
she came on some loose change, a five 
pound note, and the two little folded leaves 
torn from poor Winny's note-book. 

Eecognizing Winny's hand-writing, she 
eagerly read the two little folded leaves, 
and all hope died away in her heart as she 
did so; she utterly broke down, sobbing 
aloud over her poor young sister's last 
despairing words. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

" ben/' 

When the village doctor arrived at the cot- 
tage where Graham North was lying, he 
found him still unconscious. The doctor 
was a tall, sensible, red-haired Scotchman, 
and gently pushing the women who were 
crowding round the prostrate man aside. 
Dr. Morton at once commenced the usual 
means of restoration. 

These took almost immediate effect. 
Graham North opened his eyes, stretched 
out his arms with a sort of convulsive 
moment, as if endeavouring to reach some- 
thing, and then cried out a single word in 
accents of exceeding pain. 

" Winny ! Winny ! " he said. 

The women present looked at each other, 

VOL. I. 14 



2IO ON QOLDED HINGES. 

nudged each other, and the doctor also 
gave a significant glance at Mr. Gray who 
was standing near. 

" Winny ! Winny ! " again cried Graham, 
struggling to his feet, and waving his arms 
wildly. To his clouded brain he was still 
in the swollen river; still trying to save 
the young life that he had wrecked. 

The doctor tried to soothe him, and took 
his hands, and looked at him more closely. 
Then he saw that his head had been injured, 
doubtless when it had been struck against 
the buttress of Castle Hill Bridge, and that 
probably a serious illness would be the con- 
sequence. 

He accordingly drew Mr. Gray outside 
the cottage door. 

" This is an awkward business. Gray," he 
said. " Is the girl drowned ? They were 
clacking about it as I came in." 

" Her father says so," answered Gray ; 
" he says they tried to commit suicide to- 
gether, but somehow I doubt it, doctor ; 



''BENr 211 

more likely the poor lass tried to drown 
herself to my mind, and he tried to save 
her. He's to marry Miss Despard, I hear, 
and this poor Winny Eiddell and he were 
sweethearts this long time. But it's a fact, 
anyhow, when we got him out of the river, 
he had her cloak in his arms, and you see, 
his first thought was of her when he came 
round." 

" He's got a bad blow on the head," said 
the doctor, " not unlikely to end in some 
serious attack on the brain, and he must be 
taken home at once. It's not a pleasant 
office, Gray, but his mother will have to be 
told ; d'ye think you could do it ? " 

Gray cast down his eyes. 

" I don't much like it, doctor," he said, 

" but one has got to do unpleasant things 

often enough in this world, and if you 

like I'll go up to the Hall, and break 

it to the old lady ; but what had I best 

say ? " 

** Say there's been an accident ; no need 

14—2 



ai2 ON GOLDEN HINOES, 

to say anything about the poor lassie's 
cloak ; and, besides, what do we know ? " 

"Little enough," said Gray. "Well, 
doctor, I'll go, and I'll come back as soon 
as possible." 

" Bring a carriage with you to take him 
home," answered the doctor, and then he 
returned to his patient in the cottage, and 
Gray started for Dillford Hall. 

Both Mrs. Graham North and Katherine 
Despard had become very uneasy about 
Graham by this time. Katherine, unseen, 
had watched him from her window after he 
had returned to the avenue ; she had seen 
him give a letter to the boy Jack, and then 
apparently look round for herself, but 
she did not feel inclined to join him. Her 
nature was not a jealous one, but no woman 
could hear, unmoved, such a tale as she had 
heard from her cousin, about her betrothed 
lover. And then Katherine, not unnatur- 
ally, remembered at this moment, that she 
was a very rich woman, and that Graham 



''BE^\* 213 

North was confessedly a very poor man. 
She remembered also certain words that he 
had used when she had become engaged to 
him. " I am not a good man," he had said ; 
" I meant you to remember this as well as 
my poverty." Could he be referring to this 
poor girl? thought Katherine, and the idea 
was a very painful one. 

She felt so disturbed that she did not 
rejoin Mrs. Graham North in the drawing- 
room until that lady sent up to her to tell 
her that afternoon tea was ready. Then 
Katherine went down stairs, and found 
that Graham had not returned to the 
house. 

"Where can he be?" said his mother 
almost impatiently. " He has come back 
from Normanton, for the groom brought in 
his horse." 

" I saw him in the avenue," said Kathe- 
rine, and as she spoke Mrs. Graham North's 
clever eyes at once detected there was 
something wrong. 



214 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

" Where did you leave him then, dear ? " 
she asked. 

"A boy brought him a note that re- 
quired an answer," said Katherine colour- 
ing. " He went into the house to write it, 
and I have been in my own room ever 
since." 

Nothing more was said on the subject. 
Mrs. North chatted to Katherine in her -easy 
charming way, and complimented her upon 
her cousin's appearance. 

" I admire him," she said ; " he is the 
very beau-ideal of a soldier." 

" He is a fine-looking man," smiled 
Katherine ; " though I always think he 
looks as if he could be very cruel. I like 
Frank— but " 

"And what is the 'but,' Katherine?" 
inquired Mrs. North, also smiling. 

*' I do not quite know that I can explain 
my ' but,' " said Katherine. " Frank, to my 
mind, wants repose ; he is always in action 
as it were — he is not thoughtful — he looks 



''ben:* 215 

upon life as a drama in which there is no 
time for rest or reflection ; he is so diflerent 
to my dear uncle." 

"Mr. Despard was a very fine character." 

" He was a noble man," said Katherine, 
her fine eyes lighting with enthusiasm; 
" from my uncle's lips I never heard a mean 
or common word. He lived above the 
world, I used to think, and its worries could 
not reach him." 

"He loved you very dearly." 

" I am proud that he loved me, but he 
never looked for my fault ; she always tried 
to find good in every one." 

Here Katherine was interrupted by a ser- 
vant entering the room, and, approaching 
Mrs. Graham North. 

"Mr. Gray, of Newthorpe, wishes to 
speak to you, madam," said the servant, 
and as he spoke a sudden pang of alarm 
darted both through the heart of Mrs. 
North and Katherine. 

"Mr. Gray, of Newthorpe?" repeated 



2i6 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

Mrs. North, and she looked at Eatherine, 
who had grown a little pale. 

" He is one of ray tenants," said Kathe- 
rine ; " can anything — be the matter ? ** 
And she rose nervously from her chair. 

They both were thinking of Graham, but 
Mrs. North, long accustomed to command 
her feelings, showed the most composure. 

" I will go and speak to him," she said, 
now also rising, "Where is he, Jameson? " 

" He is in the hall," replied the servant, 
and to the hall Mrs. Graham North at once 
proceeded. 

Mr. Gray was warming his hands by the 
fire, but he turned round when he heard 
the rustle of Mrs. North's silk dress, and 
bowed to the handsome stately lady. 

" You wish to see me ? " sai'^ Mrs. North. 

"I am sorry to bring you bad news," 
said Mr. Gray, "but there has been an 
accident." 

" My son ! " gasped Mrs. North, her com- 
plexion fading to extreme pallor, and she 



grasped the back of one of the hall chairs, 
to support herself. 

"He got intp the river somehow," con- 
tinued Gray ; " there's a terrible flood on, 
but my dog Ben — a splendid fellow Ben is 
— dragged him out in time. Don't be 
alarmed, ma'am, he's safe enough at Job- 
son's cottage, and we've got the doctor ; 
in fact, the doctor sent me up to tell you — 
but the worst of it is, he has been hit on 
the head." 

" On the head ! " said Mrs. North, looking 
at Gray with terribly anxious fear depicted 
on her pale face. " You are not deceiving 
me, are you — it — it is no worse ? " 

"He's alive right enough, ma'am, if you 
mean that," answered Gray. "But he 
must have been swept by the current 
through Castle Hill Bridge, for it was just 
below that Eiddell and I saw him " 

" Eiddell ? " echoed Mrs. North. 

" Ay, Eiddell was with me, and I said to 
Eiddell, ' there's a man in the water,' and 



2l8 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

sure enough there was! He would have 
been drowned, ma'am, but for the dog. 
But there's not such a beast in the north 
as Ben. He'd take a prize anywhere; he 
should have a medal." 

"And — and he is safe?" faltered the 
mother, and then her proud eyes filled with 
tears, and without another word she ran 
back into the drawing-room to Katherine, 
who was standing pale, agitated and ex- 
pectant. 

"Katherine," said Mrs. North flinging 
her arms round Katherine's neck, " it — it 
is about Graham, but he is safe." 

Katherine grew faint, and began to 
tremble. 

" He has been in the river — has fallen 
into the river," continued Mrs. North in 
nervous haste ; "no doubt he has been 
trying the strength of the ice, and Mr. 
Gray says the current must have caught 
him and swept him through Castle Hill 
Bridge." 



" BENr 219 

" Through Castle HiU Bridge ! " repeated 
Katherine, with a kind of sob. 

" Yes, dear, but do not be afraid — he is 
safe." And again Mrs. Graham North 
kissed Katherine, while tears wet the cheeks 
of both women. " Come and talk to Mr. 
Gray, Katherine, he will ^W you," and Mrs. 
North puJt feer arm through Katherine's 
and led her gently through the outer- 
drawing-room into the hall. 

The farmer made his best bow when 
he saw Katherine, who was personally 
acquainted with most of her tenants, 
and now held a trembling hand out to Mr. 
Gray. 

" Good evening, miss," he said, " I've not 
come on a very welcome errand, but it's a 
good thing it's no worse. I was telling- 
Mrs. North here about my dog. You've 
noticed Ben many a time a'fore this. Miss 
Despard, but I'll warrant you'll notice him 
a vast more now, for he, and no other, saved 
Mr. Graham's life I Ay, that's truth now ; 



220 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

the poor dumb beast did what we couldn't 
ha' done, and he's come up with me to the 
Uall, and is sitting outside in the yard at 
this Very minute, and hell be proud if you 
ladies will go out and pat his head, for he 
has the sense of a human creter, and some 
vartues that do not seem to come quite 
natural to them." And Gray laughed. 

Katherine could not restrain her tears 
before the kindly farmer. Her love for 
animals was something wonderful; she 
understood the touching language of the 
mute appealing eyes, which finds an answer 
in every generous soul. 

'* I — ^I — know Ben," she faltered, " and — 
he saved Mr. Graham's life ? " 

" Just he and no other, miss — but ma'am 
(and the farmer turned to Mrs. North) — 
the doctor said the sooner Mr. Graham was 
in his own bed the better, and he said I 
was to fetch a carriage down to Jobson's 
cottage on the river banks there, and 
we'll ha' Mr. Graham home in no time." 



""BENr 221 

"Let us both go down for him, Mrs. 
North ? " said Katherine eagerly. 

But the farmer looked at Mrs. North, 
and gave a little sagacious disapproving 
nod. 

"If I might be so bold, I wouldn't 
advise that," he said. "Mr. Graham's a 
bit off his head with the blow and the 
ducking, and the doctor said he was to be 
kept perfectly quiet ; and, you see, if you 
ladies went, it might upset him a trifle." 
And again Gray looked at Mrs. North, who 
understood from his expression that he 
thought it would be unwise for Katherine 
to go. 

" I think we had better not, dear," she 
said. " Graham will be well looked after, 
I am sure, in Mr. Gray's hands, to whom 
I cannot express my gratitude — a mother's 

gratitude " And Mrs. North held out 

her fine hand, which the farmer respectfully 
took. "You and Dr. Morton will bring 
him safely home," continued Mrs. North, 



222 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

" and then we must nurse him, Katherine," 
she added with quivering lips. 

It was settled thus. A carriage was 
ordered, and whatever Mr. Gray thought 
necessary, and Katherine went out bare- 
headed into the court-yard, where the 
brown retriever was sitting thoroughly en- 
joying a bone that the cook had thrown 
him. Katherine called the -dog, who knew 
her, and came forward to be praised, 
gravely, wagging his tail with conscious 
self-satisfaction, at the same time his brown 
eyes wandered back lovingly to his bone. 
Katherine stooped down and kissed the 
dog's curly head, who now looked up, 
and saw her face full of emotion bending 
over him. Then Ben forgot his bone. He 
understood this sweet human friend was 
in trouble, and he did his best to comfort 
her. He licked her hands, he laid his big 
head against her dress. The dumb tongue 
could not utter the sympathy that thrilled 
his brave and noble heart. But mutely 



'• BENr 223 

he tried to express this, and the farmer's 
delight was unbounded at his favourite's 
sagacity. 

" Ay, ay, he knows well enough, miss," 
he said; " he's a rum beast, and I'll warrant 
he'll not leave his bone behind him either." 

But Katherine went into the kitchen, 
and brought him out something better 
than his bonei and Ben thoroughly enjoyed 
his well-earned feast. Then, when the 
carriage was ready, the farmer left in it, 
and Ben prepared to follow his master. 
He trotted out of the court-yard aft6r the 
carriage, but perhaps thinking better of 
it, a moment later returned, caught up 
his bone and made off with it, doubtless 
intending to bury it in some convenient 
spot, as a prudent resource against " a 
rainy day." 



>*o — *-$-:- 



OHAPTEE XV. 



THE LAST OF HER. 



They brought Graham North home, but 
Katherine Despard was not permitted to 
see her lover. 

" Best not, ma'am," said the Scotch doctor, 
with a significant nod to Mrs. Graham 
North ; " he wanders a good bit, and the 
quieter he's kept the better." 

The wisdom of this advice was soon very 
evident. Graham seemed in a sort of 
stupor when he was first carried into the 
house, but scarcely was he laid on his 
bed, when he became violently delirious. 
His face flushed, his eyes reddened, and 
he started up struggling with his arms, 
arid calling out loudly one haunting name. 

" Winny ! Winny ! " he repeated, clutch- 



THE LAST OF HER, 225 

ing at imaginary objects, and fancying 
yet that he was amid the wild waters that 
had swept over his young love. 

His mother grew pale and trembled as 
she listened. 

" Is he in danger, doctor ? " she asked, 
with quivering lips. 

"It is inflammation of the brain," an- 
swered the doctor, very gravely ; " he is 
seriously ill." 

Mrs. North scarcely knew how she lived 
through the next few days. At times 
Graham was violent, and at times he sank 
into a sullen silence, and sleep seemed 
totally to have left him. When he was 
excited he always raved on one subject. 

" Her cloak ! her cloak I " he repeated 
a dozen times in the day ; " it rises — I've 
got her. Fve got her ! " And then he 
would try to fling himself from the bed, 
and had to be held forcibly in by a strong 
nurse and one of the servants. 

At last, on the second day Mrs. North 

VOL. I. 15 



226 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

could bear her misery and anxiety no 
longer. She drew the doctor from the 
room ; she asked him in a husky whisper : 

" Doctor, what does he rave about ? Is 
there any reason in his mad words ? " 

The doctor, who was a kind man, gave a 
sympathetic shake of his head. 

" Folks say so, ma'am," he answered sadly 
enough ; " yon pretty young lassie, you 
know, at Thornley Farm, Winny Eiddell, 
disappeared the same afternoon as Mr. 
Graham was dragged out of the Dill, and 
one has one story and another another ; 
but it's a fact, anyhow, that her cloak was 
clutched in Mr. Graham's hands when he 
was saved by the dog." 

Mrs. Graham North sank down on a 
chair faint and trembling after she had 
heard the doctor's words. 

" I knew there was something," she 
faltered out ; " I saw it in their faces." 

She meant the faces of those around 
her ; the faces of those who had discussed 



THE LAST OF HER, 227 

the young girl's tragic fate downstairs ; 
who had heard how the miserable father 
had wandered all the long bitter night by 
the dark swollen stream looking for some 
trace of his lost child; how his strained 
and starting eyes at last had seen as the 
winter dawn spread its grey Ught over the 
wild river something — something that had 
caught on a broken stake ; and how the 
half-maddened man had plunged into the 
water, and brought this "something" to 
the shore. 

" It was the last of her," many had said 
with ready tears. It was poor Winny's 
velvet hat, befouled, crushed out of shape, 
a broken straw clinging to it; but it had 
been torn from the fair head — the weeping 
sister had recognized it ; the frantic father 
had fallen down on the river bank raving 
that he would see her no more. The fierce 
current would carry her swiftly to the sea, 
people thought, and all hope of finding 
Winny Eiddell's body was now over. 

15—2 



228 Oy GOLDEN HINGES. 

Those who nursed Graham North knew 
all this, but only one person knew — only 
Dorothy Eiddell — the whole truth of the 
sad story. She dare not tell the truth ; 
she heard with bitter satisfaction that 
Graham North lay desperately ill ; that he 
raved in his delirious fancies about Winny ; 
and she wished constantly that he might 
die. 

He had murdered her, she told herself 
each time she read in silence and secrecy 
her sister's last despairing words. And 
she was forced, too, to bear her father's 
bitter upbraidings. The farmer believed 
that Winny and Graham had intended to 
drown themselves together, and that the 
current had swept the dead girl from her 
lover's arms, leaving her cloak still clutched 
in Graham's rigid hands. 

Over and over he would repeat this, and 
half-maddened with drink and grief, would 
savagely reproach his eldest daughter, 

" Ye did it ? " he would say ; " ye're 



THE LAST OF HER, 229 

curst tongue did it ! " And Dorothy dare 
not speak ! 

She was too sensible not to know and 
foresee the consequences if she did. If 
her father were to know of that last sad 
scene in Dill-dene, she felt sure that some- 
thing terrible would happen. Eiddell had 
been always more or less drunk since the 
miserable night he had spent on the river 
banks, and when not abusing Dorothy, 
would sit in sullen, gloomy silence brooding 
over his wrongs. He also hoped Graham 
North would die, bitterly resenting the 
"confounded pride" which he beUeved 
had prevented the young man accepting 
his proposal to marry Winny with her 
fortune of two thousand pounds. 

So both at the Hall and the farm there 
was nothing but misery ; Katherine Despard 
also beginning to notice, as Mrs. Graham 
North had done, the expression of the faces 
of those around her. 

At first she had been told that the blow 



230 ON GOLDEN LINGE8. 

on his head which Graham had received in 
the river had brought on an attack of 
inflammation of the brain, and that he had 
to be kept perfectly quiet, and that no one 
was to be allowed to see him. In her real 
and true affection for Graham she had 
pleaded to Mrs. North to be permitted to 
stand at his door for a few minutes, so that 
she might have the poor consolation of 
hearing his voice, though she was not able 
to see him. 

But even this request, with tears in her 
eyes, Mrs. North refused. 

" My dear," she said, " it would only pain 
you; he raves of all sorts of things — ^no, 
no, we must try to get him well, and the 
doctor tells me there is hope, if he is only 
not excited. And then, Katherine, he must 
go away ; a change will do him more good 
than anything else." 

But little by little Katherine began to 
understand that he raved of things she had 
best not hear. She tried to bear the 



THE LAST OF HEB. 231 

miserable anxiety of the next few days as 
well as she could, but her position became 
a very painful one. She did not like to 
propose leaving Dillford when Mrs. Graham 
North was in such trouble, and when 
Graham lay dangerously ill. But on the 
third day after he had been brought home 
she received a letter that filled her heart 
with the most cruel pain. 

By this time Mrs. North's two young 
daughters, Lucy and Ethel, had been re- 
called home by their brother's serious 
illness. Lucy was a slender, dark-eyed 
girl, not nearly so handsome as her mother, 
but she had inherited some of the elder 
woman's characteristics. Ethel was barely 
good-looking, and the lack of beauty in 
these two girls sorely grieved Mrs. Graham 
North. Yet Ethel had attractions more 
lasting than mere looks. She was bright, 
clever amusing, and very good-natured, 
and was, moreover, a general favourite. 

The two sisters were equally delighted 



232 ON GOLDEN BINGES. 

when their mother had written to tell them 
of Blatherine's engagement to Graham. To 
Lucy this seemed to open a delightful vista. 
The want of money had already injured her 
prospects, she was perfectly sure, and when 
their brother was married to Miss Despard, 
there would be an end of this want. Lucy 
had planned many things in her ambitious 
brain when the hastily-worded lines reached 
them to tell them of Graham's accident and 
dangerous condition. 

She liked her brother, who was always 
good-natured to his two young sisters, but 
she felt very angry with him for tumbUng 
into the water at such an unfortunate time. 

" It was just like Graham," she confided 
to her sister; but Ethel took a more 
amiable view of the case, and said she did 
not suppose he would have been nearly 
drowned if he could have helped it. 

However, their mother bade them return 
home at once, and they did return. They 
were staying at a pleasant country house, 



THE LAST OF HER. 233 

where Ethel had been the life of the party, 
and every one was sorry to lose her. Lucy 
was not so generally liked ; she was very 
agreeable, but people are apt to find out 
from what cause agreeability springs. 

They returned to a gloomy household. 
Graham was no better, their father was 
more ailing than usual, and Katherine 
Despard was so nervous and depressed, 
and so unlike herself, that Lucy glanced at 
her in surprise. 

" If I were in her position," she thought, 
" nothing would make me look so miser- 
able." 

Katherine, in trutli, for the first time in 
her fortunate and happy life, did feel utterly 
miserable. She was anxious and unhappy 
about Graham North, to whom she had 
given her warm, true heart, and in addition 
to this natural grief the bitter knowledge 
had just reached her of the tragic death of 
Winny Eiddell, and its supposed connection 
with Graham's illness. 



234 Oy GOLDEN HIN&E8. 

This news had been conveyed to her 
in a letter from her cousin, Frank Despard, 
who was now stationed at Edinburgh, and 
had only reached her on the morning of the 
day that Lucy and Ethel had returned 
home. 

*'Dear Katie" (Captain Despard had 
written), " I address this to Dillford, as my 
correspondent at Castle Hill, old Ben, 
informs me you are still the guest of Mrs. 
Graham North. But I suppose, after the 
terrible scandal now attached to his name, 
you will not continue your engagement to 
her son ? You know the storv I conclude 
— of course, you know it — and yet Madam 
North, who has her sharp wits ever about 
her, may not have allowed the unvarnished 
tale to reach your ears. I am your cousin 
and friend if nothing more, and it seems to 
me that it is plainly my duty to tell you the 
truth if you do not already know it. Old 
Ben writes to me that on the afternoon 



THE LAST OF HES, 235 

when I left Castle Hill (I started shortly 
after parting with you at Dillford) that the 
unfortunate young girl, Winny Eiddell, 
who is supposed to have loved Graham 
North, " not wisely, but too well," drowned 
herself in the Dill, after hearing of his 
engagement to you ; and Graham North 
either saw the poor wretch, or fancied he 
saw her, in the river, and, in trymg to save 
her, got struck on the head, and was 
dragged out of the water, half dead, by a 
dog belonging to your tenant. Gray. 

** Has your proposed mother-in-law told 
you all this ? Has she told you that it is a 
fact that this foolish young woman's cloak 
was found tightly clutched in your 
Graham's arms when he was pulled out 
of the Dill ? There is a touch of romance 
about the situation certainly ! But it hurts 
my family pride a bit to think that your 
name should be mixed up with such a story. 
Take my advice, dear Katie — the advice of 
a man who has seen a good deal of life 



236 ON GOLDEN SINGES 

who does not set up to be a saint, and yet 
who has no such ugly blot as this upon his 
reputation — don't you marry Graham North. 
Only a bad man would have acted as he 
has done, and I do not care to see my 
cousin married to a bad man. Write and 
tell me you are going to be a wise girl, and 
believe me to remain yours affectionately, 

"F. Despard" 




CHAPTER XVI. 

MAKING THE BEST OF IT. 

This letter from Captain Despard was not a 
pleasant letter to receive, and Katherine 
had only received it about an hour before 
she was called downstairs to welcome the 
two sisters on their return to Dillford. No 
wonder then that her hands trembled, and 
her face felt very cold when the girls kissed 
her. 

" He's sure to get all right," said Lucy 
aloud by way of consolation, while she 
privately wondered how so lucky a person 
as Katherine Despard could distress herself 
so much about anything. 

Ethel, or " Eth," as she was called in the 
family, said nothing. But she looked at 
Katherine in her kind, sympathetic way, 



238 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

and again kissed her pale cheeks. Then 
Mrs. Graham North entered the room, and 
the girls naturally made many inquiries 
about their brother. 

" But however did it happen, mother ? " 
said Lucy. 

"I suppose he must have gone on the 
ice, and it had not been strong enough to 
bear him," answered Mrs. Graham Noith. 
** Katherine had been walking with him just 
a little while before." And Mrs. Graham 
North looked at Katherine as she spoke. 

But ithe moment that the quick-witted 
woman did so, she saw by Katherine's ex- 
pression, by her embarrassment and ner- 
vousness, that something had reached her 
ears about Graham's accident that the fond 
mother had hoped to hide. Katherine in- 
deed cast down her eyes and bit her lips. 
The letter that had alike so deeply wounded 
her affection and her pride was in the pocket 
of her dress. She remembered at this mo- 
ment her cousin's allusions to Mrs. Graham 



MAKING THE BEST OF IT. 239 

North ; she wondered how far his judgment 
might be true ? 

" Did he say anything to you about going 
on the ice ? " now asked Lucy, turning to 
Katherine. 

" No," said Katherine, still without look- 
ing up, and the girl at once also saw that 
something was greatly disturbing Katherine 
as well as her anxiety about Graham. 

" I must go back to my charge," said 
Mrs. Graham North the next minute. She 
wished in truth to have a moment to her- 
self to think ; she was too shrewd not to 
face a danger. " Some one has been telling 
her about this wretched girl," she thought. 
** I may as well try to soften the story." 

She went to her own bed-room and stood 
looking out on the storm-rocked ever- 
greens on the lawn for a little while. She 
was deciding what to say. Then she rang 
for her maid, and bade her ask Miss Des- 
pard to be good enough to come upstairs to 
speak to her for a few moments. 



240 ON GOLDEN HISGE8, 

Presently Katlierine entered the room, 
and Mrs. Graham North at once went up 
to her and took her hand. 

" My dear," she said, in her calm gracious 
way, still holding Katherine's trembling 
hand, "I saw downstairs that something 
was distressing you, but of course I could 
not ask you what it was before the girls. 
What is it, Katherine ? Has any one been 
telling you this absurd story they have 
got up about Graham's accident and the 
poor girl who has been drowned in the 
Dill ? " 

"I — I — have heard it, Mrs. North,'* 
faltered Katherine. 

" You cannot surely believe it ? " said 
Mrs. North. " The poor girl, no doubt, 
had foolishly ventured on the ice, and 
Graham had seen her and tried to save her, 
and the current had overpowered him. 
They say her cloak was clutched in his 
hands when the dog dragged him out. I 
think he must have had hold of her, poor 



MAKING THE BEST OF IT. 241 

soul, and then the blow on his head had 
made him insensible." 

Mrs. Graham North said all this in the 
calmest way. She almost believed what 
she was saying. Was this not indeed the 
most natural solution of this poor creature's 
end? 

But Katherine did not speak. She could 
not forget the story her cousin had told her 
before such tragic ending had come to it ; 
she could not forget Graham's look of 
agitation and annoyance when the country 
boy had placed the little pencilled note in 
his hand. 

" What have you heard, Katherine ? " 
now asked Mrs. Graham North almost 
sharply. 

"That — that this poor girl committed 
suicide," said Katherine, deeply moved ; 
" that Graham had been her lover, and 
that when she heard of our engage- 
ment " 

Here Katherine's voice broke ; her eyes 

VOL. I. 16 



242 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

filled with tears, and she became greatly 
agitated. 

" Who told you this, Katherine ? " said 
Mrs. North, after a moment's silence. 

" I — I — do not know whether I am justi- 
fied in telling you," answered Katherine, 
still greatly overcome. " It has made me 
most miserable. It was my cousin Frank 
who told me. Had I known, Mrs. North, 
nothing would have induced me to wrong 
this unhappy girl." 

"And so Captain Despard told you 
this?" said Mrs. North. "Did he not 
want to marry you, Katherine? — people 
say that he did, and I suppose he wished to 
injure Graham in your regard. I will tell 
you all I know, and I believe I know the 
truth. This poor girl, Winny Erddell, is the 
daughter of one of our tenants, and 
Graham has known her since she was a little 
child. She was rather pretty, I believe, and 
I fear a vain, foolish girl, and sometimes 
Graham used to talk to her by the river 



MAKING THE BEST OF IT, 243 

when he was fishing, last spring and in the 
summer. People began to gossip about 
them ; you know how little it requires in the 
country to make people do this — and her 
father actually came to Graham and wanted 
him to marry her, and offered him a fortune 
with his daughter, for the farmer is rich. 
Did you ever hear anything so monstroijis ! 
Of course Graham told him it was im- 
possible ; and this foolish man, I'm told, 
insists that Graham, actually Graham^ tried 
to drown himself with this silly girl ! All 
the foundation for the whole story is that 
her cloak was in Graham's hands when he 
was dragged out of the river. Of course, 
the truth is simply she had been trying to 
skate or slide — she was always a bold girl 
— and the ice had given way, and she had 
got into the water, and Graham had seen 
her, and in trying to save her life very 
nearly lost his own." 

As Katherine listened, this did not seem 

to her the most likely way to account for 

16—2 



244 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

the poor girl's death. Mrs. North also told 
her story well. 

"Graham was not a likely man to 
commit suicide/' added Mrs. North, with a 
proud smile stealing over her handsome 
face, " for the sake of a girl like this. He 
loves you very dearly, Katherine ; it was 
his poverty alone that prevented him ask- 
ing you to marry him before. He has 
often told me this — he is so proud — you 
are rich, and he is poor, and he could not 
bear you to suspect him of any unworthy 
motive." 

" I have never done that, Mrs.- North, 
never I " said Katherine energetically. 

" It was not like your noble nature to do 
so, nor is it like it now, Katherine " (and 
Mrs. Graham North again smiled her proud 
smile), "to believe the idle gossip of a 
country hamlet. How did your cousin 
hear this story ? He is in Edinburgh, is he 
not ? " 

" He writes to old Ben, my coachman. 



MAKING THE BEST OF IT 245 

about the horses, I think," answered Kathe- 
rine with a blush, for she was beginning to 
be ashamed of her cousin. " You see, Ben 
was in his father's regiment." 

Mrs. Graham gave a significant little 
shrug of her stately shoulders. 

"Excellent authority," she said; "the 
stable-boy's news. I suspect, my dear, your 
old Ben is devoted to your soldier-cousin, 
and highly disappointed that you are not 
going to marry him." 

Katherine gave a little smile. 

" Perhaps he is," she said. " Ben is de- 
voted to Frank — but Frank should not 
have written as he has done without being 
quite sure he was writing the truth. But I 
suppose there is no doubt that this poor 
gh-l is drowned?" 

" I fear that is only too true," replied 
Mrs. Graham North with a sigh. " Yes, I 
am told, my good friend the Scotch doctor 
tells me, that there is little hope now that 
her body will ever be recovered. They 



^^■i^^-fli 



346 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

liave found her hat, poor soul; it had 
caught on a stake that the flood had 
carried down the river. It is a very sad 
afiair." 

" It is more than sad," said Katherine. 
She turned away her head; she did not 
care that Mrs. North should see the tears 
again gather in her eyes, as she thought of 
the young girFs mournful fate. 

"If only my boy gets well," said the 
mother. " The inflammation is subsiding, 
the doctor says, and if there are no evil 
after efiects left on the brain, Graham in a 
short while will be himself again. But he 
must have no shocks — everything painful 
must be kept from his knowledge — it might 
end in madness if he were worried or ex- 
cited ! Katherine, my dear, my dear, you 
must help me to save my son!" 

Again Mrs. North took Katherine's 
hands, and looked imploringly in her face. 
She was really afiected. Her love for her 
handsome son; the son on whom all her 



MAKING THE BEST OF IT, 247 

hopes were fixed, was the strongest feeling 
of her heart. And now if anything were 
to happen to Graham, it would kill her, 
she told herself. 

And her feelings were but natural. On 
Graham's life and reason hung the very 
social existence of the family. No one 
knew better than the mother how utterly 
ruined in fortune the Graham North's really 
were. Even the money on which they 
were at present living was borrowed from 
the old lawyer, Mr. Dixon. Mrs. Graham 
North also knew the world well; she 
knew it was a vast mart where the 
possession of wealth is estimated above 
all other gifts, for it can purchase the rest. 
The only disagreeable thing indeed that 
rich people are compelled to do here is to 
die. But poor people have disagreeable 
things to do every day of their lives. 
Perhaps they have the best of it at the 
end, if through the shadows they can see 
another dawn. 



248 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

But Mrs. Graham North loved the world's 
highest pinnacles, and hated the lowly and 
uneasy seat she was obliged to occupy. 
She had been the wife of a poor man all 
her Ufe, and it made her miserable. When 
in her lovely girlhood, the handsome young 
squire of Dillford had come to woo her, 
she had accepted him without ever dream- 
ing that the owner of so many broad acres 
was already an impoverished man. 

Impecuniosity had indeed come to Mr. 
Graham North as a heritage. His father 
before him had already partly mortgaged 
the property, and the kindly warm-hearted 
squire had not sought a wife with a fortune, 
nor had he sought one who was economical 
or saving. Mrs. Graham North was a 
handsome woman, and she had never 
spared anything on her personal adorn- 
ment. She, indeed, had helped to ruin 
her husband ; and his embarrassments, 
the constant annoyance and degradation 
of debt, had been too much for the poor 



MAKING THE BEST OF IT 249 

squire's generous genial heart. It would 
kill him, he used to say, and it had already- 
consigned him to a living death. The once 
vigorous sportsman, the broad-shouldered 
athlete, was a wreck, mind and body alike, 
and would cry when his nurse dragged him 
from the fire. 

It was very pitiful, and the proud woman 
who bore his name, had fixed all her hopes 
of future position and happiness on her 
son. Graham must marry well, she had 
thought hundreds and hundreds of times, 
and this dearest wish of her life had seemed 
already in her grasp. 

It had almost maddened her to listen to 
Graham's ravings, and the doctor's story 
about poor Winny's death for the moment 
completely overcame her. But she had a 
resolute heart. When she saw Katherine 
had heard something, she at once deter- 
mined to know what she had heard, and 
also to try to make the best of it. She 
did try, and Katherine left Mrs. Graham 



2SO 0^ GOLDEN HINGES, 

North's bed-room certainly feeling happier 
than when she entered it. 

The old squire was crouching in his easy 
chair over the fire when Katherine re- 
turned to the breakfast-room, and the girls 
were trying to talk to their father. 

The kindly Eth was on her knees on 
the hearth-rug chafing one of the old man's 
cold rigid hands, and Katherine went up 
and took the other, and spoke to the squire 
in her sweet sympathetic way. But Mr. 
North scarcely raised his head. 

" Fresh troubles," he kept muttering, 
" fresh troubles." This dismal refrain he 
repeated again and again. Somehow it 
had reached his clouded brain that his 
son was dangerously ill (probaby through 
his attendant, though Mrs. Graham North 
had warned her to be silent on the subject), 
but the old squire certainly knew, and was 
more than usually despondent. 

"Graham is better, Mr. North," said 
said Katherine softly; she seemed to 



MAKING THE BEST OF IT, 251 

understand the drift of the poor man's 
miserable wail. 

Then he looked up, and the expression 
of her face apparently gave some comfort 
to his bewildered mind. He tried to put 
out his hands, he murmured an inarticulate 
blessing, and Katherine knelt down by 
the side of his chair and began chatting 
to him, telling him any little thing she 
thought would please him. 

His two daughters were only too glad 
to be relieved from their attempt to en- 
liven him. Lucy suggested to Eth that 
they should go and see after the unpacking 
of their dresses; and as the sisters ran 
upstairs together, the elder had a word 
to whisper in the other's ear. 

" I say, Katherine Despard must be 
awfully far gone on Graham," said Lucy. 

" Lucky for Graham, then," answered 
Eth, with a good-natured laugh. 



CHAPTER XVn. 

Graham's eesolve. 

During the next twenty-four hours a 
decided change for the better took place 
in Graham's condition, and he fell into 
the first natural sleep that he had had 
since his accident. He awoke calm ; the 
great throbbings and pulsations in his 
temples and neck quieted, and the wildness 
and redness in his eyes almost gone. He 
turned his head on his pillow and looked 
wistfully at his mother's face. 

" You are better, my darling," she said 
softly. 

He answered her like a man in his right 
mind. Then he shut his eyes again and 
sighed. The strange whirling sensation in his 
head was still ; the swift revolving pictures, 
that had chased each other in fantastic 



GRAHAM *S RESOL FE, 253 

circles, had faded into darkness, and in 
their stead memory, reason, had come 
back to the young man's brain. 

Slowly — one after the other — he remem- 
bered the miserable incidents that had 
preceded his illness. The little pencilled 
notes ; the sudden anguish of his own 
heart when he had read Winny's despair- 
ing words ; his mad race down to the 
lonely dell ; the broken ice ; the rushing 
stream — and then 

He moaned aloud. He was recalling 
the grey cloak rising and falling beneath 
the river bridge — ^his plunge and struggle 
in the stormy tide-way — his clutch at the 
unsubstantial thing that had yielded to his 
grasp. He remembered also the sudden 
blow that he had received on his head, 
and the overwhelming, surging waters in 
his ears — but here Graham's memory 
failed him. Again, with a groan, he 
opened his eyes — again looked wistfuUy 
in his mother's face. 



254 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

" How long have I been ill, mother ? " 
he asked. 

"Several days, dear," she answered as 
calmly as she could; "you got a blow 
on your head, you know — a bad blow — ^in 
the river." 

Mrs. Graham North's voice, however, 
trembled with anxiety as she said these 
words. She was wondering how far he 
remembered; she was wondering how he 
came to be drifting senseless in the river, 
with the girl's cloak clutched in his hands. 

" I remember," said Graham, in a pained 
forced voice, "the current caught me, 
and my head struck on the buttress of 
Castle Hill Bridge, mother"— and he 
lifted himself quickly up, and looked 
eagerly in his mother's face ; " was she 
saved— Winny Eiddell?" 

Mrs. Graham North had been prepared 
for this question ; she had sent the nurse 
out of the room, and she spoke quite 
steadily as she answered. 



GBAHAM '8 JRESOL VE. 255 

" Yes, my dear," she said, " she was 
saved; but you must not excite yourself, 
Graham." 

With a muttered word of thankfulness 
Graham ^nk back on his pillows, his eyes 
closed, his face twitched, and he grew very 
pale, and presently Mrs. North saw a tear 
steal down his cheek. 

Shall we look into his heart? No one 
but those who by some mischance have 
had the unspeakable misery of nearly 
ending another's life, yet by a happy 
accident have been spared that unending 
pain, can understand the great and over- 
whelming thankfulness which at this 
moment filled Graham's whole being. She 
was not dead then — the sweet young girl 
who had but loved him too well ; he could 
repair his wrong; the dark and gloomy 
portals of the grave would not fall as an 
everlasting shadow on his soul. 

His mother watching him grew frightened 
at the expression of his face. She had told 



256 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

this lie to save his reason, she whispered 
to her own alarmed heart, but she was 
almost unprepared to see the effect of 
her words. 

Yet Graham said nothing. He lay still 
making certain mental resolves ; fixing 
from this day to begin a new and different 
life ; to try to deserve the immense relief 
that had suddenly come to him. 

Mrs. Graham North now began talking 
somewhat nervously of different things, 
and tried to divert his mind from one 
absorbing thought. She told him about 
his sisters' return, and added with a 
smile : 

**I think young Selbrook must admire 
one of them ; he has been here twice to 
call since they came back." 

As she said this Graham's brow con- 
tracted, and a pained expression passed 
over his face. 

"Don't try to make matches, mother," 
he said in a low tone. 



GRAHAM'S RESOLVE. a57 

Mrs. Graham North dare not pursue 
the subject further. She rose, and went 
to the window, and saw the doctor driving 
up to the front entrance in his little old- 
fashioned gig. Making some excuse to 
Graham, she then at once quitted the 
room. She had something to say to Dr. 
Morton, before she allowed him to see 
his patient. 

She found the doctor taking off his 
overcoat in the hall. After shaking hands 
with him, she beckoned him into the empty- 
dining-room. 

" I want a word with you, doctor," she 
said. 

The tall, red-haired Scotchman gravely 
bowed his head. 

" You will find my son much better,'* 
continued Mrs. Graham North ; " he is 
quite calm, quite sensible, and I am sure 
you will order that nothing must be 
allowed to excite him.'* 

"Precisely so, ma^am," answered Dr. 

VOL. I. 17 



JS8 ON GOLDEN HISGES. 

Morton ; '^ the quieter he is kept the 
better." 

"It was about this I wish to speak to 
you ; I was prepared with an answer to 
one of his first questions ; he asked after 
that unfortunate girl. Was she saved? 
he said, and for his dear sake, doctor, to 
avoid any excitement, any shock, I said 
she was. I think I have done right." 

The doctor cast down his small, shrewd, 
thoughtful eyes. He was reflecting how 
convenient was the elastic conscience of 
this fine lady. 

"Had I told the truth it might have 
had a very bad effect," went on Mrs. 
Graham North ; " you see, he had known 
this poor creature from her childhood, and 
no doubt his accident was caused by trying 
to save her. I do not believe their absurd 
stories, doctor! I believe this foolish girl 
had ventured on the ice, and it had given 
way beneath her, and the current had 
carried her down the river, and Graham 



iprRAHAM'S SEJSOL VE. 259 

had seen her, and nearly lost his own 
life in his brave attempt." 

Still the doctor kept his eyes fixed on 
the carpet. 

"And what does Mr. Graham say himself^ 
ma'am, about it? " he asked. 

" He said nothing ; he looked thank--^I 
mean pleased — when I told him she was 
saved, and since then he has scarcely 
spoken; but I thought I would warn you ; 
I came out of his room to warn you when I 
saw you drive up to the house ; of course 
you will not undeceive him, doctor ? " 

" It's no business of mine to do it, ma'am,'* 
answered the doctor with a dry smile; "it's 
no doubt much better for him in his pre- 
sent condition to believe the poor lassie is 
alive, but it will be a sad awakening." 

"He will bear it better when he is 
stronger/' said^ Mrs. North, and the doctor 
could not gainsay her words. Nay, when 
he saw his patient he almost began to think 
that Mrs. Graham North had acted for the 



26a ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

best. Graham was calm, and spoke cheer- 
fully, and the shrewd doctor noting the ex- 
pression of his face, saw a more determined 
look there than it ordinarily wore. 

" And Miss EiddeU, Miss Winny Eiddell," 
said Graham presently, " are you attending 
her, doctor? I hope she is recovering from 
the effect of her accideut." 

"I'm not attending her, Mr. Graham. 
Now be sure you take the medicine I send 
you." And the doctor prepared rather 
hastily to go. 

" Who is attending her ? " continued 
Graham. "I wish you would find out, 
doctor, exactly how she is ; you see, we got 
our ducking together." 

The doctor nodded his head, and gave 
Graham some further directions, and then 
took his leave. In the meanwhile Mrs. 
Graham North had not been idle ; she had 
given the nurse her orders ; on no account 
was Mr. Graham to be told of the death of 
*' the unfortunate girl he had tried to save." 



GRAHAM* S RESOL VE. 26 1 

She had the doctor's instructions on the 
subject, she said, and she told the same story 
to Katherine Despard. 

Katherine felt startled and afraid ; and 
yet more afraid, when on the following day 
Mrs. Graham North came to her with 
rather an anxious countenance, and said 
that Graham had asked to see her. 

" But you must be very careful, my dear," 
added Mrs. North ; ** you must not forget 
what I told you yesterday ; he believes that 
poor girl is alive. 

"I would rather not see him," said 
Katherine nervously ; " I am a bad actress 
■ — wait until he is stronger, Mrs. North." 

" I urged that, too, Katherine ; but he 
made such a point of seeing you — but oh ! 
my dear, remember how much depends on 
your discretion ! Even a little thing might 
undo all that he has gained." 

This was not reassuring to Katherine, 
and yet how could she refuse to see Gra- 
ham ? She followed his mother to his room. 



262 OH GOLhKN HJHGE8, 

and when she saw him — so changed, so 
white — all the womanly tenderness of her 
heart drew her towards him. 

^^ Graham I " she faltered, holding out 
both her hands. 



END OF VOL. I. 


ON GOLDEN HINGES. 



?o CHAPTEK I. 

A SAD STORY. 

Graham was much overcome by Katlierine's 
entrance, and for a moment or two he did 
not speak ; he did not even look in her 
face. They were alone, for Mrs. North had 
left Katherine at the door, and presently 
Graham bent his head and kissed her hand, 
she still standing beside him. 

" I wished to see you," he said. " Kathe- 
rine, I have something I wish to say to you 
— a long story to tell you ; however bitter 
it is to us both, I want you to know the 
truth." 

•* Tell it to me some other day, Graham,' 

VOL. II. 18 



2 Oy GOLDEN HiyOES. 

answered Katherine gently. She was re- 
membering his mother's words. 

" I would rather do so now. Will you 
sit by me — sit here, where I can see your 
face ? " 

Graham was ])'ing on a couch, propped 
up with pillows, and he put his arm out as 
he spoke and pulled a chair nearer to the 
couch. 

Katherine sat down on it, and then 
looked nervously at Graham. How good- 
looking he was, she thought ; no wonder 
this poor girl had loved him — his dark 
eye-brows seemed darker, and his grey, 
somewhat melancholy, eyes larger, because 
his face had grown so thin and white. But 
it was a fine face, with marked features, 
and something noble in the expression and 
in the turn and outline of the head. 

" You remember the last time we were 
together, Katherine," continued Graham, 
after a little pause, "when we were walking 
in the avenue — after vour cousin left us ?" 



A SAD STORY. 3 

" Yes, I remember." 

" A country lad gave me a note ; I see 
you remember, Katherine ; that note was 
from one — from a young girl to whom I 
ought to have felt myself bound by honour. 
I asked you to marry me," went on 
Graham, lifting himself up excitedly, " but I 
liad no right to do so. Can you, will you, 
forgive me ? for I am going to ask you 
now to break off our engagement." 

Katherine turned very pale ; she clasped 
lier hands tightly together ; only a few 
murmured words came from her lips. 

" You mean " she said. 

" I mean I have acted disgracefully and 
dishonourably ; it is a sad and miserable 
story, but I will tell you the whole truth,, 
and then leave it to your noble and 
generous heart. You know about my^ 
accident? How do you think I got the 
blow on my head, Katherine ? I am going 
to confide this secret to you, so that you 
may entirely understand my motives, and 

18—2 



4 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

know why I have asked to see you to- 
day." 

"I have heard something of this, 
Graham," said Katherine visibly tremb- 
ling. "I — I — think you had better say 
nothing niore just now ; your mother said 
you must not excite yourself/' 

" Poor mother ! I am sorry for her, 
but a man can never be the same who 
has had the shadow of another's death 
upon his soul. I have just escaped this, 
and it has left its mark. But you do not 
understand — about eighteen months ago, 
then, Katherine, I made the acquaintance 
of the poor girl, almost child, whose claims 
upon me I feel now bound to respect." 

"Oh! do not say anything more, 
Graham ! " prayed Katherine, covering her 
face. 

" But I must, I must ! Katherine, this 
young girl and I used to meet by the Dill ; 
it was an acquaintance begun in folly. 
I saw a pretty girl on a sunny afternoon 



A SAD STORY. 5 

admiring, I thought, the reflection of her 
fair face in the stream ; but we met time 
after time — met too often, Katherine. There 
is no blame to her ; it is all my fault. 
She was pure and innocent ; her only fault 
was caring too well for me. And I — un- 
grateful, grew weary of it ; perhaps you 
think me a mean hound to say this, but 
it is true. I grew weary when it was too 
late. Then I saw you — do not turn away 
Katherine — give me some pity, for this is a 
very bitter moment at least to me. I saw 
you — and — and I hoped poor Winny would 
forget me. I tried to forget that she had 
claims upon me which it was dishonourable 
to ignore." 

"And — and she wrote to you that 
day ? " faltered Katherine. 

" She wrote to me to remind me of an 
appointment which I had already made 
with her. We used to meet in Dill-dene, 
and she was waiting for me there. You 
begin to understand now ? I hacl become 



6 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

engaged to you; but for the memory of 
Winny I would have been a proud and 
happy man. You believe this, Katherine ? " 

Katherine did not speak, and Graham 
caught her hand. 

"Most proud — most happy," he said 
emphatically. "I am a miserably poor 
man, and you are a rich woman, Katherine ; 
but it was not for the sake of money alone 
I sought your love." 

"I — ^I — did not think it was, Graham," 
said Katherine, and her eyes filled with 
tears. 

" I thank you for that," said Graham ; 
" it makes my task easier. No ; I had 
given to you what I never gave to this poor 
girl. But I was telling you about her 
little note : she was waiting for me in 
Dill-dene, and the night before I had written 
her a letter to tell her I could not meet 
her ; to tell her, in fact, that I was going 
to marry you, and that all our foolish love 
must end." 



A SAD STORY, 7 

"Oh, Graham!" 

"I was ashamed of myself after I had 
written this letter — ashamed to send it. 
Then in the morning her father came ; 
some reports had reached his ears, and he 
wanted me to marry her. I told him it was 
impossible. He is a passionate man, this 
Eiddell, and he was very angry. He 
forbade me ever to speak again to Winny, 
and I felt sure he would order her never to 
speak to me. Thus I was surprised and 
deeply annoyed when I got her little note 
to say she was waiting for me. I left you — 1 
went up to my room, and got out the letter 
I had already written to her, adding only a 
few words to tell her what her father had 
said. I gave this letter to the boy, and then 
went to seek for you. You had gone into 
the house, and I became uneasy about the 
poor girl, and walked down towards the 
river, thinking I might meet her." 

" And^and you saw her ? " asked Kath- 
erine, looking eagerly at Graham's face. 



8 OS GOLDEN HINGES, 

" I will tell you. Katherine, I pray God 
that you may never feel what I felt a few 
moments later. I saw the boy come run- 
ning with another note ; I snatched it from 
his hand — it contained a few mad words — 
she would not live after my letter; she 
would drown herself. I understood this, 
and the next instant I started for the river, 
tearing along at my utmost speed. I 
reached Dill-dene, where we used to meet, 
and she was not there. I called — there 
was no answer, but my own letter to her — 
the letter to tell her I was engaged to you 
— was lying on the ground. I snatched 
this up, and ran all down by the river side 
until near Castle Hill Bridge. There, in 
the half-dark, I saw, I thought, something 
light rise and fall on the water, close to 
one of the arches of the bridge. I flung 
off my coat, and plunged at once into the 
stream. It was stormy and flooded, and 
the ice was hurling down the tideway, 
which made it diflicult to swim. But 1 



A SAD STORY. 9 

reached the bridge at last. I remember 
grasping hold of a cloak — it was Winny's 
cloak, I felt sure, and I hoped in a moment 
to have her in my arms. Katherine, she 
was not there. The horror of that moment 
overpowered me ; the current caught me, 
and my head struck against one of the 
buttresses of the bridge." 

"And you remember nothing more?'' 
said Katherine in a tremulous and broken 
voice. 

" Nothing distinctly ; I have had horrible 
fancies ; I have seen that cloak again and 
again ; I have seen the poor child's dead, 
despairing face. I thank God, how earnestly 
and gratefully only He knows, that I am 
spared this dreadful punishment for my 



sin." 



Katherine did not speak ; a choking sob 
rose in her throat. She dared not look in 
Graham's pale, excited face, who had raised 
himself on the couch, and was supporting 
himself with one arm. 



10 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

** Winny was saved," continued Graham, 
" how I have yet to learn, for I do not care 
to ask questions on a subject so painful, 
and which for her sake, all our sakes, is 
best not spoken of. But my mother told 
me she was saved, and I have not her death 
upon my soul. But this has changed my 
whole life, Katherine ; to think of myself, 
of my own feelings is now impossible ; my 
first thoughts must be for her." 

" For her ? " echoed Katherine. 

"What can I do, Katherine? I have told 
you this story because I know your noble 
nature. I was never worthy of you ; you 
are so far above me in every way, and 
now " 

" You wish to be free ? " said Katherine, 
ahnost below her breath. 

"I wish to marry Winny Kiddell — I must 
marry her," answered Graham, turning 
away his head. " I shall emigrate, I think, 
Katherine." 

But here a sob interrupted him. Katherine 



A SAD STORY. 1 1 

had broken down; it wat' so dreadful to 
her to hear him talking thus, talking of 
and planning a future with the dead girl, 
that she could not bear it. 

"I will go now," she said faintly, and she 
rose. 

Graham naturally mistook her emotion. 
He also rose and stood beside her, taking 
both her hands in his, and speaking with 
much agitation. 

"Katherine," he said, "you are a good 
and noble woman ; you will help me in this 
bitter hour to do right ? " 

"Yes, Graham," she faltered, and then 
she pulled her hands from his, and was 
gone. 






CHAPTEE n. 

COUNTRY TALK. 

She ran down the corridor from his room, 
blinded with her tears. As she passed Mrs. 
Graham North's bed room door, that lady 
who had been waiting most anxiously to 
hear her footsteps (and who was becoming 
most uneasy at the length of Katherine's 
interview with her son) came suddenly out. 

Mrs. North was startled when she saw 
Katherine's face, and yet more startled at 
her words. 

"Let me come in here a moment," she 
said, entering the bed room. "Oh! Mrs. 
North!" she continued, "what a dreadful 
thing you have done ! " 

"I do not understand you," said Mrs. 
North, biting her lips, and growing a little 
pale. 



COUNTRY TALK. 13 

"Graham believes that unhappy girl is 
living. He sent for me to tell me he means 
to marry her ; he has broken off our en- 
gagement — oh, it is too dreadful ! " sobbed 
Katherine. 

" What — what do you say ? " 

" He has planned everything/' went on 
Katherine, still sobbing ; " he had wronged 
her, and he means to marry her ; and to 
know — to know that she is dead ! " 

" He is mad ! " said Mrs. North bitterly ; 
" mad to speak of such things to you, to 
indulge in such wild talk ; but you must 
forgive him, Katherine." 

" He is noble, I think," said Katherine, 
drjdng her tears, " most noble in his 
resolve, but it was very terrible to hear 
him." 

"He has scarcely recovered from the 
effects of his accident ; he is quixotic and 
foolish — had this unfortunate person been 
living he could not have married her." 

" I feel sure that he would have done so ; 



14 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

but I do not care to discuss it — I — I — 
am going home, Mrs. North." 

Katherine, indeed, felt not only shocked, 
but very angry. It was a cruel thing to 
deceive Graham, she thought, and then the 
story that she had just listened to was 
naturally most painful and bitter to her 
ears. 

It was all true, then. Frank Despard had 
not invented this tale ; and Mrs. Graham 
North must have known it to be true at the 
very time she was denying it. Katherine 
looked in the face of the handsome woman 
before her with some indignation expressed 
in her own. She was honest and open 
herself, and she had been treated dis- 
lionestly. 

"What did he tell you, Katherine?" 
asked Mrs. North after a little pause. 

" He told me what I had heard before : 
this poor girl and he had loved each other 
— he — he was bound in honour to her — he 
— he had no right to think of me, or to ask 



COUNTRY TALK, 15 

me to marry him. He wrote to tell her 
when she was waiting for him that he was 
engaged to me, and the poor young creature, 
in her despair, flung herself into the river 
and you know the rest/* 

" How does he know that she flung her- 
I self into the river ? " 

" Because she sent him a few last 
despairing words to tell him so. It is a 
terrible story, Mrs. North ; terrible for me ; 
most terrible for Graham ! " 

" It is, indeed, a terrible story, if this be 
true," said Mrs. North, much overcome. 

" It is true," persisted Katherine ; " and 
— and to put it right, Mrs. North — to repair 
his wrong — he says he will marry her! 
This is why he sent for me — poor, poor 
Graham — the bitterest blow has vet to 
come." 

Again Katherine could not restrain her 
tears, and Mrs. North was also greatlj' 
disturbed. She walked up and down the 
bedroom with uneven steps ; she tried to 



1 6 ON G OLDEN HINGES. 

think what it would be best to do ; what it 
would be best to say. She was shocked 
and grieved at her son's fault, but more 
shocked and grieved still at the conse- 
quences. To send for Katherine ; to tell 
her such a tale! The proud, worldly 
woman was at her wits' end. 

" Youwillnot go away surely, Katherine ?" 
she said at length. " You will help me to 
bear it — to face this dreadful difficulty — 
Avhen Graham learns the truth ? " 

"What good could I do, Mrs. North? 
He has broken off our engagement ; my 
position here would be most painful ; 
indeed, I cannot contemplate it I You 
must excuse me, but I will go to-day." 

And Katherine did go away. She re- 
turned to Castle Hill, and her heart 
felt very hot and sore within her. 
She pitied Graham deeply, and yet felt 
angry with him. He should not have 
deceived her, she told herself, forgetting 
how impossible it would have been for him 



COUNTRY TALK. 17 

to tell her the truth. And yet he was 
noble, he .was honest, she said the next 
moment. Her heart was full of complex 
emotions, and Graham's, face dark, pale, and 
earnest, was ever before her. And a certain 
subtile instinct told her that he had spoken 
true words when he had said that he had 
given her more than he had ever given to 
this poor girl. He had no motive for 
deceiving her then ; he was giving her up ; 
and this instinct, this secret knowledge, 
softened Katherine's feelings, and made it 
possible for her to forgive Graham. 

In the meanwhile the whole country-side 
rang with the story. Katherine Despard's 
great fortune naturally made her a mark 
for many observers, and the rich have 
always many interested friends. It became 
whispered (though how, it was impossible 
to tell, since neither Mrs. North nor Kath- 
erine had told it), that Katherine's engage- 
ment with Graham North was broken off. 
Captain Despard heard this in Edinburgh, 
VOL. n. 19 



i8 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

and wrote to congratulate his cousin in 
his cool, bold way : 

"So you have thrown over the gay 
Lothario, my dear Katie, I am told," he 
wrote ; " quite right ; he acted in a very 
contemptible manner to that poor weak- 
minded young woman, who was fool enough 
to drown herself for his sake; and I am 
told also that her father is a very likely 
man to put a bullet into Lothario as a 
reward for his indiscretion. In fact, it is 
an awkward story, and I am heartily glad 
you have had the good taste and the good 
sense to give up your connexion with it. 
You see, I write to you like a father, and 
you must forgive me if you think I exceed 
the privileges of near relationship and very 
faithful love. I shall run down and spend 
a couple of days with you soon if you will 
allow me, and remain 

" Ever your affectionate cousin, 

"F. Despard." 



COUNTRY TALK. 19 

KaUierine did not answer this letter, and 
it made her very angry. Yet, she could 
not deny Frank Despard's right as her 
near relation to give her advice, and to 
a certain extent to look after her. He had 
always done so, and Katherine had felt for 
him some of the admiring affection which 
a young girl gives to a big brother, until 
he had began to make love to her. 

But this love-making had found no echo 
in her heart. Frank Despard, brave soldier 
as he was, lacked certain heroic qualities 
which women like Katherine secretly wor- 
ship. Perhaps she had really admired 
Graham North in that hour of bitter 
humiliation to him, when he had given 
her up, and resolved to face poverty and 
social degradation from a sense of honour, 
more than she had ever done before. At 
all events, she resented her cousin's letter, 
and Captain Despard did not receive an 
invitation to spend a " couple of days " at 
Castle Hill. 

19—2 



20 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

It was altogether a very annoying and 
painful time for Katherine. Country neigh- 
bours called, and some were discreetly silent 
about the tragedy by the river Dill, while 
others indulged in veiled or open sneers on 
the subject. One of the sneerers was young 
Selbrooke, of the Grange, whom Mrs. Gra- 
ham North wished to be, and sometimes 
hoped was, a lover of one of her daughters. 

He was a tall, slender young man, with 
fair hair and high cheek-bones, and with 
rather an elegant and distinguished manner, 
though he never said anything in the least 
amusing or interesting. He had a good 
fortune, and was smiled on alike by matrons 
and maidens. But though no one had ever 
spoken of it, or noticed it, Katherine had 
the uncomfortable knowledge that he was 
always secretly trying to gain her regard. 
He called on her two days after her return 
to Castle Hill, and he had evidently already 
heard that her engagement to Graham 
North was ended. 



COUNTRY TALK. ai 

" So we have been doing a little tragedy 
in these parts," he said with a smile. " But 
I hear Graham North is going to pull 
through." 

"He is better, I believe," answered 
Katherine coldly. 

" Not a very desirable position to be in," 
continued Mr. Selbrooke : " they're not a 
lucky family ; really, poor Mrs. Graham 
North has my sincere pity, with her two 
plain penniless girls and this mishap of 
Graham's." And he gave a little shrug. 

Katherine scarcely made any answer. 
This young man went to Dillford Hall, and 
was supposed to be a friend of the family. 
Yet here he was, ready to smile and jest at 
their misfortunes. Old Antony Despard 
had not brought up Katherine in this 
fashion. In sunshine and shade he had 
always been true. Katherine used to say 
she had never heard a mean word from his 
lips, and the man's soul had been as his 
words. 



21 ON GOLDEN HISGES. 

Mr. Selbrooke saw he had annoyed 
Katherine, and ho changed the conversa- 
tion with easy grace. He sat there and 
talked to her and wondered if he would 
have any chance if he were to ai^k her to 
marry him. He was not in the least in 
love with her, but deep and overpowering 
emotions were not in his way. 

Lucy and Ethel Graham North arrived 
at Castle Hill on a visit to Katherine while 
he was there. Lucy fluttered, blushed, and 
smiled when she saw him, and took him to 
the window to admire the view of the 
river, and treated him as if he were a 
friend and an admirer, which position Mr. 
Selbrooke accepted with the most unblushing 
assurance. 

As little thrills of affected laughter were 
proceeding from Lucy, Katherine was 
listening gravely to Ethel's account of her 
mother in answer to Katherine's inquiries. 

"I never saw mother look so badly,'* 
said Ethel ; " she is quite unlike herself." 



COUNTRY TALK. 23 

" And your brother ? " asked Katharine a 
little tremulously, and without looking at 
Ethel. 

" They say Graham is much better ; that 
he will be downstairs before the end of the 
week, and then I hope you will come and 
see us, Katherine." 

Katherine felt embarrassed. Probably 
Mrs. Graham North had not told her girls 
of her changed position as regarded 
Graham, and in truth Mrs. Graham North 
had not done so. 

A most painful incident indeed had hap- 
pened at Dillford two days before this visit 
of Lucy and Ethel to Katherine. Graham's 
nurse, an outspoken somewhat rough young 
north-country woman, had asked to see 
Mrs. Graham North, and had entered her 
presence with a very red excited face, 
carrying a letter in her hand. 

" I really cannot stand this sort of thing, 
Mrs. North," said Jane Brough (the nurse), 
abruptly enough holding out the letter ; 



24 ON GOLDEN BINGES, 

"it has given me quite a turn, indeed it 
has." 

Mrs. Graham North took the letter in her 
hand, and as her haughty eyes fell on the 
address, her face suddenly paled. 

" Did he give you this ? " she said 

" He gave it to me, and told me to have 
it posted," answered Jane Brough, with 
something between an indignant snort and 
a wgh. "It's just awful, I think, ma'am, 
writing to the poor dead thing in her grave, 
not that she has a decent grave, poor soul, 
her that's in the cruel water still." 

For a moment Mrs. Graham North did 
not speak. She, too, felt shocked, perhaps 
almost awed. The letter she held in her 
hand was addressed in her son's hand- 
writing to : 

Miss Winifred Riddell, 

Thornley Farm, 

Nr. Normanton. 

It was addressed, therefore, as the nurse 



COUNTRY TALK, 2$ 

had said, to the poor dead girl, and the idea 
was at once painful and repugnant to 
this proud woman. 

" I will take charge of it," she said at 
length ; " my son will soon learn the sad 
truth ; as the doctor ordered it to be kept 
from him we had no choice." 

The nurse tossed her head and walked 
out of the room, feeling disgusted that Mrs. 
Graham North took the whole » affair so 
coolly. 

"She's no more feeling than the door 
nail," said Jane Brough, while relating this 
incident a few minutes later to the sym- 
pathizing housemaid ; ** her heart's set 
round with pride." 

But Jane Brough did not quite under- 
stand Mrs. Graham North. It was true 
enough that " her heart was set round with 
pride," but still in that heart were strong 
and ardent feelings, the strongest and most 
ardent her love for her only son . 

For his dear sake she had told the un- 



26 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

truth that was now bringing such painful 
consequences. She had done it for the 
best, and it had ended in disaster* Graham 
had told this miserable story to Katherine, 
had broken off his engagement ; had in fact 
ruined every prospect of his hfe, all because 
he believed this unfortunate girl to be 
alive. 

" He had better have died," thought 
Mrs. Graham North bitterly. Yet had he 
died it would have broken her heart. But 
her heart though not now broken was 
thoroughly miserable. She stood there 
with this letter of Graham's in her hand, 
and almost guessed its contents. He had 
completed his folly — believing this Winifred 
Eiddell to be hving, he had asked her to be 
his wife. 

While his mother was thus thinking of 
him, upstairs with his head bowed upon his 
breast, Graham North was slowly pacing 
backwards and forwards in his bedroom. 
His thoughts also were very serious and 



COUNTRY TALK. 27 

very sad. He had done what his mother 
had guessed, and he was now reviewing the 
consequences of his own act. 

He had written to ask Winifred Biddell 
to marry him. No one knew better than 
he did what he gave up when he penned 
the kind and gentle, if not loving words, 
that he had addressed to the poor lost girl. 
He knew as he wrote to her^ that even had 
money been his to smooth the way, that 
they were quite unsuited to spend a long 
life-time together. And he knew also that 
the strange and subtle feeling we call love, 
had passed away for ever from ^his heart 
towards her. 

This poor child had wearied him because 
her pretty face was her best heritage. The 
deeper, sweeter, charms of Katherine, her 
bright mind, her noble generous heart, had 
stolen Graham's love away. Yet he had 
hated himself when he had asked Katherine 
to marry him ; he had felt degraded and 
ashamed. But now she knew the worst — 



28 Oy GOLDEN SINGES. 

she understood his motives — she knew he 
was trying to do right. 

But it was hard — very hard — to give up 
Katherine ; to give up all that a man most 
prizes ; to take — not a step downwards, 
but a social plunge — and yet, thank God, 
thank God, that Winny lived ! She should 
never know what this had cost him ; she 
should never hear an unkind word from his 
lips. He had chosen his lot, and so must 
make the best of it, and Graham with 
knitted brows, and an anxious and uneasy 
heart, kept considering how this could best 
be done. 






CHAPTER ni. 



DOKOTHYS LETTER. 



Meanwhile at Thornley farm the weary 
days dragged heavily away, weighted 
down with grief. 

The farmer was a changed man since 
he had lost his young daughter. He drank 
deeply, and neglected his work, and was 
savage and bitter to every one who went 
near him. To Dorothy he was especially 
unkind, and the quick-tempered woman 
bitterly resented this injustice. 

Then came the news that Graham North 
was recovering, and both Dorothy and 
Eiddell felt aggrieved. 

" And my lass dead and gone ! " groaned 
Eiddell. 

"He is Winny's murderer," thought 



30 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

Dorothy vindictively, but slie bit her 
lips, and kept back the dangerous words. 

It was Mr. Gray (Katherine's tenant) 
who told them Graham North was supposed 
to be getting well. Gray had met Dr. 
Morton, and the doctor had told him that 
all danger was now over. 

" And has he said anything ? " asked 
EiddeU, rising excitedly on hearing .hi, 
news. " If he's right in the head now, 
he must remember how it happened. TU 
see him ; he must tell me how I lost my 
girl." 

" Hell not be able to see any one for 
a while yet," said Gray ; " they keep him 
very quiet, I'm told. Ay, it's a bad business, 
but, no doubt, when he's well enough, he'll 
see you, Eiddell." 

" I'll see him any-how ! " swore the 
farmer with a bitter oath. "Curse that 
brute of yours. Why didn't he let him 
drown, if she was to go ! " he added 
savagely, shaking his fist at Ben, the 



DOROTHY'S LETTER, 31 

brown retriever dog, who, as usual, had 
accompanied his master to Thornley, and 
who growled as KiddeU shook his hand 
at him. 

" Nay, man, nay, that's not just," said 
Gray, and he called the dog to him and 
carressed the noble head. " Ben did his 
best, and we may be sure if the poor lassie 
had been there he would have sighted her, 
for many a time she noticed him, for she was 
as good as she was bonny, and had a kind 
word for everything that came near her." 

Gray spoke soothingly, and was indeed 
suppressing part of the doctor's informa- 
tion from the fear of exciting Eiddell. 

"It's a queer business altogether," the 
doctor had said, who was on friendly terms 
with Gray, " and Madam Graham North, 
in her high-handed way, has complicated 
it a bit more. She told Graham that the 
poor girl was saved, and he's been writing 
to her, I hear, and asked me if I was 
attending her." 



32 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

" And what does Miss Despard say to it 
all ? " Gray had asked. 

"That's all ended I'm told. Madam 
meant to be very clever, but I fear she has 
missed her mark." 

The doctor spoke under a sense of 
natural irritation. For many years he had 
attended the Graham North's without 
receiving the smallest remuneration. He 
was not a greedy man, but he was honest 
and paid his way, and he thought it well 
when others paid theirs. And Mrs. Graham 
North's manner to him was not what it 
ought to be, the doctor thought, also when 
she owed him so long a bill. It's all very 
well for rich people to assume a grand air, 
and to put a heavy cheque into your hand 
with a certain amount of pomposity. But 
there is a manner proper for impecuniosity, 
and a manner proper for wealth, and Mrs. 
Graham North always spoke and acted in 
a way highly aggravating to the poor 
people to whom she owed money. 



DOROTHY'S LETTER. 33 

Thus Dr. Morton somewhat forgot pro- 
fessional reticence in his communication to 
Gray, but Gray had the good sense to hold 
his tongue, and not tell all that he had 
heard to the unhappy Eiddell. 

Dorothy listened to the conversation of 
the two farmers, and her heart grew very 
bitter as she did so. But presently, without 
a word, she left the room, and going to her 
own she unlocked the trunk where she had 
hidden away Graham North's coat, and his 
cruel letter to Winny, and her young 
sister's last despairing words. 

Dorothy read these over in the bitterness 
of her soul. So he was getting better, this 
man, she thought angrily, who had de- 
stroyed all the happiness of their home, and 
made nothing but wretchedness, drink and 
misery for "father," and trouble and in- 
justice for herself, besides " murdering the 
poor silly girl who had only loved him too 
weU." 

Dorothy, prejudiced and narrow, made 
VOL. n. 20 



34 Oy GOLDEN HINGES. 

no allowance for temptation, and felt no 
pity for the sinner. 

" He was a selfish brute," she told her- 
self, " and no doubt would be after Miss 
Despard again in no time now." 

This latter thought was almost unen- 
durable to Dorothy. But she had it in her 
power at leas^ to give him some fresh pain ; 
and besides, she was bound to return him 
his property now that he was well enough 
to receive it. She hugged this idea. It 
was but common honesty to send him 
back his money and his coat, but 
Dorothy knew she was partly avenging 
Winny's death and her own misery by 
doing so. 

She packed up the coat, and drew out 
the money that she had found in it on that 
miserable night when she had waited in 
vain for Winny's return. There was a 
five-pound note and a few shillings, and 
Dorothy went into Normanton on the 
morning foUowing Gray's visit to Thornley, 



DOROTHY'S LETTER. 35 

and got post-office orders to return this 
money to Graham North. 

The woman felt a sort of grim satisfac- 
tion in her task. She saw after her father's 
dinner on her return from the little town, 
and bore his unmerited abuse in silence. 
Then when he went out, moody and sullen 
as was now his wont, Doro*hy sat down 
and began to write her intended letter. 

She had rehearsed it many times. She 
wanted to be as cruel as he had been, and 
to make him suffer all the shame and dis- 
grace she could heap on his head. 

" Sir," she began> " I beg herein to in- 
close post-office orders for five pounds seven 
shillings and three pence, being the sum I 
found in the pocket of your coat, on the 
night when you drove my poor sister to her 
cruel end. I will also send*back your coat, 
but I will keep the letter that broke my 
sister's heart, and the last words she wrote 

on earth. 

20—2 



36 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

" Sir, I have read your letter to Winny, 
and I look on you as her murderer. You 
say in it you are going to marry Miss Des- 
pard, but if yoii do Miss Despard shall know 
beforehand of your cruel conduct, and the 
wrong you did a poor foolish girl who 
trusted you and loved you only too well. 
And you better keep out of the way. 
My poor father does not yet know the 
truth, but believes that you and Winny 
tried to drown yourselves together. If he 
saw her last words, and if he read your 
letter to her, your life would be no longer 
safe, for I know he would revenge her 
early death. I will not tell him the bitter 
truth, not for your sake but his, so that no 
worse come of it ; but the farm boy, Jack, 
who carried her notes to you, and your 
letters to her, and who saw her fall down 
in her misery when she read your cruel 
words in Dill-dene, is grandson to an old 
woman belonging to the farm people here, 
and so the story may creep out. This boy 



DOROTHY'S LETTER. 37 

was with me, too, when I found your coat 
by the river side, and I advise you there- 
fore to go away, and I hope I shall never 
look again upon your face, for you have 
brought death and misery upon us, and I 
can never forgive you. 

"Dorothy Eiddell." 

Dorothy penned these words with hard 
dry eyes, and without any pity for Graham. 
Could she have thought of anything more 
bitter to write she would have written it. 
She did not, of course, know the terrible 
shock she was about to give him. He was 
out of danger, he was getting well after he 
had killed Winny, and she hoped at least 
that her words would give him pain, and 
disturb his prosperous wooing of Miss 
Despard. 

She carried her letter to the post, and 
then returned to her household duties with 
increased activity. She counted the hours 
until he would receive it, and wondered 



38 ON GOLDEN HINGES 

whether any answer would be sent to 
her. 

He received it on the following morning 
at breakfast time. It was the first day he 
had been down to breakfast since his illness, 
and when he entered the room looking very 
pale, and taller (because he had grown so 
thin) his mother rose and kissed him. 

"Welcome down again, my dear," she 
said tenderly. 

Graham thanked her, smiled, and sat 
down opposite to her. Then the girls came 
in full of life and youth. Lucy was happily 
excited, and laughed her little heartless 
laugh continually. She thought Mr. Sel- 
brooke was on the eve of proposing to her, 
and was already considering what manner 
of wedding garment would be most be- 
coming. She was one of those young 
women to whom the millinery of marriage . 
is the most essential consideration connected 
with the ceremony. 

Presently the post bag was brought in by 



DOROTHY'S LETTER, 39 

a servant, and Mrs. Graham North opened 
it. She took out. several letters, though her 
correspondence had decreased of late, after 
a Uttle private monetary arrangement be- 
tween herself and Katherine Despard. 
Then she handed a letter to Graham, who 
put out his hand somewhat eagerly to receive 
it. He thought as he glanced at the address 
that it was an answer to the letter he had 
written to poor Winny Eiddell, the letter 
his mother had hidden quietly away. 

Mrs. Graham North looked anxiously at 
her son when she saw his eagerness. She 
watched him open his letter, and she saw 
the two post office orders fall unheeded on 
the table. Then she saw a great, sudden, 
and terrible change in Graham's face. We 
know the words he was reading — ^Dorothy's 
hard bitter words — and their effect on 
Graham terrified Mrs. North. 

He turned pale, almpst grey-tinted, and a 
spasm distorted his face. But, without a 
word he rose from the table and left the 



1 



40 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

room, taking his letter with him. Mrs. 
North dare not ask him what was the 
matter ; she, too, turned pale ; she felt a 
catastrophe was near. 

Scarcely was Graham gone, when his bell 
upstairs rang violently. His mother now 
started to her feet and ran to his room. 
He was standing in the centre of it when 
she entered, still with the same terrible look 
on his face. 

" Why did you deceive me, mother ? " he 
said in a loud excited tone. " She is dead, 
her sister says — Winifred Eiddell — and I 
murdered her ! " 

" Hush, Graham, hush ! " 

"What object had you?" continued 
Graham, who was terribly agitated. " Do 
you know what you have done? — a fine 
farce you have made me play ; I have 
written to ask this dead girl to be my 
wife!" 

" My son, my son 1 " cried Mrs. Graham 
North, going up to him and flinging herself 



DOSOTHY'S LETTER, 41 

down before him, and casting her arms 
round his knees, " forgive me, forgive me ! 
Your reason, your life hung in the balance. 
I deceived you to save you Do you think 
I have not suffered ? Your letter to this 
poor girl never went; they brought it to 
me, and I locked it away, Graham, 
Graham, do not look at me thus ! " 

** Will you read this letter ? " said Graham 
gloomily. "But this has ended it all, 
mother, I will go away — ^will never 
return." 

Mrs. Graham North rose from her knees, 
and took Dorothy's letter in her trembling 
hands. As she read the angry, bitter 
words, absolute terror seized her ; she 
seemed to see a vision of the vindictive 
farmer ; to dread some fearful tragedy be- 
falling her son. 

" Yes, you must go away," she said, pale 
and eager ; " you must go at once, Graham. 
Keep out of the way of that dreadful 
man." 



42 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

" I do not wish to keep out of his way ; 
it is not for that, mother, but here I can- 
not stay/' 

He walked up and down the room, with 
his brows knitted, and scarcely seemed to 
hear what his mother said during the next 
few minutes. He was trying to realize the 
blow that had fallen on him — ^Winny dead 
— and his words had killed her. He re- 
peated this mentally, over and over again ; 
the one idea overwhelmed all others. But 
his mother, frightened at his expression, 
at his starting eyes fixed on vacancy, went 
up to him, and slid her arm through his. 

" Go up to town to-night, dear," she 
said ; " the change will do you good, and, 
by-and-by, I will join you there," 

Still Graham did not speak. 

" You will get over this, Graham," urged 
the anxious mother ; " there are bitter and 
unhappy moments in every life " 

" I shall never get over it," interrupted 
Graham gloomily and briefly. " Go away 



JDOROTBY'S LETTEB. 43 

now, mother, and leave me to myself. I 
will go to-night." 

Mrs, Graham North went away at her 
son's bidding, cowed and awed by this 
bitter self-upbraiding grief She heard him 
lock the door after she left him, and we, 
too, will leave him, for there are moments 
when it is well that none should see the 
darkness and despair which, like a black 
cloud, sweeps at times over a human soul. 

^^ ^^ ^^ ■•• ^^ 

Graham North left Dillford the same 
night, and, during the day, saw no one but 
his mother. After the first terrible shock 
was over, he roused himself, and made 
certain arrangements Uke a man who in- 
tends never to return to the place that he 
is leaving. He wrote, for one thing, to 
Dorothy Eiddell, and, for another, to Mr. 
Dixon, the old lawyer, and he spoke in a 
calm tone to his mother about their affairs, 
and told her he meant to begin an entirely 
new life. 



44 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

"I mean to work for my daily bread," 
he said, and his mother dare not even 
hint a word of Katherine Despard. 

Before he left, he went downstairs to say 
good-bye to his father, but the old squire 
did not seem to understand, and babbled 
some aimless words. 

" He is not so well to-day," said his 
attendant, and when Graham bent down 
and kissed his father's crippled hand, the 
poor man began to cry. 

"Fresh troubles," he whined out — the 
old, sad refrain that had lingered on his 
lips so long. 

With a suppressed sigh, Graham turned 
away, feeling that he would see his father's 
face no more, and in the hall he found his 
mother waiting, ready to accompany him 
to the station. 

"Let me go with you," the proud 
woman almost pleaded, and Graham could 
not refuse her request. 

Outside, it was one of those gloomy 



DOBOTHTS LETTER, 45 

winter nights when a great darkness lies on 
the face of the earth, black and heavy as a 
pall. Mrs. Graham North held her son's 
hand, and talked to him hopefully, though 
she could not restrain her tears as they 
drove on, and Graham tried to answer her, 
unwilling to add to her distress. But he 
spoke almost without heeding what he said. 
In the darkness, he still saw one face — the 
fair, sweet face, with pathetic, trustful 
eyes — that he had last kissed on the moor- 
land, amid the snow. 






A 



V9SJ 



CHAPTER rv. 

BUYING HORSES. 

When Dorothy Eiddell received Graham 
North's letter, its contents gave her a 
certain mournful satisfaction. 

" I have received your letter," she read, 
" and it fell upon me as a blow too terrible 
for words. They told rae Winny was 
saved ; I believed her to be living and 
well, and my first act when I recovered 
my senses was to write and ask her to be 
my wife. Ask the nurse, Jane Brough, if 
this be true ; she gave the letter to my 
mother, and if you wish her to do so my 
mother will forward it to you. I do not 
write this to excuse myself; Winny's death 
is more terrible to me than to any one — it 
is most terrible, and I will go from here at 



BUYING HORSES, 47 

once, and shall never return, but not to 
escape your father's anger. I will send my 
address when I reach London, and at any 
time he can find me, but I cannot stay here 
— cannot stay beside the Dill. 

*' Graham North." 

Dorothy felt a strange feeling of pride in 
this sad letter as she read and re-read it. 
This young man then would have married 
poor Winny, and showed at least some 
feeling about her early death. And the 
neighbours ought to know the truth, 
reflected Dorothy; they had been ready 
enough to think the worst and say the 
worst, and Dorothy felt that it was due to 
her sister's memory to let every one know 
that Graham North had written to ask 
Winny to be his wife, believing her to be 
still alive. 

And her father — ought she to tell her 
father ? But no, no, this would but lead to 
fresh troubles ; the farmer knew nothing of 



48 ON GOLDEN BINGES. 

the letter that had broken his daughter's 
heart, or of Winny's last despairing words, 
and would naturally resent such secrets 
being kept from his knowledge. Dorothy, 
in fact, dare not tell him, but she deter- 
mined to write to Mrs. Graham North and 
ask for the letter that her son had written 
to poor Winny. 

She was thankful, too, that Graham North 
had left Dillford, and that her father would 
have no chance of meeting him. 

"Things may settle down a bit now," 
sighed the practical Dorothy, and so she 
locked away Graham's letter, and busied 
herself about the house, thinking all the 
while what she should write to Mrs. Graham 
North. 

That lady also felt thankful that her son 
had left Dillford, and she began again to 
hope that brighter days might come. She 
exerted herself even so far that on the very 
day after Graham left she drove over to 
Castle Hill to see Katherine. 




rrv 



BUYING HORSES. 49 

She found her sitting at the library- 
window looking pensively at the grey 
winter sky, athwart which the sinking sun 
was casting gleams of yellow light. It was 
a peaceful scene, and fluttering and chirping 
amid the leafless trees, that grew down the 
steep bank just below the hbrary window, 
were scores of little birds that Katherine 
regularly fed. But Katherine did not look 
happy; she could hear the wash of the 
Dill, and see the river rolling by where 
she sat, and was perhaps thinking of the 
hapless girl whose wrecked life had ended 
there. 

She rose somewhat nervously to receive 
Mrs. Graham North, when that lady was 
announced, and held out her hand, but 
Mrs. North kissed Katherine. 

"I was determined to come to see you 
to-day," she said; "I have something to tell 
you — Graham is gone." 

" Gone ! " echoed Katherine. 
"Yes ; he knows all now, Katherine — the 
VOL. n. 21 



5^ ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

whole sad story. You would like to hear 
how it happened, would you not ? " 

" Yes, indeed." 

"That poor girl's sister had found 
Graham's coat, it seems, on the night when 
he tried to save her ; he had flung it off* on 
the river bank, and in this coat were the 
letters that had passed between them, and 
some money. And this young woman, 
Dorothy Eiddell, wrote to return this 
money, and mentioned her dead sister." 

" What did she say ? " 

" She wrote of her as dead. I shall never 
forget Graham's face — it was dreadful, too 
dreadful. But he did not speak ; he rose 
and went straight out of the room, and 
then his bell rang, and I ran up to him." 

"An A then?" asked Katherine, visibly 
moved. 

" He asked me why I had deceived him ; 
he was terribly agitated ; he told me what 
he had told you — about marrying her, and 
then he said he would go away, and work 



BUYING S0R8ES. 51 

for his own living, and he started last night 
for London." 

" We shall see him there, then," said 
Katherine, in a low tone. 

These words gave inexpressible relief to 
Mrs. Graham North. 

" He will get over all this misery, I hope/' 
she said, " it has been a most unfortunate 
affair ; and Graham is so sensitive." 

Katherine did not speak ; she changed the 
conversation, and Mrs. Graham North was 
also glad to do so. They talked of the 
girls, and presently the elder lady asked 
Katherine if she had seen their neighbour, 
Mr. Selbrooke, lately. 

"What do you think of him, really?" 
she said; "I would Hke to know." 

" I think he is fairly agreeable," answered 
Katherine. 

" Oh, yes, agreeable ; but do you think 
he is sincere, quite sincere ? " 

" That is a difficult question to answer," 

smiled Katherine. 

21—2 



52 Oy GOLDEN HINGES. 

" I can be quite confidential I know to 
you, my dear, and I fancy Lucy rather likes 
this young man, and that, of course, makes 
me anxious about him." 

Katherine hesitated. 

"I know very little of him," she said, 
after a pause; "but if you wish my real 
opinion, I do not consider him very sincere." 

Mrs. Graham North at once understood 
this. She knew Katherine's character, and 
knew, therefore, that she would not say 
this without reason. 

" I have had my doubts," she said, " but 
young girls are so foolish ; they believe all 
the flattering nonsense men tell them. I 
must tell Lucy what you think." 

" No, do not do that ; I may, of course, 
be mistaken, but he has a sort of sneering 
manner, don't you think ? " 

"Perhaps he affects it. And how is your 
cousin. Captain Despard, Katherine ? " 

" Very well, I think," answered Katherine 
quietly. 



BUYING HOESES. 53 

They talked of other things after this, 
and they parted cordially, Katherine notic- 
ing how aged and worn Mrs. Graham North 
looked, although she bore herself so bravely. 
She pressed Katherine to visit them at Dill- 
ford, and Katherine did not refuse. 

" You are such a favourite of my poor 
husband's," said Mrs. Graham North ; " I 
have never seen him smile since you went 
away." 

This was a speech sure to touch 
Katherine's kindly heart, and it did touch 
it. She remembered when the poor squire 
had tried to put out his crippled hands to 
bless her, and how Graham had looked as 
he stood that night by his father's side. 
That time seemed so far off now, when she 
had been happy, and Katherine sighed. 

And after her visitor left her she sat long 
thinking of Graham. Such terrible pain 
and shame had come to him, that her heart 
longed to comfort him, and she kept pic- 
turing him to herself in his lonely misery. 



54 ON G OLDEN HINGES. 

Yet what could she do ? He had broken 
off their engagement, aud between them 
stood the shadow of the poor dead girl. 

That shadow did not grow less as the days 
went on. One morning Katherine received 
a telegram from her cousin Frank Despard, 
to tell her he would be at Castle Hill before 
the evening, and he accordingly arrived, 
and unfortunately found the girls, Lucy and 
Ethel Graham North, having afternoon tea 
with Katherine. 

They had come unexpectedly, and 
Katherine hoped they would go before her 
cousin came, as she knew Frank would 
begin talking of Graham if he saw them. 
As he entered the room and recognized 
them for an instant a frown passed over his 
face, but the next moment he smiled. 

Of course he remembered the Miss 
Graham Norths, he said, as Katherine ner- 
vously mentioned their name. He sat down 
by Lucy, and that young lady was quite de- 
lighted with him. He was a man who tried 



BUYING H0E8E8. 55 

to make every woman believe that he was 
(for the time, at least) channed with her, 
and Lucy very easily believed anything 
flattering. 

Before she left Castle Hill she had invited 
Captain Despard to visit them at Dillford, 
and she talked of nothing but soldiers and 
soldiering all the way home. Captain Des- 
pard escorted them to their pony-carriage, 
and then returned to Katherine in the 
library. 

" So Katie," he said, " you have not quite 
broken off with this interesting family 
yet ? " 

He came up close to her, and looked at 
her straight in the face as he asked this 
question, and Katherine was conscious that 
she blushed under that fixed gaze. 

" How could I break off with such near 
neighbours ? " she said. 

"But your engagement with Graham 
North is broken off." 

" Yes." 



56 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

"I am glad of that, most truly glad. 
You could not have married such a 
scoundrel." 

"He is not a scoundrel, Frank," said 
Katherine quickly. " Please do not let us 
discuss it- It was Graham North's own 
wish to break off our engagement." 

" Pardon me, fair coz, that I do not 
quite believe." 

" Well, it is broken off, at all events, so 
we need not talk of it. He has left Dillford. 
lie is in London." 

" Dillford was a little too warm to hold 
him, I hear. An enraged parent with a 
horsewhip, or a cartwhip, or a pistol, I'm 
told, was dogging his footsteps. No wonder 

he bolted." 

"Will you have some tea, Frank, or 
shall I ring?" 

" No tea, thank you — but, joking apart, 
my dear, I cannot tell you how glad I am 
that )^ou are done with this folly. You 
know I do not set up for a paragon, but 



BUYING H0B8ES. 57 

what would you think if your beloved 
cousin had driven some foolish young 
woman to commit suicide? It's an un- 
pleasant fact in a man's career, isn't it ? " 

"Frank, will you do me one favour? 
Will you not mention this subject any 
more while you are here ? It is painful 
to me ; it can do no good." 

" Of course I won't mention it if it 
worries you. What a nice room this is, 
Katherine ; it's always like coming home 
to come to Castle Hill." And Captain 
Despard gave an impatient sigh. 

"That is only natural," said Katherine 
with a smile ; " it was in truth your home, 
Frank, and you are always welcome 
here." 

Yet he had made her very unhappy. 
The cruel realism of his words had broken 
rudely into some sweet dreams. She was 
glad when he went out to inspect her 
horses, but she could not forget what he 
had said. She could not talk to him about 



58 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

Graham, nor tell him of that last interview 
in which he had given her up. She knew 
Frank would only mock and gibe, and 
would no more believe that Graham North 
had really meant to marry the poor girl 
than he himself had. 

But the invisible links, the subtle rever- 
beration of thoughts which bind together 
some souls, made Katherine understand 
Graham, He had been weak, he had 
erred; but she believed in him. She felt 
he was more noble than her cousin, though 
her cousin had boasted of his own 
superiority. But Frank Despard, though 
Katherine's near relation, was not akin 
to her heart. 

He walked down towards the stables 
after he left her with a hard smile on his 
face. He was angry, yet determined. His 
devoted follower and admirer, old Ben, 
Katherine's coachman, was looking out for 
him. Ben had been at the station with 
the waggonette ready to receive him, and 



BUYING S0R8E8. 59 

had coached him up in all the gossip of 
the neighbourhood. 

He knew Graham North had left Dill- 
ford before he entered Castle Hill, and he 
really believed he had gone because Kath- 
erine had refused him. He was annoyed, 
therefore, that Katherine declined to dis- 
cuss the subject, and there was something 
in her manner, in the expression of her 
face, when she spoke of Graham North, that 
was highly displeasing to Francis Despard. 

Ben touched his hat and came forward 
when he saw Despard approaching, and 
then with some pride led him to inspect 
Katherine's stables. 

" By-thebye, Ben," said Despard pre- 
sently with a cool, careless air, " do you 
think there are any farmers about here — 
that man Kiddell, for instance — who have 
any young horses to dispose of that would 
do for artillery horses ? I would give a 
good price, and I could see about them 
myself when I am here." 



^o ON GOLDEN SINGES. 

Ben touched his hat again, and quite 
understood what he was expected to say. 

" Eiddell has a fine young pair, sir," he 
answered ; " brown powerful horses, and I 
wouldn't wonder if they were the very 
thing you want." 

"D'ye think he'd sell?" said Despard, 
striking the ash off his cigar. 

"No harm in seeing, sir. I might go to 
the farm and sound him to-night ; and to- 
morrow, if agreeable to you, we might 
walk up together to Thornley to have a 
look at the beasts." 

" All right, see about it, and tell me what 
he says." 

Ben accordingly did "see about it." 
He saw the farmer, and told him the 
" captain " was" willing to give a long price 
for his horses, and Eiddell felt pleased that 
his horses had been selected before the 
other farmers around, for inspection. 

"I told the captain yours were always 
the best lot," said the diplomatic Ben. 



BUYING H0B8E8. 6i 

" The captain's quite welcome to see 
them," answered Eiddell, and then he took 
Ben into the parlour and gave him a glass 
of his best whisky, drinking two himself at 
the same time for company's sake. 

They settled that Captain Despard was to 
go up the next morning to the fann, but 
Captain Despard said nothing to Katherine 
about this little arrangement. The cousins 
spent a pleasant evening together after all. 
It was like the old times, when they had 
been almost as brother and sister, and when 
Frank used to tell Katherine of stirring 
deeds as they sat together in the twilight, 
while their uncle dozed in his chair. 

Katherine had really cared for this brave 
soldier in those days. She had been proud 
of her kinsman. He had served in the Zulu 
war and in the first Egyptian war, and 
always with distinction. Twice severely 
wounded, his conspicuous courage men- 
tioned in despatches, his unfortunate per- 
sonal defect had yet stood in the way of 



6a ON GOLDEN HINQE8. 

rapid promotion. But he was now daily- 
expecting his majority, and Katharine 
listened, well pleased, to his eager hopes of 
future service. 

Graham North's name was never men- 
tioned again between them. But they had 
many subjects in common. The old Indian 
home where Katherine, then a very young 
girl, had lived with her father and Francis 
Despard, a youthful subaltern, had inspired 
her childish heart with great admiration. 

A long gap of time had passed since 
then, and ambition and ardent devotion to 
his profession had filled the space in Francis 
Despard's mind. But he had never for- 
gotten his young cousin. He loved fighting 
for fighting's sake, and he had been a lover 
of other women, but he always liked to 
"go home," as he called it, to see Kath- 
erine. He had never liked any one so well, 
and he meant to marry her, and cared very 
little what he did to gain his aim. 

So he went up the next morning to 



BUYING HORSES, 63 

Thornley, ostensibly to see faimer BiddeH's 
horses, but in reality to see farmer Eiddell 
himself. He wanted to know how much the 
man knew about his daughter and Graham 
North, and to heap coals on the fire of 
Eiddell's indignation. Ben had told him 
that Eiddell still believed that Graham had 
tried to commit suicide with poor Winny, 
and that though none of his neighbours 
shared this delusion, that none also had 
cared to undeceive him. 

Ben also told Despard that Eiddell had 
been furious when he heard that Graham 
North had left Dillford without making any 
explanation to him how Winny's death had 
occurred. He had gone up to the Hall, but 
Mrs. Graham North had pleaded illness, and 
declined to receive him. 

Armed with this information, Despard 
went to buy the farmer's horses. He did 
not want them, but he wanted to make it 
impossible for Graham North ever to 
return to the neighbourhood of Castle Hill. 



64 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

The farmer received him civilly enough . 
The poor man looked greatly changed and 
shattered, and the marks of strong drink 
and strong passions were plainly betrayed 
by his face. Despard, accustomed to all 
manners of men, however, easily ingratiated 
himself into the sullen Kiddell. He began 
by admiring his horses, and he ended by 
paying handsomely for them, and the 
bargaining spirit of the British farmer 
was aroused. 

" I'll be proud to do business with you 
another time, captain," he said, as he 
pocketed Despard's cheque, " though, to 
tell the truth, I've cared for naught lately." 
And the farmer gave a restless sigh. 

"Ah!" said Despard, looking at him, 
" you Ve had great trouble of late. I have 
heard of it ; I am truly sorry." 

"I tell you what kind of trouble, captain," 
answered Eiddell, bringing his heavy 
clenched fist down on the dining-room 
table, for they had gone into the house 



BUYING HOUSES. 65 

SO that Despard might draw his cheque ; 
"I've had sich trouble as breaks a man's 
heart ! My lass — the bonniest lass you 
ever looked at, and as good as bonny — 
went and drowned herself for the sake of 
a young fellar who never cared for her 
like her old father." 

"No, I am sure he did not. I know 
whom you mean, of course, Mr. Eiddell. 
This sad- afiair, in fact, has caused me 
a great deal of pain and annoyance also, 
as this young gentleman was unhappily 
engaged to be married to my cousin, Miss 
Despard." 

The farmer lifted up his round blood- 
shot eyes, and stared with a half- stupefied 
stare in Despard's face as he said this. 

"Will you say that again, captain?" 
he said. 

" About Graham North's eugagement, 

do you mean ? That was unfortunately too 

true, but the moment I wrote and told 

my cousin the sad truth about your poor 

VOL. II. 22 



€6 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

daughter, she broke off with him at 
once." 

" Broke off with him at once ? " 

" Yes ; but the whole affair has been 
very annoying for her family. Indeed, as 
soon as she told me of her engagement I 
conceived it my duty to make inquiries 
about him, and then I heard he was en- 
gaged, or ought to be engaged — at all 
events, was the lover of your daughter." 

" You heard that ? " 

" Yes, and I then went over to Dillford, 
where my cousin was staying, to see her. 
I did see her, and told her the story I had 
heard. While I was talking to her, this 
young Graham North rode up, and I left 
them together, and I am sorry to say the 
same afternoon your poor daughter drowned 
herself." 

As Despard said this, in his cool hard 
way, the farmer's face gradually grew 
purple, while his eyes seemed to be abso- 
lutely starting out of his head. 



BUYING HOUSES. 67 

Again he struck his hand on the table, 
and a volley of oaths burst from his lips. 

" If I believed this ! " he gasped out. 

" You must believe it, my good fellow ! It's 
awful hard lines on you, but facts are facts." 

* The 27th of January," said Eiddell 
huskily, "that was the black day! That 
morning, captain — ^ay, I see it all now — 
that morning I went up to the Hall and 
saw the cursed scoundrel — folks had been 
talking; my darter Dorothy had told me 
folks had talked of my girl, and I went to 
offer this villain two thousand pounds if he*d 
marry her! It was impossible, he said! 
He didn't say because he was going to 
marry Miss Despard, or I would have 
struck his false mouth wi' my fist. Ay, 
that was the day, and Winny drowned 
herself. I thought they had drowned them- 
selves together " 

Despard gave a little shrug of his 
shoulders. 

" No," he said ; " he thought too much 

22—2 



68 Oy GOLDEN HINGES. 

of himself for that ; he had done very well 
for himself, you know, Mr. Eiddell ; he 
was engaged to a very rich and very 
charming woman, and he wanted to get 
rid of his old entanglements as fast as he 
could ; so after I left my cousin he sent 
down a letter to your poor girl who was 
waiting for him at their old trysting-place 
by the Dill, coolly to tell her he was going 
to marry Miss Despard, and tliat all love 
passages must end between them, and 
your poor girl took it so much to heart 
that she threw herself into the river." 

The farmer never asked Despard how he 
had learned all this. He stood staring at 
Despard, rage, fury, almost madness, de- 
picted on his face. Great drops broke out 
on his red forehead, and then he staggered 
to the sideboard, like a man drunk, over- 
whelmed, and swallowed some raw whisky, 
which seemed to revive him. 

"What would ye do, captain?" he asked, 
turning fiercely round. 



BUYING HOUSES, ' 69 

" Do you mean to this young man ? " 
said Despard coolly. 

" Ay, to this d devil, who killed my 

girl ! " 

" Oh, you mustn't ask me ; I'm a soldier, 
and we soldiers don't sit quietly down 
under such injuries as this." 

" Nor will I ! " shouted Eiddell. " Look 
here, captain, they say you're a brave man, 
and aren't afraid to face your end. Neither 
am I ! I'll swing for this job — I'll have his 
blood — I'll shoot him like a dog, who didn't 
spare my girl — my Winny, who had a face 
like a flower, and loved her old, rough 
father, and would kiss him, she who was as 
fine and fair as any lady in the land. D'ye 
think I'd stand it ? So he flung her away, 
did he, like an old glove, when he was 
done with her ; but he didn't reckon on her 
father. But I'll reckon wi' him ! " 

"He's taken good care to keep out of 
your way. I suppose you know he has 
left DiUford ? " 



70 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

"He's in London, isn't he? Ill find 
him ; Til put a bullet into him, and send 
him after the poor lass whose life he made 
too bitter for her to bear." 

"It's only natural that you should feel 
this ; however, I don't suppose Mr. Graham 
North is likely to show his face again in 
these parts in a hurry." 

Then the farmer swore too awful an 
oath to be recorded here that the day 
Graham North set his foot on the lands of 
DiJlford he would be a dead man, and 
Francis Despard, being now quite satisfied 
with his morning's work, prepared to take 
his leave. 

Having parted with the farmer, he walked 
towards Castle Hill, whistling softly as he 
wtent. He had laid the train, and some 
day the mine would explode, though it 
might end in murder. 

" Aud a good thing, too,*' thought 
Despard ; " he's best dead, and out of 
Katherine's way." 



CHAPTER V. 



THE farmer's oath. 



He told his cousin where he had been when 
he reached Castle Hill. 

"My dear," he said, walking into the 
library, where Katherine was sitting, *' can 
I have a brandy and soda, for my soul 
thirsteth within me ? " 

Katherine looked up from her book with 
a smile. 

"Where have you been, Frank," she 
said, "to come in with such a thirsty 
soul ? " 

"My dear, I have been sitting on a 
powder-magazine, on a portmanteau of 
dynamite, if there is anything warmer, on 
that I received orders last night not to 
name a certain gentleman, but for the sake 



72 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

of this nameless one I have suffered many 
things to-day. 

« Frank I " 

" Quite true, my dear, but I'll tell yoii 
the whole story, always of course without 
mentioning names. Well, to begin with^ 
I want to buy some artillery horses, and 
that rascal old Ben led me unawares into 
the lion's den." 

" I do not understand." 

" Wait a bit ; Ben declared he knew oi* 
a serviceable pair of good strong brutes, 
and invited me to take a stroll up to n 
neighbouring homestead to look at them. 
I walked up enjoying my cigar, and think- 
ing how happy is the ploughboy, whistling 
in his muddy boots as he tramps over the 
fresh-turned clay ! That sort of thing you 
know — rural felicity — short-sighted mortal 
that I was. Well, we arrived at the 
homestead, and Ben introduced me to a 
most bucolic whisky-and-water looking 
gentleman, or I should more truly say. 



THE FARMERS OATH. 73 

whisky without water — Mr. Biddell! I 
started ; I remembered the name of some- 
body's victim." 

" Oh, Frank, do not begin that again I " 

" I must, Katie. For somebody's sake, 
I must tell you the trap into which I 
had fallen. I saw the horses, I bought 
them, and paid for them, and then my 
whisky without water gentleman having 
made a fairly hard bargain, gave a senti- 
mental roll of his bloodshot eyes as he 
pocketed my cheque, and said he hoped 
to do a little more business with me on 
some future occasion. But he added, 'I 
care for naught now,' always barring the 
whisky without water, I should say." 

" You saw poor Mr. Eiddell, of Thornl^^ 
Farm, I suppose ? " 

" Precisely, I saw poor Mr. Eiddell, of 
Thornley Farm, and heard a bit of poor 
Mr. Eiddell's mind. My dear, it is on 
murder bent ! Don't turn pale, Katie ; 
the bucolic mind is not far stretching. 



74 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

and I don't suppose his hatred will take 
him beyond the narrow limits of his 
own county. But if somebody has any 
regard for his skin, or for the melancholy 
and Romeo-like visage on which no doubt 
lie prides himself, don't let him come 
near Dillford, Castle Hill, or Thornley 
again. In fact, this man swore, Katie, 
such an oath that I cannot repeat it before 
ears polite, but he swore he'd have the 
blood of the villain who drove his girl 
to her death. I hope you understand I 
am quoting Mr. Eiddell's words ? " 

"Frank," said Katherine rising, and 
showing evident tokens of much emotion, 
"if you knew how intensely painful all 
tliis is to me, I am sure you would never 
name the subject," 

" I know it's painful, Katie, and I didn't 
mean to be a brute, but I thought it would 
be well to give you some warning of this 
man's intentions, and you can warn your 
friend, Mrs. Graham Nortli, in the interest 



TRE FARMERS OATH, 75 

of her son. I jam not exaggerating, and 
Eiddell is in earnest, and I'll tell you 
he's a precious ugly customer to deal with ; 
but of course, you cannot wonder at the 
fellow, who, it seems, was devoted to this 
poor girl." 

"I know — I know — but do not talk of 
it, I entreat you, Frank, do not name it 
any more." 

He went up to her, bent down, and 
kissed her hand. 

" Forgive me, dearest of women," he 
said; "no Katherine, I will not name it 
any more." 

As he stood looking at her he thought 
how much he loved her, and how he would 
let no man take her away from him. He 
never considered her feelings ; slie was a 
good woman, he would have argued in 
his coarse and selfish fashion, if any other 
idea had occurred to him, and he was 
sure she would be true to him if once she 
were his wife, and would learn to love him. 



76 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

"Perhaps better than I shall love her 
then," he might have added, for he was 
a bitter cynic even about himself. But 
he was determined to marry her, and was 
one of those rash mortals who believe it 
is in the power of human will to bring 
anything to pass. 

He could not understand indeed that 
there might be silent memories, strong in- 
visible bonds between two souls that yet 
were parted. 

"Women forget even faster than men," 
he used to say jestingly, and he really be- 
lieved this. He knew very well that 
Katherine had liked Graham North, but 
all this would pass away, with the " follies 
of her girlhood." 

And he acted on this belief. Katherine 
noticed that during the day after his visit to 
Tliornley Farm that he was very restless. 
He came in and went out of the rooms 
almost aimlessly ; he smoked on the terrace 
and threw away his cigars before they were 



THE FABMEIta OATH. 77 

half ended. At last he went up to her, and 
put his hand on her shoulder. 

"Do you know, Katie," he said, "I never 
felt so unwilling to leave Castle Hill as I do 
to-day." 

"But need you really go to-night, 
Frank?" 

"I really must; it's a horrid bore, though, 
for I would like so much to stay, unless 
you vrill go with me ? " 

Katherine shook her head smilingly. 

"That wouldn't do, even with my big 
cousin," she said. 

" Cousinship is a very stupid arrange- 
ment, do you know, Katie ; it is neither one 
thing nor the other. A fellow is constantly 
thrown with his cousin, and yet he is ex- 
pected not to make love to her — very hard 
upon the fellow." 

Very," laughed Katherine. 
Don't you laugh. Miss Katie; I'm in 
earnest, though I mayn't express myself 
very gracefully. But now really, wouldn't 






78 ON GOLDEN HIXGE8. 

it be the very best thing for us l)oth, if 
you would marry me ? " 

" No, I don't think it would." 

" But why, my dear child ? I really like 
you, Katie ; like you a deal better than I 
ever liked any other woman ; a deal 
better than I like myself ! There, that's a 
real conquest for you now, for man is essen- 
tially a selfish animal, and loves himself 
generally with a love * passing the love of 
woman/ " 

" Frank, do not be stupid." 

"Is it stupid, little woman? It's only 
natural, at any rate. Here, as I said befcH'e, 
I am thrown daily — have been thrown 
for years — with a most charming girl, and 
the charming girl won't let me make love 
to her ! It isn't really fair, and I've been 
horribly vexed lately about your name being 
mixed up in this miserable business that you 
don't like mentioned. So why not put a 
stop to all their confounded gossip at^once, 
and give me a legal right to protect you ? " 



THE FARMERS OATH, 79 

" I do wish you would not talk thus." 

" How can I help it ; I'm not made of 
stone ; you are not thinking of any one else, 
are you, Katie ? " 

" No, indeed I am not." 

"Then may I ask do you contemplate 
being an old maid? You impudent girl, 
are you laughing at me.'^ I don't believe 
you've a bit of heart." 

" All the more fit for an old maid then, 
Frank." 

" Don't be stupid ; now look here, be a 
good girl, and come and get married to me 
without any fuss, and we'll be as jolly as 
possible. No, I won t be refused, Katie, I'm 
going to marry you, and we'll be * happy 
ever afterwards.' " 

Katherine could not help laughing. 
Frank Despard's rough and ready way of 
making love always amused her, because 
she did not in the least believe that he was 
in love with her. lie wanted to marry hei-, 
but that was a very different thing. 



«o ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

" Well, Frank, when you are done with 
all this nonsense," she said rising, " I will 
go and dress for dinner. How can you 
be so silly — but soldiers and sailors, you 
know " 

" All very fine," he retorted ; but with a 
little nod and a smile Katherine was gone, 
and he had no further opportunity of talk- 
ing to her alone. 

He left Castle Hill in time to catch the 
night train for the north, and he left it 
still quite determined to marry Katheriiie. 
He was in truth more in love with her 
than she believed him to be. Her very 
indifference roused a stronger passion in 
his rough and wayward heart. 

He would have her, he told himself, as 
old Ben drove him away from Castle Hill, 
and he never faltered from this resolve. 
On the whole, too, he thought that he had 
done pretty well during this visit to his 
cousin's house. He had made it impossible 
for one thing for Graham North to return 



THE FABMEE8 OATH, 8i 

to the neighbourhood, and for another, 
though he had proposed to Katherine, jshe 
had not absolutely refused him. 

He had at least succeeded in rousing the 
most furious and vindictive passions in 
the breast of farmer Eiddell. Scarcely had 
he left , Thornley when the farmer ran into 
the kitchen, shouting and gesticulating like 
a madman. 

Dorothy was standing at the table 
making a pudding, and Eiddell seized her 
floury hand and dragged her into the 
parlour, banging the door violently behind 
her. 

" Father, are you mad ? " said Dorothy, 
who was utterly surprised and frightened. 

" Ay, mad, if ye like ! D'ye know 
what IVe heard? D'ye know who that 
was who was here ? " shouted the farmer. 

" I saw old Ben, the coachman from 
Castle Hill. Susan said he had come with 
a gentleman to buy a horse." 

" Ay, to buy a horse, and to tell me what 
VOL. n. 23 



82 Oy GOLDEN HINGES, 

I'd lief been dead before I heard ! Lass, 
that gentleman was Captain Despard, Miss 
Despard's cousin, and he told me the real 
story how my girl came to her end. That 
double-dyed villain wrote to tell her he 
was going to marry Miss Despard, and he 
was going to marry her, and when Winny 
read the letter — ^he had sent it down to 
the river where she was waiting for him, 
and where they used to meet — the poor 
lass flung herself into the waters to hide 
her grief and shame." 

Dorothy gave a gasp, and drew in her 
lips, and her rosy face grew pale. 

" How had he heard ? " she faltered. 

" Heard ! they've all heard ! This 
devil has told Miss Despard, I suppose, 
and Miss Despard has told her cousin. 
He — the captain — made inquiries when 
Miss Despard told him she was going to 
marry this scoundrel, and then he heard 
all about poor Winny — that they were 
lovers, that they ought to be married if 



THE FARMERS OATH. 83 

they weren't, and the captain went down 
to Dillfprd and told his cousin.'' 

"And then?" asked Dorothy; she was 
trembling — she who knew all this so well — 
was asking herself should she tell her 
father the whole truth, but his next 
words decided her. 

" Then ! Why, then this devil wrote the 
letter that killed my girl ! Wrote to tell 
her he was done with her, that he was 
going to marry Miss Despard, and that she 
must just make the best on't ! There — he 
wrote that to our Win — but he wrote 
once too often! Dorothy, my woman" 
(and again the farmer swore the dreadful 
oath he had sworn before Despard, caUing 
on the name of the Highest to witness it), 
" that man and I shan't live together in the 
land — ^it's life for life — ^he killed my girl, 
and I'll km him!" 

" Oh, father, don't say such dreadful 
things." 

" I'll say them and I'll do them," swore 

23—2 



84 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

the enraged man; "he's in London, but 
I'll track him down ; I'll shoot him like a 
dog— ay, if I swing for it." 

"It's wicked to talk so," said Dorothj-, 
who had now made up her mind ; " you 
have another daughter, father, though you 
think nothing of me. Poor Winny is gone, 
and we can't get her back, and murder 
won't help us to do it. Leave the young 
man alone, his conscience will punish him 
enough." 

" We'll see," answered Eiddell, and then 
he had again recourse to his whisky bottle, 
and Dorothy watching him, thanked God 
that she had wisely held her tongue. 

For she knew Graham North's address ; 
had at this moment a few lines from him in 
her pocket wjiich had only arrived during 
the morning. He had written to tell her 
where he was immediately he was settled, 
and this action, and his letter before he left 
Dillford, had somewhat softened Dorothy's 
feelings towards him. At all events, she 



THE FARMER'S OATH, ^ 

determined her father should learn no more 
from her. 

"If I told him Mr. North would have 
married poor Winny in the end, it would 
only bring it all over again, and do no 
good," reflected Dorothy; so she tried to 
soothe her father, and asked him about 
his horses, and how much Captain Despard 
had paid for them. 

" It would be a good thing if you took 
to rearing horses regularly, I think, father," 
she said ; " you see they are always wanted 
for the army, and you might get a connec- 
tion through the captain." 

Eiddell would not answer her, but her 
words were words of wisdom. They re- 
called to the man's narrow mind the 
remembrance of money and money-making, 
dear to every mascuUne soul. 

" One must live even if one has no heart 
for it," thought the poor farmer ; and pre- 
sently, with a heavy sigh, he went out to 
look after his live stock, and see especially 



86 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

to the grooming of the two young horses 
bought by Captain Despard. 

But whether in his farm-yard or in his 
fields, he was always haunted by the sweet 
face of his young daughter. His brain, 
half maddened with drink, pictured her 
now ghastly, changed — tossed by the cruel 
sea, or lying entombed in the river slime — 
but not at rest. 

"I cannot go even to her bit grave," 
said the farmer in his lonely self-<5onmiune, 
dashing away a tear with his rough hand ; 
" if I could think of her sleepen' — her pretty 
face still and white — it would be something. 
But to lose her as I did ; her last thought 
to be of her misery, is more than a man's 
heart can stand. But I've one thing left 
to live for, as that false hound shall know." 

And even in his heavy sleep this vision 
ever pursued him. He would dream of 
Winny ; see in the shadowy field of unde- 
fined images that flit and pass in disordered 
train, the slender graceful creature who 



THE FARMERS OATH. 



87 



had been his pride, and then wake up with 
starting eyes and clenched hands, swearing 
vengeance against the murderer of his 
girl. 




CHAFER VI. 

MRS. FRTER. 

A GREAT mental shock, especially if caused 
by any action of our own, almost invariably 
has a powerful influence on our hearts and 
lives. There are those who grow larger, 
and there are those who grow smaller in 
passing through the crucible. In looking 
back beyond such miserable times we see 
a different self — the untried self — and we 
wonder how we ever could be as then we 
must have been. 

So at least it seemed to Graham 
North when he thought of his past life amid 
the vast solitude in which he found himself. 
For at first he sought neither friend nor 
acquaintance in London, and every passing 
face he looked on was a strange one. His 
burden was yet too heavy, and his sorrow 



MRS. FRYEE. 89 

too fresh to bear communion with his 
fellow men. The shadow that had fallen 
on his heart wrapped everything in gloom. 

But little by little this was forced by 
circumstances away from him. The first 
thing that absolutely aroused him, that 
made him see that it was a positive necessity 
that he should exert himself, was a letter 
which he received from his old friend, Mr. 
Dixon, the lawyer at Normanton. 

Mr. Dixon wrote in the kindest fashion. 
He did not attempt to ignore the blow that 
had befallen Graham, and he wrote a few 
sympathetic and feeling words on the sub- 
ject. But it was the future, and not the past, 
that Mr. Dixon made the text of his letter. 

He pointed out that every man is the 
better for having a regular profession or 
employment. But nowadays money was 
required to enter into almost all careers, 
and this money Mr. Dixon told Graham 
would be forthcoming whenever he re- 
quired it. 



90 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

" As an old lawyer, my dear lad," wrote 
the kindly man, " if you will permit me to 
advise you, I would point to the law. Why 
not study for the Bar? This will divert 
your mind from painful themes, and throw 
you with a set of men who will at least give 
you something new to think about. Am- 
bition will stir within you, for it is an arena 
where the victor is crowned with honour, 
and where there is necessarily great com- 
petition. If you decide on this course, I 
have an old friend in the Temple, who, by 
the way, has not himself been over suc- 
cessful, and he will, I am sure, gladly take 
you as a pupil, and coach you to the best of 
his ability. I will settle about all expenses, 
and inclose a cheque for one hundred 
pounds for present use, as I know how 
annoying it is to be short of means in 
London. Let me hear from you, and 
believe me to remain, your sincere friend, 

"John Dixon." 



MBS. FRYER. 91 

This letter had a powerful effect on 
Graham North. It touched him to the 
heart. What had he done to deserve such 
generous kindness, he asked himself, remem- 
bering with a pang of bitter shame that he 
was already indebted to Mr. Dixon for over 
five hundred pounds. 

But he would have been mofe affected 
had he known from whom this proposal 
really originated. Mr. Dixon had, in fact, 
got a new client, and all she stipulated was 
that her name should not appear in the 
transaction. Mr. Dixon was, indeed, only 
too glad to obey Miss Despard's instructions. 
Katherine had gone to him shyly enough ; 
she scarcely knew how to begin the con- 
versation, and blushed so prettily, she quite 
won the old man's heart. 

** You — you are a friend of Mr. Graham 
North ? " she said at last without looking up. 

"I have been a friend oi three Graham 
Norths," answered Mr. Dixon with a smile ; 
" ay — ^I've known them all ! " 



9a ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

Then Katherine nervously began to tell 
Mr. Dixon what she wanted him to do. Of 
course he knew all about this sad, sad story. 

Yes, Mr. Dixon said he knew ; he pitied 
Graham heartily; he was a fine fellow, 
though he had been unfortunate enough to 
get into this trouble. 

This made it more easy for Katherine, 
and Mr. Dixon listened with undoubted 
pleasure to what she had to say. Graham 
should have something to do ; something to 
make him forget the miserable past, and 
Katherine begged the lawyer to write to 
him, and propose to him some profession, 
and also to assure him that money would 
not be wanting for anything he should 
choose. 

" But make him think it is your money, 
please, Mr. Dixon," said Katherine in her 
sweet, simple, earnest way ; " it would not 
do, you know ; he would not take it from 
me, but you are an old friend, and I know 
Graham thinks very highly of you." 



MRS. FRYEB. 93 

Mr. Dixon was not a little gratified by, 
her confidence. And he foresaw also, he 
hoped, a happy future yet for Graham, 
since this charming young woman had still 
so strong an interest in him. He promised 
to write to him at once, and he did write, 
and this letter had a good influence on the 
moody man, who was perpetually haunted 
with the memory of the poor girl whose 
life he had so fatally injured. 

But Mr. Dixon's letter pierced through 
the dull apathy that had fallen on his heart. 
Graham began to ask himself if he had any 
right to give way to utter despondency as 
he had done. It did not fit him at any 
rate for the battle of life which he knew lay 
before him. And this kind, generous old 
man, he argued to himself,' how could he 
ever repay the heavy debt he owed him, 
unless he tried to put his sorrow behind 
him? 

And he did try. He wrote a grateful 
letter to Mr. Dixon, but he told him that 



94 OX GOLDEN HIN0E8. 

after giving the mattei" every consideration 
he did not think he would care to study for 
the Bar. The knowledge of the expense 
really deterred him, and the feeling also 
that the profession was not suited to the 
natural bent of his mind. He was studious, 
proud and reserved, and he felt the work 
most fitted for him was what he could do 
alone. 

He determined, therefore, to join an 
already over-crowded calling, and become 
a writer. He had had the usual training 
alone of so many aspiring youths, and had 
written poetry and prose in his callow days, 
when his boyhood was merging into man- 
hood, and vague dreams and theories 
floated in constant succession through his 
brain. 

His cheeks had flushed and his heart 
glowed ivithin him at seeing his crude ideas 
appear before him in the columns of a 
country newspaper, and he had made up 
his mind at one time that he was a 



MRS. FRYER. 95 

genius, and that a great career lay before 
him. 

This conviction had, however, soon fallen 
from him. Two articles that he sent to a 
London magazine were duly returned, and 
he had heard some one laughing at one 
of his choicest morsels in the poets' corner, 
while he was standing in the County Inn, 
at Normanton, and he had thrown away 
his pen in disgust. He was too sensitive, in 
fact, to go through the drudgery, and knew 
nothing of the Job-like patience of some 
authors. But now, when his early aspir- 
ations were all gone, cold, and dead, he 
turned to it again. He did not think he 
was a genius^ now ; he was quite sure he 
was not, but it was a means of livelihood, 
and he not unnaturally under-estimated the 
difficulties in his way. 

Mr. I Dixon showed Graham's letter to 
Katherine, and she felt somewhat dis- 
appointed when she read it, and was sorry 
Graham had decided not to study for the Bar. 



96 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

" Does he mean by a writer, a writer of 
books ? " she asked. 

"No, for the daily press, I think — leading 
articles, and that sort of thing ; well, my 
dear young lady, some of these leaders in 
first-rate journals are master-pieces ; Mr. 
Graham may yet be a distinguished man." 

At all events it was a good thing both 
Katherine and Mr. Dixon agreed, that 
Graham had determined to do something 
at once. Mr. Dixoti wrote another kind, 
encouraging letter to him, and Katherine 
and the old man speedily became fast 
friends, the first link between them being 
this little secret about Graham North, and 
it was a secret they rigidly kept to them- 
selves. 

In the meanwhile, Graham had deter- 
minately set to work. He began by 
changing his residence, leaving the quiet 
family hotel where he was staying, and 
going to yet more quiet lodgings in Maida 
Vale. 



MRS, FRYER, 97 

He saw these lodgings advertised in the 
Telegraphy and took them because the 
woman, who showed them to him, was a 
homely, north-country woman. The way 
she rolled out her words from her large 
mouth decided him, in compunction with 
her pleasant, flat, honest, ugly face. 

He would be the only lodger, she said, 
and they were very quiet — only the lady 
and herself. 

"The lady," repeated Graham, in a dis- 
mayed tone. " Is she — an old lady ? " 

The woman smiled. 

"None on us like to be called old, you 
know, sir," she said, " but Mrs. Fryer isn't 
young — she'll be getting on to sixty." 

This satisfied Graham, and he agreed to 
go, and found himself the same night in a 
little quiet, well-furnished dining-room, 
with every comfort around him. There 
was a long garden at the back of the house, 
where he could walk, the north-country 
woman (whose name was Hannah) informed 

VOL. IT. 24 



9S ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

him, and for some days he saw nothing 
of the lady to whom the house really 
belonged. 

Hannah was very attentive to him, and 
he was perfectly undisturbed. So he began 
to write political articles, and succeeded 
fairly well/ But at first he met with 
nothing but disappointment when he at- 
tempted to dispose of them. He, in fact, 
tried nearly all the leading papers in vain. 

His appearance procured him a civil 
reception, but it procured him nothing 
more. 

"We have plenty of such articles as 
these, sir, always on hand," he was told 
with a smile, after a glance had been given 
at the fine and patriotic sentences that had 
cost him so much time and thought. No 
one would have anything to do with them 
however ; the regular " staff " glanced at 
each other and shrugged their shoulders, 
when he turned disappointed away. 

But he had made up his mind not to be 



MS8, FRYER, 99 

beaten, and suddenly an idea flashed across 
his brain. In his youthful days, when he 
had figured in the poets' corner in the 
Normanton Gazette, he had been on friendly 
terms with the kindly, nervous little man, 
who was then its editor, and this Mr. Wells 
had, during Graham's absence abroad, 
joined the London Press. 

Graham determined to find out the 
whereabouts of his old acquaintance, and 
soon learned that Mr. Wells was now sub- 
editor of a well-known morning paper, and, 
strange to say, on the very day he meant to 
call on him, he met the little man in the 
street close to the office of the paper. 

Graham stopped and held out his hand. 
Mr. Wells was hardly changed in the ten 
years that had passed over his head, except 
that he was a little greyer, but at first he 
did not recognize Graham. 

The handsome lad, with the dreamy 
poetic eyes, had disappeared. In his place 
Mr. Wells saw a grave-faced man, dressed 

24—2 



loo ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

in deep mourning, with finely-cut features, 
and a grey line here and there in his dark 
hair. 

" I beg your pardon," said Mr. Wells in 
his nervous way, " but I have not the plea- 
sure of knowing " 

"Don't you remember me? Graham 
North.'' 

" To be sure ! to be sure ! " cried Mr. 
Wells, though he was by no means sure. 
" Ah, yes, yes — my poetical young friend 
at Normanton — I remember now — but you 
are changed — I fear you have had some 
sorrow?" And he glanced at Graham's 
dress. 

" I have had a great sorrow," answered 
Graham ; " I was just going to call on you, 
Mr. Wells, may I do so ? " 

Mr. Wells said he was delighted to see 
him ; he was not, for he was really too 
busy to be delighted to see any one ; 
but even he did not say he was delighted 
when he heard what Graham really wanted. 



MRS, FRYER. loi 

His face fell, yet he made an effort to 
smile. 

" Still a literary turn, then," he said, " ha, 
hum — it's astonishing how much of that 
kind of thing there is about." 

But he, however, promised to help Gra- 
ham if he could. Graham therefore left 
some of his articles with him, and left his 
address, and then sombrely returned to his 
rooms. 

The same day, after his lonely dinner 
was over, as he sat sadly enough gazing 
into the fire, Hannah rapped at the door, 
and asked him if he would be pleased to 
see Mrs. Fryer. 

Already there was the rustle of a silk 
gown in the passage, so there was nothing 
left for Graham but to rise with the best 
grace he could, and in another moment a 
tall stout woman, over sixty, entered the 
room, and made him a magnificent bow. 

She had a very remarkable face ; vain as 
a girl, and with a foolish simper ever on 






102 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

her faded lips, over which one darkish 
tooth protruded, she certainly could never 
have been handsome. Yet she had all the 
mannerism of beautj. She had a curious 
cast in one eye, and heavy bands of dark 
false hair, but it never seemed to occur to 
her that she was not attractive to look 
upon. And in spite of her peculiarities, 
you saw some how that she was a lady. 

" I am pleased to know you, Mr. Graham 
North," she said; "I know the name of 
your people well, and in my girlish days 
used to meet your mother at the county 
balls — she was handsome then — you remind 
me of her." 

She had a shrill, thin, tinny voice, and as 
she paid Graham this compliment she sim- 
pered, and cast down her eyes. 

*^ Then you lived in Northumberland ? " 
said Graham. 

" Ah, yes — my married days were spent 
in Northumberland — ^they were days of 
trial — ^but you see one still lives ! " 



MBS. FRYER. 103 






And you knew my mother ? " 
Not personally, but I have often seen 
her, and I am very glad to make the ac- 
quaintance of her son. I Uke the society 
of gentlemen ; for this reason alone I allow 
my good Hannah to let part of the house, 
for it's terribly dull to live only with 



women." 



^' Well, that is very flattering to us." 

" It is true though ! Men are great 
trials as husbands. The happiest days of 
my wedded life were when po" Fiyer WM 
too ill to -rise from the sofa. He was de- 
pendent on me then, and therefore tried to 
make himseK agreeable. But he had a 
horrible temper ! I used to wonder how it 
was possible that one person could make a 
house so miserable." 

" Then you have not married again ? " 
smiled Graham. 

*' I shall never marry again! No, I like 
a companion who has a sympathetic soul, 
and with whom I can hold converse on the 



104 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

vague and, I fear, often vain aspirations of 
our complex hearts. I am poetical. I love 
reading. I write prose and verse, and I am 
musical, and therefore companionable, and 
I shall be pleased to see you sometimes in 
my drawing-room." 

" You are very good." 

" It will be a pleasure to me. Come up 
now and I will show you all my treasures." 

What could Graham say ? And after all 
it was a certain relief to his jaded weary 
mind to talk to this flighty lady. And she 
also proved really kind. Her foibles were 
so apparent, and her vanity so innocent and 
harmless, that they amused without annoy- 
ing you. And she soon took an immense 
fancy to Graham, and was never weary of 
telling him that if she had had the mis- 
fortune to have a son, she would . have 
wished for such a one as Graham North ; 
" but aU the same," she would add archly, 
" I am glad he did not arrive ! " 






CHAPTER Vn. 



WORK, 



February passed away chill and foggy, and 
March dawned, and the modest promises of 
spring were to be seen on the trees, and in 
the changeful winds and skies, and still 
Graham North toiled on in the little house 
in Maida Vale, manfully struggling against 
rebuffs. 

Then quite suddenly, about the middle of 
March, work came to him. He had seen 
his friend, Mr. Wells, in the meanwhile 
twice, and each time the little man had, as 
it were, virtually patted him on the back. 

" There is promise, great promise," he 
would say, tapping Graham's manuscript 
with his thin, nervous fingers, and with 
this encouragement Graham persevered. 



io6 Oy GOLBES HINGES. 

But one day he got a note from the sub- 
elitor, asking him to call at the office of 
the paper, and Graham went. 

Mr. Wells had a proposal to make to 
him. His son, John Wells, a young man of 
twenty-two, who also was employed on the 
staff of the paper, had broken down under 
pressure, and the doctors said he must 
have rest and change. It was too good a 
post to give up without an effort, and Mr. 
Wells had obtained the consent of the pro- 
prietors to endeavour temporarily to supply 
his son's place, and he now offered this 
position to Graham. 

Graham saw John Wells, and knew as he 
looked on the large glittering eyes, on the 
sunken thin-skinned face, and heard the 
hollow cough, that the bright promise of 
John Wells' youth would never be fulfilled. 
He had fallen in the ranks ; broken down 
before his great gifts had come to fruition, 
and only his anxious father and mother did 
not see that in rea,lity his work was done. 



WOUK. 107 

. He was going to Spain, and talked of 
what lie would do when he was there, and 
what he would do when he came back. 
He was full of hope, and the dark shadow 
that was stalking so near him was hidden 
from his sight. He cheerfully instructed 
Graham how to fulfil his duties, and so 
Graham became a journalist, and learned 
by experience how by the "sweat of his 
brow " alone a man can earn his . daily 
bread. 

But he did earn it ; the remuneration he 
received providing all his modest wants, 
and be at once returned Mr. Dixon part of 
the hundred pounds that he had advanced. 
He was pleased to do this, and the old man 
was pleased to receive it. He saw Graham 
was in earnest now, and had partly, at least, 
thrown off the be-numbing influences of his 
self-reproachful grief. 

So the spring passed, away ; Graham at 
his: desk, at the office, through many a long 
balmy night j forced to think of the stirring 



lo8 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

present, and not of the dead past ; forced, 
in fact, to live and not to dream. Only 
when he was alone did he see faint shadowy 
pictures of faces that had once been 
realities in his life* 

His mother often wrote to him, and when 
he told her of the eccentric Mrs. Fryer, 
Mrs. Graham North remembered her. Her 
husband was a very little man, Mrs. 
Graham North wrote, and was supposed to 
be terribly afraid of his big wife. It was 
strange that Graham should have met her, 
and stranger still that she would allow her 
servant to take a gentleman to board with 
them ; but Mrs. Graham North added, " I 
suppose she must be very poor." 

Graham supposed so, too, and sometimes 
brought little delicacies home to assist Mrs. 
Fryer in her housekeeping. She always 
received them very graciously ; she would 
nod her head and look at Hannah. 

"Ah, blue blood tells," she woud say, 
even though Graham were present. Indeed, 



WOBK. 109 

she was always flattering him, and was 
never so pleased as when she could induce 
him to visit her drawing-room. She sang 
little songs to him in her cracked voice, 
and read him her foolish little rhymes. 
But he was always gentle and deferential 
to women. If Mrs. Fryer bored him, she 
never guessed it, and was, indeed, satisfied 
that she made his life more pleasant to 
him. 

And, after Graham had been an inmate 
of her house about two months, an accident 
happened which drew their acquaintance 
closer. One evening, just when Graham 
was going out, Mrs. Fryer drove up in a 
cab, and before Graham could reach the 
garden gate, she somehow managed to 
entangle her foot in her dress, and fell 
heavily on the pavement. 

Graham ran forward and lifted her up, 
and the poor woman screamed. She was 
evidently seriously hurt, and had to be 
carried into the house, and, while Hannah 



no ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

went for the doctor, Graham stayed with 
her, Mrs. Fryer holding his hand fast, while 
tears ran down her cheeks with pain. 

She had broken her leg, and during her 
illness he was very kind to her. He was 
sorry for her, and humoured all her little 
vanities. 

"What would I have done without 
you ? " she said^ and he smiled good- 
naturedly. He was in truth glad to do 
anything for her. He was always thinking 
how his selfishness had wrecked one 
woman's life, and trying to be unselfish 
now. The violent shock of Winny's death 
had changed and enlarged his whole 
nature. 

So he helped to nurse poor silly Mrs. 
Fryer, and one day when his mother sent 
him a great box of flowers from Dillford, 
he took the whole contents up to the old 
lady's bedroom. What pleasure they gave 
her ! Her hands trembled and tears 
came into her eyes with emotion. She 



WORK. 1 1 1 

thought Graham brought her the flowers 
because he liked and admired her so much, 
and never dreamt that it was only out of 
kindliness and good-nature, and that he 
would have done the same to the poor 
barrow woman in the street if he had 
happened to be thrown with her. 

At all events he quite won her heart ; 
she could talk of nothing else, and one 
afternoon during the first weeks of her 
illness Graham had a visitor, in whom also 
she was greatly interested. 

He was sitting writing when Hannah 
opened the door of his room, and said : 

" Your mother's come, sir." 

Graham started up from his chair in the 
greatest possible surprise, and there behind 
him, smiling, actually stood his mother ! 

" My dear, my dear," she said, and ran 
forward and kissed him tenderly. "Are 
you not surprised to see me?" she con- 
tinued. "I did not write because I was 
not quite sure I could leave your poor 



Ill ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

father — ^he is so ill, Graham — but somebody 
wanted me to come, so I came." 

" And who is somebody ? " asked 
Graham smiUng. 

" Come and see," said his mother, and he 
followed her bare-headed down the little 
garden walk, before the house, and sitting 
in a carriage standing at the gate he 
recognized Katherine Despard. 

"Are you not surprised?" she said, 
putting out her hand. 

He was not only surprised, but greatly 
agitated. That bright handsome face, 
the grey shining trustful eyes, the sensitive 
tender mouth, seemed to bring all the past 
back to him in a moment of time. He 
scarcely spoke ; he held her hand, and then 
his mother said, smilingly : 

"Are you not going to ask Katherine 
into your rooms, Graham ? " 

" Of course I am," he answered, with a 
certain effort ; " let me hand you out — Miss 
Despard." 



WOBK, 113 

A little thrill of disappointment passed 
through Katherine's heart as he called her 
" Miss Despard." 

" Do you make a long stay in town ? " he 
continued, as he walked by her sid^ up the 
little garden. 

It was all so cold and formal. Kath- 
erine felt chilled and nervous and ashamed 
that she had sought him out. In reality, 
Graham could. not speak easily, because he 
felt seeing her again so deeply. 

"I — ^I — wanted some dresses," faltered 
Katherine, " and to go to the theatres, and 
so I persuaded Mrs. Graham North to come 
up to town with me ; and of course she 
wished naturally to see you first." 

"I am very pleased to see you both — 
will you. go in — you see there is plenty of 
ink about." 

As Graham said this he led Katherine 

and his mother into the dining-room, and 

in a few moments they both felt more at 

ease. The old charm which each had for 

VOL. n. 25 



114 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

the other resumed its sway. Katherine 
was interested about his Writings and his 
work, and heard the sad story of poor 
John Wells with sympathizing looks. It 
seemed, indeed, as though these two could 
not be cold and unfriendly to each other 
even if they would. 

Presently Hannah rapped at the door, 
and put in her old-fashioned head. 

"Please, sir, Mrs. Fryer's compliments, 
and would the ladies like tea ? " 

No, the ladies had already had tea, 
but this interruption naturally turned 
the conversation to the poor invalid 
upstairs. 

" My dear Graham ! do you mean to say 
you go up and talk to this old woman?" 
said Mrs. Graham North with a little 
shrug. 

" She is very lonely, mother, and suffers 
lots of pain." 

" But still, my dear, need you be head 
nurse ? " 



*^ I-^think it is very 'good of you^" said 
Kath4rifH«^witli a quiver on'iiei? lipg; and 
Graham looked at her for a moment and 
then turned away. ^ > 

Before they left they pressed him to dine 
with them, but he shook his head. 

" You forget that I am a working man," 
he said ; " to dine out would be an im- 
possibility to me." 

" What ! are you such a slave as that ? " 
cried his mother in dismay. 

" I am not quite a slave, mother, but I 
have to be at the office the most of the 
night, and so Miss Despard must excuse 



me. 



"Will you come to lunch to-morrow, 
then ? " asked Katherine. 

After a moment's hesitation he promised 

to do this. Then he escorted them down 

to the carriage, and stood looking after it 

as it drove away. He gave a weary sigh, 

he shrugged his shoulders, he told himself 

he was a fool as he returned to the house. 

25-2 



1 16 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

But this visit had unsettled him ; never had 
his work seemed so weary as that night, 
for a vision of Katherine, radiant, smiling, 
charming, would not keep away. 




CHAPTER Vm. 



WARNED. 



Scarcely had the carriage turned from 
Mrs. Fryer's door, when Katherine and 
Mrs. Graham North looked at each other 
with sympathizing glances. 

" How changed he is ! " said Katherine. 

" He looks ill — he is overworked, I am 
afraid," answered Mrs. Graham North. 

'^ He looks so sad — what he must have 
suffered!" And Katherine slid her hand 
into Mrs. North's. " Did you notice his 
hair is beginning to turn grey ? " 

These two women were very good friends 
now, for they had a strong bond between 
them, and Katherine had forgiven Mrs. 
North, for the sake of Graham. As for 
Mrs. North she had every reason to be fond 



1 18 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

of (he generous Katherine, and she naturally 
still most earnestly hoped that she would 
marry her son. 

"I did not notice the grey hairs," 
she said now with a somewhat sad smile ; 
** but it is such a wretched life for 
him ! " 

They talked of him all: the way to the 
hotel. They must try to get him to go 
about with them, th^ plaxmed^ as the 
change and amusement would do him good. 
They forgot he -had no time to amuse him- 
self, and that he had accepted a changed 
position of life. But when he came the 
next day he told them this quite plainly. 

" IJ feel out of my place with you now," 
he said to Eatherine, with a smile. 

" You will make me angry with you," 
she answered.. . 

Katherine scarcely admitted : to herself 
how keen and vivid wfts the pleasure? that 
she felt iost Graham's society at this^lome. 
She caught hej^eH looking at his face and 



WABNm. 119 

thinking how noble it was; the look of 
endured pain that gave so changed an 
expression to it. He was indeeci greatly 
changed, yet the subtle attraction, of 
Katherine's presence made him sometimes 
feel like the Graham of old again. . But 
he always checked himself. That must 
be all over ; life for him now meant stern, 
sober reality, where duty and, not pleasure 
had to be pursued. He had to work for 
his daily bread, and probably for the 
daily bread of his mother and. sisters, 
and he had no right ever to thin]i of 
Katherine Despard. 

He never had had any right to think 
of her. In a moment of weakness,, worried 
past endurance by want of money, he had 
been false to honour and good faith, The 
dreadful consequences of his faithlessness 
was still ever before him, and though that 
weaker nature might still tempt him, 
might whisper that . Katherine still, Jpy^d 
him, that he .loved her, that the past 



} 



I20 ON OOLDEN HINGES, 

might be forgotten, Graham resolutely 
shut his ears. 

And in his grave and gentle manner Eath- 
erine discerned his determination. And 
she could not but respect it. He accepted 
his punishment bravely and silently, but 
Katherine remembered, perhaps, what he 
had said even at the moment when he 
was parting with her — that he had given 
her more than he had given to the poor 
girl he then meant to make his wife. 

But fate was soon again to separate 
them. Graham had lunch with Katherine 
and his mother one day, and promised 
on the following day to return and take 
them to some of the picture galleries. 

" Though this must be the end of my 
dissipation," he said. 

"We shall see," answered Katherine 
smilingly. 

Early, however, t^e next morning a tele- 
gram reached him from his mother. 

" Come at once, Graham, there is bad 



t6 



WARNED. 121 

news," were the words telegraphed to 
him, and we may be sure Graham lost no 
time in hurrying to their hotel. 

Bad news indeed had come. A telegram 
from Lucy Graham North to her mother 
urging her immediate return. 

Lose no time," Lucy had telegraphed, 

my father is exceedingly ill." 

They all knew what this meant. The 
poor squire was either dying or dead. 
The doctors had indeed told his wife 
another attack would be fatal, and Mrs. 
Graham North was in tears when Graham 
arrived. 

When the last parting had come, she 
was reproaching herself, and jemembering 
the old love that had slowly passed away 
amid trouble and care. But now for 
the moment she thought of the husband 
of her youth — the handsome young squire 
that had come to woo her, bringing, she 
believed, wealth as well as love in his 
open hand. The love had been real, the 



1 22 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

wealth hollow and . delusive, and Mrs. 
Graham North hated poverty. But she 
had been a true wife ; even scandal, had, 
never breathed a light whisper about 
the reputation . of this proud woman. . 

^'I must go to him at once/' she said, 
to Graham. 

** And — Katherine ? " asked Graham, 
looking at Katherine. 

" I will go too, of course," said Catherine, 
" I could not leave your mother now." 

" I thank you very much," he answered 
simply; "I cannot get leave to-day to go 
down with you, mother — but I will 
come^" 

"No, no, my dear," said Mrs. JTorth, 
drying her tears, and amid her sorrow, 
thinking of a dearer life than that of her 
dying V husband's ;" you must not come — 
even if the worst happens, Graham, you 
must keep away from Dillford." . 

Graham quite understood her, meaning., 
She was, thinkii^ of Dorothy Kiddell's 



WARNED. , wj 

letter, in which she- had warned Graham 
of her father's proposed vengeance, and 
Katherine standing near, also understood 
what Mrs. Graham North meant, her 
cousin's interview with . the farmer recur- 
ring at this moment very vividly . to her 
mind. 

"No, Graham, you must not come," 
she said, " I will be with your mother." 

Graham said nothing; he went to the 
station with them, and got their tickets, 
and parted with them. with grave and deep 
anxiety in his heart. ^ His father's death 
would precipitate matters, and sooner than 
he expected he would probably have to 
find his mother and sisters a home. 

The mortgagees would now probably 
foreclose, as there was no possibility of 
paying 4hem off, and the ♦ estates would 
go to the hammer. It was all very sad, 
and it seemed sadder still when the next 
morning's post brought him/the news that 
his father was dead. r^K- . 



124 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

"We did not arrive in time," wrote 
Katherine Despard, "your poor father's 
troubles were over before we reached 
Dillford. He looks so peaceful, so happy ; 
we must not grieve, as his life was so full 
of pain. Your mother is in great distress, 
and she has asked me to write to you, but 
do not be anxious about them, and do not 
come. I shall see Mr. Dixon, and make 
all necessary arrangements, and I hope 
and trust that you will regard me as a 
true friend. But again let me urge you 
not to come to Dillford at present, and 
I remain, 

" Very sincerely yours, 

"Katherine Despard." 

In reply to this letter, Graham North 
wrote to tell Katherine that he intended 
to be present at his father's funeral. After 
thanking her for her great kindness and true 
friendship to them in their hour of adversity 
and pain, he added : " I know of course 



WARNED. 125 

to what you allude in wishing me not to 
come to DiUford, but I shall not allow 
Mr. Eiddell's threats to deter me from 
paying the last respect I can pay to my 
dear father. I shall arrive at DiUford 
to-morrow, and until then, remain sincerely 
and gratefully yours, 

"Graham North." 

This letter filled Katherine's heart with 
the greatest anxiety. Yet she could do 
nothing more, and on such an occasion 
surely Graham would be safe. 

Even his mother seemed to think this, 
and was evidently secretly gratified when 
Katherine showed her this letter ; it galled 
her pride that a son of her's should fear 
a man in Mr. Eiddell's position, and though 
she had urged Graham not to come, -she 
was yet proud and glad to learn that he 
meant to do so. 

And on the evening before the funeral 
he arrived. His friend, Mr. "Wells, had 



ia6 ON GOLMiN HINGES. 

got some t>ne to take hb post for acoupde 
of dayfr,but he could 'no& arraDge^to leave 
town sooner than he did. Poor^ Mrs. 
Fryer was in the greatest distress about 
him leaving her at aU, and indulged in 
many gloomy prophecies about herself. 

"I shall be gone before you return," 
she said, wiping away her fast-falling 
tears at the dismal idea. 

" You must not talk such nonsense," said 
Graham ; " you would not like me not to 
go and see my poor father laid in his grave ? " 

" No, no, it is right ; but you will come 
into the estate now ? " 

**I will come into fresh troubles, Mrs. 
Fryer ; my father was a ruined man ; I am 
the son of a ruined man — my only heritage 
is debt." 

The poor old lady nervously twisted her 
handkerchief round her jSngers ; then in 
her feeble, piping voice, and looking at 
him with her blinking eyes, she made him 
an offer that completely surprised him. 



WASJSnSD, 127 

" I am not a rich woman," she said, 
" but, my dear boy, if five hundred pounds 
will be any assistance to you, I can lay my 
hands on that ? Do not refuse ; I love you 
as my own son, and it is the poor helping 
the poor, you know ! " And she gave a 
little laugh. 

Graham was touched by her kindness; 
that this poor lady out of her scanty means 
should make such a generous sacrifice for 
him actually affected him, and with genuine 
feeling he took her hand. 

" You are very kind," he said ; " more 
than kind, but this could not be, Mrs. 
Fryer. I thank you as much as if I had 
accepted your offer, but I mean to live 
by my work, you know, and when I do 
write a book, you must promise to buy 
a copy." 

"A hundred, my dear boy!" she an- 
swered, and she made him promise to write 
to her when he went away. They parted 
on the best of terms, and it was somethinjr, 



128 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

Graham thought, to have made one friend 
in his lonely, desolate life, even though it 
was only this eccentric old lady. 

He had an unhappy journey down . to 
Dillford, and at the first sight of the wind 
ing Dill he was painfully affected. The 
blue river was gliding beneath the drooping 
willows as it had glided in the spring time 
twelve months ago; the tall reeds stood 
straight and erect now as they had stood 
then, and for Graham the shadow of a fair 
face still rested on the water. It all came 
back with the bitterest force ; Winny's love 
and her last despairing cry as the frozen 
tide had swept over her, Graham seemed 
to see and hear it all, and with a groan 
he sank back in the railway carriage and 
covered his face. 

A carriage was waiting for him at the 
station, and in half-an-hour he was at 
home. His mother ran out into the hall 
to receive hira, already dressed in her deep 
weeds, and clasped him closely to her 



WABXED. 129 

breast. Even slie understood some of the 
dull cold misery of liis heart. 

" Katherine has been like a daughter to 
me," she half whispered in his ear as she 
led him into the drawing-room, where his 
sisters were waiting to kiss him. " She 
went to Castle Hill this afternoon to meet 
Mr. Dixon and make some arrangement, 
but she will return here to-morrow. What 
would I have done without her, Graham ? 
She is an angel ! " 

Graham only gave a wintry smile in 
reply. It was a certain relief to him that 
Katherine was not there. This home-com- 
ing seemed to him more dreadful than he 
had expected it to be. He tried, but could 
not shake off his terrible depression. 

He went up to see his dead father, and 
looked long and earnestly on that placid 
face. The last weary years of the poor 
squire's life seemed obliterated in death. 
He almost seemed to smile as he lay there 
in his calm repose, and Graham knelt down 
VOL. n. 26 



130 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

by his side and promised to do his best to 
protect the portionless wife and children 
that his father had left. 

To this task he now intended to devote 
his life. This idea brought a little comfort 
to him ; he could still do some good, and 
be of some use to those most closely con- 
nected with him. 

But the shadow of the painful past was 
brought yet nearer to him before the night 
was over. One of the servants rapped at 
the door of his room, and told him in a 
mysterious whisper that " a person " wished 
to speak to him, but did not wish the rest 
of the family to know she was there. 

" Who is it ? " asked Graham. 

The servant looked uncomfortable, hesi- 
tated, and finally said : 

"it's Miss Kiddell, sir, from Thomley 
Farm ; she said she would like to speak to 
you for a moment alone, but she did not 
wish the mistress to know she was here." 

" Where is she ? " said Graham^ 



WARNED, 131 

She was in the breakfast-room, and 
thither Graham went with some of the 
desperate resolution with which men face 
danger and death. 

The room was dimly lighted as he entered 
it, and Dorothy turned round as he ap- 
proached her, and she saw the great change 
in his face. 

" You'll be surprised to see me," she 
said, speaking low and quickly. " IVe not 
come for vengeance, Mr. Graham, but to 
give you a warning ; my father has heard 
you are here, and you best go away again 
to-night." 

"You know why I am here, Miss Kiddell,*^ 
answered Graham slowly and firmly, " and 
I cannot leave Dillford until after my 
father's funeral." 

" But, sir," said Dorothy eagerly, " it 
will be murder if you stay. The moment 
my father heard you had come, he swore 
he'd have your life, and he's like a madman 
He's been nearly always drunk since poor 

26-2 



132 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

Winny's death, and he swore, both to me 
and that soldier chap, the captain, who they 
say is to marry Miss Despard, that he'd 
shoot you like a dog." 

"You are very good to give me this 
warning — under the circumstances most 
good — but you can understand also, I am 
sure, that I will never go out of your father's 
way. 1 wrote to you from London, if you 
remember, and gave you my address." 

"But I kept that to myself, sir, as well 
as other things. Poor father found out 
nothing from me, but the captain came to 
the farm to buy horses and he told father 
the whole story — all about your letter to 
Winny — the letter, no creature but myself 
has ever seen since her death, but he 
knew all about it, and how she wrote to 
you before she drowned herself, and he 
worked father up until he was mad as he 
could be." 

Captain Despard ? " 

Yes, sir. Captain Despard ; folks say he 



it 



WABNED. 133 

wants to marry Miss Despard, and I tell 
father he meant no good by bringing all 
this up again, and setting father clean out 
of his senses, between grief and drink." 

"He probably had a motive." 

"Oh ! yes, one can guess his motive 
quick enough," answered the shrewd Doro- 
thy ; " but there it is, sir ! Father heard 
you had come this afternoon, and he came 
in nigh black in the face with rage. I was 
frightened of him, and I watched him ; he 
locked himself into his room, and I peeped 
through the key-hole and heard him swear- 
ing most awful. Then he unlocked one of 
his drawers and got out his pistol, and kept 
trying and snapping the lock. He means 
mischief, Mr. Graham ! " 

"I can only thank you again," said 
Graham, "and Miss Kiddell — let me say 
one other word — will you believe that the 
great wrong I did your sister has been most 
bitterly repented of ? " 

"I believe that," said Dorothy huskily, 



134 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

for she felt a choking sensation in her 
throat ; " and I believe, too, Mr. Graham, 
you would have done poor Winny justice 
in the end ; and I don't want your blood to 
lie on father's hands ; please go away, sir." 
« I cannot ! I never shrank from facing 
the consequences of my own deeds but 
once, and I never shall again." 




CHAPTEE IX. 



A MmHTIER HAND. 



They buried the old squire the next morn- 
ing, and many of his friends and neighbours 
gathered together to see him laid in his 
grave. It was a sunshiny morning, the 
greenness and beauty of June on the 
hedges and meadows, and as the country 
gentlemen rode through them on their way 
to Dillford HaU, they talked of the Graham 
Norths, and told each other that the old 
man would probably be the last of the 
name whose bones would rest among them. 
They all of course knew the scandal 
about Graham. It was an ugly story, and 
told, we may be sure, with many additions, 
and the beauty of the poor girl had made 
her much talked of even before her tragic 



1 36 ox G OLDEN HIXGES. 

ending. When, therefore, the funeral guests 
saw Graham standing to receive them, no 
one greeted him very warmly. 

It was only what he expected and what 
he had schooled himself to bear. He stood 
there grave, pale and handsome, and only 
bowed coldly in return to the feebly-offered 
hand-clasps of the neighbouring squires. 
Then Mr. Dixon came, and the generous- 
hearted old lawyer understood Graham's 
painful position at once. 

He went up to him and warmly shook 
hands with him, speaking to him so cor- 
dially that the neighbours, knowing Mr. 
Dixon to be such a respectable man, 
thought they could not be wrong in being 
a little civil too, especially as they were in 
Graham's house. But he received their 
advances in precisely the same spirit as he 
had received their neglect. His eyes were 
cast' down, he was holding himself erect at 
his fullest height, and he simply replied 
when he was spoken to. 



A MIGHTIER HAND. 137 

The melancholy moment came at last 
when the familiar form is borne away in 
the unfamiliar trappings of the grave. 
There are few hearts so callous as to be 
quite unmoved when they see carried out 
shrouded and cloaked even the indifferent 
dead. We seem all akin just then; one 
universal law binds us tosfether at this 
solemn time. 

Graham was the chief mourner, and as 
he left the house there passed through his 
mind a vague speculation if he would ever 
return to it alive. He never looked out of 
the carriage window as it went along, yet 
he knew when they passed the Dill ; when 
they drove down the road in sight of 
Winny Eiddell's old home. The burial- 
ground of the Graham Norths was in a 
little simple country churchyard, and here 
many an old grey, moss-grown tomb- stone 
told where slept some former squire of 
Dillford. 

The church stood on a little hill, and up 



138 ox GOLDEN HINGES, 

the hill were, worn stone steps,, and round 
the churchyard a crumbling wj^U. The 
gateway was standing open, and a surpliced 
priest stood waiting for the old squire. The 
coffin had to be carried up the steps, and 
as Graham followed his father's . body, just 
as he entered the gateway, he lifted his 
eyes, and they fell on a figure standing 
against the wall. 

It was Bichard Kiddell. There were 
other neighbours about, but Graham only 
saw that one man. Their eyes met, and 
a look of concentrated hatred and rage 
lit Eiddell's with almost demoniac fury. 

He muttered a menacing word ; he put 
his hand with a swift gesture to the pocket 
of his coat. But just before Graham was 
borne the body of the squire, and that 
silent solemn spectacle stayed Riddell's 
hand. The procession passed on ; the 
ceremony began, first in ilxe church, and 
then by the open grave, but still Eiddell 
did not move. 



A MIGHTIER HAND, 139 

V " Let them put the old man ia the 
ground first," he muttered, " and then 
(and he gnashed his teeth, and felt the 
pistol he had hidden in the pocket of his 
coat), " we'U see then " 

Before he left the farm, Dorothy Biddell 
had gone down on her knees to deter him 
from his murderous purpose. During the 
whole morning he had been wandering 
about the place muttering and cursing to 
himself, and as the hour for the squire's 
funeral approached, Dorothy watching him, 
saw him get out his pistol and secrete it, 
and running up to him as she saw him 
preparing to leave the house, she implored 
him for God's sake not to stain his hands 
with blood. 

" Father, have you no thought for me ?" 
she said. " Winny is dead and gone ; let 
her rest in her grave." 

But these words only seemed to increase 
the farmer's fury. 

" Ay, in her grave ! " he answered 



I40 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

bitterly, "her that has no grave — ^my 
bonny lass he drove to shame and death. 
Don't take hold on me woman" (and he 
pushed her roughly away). " I've sworn 
it, and I'll keep my oath, and neither 
heaven nor hell shall hold me back ! " 

With these terrible words on his lips he 
went out. Dorothy, half frantic with fear, 
ran hither and thither bewildered, not 
knowing how to act ; but at last she thought 
she would run down to Dillford Hall, 
hoping to hear that Graham North had 
thought better of his resolution, and had 
gone quietly away. 

As she neared the hall, she saw a lady 
in black pacing up and down in a secluded 
walk in the shrubberies. Desperation gave 
Dorothy courage to do what under ordinary 
circumstances she would never have thought 
of doing. She ran up to this lady, who 
looked round as she heard the hasty foot- 
steps behind her, and then Dorothy saw 
it was Miss Despard. 



A MIGHTIER HAND, 141 

Katherine also recognized the poor pant- 
ing woman, and stopped to speak to her. 

" Do you want anything ? " she said 
kindly 

Upon this Dorothy began to sob. 

" Oh ! Miss," she cried, trembling, and 
in a broken voice, "perhaps I shouldn't 
say it to you — but — but has Mr. Graham 
North gone to the old squire's funeral ? " 

" Yes, he has gone," answered Katherine, 
now also becoming much agitated; "but 
what has happened ? " 

" Father will murder him then. Miss ; 
father's gone out like a madman with his 
pistol to shoot him. Oh ! Miss, what shall 
we do to save him ? " 

Dorothy was in a terrible state ; she wept, 
she wrung her hands, and in a moment 
Katherine's fine colour utterly faded, but 
she retained her presence of mind. 

" To the church at Bewley ; has he gone 
to the church at Bewley ? " she asked 
breathlessly. 



142 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

"He said nothing — only that neither 
heaven nor hell would hold him back! 
But he'll be gone to the church — I heard 
him mutter something about the church." 

" Come, then," said Katherine, without a 
moment's hesitation, " let us run to Bewley, 
he'll not hurt him if we are there ! " 

Dorothy eagerly seized on this idea. To- 
gether as fast as they could go these two 
started, running across the fields by the 
most direct and shortest way they could 
think of to the church at Bewley. It 
seemed an unending journey to the panting 
women, though in reality it was not much 
more than a mile. At last they saw the 
little grey edifice on the hill, standing out 
against the bright blue sky. 

" There ! there ! " panted Dorothy pointing 
upwards, for they were now on the road 
leading to the worn stone steps, up which 
the funeral procession had but lately passed. 
" Look, Miss, there's father by the church- 
yard wall, close to the gate ! " 



A MIGHTIER HAND. 143 

Katherine did look up, and that picture 
never passed out of her mind any more. 
She saw the grey old church, the blue sky, 
the cowslips in the meadow land on either 
side of the stone steps up the steep hill ; 
and she saw the churchyard wall, and by 
the wall the figure of a man standing with 
outstretched arm, and with a weapon in his 
hand, for the sun glittered on the shining 
barrel. 

And she saw too, beyond, through the 
open gate, the funeral guests passing slowly 
down from tlie open grave. The service 
was over ; the old squire was left among his 
forefathers, and the little crowd of neigh- 
bours and friends were turning sorrowfully 
away. Those who were going to the 
carriages waiting on the road below came 
first, and at the head of these Katherine 
recognized the tall erect form of Graham 
North. 

" They're coming away — we're too late ! " 
shrieked Dorothy, "Oh! Miss, Miss, see 



144 ON GOLDEN SINGES. 

father has the pistol. Oh ! I dare not, I 
dare not look ! " 

She fell down at the foot of the stone 
steps leading up the hill, and covered her 
face. But Katherine ran on — ran up the 
steps, nearer, nearer, panting, stumbling — 
and she saw Graham now close to the gate- 
way ; and she saw Eiddell's raised arm, and 
as Graham passed through the gate she saw 
Eiddell fall. 

There was sudden confusion among the 
funeral guests ; a prostrate man lay on the 
pathway, and Graham North stooped and 
lifted him in his arms. It was the farmer, 
with purple face, stricken powerless limbs, 
and choking breath. The violence of his 
own passions had smote him, and he had 
been struck down by a mightier hand than 
that which he had vainly boasted nothing 
could hold back. 



CHAPTER X. 



AMONG TOE TOMBS. 



A MINUTE later. Dr. Morton (who was 
amongst those who had attended the squire's 
funeral) was kneeling by Riddell's side, 
raising his head, and unloosing his necktie. 
Upon this, Graham rose, and looking round, 
saw Katherine pale, dazed, and panting, 
standing quite near him, while Mr. Dixon 
was holding her arm as if to support her. 

" What is the matter ? " asked Graham, 
addressing her. 

Katherine tried to answer him, but her 
voice failed her. 

" I think we had better endeavour to get 
Miss Despard into the church," said Mr 
Dixon, looking at Graham significantly ; 
" she will be better out of this." 

VOL, n. 27 



1 46 ON G OLDEN HINGES, 

Graham assented. He took hold of 
Katherine's other arm, and the two men 
led her thus out of the little crowd round 
the prostrate farmer, followed we may be 
sure by many commenting looks. 

They took her inside the church yard 
gates, but here Katherine's strength utterly 
failed her, and she would have fallen to the 
ground had not Graham held her up. He 
put his arms round her and lifted her on a 
grey stone tablet standing close under the 
shadow of the church yard wall. 

Katherine's pallor had now become 
alarming. She had broken down under 
the strain, and leaned back against the 
wall, supported by Graham. 

"If we could 'get some water!" he 
said. 

" I'll go and see if I can," answered Mr. 
Dixon, and he turned and left them sitting 
in the sunshine on the grey old tomb. 

It seemed at first all like a dream to 
Graham. How did Katherine happen to 



AMONG TH^ TOMBS, 147 

be here; what had so utterly overcome 
this usually calm and stately woman ? 

He asked himself this question, and in 
an instant there flashed across his mind 
some glimmering of the truth. A hint 
had reached her ears perhaps of his danger 
-^yon menacing figure by the wall re- 
curred to him — she had come in the faith- 
fulness and nobleness of her nature to save 
him, and as he sat there thinking thus, 
holding her in his arms, the strong deep 
feelings which he felt towards her swept 
over him with resistless force. 

Almost involuntarily he caught her hand 
and held it tight ; almost involuntarily 
drew her close, close to his breast. 

" Katherine, my beloved, my dearest, my 
best beloved ! " 

The words escaped his lips, and for a 

moment ho did not wish them unsaid. He 

had forgotten all his resolutions ; all the 

cold hard life he had mapped out for the 

future. He was a young man and he loved 

27 2 



148 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

her, and a great tide of passionate emotion 
shut out all else from his heart. 

But only for a brief, brief time. Haunting 
memory came back even as he pressed her 
against his throbbing breast ; his own 
miserable position ; Katherine's wealth, a 
hundred obstacles, which stood between 
his love and hers. No, it could not be, and 
Graham's arms relaxed, and with a heavy, 
weary sigh, he looked at her white face, 
now damp with cold dew. 

Katherine had fainted, and lay back with 
her head on Graham's shoulder, cold, pale, 
and still. Graham grew frightened as he 
looked at her. Her lips were a little apart, 
and her long dark eye-lashes drooped over 
her beautiful grey eyes. How handsome 
she was ! He pushed back the curling brown 
hair from her forehead, and wondered at 
her beauty. There was no woman like 
her, he thought, so noble, so tender, and 
yet^and yet, she must be nothing to him ! 

But each moment he grew more uneasy 



AMONG THE TOMBS. 149 

about her, and it was a great relief to him 
when he saw Mr. Dixon re-enter the church- 
yard, accompanied by Dr. Morton. 

"Eh, what is this?" said the Scotch 
doctor, laying - his hand on Katherine's 
wrist. " Humph, a dead faint — don't hold 
her head up, Mr. Graham, let us lay her 
on the grass, and she'll soon come round." 

So they laid her on the turf beneath 
which slept "" Margery, wife of Graham 
North, Esquire, of Dillford " (so the grey 
tablet told the tale), who had died in the 
year 1784, and whose heart a hundred 
years ago had beat and throbbed, and 
perhaps fainted with fear for the sake 
of the Graham North of that day as 
Katherine's had done now. 

Then they got some water from a neigh- 
bouring cottage, and bathed Katherine's 
hands and brow, and presently, with deep- 
drawn sighs, she began to revive. She 
opened her eyes, and seeing Graham 
bending over her, she seemed to remember. 



ISO ON G0L1>EN HINGES, 

" I— I— ran aU the way," she said, " that 

dreadful man *' andi she looked in his 

face inquiringly. 

"He has done no harm," answered 
Graham ; " do not think of him." 

In a few minutes Katherine was able to 
sit up and look around her. 

" But you must take care, Miss Despard," 
said the doctor, again feeling her pulse, 
" you have run far too fast ; it won't do for 
you to over-exert yourself again in this 
way." 
. Katherine smilevl. 

" I won't run so fast any more, doctor," 
she said, and, indeed, when they lifted her 
to her feet, she found she was still unable 
to stand. 

Curious country ' neighbours were now 
peering in at the churchyard gate; the 
clergyman who had officiated at the funeral 
was hovering near, anxious about Miss 
Despard's well-being (for Katherine #as a 
liberal subscriber to all local charities), but 



JlMONG the tombs. 151 

uawilling to be seen in public with such a 
sinner as Graham North ; it was, in fact, 
becoming most unpleasant for Katherine, 
and she looked appealingly at her friend, 
Mr. Dixon. 

" I wish I was at home," she said ; " how 
do you think you can get me home ? " 

There was only one way out of the 
churchyard; Kiddell was still lying on 
the ground, Dorothy now holding up her 
father's head, and waiting until the doctor 
thought it safe for him to be carried to one 
of the carriages on the road below, and if 
Katherine went she must pass this group- 
She was not strong enough to walk, and at 
last . she decided Ur wait where she was 
until the little crowd outside the gates had 
dispersed, and the farmer had been carried 
away. 

The doctor, therefore, left Katherine to 
«ee after > Eiddell, and Mr. Dixon volun- 
teered to go and urge the funeral guests to 
4;ake their departure. Thus Katherine was 



1 52 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

again left ia the charge of Graham North, 
though there were some among the gentle- 
men present who decidedly thought this 
should not be. 

They quietly joked Mr. Dixon on the 
subject, although they had met on such a 
solemn occasion. 

"So the heiress still clings to her old 
love, eh, Dixon ? " said one. 

"Pity such a fine girl makes such a 
fool of herself," said another, with a little 
shrug. 

" I say, Mr. Dixon, has Graham North to 
have it all his own way after all then?" 
asked young Selbrooke, with a light laugh. 

Mr. Dixon smiled and explained. Miss 
Despard had been ill, and now wished to 
go home as quietly as possible. " It was a 
very sad, and a very unfortunate affair 
altogether," said the tall, grey-haired, spare, 
old lawyer, "very, but lads will be lads — 
Graham was a fine fellow in spite of all — 
and as for that poor man," and Mr. Dixon 



AMONG THE TOMBS. 153 

nodded aud looked at the prostrate Eiddell, 
" he was always mad drunk ; no wonder he 
has taken a fit." 

" And we know what made him take to 
drink, don't we?" smiled Mr. Selbrooke. 
"Ah, well, Mr. Dixon, we must come to 
you in all our little troubles." 

" You are clever enough to manage your 
own, I think," repUed Mr. Dixon. " Graham 
North may not have had so much experi- 
ence." 

There was a little laugh at the expense of 
Selbrooke, and it ended in the funeral guests 
leaving Bewley, and in the unfortunate 
farmer being carried by sympathizing 
friends down to one of the carriages. He 
had been struck by apoplexy, though not 
fatally, and the doctor told the weeping 
Dorothy he would probably, partially at 
least, recover. 

"It's better than being hanged, at any 
rate," thought Dorothy, and there were 
others thought so too, for Eiddell's pistol 



154 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

bad beeiv picked up, and freely commented 
upon. 

While all this was going on outsiide the 
churchyard gates, Graham and Eatherine 
were alone among the moss-grown grave- 
stones.* The bright sunshine flickered on 
the grass, the crows were cawing amid the 
tall elms that stood down by one side of 
the crumbling wall ; the air was fresh and 
pure on the hill, and Katherine was looking 
up at Graham's face, who was standing 
before her. 

"You must be wondering how this all 
happened," she said ; ** but * Miss Riddell 
came ruiDfning down to^Dillford — she was 
afraid of her father — and when ishe told me, 
Iran with her here as fast a^ we could run; 
W^ thought that Mr i Eiddeil would not be 
so inad, so wicked, if we were here — but, 
but, God watched over you, Graham." 

. Katherine spoke with emotion, and 
Graham^ voice trembled as h^^answegred 
her.'-: ..... 



AMONG THE TOMBS. 155 

" I can never thank you enough, Kath* 
erine," he said ; " you have stood by me 
when every one else looks coldly at me-^I 
see it all quite well, and I know also that I 
deserve cold looks — but the one from 
whom I deserved them most has been — but 
I can never say what you have been." 

** I do not give my friendship and take it 
away with the sunshine," said Katherine, 
trying to smile; "you have had great 
trouble, great pain — ^but I want you to 
believe, Graham, that I am your faithful 
friend." 

"I do believe it," he answered; and 
Katherine held' out her hand. 

" Then that is a compact," she said, *^ and 
you must not swerve from it." 

" Am I likely to do so, do you think?" 

He sat down on the grey stone tablet as 
he spoke, Katherine still sitting on the 
grass. sHow* blue the sky was, and how 
soft the rustle of the breeze through the 
elms, and the sunshine bathing in glory the 



iS6 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

sky and earth ! It was a beautiful world if 
death and sorrow did not cast their black 
shadows over it. Graham was thinking, 
and Katherine watching him, guessed his 
thoughts. He took off his hat, and Kath- 
erine saw the white lines in the dark crisp 
hair. What he had suffered ! She under- 
stood it all ; the secret sympathy between 
their souls made things plain to her that 
Graham was too proud and sensitive ever 
to speak of. And she knew he loved her 
— he hid this, too, speaking now quietly 
and gently, his passionate outburst of half- 
Mn-hour ago locked away in his own 
breast; and yet instinct — that wondrous 
divine gift — told Katherine that for a 
moment his restraint and reserve had 
broken down, though her own senses had 
been too dulled to hear. 

When Mr. Dixon returned he found them 
talking quietly together, and Katherine 
looked up with a smile as he approached 
her. 



AMONG THE TOMBS, 157 

" Can I get home now, do you think ? '' 
she said. 

"I've got them all away at last," an- 
swered Mr. Dixon ; " and Morton has gone 
home with poor Eiddell — he'll get over the 
attack this time Morton thinks, but he has 
drank heavily for years, and that breaks up 
a man's constitution sooner or later for a 
certainty — so now, my dear young lady, if 
you like to try, I and Mr. Graham here will 
help you on your way?" 

Graham rose and assisted Katherine to 
her feet, and then, supported between 
them, she was escorted to the carriage 
which Mr. Dixon had kept back to carry 
her home. 

She felt a strange glad feeling of relief 
and happiness in her heart as she went 
down the broken grey stone steps, up 
which she had run in such frantic haste and 
fear. She smiled, her colour came back, 
and she talked to Mr. Dixon quite cheer- 
fully of the beauty of the day. 



I S8 ON G OLDEN HINGES. 

They both went to Castle Hill with her, 
but declined to go into the house, Mr. 
Dixon promising to see her the next day. 

"She's a woman in a thousand, Mr. 
Graham," he said emphatically with a 
backward glance after they had parted 
with Katherine ; " there's something about 
her soul so fine and pure that the dirt of 
the earth won't touch it." 



>4ife^-' 



CHAPTER XI. 



A PURCHASE. 



Graham also saw Mr. Dixon the next day, 
and proposed to the old lawyer that the 
acres which had been theirs over two hun- 
dred years should now be sold, as there 
seemed no other way to escape out of their 
difficulties. 

The entail of the estates had ended with 
the late Graham North, and the poor old 
squire had never sought to renew it. They 
were, indeed, too heavily mortgaged to ren- 
der this possible, and things had gone on 
drifting from bad to worse year after year, 
until it seemed now to Graham hopeless to 
attempt to retain any of the property. 

Mr. Dixon listened gravely to what Gra- 
ham had to say, nodding his head occa- 



1 6o ON G OLDEN HINGES. 

sionally when he approved of the young 
man's sentiments. 

" Well, Mr. Graham," he said, at length 
as Graham pausal, "I thought it very likely 
you would have some such idea as this now 
that the old squire's gone, and I have a 
purchaser ready for part of the land, if you 
approve of the offer." 

"I am only too glad to get it, Mr. 
Dixon." 

"Well, it's a good offer for you, and I 
think for my client, too," continued Mr. 
Dixon, with a smile. " My client proposed 
to purchase Thornley Farm and Twyford 
outright for ready money, and to pay off 
the present mortgagees, and become the 
sole mortgagee on the whole property, and 
thus, as my client has a house of her own, 
Dillford Hall will not be interfered with, and 
your mother not disturbed in her home." 

Graham cast down his eyes and coloured. 

" This offer comes from Miss Despard, I 
suppose ? " he said. 



A PURCHASE. i6i 

" Precisely ; she did not wish her name 
mentioned, but I told her that in such an 
important transaction as this that it was 
impossible, and to no one else also would 
the land be so valuable. You see it 
marches with her own, Mr. Graham, and, 
to tell you the truth, old Antony Despard 
once sounded me to know if the old squire 
were likely to part with Thornley, but I did 
not like to name it, I only mention this to 
show you that though no doubt Miss Des- 
pard is influenced by her friendship for 
your family in this ofier, that still the pur- 
chase of Thornley and Twyford would have 
been approved of by her uncle. And no 
doubt it is a great consideration to have a 
friendly mortgagee ; the ready money will 
relieve you from all your pressing difficul- 
ties, and you'll still be the Graham Norths 
of Dillford, and no one need know about 
the change of mortgagee except those 
nearly concerned in it ; in fact, I think it 
is a good arrangement all round." 

VOL. n. 28 



i62 ON GOLDEN HINGES 

'^ It is a most generous one, but I cannot 
accept such generosity." 

"Nonsense, my dear lad, I'll see Miss 
Despard isn't cheated; won't allow her, in 
fact, to cheat herself. But just think how 
this relieves you ! And it really isn't a bad 
thing for Miss Despard ; Castle Hill will be 
a splendid property with these two farms 
added, and she has the ready money to pay 
for them, and very few people have that. 
I shall be glad when it's settled, and pleased 
to have you amongst us again, Mr. Graham." 

** That, at least, will not be," said Graham 
gravely ; " for my mother's sake I will think 
this over, but for myself, Mr. Dixon, my 
plan of life is very different — I shall never 
live at Dillford." 

" Never is a long word, Mr. Graham, and 
few of us can say truthfully we shall never 
do a thing though we mayn't think of doing 
it at the time. Well, well, let it rest for 
the present — ^you are a young man still. 
But at all events this insures your mother's 



. A PURCnA8K 163 

undisturbed possession of her old home, and 
I fancy it will be highly gratifying to her in 
every way." 

"If it is not taking an advantage of Miss 
Despard's great goodness ? " 

" Why, you see, Mr. Graham, she has the 
money, and it's as well invested as it could 
be (considering the relative positions of the 
property) in the purchase of Thornley and 
Twyford; and she can't lose her money 
when the land is there on the mortgages ; 
so with your consent we'll have the deedsi 
drawn out and the afiair arranged as. 
quickly as possible — ^nothing like striking- 
when the iron's hot, Mr. Graham." And 
the old man laughed. 

" But Miss Despard should consult some 
of her own friends or relations about 
such a large investment of her money as 
this." 

" Well, the young lady is of age you know, 
Mn Graham, and as for her relations — 
there's Captain Despard. Folks say, you 

28—2 



i64 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

know, he wants to marry her, but she 
assured me that would never be, and unless 
he is going to be her husband I do not see 
what he has to do with her money, and he 
would not be friendly to this arrangement, 
we may be sure." 

" I will think it over then, Mr. Dixon, 
and in the meanwhile let me thank you 
again for all your great kindness; you 
have been more than a friend to me." 

"Don't mention it, Mr. Graham. Ay, 
ay, and we all go one after the other, so we 
may as well try to help each other a bit on 
the way ! The poor squire — I mind him 
well and hearty, standing on the very spot 
where you are standing now, Mr. Graham ; 
but you are not like him in the face. You 
have a look of your mother." 

" She would not be flattered by that," 
laughed Graham. 

" No. Well, you are not as handsome 
as she was when she was your age. I 
remember her as a bride — a splendid 



A TUBCHASE, 1 6s 

woman — and she held herself like a 
queen." 

" She has had a great deal of trouble 
since then." 

" Ay ; it comes to us all, Mr. Graham ; 
sooner or later we get a hint not to set 
our affections too much on this world, 
and it's well, for here we have ' no abiding 
City. 

" And yet the things of this world make 
our happiness or misery." 

" To the young, no doubt ; in the hey- 
day of youth and passion we are absorbed 
by the strength of our own feelings, and 
believe them to be everlasting. But they 
are not, Mr. Graham. This is why I 
advised you not rashly to say you would 
never live at Dillford ; you may live there 
yet, with your grand-children prattling by 
your knee I " 

Graham laughed, and then sighed. But 
he parted with his old friend on the best of 
terms, and then went to say good-bye to 



i66 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

Katherine Despard, as he was obliged to 
return to his work on the same evening. 

He met Katherine on Castle Hill Bridge 
when on his way to the house. She blushed 
and held out her hand with her frank, glad 
smile. 

" Where do you think I have been ? " 
she said. 

"Well, you must tell me," answered 
Graham. 

" I have been down to see Miss Eiddell at 
Thornley Farm ; I thought she might think 
it unkind of me not speaking to her again 
yesterday, and so I went to see her this 
morning Her father is better — out of all 
immediate danger, the doctor, thinks — ^but 
his right arm is quite powerless." 

" Poor man ! " 

" I can't quite pity him, Graham. But 
we won't talk of it. You were coming to 
call on me, so come now." 

" I wanted to say good-bye, Katherine." 
Good-bye 1 Then are you really going ? " 



u 



A :pubchase. 167 

"I must go, but I .will turn with you 
now. I have been to Mr. Dixon's this 
morning, Katherine. He has told me of a 
certain proposal of yours — about the 
property/' 

" It was only in the event of you wishing 
to sell some portion of it, Graham," said 
Katherine, ^ blushing very deeply ; " Mr. 
Dixon suggested that at your poor father's 
death it might come into the market, and 
in that case I said I would hke to be the 
purchaser, for as the lands join, I — thought 
it would be very nice." 

"Very nice for me," smiled Graham; 
"but unless you really wish to buy it, 
Katherine " 

"I do really wish, and all about the 
mortgages and that — but let Mr. Dixon 
settle it— he will act for us both ; what a 
dear old man he is, Graham ! " 

" He is the kindest man." 

" He is a true friend of yours ; there is 
something. so simple and noble about him. 



1 68 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

Ah, Qraham, I suppose it is he who has 
chosen the better part !' " 

•' You mean that he is very good ? " 

" Yes ; he reminds me a little bit of my 
uncle — he was such a noble character ; he 
never seemed to be vexed by the small 
things that vex us, he always seemed above 
them, and yet he was so gentle to the weak- 
nesses and follies of other people. I — I — 
think you would have loved him, Graham." 

Graham bit his lips and turned away his 
head. 

"To go back about this purchase of 
yours " he said a moment later. 

" Don't talk of it ; let the lawyers arrange 
it." 

" But I must talk of it ; I don't want you 
to do this, or to do anything concerning it, 
without the most serious consideration for 
one thing, and for another, I think you 
should consult some friend or relation." 

" I have no friend or relation luckily who 
has anything to do with my money," said 



A PUBCHA8E, 169 

Katherine with a little laugh; "my only 
near relation, indeed, is Frank." 

" Well, had you not better consult Cap- 
tain Despard ? " 

" Major Despard, please, now ; Frank got 
his majority three weeks ago. No, I do 
not care to consult Frank about this ; in 
fact, I should rather not." 

" You do not think he'd approve ? " 

"Frank has nothing to do with it, 
Graham ; he chooses sometimes to assume 
the privileges of a big brother and give me 
advice, but to tell you the truth Frank is 
not a man whose advice I set much value 
upon. I like him, you know, very much, 
and we have a hundred old family ties in 
common, but — well, you see he is a very 
prejudiced man for one thing, and expects 
every one to see with his eyes, though, to 
my thinking, they are not the most clear- 
sighted eyes in the world! He has not 
* the hearing ear and the seeing eye ' of a 
big mind. My uncle had twice his power 



170 ON GOLDEK HINGES. 

of thought and observation, and yet Frank 
sets every one down that does not agree 
with him, whereas uncle was always ready 
to listen and be convinced." 

"Still, as he is your nearest male re- 
lation " 

"I shall begin to think you are as 
obstinate in your own opinion as Frank ! " 
interrupted Katherine smiling. *'Well, I 
am obstinate too, and I won't talk any more 
on the subject." 

They went into the house after this, and, 
to Graham's surprise, a big, brown, splendid 
retriever dog lying on a mat in the hall, 
after receiving Katherine with every mark 
of canine affection, suddenly turned to 
himself, and after sniffing at the hand 
Graham held out, and looking up in his 
face, began to display the most extra- 
ordinary signs of joy and recognition. 

" Why you don't know me, old fellow ? " 
said Graham. " Why are you so pleased ? " 

" It is really wonderful ! " said Katherine 



A PURCHASE. 171 

in a low tone, stroking her dog's head ; 
" so you know him, do you, Ben ? Do you 
not remember him, Graham ? Oh, no, of 
course not. Ben saved your life, Graham, 
and I bought him of my tenant, Mr. Gray, 
because he is so sagacious." 

But Katherine did not tell Graham the 
price she had paid to Mr. Gray to induce 
him to part with his favourite. 






-•-^Y®< 



r^ 



••- 



CHAPTER Xn. 

A FIT OF PASSION. 

Graham returned to town a happier man 
than he had left it. Not that the word 
happy could be properly applied in any 
sense to his frame of mind, but he felt re- 
heved of a great weight of care regarding 
the future of his mother and sisters. 

And Mrs. Graham North's satisfaction at 
the arrangement that had been made about 
their affairs was unbounded. She foresaw 
that the moment it was known in the neigh- 
bourhood that Katherine Despard had 
purchased part of the estates and was about 
to become sole mortgagee on the remaining 
portion, that people would naturally con- 
clude she was going to marry Graham. 

" And she would not have done this ; 



A FIT OF PASSION. 173 

would never have proposed it, unless she 
did mean to marry him," thought the proud 
fond mother ; " again Graham holds his 
fortune in his hands." 

Her spirits rose; the old man who had 
been borne away was almost forgotten, and 
her love and her hopes for her son filled 
her whole life. She was really fond of 
Katherine, and then it is so easy to like 
those whom it materially benefits us to be 
on good terms with. So at least Mrs. 
Graham North found it; tears came into 
her eyes the first time she clasped Katherine 
in her arms after she had heard her pro- 
posal about the estates, but they were tears 
of joy. 

" You are our good angel, Katherine ! " 
she said in a voice of genuine emotion. 

" I think it is a very good arrangement 
for us all," answered Katherine with a 
smile, " though Graham was very obstinate 
about it — ^he wanted to, call in Frank, but 

resisted that ! " 



1 74 0.V GOLDEN HINGES. 

It will be seen from this speech that 
Katherine had also recovered her spirits. 
She was one of those generous people who 
never do things by halves, and from the 
day when she had seen Graham in London, 
and read on his face the story of his deep 
and bitter regret, she had forgiven him for 
the past, and longed to comfort him in the 
future. 

His very reserve and pride drew her 
nearer to him. A very rich woman has so 
many lovers that to woo is not always the 
way to win her. Katherine indeed under- 
estimated her own personal attractions, and 
thought most of the attention she received 
hung on a golden hinge. 

About her cousin she was quite sure of 
this, but she was mistaken. If she had 
fallen into his arms without any trouble, 
Francis Despard was indeed the man not 
highly to have valued the too easily won 
love. But her smiling indifference had 
piqued him, and her beauty had aroused 



JL FIT OF. PASSION. 175 

stronger and deeper passions than she 
believed him capable of feeling. Each time 
Despard saw her he told himself he loved 
her more. His fury would have been un- 
bounded had he heard of the proposed 
arrangement about the Dillford property, 
and Katherine quite understood this, though 
she thought it was her fortune and not 
herself that he coveted. 

But by Mr. Dixon's advice nothing had 
yet been mentioned about Katherine's in- 
tended purchase of Thornley and Twyford. 
There were many things to settle, the old 
lawyer told Mrs. Graham North, who in her 
first elation on hearing the news would have 
proclaimed it from the house-tops. 

"'Least said, soonest mended,' you re- 
member the old adage," counselled Mr. 
Dixon ; " I wouldn't name it even to the 
young ladies ; time enough for that after 
the deeds are signed, and I think both Mr. 
Graham and Miss Despard would like it as 
little talked of as possible." 



1 76 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

Mrs. Graham North did not like having 
advice given to her, but, on reflection, she 
saw the wisdom of Mr. Dixon's. Major 
Despard might make himself unpleasant, 
though, of course, he had no right to do 
so ; but still there it was. He had wanted 
to marry Katherine, and he might make a 
handle of the story of that unfortunate girl, 
as he had done before, and, perhaps, in- 
fluence Katherine against the dictates of her 
own heart. 

What these dictates were Mrs. Graham 
North was quite satisfied. Katherine cared 
for Graham, had always cared for him, and 
" many waters cannot quench love, neither 
can the floods drown it," and Mrs. Graham 
North was convinced that the strongest 
arguments which Major Despard could use 
would never quite turn Katherine's heart 
away from her old love. 

She was not so sure about the feelings of 
her son. His mad resolution to marry 
" that wretched girl," as she mentally de- 



A FIT OF PASSION, I77 

signaled poor Winny ; his deep and settled 
melancholy since he had received the news 
of her death, deceived his mother's quick 
eyes. She thought he must have been in 
love with Winny, and could not understand 
otherwise the bitterness of his regret. 

"But he will forget her," she thought 
hopefully, " all men forget." 

She trusted to time, and, in the mean- 
while, saw things going on pretty much as 
she wished them to do. The purchase of 
the property, and the transfer of the 
mortgages, drew Graham and Katherine 
necessarily together. They began to write 
about business, and, a month after his 
father's death, Graham came down once 
more to Dillford for the purpose of signing 
deeds, and, naturally, saw a good deal of 
Katherine. 

It was after this second visit that a hint 

reached Francis Despard's ears that his 

cousin had purchased part of the Dillford 

property. Richard Eiddell held a lease of 

VOL. n. 29 



173 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

Thomley Farm from the late squire, and it 
became necessary for this to be transferred. 
Thus it crept out in the neighbourhood that 
Miss Despard was buying land, and Francis 
Despard heard it from his faithful ally in 
Katherine's stables. 

One of the terrible fits of passion which 
swept over him like a tornado was the 
first consequences of old Ben's information. 
Then, unluckily for himself, he did not 
wait until he had regained his composure, 
but started ofi* to Castle Hill while yet in a 
towering rage, and burst in upon the 
astonished Katherine, white to the lips with 
anger. 

" You did nSt expect to see me," he said 
— he was so furious that he could scarcely 
speak ^ civily — " and I would not have 
intruded myself upon you uninvited. 
Mademoiselle Katie, but I hear that you 
are being so abominably and vilely cheated, 
it is only right I should come to the 
rescue. " 



A FIT OF .PASSION. 1 79 

"I do. not understand you, Frank," 
answered Katherine coldly. 

She had risen at his entrance, and stood 
there facing him. One of the most gener- 
ous and noble-hearted of women, she yet 
was quick tempered, and she was aware of 
this defect in her character. But she rarely 
gave way to it ; indeed, she was rarely 
tried. Life lay for her along the smooth 
paths, paved with gold, and the daily little 
worries and cares that beset and harass the 
poor came not in her way. Therefore, ahe 
was generally considered to be a most 
charming temper ; but she could get very 
angry, and she got very angry now. 

" I hear that you have been giving an 
enormous price for a lot of trumpery pro- 
perty to save a disreputable man from the 
bankruptcy court," went on Despard, rais- 
ing his voice. " Really, Katherine, it's too 
disgusting ! " 

"How dare you speak to me thu^, 

Frank ? " 

29—2 



i8o ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

" Oh, yes, indeed I dare ! I tell you 
what it is, Katherine, you have allowed 
yourself to get among a set of harpies, and 
it's a shame to waste the old man's money 
in propping up the credit of a fellow who, 
if he had his due, ought to be hanged, for 
he was as good as the murderer of that 
girl ! " 

"Are you done? " asked Katherine, who 
now also had turned white with anger. 

" No, I am not done. Is it true what I 
am told that you have purchased these 
worthless acres to please this Graham 
North, and that you have lent them 
money ? " 

"Perhaps you would be pleased to 
recollect that it is my money." 

" What do you say ? Your money ? 
Of course it's your money ; but what can 
every true friend you have think at seeing 
you throwing it away in this mad fashion. 
Katherine ! " and his rage and love com- 
pletely got the better of him, and he seized 



A FIT OF PASSION. i8i 

both her wrists in the grip of a vice, " you 
shall not do it! Do you hear, you shall 
not I " 

Katherine was frightened at his violence. 
His light wild grey eyes seemed to turn 
red, and his whole form verberated with 
passion. But she did not lose her presence 
of mind. 

" Are you mad, Frank ? " she said ; and 
she looked at him steadily. 

" If I am, you have driven me so. Do 
you think nothing of me — am I nothing to 
you ? It's not the money I care for — the 
money be cursed ; but it's your good name, 
absolutely your honour. What do you 
think people will say ? A girl of your age 
buying property and lending money to a 
broken-down beggar who has had to fly 
the country for his evil deeds and hide 
himself in London. Yes, that's about it — 

you are a generous girl, and they have 
traded on your generosity. That old 
woman is a regular viper, Katherine, and 



i82 ON. GOLDEN HINGES. 

you allow yoursdf to be taken in by 
her." 

** Mrs. Graham North knew nothing of 
the whole arrangement until it was all 
settled." 

" Then it is all settled ? " asked Francis 
Despard, with an evil gleam in his eyes, 
and he suddenly released Katherine's wrists. 

" I do not know that I ought to answer 
you, but I will. It is settled so far that 
I have purchased part of the Dillford 
property, for which I have paid a fair price, 
and as I have done this with my own 
money, I see no reason why I should ask 
your advice on the subject, nor why you 
should give it to me unasked." 

" And you mean to marry Graham 
North after all?" 

" I mean nothing of the sort. This is 
a mere business arrangement between us, 
and there has been no question of 
marriage ; but even if there were, what 
right have you to interfere, Prank ? " 



Ji FIT OF PASSION, 1S3 

Again an evil . gleam passed over 
Despard's face. 

" So you think I have none ? " he said. 
. He folded his arms across his broad 
breast; he fixed his wild daring eyes on 
her face, and he gave a loud and bitter 
laugh. 

"None have I, Katie! All my life I 
have been your lover, and you have 
known it very well, and my uncle knew 
it, and wished us to marry, and you 
know that, too. But for this he would 
have made a fairer and more equal division 
of his money between us. Oh, yes, 
you know very well, and you would have 
married me, too, my dear, if this lover 
of many women had not come between 
us. What do you see in him ? He is not 
particularly handsome, is he, and he is 
very particularly immoral, and a beggar 
to boot. Yet my cousin — my old love — 
makes a fool of herself about him, and 
tries to rush between him and an injured 



i84 Oy GOLDEN HINGES. 

father's just vengeance. Oh, yes, I know 
all about it, Katie, and it's been gall and 
bitterness to my ears ! " 

" I will never forgive you for what you 
have said, Frank." 

" Will you not ? When a man's heart is 
bursting he does not stop to pick his words. 
You have no feeling for me — ^none, none, and 
yet I only love you too well." 

It was the first time that Katherine had 
really believed in her cousin's protestations. 
But there was no mistaking the deep ring of 
pain in his voice now, the bitter heart- 
wrung cry. He stood there looking at her, 
and Katherine began to realize that this 
man loved her, and that the iron bad 
entered his soul. 

"I — I — never thought you were in 
earnest," she faltered. 

" No ? You thought I was looking after 
your money like this other fellow, but I 
was not, Katie. I don't want you to tinker 
me up as he does ; but because I didn't 



A FIT OF PASSION, 185 

come sentimentalizing and pretending this, 
that, and the other, you believe no good of 
me. 

" I do not say that, Frank, but you have 
behaved in a very unjustifiable manner 
to-day/' 

"Because I am mad with rage. You 
don't believe in me; yet do you think I 
have not resisted temptations, and that I 
could have come wooing you with hands 
stained as black as this man's ? My dear, 
all men have women who are in love with 
them, and are ready to make fools of them- 
selves for their sakes ; bat all men do 
not care to break girls' hearts because a 
richer woman happens to come in their 
way." 

You are very flattering ! " 
I don't want to be flattering. I could 
tell you something, but I won't ! I won't. 
Katherine, will you promise me one thing ? . 
Promise me solemnly on your word of 
honour never to marry Graham North ? " 



it 



i86 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

'^ You have no right to ask such a pro- 
mise, Frank. There is no question of our 
marriage as I told you before. But I will 
bind myself by no promise to you." 

A look of concentrated fury passed over 
Despard's face. 

" You won't, will you not ? Then you 
mean to do it. All right. Miss Katie. But 
for all that, you will never be the wife of 
Graham North." 

He did not say another word, but with a 
little nod walked straight out of the room, 
leaving Katherine uneasily thinking over 
this wild outburst. It grieved her and an- 
noyed, her in every way. She was not a 
woman who loved to give pain, and could 
feel a mean triumph in her cousin's bitter 
disappointment. His violence had shocked 
and startled her, and she began to ask 
herself tremblingly where it might end. 

She waited for about half an hour^but 
as he did not return to the room, she. went 
to look after his comforts, naturally imagin- 



A FIT OF PASSION. 187 

ing he had come to stay a day or two at 
Castle HiU. 

She was told that Major Despard had 
driven to the station some little time ago, 
and that he did not mean to return. 




CHAPTER Xm. 

THE DRIFTING CURRENT. 

All this time Graham kept steadily at his 
work. His friend, Mr. Wells, praised that 
work, and as the proprietors of the paper 
seemed satisfied, he had some encourage- 
ment to lighten his labours. And one sad 
morning the news came to the office that 
another labourer had fallen " weary with 
the march of life." Poor John Wells was 
dead, had broken a blood vessel in the 
streets of Seville, and after a little delay, 
the proprietors ofiered the post permanently 
to Graham, which he had hitherto held 
temporarily in the expectation of poor 
Wells' return. 

Graham accepted this ofier, and did his 
best to soothe and comfort the bereaved 



THE DRIFTING CURRENT 189 

father, who broke down in the anguish of 
the loss of his gifted son. 

« Why did I not die before him ? " he 
cried. "God knows I am tired enough, 
and weary, too." 

It was a groan wrung from the lips of 
patient labour. Mr. Wells was getting an 
old man, and he had worked hard at his 
desk since he was a lad of fourteen, and 
had never knocked anything out of it but 
bare subsistence. This is the fate of some 
men, and it had been the fate of John 
Wells, senior. He was a clever little man, 
and he had never stinted his work, sitting 
up late and getting up early, but he lacked 
the power that would have pushed him on. 
His son, of finer fibre, who had gone into 
the strife fuU of noble longings and enthu- 
siasm, had also fallen in the ranks. But 
had this youth lived, he had in him the 
makings of a great man, and this know- 
ledge added to the bitterness of his father's 
regret. 



190 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

"I always thought he would da some- 
thing," he said, wiping away the tears that 
dimmed his own worn and faded eyes, and 
forgetting the frail frame that poor young 
John Wells inherited, too slight to bear the 
strain of the greater mind. 

However, the gap had to be fiUed up, the 
ranks closed, and Graham North stood in 
John Wells' place.. Though a man dies, 
the daily paper has to come out at the 
same hour, and the work one leaves an- 
other gets. After the first day, Mr. Wells 
never talked of his grief, but sat toiling as 
usual, though Graham noticed how his thin 
liair grew thinner and greyer, and his ner- 
vous hands twitched a little more. 

Graham, too, sat at his desk, with the 
shadow of his grief and bitter regret still 
falling around him. The last time he had 
been at Dillford he had summoned resolu- 
tion to go down to the banks of the Dill. 
He stood on the very spot where he used to 
meet his young love in the bygone summer 



THE DRIFTING CUBHENT. 191 

eves, when the moonlight crested. the tide 
with gold, and the night breeze stole 
through the over -hanging boughs and 
stirred the long reeds that grew to the 
river edge. 

The tender hours came back to him ; the 
girl's sweet, upraised face, his own false 
broken vows. Self-glamour had fallen from 
his eyes with cruel vengeance, and his soul 
had been washed white by tears. No one's 
self-reproach could be more bitter or more 
true. He walked up this still Dill-dene with 
the afternoon sun glinting in shadows on 
the grass, and recalled the cold, chill spot 
where Winny had kept her last tryst to 
him. 

It was all so bitter and so sad. If he 
had truly loved her and his life-passion 
had died with her, it seemed to him 
that his burden would have been lighter 
to bear. But the knowledge that his 
heart had gone from her, that he was 
weary of his bondage, destroyed the solemn 



193 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

sacred hopes that console the mourner by 
the beloved's grave. 

But he must bear it, and he did bear 
it manfully and pravely, accepting the 
changed position he knew that he must 
hold in the eyes of those whose respect he 
had forfeited. He did not deceive himself ; 
he did not need young Selbrooke's sneer to 
tell him what his neighbours said and 
thought. 

He met this young man by chance on his 
second visit to Northumberland. 

" So you are down again, Graham," said 
Mr. Selbrooke. "Any more tragedies to be 
expected, then ? By Jove, you are a lucky 
dog." 

Graham took not the slightest notice of 
this speech nor of any other of the sort. 
But he was glad to go away. In town he 
had his work, his own place, and no one 
knew nor cared anything about his private 
affairs, and Graham was a man who did not 
like them discussed. 



THE BHIFTING CURRENT. 193 

He lived on with liis old friend Mrs. 
Fryer, and saw with sincere regret that 
the poor lady was fading fast away. She 
had never recovered from her accident, 
but got weaker and weaker, the thin treble 
of her voice growing fainter and fainter 
as the days went on. 

Nothing gave her such pleasure as for 
Graham to pay her a little attention, and 
however weary he was, he never neglected 
this. He used to take her a bunch of 
flowers or a book, and she was quite happy 
all the day after. She talked of her end 
also with perfect self-satisfaction. She had 
different theories, but no uneasy doubts ; 
the gloomy, self-reproachful Graham, 
sometimes envied this old woman playing 
and coquetting on the edge of the tomb. 

When Graham told her (after it was all 

arranged) that Miss Despard of Castle Hill 

had purchased part of Dillford, and so 

relieved his heaviest necessities, Mrs. Fryer 

nodded her head. 

VOL. II. 30 



194 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

"Why don't you marry her, my dear 
boy?" she said. *'Ah, yes, I know, I 
know " (and she waved her hand), but 
we must patch up our old houses by 
money made in trade — it's the turn, the 
world's taken, and we must go with the 
times." 

"Miss Despard is too far above me in 
every way, Mrs. Fryer." 

"Do not sneer like a good child; I 
do not say you could be in love with 
her, but marriages of convenience do 
very well — to be sure, mine was a mar- 
riage of convenience, and it did very 
badly!" 

Graham laughed. 

"I would like to see the portrait of 
this young lady," continued Mrs. Fryer. 
" I do not wish to see you throw yourself 
away on any one, you know." 

" She is considered handsome," said 
Graham gravely. He did not tell Mrs. 
Fryer that he had Katherine's portrait 



THE DRIFTING CURRENT, 195 

downstairs, and that it pleased him some- 
times to look on the bright, noble face, 
though that dear face could never be 
his. But though they could not be lovers, 
a certain bond and compact existed between 
them, and neither forgot what had been 
said in the old grave-yard at Bewley. 

Katherine had then said she was Graham's 
faithful friend, and her heart had not 
wavered from that promise. She wrote 
to him after her cousin's mad outburst, 
but she did not mention to Graham Frank 
Despard's hasty visit to Castle Hill. She 
mentioned it to no one, and a day or two 
afterwards she received a letter of apology 
from Major Despard. 

" Will you forgive me, dear Katherine ? " 
he wrote, "but you know what a hot 
temper I have, and I was cut to the 
quick by what I was told. However, as 
you politely informed me you have a right 
to do what you like with your own, so 

30—2 



196 . ON GOLDEN mXGES. 

I must e'en grin and bear it, and remain 
(what at least I shall always be) your 
affectionate cousin, 

"F. Despard." 

So a sort of peace was patched up 
between them, but Katherine did not forget 
her cousin's words and looks. They had 
been a sort of revelation to her, showing 
her the man's true heart in a moment of 
uncontrollable passion. For the first time 
in her life she felt afraid of him, and 
would gladly have heard that Frank had 
received orders to leave England. 

For the present his battery continued 
at Edinburgh, but there was a talk of 
seeing some fighting, he hoped soon, he 
told her, and Katherine would have felt 
relieved to know that he was actively 
employed. 

And somehow she began to grow tired 
of living at Castle Hill, and in the early 
autumn, to the surprise of some of her 



THE DlilFTING CURRENT. 197 

neighbours, took a charming country 
house at Wargrave-on-Thames. 

She had a friend living in one of the 
houses by the river, and this friend knew 
the owners of Fairfield (so the place was 
named), and knew that this gentleman and 
his wife wished to spend the autumn and 
winter abroad, and would not object to 
let their place if they could find a suitable 
tenant. 

Katherine's friend, Mrs. Ballairs, a pretty 
little active woman, was delighted at the 
idea of having Katherine for a neighbour, 
for she had known her as a young girl in 
India, and knew of the great fortune which 
had come to her, and also the advantages 
accruing from a rich friend. 

So she negotiated the affairs, and in the 
golden days of August, when the sun shone 
brightest on the smooth and shiny river, 
Katherine found herself on the banks of 
the reedy Thames. 



CHAPTER XIV. 



BY THE RIVER. 



It was a beautiful spot this Fairfield, so 
still and peaceful that when you entered 
the gates you seemed to pass out of the 
discords and worries of the world. So, at 
least, it seemed to Katherine on yon bright 
August evening, when the carriage which 
had been sent to meet her at the station 
stopped in a rural pleasant country lane 
lying between an orchard and the walls 
round the house. 

The gate-way closed behind her, and a 
narrow-flagged pathway, through a bowery 
approach, led to the porch. The interior 
of the house was simply perfect ; the long, 
low drawing-room, with its pale blue dra- 
pery, its Chippendale chairs, and old blue 



BY THE RIVER. 199 

china, was a model of comfort and good 
taste. Three windows opened into the 
garden on one side, and on the other a 
quaint diamond-paned window, with a 
cushioned seat, gave the room a delight- 
fully old-world air ; and the great bunches 
of cut roses in china bowls completed the 
effect. 

Katherine was perfectly charmed with 
the whole place, and hurried out upon 
the dewy lawn and looked at the great 
trees which on the right stood towering 
above the house. After you crossed the 
lawn you came to the flower garden. Here 
the same artistic taste was visible that 
reigned in the house, every species of 
flower being cultivated, and blooming in 
the greatest perfection. Beyond the flower 
garden was a wide green field, where 
beneath more stately trees three sleek and 
sweet-breathed cows spent their placid 
existence. Turn, indeed, which way you 
would, the whole picture was complete. 



20O OS GOLDEN HISGES. 

It was a country place which had all the 
l)eautie3 and delights of the country, and 
none of its drawbacks; and then a few 
minutes' walk brought you to the willowy 
banks of the shining river. 

Katherine was still standing on the lawn^ 
bare-headed, and looking admiringly around 
her, when her friend, Mrs. Ballairs, ran out 
of one of the drawing-room windows, which 
opened to the ground, and flung her arms 
enthusiastically round her. 

" I thought I would be in time to receive 
you, my dearest Katherine," panted out 
the pretty little woman ; " but I have 
always so much to do, my hands are 
always full — ^but then, we are not sent 
here for enjoyment ! " 

Katherine laughed. She remembered 
the time when little Mrs. Ballairs had 
apparently been sent into the world for 
enjoyment ; when she had been the wife 
of the adjutant of the regiment of which 
Katherine's father had the command, and 



BY THE RIVER. 201 

when the scandal-mongers of the Indian 
station had many a little tale to whisper 
about her. 

But several years had passed since then, 
and Mrs. Ballairs told every one now that 
she was "very serious." She had buried 
poor Ballairs, in India, but her " serious- 
ness " did not commence with her widow- 
hood. Katherine had seen her after the 
adjutant's death, but the weeds and the 
weepers had a coquettish and lively smatch 
about them still. 

" How changed you are, my dear, how 
improved ! " she presently cried, holding 
Katherine at arm's length, so that she 
might look at her. "Ah, to think you 
were a mere child when I saw you last, 
and now you are a woman — but we must 
not forget the solemn flight of time ! " 

Time, however, had apparently forgotten 
Mrs. Ballairs. Her face was as round, as 
rosy, and as smooth as Katherine re- 
membered it ten years ago, in India. She 



J02 Oy GOLDEN HINGES. 

liad already been a wife ten years at that 
time, it was said, and liad danced, and 
smiled, and flirted a good deal before she 
had finally led the adjutant to the altar. 

**Do you find me changed?" she con- 
tinued, casting down her eyes with the 
very conscious look Katherine recollected 
so well ; " but, ah, of course, you do — I 
have had much to change me — and my 
heart is quite changed, Katherine. I am 
very serious now." 

Again Katherine felt almost irresistibly 
tempted to laugh. 

" You look very well, not the least 
changed," she said ; *' your seriousness must 
agree with you." 

" You wicked girl ! " and a gleam of fun 
for a moment twinkled in Mrs. Ballairs 
blue eyes, which, however, she instantly 
checked ; " but I cannot expect a young 
girl like you to regard things in their true 
light as I do. No, my dear, this comes 
.c us through trial — endured trial — but. 



BY THE RIVER. 203 

by-th&-by, Katherine, love, I forgot to tell 
you, the servants asked me to tell you that 
dinner was ready, and I ordered grouse." 

" I am very hungry after my journey," 
answered Katherine smiling, " but I hope 
you"ll stay and help me to eat the 
STOUse ? " 

"I thought I would," said the little 
woman pensively ; " it's so delightful to 
see you again ; quite a treat, and grouse 
are a treat — yes, I will stay." 

And she did stay, and told Katherine 
how she had been converted from her 
wicked ways, " not that I ever was wicked, 
you know, dear," she explained, "only 
thoughtless, a little giddy butterfly dancing 
in the sun. But now that is all gone ; I 
live for others, for good works and self- 
denial ; I owe all to one man, Katherine — 
one noble man, an angel on earth — the 
rector of the parish, Mr. Vincent." 

"This really sounds very serious. Is 
there a Mrs. Eector, may I inquire ? " 



204 Oy GOLDEy HINGES. 

" You naughty girl ! No, love, it is said 
he gave his heart long ago, when he was 
quite a young man, to one of the highest 
in the land. Of course, I do not know 
the truth, and he never alludes to it. But 
he has given his hand to none — not yet, 
at least." And Mrs. Ballairs sighed. 

"You make me quite anxious to see 
your paragon," laughed Katherine, and 
Mrs. Ballairs fidgetted. 

" Oh, he does not care for girls," she 
said, " the way the girls run after him here 
is absurd ; but I suppose it is there are 
so few men ; so different to India, do you 
remember, dear ? It was so nice there — 
at least, of course, for the light-minded 
and frivolous. By-the-by, how is your 
handsome cousin Frank ? Ah, you remind 
me so of old days.'' 

" Frank won't know you, if you talk in 
such a solemn way — Frank is very well — 
he was a devoted admirer of yours, wasn't 
he?" 



BY THE BIVEK. 205 

"Friend, love, not admirer," said Mrs. 
Ballairs, casting down lier eyes ; " yes, 
I knew Frank Despard very well — and 
he is not married vet ? " 

" No, I hear nothing of it." 

Again Mrs. Ballairs sighed, seeing 
Katherine recalled so many things, the 
morning rides, the tender little notes 
that the adjutant never saw, the bouquets, 
the love-making. Francis Despard had 
been one of her " friends," as she called 
them, and Francis Despard was neither 
a shy nor despairing lover. 

" They were pleasant times," said Mrs. 
Ballairs, rousing herself, " but full of' 
vanity and temptation — one must dress 
well with heaps of men always about 
one — now I do not think of these things." 

" Then the rector doesn't care for dress ? " 

" Oh, Katherine, do not speak in that 
tone — he is far above folly and vanity of 
any kind — no, you see how plainly I 
dress now. I give all my money to floral 



2o6 ON GOLLEN HINGES, 

decorations for the church, and if I have 
any to spare, to the poor." 

She prattled on about herself and her 
virtues the whole evening. She would 
bring Mr. Vincent to see Katherine, she 
said, and she did bring him on the follow- 
ing day; but Katherine was agreeably 
surprised when she saw this admired 
rector. 

The poor man could not help the ladies 
running after him and trying to make a 
fool of him. He was a good-looking, 
stately man of some forty years, with a 
fine expression and grey hair, and his 
manner gave you the impression that all 
the flattery he received had left him 
unspoiled. He was the cause of Mrs. 
Ballairs *' seriousness," and of the " serious- 
ness " of many others. Widows and 
maidens alike pursued him, making his 
church a flower-show, and singing for 
him and working for him, all for the 
sake of a stray smile. 



BY THE mVKR. 207 

It was a new experience to Katherine, 
this parson worship, and tickled her sense 
of humour, but when she saw the resigned, 
good-natured philosophy with which the 
Eev. Jasper Vincent bore it, she could not 
help liking the man. It was impossible 
for him to marry them all, so he remained 
a bachelor and broke nobody's heart. 

I^s. Ballairs lived in a little house, 
actually on the river-edge, whereas Fair- 
field was a short distance from the village. 
And Mrs. Ballairs, in spite of her " serious- 
ness," gave garden parties, and invited 
any young college man or stray recruit 
she could pick up. She rowed, too, on the 
river, in her white gown, and Katherine 
learned to row under her tutoring, and 
would sit dreamily looking on the water 
and thinking of Graham North. 

She was glad to be away from Castle 
Hill, and all the worries and pain of the 
last few months ; glad to be among those 
who knew nothing of her broken en- 



2o8 ON G OLDEN HINGES. 

gagement and its tragic cause. The life 
on the river soothed and amused her, but 
she never forgot Graham, and after she 
had been a fortnight at Fairfield, she 
wrote to him, and asked him to come 
down and pay her a visit. 

Graham had great difficulty in getting 
away even for a day ; but one lovely 
Sunday morning Katherine was walking 
pensively up and down on the broad grass 
path between the flower borders which 
adorned the fruit garden at Fairfield, when 
she saw some one crossing the little rustic 
bridge that separated this part of the 
grounds from the flower gardens in front. 

In a moment she recognized Graham 
North, and with a bright smile and a 
blush, went forward to receive him. 

**So you have found me out?" she 
said. 

" They told me you were somewhere in 
the garden," answered Graham smiling, 
" and so I said I would try to find you. 



BY THE BIFEB, 2D9 

ft 

What a pretty place this is — the country 
idealized." 

" Yes, isn't it charming ? One seems so 
at peace here somehow, among the birds 
and flowers." 

Graham took off his hat as Katherine 
spoke, and looked up at the blue white- 
flecked sky, and at the tall trees, where the 
black -winged rooks flitted and cawed. 

" I must get some of your peace then, 
Katherine," he said, still smiling, " for I 
am weary," and he pushed his hair back 
from his brow. 

" You look so tired Graham, come into 
the house and rest." 

" I would rather stay out in the air, it's 
too precious to be wasted. Are you going 
to church ? If you are not, what do you 
say to a row on the river ? " 

" I would like it immensely. I am quite 
proficient in the art now, I can assure you, 
and very vain of it." 

They went together into the house after 
VOL, n. 31 



210 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

this, and then through the village down to 
the little landing place, and soon found them- 
selves on the shining river. It was a lovely 
morning, every ripple of the rolling tide 
crested with gold, and the spray from the 
oars fell like glittering jewels. Up past the 
houses they swiftly shot ; up past the little 
wooded islets, and here and there watched 
a kingfisher dart with brilliant plumage 
through the reeds, a flash of colour 
gorgeous in the sun. 

They scarcely spoke, Graham rowing like 
a steady practised oarsman, and Katherine 
sitting opposite to him steering, in her white 
gown, and her straw hat, with its plain blue 
band. No one noticed them or looked 
after them. A young man and a girl in a 
boat is too common a sight on the Thames 
to attract either attention or comment. 
And it was this solitude, the knowledge 
that they were alone as it were, which 
made the charm to these two on yon bright 
August morn. 



BY THE RN^EB: 21 1 

Mrs. Ballairs was sitting at the feet of 
her beloved rector, and Katherine had no 
other friend in the place. So they had no 
one to interfere with them, and they 
scarcely noticed time. The smooth water, 
the sunshine, the reedy shore, and the blue 
bright sky was enough. It was a little 
idyl in the man's dull prosaic life, and the 
worn look of mental labour passed away 
from his face, and his youth seemed to come 
back to him as he looked on Katherine in 
her fair and blooming prime. 

They rowed as far as Sonning, and then 
found it was mid-day. They therefore 
moored their little craft, and went to 
the rustic inn looking on the river to have 
lunch. Katherine had not felt so joyous 
since she had been a young girl riding with 
her father on the Indian hills. Her wealth 
weighed her down somewhat, and the 
distrust it bred of people's motives was 
foreign to the natural bent of her bright 
and* trustful heart. But she could not shut 

31—2 



212 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

her ej£B, and used to sigh sometimes for a 
little love that was not bought . 

After they had finished lunch, they 
strolled through the picturesque village, 
quaint and old-world, with the roses 
blooming and clambering to the roofs 
of the flint-built dwellings. Then they 
went into the church-yard and read the 
inscriptions on the moss-grown headstones. 
It was all so still ; the afternoon bell began 
to dong; the children came trooping in, 
laughing among the graves. An old man 
was standing crying by a little mound. 

"It is all so strange, is it not?" said 
Katherine softly, " life and death, joy and 
sorrow, go where we will, we find them 
together. 

"But it does not make our own less 
bitter or less sweet," answered Graham 
thoughtfully. 

" No, I fear our philosophy is principally 
for our neighbours." 

" Time is the consoler, Katherine," said 



BY THE RIVER. 213 

Graham, as if he were following the train of 
Ills own thoughts. " God does not, I think, 
mean us always to suffer." 

*' I am sure He does not, Graham." 

The words came fresh and straight from 
Katherine's heart. She looked in his face 
and understood the sufferings of which 
Graham spoke, and she silently prayed his 
grief might pass away. They went out of 
the churchyard almost in silence, and down 
to the river edge. Their little boat lay 
moored with the rest on the sun-lit water, 
and after they entered' it, Graham rowed 
Katherine through Sonning Bridge. 

But the lengthening shadows told them 
their holiday was nearly done. Unwillingly 
Graham turned the boat, but he was com- 
pelled to be in town before nightfall, and so 
began pulling down the stream. 

They talked more on the way homeward 
than th«y had done in the morning. They 
had got accustomed to be together, And 
Katherine told Graham about pretty little 



214 OJS GOLDEN HINGES, 

Mrs. Ballairs, and her sudden conversion 
from the ways of the wicked world. And 
when they arrived at Wargrave, Mrs. 
Ballairs herself was standing disconsolately 
on her little river-washed lawn. 

She recognized Katherine with surprise, 
and ran to meet her at the landing place. 

" My dear, where have you been ? " she 
said. " I have been quite uneasy about 
you ; as you were not at church, I went up 
to Fairfield immediately after service, 
and the servants said you had gone out and 
given no orders about lunch." 

Mrs. Ballairs in truth had gone up to 
have lunch with Katherine, and felt herself 
aggrieved and defrauded because Katherine 
was not there to give it to her. The little 
woman had ordered none at home, and the 
cold mutton to which she was compelled to 
return had made her unamiable. 

** You did not tell me you were going on 
the river, Katherine, dear," she said. 

" Because I did not know," smiled Katli- 



BY THE RIVER, lis 

erine. *'My friend, Mr. Graham North, 
came from town, and we have been at 
Sonning." 

Mrs. Ballairs gave a little shrug of her 
shoulders, and walked up to Fairfield with 
Katherine and Graham uninvited. 

" Shall I be in the way ? " she said plain- 
tively. 

*• Not in the least," answered Katherine, 
and the three having reached the house, 
were received with a joyous welcome by 
Ben, the brown retriever, for Katherine had 
brought him with her to the river. 

" We must take him out the next time 
we go together on the water, Graham," she 
said, now looking at Graham. 

Upon this Mrs. Ballairs glanced quickly 
from one to the other of her companions. 

" I would not advise you, Mr. Graham 
North," she said, " he is a horrid rough dog, 
and jumps in and out of the boat and covers 
one with wet." 

"I do not think I would mind that," 



2i6 Oy GOLDEN HISGES. 

anBwered Graham with a smile, who was 
fondling Ben's curly head, " for good or ill 
I owe Ben a great gift." 

" And what is that ? *' she asked. 

"My life — Ben did either a very good 
thing or a very bad thing for me, and I 
suppose whether it is good or bad depends 
upon myself." 

" Eeally ! how interesting. I shall begin 
to like Ben," smiled Mrs. Ballairs. 

But Graham was now compelled to go. 
Katherine followed him to the porch, and 
they parted with a tender hand-clasp. 

"You will come again ? " she said. 

" If I may — thank you for one bright 
day, Katherine." 

" I hope you will yet have many bright 
days," she answered, and then she parted 
with him, and returned to Mrs. Ballairs, in 
the drawing-room. 

" My dear, who is your friend ? " asked 
the little woman. "He is a handsome man, 
and has a distinguished air." 



BY THE BIVER. 217 

" He is a journalist." 

" A xchai f " cried Mrs. Ballairs in a voice 
of horror. 

"A newspaper man, writes articles for 
the newspapers," laughed Katherine. 

** My love," said Mrs. Ballairs, speaking 
very earnestly, " really this is serious^ 

" What do you mean ? " 

" I am not censorious, Katherine ; once 
I was not — well strait-laced; at least, 
people, jealous people, unkindly said so ; 
but isn't this going a little too far ? " 

I really do not know what you mean." 
My love, think of your position ! What 
would your dear father have said, what 
would Frank say, if he knew you were 
spending a whole day — and Sunday too — 
on the river with a newspaper man ? " 

Again Katherine laughed, a ringing 
joyous laugh. 

" It's very bad, isn't it ? " she said ; " but 
you may console yourself — Mr. Graham 
North, though now a journalist, is a man 






2i8 ox GOLDEN HiyGES, 

of very old family, one of our oldest 
Northumbrian families, and he is, moreover, 
the owner of a very fine estate called 
Dillford ; and, moreover still, is a very old 
and intimate friend of mine." 

"Oh, that makes all the difference, of 
course ; but do you know, love, you gave 
me quite a start — really, I feel a little faint. 
Do you mind, Katherine, dear, but I do 
think a glass of champagne would do me 
ever so much good." 



V-*«-4y^ cf^* 3* 



CHAPTER XV. 

MOONLIGHT ON THE THAMES. 

This first visit of Graham North's to 
Wargrave was one of many. He could 
only stay a few hours when he went, but 
these few hours passed in Katherine's 
fragrant garden, or on the cool and rippling 
river, seemed to give him new life. 

His busy days in town, his absorbing 
occupation made him doubly welcome the 
pleasant rest, and Katherine's bright face 
"grew brighter when he came." There 
was nothing here to remind him of the 
bitter past ; no cold looks, no sad pictures 
peopled with things that once had beeii, as 
there was at Dillford. Little Mrs. Ballairs 
flitted about. the sunny garden, trying to 
flirt with the good-looking rector, and 



220 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

Katherine stood by Graham's side in her 
fair sweet womanhood, or walked with 
him along the willowy shore. 

Then one day when he was expected he 
did not come. Katherine was frightened at 
the depth of her disappointment and anxiety. 
She wandered in and out of the house, she 
sent twice to the station, and she got out of 
temper with Mrs. Ballairs. 

" He may have written a bad article, and 
have had to write it over again,"' said this 
aggravating little woman ; " it's so funny a 
gentleman doing these things at all I " 

" Do you mean being a writer ? " said 
Katherine sharply. 

" I mean for newspapers, you know ; but 
don't get angry, or I declare I shall think 
you are in love with Mr. Graham North." 

Katherine restrained her temper, and 
walked out of the room. Presently, how- 
ever, the post came in, and Katherine knew 
why Graham could not come. 

His old friend, Mrs. Fryer, had been 



MOONLIGHT ON THE THAMES, 221 

seized with a dapgerous, and, it was feared, 
a fatal illness, and she had entreated 
Graham not to leave her. 

" I do not like to do so, poor old lady," 
he wrote, " for she seems in great suffering, 
and though I can do her no good, stiU, if 
she wishes to have me near her, of course I 
must stay." 

So he gave up his holiday and spent some 
very painful hours by the bedside of the 
dying woman. For it had come to this : 
her broken leg had never got well, and now 
a terrible illness had come upon her, and 
all her little vanities were fading before the 
great and awful dread of death. 

"Stay with me I Stay with me!" she 
kept saying to Graham. '*I dare not be 
alone." 

So he stayed and comforted her as best 
he could. She had never before realized 
the great change, prattling on when she lay 
with her broken leg as she had prattled all 
the long years before. She wrote her little 



222 ON GOLBEN HDHQES. 

feeble verses, and was aiu^ous about the 
state of her wig almost to the very last. 
Then suddenly she seemed to comprehend 
that she was about to leave all these thmgs, 
and she shrank back appalled at the pro^ 
spect ; the vain little feeble mind was terri- 
fied at the real approach of what she had 
often jested and made mirth about in the 
days when she was well. 

But the border-land was soon passed, the 
shadows darkened, and by midniglit poor 
Mrs. Fryer lay unconscious of all earthly 
things. Her faithful servant stood weeping 
by her side, chafing the stiffening hands, 
and in the still hours of the early dawn she 
died. Graham was sincerely affected ; her 
eccentricities, her follies, seemed nothing 
now, and he only remembered her unfailing 
kindness to himself 

" If she were a bit cracked, poor thing, 
about poetry and that like," said Hannah, 
wiping away her fast-falling tears, "she 
was true at heart. I've served her thirty 



MOONLIGHT ON THE THAMES. 223 

years, and Fll never put up with 
another." 

And Hannah found she would have no 
need to go into further service. The day 
after Mrs. Fryer's funeral (Graham having 
followed her to the grave), to his great 
surprise he was waited on by the lawyer 
who had conducted Mrs. Fryer's business 
affairs for many years. 

This gentleman informed him that Mrs. 
Fryer, a few months before her death, had 
made a will in his favour, burdening her 
estate with but one annuity, which was a 
hundred a year to her faithful servant, 
Hannah Eidlev. 

" Made it in my favour ? " repeated 
Graham North, in the greatest astonishment. 
Yes," smiled Mr. Danby, the lawyer, 
you quite won the old lady's heart some- 
how, and she has left you everything she 
possessed in the Avorld, and this annuity to 
her old servant is her only other bequest." 

" You utterly astonish me ; to tell you 



it 



224 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

the truth, I did not think, poor thing, she 
would have more than a hundred a yeaf to 
leave." 

" She was a very eccentric woman," 
answered Mr. Danby, ** and she possessed a 
considerable amount of property, although 
she lived, I believe, in a very parsimonious 
fashion. She has left you over fifteen 
thousand pounds, Mr. Graham North, and 
in her will she states that she bequeaths her 
property to the * most perfect gentleman of 
her acquaintance.' " 

"Poor woman, she must have been 
cracked." 

"Not a bit of it; she was one of the 
sharpest women about money I ever met, 
but she was eccentric, and you took her 
fancy, and she had a right to leave her 
money to whom she pleased. Indeed, she 
had no near relatives, and has held no com- 
munication with her late husband's family 
for years ; and, moreover, her money was 
her own private fortune, and she had a 



MOONLIGHT ON THE THAMES. 225 

perfect right to dispose of it as she 
has done. You are a lucky man, Mr. 
Graham North, and I heartily congratulate 
you." 

"Well, I never was so completely sur- 
prised in my Ufe ; but I remember now 
being very much astonished when my poor 
father died. I told her he had left me 
nothing but debts, and this kind lady 
instantly said if five hundred pounds would 
be of any use to me, she could lay her 
hands on that. * It's the poor helping the 
poor, you know,' she added." 

"She told me of this incident, Mr. 
North," smiled Mr. Danby, and she added 
* a little snob would have jumped al the 
money, but this true gentleman gratefully 
declined it.' But she had quite determined 
to make you her heir very soon after you 
came to live with her." 

" And no one else has any better claim ? " 

" Certainly not ; by-the-by, this house 
was her own, and is especially left to you 
VOL. n. 32 



226 ON GOLDEN Hlfi GE8. 

with all the furniture and plate, and I 
believe some very valuable china." 

Thus Graham North came into a little 
fortune, and felt a strange, new plea- 
sure in its possession. One of his first acts, 
we may be sure, was to write to his old 
friend, Mr. Dixon, and return him his 
generous advance. 

Mr. Dixon was so delighted that he came 
up to town to see Graham, and for the first 
time in his life he acted in a very dishonour- 
able manner. 

" My dear, lad," he said, clasping both 
Graham's hands in the genial warmth of his 
heart, " I never was so pleased since you 
came to tell me you were going to marry 
the finest girl I know. Come, come, Mr. 
Graham, this will set it all right ; fifteen 
thousand in ready money is a prize to any 
man ; and now when ye've got so rich, I'll 
e'en whisper a secret in ye're ear." 

" And what is that, Mr. Dixon ? " 

" It wasn't my money at all, my lad, that 



MOONLIGHT ON THE THAMES, 227 

I was SO generous with the offer of!" 
chuckled the old Scotchman. "It was a 
certain bonny lass who came to me with a 
tear in her eye, and begged me to write 
and offer you any amount of money you 
might require, *Only you must say it is 
your money, Mr. Dixon,' she prayed in her 
pretty way, ' or he will not take it.' You 
guess who I mean, don't you ? Ay, ay, Mr. 
Graham, you're a lucky dog, and if I was 
forty years younger I would try to cut you 
out myself ! " And again the old man 
laughed, but Graham turned uneasily 
away. 

" Can nothing be done, Mr. Dixon ? " he 
said in a low tone. "Now that I have 
money, can nothing be done to repair a 
great wrong ? " 

" You mean about — the Eiddells ? " 
"Yes, if they would accept everything 
I have I would give it ; I can make my own 
bread now, and_ if my conscience were 

more at ease " 

32—2 



228 ON GOLDTN HINGES. 

"You are a fine fellow, and I always 
said it, in spite of all. Yes, my lad, I think 
money might do something ; it heals most 
wounds, you know, and if you'll let me 
manage this, I'll sound the old man, and 
see what can be done ; he's up and about 
again, I'm told, but sore shattered, and 
can't use his right arm." 

" Make him any offer you like," said 
Graham, " and if he won't accept it, perhaps 
his daughter, his eldest daughter, will. She 
has behaved most generously to me, and I 
would like her to think I was not quite un- 
grateful." 

They settled it thus, and then Graham 
showed his old friend all poor Mrs. Fryer's 
" treasures," as she used to call them. She 
had some valuable antique silver, and 
Graham insisted upon Mr. Dixon accept- 
ing a huge old-fashioned epergne^ over 
which he had gone into raptures. 

" Don't give away your things like this, 
Mr. Graham; you'll never be rich if you 



MOONLIGHT ON THE THAMES, 229 

do," said the Scotchman ; and yet he was 
pleased with Graham's gift, and carried it 
down to Northumberland with him, and 
told all his neighbours how young Graham 
North had come into a nice little fortune ; 
and the neighbours began to regard Graham 
North with more favour after they had 
heard the news. 

"It was an unfortunate affair for the 
poor fellow about that girl," they said ; hut 
after all they did not suppose he was any 
worse than others. If he had gone down 
to DiJlford now he would have met no cold 
looks. But he did not care to go. He 
went down to Wargrave the first day he 
could get away, and Katherine met him 
with outstretched hand. 

" You have come at last ? " she said. 

" I have come to thank you, Katherine," 
he answered, " for another proof of your 
kind friendship." 

"What do you mean?" 

"I have had a visit from Mr. Dixon, and 



2^o ON G OLJ)Ey HINGES. 

I nearly brought him down to see you, but 
he was afraid to come, because he has told 
one of your secrets." 

" I do not understand," said Katherine 
blushing. 

" Well, to begin with, I must tell you 
my news. Do you know, I absolutely feel 
rich. I have the novel sensation of wishing 
to lend any one I come near some money. 
It will wear off, I suppose, and I shall 
become miserly, but at the present moment 
I feel exceedingly generous." 

" You have written a book and made 
some money ? " laughed Katherine. 

" Had I written a book I was much more 
likely to have lost some money. No, I 
liave been left some money. It is the most 
extraordinary thing; the old lady with 
whom I lived, poor Mrs. Fryer, has left me 
over fifteen thousand pounds." 

" I am so glad ! so very very glad ! I 
congratulate you most heartily," said Kath- 
erine, and she held out both her hands, 



MOONLIGHT ON THE THAMES. 231 

which Graham took. For a moment they 
stood thus ; for a moment they looked into 
each other's eyes ; and then a strange 
moisture dimmed Katherine's, and she 
pulled her hands away. 

"And the old lady left you all this?" 
she said nervously. " Why, Graham, you 
used to say she was a poor old lady ? " 

" So I believed her to be. She always 
spoke of herself as poor." 

" I declare I believe you must have 
known," said Katherine, trying to speak 
playfully. "You were very attentive to 
her, you know." 

Graham laughed. 

" She had luckily no legal heirs to accuse 
me of making love to her for her money," 
he said. " Poor old lady, I do not know 
why she took a fancy to me." 

'^ I once heard of an old lady who left a 
young man a fortune because lie helped 
her out of a crowd. I believe you remem- 
bered about the young man." 



232 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

As Katherine said this, Mrs. Ballairs, 
who was going to dine at Fairfield, tripped 
into the room. 

** Ah, Mr. Graham North," she said, hold- 
ing out her hand; "so you are down 



again." 



Yes, and I hope you have been very 
well during my absence, Mrs. Ballairs ? " 

" You look very well, at any rate," she 
answered ; " and you and Katherine seemed 
very merry when I came in." 

" No wonder we are merry," said Kath- 
erine. " Fancy, Mrs. Ballairs ; Mr. Graham 
North has been left a large fortune since 
we saw him by an old lady who was no 
relation whatever." 

" A large fortune ! " repeated the poor 
little woman in a tone of intense envy. 

" No, not a large -fortune, a nice little 
fortune," said Graham smiling ; " and Miss 
Despard has been accusing me of making 
love to the poor old lady to get it." 

" I am sure I would make love to any one 



MOONLIGHT ON THE THAMES. 233 

to get a fortune ; that is, of course, you can 
do so much good with money," said Mrs. 
Ballairs, " the want of it cripples one's 
hands. 

Mrs. Ballairs was indeed by no means 
rich, and was what she used to call " some- 
what dipped." In spite of her *• serious " 
turn of mind, she loved the world's good 
things, and was not indifferent to the fact 
that her rector was rich. 

"By-the-by, Katherine dear," she said 
presently, "I was so surprised to-day, so 
exceedingly surprised, but I had a letter 
from Frank Despard." 

" Had you ? " said Katherine. 

" Yes, he said that you had told him we 
were living close to each other and were 
great friends. It was a charming letter — 
Frank is a charming fellow after all — and it 
reminded me so of old times." And Mrs. 
Ballairs cast down her eyes and sighed. 

Katherine laughed, but somewhat un- 
easily. Her cousin had written to her once 



234 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

or twice of late. He was coming up to 
town on business, he said, and would run 
down to see Katherine at Wargrave ; and in 
reply, Katherine had mentioned that his old 
Indian acquaintance, Mrs. Ballairs, was 
living in the village. 

Upon this. Major Despard had written 
about his old friend. 

" So the little Ballairs is located by the 
river, is she? Eemember she is rather 
a shady subject, Katie, so don't be too great 
friends with her." 

Yet after writing thus of her he had 
written to her. The idea disturbed Kath- 
erine. True, Frank Despard and this little 
woman were supposed to be remarkably 
good friends in the old Indian days. But 
it was mean of Frank, Katherine thought, 
and it did not make her feel more amiable 
to her cousin. 

However, Mrs. Ballairs was evidently 
quite pleased to have heard from him. She 
spoke of him again and again during the 



MOONLIGHT ON THE THAMES. 235 

evening, recalling little anecdotes about 
" Frank," and laughing softly and casting 
down her eyes, and resuming all her old 
worldly coquettish ways. The truth was, 
she was getting quite tired of her rector. 

" He neither goes a step forward or back- 
ward," she said, speaking of him impatiently 
to Katherine ; " I do not believe he means 
anything to any one." 

" Of course, he doesn't," laughed Kathe- 
rine ; " he wouldn't be so cruel as to disap- 
point all his numerous admirers by making 
a choice." 

" It's very unkind of you to speak thus, 
Katherine ; it's quite true the way the girls 
run after him is simply disgraceful ; but he 
always tells me he doesn't care for girls." 

"Perhaps he tells them he doesn't care 
for widows." 

" If I thought so I would give up the 
church," cried Mrs. Ballairs, in a rage. 
"The money I waste on flowers — ^but of 
course you mustn't mention this, dear." 



236 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

" Do not be afraid," said Katherine. But 
this conversation made Mrs. Ballairs eager 
enough to welcome back one of her old 
military friends. 

So she talked of Frank Despard and 
the beautiful moonlight nights at the hill 
stations, and the balls, and how she had 
not a dance left disengaged for days before 
they came off. 

"And Frank once made me give him 
one," she said,' " though he had only come 
to the station that afternoon ; but he made 
me throw over poor little Piper, who was 
shot in Egypt the other day. Ah! I re- 
member it so well." 

It had got quite dark as they sat and 
listened to Mrs. Ballairs' Indian experi- 
ences. Then they all went bareheaded 
into the dewy garden, and presently the 
full moon rose and filled the garden 
with its soft white light, except- where 
the dark shadows fell from the trees and 
shrubs. 



MOONLIGHT ON THE THAMES, 237 

*' It would be lovely on the river, wouldn't 
it ? " said Katherine. 

"My dear, would it be' quite the thing?*' 
asked Mrs. Ballairs. 

" Surely with you there," said Katherine. 
And so they ran in and got hats and cloaks 
and went down to the moonlit river. 

It was an exquisite scene — shadowy, 
weird and still, save the splash of the dip- 
ping oars. They rowed into mid-stream, 
were a silvered roadway lighted the track, 
and showed the way as plainly for them as 
the daylight. 

Mrs. Ballairs sang a little song, and be- 
came excited and romantic, but Graham 
and Katherine were very silent and ab- 
sorbed. 

" If Frank were here, what fun it would 
be," cried Mrs. Ballairs. 

" Or the rector ? " said Katherine. 

" Oh, you wicked girl. If you say any- 
thing more, I shall say something wicked, 
too. Mr. Graham North, do you not con- 



238 ON GOLDEN BINGES. 

eider Katherine a very naughty young 
person ? " 

" I have not found her so," he answered, 
in his deep, soft voice. 

Presently Mrs. Ballairs declared it was 
time to go home. 

*' I must think of the world, my love," 
she said, and so they landed her at the foot 
of her little lawn, wh'ch was but a few 
yards from the regular landing place. 
When they reached this, however, Graham 
for a moment rested on his oars. 

" Would you mind rowing down stream 
a few yards, Katherine ? " he said. " It's 
too beautiful to go in, isn't it ? And now 
that we have got rid of that chatterbox " 

" Let us go," said Katherine softly. 

Neither spoke for the next few minutes. 
Graham rowed on slowly through the 
silvered tide, with his eyes fixed on Katli- 
erine's face, whose head was drooped a little 
on her breast. The hour, the scene, and 
the passionate emotion in his own heart 



MOONLIGHT ON THE THAMES, 239 

had swept all else aside. Suddenly lie 
turned the boat. 

"We will go home now," he said, and 
Katherine mutely obeyed him. 

They soon reached the landing place, 
and then walked on in silence together 
through the quiet village — Graham draw- 
ing Katherine's arm through his. Then 
they entered the country lane leading to 
Fairfield, lying still, white, and shadowy in 
the moonhght. Here Graham stopped. 

" Katherine," he said, clasping the hand 
that trembled on his arm, " can you, will 
you, forgive the past ? " 

" Yes, Graham, yes," she answered, and 
she looked up in his face. 

He drew her against his breast. 

" My dearest, my dearest," he mur- 
mured, and he pressed his lips to hers in 
one long tender kiss of love. 



CHAn:EE XVI. 

A SHADOW FROM THE PAST. 

The next morning, about eleven o'clock, 
when Mrs. Ballairs walked into the draw- 
ing-room at Fairfield, she found Graham 
North standing on the lawn, playing with 
Ben, and Katherine, in a white gown, and 
with a bunch of scarlet geraniums for a 
button-hole, cutting roses from a standard 
tree before the house. 

" Good-morning," said Katherine, as soon 
as Mrs. Ballairs appeared, "how are you 
after your row ? " 

" Pretty well — and so you are still here, 
Mr. Graham North ? " said the widow. 

" Yes ; I slept at the village inn, but I 
am going to town immediately — I only 
came in to wish Katherine good-morning." 



A SHADOW FROM THE PAST, 241 

"Oh, indeed," and the little woman 
looked from one to the other. " And how 
is Katherine after her row ? " she added 
pointedly* 

" Well and happy," answered Katherine, 
and she looked at Graham. 

A servant now came out of the house to 
tell Graham that the carriage was ready to 
take him to the station, and Katherine 
went with him through the open window 
into the drawing-room. Mrs. Ballairs, 
looking after them, saw them stand a 
moment there hand-clasped, and then dis- 
appear (still hand-clasped) into the passage. 

She drew her own conclusions, and when 
Katherine rejoined her on the lawn after 
Graham was gone, she at once began to 
question her. 

" Eeally, this is very pretty, Miss 
Katherine," she said, "a young man here 
at eleven o'clock ! " 

"Well?" answered Katherine with an 
amused look, taking up her basket of roses. 
VOL. n. 33 



242 Oy GOLDEN HISGES, 

"I suppose you two have been love- 
making?" 

" You can't expect me to confess ! " 

" But really, Katherine, it is highly im- 
proper — unless of course there is something 
serious between you ? " 

" Then it is not improper." 

"What! do you mean to say you are 
engaged ? " cried Mrs. Ballairs. 

" We were engaged long ago," answered 
Katherine quietly, "and something hap- 
pened to prevent it then, and now we are 
engaged again, so you see, my friend, there 
is nothing improper in Graham being here 
at eleven o'clock." 

"Oh, no, not in that case — ^but about 
this young man, Katherine — do you think 
your cousin Frank will approve ? " 

"My cousin Frank has nothing to do 
Tvith it, Mrs. Ballairs." 

" Still, my love, would it not be well to 
consult him ? You see you are only a girl 
— ^I do not wish to say anything against 



A 8RAD0W FROM THE PAST, 243 

Mr. Graham North — but as Frank talks of 
coining to Wargrave " 

" Frank's coming can make no difference 
about this — Mr. Graham North is my 
choice, and I am his — ^we do not need to 
consult any one." 

"Well, dear, of course you know your 
own feelings best, but girls often make such 
mistakes. There was poor dear Ballairs — 
I am sure he did his best to make me happy, 
poor fellow, but I think others could have 
made me happier. It's very perplexing, 
really, one never knows what to do." 

Katherine laughed. 

"1 don't feel at all perplexed," she 
said, "I have quite made up my mind 
— and so you must congratulate me, Mrs. 
Ballairs." 

" I do, my love, I do 1 " and she flung her 
arms round Katherine ; " may this step be 
for your true, your real happiness — but 
don't expect too much dear, there are 
always cares and bothers, I think — ^it is a 

33—2 



244 ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

weary tiresome world, and you can never 
tell what others mean to do." 

Mrs. Ballairs indeed was getting quite 
disconsolate about her rector, and her own 
affairs were also in a very muddled condition. 

She never could manage money, she used 
to say in the old days, when the poor 
adjutant had remonstrated with her for her 
extravagance. Since then she had come 
into a small income by the death of her 
mother, and the little lioiise by the river 
had thus also come into her possession. 
She had plenty to live on, if she would 
have been content to live without luxuries. 
But she gave little dinners to her rector, 
and sometimes she drank champagne when 
she felt very low, and she ordered flowers 
from town to lay at her rector's feet, and 
spent more in running after him than she 
could afford, and in return she had got 
absolutely nothing. 

She recalled the bouquets and the presents 
she used to get in India — the beautiful little 



A SHADOW FROM THE PAST. 245 

thorough-bred one man had given her, the 
gold and silver bangles that yet hung on 
her vrrists. But the Eev. Jasper Vincent 
gave no more than a gentle benevolent 
smile in return for all her attentions. She 
began to think she was wasting her time. 
Katherine had put her old friend, Frank 
Despard, into her head, and as soon as she 
returned home after hearing of Katherine*s 
engagement to Graham North, she sat down 
to write to Despard and tell him all about 
it, and renew the old familiar terms on 
which they once had been. 

The immediate efiect of her letter neither 
Mrs. Ballairs nor Katherine ever heard of. 
He allowed the terrible burst of rage and 
bafBed passion that swept over him to cool 
down before he wrote to either his friend 
or his cousin. Then Katherine received a 
short, and on the whole, a kind letter. 

'* Dear Katie, 

" The little Ballairs has written to me 



246 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

that Borneo has cast up again, and that 
after all you are going to forgive him, and 
trust that he will be a good boy henceforth 
and for evermore. I won't say I am 
pleased to hear this, because I am not. 
However, a wilful woman must e'en have 
her way, and as Bomeo is to marry you and 
become my cousin, I must hold out my 
hand to him with the best grace I can. I 
expect to be on the route soon — to Egypt 
— and I would like to see you once more, 
to say nothing of the charming Ballairs. 
I propose, therefore, to come to Wargrave 
on Thursday. Can you put me and my 
servant up ? But at all events I shall be 
able to find some rustic accommodation. 
Write and tell me if I may come, and be- 
lieve me, my dear Katie, to remain, ever 
your affectionate cousin, 

"F. Despard." 

Katherine was pleased to get this letter ; 
it set her mind at ease about the way in 



A SHADOW FROM THE PAST. 247 

which Frank Despard meant to treat her 
engagement, and she wrote a kind note in 
reply. She would be very pleased, she told 
him, to see him on Thursday, and there was 
plenty of room at Fairfield. "The fair 
widow is charmed at the idea of meeting 
you again," she added; "I hope you will 
be able to spend a few pleasant days." 

Mrs. Ballairs was quite excited when 
she heard he was coming. She ordered 
a new boating dress from town, and a hat, 
and laid aside her sombre-tinted gowns, 
with which she had in vain assaulted the 
rector's icy heart. And when Frank came 
— so stalwart, so soldier-like — she went into 
raptures about his appearance. 

" What a splendid fellow he is ! " she 
whispered to Katherine ; " after all there is 
nothing like soldiers." 

Despard, himself, seemed pleased to see 
his old friend, and took both her hands. 

" You don't look a day older," he said ; 
" you put us all quite to shame — does she 



248 ON GOLDflN HINGES. 

look a day older, Katie, than when you 
were a little girl ? " 

"She looks very well," said Katherine 
smiling ; and she asked Mrs. Ballairs to stay 
and dine with them the first day her cousin 
was at Wargrave. 

They spent a very pleasant evening 
together, and talked of old times, and grew 
merry over the jests of long ago. Mrs. 
Ballairs seemed suddenly to have forgotten 
all her "seriousness," and went back, as if 
by magic, to 'the lively little woman both 
Katherine and Despard remembered so well. 
And when the time came for the widow to 
return home, Despard said he would see 
her on her way. 

As they left Katherine's house, he drew 
her hand through his arm. 

"Do you know it's very jolly, little 
woman," he said, " to see you again ? " 
Eeally, Frank." 

Quite really — we're too old for the 
sentimental and all that sort of folly; at 






A SHADOW FROM THE PAST. 249 

least I am — it's all been knocked out of me, 
Bella mia, but still I am pleased, very- 
pleased, to see you again." 

"I am glad of that — ^I have often thought 
of you, often wished to see you — ah, those 
were happy days, long ago, Frank!" And 
Mrs. Ballairs sighed. 

"Weren't they? So this is your bower, 
is it ? " They had stopped at the back of 
the little river-side house. "Well, won't 
you ask me in, Bella? Surely we are old 
enough friends for that." 

" Yes, of course we are ; come in." 

So Major Despard went in, and praised 
the doll's house, as he had praised the doll. 
He went round the drawing-room and 
admired this and that, and declared it was 
a jolly little den, and " quite too dangerous 
for a poor mortal man to find himself in." 

" And who is your parson ? " he asked, 
for his quick eyes had fallen on the various 
portraits in different attitudes of grace and 
benevolence, which the rector's admirers 



250 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

had insisted upon him being taken in, and 
Mrs. Ballairs not expecting Frank Desps^ 
to call that night, had neglected to put 
away the numerous photographs of one 
man. 

" Oh, that is the rector, the Eev. Jasper 
Vincent," answered Mrs. Ballairs with a 
little laugh, and rather with the air of 
being caught. 

" You must be very fond of the Rev. 
Jasper apparently," laughed Despard ; " one, 
two, three — I declare, Bella, there are seven 
Eev. Jaspers. I shall be jealous of him." 

" Don't be stupid," said Bella, catching 
up a few of the photographs ; " the house- 
maid has put them all out by mistake. So 
absurd. They generally lie here." And 
she thrust them into a drawer. 

Then she bade Frank Despard sit down 
and make himself at home, and he obeyed 
her, and spent half-an-hour or so with her, 
still chatting of the "dangerously happy 
times of yore." He indeed left the little 



A 8HAD0 W FROM THE PAST. 25 1 

woman in a flutter of gratified vanity and 
happiness, and having bidden her good- 
night, after promising to see her early in 
the morning, he walked through the village 
on his way to Katherine's house, whistling 
softly as he went. 

In the lane leading to Fairfield he met 
his servant, a slight, young, dark-haired 
lad, and stopped to give him some direc- 
tions. After this he returned to Katherine, 
and found her standing by the fire (for the 
night had got chilly) in the long low 
drawing-room. 

The lamp was lit on the centre table, 
and great blue china bowls of cut flowers 
stood round it. It was such a picturesque 
room, and Despard looked round and ad- 
mired it, and then went and stood by his 
cousin's side. 

"And is it true, Katherine," he said, 
" quite true, that you are going to marry 
—Graham North ? " 

" It is quite true, Frank." 



25a ON GOLDEN HINGES, 

"Then I shall say nothing more. I 
did'nt come here to growl, you know. I 
accept the situation." 

He stood silent for a few minutes after 
this looking at her. Then quite suddenly 
he took her hand, and bent towards her. 

" Will you give me one kiss for the old 
love's sake ?" he said ; but Katherine shrank 
back. 

" What, you won't ! They are all for 
him, then— all, Katie ? " 

" Come, we must not talk nonsense," said 
Katherine, alarmed at the turn his mood 
had taken. "^Good-night, Frank. I hope 
you will sleep well." 

She went away, and Despard gnawed his 
lips and clenched his hands after 6he was 
gone. He had never cared for a woman as 
he did for this one. All his light loves had 
come and gone and left no mark, but his 
love for Katherine had grown stronger and 
deepe ear by year. 

Yet he showed no sign of disappointment 



A SHADOW FROM THE PAST, 253 

or low spirits the next morning. He went 
early to see Bella, and found not a single 
portrait of the Eev. Jasper to be seen in 
her drawing-room. 

" Oh, you faithless woman," he cried, 
instantly noticing this. " Where have you 
locked the dear rector away ? " 

Mrs. Ballairs took up a carved Indian 
ivory fan and playfully tapped his aim with 
it. 

" Hold your tongue, you naughty boy," 
she said, " or I shall get angry. Frank, do 
you remember this fan ? " 

It was one of liis own gift^ long ago. It 
was not a very handsome one, and it had 
lain among other woman's rubbish un- 
noticed for years. But she remembered it 
now ; remembered the handsome lad riding 
up with it in his pocket, and his blush, 
and the gleam in his wild grey eyes as he 
slid it into her hand. Frank Despard had 
forgotten the incident (for he had given 
away other fans since then), but he was 



aS4 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

quite quick enough to pretend that he 
remembered it. 

"What, have you kept that old stick 
all this time ? " he said ; " I must give you 
a better one, Bella/' 

They spent the day out on the river 
after this, Katherine and " Bella " rowing 
by turns, and it was close on seven when 
they returned to Wargrave. Mrs. Ballairs 
stopped at her little house to change her 
dress, but promised to be with them in a 
few minutes, and the cousins walked on 
to Fairfield together. When they reached 
the house they found that Graham North 
had arrived, and he came forward into the 
hall to meet them. 

Katherine had expected him to dinner, 
and to remain all night, and over the 
following day, and Frank Despard knew 
he was expected, and held out his hand to 
him when he saw him. 

" And how are you, Mr. Graham North ? " 
he said. 



A SHADOW FROM THE PAST, 255 

Oraham answered hiin civilly, and 
Katherine- ran away to change her dress, 
and Despard went to change his. When 
they met again in the drawing-room, Mrs. 
Ballairs (with her old ivory fan in her 
hand) was already there, and at dinner 
the two . men talked to each other as 
though no hidden jealousy lay between 
tiiem. 

Then, after dinner, Katherine and Graham 
strolled out together into the still, dark 
garden. Despard looked after them for 
a moment, and then drew the claret-jug 
nearer. 

" While these two do a little billing and 
cooing, you and I may as well have another 
glass of wine, eh, Bella ? " he said. 

Bella, nothing loath, held out her glass, 
and began chattering as usual about the 
" dear old days in India." But presently 
she noticed Despard's attention had wan- 
dered away. He rose and went to the open 
dining-room window and lit a cigar. All 



356 ON GOLDEN SIXGES. 

the windows opened into the garden, and 
he stood leaning on the sash, and peering 
into the darkness beyond. But he could 
not see Graham and Katherine. They 
were walkmg hand-clasped, and with 
Katherine's head resting on Graham's 
shoulder, beneath a thick bowery little 
avenue at one side of the garden. And 
as they went on whispering words of love, 
suddenly something sighed and stirred, 
amid the thick foliage near them. 

They both started, and looked round. 

"What was that?" said Katherine, 
lifting her head. "Surely some one 
sighed ? " 

"Perhaps it was a rabbit, rustling 
through the under-growth," answered 
Graham. 

But the idea disturbed them, that they 
jnight have an unseen listener, and in a 
few minutes they returned to the house. 
They found Frank Despard still apparently 
smoking contentedly, leaning against the 



A SHADOW FROM THE PAST. 257 

window, and talking to Mrs. Ballairs, who 
was sitting within. 

" Have you had a pleasant stroll? " cried 
Despard, with a little mocking ring in his 
voice, as they approached. 

Katherine laughed, and then they all had 
coffee, and the windows were closed, and 
presently Mrs. Ballairs declared it was 
time she was going home, and Frank 
Despard ojflfered to escort her there. 

Before he returned, Graham and Kath- 
erine said good-night to each other, and 
Graham found himself in the charming 
bedroom allotted to his use. This room, 
like the rest of the house, was furnished 
in perfect taste ; the drapery being all 
pure white, with a carpet of soft mossy 
crimson. 

Graham was tired and soon fell asleep, 

dreaming of Katherine. He had been in 

a deep sleep for some hours, when he 

awoke with the strange consciousness of 

something being in the room. The moon- 
voL. n. 34 



258 ON GOLDEN HINGES. 

light was now shining in at the windows, 
two of which looked into the garden, and 
the third on the shrubbery before the 
house, at the side of the roadway. 

Graham opened his eyes and looked up, 
and they fell on a white shadowy form 
standing in the moonlight. His heart 
seemed to stand still, and a cold dew 
broke out on his brow. The form was 
moving slowly, or rather gliding across 
the room between the window and the 
bed. It raised its head, and a sigh, which 
seemed to thrill through Graham's very 
soul, fell on his ears. He started up in 
bed horror-stricken, and the form turned 
its white mourhful face, and looked at 
him with mute appealing eyes. It was 
the face of the dead girl Winny Riddell, 
and her long fair hair fell round her, 
wet and glistening in the mystic light. 

END OF VOL. II. 

