THE PARISIANS. 



BOOK FIE8T. 



CHAPTER I. . 

It was a bright day in the early spring of 1869. 

All Paris seemed to have turned out to enjoy itself. The 
Tuileries, the Champs Elysees, the Bois de Boulogne, swarmed 
with idlers. A stranger might Ijave wondered where Toil 
was at work, and in what nook Poverty lurked concealed. 
A miUionnaire from the London Exchange, as he looked 
round on the magctsins^ the equipages, the dresses of the 
women . as he inquired the prices in the shops and the rent 
of apaHments . might have asked himself, in envious won- 
der. How on earth do those gay Parisians live ? What is 
their fortune ? Where does it come from ? 

As the day declined, many of the scattered loungers 
crowded into the Boulevards ; the caf^ and restaurants be- 
gan to light up. 

About this time a young man, who might be some five or 
six and twenty, was walking along the Boulevard des Ita- 
liens, heeding little the thr%g t^mpugh which he glided his 
solitary way ; there was that iif his aspect and bearibg which 
caught attention. He looked a somebody, but, though un- 
mistakably a Frenchman, not a Parisian. His dress was not 
in the prevailing mode . to a practiced eye it betrayed the 
taste and the cut of a pirovinbial ,tatlor. ^is gait was not 
that of' the Parisian-^less loupgftlg, more stately; and un- 
like the Parisian, he seem^ kidifferent to the gaze of others. 

Nevertheless there was about him that air of dignity or 
distinction which those who are reared from their cradle in 
the pride of birth acquire so unconsciously that it seems 
hereditary and inborn. It must also be confessed that Jihe 

.<. 

 VjOOQIC"-_ y 



12 THB PARISIANS. 

young man himself was endowed with a considerable share 
of that nobility which Nature capriciously distributes among 
her favorites, with little respect for their pedigree and blazon 
. ^the nobility of form and face. He was tall and well shaped, 
with graceful length of limb and fall of shoulders ; his face 
was handsome, of the purest type of French masculine beau- 
ty . the nose inclined to be aquiline, and delicately thin, with 
finely cut open nostrils ; the complexion clear, the eyes large, 
of a light hazel, with dark lashes, the hair of a chestnut 
brown, with no tint of auburn, the beard and mustache a 
shade darker, clipped short, not disguising the outline of 
lips, which were now compressed, as if smiles had of late 
been unfamiliar to them ; yet such compression did not seem 
in harmony with the physiognomical character of their for- 
mation, which was that assigned by Lavater to tempera- 
ments easily moved to gayety and pleasure. 

Another man, about hi^ own age, coming quickly out of 
one of the streets of the Chauss6e d'Antin, brushed close by 
the stately pedestrian above described, caught sight of his 
countenance, stopped short, and exclaimed, "Alain !" The 
person thus abruptly accosted turned his eye tranquilly on 
the eager face, of which all the lower part was enveloped in 
black beard ; and slightly lifting his hat with a gesture of 
the head that implied, " Sir, you are mistaken : I have not 
the honor to4cnow you," continued his slow, indifferent way. 
'The would-be acquaintance was not so easily rebuffed. 
"Pe^" said he, between his teeth, "I am certainly right. 
He is not much altered . of course lam; ten years of Paris 
would improve an orang-outang." Quickening his step, and 
regaining the side of the man he had called "Alain," he said, 
with a well-bred mixture of boldness and courtesy in his tone 
and countenance, 

" Ten thousand pardons if I am wrong. But surely I ac- 
cost Alain de Kerouec,son of the Marquis de Roohebriant ?" 

" True, sir ; but^-" ly^ 

" But you do not remember me, your old coUege^iind, 
Frederic Lemercier ?" 

" Is it possible ?" cried Alain, cordially, and with an ani- 
mation which changed the whole character of his counte- 
nance. " My dear Frederic, my dear friend, this is indeed 
good fortune ! So you, too, are at Paris ?" 



\ 



 



Gopgk 



THE PARISIANS. 13 

" Of course ; and you ? Just come, I perceive," he added, 
somewhat satirically, as, linking his arm in his new-found ^ 
friend's, he glanced at the cut of that friend's coat collar. 

" I have been here a fortnight," replied Alain. 

" Hem ! I suppose you lodge in the old Hdtel de Roche- 
briant. I passed it yesterday, admiring its vast fa^ade^ lit- 
tle thinking you were its inmate.'- 

" Neither am I ; the hotel does not belong to me . it was 
sold some years ago by my father." 

" Indeed 1 I hope your father got a good price for it ; 
those grand hotels have trebled their value within the last 
five years. And how is your father? Still the same pol- 
ished grand seigneur? I never saw him but once, you 
know ; and I shall never forget his smile, style grand mo- 
nargue^ when he patted me on the head and tipped me ten 
napoleons." 

"My father is no more," said Alain, gravely; "he has 
been dead nearly three years." 

"Cie// forgive me; I am greatly shocked. Hem ! so you 
are now the Marquis de Rochebriant . ^ great historical 
name, worth a large sum in the market. Few such names 
left. Superb place your old chateau, is it not ?" 

"A superb place, No . a venerable ruin. Yes !" 

"Ah, a ruin ! so much the better. All the bankers are 
^^mad after ruins . so charming an amusement to restore 
them. You will restore yours, without doubt. I will in- 
troduce you to such an architect ; has the moyen dge at his 
fingers' ends. Dear . but a genius." 

The young Marquis smiled. for since he had found a col- 
lege friend, his face showed that it could smile . smiled, but 
^ , not cheerfully, and answered, 

" I have no intention to restore Rochebriant. The walls 
are solid; they have weathered the storms of six centu- 
ries; they will last rty time, and with me the race per- 
ishes." 

" Bah ! the race perish, indeed ! you will marry. Parlez- 
moi de pa . you could not come to a better man. I have a 
list of all the heiresses at Paris, bound in Russia leather. 
You naS^^ke your choice out of twenty. Ah, if I were 
but a Rochebriant ! It is an infernal thing to come into 
the world a Lemercier. I am a democrat, of course. A Le- 



 



 



14 THE PABISIANS. 

mercier would be in a false position if he were not. But if 
any one would leave me twenty acres of land, with some an- 
tique right to the De and a title, faith, would not I be an 
aristocrat, and stand up for my order? But now we have 
met, pray let us dine together. Ah ! no doubt you are en- 
gaged every day for a month. A Rochebriant just new to 
Paris must bef^k by all the Faubourg." 

" No," answered Alain, simply, " I am not engaged ; my 
range of acquaintance is more circumscnbed than yon sup- 
pose." . . . . 

"So much the better for me. I am luckily disengaged 
to-day, which is not often the case, for I am in some re- 
quest in my own set, though it is not that of the Faubourg. 
Where shall we dine ?. at the Trois Fr^res ?" 

"Wherever you please. I know no restaurant at Paris 
except a very ignoble one, close by my lodging." 

^^ Apropos, where do you lodge?" 

" Rue de rUniversit6, Numero . " 

"A fine street, but triste. If you have no longer your 
family hotel, you have no excuse to linger in that museum 
of mummies, the Faubourg St. Germain ; you must go into 
one of the new quarters by the Champs Elysfees. Leave it 
to me ; Pll find you a charming apartment. I know one to 
be had a bargain . a bagatelle-r-five hundred naps a year. 
Cost you about two or three thousand more to furnish tol- 
erably, not showily. Leave all to me. In three days you 
shall be settled. Apropos/ horses! You must have En- 
glish ones. How many ? . three for the saddle, two for your 
c(yupif Pll find them for you. I will write to London to- 
morrow. JReese " (Rice) " is your man." 

" Spare yourself that trouble, my dear Frederic. I keep 
no horses and no coupi. I shall not change my apartment." 
As he said this, Rochebriant drew himself up somewhat 
haughtily. 

" Faith," thought Lemercier, " is it possible that the Mar- 
quis is poor? No. I have always heard that the Roche- 
briants were among the greatest proprietors in Bretagne. 
Most likely, with all his innocence of the Faubourg St. Ger- 
main, he knows enough of it to be aware that I, Frederic 
Lemercier, am not the man to patronize one of its greatest 
nobles. Sacre bku! if I thought that; if he meant to give 



 



 



THE PABISIAKS. 15 

himself airs to n\e, his old college friend . I would . I would 
call him out." 

Just as M. Lemercier had come to that bellicose resolu- 
tion, the Marquis said, with a smile which, though frank, 
was not without a cei*tain grave melancholy in its expres- 
sion, "My dear Frederic, pardon me if I seem to receive 
your friendly offers ungraciously. But believe that I have 
reasons you will approve for leading at Paris a life which 
you certainj|^l?C*ill not envy;" then, evidently desirous to 
change th^ sweet, he said, in a livelier tone, "But what a 
marvelous cil^this Paris of ours is! Remember, I had 
never seen if before : it burst on me like a city in the Ara- 
bian Nights. two weeks ago. And that which strikes me 
most . I say it with regret and a pang of conscience . is ' 
certainly not the Paris of former times, but that Paris 
which M. Bonaparte . ^I beg pardon, which the Emperor . 
has called up around him, and identified forever with his 
reign. It is what is new in Paris that strikes and inthralls 
me. Here I see the life of France, and I belong to her 
tombs!" ' 

"I don't quite understand you," said Lemercier. "If 
you think that because your father and grandfather were 
Legitimists, you have not the fair field of living ambition 
open to you under the empire, you never were more mis- 
taken. Moyen dge^ and even rococo^ are all the rage. You 
have no idea how valuable your name would be either at 
the Imperial Court or in a Commercial Company. But 
with your fortune you are independent of all but fashion 
and the Jockey Club. And a propos of that, pardon me . 
what villain made your coat? . let me know; I will de- 
nounce him to the police." 

Half amused, half amazed, Alain Marquis de Rochebriant 
looked at Frederic Lemercier much as a good-tempered lion 
may look upon a lively poodle who takes a liberty with his 
mane, and, after a pause, he replied, curtly, " The clothes I 
wear at Paris were made in Bretagne ; and if the name of 
Rochebriant be of any value at all in Paris, which I doubt, 
let me trust that it will make me acknowledged as gentih 
homme^ whatever my taste in a coat, or whatever the doc- 
trines of a club composed . of jockeys." 

*f Ha, ha !" cried Lemercier, freeing himself from the arm 

 VjOOQIC 



16 THE PARISIANS. 

of his friend, and laughing the more irresistibly as he en- 
countered the grave look of the Marquis. " Pardon me . I 
can't help it . the Jockay Club. composed of jockeys! . it 
is too much ! . the best joke ! My dear Alain, there is some 
of the best blood of Europe in the Jockey Club: they 
would exclude a plain bourgeois like me. But it is all the 
same ; in one respect you. are quite right. Walk in a hUyuse 
if you please . ^you are still Rochebriant . you would only 
be called eccentric. Alas ! I am obliged to s^i^ to London 
for my pantaloons ; that comes of being a Lfmercier. But 
here we are in the Palais Royal." 



CHAPTER IL 

The scdona of the Trois Fr^res were crowded . our friends 
found a table with some "little difficulty. Lemercier pro- 
posed a privarte cabinet, which, for some reason known to 
himself, the Marquis declined. 

Lemercier, spontaneously and unrequested, ordered the 
dinner and the wines. 

While waiting for their oysters, with which, when in sea- 
son, French bon-vivants usually commence their dinner, Le- 
mercier looked round the salon with that air of inimitable, 
scrutinizing, superb impertinence which distinguishes- the 
Parisian dandy. Some of the ladies returned his glance co- 
quettishly, for Lemercier was beait garpon; others turned 
aside indignantly, and muttered something to the gentle- 
men dining with them. The said gentlemen, when old, 
shook their heads, and continued to eat unmoved ; when 
young, turned briskly round, and looked, at first fiercely, at 
M. Lemercier, but, encountering his eye through the glass 
which he had screwed into its socket . ^noticing the hardi- 
hood of his countenance and the squareness of his shoulders 
. even they turned back to the tables, shook their heads, 
' and continued to eat unmoved, just like the old ones. 

"Ah !" cried Lemercier, suddenly, " here comes a man you 
should kno wj mon cher. He will tell you. how to place your 
money . a rising man . a coming man . a future minister. 
Ah ! bon-jour, Duplessis, bon-jour^^ kissing his hand to a gen- 
tleman who had just entered, and was looking about him 



 



 



THE PABIBIAK8. 17 

for a seat. He was evidently well and favorably known at 
the Trois Fr^res. The waiters had flocked round him, and 
were pointing to a table by the wiqdow which a saturnine 
Englishman, who had dined off a beefsteak and potatoes, 
was about to vacate. 

Mons. Duplessis, having first assured himself, like a pru- 
dent man, that his table was secure, having ordered his oys- 
ters, his chablis, and his potage d la bisque^ now paced calmly 
and slowly across the salon^ and halted before Lemercier. 

Here let me pause for a moment, and give the reader a 
rapid sketch of the two Parisians. 

Frederic Lemercier is dressed, somewhat too showily, in 
the extreme of the prevA'ent fashion. He wears a superb 
pin in his cravat . a pin worth 2000 francs; he wears rings 
on his fingers, hreloques to his watch-chain. He has a warm 
though dark complexion, thick black eyebrows, full lips, a 
nose somewhat turned up, but not small, very fine large dark 
eyes, a bold, open, somewhat impertinent expression of coun- 
tenance . withal decidedly handsome, thanks to coloring, 
youth, and vivacity of " re^arc?.'* 

Lucien Duplessis, bending over the table, glancing first 
with curiosity at the Marquis de Rochebriant, who leans his 
cheek on his hand and seems not to notice him, then concen- 
trating his attention on Frederic Lemercier, who sits square 
with his hands clasped . Lucien Duplessis is somewhere be- 
tween forty and fifty, rather below the middle height, slen- 
der but not slight . what in English phrase is called " wiry." 
He is dressed with extreme simplicity : black frock-coat but- 
toned up ; black cravat worn fiigher than men who follow 
the fashions wear their neckcloths nowadays; a hawk's eye 
and a hawk's beak ; hair of a dull brown, very short, and 
wholly without curl ; his cheeks thin and smoothly shaven, 
but he wears a* mustache and imperial, plagiarized from 
those of his sovei^eign, and, like all plagiarisms, carrying the 
borrowed beauty to extremes, so that the points of mustache 
and impenal, stiffened and sharpened by cosmetics which 
must have been composed of iron, looked like three long 
stings guarding lip and jaw from invasion ; a pale olive- 
brown complexion; eyes small, deep sunk, calm, piercing; 
his expression of face at first glance not striking, except for 
quiet immovability. Observed more heedfully, the expres- 

 vJjOOQIC 



18 THE PARISIANS. 

sion was keenly intellectual. determined abofit the^lips, cal- 
culating about the brows : altogether the face of no ordinary 
man, and one not, perhaps, without fine and high qualities, 
concealed from the general gaze by habitual reserve, but 
justifying the confidence of those whom he admitted into 
his intimacy. 

"Ah, mon cAer," said Lemercier, " you promised to call on 
me yesterday at two o'clock. I waited in for you half an 
hour; you never came." 

"No; I went first to the Bourse. The shares in that 
company we spoke of have fallen ; they will fall much low- 
er . foolish to buy in yet; so the object of my calling on 
you was over. I took it for granlied you would not wait 
if I failed my appointment. Do you go to the opera to- 
night?" 

" I think- not . ^nothing worth going for ; besides,- 1 have 
found an old friend, to whom I consecrate this evening. Let 
me introduce you to the Marquis de Rochebriant. Alain, 
M. Duplessis." 

The two gentlemen bowed. 

" I had the honor to be known to monsieur your father," 
said Duplessis. 

"Indeed," returned Rochebriant. "He had not visited 
Paris for many years before he died." 

" It was in London I met him, at the house of the Russian 
Princess C ." 

The Marquis colored high, inclined his head gravely, and 
made no reply. Here the waiter brought the oysters and 
the chablis, and Duplessis retfred to his own table. 

"That is the most extraordinary man," said Frederic, as 
he squeezed the lemon over his oysters, " and very much to 
be admired." 

" How so ! I see nothing at least to admire i^i his face," 
said the Marquis, with the bluntness of a provincial. 

"His face.- Ah! you are a Legitimist . party prejudice. 
He dresses his face after the Emperor ; in itself a very clever 
face, surely." 

"Perhaps, but not an amiable one. He looks like a bird 
of prey." 

"All clever men are birds of prey. The eagles are the 
heroes, and the owls the sages. Duplessis is not an eagle 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 19 

nor an owL I should rather call him a falcon, except that I 
would not attempt to hoodwink him." 

" Call him what you will," said the Marquis, indifferently ; 
" M. Duplessis can be nothing to me." 

"I'm not so sure of that," answered Frederic, somewhat 
nettled by the phlegm with which the Provincial regarded 
the pretensions of the Parisian. "Duplessis, I repeat it, is 
an extraordinary man. Though untitled, he descends from 
your old aristocracy ; in fact, I believe, as his name shows, 
irom the same stem as the Richelieus. His father was a 
great scholar, and I believe he has read much himself. 
Might have taken to literature or the bar, but his parents 
died fearfully poor ; and some distant relations in commerce 
took charge of him, and devoted his talents to the Bourse, 
Seve years ago he lived in a single chamber, au quatriknej 
near the Luxembourg. He has now a hotel, not large, but 
charming, in the Champs Elys6es, worth at least 600,000 
frangs. Nor has he made his own fortune alone, but that of 
many others ; some of birth a3 high as your own. He has 
the genius of riches, and knocks off a million as a poet does 
an ode, by the force of inspiration. He is hand-in-glove with 
the ministers, and has been inirited to Compi^gne by the 
Emperor. You will find him very useful." 

Alain made a slight movement of incredulous dissent, and 
changed the conversation to reminiscences of old school-boy 
days. 

The dinner at length came to a close. Frederic rang 
for the bill . glanced over it. "Fifty-nine francs," said he, 
carelessly flinging down his napoleon and a half The Mar- 
quis silently drew forth his purse and extracted the same 
sum. 

When they were out of the restaurant^ Frederic proposed 
adjourning to his own rooms. " I can promise you an excel- 
lent cigar, on% of a box given to me by an invaluable young 
Spaniard attached to the Embassy here. Such 'cigars are 
not to be had at Paris for money, nor even for love, seeing 
that women, however devoted and generous, never offer you 
any thing better than a cigarette. Such cigars are only to 
be had for friendship. Friendship is a jewel" . * 

" I never smoke," answered the ^Marquis, " but I shall be 
charmed to come to your rooms ; only don't let me encroach 

 VjOOQIC 



20 THE PARISIANS. 

on your good-nature. Doul)tles8 you have engagements for 
the evening." 

" None till eleven o'clock, when I have promised to go to 
a 8oir^ to which I do not offer to take you ; for it is one of 
those Bohemian entertainments air which it would do you 
barm in the Faubourg to assist . at least until you have 
made good your position. Let me see, is not the Duchesse 
de Tarascon a relation of yours?" 

" Yes ; my poor mother's first cousin." 

" I congratulate you. Tr^ grande dame. She will launch 
you in puro coelo^ as Juno might have launched one of her 
young peacocks." 

"There has bejen no acquaintance between our houses," 
returned the Marquis, dryly, " since the m^ailiance of her 
second nuptials." . 

^^Misalliance ! second nuptials ! Her second husband was 
the Duke de Tarascon." 

"A duke of the Firat Empire . the grandson of a butcher." 

^^Diahle ! you are a severe genealogist, Monsiev/r U Man'- 
quia. How can you consent to walk arm in arm with me, 
whose great-grandfather supplied bread to the same ^rmy 
to which the Duke de Tarascon's grandfather furnished the 
meat?" 

" My dear Frederic, we two have an equal pedigree, for 
our friendship dates from the same hour. I do not blame 
the Duchesse de Tarascon for marrying the grandson of a 
butcher, but for marrying the son of a man made duke by 
a usurper. She abandoned the faith of her house and the 
cause of her sovereign. Therefore her marriage is a blot on 
our scutcheon." 

Frederic raised his eyebrows, but had the tact to pursue 
the subject no further. (He who interferes in the quarrels of 
relations must pass through life without a friend.^l 

The young men now arrived at Lemercier's apartment, an 
entresol looking on the Boulevard des Italiens, consisting of 
more rooms than a bachelor generally requires ; and though 
low-pitched, of good dimensions, decorated and furnished 
with a luxury which really astonished the provincial, though, 
with the high-bred pride of an Oriental, he suppressed every 
sign of surprise. 

Florentine cabinets freshly retouched by the exquisite skill 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 21 

of Mombro, costly specimens of old Sevres and Limoges, pic- 
tures and bronzes and marble statuettes . all well chosen and 
of great price, reflected from mirrors in Venetian frames . 
made a coup d^oeil very favorable to that respect which the 
human mind pays to the evidences of money. Nor was com- 
fort less studied than splendor. Thick carpets covered the 
floors, doubled and quilted portikres excluded all draughts 
from chinks in the doors. Having allowed his friend a few 
minutes to contemplate and admii^ the saUe d manger and 
salon which constituted his moi-e state apartments, Frederic 
then conducted him into a small cabinet, fitted up with scar- 
let cloth and gold fringes, whereon were artistically an-anged 
trophies of Eastern weapons, and Turkish pipes with amber 
mouth-pieces. 

There placing the Marquis at ease on a divan, and flinging 
himself on another, the Parisian exquisite ordered a valet, 
well dressed as himself, to bring coffee and liqueurs; and 
after vainly pressing one of his matchless cigars on his friend, 
indulged in his own regalia. 

" They are ten years old," said Frederic, with a tone of 
compassion at Alain's self-inflicted loss . "ten years old. 
Bom, therefore, about the year ib which we two parted." 

" When you were so hastily summoned from college," said 
the Marquis, "by the news of your father's illness. We 
expected you back in vain. Have you been at Paris ever 
since?" 

" Ever since ; my poor father died of that illness. His 
fortune proved much larger than was suspected . ^my share 
amounted to an income from investments in stocks, houses, 
etc., to upward of 60,000 francs a year ; and as I wanted six 
years to my majority, of course the capital on attaining my 
majority would be increased by accumulation. My mother 
desired to keep me near her ; my uncle, who was joint guard- 
ian with her, looke'd with disdain on our poor little provin- 
cial cottage ; so promising an heir should, acquire his finishing 
education under masters at Paris. Long before I was of age 
I was initiated into politer mysteries of our capital than those 
celebrated by Eugene Sue. When I took possession of my 
fortune five years ago, I was considered a CrcBsus ; and real- 
ly for that patriarchal time I was wealthy. Now, alas I my 
accumulations have vanished in my outfit ; and 60,000 francs 



Digitized 



fCoogk 



22 THB PARISIANS. 

a year is the least a Parisian can live upon. It is not only 
that all prices have fabulously increased, but that the dearer 
things become, the better people live. When I first came 
out, the world speculated upon me ; now, in order to keep 
my standing, I am forced to speculate on the world. Hith- 
erto I have not lost; Duplessis let me into a few good things 
this year, worth 100,000 francs or so. Croesus consulted the 
Delphic Oraola Duplessis was not alive in the time of 
Croesus, or Croesus would have consulted Duplessis." 

Here there was a ring at the outer door of the apartment, 
and in another minute the v^t ushered in a gentleman 
somewhere about the age of thirty, of prepossessing counte- 
nance, and with the indefinable air of good-breeding and 
usage du monde. Frederic started up to greet cordially the 
new-comer, and introduced him to the Marquis under the 
name of " Sare Grarm-Varn." 

" Decidedly,'* said the visitor, as he took off his paletot 
and seated himself beside the Marquis . "decidedly, my 
dear Lemercier," said he, in very correct French, and with 
the true Parisian accent and intonation. " You Frenchmen 
merit that praise for polished ignorance of the language of 
barbarians which a distinguished historian bestows on the 
ancient Romana Permit me. Marquis, to submit to yon the 
consideration whether Grarm Vam is a fair rendering of my 
name as truthfully printed on this card." 

The inscription on the card, thus drawn from its case and 
placed in Alain's hand, was . 

Mr. Graham Vane. 

No, . Rue D'Anjou, 

The Marquis gazed at it as he might on a hieroglyphic, and 
passed it on to Lemercier in discreet silence. 

That gentleman made another attempt at the bai*barian 
appellation. 

" * Gr^r . ham Varne.' C'est 9a ! I triumph ! all difficul- 
ties yield to French energy." * 

Here the coffee and liqueurs were served ; and afler a short 
pause the Englishman, who had very quietly been observing 
the silent Marquis, turned to him and said: ^^Monsieiir le 
Marquis^ I presume it was your father whom I remeitiber 
as an acquaintance of my own father at Ems. It is many 

^H  VjOOQIC 



THE PASISIANS. 23 

years ago: I was but a child. The Count de Chambord 
was then at that eBervatiug little spa for the benefit of the 
Countess's health. If our friend Lemercier does not mangle 
your name as he does mine, I understand him to say that 
you are the Marqds de Rochebriant." 

"That is my name; it pleases me to hear that my father 
was among those who fiocked to Ems to do homage to the 
royal personage who deigns to assume the title of Count de 
Chambord." 

" My own ancestors clung to the descendants of James 11. 
till their claims were buried in the grave of the last Stuart ; 
and I honor the gallant men who, like your father, revere in 
an exile the heir to their ancient kings." 

The Englishman said this with grace and feeling; the 
Marquis's heart warmed to him at once. 

" The first loyal gentUhomme I have met at Paris," thought 
the Legitimist ; " and oh, shame ! hot a Frenchman !" 

Graham Vane, now stretching himself and accepting, the 
cigar which Lemercier offered him, said to that gentle- 
man: "You who know your Paris by heart . every body 
and every thing therein worth the knowing, with many bod- 
ies and many things that are not worth it . can you inform 
me who and what is a certain lady who every fine day may 
be seen walking in a quiet spot at the outskirts of the Bois 
de Boulogne, not far from the Baron de Rothschild's villa ? 
The said lady arrives at this selected spot, in a dark blue 
c(xupi without armorial bearings, punctually at the hour of 
three. She wears always the same dress, a kind of gray 
pearl-colored silk, with a cdchemire shawl. In age she may 
be somewhat about twenty . a year or so more or less . and 
has a face as haunting as a Medusa's ; not, however, a face 
to turn a man into a stone, but rather of the two turn a 
stone into a man. A clear paleness, with a bloom like an 
alabaster lamp with the light flashing through. I borrow 
that illustration from Sare Scott, who applied it to Milor 
Bee-ron." 

"I have not seen the lady you describe," answered Lemer- 
cier, feeling humiliated by the avowal ; " in fact, I have not 
been in that sequestered part of the Bois for months ; but I 
will go to-morrow: three o'clock, you say. leave it to me; 
to-morrow evening, if she is a Parisienne, you shall know all 



Digitized tfy 



 



24 . THE PARISIANS. 

about her. But, mon cher^ you are not of a jealous temper- 
ament to confide your discovery to another." 

"Yes, I am of a very jealous temperament," replied the 
Englishman ; " but jealousy comes after love, and not be- 
fore it. I am not in love ; I am only haunted. To-morrow 
evening, then, shall we dine at Philippe's, seven o'clock ?" 

"With all my heart," said Lemercier; "and you too, 
Alain." 

" Thank you, no," said the Marquis, briefly ; and he rose, 
drew on his gloves, and took up his hat. 

At these signals of departure, the Englishman, who did 
not want tact nor delicacy, thought that he had made him- 
self de trop in the t^e-d-tMe of two friends of the same age 
and nation ; and catching up his paletot, said, hastily, " No, 
Marquis, do not go yet, and leave our host in solitude ; for 
I have an engagement which presses, and only looked in at 
Lemercier's for a moment, seeing the light at his windows. 
Permit me to hope that our acquaintance will not drop, and 
inform me where I may have the honor to call on you." 

" Nay," said the Marquis ; " I claim the right of a native 
to pay my respects first to the foreigner who visits our cap- 
ital, and," he added in a lower tone, " who speaks so nobly 
of those who revere its exiles." 

The Englishman saluted, and walked slowly toward the 
door; but on reaching the threshold, tunied back -and made 
a sign to Lemercier, unperceived by Alain. 

Frederic understood the sign, and followed Graham Vane 
into the adjoining room, closing the door as he passed. 

" My dear Lemercier, of course I should not have intruded 
on you at this hour on a mere visit of ceremony. I called 
to say that the Mademoiselle Duval whose address you sent 
me is not the right one . not the lady whom, knowing your 
wide range of acquaintance, I asked you to aid me in finding 
out." 

" Not the right Duval ? DiahU ! she answered your de- 
scription exactly." 

"Not at all." 

"You said she was very pretty and young . under twen- 
ty." 

"You forgot that I said she deserved that, description 
twenty-one years ago." 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 25 

"Ah, SO you did; but some ladies are always young. 
* Age,' says a wit in the Figaro^ ' is a river which the wom- 
en compel to re-ascend to its source when it has flowed on- 
ward more than twenty years.' Never mind . aoyez tran- 
quiUe . I will find your Duval yet if she is to be found. 
But why could not the friend who commissioned you to 
inquire choose a name less common ? Duval ! every street 
in Paris has a shop door over which is inscribed the name 
of Duval." 

" Quite true, there is the diflSculty ; however, my dear 
Lemercier, pray continue to look out for a Louise Duval 
who was young and pretty twenty-one yeare ago . this 
search ought to interest me more than that which I intrusted 
to you to-night respecting the pearly-robed lady : for in the 
last I but gratify my own whim ; in the first I discharge a 
promise to a friend. You, so perfect a Frenchman, know 
the difference ; honor is engaged to the first. Be sure you 
let me know if you find any other Madame or Mademoiselle 
Duval ; and of course you remember your promise not to 
mention to any one the commission of inquiry you so kind- 
ly undertake. I congratulate you on your friendship for 
M. de Rochebriant. What a noble countenance and man- 
ner !" 

Lemercier retunied to the Marquis. "Such a pity you 
can't dine with us to-morrow. I fear you made but a poor 
dinner to-day. But it is always better to arrange the menu 
beforehand. I will send to Philippe's to-morrow. Do not 
be afraid." 

The Marquis paused a moment, and on his young face a 
proud struggle was visible. At last he said, bluntly and 
manfulfy, 

" My dear Frederic, your world and mine are not and can 
not be the same. Why should I be ashamed to own to ray 
old school-fellow that I am poor . very poor ; that the din- 
ner I have shared with you to-day is to me a criminal ex- 
travagance? I lodge in a single chamber on the fourth 
story; I dine off a single />/a^ at a small restaurateur*^ ; the 
utmost income I can allow tp myself does not exceed five 
thousand francs a year: my fortunes I can not hope much 
to improve. In his own country Alain de Rochebriant has 
no career." 

L. 2 

 VjOOQIC 



2B THE PAJEUSIANS. 

Lemercier was so astonished by this confession that he 
remained for some moments silent, eyes and month both 
wide open ; at length he sprang up, embraced his friend, 
well-nigh sobbing, and exclaimed, ^^Tant mieux pour nioif 
You must take your lodging with me. I have a charming 
bedroom to spare. Don't say no. It will raise my own 
position to say I and Rochebriant keep house together. It 
must be so. Come here to-morrow. As for not having a 
career . bah I I and Duplessis will settle that. You shall 
be a miUionnaire in two years. Meanwhile we will join cap- 
itals; I my paltry notes, you your grand name. Settled !" 

" My dear, dear Frederic," said the young noble, deeply 
affected, " on reflection you will see what you propose is 
impossible. Poor I may be without dishonor; live at an- 
other man's cost I can not do without baseness. It does 
not require to be gentUhomme to feel that : it is enough to 
be a Frenchman. Come and see me when you can spare 
the time. There is my address. You are the only man 
in Paris to whom I shall be at home. Au revoir.^^ And 
breaking away from Lemercier's clasp, the Marquis hur- 
ried off. 



CHAPTER III. 

Alain reached the house in which he lodged. Externally 
a fine house, it had been the hotel of a great family in the 
old regime. On the first floor were still superb apartments, 
with ceilings painted by Le Brun, with walls on which the 
thick silks still seemed fresh. These rooms were occupied 
by a rich agent de change; but, like all such ancient pal- 
aces, the upper stories were wretchedly defective, even in 
the comforts which poor men demand nowadays: a back 
staircase, narrow, dirty, never lighted, dark as Erebus, led to 
the room occupied by the Marquis, which might be natural- 
ly occupied by a needy student or a virtuous grisette. But 
there was to him a charm in that old hotel, and the richest 
locataire therein was not treated with a respect so ceremo- 
nious as that which attended the lodger on the fourth story. 
The porter and his wife were Bretons ; they came from the 
village of Rochebriant ; they had known Alain's parents in 



 



 



THB PABISIANS. 27 

^ their yoatig days; it was their kinsman who had recom- 
"^ mended him to the hotel which they served : so, when he 
^ paused at the lodge for his key, which he had left there, the 
^ porter's wife was in waiting for his return, and insisted on 
^ lighting him up stairs and seeing to his fire, for after a warm 
^ day the night had turned to that sharp biting cold which is 
\ more trying in Paris than even in London. 
^ The old woman, running up the stairs before him, opened 
"^the door of his room, and busied herself at the fire. " Gen- 
'^ tly, my good Martha," said he ; " that log suffices. I have 
^been extravagant to-day, and must ptnch for it" 
/^ M. le Marquis jests," said the old woman, laughing. 
^ "No, Martha; I am serious. I have sinned, but I shall 
vN reform. JEntre nous^ my dear friend, Paris is very dear 
v/^when one sets one's foot out-of-doors: I must soon go back 
to Rochebriant." 

" When M, le Marquis goes back to Rochebriant he must 
take with him a Madame la Ma/rquiae . some pretty angel 
with a suitable doV^ 

"A dot suitable to the ruins of Rochebriant would not 
BufiSce tb repair them, Martha : give me my dressing-gown, 
and good-night." 

^^Bon repos^ M. le Marquis I heavx r^es^ et bd avenir /" 
^Bd avenir P^ murmured the young man, bitterly, leaning 
his cheek on his hand ; " what fortune fairer than the pres- 
ent can be mine? yet inaction in youth is more keenly felt 
than in age. How lightly I should endure poverty if it 
brought poverty's ennobling companion, Labor . denied to 
me I Well, well ; I must gb back to the old rock : on this 
ocean there is no sail, not even an oar, for me." 

Alain de Rochebriant had not been reared to the expec- 
tation of poverty. The only son of a father whose estates 
were large beyond those of most nobles in modern France, 
his destined heritage seemed not unsuitable to his illustri- 
ous bii*th. Educated at a provincial academy, he had been 
removed at the age of sixteen to Rochebriant, and lived 
there simply and lonelily enough, but still in a sort of feudal 
state, with an aunt, an elder and unmarried sister to his fa- 
then 

His father he never saw but twice after leaving college. 
That brilliant seigneur visited France but rarely, for very 



 



 



28 THB PARISIANS. 

brief intervals, residing wholly abroad. To him went all 
the revenues of Rochebriant save what sufSced for the m^ 
nage of his son and his sister. It was the cherished belief 
of these two loyal natures that the Marquis secretly de- 
voted his fortune to the cause of the Bourbons . how, they 
knew not, though they often amused themselves by conjec- 
turing ; and the young man, as he grew up, nursed the hope 
that he should soon hear that the descendant of Henri Quatre 
had crossed the frontier on a white charger, and hoisted the 
old gonfalon with \t^ fleur-de-lis. Then, indeed, his own ca- 
reer would be opened, and the sword of the Kerouecs drawn 
from its sheath. Day after day he expected to hear of re- 
volts, of which his noble father was doubtless the soul. But 
the Marquis, though a sincere Legitimist, was by no means 
an enthusiastic fanatic. He was simply a very proud, a 
very polished, a very luxurious, and, though not without the 
kindliness and generosity which were common attributes of 
the old French noblesse^ a very selfish grand seigneur. 

Losing his wife (who died the first yeat of marriage in 
giving birth to Alain) while he was yet very young, he had - 
lived a frank libertine life until he fell- submissive under the 
despotic yoke of a Russian princess, who, for some mysteri- 
ous reason, never visited her own country, and obstinately 
refused to reside in France. She was fond of travel, and 
moved yearly from London to Naples, Naples to Vienna, 
Berlin, Madrid, Seville, Carlsbad, Baden-Baden . anywhere 
for caprice or change, except Paris. This fair wanderer suc- 
ceeded in chaining to herself the heart and the steps of the 
Marquis de Rochebriant. 

She was very rich ; she lived semi-royally. Hers was just 
the house in which it suited the Marquis to be the enfant 
gdte. I suspect that, cat-like, his attachment was rather to 
the house than to the person of his mistress. Not that he 
was domiciled with the princess; that would have been 
somewhat too much against the proprieties, greatly too 
much against the Marquis's notions of his own dignity. He 
had his own carriage, his own apartments, his own suite, as 
became so grand a seigneur, and the lover of so grand a 
dame. His estates, mortgaged before he came to them, 
yielded no income sufficient for his wants; he mortgaged 
deeper and deeper, year after year, till he could mortgage 



 VjOO^IC 



THE PABISIANS. 29 

them no more. He sold his hotel at Paris . he accepted 
without scrapie his sister's fortune . he bon-pwed with equal 
sang-froid the two hundred thousand francs which his son 
on coming of age inherited from his mother. Alain yielded 
that fortune to him without a murmur . nay, with pride ; he 
thought it destined to go toward raising a regiment for the 
fleur-de-lis. 

To do the Marquis justice, he was fully persuaded that he 
should shortly restore to his sister and son what he so reck- 
lessly took from them. He was engaged to be married to 
his princess so soon as her own husband died. She had 
been separated from the prince for many years, and every 
year it was said he could not last a year longer. But he 
completed the measure of his conjugal iniquities by continu- 
ing to live ; and one day, by mistake. Death robbed the lady 
of the Marquis instead of the prince. 

This was an accident which the Marquis had never count- 
ed upon. He was still young enough to consider himself 
young; in fact, one principal reason for keeping Alain se- 
cluded in Brittany was his reluctance to introduce into the 
world a s6n " as old as myself," he would say, pathetically. 
The news of his death, which happened at Baden after a 
short attack of bronchitis caught in a supper al fresco at 
the old castle, was duly transmitted to Rochebriant by the 
princess ; and the shock to Alain and his aunt was the 
greater because they had seen so little of the departed that 
they regarded him as a heroic myth, an impersonation of an- 
cient chivalry, condemning himself to voluntary exile rather 
than do homage to usurpers. But from their grief they 
were soon roused by the terrible doubt whether Rochebriant 
could still be retained in the family. Besides the mort- 
gagees, creditors from half the capitals in Europe sent in 
their claims; and all the movable effects transmitted to 
Alain by his father's confidential Italian valet, except sun- 
dry carriages and horses which were sold at Baden for what 
they would fetch, were a magnificent dressing-case, in the 
secret drawer of which were some bank-notes amounting to 
thirty thousand francs, and three large boxes containing the 
Marquis's correspondence, a few miniature female portraits, 
and a great many locks of hair. 

Wholly unprepai*ed for the ruin that stared him in the 

 VjOOQIC 



30 THE PABISIANS. 

face, the young Marquis evinced the natural strength of his 
character by the calmness with which he met the danger, 
and the intelligence with which he calculated abd reduced it. 

By the help of the family notary in the neighboring town, 
he made himself master of his liabilities and his means ; and 
he found that, after .paying all debts and providing for the 
interest of the mortgages, a property which ought to have re- 
alized a rental of 10,000 a year yielded not more than 400. 
Nor was even this margin safe, nor the property out of per- 
il ; for the principal mortgagee, who was a capitalist in Par- 
is, named Louvier, having had during the life of the late 
Marquis more than once to wait for his half-yearly interest 
longer than suited his patience . and his patience was not 
enduring . plainly declared that if the same delay recurred 
he should put his right of seizure in force ; and in France, 
still more than in England, bad seasons seriously affect the 
security of rents. To pay away 9600 a year regularly out 
of 10,000, with the penalty of forfeiting the whole if not 
paid, whether crops may fail, farmers procrastinate, and tim- 
ber fall in price, is to live with the sword of Damocles over 
one's head. 

For two years and more, however, Alain met his difficul- 
ties with prudence and vigor; he retrenched the establish- 
ment hitherto kept at the chateau, resigned such rural pleas- 
ures as he had been accustomed to indulge, and lived like 
one of his petty farmers. But the risks of the future re- 
mained undiminished. 

" There is but one way, Monsieur le MarquiB^'* said the 
family notary, M. Hubert, " by which you can put your 
estate in comparative safety. Your father raised his moit- 
gages from time to time, as he wanted money, and often at 
interest above the average market interest. You may add 
considerably to your income by consolidating all these mort- 
gages into one at a lower percentage, and in so doing pay 
off this formidable mortgagee, M. Louvier, who, I shrewdly 
suspect, is bent upon becoming the proprietor of Rochebri- 
ant. Unfortunately those few portions of your land which 
were lightly charged, and, lying contiguous to small propri- 
etors, were coveted by them, and could be advantageously 
sold, are already gone to pay the debts of monsieur the late 
Marquis. There are, however, two small farms which, bor- 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 31 

deiiog close on the town of S , I think I could dispose 

of for building purposes at high rates ; but these lands are 
covered by Monsieur Louvier's genei*al mortgage, and he 
has refused to release them unless the whole debt be paid. 
Were that debt, therefore, transferred to another mortgagee, 
we might stipulate for their exception, and in so doing se- 
cure a sum of more than 100,000 francs, which you could 
keep in reserve for a pressing or unforeseen occasion, and 
make the nucleus of a capital devoted to the gradual liqui- 
dation of the charges on the estate. For with a little capi- 
tal. Monsieur le Marquis^ your rent-roll might be very great- 
ly increased, the forests and orchards improved, those mead- 
ows round S drained and ii-rigated. Agriculture is be- 
ginning to be understood in Bretagne, and your estate would 
soon double its value in the hands of a spirited capitalist. 
My advice to you, therefore, is to go to Paris, employ a good 
avaui^ practiced in such branch of his profession, to nego- 
tiate the consolidation of your mortgages upon terms that 
will enable you to sell outlying portions, and so pay off the 
charge by installments agreed upon; to see if some safe 
company or rich individual can be found to undertake for a 
term of years the management of your forests, the draining 

of the S- meadows, the superintendence of your fisheries, 

etc. They, it is true, will monopolize the profits for many 
years . perhaps twenty; but you are a young man; at the 
end of that time you will re-enter on your estate with a 
rental so improved that the mortgages, now so awful, will 
seem to you comparatively trivial." 

In pursuance of this advice, the young Marquis had come 
to Paris fortified with a letter from M. Hubert to an avoue 
of eminence, and with many lettera from his aunt to the no- 
bles of the Faubourg connected with his house. Now one 
reason why M. Hubert had urged his client to undertake this 
important business in person, rather than volunteer his own 
services in Paris, was somewhat extra-professional. He had 
a sincere and profound affection for Alain ; he felt compassion 
for that young life so barrenly wasted in seclusion and severe 
privations; he respected, but was too practical a man of bus- 
iness to share, those chivalrous sentiments of loyalty to an 
exiled dynasty which disqualified the man for the age he 
' lived in, and, if not greatly modified, would cut him off 



 



 



32 THE PARISIANS. 

from the hopes and aspirations of his eager generation. He 
thought plausibly enough that the air of the grand metrop- 
olis was necessary to the mental health, enfeebled and with- 
ering amidst the feudal mists of Bretagne ; that once in Paris, 
Alain would imbibe the ideas of Fans, adapt himself to some 
career leading to honor and to fortune, for which he took 
facilities from his high birth, a historical name too national 
for any dynasty not to, welcome among its adherents, and 
an intellect not yet shai-pened by contact and competition 
with others, but in itself vigorous, habituated to thought, 
and vivified by the noble aspirations which belong to imag- 
inative natures. 

At the least, Alain would be at Paris in the social position 
which would afford him the opportunities of a marriage in 
which his birth and rank would be readily accepted as an 
equivalent to some ample fortune that would serve to redeem 
the endangered seigneuries. He therefore warned Alain that 
the affair for which he went to Paris' might be tedious, that 
lawyers were always slow, and advised him to calculate on 
remaining several months, perhaps a year; delicately sug- 
gesting that his rearing hitherto had been too secluded for 
his age and rank, and that a year at Paris, even if he failed 
in the object which took him there, would not be thrown 
away in the knowledge of men and things that would fit hiin 
better to grapple with his difficulties on his return. 

Alain divided his spare inc6me between his aunt and him- 
self, and had come to Paris resolutely determined to live 
within the 200 a year which remained to his share. He 
felt the revolution in his whole being which commenced 
when out of sight of the petty principality in which he was 
the object of that feudal reverence, still surviving in the 
more unfrequented parts of Bretagne, for the representatives 
of illustrious names connected with the immemorial legends 
of the province. 

The very bustle of a railway, with its crowd and quickness 
and unceremonious democracy of travel, served to pain and 
confound and humiliate that sense of individual dignity in 
which he bad been nurtured. He felt that, once away from 
Rochebriant, he was but a cipher in the stfm of human be- 
ings. Arrived at Paris, and reaching the gloomy hotel to 
which he had been recommended, he greeted even the deso- 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 33 

lation of that solitude which is asualiy so oppressive to a 
stranger in the metropolis of his native land. Loneliness 
was better than the loss of self in the reek and pressure of 
an unfamiliar throng. For the first few days he had wan- 
dered over Paris without calling even on the avoui to whom 
M. Hubert had directed him. He felt with the instinctive - 
acuteness of a mind which, under sounder training, would 
have achieved no mean distinction, that it was a safe pre- 
caution to imbue himself with the atmosphere of the place, 
seize on those general ideas which in great capitals are so 
contagious that they are often more accurately caught by 
the first impressions than by subsequent habit, before he 
brought his mind into contact with those of the individuals 
he had practically to deal with. 

At last he repaired to the avoui^ M. Qandrin, Rue St. 
Florentin. He had mechanically formed his idea of the 
abode and person of an avoui from his association with M. 
Hubert. He expected to find a dull house in a dull street 
near the centre of business, remote from the haunts of idlers, 
and a grave man of unpretending exterior and matured 
years. 

He arrived at a hotel newly fronted, richly decorated, in 
the fashionable quartier close by the Tulleries. He entered 
a wide porte cochkire^ and was directed by the concierge to 
mount au premier. There, first detained in an office fault- 
lessly neat, with spruce young men at smart desks, he was at 
kngth admitted into a noble salon^ and into the presence of 
a gentleman lounging in an easy-chair before a magnificent 
bureau of marqiLeterie^ genre Louis Seize, engaged in patting 
a white curly lap-dog with a pointed nose and a shrill bark. 

The gentleman rose politely on his entrance, and released 
the dog, who, after sniffing the Marquis, condescended not 
to bite. 

^^Monsiewr le Marquis,'*^ said M. Gandrin, glancing at the 
card and the introductory note from M. Hubert, which Alain 
had sent in, and which lay on the secretaire beside heaps of 
letters nicely arranged and labeled, " charmed to make the 
honor of your acquaintance; just arrived at Paris? So M. 
Hubert . a very worthy person whom I have never seen, but 
with whom I have had coiTespondence . tells me you wish 
for my advice ; in fact, he wrote to me some days ago, men- 

^*  Google 



34 THE PARISIANS. 

tioning the business in question . consolidation of mortgages. 
A very large sum wanted, Monsieur le Marquis^ and not to 
be had easily." 

" Nevertheless," said Alain, quietly, " I should imagine 
that there must be many capitalists in Paris willing to in- 
vest in good securities at fair interest." 

" You are mistaken, Marquis ; very few such capitalists. 
Men worth money nowadays like quick returns and large 
profits, thanks to the magnificent system of Credit MobUier^ 
in which, as you are aware, a man may place his money in 
any trade or speculation without liabilities beyond his share. 
Capitalists are nearly all traders or speculators." 

" Then," said the Marquis, half rising, " I am to presume, 
sir, that you are not likely to assist me." 

" No, I don't say that. Marquis. I will look with care 
into the matter. Doubtless you have with you an abstract 
of the necessary documents, the conditions of the present 
mortgages, the rental of the estate, its probable prospects, 
and so forth." 

" Sii', I have such an abstract with me at Paris ; and hav- 
ing gone into it myself with M. Hubert, I can pledge you 
my word that it is strictly faithful to the facts." 
, The Marquis 8ai<* this with 7i(iive simplicity, as if his word 
were quite sufficient to set that part of the question at rest. 

M. Gandi'in smiled politely and said, ^^Eh Men, M. le Mar- 
quia : favor me with the abstract ; in a week's time you shall 
have my opinion. You enjoy Paris ? Greatly improved un- 
der the Emperor ; the salons^ indeed, are hardly open yet. 
Apropos f Madame Gandrin receives to-morrow evening ; al- 
low me that opportunity to present you to her." 

Unprepared for the proffered hospitality, the Marquis had 
no option but to murmur his gratification and assent. 

In a minute more he was in the streets. The next even- 
ing he went to Madame Gandrin's . a brilliant reception . 
a jv^hole moving flower-bed of " decorations " there. Hav- 
ing gone through the ceremony of presentation to Madame 
Gandrin . a handsome woman dressed to perfection, and 
conversing with the secretary to an embassy . the young 
noble ensconced himself in an obscure and quiet comer, ob- 
serving all, and imagining that he escaped observation. And 
as the young men of his own years glided by him, or as their 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 36" 

talk reached his ears, he became aware that from top to toe, 
within and without, he was old-fashioned, obsolete, not of 
his race, not of his day. His rank itself seemed to him a 
waste-paper title-deed to a heritage long lapsed. Not thus 
the princely seigneurs of Rochebriant made their dUbut at 
the capital of their nation. They had had the entrke to the 
cabinets of their kings ; they had glittered in the halls of 
Versailles ; they had held high posts of distinction in court 
and camp ; the great Order of St. Louis had seemed their 
hereditary appanage. His father, though a voluntary exile 
in manhood, had been in childhood a king's page, and through- 
out life remained the associate of princes ; and here, in an 
avou&s 8oir&e, unknown, unregarded, an expectant on an 
avou^s patronage, stood the last lord of Rochebriant. 

It is easy to conceive that Alain did not stay long. But 
he staid long enough to convince him that on ^200 a year 
the polite society of Paris, even as seen at M. Gandrin's, was 
not for him. Nevertheless, a day or two after, he resolved 
to call upon the nearest of his kinsmen to whom his aunt 
had given him letters. With the Count de Vandemar, one 
of his fellow-nobles of the sacred Faubourg, he should be 
no less Rochebriant, whether in a garret or a palace. The 
Vandemars, in fact, though for many generations before the 
First Revolution a puissant and brilliant family, had always 
recognized the Rochebriants as the head of their 'house . the 
trunk from which they had been slipped in the fifteenth cen- 
tury, when a younger son of the Rochebriants married a 
wealthy heiress and took the title, with the lands of Van- 
demar. 

Since then the two families had often intermarried. The 
present Count had a reputation for ability, was himself a 
large proprietor, and might furnish advice to guide him 
with M. Gandrin. The H6tel de Vandemar stood facing 
the old H6tel de Rochebriant ; it was less spacious, but not 
less venerable, gloomy, and prison-like. 

As he turned his eyes from the armorial scutcheon which 
still rested, though chipped and moldering, over the portals 
of his lost ancestral house, and was about to cross the street, 
two young men, who seemed two or three years older than 
himself, emerged on horseback from the Hdtel de Vandemar. 

Handsome young men, with the lofty look of the old race, 



 



 



36 THE PARISIANS. 

dressed with the punctilious care of person which is not fop- 
pery in men of birth, but seems part of the self-respect that 
appertains to the old chivalrio point of honor. The horse 
of one of these cavaliers made a caracole which brought it 
nearly upon Alain as he was about to cross. The rider, 
checking his steed, lifted his hat to Alain and uttered a 
word of apology in the courtesy of ancient high-breeding, 
but still with condescension as to an inferior. This little 
incident, and the slighting kind of notice received from co- 
evals of his own birth, and doubtless his own blood . for 
he divined truly that they were the sons of the Count de 
Vandemar . disconcerted Alain to a degree which perhaps 
a Frenchman alone can comprehend. He had even half a 
mind to give up his visit and turn back. However, his na- 
tive manhood prevailed over that morbid sensitiveness which, 
born out of. the union of pride and poverty, has all the effects 
of vanity, and yet is not vanity itself. 

The Count was at home, a thin spai'e man with a narrow 
but high forehead, and an expression of countenance, keen, 
severe, and un peu moq%f,euae. 

He received the Marquis, however, at firat with great 
cordiality, kissed him on both sides of his cheek, called him 
" cousin," expressed immeasurable regret that the Countess 
was gone out on one of the missions of charity in which the 
great ladies of the Faubourg religiously interest themselves, 
and that his sons had just ridden forth to the Bois. 

As Alain, however, proceeded, simply and without false 
shame, to communicate the object of his visit to Paris, the 
extent of his liabilities, and the penury of his means, the 
smile vanished from the Count's face; he somewhat drew 
back his fauteuil in the movement common to men who 
wish to estrange themselves from some other man's difficul- 
ties ; and when Alain came to a close, the Count remained 
some moments seized with a slight cough ; and, gazing in- 
tently on the carpet, at length he said, " My dear young 
friend, your father behaved extremely ill to you . dishonor- 
ably, fraudulently." 

" Hold !" said the Marquis, coloring high. " Those are 
words no man can apply to my father in my presence." 

The Count stared, shrugged his shoulders, and replied, 
with sang-froid. 



 



 



THE PARISIAKS. 37 

"Marquis, if you are contented with your father's conduct, 
of course it is no business of mine; he never injured me. I 
presume, howeyer, that, considering my years and my char- 
acter, you come to me for advice . is it so ?" 

Alain bowed his head in assent. 

"There are four coui-ses for one in your position to take," 
said the Count, placing the index of the right hand suc- 
cessively on the thumb and three fingera of the left . " four 
courses, and no more. 

" First. To do as your notary recommended : consolidate 
your mortgages, patch up your income as you best can, re- 
turn to Rochebriant, and devote the rest of your existence 
to the preservation of your property. By that course your 
life will be one of permanent privation, severe struggle; 
and the probability is that you will not succeed : there will 
come one or two bad seasons, the farmers will fail to pay, 
the mortgagee will foreclose, and you may find yourself, af- 
ter twenty years of anxiety and torment, prematurely old 
and without a sou, 

"Course the second. Rochebriant, though so heavily en- 
cumbered as to yield you some such income as your father 
gave to his chef de cuisine^ is still one of those superb terres 
which bankers and Jews and stock-jobbers court and hunt 
after, for which they will give enormous sums. If you place 
it in good hands, I do not doubt that you could dispose of 
the property within three months, on terms that would leave 
you a considerable surplus, which, invested with judgment, 
would afford you whereon you could live at Paris in a way 
suitable to your rank and age.. ^Need we go further ? Does 
this course smile to you ?" 

"Pass on. Count; I will defend to the last what I take 
from my ancestors, and can not voluntarily sell their roof- 
tree and their tombs." 

" Your name would still remain, and you would be just as 
well received in Paris, and your noblesse just as implicitly 
conceded, if all Judaea encamped upon Rochebriant, Con- 
der how few of us gentilshommes of the old regime have 
any domains left to us. Our names alone survive ; no revo- 
lution can efface them.^^ 

" It may be so, but pardon me ; there are subjects on 
which we can not reason . we can but feel. Rochebriant 
may be torn from me, but I can not yield it." 

 VjOOQIC 



38 THE PASISIAKS. 

"I proceed to the third course. Keep the chiteaa and 
give up its traditions; remain de facto Marquis of Rochebri- 
ant, but accept the new order of things. Make yourself 
known to the people in power. They will be charmed to 
welcome you ; a convert from the old noblesse is a guaran- 
tee of stability to the new system. You will be placed in 
diplomacy; effloresce into an ambassador, a minister . and 
ministers nowadays have opportunities to become enor- 
mously rich." 

"That course is not less impossible than the last. Till 
Henry V. formally resign his right to the throne of St. 
Louis, I can be servant to no other man seated on that 
throne." 

" Such, too, is my creed," said the Count, " and I cling to 
it; but my estate is not mortgaged, and I have neither the 
tastes nor the age for public employments. The last course 
is perhaps better than the rest ; at all events, it is the easi- 
est. A wealthy marriage, even if it must be a misalliance. 
I think at your age, with your appearance, that your name 
is worth at least two million francs in the eyes of a rich ro- 
turier with an ambitious daughter." 

"Alas 1" said the young man, rising, " I see I shall have to 
go back to Rochebriant. I can .not sell my castle, I can not 
sell my creed, and I can not sell my name and myself." 

" The last all of us did in the old regime^ Marquis. Though 
I still retain the title of Vandemar, my property comes from 
the Farmer-General's daughter, whom my great-grandfather, 
happily for us, married in the days of Louis Quinze. Mar- 
riages with people of sense and rank have always been mar- 
riages de convefiiance in France. It is only in U petit monde 
that men having nothing marry girls having nothing, and I 
don't believe they are a bit the happier for it. On the con- 
trary, the quarrels de manage leading to frightful crimes 
appear, by the Gazette des TVibunanx^ to be chiefly found 
among those who do not sell themselves at the altar." 

The old Count said this with a grim persiflage. He was a 
Voltairian. 

Voltairianism, deserted by the modem Liberals of France, 
has its chief cultivation nowadays among the wits of the old 
r&gime. They pick up its light weapons on the battle-field 
on which their fathers perished, and re-feather against Ihe 



 



 



I 

J ^ THE PARISIANS. 39 

ca^iaiUe the shafts which had been pointed against the no- 



"Adieu, Count," said Alain, rising; "I do BOt thank you 
less for your advice because I have not the wit to profit 
by it." 

^^Au revotTy my cousin ; you will think better of it when 
you have been a month or two at Paris. By-the-way, my 
wife receives every Wednesday ; consider our house yours." 

" Count, can I enter into the world which Madame h 
Comtesse receives, in the way that becomes my birth, on the 
income I take from my fortune ?" 

The Count hesitated. " No," said he at last, frankly ; 
"not because you will be less welcome er less respected, 
but because I see that you have all the pnde and sensitive- 
ness of a seigneur de province. Society would, therefore, 
give you pain, not pleasure. More than this, I know, by the 
remembrance of my own youth, and the sad experience of 
my own sons, that you would be irresistibly led into debt, 
and debt in your circumstances would be the loss of Roche- 
briant. No ; I invite you to visit us. I offer you the most 
select but not the most brilliant circles of Pans, because my 
wife is religious, and frightens away the birds of gay plum- 
age with the scarecrows of priests and bishops. But if you 
accept my invitation and my offer, I am bound, as an old 
man of the world to a young kinsman, to say that the 
chances are that you will be ruiiied." 

"I thank you. Count, for your candor; and I now ac- 
knowledge that I have found a relation and a guide," an- 
swered the Marquis, with a nobility of mien that was not 
without a pathos which touched the hard heart of the old 
man. 

" Come at least whenever you want a sincere if a rude 
fiiend ;" and though he did not kiss his cousin's cheek this 
time, he gave him, with more sincerity, a parting shake of 
the hand. 

And these made the principal events in Alain's Paris life 
till he met Frederic Lemercier. Hitherto he had received 
no definite answer from M. Gandrin, who had postponed an 
interview, not having had leisure to make himself master of 
all ^ details in the abstract sent to him. 



 



 



40 THB PABISIANS. 



CHAPTER IV. 

The next day, toward the afternoon, Frederic Lemercier, 
somewhat breathless from the rapidity at which he had as- 
cended to so high an eminence, burst into Alain's chamber. 

"/V-r/ raon cher; what superb exercise for the health . 
how it must strengthen the muscles and expand the chest ; 
after this who should shrink from scaling Mont Blanc? . 
Well, well. I have been meditating on your business ever 
since we parted. But I would fain know more of its details. 
You shall confide them to me as we drive through the Bois. 
My coupk is below, and the day is beautiful. Come." 

Tq the young Marquis, the gayety, the heartiness of his 
college friend were a cordial. How different from the dry- 
counsels of the Count de Vandemar ! Hope, though vague- 
ly, entered into his heart. Willingly he accepted Frederic's 
invitation, and the young men were soon rapidly borne along 
the Champs Elys6es. As briefly as he could, Alain described 
the state of his affairs, the nature of his mortgages, and the 
result of his interview with M. Gandrin. 

Frederic listened attentively. "Then Gandrin has given 
you as yet no answer ?" 

" None : but I have a note from him this moniing asking 
me to call to-morrow." 

"After you have seen him, decide on nothing . if he makes 
you any offer. Get back your abstract, or a copy of it, and 
confide it to me. Gandrin ought to.help you ; he transacts 
affairs in a large way. BeUe clientele among the million' 
nairea. But his clients expect fabulous profits, and so 'does 
he. As for your principal mortgagee, Louvier, you know of 
course who he is." 

" No, except that M. Hubert told me that he was very 
rich." 

"Rich. I should think so; one of the Kings of Finance. 
Ah ! observe those young men on horseback." 

Alain looked forth and recognized the two cavaliers 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PABISIANS. 41 

whom he had coDJectured to be the sons of the Count de 
Vandemar. 

"Those heau3i gar^ons are fair specimens of your Fau- 
bourg,'' said Frederic ; " they would decline^ my acquaint- 
ance because my grandfather kept a shop, and they keep a 
shop between them !" 

"A shop . ^I am mistaken, then. Who are they ?" 

" Raoul and Enguen*and, sons of that mocker of man, the 
Count de Vandemar." 

"An^ they keep a shop ! you are jesting." 

"A shop at which you may buy gloves and perfumes, Rue 
de la Chauss6e d'Antin. Of course they don't serve at the 
counter; they only invest their pocket-money in the specu- 
lation, and, in so doing, treble at least their pocket-money, 
buy their horses, and keep their grooms." 

" Is it possible ! nobles of such birth I How shocked the 
Count would be if he knew it !" 

" Yes, very much shocked if he was supposed to know it. 
But he is too wise a father not to give his sons limited al- 
lowances and unlimited liberty, especially the liberty to add 
to the allowances as they please. Look again at them ; no 
better riders and more affectionate brothers since the date 
of Castor and Pollux. Their tastes, indeed, differ : Raoul is 
religious and moral, melancholy and dignified ; Enguerrand 
is a lion of the first water . U^gant to the tips of his nails. 
These demigods are nevertheless very mild to mortals. 
Though Enguerrand is the best pistol-shot in Paris, and 
Raoul the best fencer, the first is so good-tempered that you 
would be a brute to quarrel with him ; the last so true a 
Catholic that if you quarreled with him you need fear not 
his sword. He would not die in the committal of what the 
Church holds a mortal sin." 

"Are you speaking ironically? Do you mean to imply 
that men of the name of Vandemar are not brave ?" 

" On the contrary, I believe that, though masters of their 
weapons, they are too brave to abuse their skill ; and I must 
add that, though they are sleeping partners in a shop, they 
would not cheat you of a farthing. Benign stars on earth, 
as Castor and Pollux were in heaven." 

" But partners in a shop !" 

" Bah ! when a minister himself, like the late M. de M , 



 



 



42 THS PARISIANS. 

kept a shop, and added the profits of bonbons to his revenue, 
you may form some idea of the spirit of the age. If young 
nobles are not generally sleeping partners in shops, still tbey 
ai*e more or less adventurers in commerce. The Bourse is 
the profession of those who have no other profession. You 
have visited the Bourse f^^ 

"No." 

"No! this is just the hour; we have time yet for the 
Bois.. Coachman, drive to the Bourse.^^ 

" The fact is," resumed Frederic, " that gambling is one 
of the wants of civilized men. The rouge-et-noir and roulette 
tables are forbidden . the hells closed ; but the passion for 
making money without working for it must have its vent, 
and that vent is the Bourse. As instead of a hundred wax- 
lights you now have one jet of gas, so instead of a hundred 
hells you have now one Bourse, and . it is exceedingly con- 
venient; always at hand; no discredit being seen there, as 
it was to be seen at Frascati's . on the contrary, at once re- 
spectable, and yet the -modJe." 

The coiq)^ stops at the Bourse, our friends mount the 
steps, glide through the pillars, deposit their canes at a place 
destined to guard them, and the Marquis follows Frederic 
up a flight of stairs till he gains the open gallery round a 
vast hall below. Such a din ! such a clamor ! disputatious, 
wrangling, wrathful. 

Here Lemercier distinguished some fiiends, whom he join- 
ed for a few minutes. 

Alain, left alone, looked down into the hall. He thought 
himself in some stormy scene of the First Revolution. An 
English contested election in the market-place of a borough 
when the candidates are running close on each other, the 
result doubtful, passions excited, the whole borough in civil 
war, is peaceful compared to the scene at the Bourse. 

Bulls and bears screaming, bawling, gesticulating, as if one 
were about to strangle the other ; the whole, to an uninitia- 
ted eye, a confusion, a Babel, which it seems absolutely im- 
possible to reconcile to the notion of quiet mercantile trans- 
actions, the purchase and sale of shares and stocks. As Alain 
gazed bewildered, he felt himself gently touched, and, look- 
ing round, saw the Englishman. 

"A lively scene !" whispered Mr. Vane. " This is the heart 
of Paris: it beats very loudly." r^^^^T^ 

''  VjOOQ Ic 



THE PARISIANS. 43 

" Is your Bourse in London like this ?" 

''I can not tell you; at our Exchange the general pub- 
lic are not admitted ; the piivileged priests of that temple 
sacrifice their victims in close penetralia, beyond which the 
sounds made in the operation do not travel to ears profane. 
But had we an Exchange like this open to all the world, and 
placed, not in a region of our metropolis unknown to fashion, 
but in some elegant square in St. tfames's or at Hyde Park 
Comer, I suspect that our national character would soon un- 
dergo a great change, and that all our idlers and sporting- 
men would make their books there every day, instead of wait- 
ing long months in ennui for the Doncaster and the Derby. 
At present we have but few men on the turf; we should then 
have few men not on Exchange, especially if we adopt your 
law, and can contrive to be traders without risk of becom- 
ing bankrupts. Napoleon I. called us a shop-keeping nation. 
Napoleon HI. has taught France to excel us in every thing,* 
and certainly he has made Paris a shop-keeping city." 

Alain thought of Raoul and Enguerrand, and blushed to 
find that what he considered a blot on his countrymen was 
so familiarly perceptible to a foreigner's eye. 

"And the Emperor has done wisely, at least for the time," 
continued the Englishman, with a more thoughtful accent. 
"He has found vent thus for that very dangerous class in 
Paris society to which the subdivision of property gave birth 
. viz., the crowd of well-bom, daring young men without 
fortune and without profession. He has opened the Bourse^ 
and said, 'There, I give you employment, resource, an avenir.^ 
He has cleared the by-ways into commerce and trade, and 
opened new avenues of wealth to the noblesse, whom the 
great Revolution so unwisely beggared. What othft' way 
to rebuild a noblesse in France, and give it a chance of power 
because an access to fortune ? But to how many sides of 
your national cferacter has the Bourse of Paris magnetic at- 
traction ! You Frenchmen are so brave that you could not 
be happy without facing danger, so covetous of distinction 
that you would pine yourselves away without a dash, co4te 
qite coUte, at celebiity and a red ribbon. Danger 1 look be- 
low at that arena . there it is ; danger daily, hourly. But 
there also is celebrity ; win at the Bourse, as of old in a 1*)ur- 
nament, and paladins smile on you, and ladies give you their 

 VjOOQTC 



44 THE PARISIANS. 

scarfs, or, what is much the same, they allow you to buy 
their cachemires. Win at the Bourse . what follows ? the 
Chamber, the Senate, the Cross, the Minister's portefeuiHe. 
I might rejoice in all this for the sake of Europe . could it 
last, and did it not bring the consequences that follow the 
demoralization which attends it. The Bourse and the CrSdit 
Mohilier keep Paris quiet . at least as quiet as it can be. 
These are the secrets of this reign of splendor; these the two 
lions couQhants on which rests the throne of the imperial re- 
constructor." 

Alain listened surprised and struck. He had not given 
the Englishman credit for the cast of mind which such re- 
flections evinced. 

Here Lemercier rejoined them, and shook hands with 
Graham Vane, who, taking him aside, said, " But you prom- 
ised to go to the Bois, and indulge my insane curiosity about 
.the lady in the pearl-colored robe?" 

" I have not forgotten ; it is not half-past two yet ; you 
said three. Soyez tranquiUe; I drive thither from the Bourse 
with Rochebriant." 

" Is it necessary to take with you that very good-looking 
Marquis ?" 

"I thought you said you were not jealous, because not yet 
in love. However, if Rochebriant occasions you the pang 
which your humble servant failed to inflict, I will take care 
that he do not see the lady." 

" No," said the Englishman ; " on consideration, I should 
be very much obliged to any one with whom she would fall 
in love. That would disenchant me. Take the Marquis by 
all means." 

Me^while Alain, again looking down, saw just under him, 
close by one of the pillars, Lucien Duplessis. He was stand- 
ing apart from the throng . a small space cleared round him- 
self.and two men who had the air of gentlemen of the beau 
monde with whom he was conferring. Duplessis^ thus seen, 
was not lijse the Duplessis at the restaurant. It would be 
difficult to explain what the change was, but it forcibly 
struck Alain: the air was more , dignified, the expression 
keener ; there was a look of conscious power and command 
about the man even at that distance ; the intense, concen- 
trated intelligence of his eye, his firm lip, his marked features. 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PABISIANS. 45 

his projecting, massive brow . would have impressed a very 
ordinary observer. In fact, the man was here in his native 
element . in the field in which his intellect gloried, com- 
manded, and had signalized itself by successive triumphs. 
Just thus may be the change in the great orator whom you 
deemed insignificant in a drawing-room, when you see his 
crest rise above a reverential audience ; or the great soldier, 
who was not distinguishable from the subaltern in a peace- 
fiil club, could you see him issuing the order to his aids-de- 
camp amidst the smoke and roar of the battle-field. 

"Ah, Marquis !" said Graham Vane, " are you gazing at 
Duplessis ? He is the modem genius of Paris. He is at 
once the Cousin, the Guizot, and the Victor Hugo of specu- 
lation. Philosophy . Eloquence . audacious Romance . all 
Literature now is swallowed up in the sublime epic of Agio- 
tage^ and Duplessis is the poet of the empire." 

" Well said, M. Grarm- Varn," cried Frederic, forgetting 
his recent lesson in English names. "Alain underrates that 
s^reat man. How could an Englishman appreciate him so 
well?" 

"Jfa/o^/" retunied Graham, quietly; "I am studying to 
think at Paris, in order some day or other to know how to 
act in London. Time for the Bois. Lemercier, we meet at 
seven . Philippe's." 



CHAPTER V. 

" WHAT^do you think of the bourse ?^^ asked Lemercier, as 
their carriage took the way to the Bois. 

" I can not think of it yet ; I am stunned. It seems to me 
as if I had been at a Sabbaty of which the wizards were agents 
de change^ but not less bent upon raising Satan." 

" Pooh ! the best way to exorcise Satan is to get rich 
enough not to be tempted by him. The fiend always loved 
to haunt empty places ; and of all places nowadays he pre- 
fers empty purees and empty stomachs." 

" But do all people get rich at the Bourse ? or is not one 
man's weialth many men's ruin ?" 

"That is a question not very easy to answer; but upder 
our present system Paris gets rich, though at the expense 



 



 



46 THE PABISIA.NS. 

of individual Parisians. I will try and explain. The aver- 
age luxury is enormously increased even in my experience ; 
what were once considered refinements and fopperies are 
now called necessary comforts. Prices are risen enormous- 
ly, house rent doubled within the last five or six years ; all 
articles of luxury are very much dearer; the very gloves 
I wear cost twenty per cent more than I used to pay for 
gloves of the same quality. How the people we meet live, 
and live so well, is an enigma that would defy CEdipns if 
CEdipus were not a Parisian. But the main explanation is 
this : speculation and commerce, with the facilities given to 
all investments, have really opened more numerous and 
more rapid ways to fortune than were known a few years 
ago. 

" Crowds are thus attracted to Paris, resolved to venture 
a small capital in the hope of a large one ; they live on that 
capital, not on their income, as gamesters do. There is an 
idea among us that it is necessary to seem rich in order to 
become rich. Thus there is a general extravagance and pro- 
fusion. English milm'ds marvel at our splendor. Those 
who, while spending their capital as their income, fail in 
their schemes of fortune, after one, two, three, or four years 
. vanish. What becomes of them I know no more than I 
do what becomes of the old moons. Their place is immedi- 
ately 'supplied by new candidates. Paris is thus kept peren- 
nially sumptuous and splendid by the gold it ingulfs. But 
then some men succeed . succeed prodigiously, pretematu- 
rally ; they make colossal fortunes, which are magnificent- 
ly expended. They set an example of show and pemp, which 
is of course the more contagious because so many men say, 
* The other day those rniUionnairea were as poor as we are ; 
they never economized; why should we?' Paris is thus 
doubly enriched . by the fortunes it swallows up, and by 
the fortunes it casts up ; the last being always reproductive, 
and the first never lost except to the individuals." 

" I understand : but what struck me forcibly at the scene 
we have left was the number of young men there ; young 
men whom I should judge by their appearance to be gen- 
tlemen, evidently not mere spectators . eager, anxious, with 
tablets in their hands. That old or middle-aged men should 
find a zest in the pursuit of gain I can understand, but youth 



 



 



THE PAJUSIANS. 47 

and avarice seem to me a new combination, which Moli^re 
never divined in his Avare.^'* 

^^ Toung men, especially if yoang gentlemen, love pleas- 
ure ; and pleasure in this city is very dear. This explains 
why so many young men frequent the Boitr$e. In the old 
gaming-tables, now suppressed, young nien were the major- 
ity ; in the days of your chivalrous forefathers, it was the 
young nobles, not the old, who would stake their very man- 
tles and swords on a cast of the die. And naturally enough, 
mon cher; for is not youth the season of hope, and is not 
hope the goddess of gaming, whether at rouge-et-noir or the 
Bourse f"^ 

Alain felt himself more and more behind his generation. 
The acute reasoning of Lemercier humbled his amour propre. 
At college Lemercier was never considered Alain's equal in 
ability or book-learning. What a stride beyond his school- 
fellow had Lemercier now made ! How dull ^nd stupid the 
young provincial felt himself to be, as compared with the 
easy cleverness and half-sportive philosophy of the Parisian's 
fluent talk ! 

He sighed with a melancholy and yet with a generous 
envy. ^ He had too fine a natural perception not to acknowl- 
edge that there is a rank of mind as well as of bii*th, and 
in the first he felt that Lemercier might well walk before 
a Rochebriant ; but his very humility was a proof that he 
underrated himself. 

Lemercier did not excel him in mind, but in experience. 
And just as the drilled soldier seems a much finer fellow 
than the raw recruit, because he knows how to carry him- 
self, for after a year's discipline the raw recruit may excel 
in martial air the upright hero whom he now de^aiungly 
admires, and never dreams he can rival, so set a mind from 
a village into the drill of a capital, and see it a year after ; 
it may tower a head higher than its recruiting sergeant. 



CHAPTER VL 

"I BBUBVB," said Lemercier, as the coupi rolled through 
the lively alleys of the Bois de Boulogne, " that Paris is 
built on a loadstone, and that every Frenchman with some 



 



 



48 THB PARISIANS. 

iron globules in his blood is irresistibly attracted toward it. 
The English never seem to feel for London the passionate 
devotion that we feel for Paris. On the contrary, the Lion- 
don middle class, the commercialists, the shop-keepers, the 
clerks, even the superior artisans compelled to do their basi- 
ness in the capital, seem always scheming and pining to have 
their home out of it, though but in a suburb." 

"You have been in London, Frederic?" 

" Of course ; it is the mode to visit that dull and hideoas 
metropolis." 

" If it be dull and hideous, no wonder the people who are 
compelled to do business in it seek the pleasures of home out 
of it." 

" It is very droll that, though the middle class entirely 
govern the melancholy Albion, it is the only country in Eu- 
rope in which the middle class seem to have no amusetnents; 
nay, they legislate against amusement. They have no^ lei- 
sure day but Sunday ; and on that day they close all their 
theatres . even their museums and picture-galleries. What 
amusements there may be in England are for the higher class- 
es and the lowest." 

" What are the amusements of the lowest class ?" 

" Getting drunk." 

"Nothing else?" ^ 

" Yes. I was taken at night under protection of a police- 
man to some cabarets^ where I found crowds of that class 
which is the stratum below the working class; lads who 
sweep crossings and hold horses, mendicants, and, I was 
told, thieves^ girls whom a servant-maid would not speak 
to . very merry . dancing quadrilles and waltzes, and rega- 
ling Jihemselves on sausages . the happiest-looking folks I 
found in all London . and, I must say, conducting themselves 
very decently." 

"Ah I" Here Lemercier pulled the check-string. " Will 
you object to a walk in this quiet alley ? I see some one 
whom I have promised the Englishman to . But heed me, 
Alain ; don't fall in love with her." 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 49 



CHAPTER VII. 

The lady in the pearl-colored dress ! Certainly it was a 
face that might well arrest the eye and linger long on the 
remembrance. 

There are certain " beauty- women," as there are certain 
" beauty-men," in whose features one detects no fault . who 
are the show-figures of any assembly in which they appear 
. but who, somehow or other, inspire no sentiment and ex- 
cite no interest ; they lack some expression, whether of 
mind, or of soul, or of heart, without which the most beau- 
tiful face is but a beautiful picture. This lady was not one 
of those " beauty- women." Her features, taken singly, were 
by no means perfect, nor were they set off by any brilliancy 
of coloring. But the countenance aroused and impressed 
the imagination with a belief that there was some history 
attached to it which you longed to learn. The hair, simply 
parted over a forehead unusually spacious and high for a 
woman, was of lustrous darkness ; the eyes, of a deep violet 
blue, were shaded with long lashes. 

Their expression was soft and mournful, but unobservant. 
She did not notice Alain and Lemercier as the two men 
slowly passed her. She seemed abstracted, gazing into 
space as one absorbed in thought or reverie. Her complex- 
ion was clear and pale, and apparently betokened delicate 
health. 

Lemercier seated himself on a bench beside the path, and 
invited Alain to do the same. " She will return this way 
soon," said the Parisian, " and we can observe her more at- 
tentively and more respectfully thus seated than if we were 
on foot; meanwhile, what do you thuik of her? Is she 
French ? . is she Italian ? . can she be English ?" 

'^ I should have guessed Italian, judging by the darkness 
of her hair and the outline of the features ; but do Italians 
have so delicate a fairness of complexion ?" ' 

"Very rarely; and I should guess her to be French, judg- 
ing by the intelligence of her expression, the simple neatness 

J.-3 

 VjOOQIC 



50 THE PABISIANS. 

of her dress, and by that nameless refinement of air in which 
a Parisienne excels all the descendants of Eve . if it were 
not for her eyes. I never saw a Frenchwoman with eyes of 
that peculiar shade of blue; and if a Frenchwoman had such 
eyes, I flatter myself she would have scarcely allowed us to 
pass without making some use of them." 

" Do you think she is married ?" asked Alain. 

" I hope so. for a girl of her age, if comme il fau% can 
scarcely walk alone in the Bois, and would not have ac- 
quired that look so intelligent . more than intelligent . so 
poetic." 

" But regard that air of unmistakable distinction, regard 
that expression of face . so pure, so virginal: comme ilfavt 
she must be." 

As Alain said these last words, the lady, who had turned 
back, was approaching them, and in full view of their gaze. 
She seemed unconscious of their existence as before, and Le- 
mercier noticed that her lips moved as if she were murmur- 
ing inaudibly to herself. 

She did not return again, but continued her walk straight 
on till at the end of the alley she entered a carriage in wait- 
ing for her, and was driven off. 

" Quick, quick !" cried Lemercier, running toward his own 
coupi ; " we must give chase." 

Alain followed somewhat less hurriedly, and, agreeably to 
instructions Lemercier had already given to his coachman, 
the Parisian's eoapi set off at full speed in the track of the 
strange lady's, which was still in sight. 

In less than twenty minutes the carriage in chase stop- 
ped at the grille of one of those charming little villas to be 

found in the pleasant suburb of A ; a porter emerged 

from the lodge, opened the gate ; the carriage drove in, 
again stopped at the door of the house, and the two gentle- 
men could not catch even a glimpse of the lady's robe as 
she descended from4ihe carriage and disappeared within the 
house. 

" I see a cafe yonder," said Lemercier ; " let us learn all 
we can as to the fair unknown, over a sorbet or SLpetit verre.^^ 

Alain silently, but not reluctantly, consented. He felt in 
the fair stranger an interest new to his existence. 

They entered the little caf&, and in a few minutes Lemer- 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 61 

cicr, with the easy savoir vivre of a Parisian, had extracted 
from the garpon as much as probably any one in the neigh- 
borhood knew of the inhabitants of the villa. 

It had been hired and furnished about two months previ- 
ously in the name of Signora Venosta ; but according to the 
report of the servants, the lady appeared to be the gouver- 
na?it. or guardian of a lady much younger, out of whose in- 
come the villa Was rented and the household maintained. 

It was for her the coupi was hired from Paris. The elder 
lady very rarely stinted out during the day, but always ac- 
companied the younger in any evening visits to the theatre 
or the houses of friends. 

It was only within the last few weeks that such'visits had 
been made. 

The younger lady was in delicate health, and under the 
care of an English physician famous for skill in the treat- 
ment of pulmonary complaints. It was by his advice that 
she took daily walking exercise in the Bois. The establish- 
ment consisted of three servants, all Italians, and speaking 
but imperfect French. The garden did not know whether 
either of the ladies was married, but their mode of life was 
free from all scandal or suspicion ; they probably belonged 
to the literary or musical world, as the garpon had observed 
as their visitor the eminent author, M. Savarin and his wife, 
and, still more frequently, an old man not less eminent as a 
musical composer. 

" It is clear to me now," said Lemercier, as the two friends 
reseated themselves in the carriage, " that our pearly ange is 
some Italian singer of repute enough in her own country to 
have gained already a competence ; and th^t, perhaps, on ac- 
count of her own health or her friend's, she is living quietly 
here in the expectation of some professional engagement, or 
the absence of some foreign lover." 

" Lover ! do you think that ?" exclaimed Alain, in a tone 
of voice that betrayed pain. 

'' It is possible enough ; and in that case the Englishman 
may profit a little by the information I have promised to 
give him." 

" You have promised the Englishman ?" 

"Do you not remember last night that he described the 
lady, and said that her face haunted him : and I . " 

 VjOOQIC 



52 THB PABISIANS. 

"Ah ! I remember now. What do you know of this En- 
glishman ? He is rich, I suppose." 

" Yes, I hear he b very rich now ; that an uncle lately 
left him an enormous sum of money. He was attached to 
the English Embassy many years ago, which accounts for his 
good French and his knowledge of Parisian life. He comes 
to Pans very often, and I have known him some time. In- 
deed, he has intrusted to me a difficult and delicate commis- 
sion. The English tell me that his father was one of the 
most eminent members of their Parliament, of ancient birth, 
very highly connected, but ran out his foitune and died 
poor; t^ our friend had for some years to maintain him- 
self, I nBly, by his pen ; that he is considered very able ; 
and, now that his uncle has enriched him, likely to enter 
public life and run a career as distinguished as his father's." 

" Happy man ! happy are the English," said the Marquis, 
with a sigh; and as the carriage now entered Paris, he 
pleaded the excuse of an engagement, bade his friend good- 
bye, and went his way musing through the crowded streets. 



CHAPTER Vm. 

LETTER FBOH ISAUBA CICOGNA TO MADAMS DB GBANT- 
MESNIL. 

"ViUaD' ^,A . 

"I CAN never express to you, my beloved Eulalie, the 
strange charm which a letter from you throws over my poor 
little lonely world for days after it is received. There is al- 
ways in it something that comforts, something that sustains, 
but also a something that troubles and disquiets me. I sup- 
pose Goethe is right, ' that it is the property of true genius 
to disturb all settled ideas,' in order, no doubt, to lift them 
into a higher level when they settle down again. 

" Your sketch of the new work you are meditating amidst 
the orange groves of Provence interests me intensely ; yet, 
do you forgive me when I add that the interest is not with- 
out terror. I do not find myself able to comprehend how, 
amidst those lovely scenes of nature, your mind voluntarily 
surrounds itself with images of pain and discord. I stand in 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 53 

awe of the calm with which you subject to your analysis 
the infirmities of reason and the tumults of passion. And 
all those laws of the social state which seem to me so fixed 
and immovable you treat with so quiet a scorn, as if they 
were but the gossamer threads which a touch of your slight 
woman's hand could brush away. But I can not venture to 
discuss such subjects with you. It is only the skilled en- 
chanter who can stand safely in the magic circle, and com- 
pel the spirits that he summons, even if they are evil, to min- 
ister 4;o ends in which he foresees a good. 

" We continue to live here very quietly, and I flo not as 
yet feel the worse for the colder climate. Indeed, my won- 
derful doctor, who was recommended to me as-iAtaerican, 
but is in reality English, assures me that a single winter 
spent here under his care will suflSce for my complete re-es- 
tablishment. Yet that career, to the training for which so 
many years have been devoted, does not seem to me so allur- 
ing as it once did. 

" I have much to say on this subject, which I defer till I 
can better collect my own thoughts on it . at present^ they 
are conftised and struggling. The great Maestro has been 
most gracious. 

"In what a radiant atmosphere his genius lives and 
breathes ! Even in his cynical moods, his very cynicism has 
in it the ring of a jocund music . the laugh of Figaro, not of 
Mephistopheles. 

"We went to dine with him last week; he invited to 
meet us Madame S , who has this year conquered all op- 
position, and reigns alone, the great S , Mr. T ^ a pi- 
anist of admirable promise . your friend M. Savarin, wit, crit- 
ic, and poet, with his pleasant sensible wife, and a few others 
whom the Maestro confided to me in a whisper were author- 
ities in the press. After dinner S sang to us, magnifi- 
cently, of course. Then she herself graciously turned to me, 
said how much she had heard from the Maestro in my praise, 
and so-and-so. I was persuaded to sing after her. I need 
not say to what disadvantage. But I forgot my nervous- 
ness ; I forgot my audience ; I forgot myself, as I always do 
when once my soul, as it were, finds wing in music, and buoys 
itself in air, relieved from the sense of earth. I knew not 
that I had succeeded till I came to a close, and then my eyes 



 



Google 



54 THE PABISIANS. 

resting on the face of the grand prima donna^ I was seized 
with an indescribable sadness . with a keen pang of remorse. 
Perfect artiste though she be, and with powers in her own 
realm of art which admit of no living equal, I saw at once 
that I had pained-her ; she had grown almost livid ; her lips 
were quivering, and it was only with a great effort that she 
muttered out some faint words intended for applause. I 
comprehended by an instinct how gradually there can grow 
upon the mind of an artist the most generous that jealousy 
which makes the fear of a rival annihilate the delight in art. 

If ever I ehould achieve S ^'s fame as a singer, should I 

feel the same jealousy ? I think not now, but I have not 
been tested. She went away abruptly. I spare you the re- 
cital of the c^pliments paid to me by my other auditors, 
compliments that gave me no pleasure ; for on all lips, except 
those of the Maestro^ they implied, as the height of eulogy, 
that I had inflicted torture upon S. . 'If so,' said he, 
* she would be as foolish as a rose that was jealous of the 
whiteness of a lily. You would do yourself great wrong, 
my child, if you tried to vie with the rose in its own color.' 

" He patted my bended head as he spoke, with that kind 
of fatherly, king-like fondness with which he honors me ; and 
I took his hand in mine, and kissed it gratefully. * Never- 
theless,' said Savarin, * when the lily comes out there will be 
a furious attack on it, made by the clique that devotes itself 
to 'the rose : a lily clique will be formed en revanche^ and I 
foresee a fierce paper war. Do not be frightened at its first 
outburst ; every fame worth having must be fought for.' 

"Is it so? have you had to fight for your fame, Eulalie? 
and do you hate all contest as much as I do ? 

" Our only other gayety since I last wrote was a aoirke at 
M. Louvier's. That republican miUionnaire was not slow 
in attending to the kind letter you addressed to him recom- 
mending us to his civilities. He called at once, placed his 
good oflices at our ^i^osal, took charge of my modest for- 
tune, which he has invested, no doubt, as safely as it is ad- 
vantageously in point of interest, hired our carriage for us, 
and in short has been most amiably useful. 

"At his house we met many to me most pleasant, for they 
spoke with such genuine appreciation of your works and 
yourself. But there were others whom I should never have 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 55 

esrpected to meet under the roof of a Croesus who has so 
great a stake in the order of things established. One young 
man . a noble whom he specially presented to me, s a poli- 
tician who would be at the head of affairs when the Red Re- 
public was established . asked me whether' I did not agree 
with him that all private property was public spoliation, and 
that the great enemy to civilization was religion, no matter 
in what form. 

"He addressed to me these tremendous questions with 
an effeminate lisp, and harangued on them with small feeble 
gesticulations of pale dainty fingers covered with rings. 

" I asked him if there were many who in France shared 
his ideas. 

" ' Quite enough to carry them some day,' he answered, 
with a lofty smile. *And the day may be nearer than the 
world thinks, when my confrhrea will be so numerous that 
they will have to shoot down each other for the sake of 
cheese to their bread.' 

" That day nearer than the world thinks ! Certainly, so 
far as one may judge the outward signs of the world at Par- 
is, it does not think of such things at all. With what an air 
of self-content the beautiful city parades her riches ! Who 
can gaze on her splendid palaces, her gorgeous shops, and 
believe that she will give ear to doctrines that would anni- 
hilate private rights of property; or who can enter her 
crowded churches, and dream that she can ever again install 
a republic too civilized for religion ? 

"Adieu. Excuse me for this dull letjer. If I have written 
on much that has little interest even for me, it is that I wish 
to distract my mind from brooding over the question that 
interests me most, and on which I most need your counsel. 
I will try to approach it in my next. 

" ISAURA." 



FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME. 

" Enlalie, Eulalie ! . What mocking spirit has been permit- 
ted in this modern ^ge of ours to place in the heart of woman 
the ambition which is the prerogative of men? . You, indeed, 
so richly endowed with a man's genius, have a right to man's 
aspirations. But what can justify such ambition in me? 

 VjOOQIC 



56 THE PARISIANS. 

Nothing but this one unintellectual perishable gift of a voice 
that does but please in uttering the thoughts of others. 
Doubtless I could make a name familiar for its brief time to 
the talk of Europe . a name, what name ? a singei^'s name. 
Once I thought that name a glory. Shall I ever forget the 
day when yon first shone upon me ; when, emerging from 
childhood as from a dim and solitary by-path, I stood forlorn 
on the great thoroughfare of life, and all the prospects before 
me stretched sad in mists and in rain ? You beamed on me 
then as the sun coming out from the cloud and changing the 
* face of earth ; you opened to my sight the fairy-land of poet- 
ry and art ; you took me by the hand and said, * Courage ! 
there is at each step some green gap in the hedge-rows, some 
soft escape from the stony thoroughfare. Beside the real life 
expands the ideal life to those who seek it. Droop not, seek 
it; the ideal life has its sorrows, but it never admits despair; 
as on the ear of him who follows the winding course of a 
stream, the stream ever varies the note of its music, now 
loud with the rush of the falls, now low and calm as it glides 
by the level marge of smooth banks ; now sighing through 
the stir of the reeds, now babbling with a fretful joy as some 
sudden curve on the shore stays its flight among gleaming 
pebbles ; so to the soul of the artist is the voice of the art 
ever fleeting beside and before him. Nature gave thee the 
bird's gift of song . raise the gift into art, and make the art 
thy companion. 

"'Art and Hope were twin-born, and they die together.' 
"See how faithfully I remember, methinks, your very 
words. But the magic of the words, which I then but dim- 
ly understood, was in your smile and in your eye, and the 
queen-like wave of your hand, as if beckoning to a world 
which lay before you, visible and familiar as your native, 
land. And how devotedly, with what earnestness of pas- 
sion, I gave myself up to the task of raising ray gift into an 
art ! I thought of nothing else, dreamed of nothing else ; 
and oh, how sweet to me then were words of praise ! 'An- 
other year yet,' at length said the mastei-s, ' and you ascend 
your throne among the queens of song.' Then . then . I 
would have changed for no other throne on earth my hope 
of that to be achieved in the realms of my art. And then 
came that long fever: my strength broke down, and the 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 57 

Maestro said, ' Rest, or your voice is gone, and your throne 
is lost forever.' How hateful that rest seemed to rae ! You 
again came to my aid. You said, ' The time you think lost 
should be but time improved. Penetrate your mind with 
other songs than the trash oi Idbretti, The more you ha- 
bituate yourself to the forms, the more you imbue youreelf 
with the spirit, in which passions have been expressed and 
character delineated by great writers, the more completely 
you will accomplish yourself in your own special art of sing- 
er and actress.' So, then, you allured me to a new study. 
Ah ! in so doing did you dream that you diverted me froji 
the old ambition ? My knowledge of French and Italian, 
and my rearing in childhood, which had made English famil- 
iar to me, gave me the keys to the treasure-houses of three 
languages. Naturally I began with that in which your mas- 
terpieces are composed. Till then I had not even read your 
works. They were the first I chose. How they impressed, 
how they startled me \ what depths in the mind of man, in 
the heart of woman, they revealed to me ! But I owned to 
you then, and I repeat it now, neither they nor any of the 
works in romance and poetry which form the boast of recent 
French literature, satisfied yearnings for that calm sense of 
beauty, that divine joy in a world beyond this world, which 
you had led me to believe it was the prerogative of ideal art 
to bestow. And when I told you this with the rude frank- 
ness you had bid me exercise in talk with you, a thoughtful 
melancholy shade fell over your face, and you said, quietly, 
* You are right, child ; we, the French of our time, are the 
ofispring of revolutions that settled nothing, unsettled all : 
we resemble those troubled states which rush into war 
abroad in order to re-establish peace at home. Our books 
suggest problems to men for reconstructing some social sys- 
tem in which the calm that belongs to art may be found at 
last: but such books should not be in your ha>ids; tjiey are 
not for the innocence and youth of women, as yet unchanged 
by the systems which exist.' And the next day you brought 
rae Tasso's great poem, the Gemsalemme lAberata^ and said, 
smiling, 'Art in its calm is here.' 

" You remember that I was then at Sorrento by the order 
of my physician. Never shall I forget the soft autumn day 
when I sat among the lonely rocklets to the left of the town 

 VjOOQIC 



68 THE PARISIANS. 

. the sea before me, with scarce a ripple ; my very heart 
steeped in the melodies of that poem', so marvelous for a 
sti-ength disguised in sweetness, and for a symmetry in 
which each proportion blends into the other with the per- 
fectness of a Grecian statue. The whole place seemed to 
me filled with the presence of the poet to whom it had giv- 
en birth. Certainly the reading of that poem formed an 
era in myl^istence ; to this day I can not acknowledge the 
faults or weaknesses which your criticisms pointed out . ^I 
believe because they are in unison with my own nature, 
which yearns for harmony, and, finding that, rests content- 
ed. I shrink from violent contrasts, and can discover noth- 
ing tame and insipid in a continuance of sweetness and se- 
renity. But it was not till after I had read La Gervsalemme 
again and again, and then sat and brooded over it, that I 
recognized the main charm of the poem in the religion which 
clings to it as the perfume clings to a flower . a religion 
sometimes melancholy, but never to me sad. Hope always 
pervades it. Surely if, as you said, * Hope is twin-born with 
art,' it is because art at its highest blends itself unconscious- 
ly with religion, and proclaims Its affinity with hope by its 
faith in some future good more perfect than it has realized 
in the past. 

" Be this as it may, it was in this poem so pre-eminently 
Christian that I found the something which I missed and 
craved for in modem French masterpieces, even yours . 
a something spiritual, speaking to my own soul, calling it 
forth; distinguishing it as an essence apart from mere hu- 
man reason ; soothing, even when it excited ; making earth 
nearer to heaven. And when I ran on in this strain to you 
after my own wild fashion, you took my head between your 
hands and kissed* me, and said, 'Happy are those who be- 
lieve ! long may that happiness be thine I' Why did I not 
feel in Dante the Christian charm that I felt in Tasso? 
Dante in your eyes, as* in those of most judges, is infinitely 
the greater genius, but reflected on the dark stream of that 
genius the stars are so troubled, the heavens so threatening. 

" Just as my year of holiday was expiring I turned to En- 
glish literature ; and Shakspeare, of course, was the first En- 
glish poet put into my hands. It proves how child-like my 
mind still was, that my earliest sensation in reading hira was 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 69 

ttat of disappointment. It was not only that, despite my 
familiarity with English (thanks chiefly to the care of him 
whom I call my second father), there is much in the met- 
aphorical diction of Shakspeare which I failed to compre- 
hend ; but he seemed to me so far like the modern French 
writers who effect to have found inspiration in his muse, 
that he obtrudes images of pain and suffering without cause 
or motive suflSciently clear-to ordinary understandings, as I 
had taught myself to think it ought to be in the drama. 

" He makes Fate so cruel that we lose sight of the mild 
deity behind her. Compare, in this, Corneille's Polyeacte 
with the Hamlet. In the fii*st an equal calamity befalls the 
good, but in their calamity they are blessed. The death of 
the martyr is the triumph of his creed. But when we have 
put down the English tragedy . when Hamlet and Ophelia 
are confounded in death with Polonius and the fractricidal 
king, we see not what good end for humanity is achieved. 
The passages that fasten on our memory do not make us 
happier and holier ; they suggest but terrible problems, to 
which they give us no solution. 

" In the Horaces of Corneille, there are fierce contests, 
rude passions, tears drawn frcnn some of the bitterest sources 
of human pity ; but then through all stands out, large and 
visible to the eyes of all spectators, the great ideal of de- 
voted patriotism. How much of all that has been grandest 
in the life of France, redeeming even its worst crimes of 
revolution in the love of country, has had its origin in the 
Horaces of Corneille ! But I doubt if the fates of Coriolanus, 
and Caesar, and Brutus, and Antony, in the giant tragedies 
of Shakspeare, have made Englishmen more willing to die 
for England. In fine, it was long before . I will not say I 
understood or rightly appreciated Shakspeare, for no En- 
glishman would admit that I or even you could ever do so 
. but before I could recognize the justice of the place his 
country claims for him as the genius without an equal in 
the literature of Europe. Meanwhile, the ardor I had put 
into study, and the wear and tear of the emotions which the 
study called forth, made themselves felt in a return of my 
former illness, with symptoms still more alarming ; and when 
the year was out, I was ordained to rest for perhaps anoth- 
er year before I could sing in public, still less appear on the 



 



 



CO THE PARISIANS. 

stage. How I rejoiced when I heard that fiat, for I emerged 
from that year of study with a heart utterly estranged from 
the profession in which I had centred ray hopes before . 
Yes, Eulalie, you had bid me accomplish myself for the arts 
of utterance by the study of arts in which thoughts origi- 
nate the words they employ, and in doing so I had changed 
myself into another being. I was forbidden all fatigue of 
mind ; my books were banished,'but not the new self which 
the books had formed. Recovering slowly through the sum- 
mer, I came hither two months since, ostensibly for the ad- 
vice of Dr. C ^ but really in the desire to commune with 

my own heart, and be still. 

" And now I have poured out that heart to you . would 
you persuade me still to be a singer? If you do, remember 
at least how jealous and absorbing the art of the singer and 
of the actress is. How completely I must surrender myself 
to it, and live among books, or among dreams, no more. Can 
I be any thing else but singer ? and if not, should I be con- 
tented merely to read and to dream ? 

" I must confide to you one ambition which, during the 
lazy Italian summer, took possession of me . I must tell you 
the ambition, and add that I have renounced it as a vain one. 
I had hoped that I could compose, I mean in music. I was 
pleased with some things I did. they expressed in music 
what I could not express in words ; and one secret object in 
coming here was to submit them to the great Maestro. He 
listened to them patiently ; he complimented me on my ac- 
curacy in the mechanical laws of composition ; he even said 
that my favorite airs Vere Uouchants et gradevx: 

"And so he would have left me, but I stopped him timid- 
ly, and said, 'Tell me frankly, do you think that with time 
and study I could compose music such as singers equal to 
myself would sing to ?' 

"'You mean as a professional composer?' 

"'Well, yes.' 

"'And to the abandonment of your vocation as a singer ?* 
JL es. 

My dear child, I should be your worst enemy if I en- 
couraged such a notion ; cling to the career in which you 
can be greatest ; gain but health, and I wager my reputa- 
tion on your glorious success on the stage. What can you 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 61 

be as a composer? You will set pretty music to pretty 
words, and will be sung in drawing-rooms with the fame a 
little more or less that generally attends the compositions 
of female amateurs. Aim at something higher, as I know 
you would do, and yoii will not succeed. Is there any in- 
stance in modem times, perhaps in any times, of a female 
composer who attains even to the eminence of a third-rate 
opera writer ? Composition in letters may be of no sex. 
In that Madame Dudevant and ydur friend Madame de 
Grantmesnil can beat most men ; but the genius of musical 
composition is homme^ and accept it as a compliment when 
I say that you are essentially /emme.' 

" He left pe, of course, mortified and humbled ; but I feel 
he is right as regards myself, though whether in his depre- 
ciation of our .whole sex I can not say. But as this hope 
has left me, I have become more disquieted, still more rest- 
less. Counsel me, Eulalie ; counsel, and, if possible, comfoit 
me. IsAURA." 



FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME. ' 

" No letter from you yet, and I have left you in peace for 
ten days. How do you think I have spent them? The 
Maestro called on us with M. Savarin, to insist on our ac- 
companying them on a round of the theatres. I had not 
been to one since my arrival. I divined that the kind- 
hearted composer had a motive in this invitation. He 
thought that in witnessing the applauses bestowed on act- 
ors, and sharing in the fascination itf which theatiical illu- 
sion holds an audience, my old passion for the stage, and 
with it the longing for an artiate^s fame, would revive. 

" In my heart I wished that his expectations might be re- 
alized. Well for me if I could once more concentre all my 
aspirations on a prize within ray reach ! 

" We went first to see a comedy greatly in vogue, and the 
author thoroughly understands the French stage of our day. 
The acting was excellent in its way. The next night we 
went to the Od^on^ a romantic melodrama in six acts, and I 
know not how many tableaitx, I found no fault with the 
acting there. I do not give you the rest of our programme. 
We visited all the principal theatres, reserving the opera and 

 VjOOQIC 



62 THE PARISIANS. 

Madame S for the last. Before I speak of the opei*a, let 

me say a word or two on the plays. 

" There is no country in which the theatre has so great a 
hold on the public as in France ; no country in which the 
successful dramatist has so high a fame; no country, per- 
haps, in which the state of the stage so faithfully represents 
the moral and intellectual condition of the people. I say 
this not, of course, from my expenence of countries which I 
have not visited, but from all I hear of the stage in Germany 
and in England. 

"The impression left on my mind by the performances I 
witnessed is, that the French people are becoming dwarfed. 
The comedies that please them are but pleasant caricatures 
of petty sections in a corrupt society. They contain no 
large types of human nature ; their witticisms convey no 
luminous flashes of truth ; their sentiment is not pure and 
noble . ^it is a sickly and false perversion of the impure and 
ignoble into travesties of the pure and noble. 

"Their melodramas can not be classed as literature . all 
that really remains of the old French genius is its vaudeville, 

"Great dramatists create great parts. One great part, 
such as a Kachel would gladly have accepted, I have not 
seen in the dramas of the young generation. 

" High art has taken refuge in the opera ; but that is not 
French opera. I do not complain so much that French taste 
is less refined. I complain that French intellect is lowered. 
The descent from Polyeucte to Buy Bias is great, not so 
much in the poetry of formi as in the elevation of thought ; 
but the descent from Buy Bias to the best drama now pro- 
duced is out of poetry altogether, and into those flats of 
prose which give not even the glimpse of a mountain-top. 

"But now to the opera. S in Normal Jhe house 

was crowded, and its enthusiasm as loud as it was genuine. 

You tell me that S never rivaled Pasta, but certainly 

her Norma is a great performance. Her voice has lost less 
of its freshness than I had been told, and what is lost of it 
her practiced management conceals or carries offl 

*iThe Maestro was quite right . I could never vie with her 
in her own line ; but, conceited and vain as I may seem even 
to you in saying so, I feel in my own line that I could com- 
mand as large an applause . of course taking into account 

 VjOOQIC 



THB PABISIANS. 63 

my brief-lived advantage of youth. Her acting, apart from 
her voice, does not please me. It seems to me to want in- 
telligence of the subtler feelings, the under-current of emo- 
tion, which constitutes the chief beauty of the situation and 
the character. Am I jealous when I say this ? Read on 
and judge. 

" On our return that night, when I had seen the Venosta 
to bed, I went into my own room, opened the window, and 
looked out. A lovely night, mild as in spring at Florence . 
the moon at her full, and the stars looking so calm and so 
high beyond our reach of their tranquillity. The evergreens 
in the gardens of the villas around me silvered over, and the 
summer boughs, not yet clothed with leaves, were scarcely 
visible amidst the changeless smile of the laurels. At the 
distance lay Paris, only to be known by its innumerable 
lights. And then I said to myself, 

^^No, I can not be an actress; I can not resign my real 
self for that vamped-up hypocrite before the lamps. Out 
on those stage robes and painted cheeks ! Out on that sim- 
ulated utterance of sentiments learned by rote and practiced 
before the looking-glass till every gesture has its drill ! 

" Then I gazed on those stars which provoke our question- 
ings, and return no answer, till my heart grew full, so full, 
and I bowed my head and wept like a child,'' 



>v 



FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME. 

"And still no letter from you ! I see in the journals that 
you have left Nice. Is it that you are too absorbed in your 
work to. have leisure to write to me ? I know you are not 
ill; for if you were, all Paris would know of it. All Europe 
has. an interest in your health. Positively I will write to 
you no more till a word from yourself bids me do so. 

" I fear I must give up my solitary walks in the Bois de 
Boulogne : . they were very dear to. me, partly because the 
quiet path to which I confined myself was that to which you 
directed me as the one you habitually selected when at 
Paris, and in which you had brooded over and revolved the 
loveliest of your romances ; and partly because it was there 
that, catching, alas ! not inspiration but enthusiasm from the 
genius that had hallowed the place, and dreaming I might 



 



 



64 THE PABISIANS. 

originate music, I nui-sed my own aspirations and murmured 
my own airs. And though so close to that world of Paris 
to which all artists must appeal for judgment or audience, 
the spot was so undisturbed, so sequestered. But of late 
that path has lost its solitude, and therefoi*e its charm. 

" Six days ago the first person I encountered in my walk 
was a man whom I did not then heed. He seemed in thought, 
or i-ather in reverie, like myself; we passed each other twice 
or thrice, and I did not notice whether he was young or old, 
tall or short ; but he came the next day, and a third day, 
and then I saw that he was young, and, in so regarding him, 
his eyes became fixed on mine. The fourth day he did not 
come, but two other men came, and the look of one was in- 
quisitive and offensive. They sat themselves down on a 
bench in the walk, and though I did not seem to notice 
them, I hastened home : and the next day, in talking with 
our kind Madame Savarin, and alluding to these quiet walks 
of mine, she hinted, with the delicacy which is her charac- 
teristic, that the customs of Paris did not allow demoiselles 
comme U faut to walk alone even in the most sequestered 
paths of the Bois. 

"I begin now to comprehend your disdain of customs 
which impose chains so idly galling on the liberty of our 
sex. 

".We dined with the Savarins last evening : what a joyous 
nature he has ! Not reading Latin, I only know Horace by 
translations, which I am told are bad ; but Savarin seems to 
me a sort of half Horace. Horace on his town-bred side, so 
playfully well-bred, so good-humored in his philosophy, so 
affectionate to friends, and so biting to foes. But certainly 
Savarin could not have lived in a country farm upon endives 
and mallows. He is town-bred and-ParisiiEin,/ws$'w'aw hout 
des ongles. How he admires you, and how I love him for it ! 
Only in one thing he disappoints me there. It is your style 
that he chiefly praises: certainly, that style is matchless; 
but style is only the clothing of thought, and to praise your 
style seems to me almost as invidious as the compliment to 
some perfect beauty, not on her form and face, but on her 
taste in dress. 

"We met at dinner an American and his wife . a Colonel 
and Mi's. Morley : she is delicately handsome, as the Ameri- 



 



Google 



THE PARISIANS. 66 

can women I have seen generally are, and with that frank 1/ 
vivacity of manner which distinguishes them from English 11 
women. She seemed to take a fancy to me, and we soon ' 
grew very good friends. 

" She is the first advocate I have met, except yourself, of 
that doctriner upon the Rights of Women . of which one 
reads more in the journals than one hears discussed in salons, 

"Naturally enough I felt great interest in that subject, 
more especially since my rambles in the Bois were forbid- 
den ; and as long as she declaimed on the hard fate of the 
women who, feeling ^^ithin them powers that struggle for 
air and light beyond the close precinct of household duties, 
find themselves restricted from fair rivalry with men in such 
fields of knowledge and toil and glory as men since the 
world began have appropriated to themselves, I need not say 
that I went with her cordially : you can guess that by my 
former letters. But when she entered into the detailed cat- 
alogue of our exact wrongs and our exact rights, I felt all 
the pusillanimity of my sex, and shrank back in terror. 

" Her husband, joining us when she was in full tide of 
eloquence, smiled at me with a kind of saturnine mirth. 
* Maderooiselie, don't believe a word she says ; it is only tall 
talk ! In America the women are absolute tyrants, and it is 
I who, in concert with my oppressed countrymen, am going 
in for a platform agitation to restore the Rights of Men.' 

"Upon this there was a lively battle of words between 
the spouses, in which, I must own, I thought the lady was 
decidedly worsted. 

" No, Eulalie, I see nothing in these schemes for altering 
our relations toward the other sex which would improve our , 
condition. "JTie inequalities we suffer are not im posed by k 
law. not ev enHSTTiOTveBtion ;_th(5y ftW Iftiposea by^ggrtrre: \i 

"Eulalie, you have had an expenence unkliown'to me ; you 
have loved. In that day did you . you, round whom poets 
and sages and statesmen gather, listening to your words as 
to an oracle . did you feel that your pride of genius had 
gone out from you . that your ambition lived in him whom 
you loved . that his smile was more to you than the ap- 
plause of a world ? 

" I feel as if love in a woman must destroy her rights of 
equality . that it gives to her a sovereign even in one who 

 VjOOQIC 



66 THE PABI8IANS. 

woald be inferior to herself if her love did not glorify and 
crown him. Ah I if I could but merge this terrible egotism 
which oppresses me into the being of some one who is what 
I would wish to be were I a man ! I would not ask him to 
achieve fame. Enough if I felt that he was worthy of it, 
and happier methinks to console him when he failed than 
to triumph with him when he won. Tell me, have you felt 
this ? When you loved, did you stoop as to a slave, or did 
you bow down as to a master ?" 



FBOM MADAMB DB GEANTMESNIL TO ISAUBA CICOGNA. 

" Chebe enfant, . All your four letters have reached me 
the same day. In one of my sudden whims I set off with 
a few friends on a rapid tour along the Riviera to Genoa, 
thence to Turin on to Milan. Not knowing where we should 
rest even for a day, my letters were not forwarded. 

" I came back to Nice yesterday, consoled for all fatigues 
in having insured that accuracy in description of localities 
which my T^ork necessitates. 

"You are, my poor child, in that revolutionary crisis 
through which genius passes in youth before it knows its 
own self, and longs vaguely to do or to be a something 
other than it has done or has been before. For, not to be 
unjust to your own powers, genius you have . that inborn 
undefinable essence, including talent, and yet distinct from 
it. Genius you have, but genius unconcentrated, undisci- 
plined. I see, though you are too diffident to say so open- 
ly, that you shrink from the fame of singer, because, fevered 
by your reading, you would fain aspire to the thorny crown 
of author. I echo the hard saying of the Maestro, I should 
be your worst enemy did I encourage you to forsake a ca- 
reer in which a dazzling success is so assured, for one in 
which, if it were your true vocation, you would not ask 
whether you were fit for it; you would be impelled to it 
by the terrible star which presides over the birth of poets. 

"Have you, who are so naturally observant, and of late 
have become so reflective, never remarked that authors, how- 
ever absorbed in their own craft, do not wish their children 
to adopt it ? The most successful author is perhaps the last 
person to whom neophytes should come for encouragement. 



 



 



THB PABISIANS. 67 

This,! think, is not the case with the cultivators of the sister 
art& The painter, the sculptor, the musician, seem disposed 
to invite disciples and welcome acolytes. As for those en- 
gaged in the practical affairs of life, fathers mostly wish their 
sons to be as they have been. 

*' The politician, the lawyer, the merchant, each says to his 
children, * Follow my steps.' All parents in practical life 
would at least agree in this . they would not wish their sons 
to be poets. There must be some sound cause in the world's 
philosophy for this general concurrence of digression from a 
road of which the travelers themselves say to those whom 
they love best, * Beware !' 

" Romance in youth is, if rightly understood, the happiest 
nutriment of wisdom in after-years ; but I would never in- 
vite any one to look upon the romance of youth as a thing 

" *To case in periods and embalm in ink.* 

^^JEmfant^ have you need of a publisher to create romance ? 
Is it not in yourself? Do not imagine that genius requires 
for its enjoyment the scratch of the pen and the types of the 
printer. Do not suppose that the poet, the romancier^ is 
most poetic, most romantic, when he is striving, struggling, 
laboring, to check the rush of his ideas, and materialize the 
images which visit him as souls into such tangible likeness- 
es of flesh and blood that the highest compliment a reader 
can bestow on them is to say that they are life-like. No : 
the poet's real delight is not in the mechanism of compos- 
ing ; the best part of that delight is in the sympathies he 
has established with innumerable modifications of life and 
form, and art and nature . sympathies which, are often found 
equally keen in those who have not the same gift of lan- 
guage. The poet is but the interpreter. What of? . Truths 
in the hearts of others. He uttera what they feel. Is the 
joy in the utterance ? Nay, it is in the feeling itself. So, 
my dear, dark-bright child of song, when I bade thee open, 
out of the beaten thoroughfare, paths into the meads and 
river-banks at either side of the formal hedge-rows, rightly 
dost thou add that T enjoin thee to make thifte art thy com- 
panion. In the culture of that art for which you are so emi- 
nently gifted, you will find the ideal life ever beside the real. 
Are yon not ashamed to tell me that in that art you do but 



 



 



68 THE PARISIANS. 

Utter the thoughts of others ? You utter them in music ; 
through the music you not only give to the thoughts a new 
character, but you make them reproductive of fresh thoughts 
in your audience. 

" You said very truly that you found, in composing, you 
could put into music thoughts which you could not put into 
words. That is the peculiar distinction of music. No gen- 
uine musician can explain in words exactly what he means 
to convey in his music. 

"How little a libretto interprets an opera . ^how little we 
care even to read it ! It is the music that speaks to ns ; 
and how? . through the human voice. We do not notice 
how poor are the words which the voice warbles. It is the 
voice itself interpreting the soul of the musician which en- 
chants and inthralls us. And you, who have that voice, pre- 
tend to despise the gift. What I despise the power of com- 
municating delight ! the power that we authors envy ; and 
rarely, if ever, can we give delight with so little alloy as the 
singer. 

" And when an audience disperses, can you guess what 
griefs the singer may have comforted ? what hard hearts he 
1 may have softened ? what high thought she may have awa- 
kened ? 

" You say, ' Out on the vamped - up hypocrite ! Out on 
the stage robes and painted cheeks !' 

" I say, ' Out on the morbid spirit which so cynically re- 
gards the mere details by which a whole effect on the 
minds and hearts and souls of races and nations can be pro- 
duced !' 

"There, have I scolded you sufficiently? I should scold 
you more, if I did not see in the affluence of your youth and 
your intellect the cause of your restlessness. 

" Riches are always restless. It is only to poverty that 
the gods give content. 

" You question me about love : you ask me if I have ever 
bowed to a master, ever merged my life in another's ; expect 
no answer on this from me. Circe herself ,c6.uld give no an- 
swer to the sihiplest maid, who, never having loved, asks, 
* What is love ?' 

" In the history of the passions, each human heart is a 
world in itself; its experience profits no others. In no two 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 69 

lives does love play the same part or bequeath the same 
record. 

"I know not whether I am glad or sorry that the word 
Move' now falls on my ear with a sound as slight and as 
&int as the dropping of a leaf in autumn may fall on thine. 

^'I volunteer but this lesson, the wisest I can give, if thou 
canst understand it : as I bade thee take art into thy life, so 
learn to look on life itself as an art. Thou couldst discover 
the charm in Tasso ; thou couldst perceive that the requisite 
of all art, that which pleases, is in the harmony of proportion. 
We lose sight of beauty if we exaggerate the feature most 
beautifuL 

"Love proportioned, adorns the homeliest existence; love 
disproportioned, deforms the fairest. 

"Alas ! wilt thou remember this warning when the time 
comes in wbich it may be needed ? - 



 



 



10 THE PABISIAKS. 



BOOK SECOND. 



CHAPTER L 

It is several weeks after the date of the last chapter ; the 
lime-trees in the Taileries are clothed in green. . 

In a somewhat spacious apartment on the ground-floor 
in the quiet locality of the Rue d'Anjou a man was seated, 
very still, and evidently absorbed in deep thought, before a 
writing-table placed close to the window. 

Seen thus, there was an expression of great power both of 
intellect and of character iii a face which, in ordinary social 
commune, might rather be noticeable for an aspect of hardy 
frankness, suiting well with the clear-cut, handsome profile, 
and the rich dark auburn hair, waving carelessly over one 
of those broad open foreheads which, according to an old 
writer, seem the "frontispiece of a temple dedicated to 
Honor." ' 

The forehead, indeed, was the man's most remarkable fea- 
ture. It could not but prepossess the beholder. When, in 
private theatricals, he had need to alter the character of his 
countenance, he did it effectually, merely by forcing down 
his hair till it reached his eyebrows. He no longer then 
looked like the same man. 

The person I describe has been already introduced to the 
reader as Graham Vane. But perhaps this is the fit occa- 
sion to enter into some such details as to his parentage and 
position as may make the introduction more satisfactory and 
complete. 

His father, the representative of a very ancient family, 
came into possession, after a long minority, of what may he 
called a fair squire's estate, and about half a million in mon- 
eyed investments, inherited on the female side. Both land 
and money were absolutely at his disposal, unencumbered 
by entail or settlement. He was a man of a brilliant, irreg- 
ular genius, of princely, generosity, of splendid taste, of a gor- 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 71 

geous kind of pride closely allied to a masculine kind of van- 
ity. As soon as he was of age he began to build, converting 
his squire's ball into a ducal palace. He then stood for the 
county; and in days before the first Reform Bill, when a 
county election was to the estate of a candidate what a long 
war is to the debt of a nation. He won the election ; he ob- 
tained early successes in Parliament. It was said by good 
authorities in political circles that, if he chose, he might as- 
pire to lead his party, and ultimately to hold the first rank 
in the government of his country. 

That may or may not be true ; but certainly he did not 
choose to take the trouble necessary for such an ambition. 
He was too fond of pleasure, of luxury, of pomp. He kept a 
famous stud of racers and hunters. He was a munificent 
patron of art. His establishments, his entertainments, were 
on a par with those of the great noble who represented the 
loftiest (Mr. Vane would not own it to be the eldest) branch 
of his genealogical tree. 

He became indifferent to political contents, indolent in 
his attendance at the House, speaking seldom, not at great 
length nor with much preparation, but with power and fire, 
originality and genius; so that he was not only effective 
as an orator, but, combining with eloquence advantages of 
birth, person, station, the reputation of patriotic independ- 
ence, and genial attributes of character, he .was an authority 
of weight in the scales of party. 

This gentleman, at the age of forty, married the dowerless 
daughter of a poor but distinguished naval ofiSicer, of noble 
family, first cousin to the Duke of Alton. 

He settled on her a suitable jointure, but declined to tie 
up any portion of his property for the benefit of children by 
the marriage. He declared that so much of his fortune was 
invested either in mines, the produce of which was extreme- 
ly fluctuating, or in various funds, over rapid transfers in 
which it was his amusement and his interest to have con- 
trol, unchecked by reference to tA^tees, that entails and set- 
tlements on children were an inconvenience he declined to 
incur. 

Besides, he held notions of his own as to the wisdom of 
keeping children dependent on their father. "What num- 
bers of young men," said he, "are ruined in character and 



 



 



72 THE PABISIANS. 

in fprtane by knowing that when their father dies they are 
certain of the same provision, no matter how they displease 
him ; and in the mean while forestalling that provision by 
recourse to usurei-s!" "These arguments might not have 
prevailed over the bride's father a year or two later, when, 
by the death of intervening kinsmen, he became Duke of 
Alton; but in his then circumstances the marriage itself 
was so much beyond the expectations which the portionless 
daughter of a sea-captain has the right to form, that Mr. 
Yane had it all his own way, and he remained absolute mas- 
ter of his whole fortune, save of that part of his landed es- 
tate on which his wife's jointure was settled ; and even from 
this incumbrance he was very soon freed. His wife died in 
the second year of marriage, leaving an only son . Graham. 
He grieved for her loss with all the passion of an ilrf^res- 
sionable, ardent, and powerful nature. Then for a while he 
sought distraction to his sorrow by throwing himself into 
public life with a devoted energy he had not previously dis- . 
played. 

His speeches served to bring his party into power, and 
he yielded, though reluctantly, to the unanimous demand of 
that party that he should accept one of the highest offices 
in the new Cabinet. He acquitted himself well as an admin- 
istrator, but declared, no doubt honestly, that he felt like 
Sindbad released from the old man on his back, when, a year 
or two afterward, he went out of office with his party. No 
persuasions could induce him to come in again ; nor did he 
ever again take a very active part in debate. " No,'' said 
he, " I was born to the freedom of a private g^entleman . ^in- 
tolerable to me is the thralldom of a public servant. But I 
will bring up my son so that he may acquit the debt which 
I decline to pay to my country." There he kept his word. 
Graham had been carefully educated for public life, the am- 
bition for it dinned into his ear from childhood. In his 
school vacations his father made him learn and declaim 
chosen specimens of masQ(fine oratory ; engaged an eminent 
actor to give him lessons in elocution; bade him frequent 
theatres, and study there the effect which words derive from 
looks and gesture ; encouraged him to tak^ part himself in 
private theatricals. To all this the boy lent his mind with 
delight. He had the orator's inborn temperament; quick, 



 



Google 



THE PARISIANS. 73 

yet imaginative, and loving the sport of rivalry and contest. 
Being also, in his boyish years, good-humored and joyous, he 
was not more a favorite with the masters in the school-room 
than with boys in the play-ground. Leaving Eton at seven- 
teen, he then entered at Cambridge, and became, in his first 
term, the most popular speaker at the Union. 

But his father cut short his academical career, and de- 
cided, for reasons of his own, to place him at once in Diplo- 
macy. He was attached to the Embassy at Paris, and par- 
took of the pleasures and dissipations of that metropolis too 
keenly to retain much of the sterner ambition to which he 
had before devoted himself. Becoming one of the spoiled 
darlings of fashion, there was great danger that his character 
would relax into the easy grace of the Epicurean, when all 
sucE^oiterings in the Rose Garden were brought to an ab- 
rupt close by a rude and terrible change in his fortunes. 

His father was killed by a fall from his horse in hunting ; 
and when his afiairs were investigated, they were found to 
be hopelessly involved . apparently the assets would not 
suffice for the debts. The elder Vane himself was probably 
not aware of the extent of his liabilities. He liad never 
wanted ready money to the last. He could always obtain 
that from a money-lender, or from the sale of his funded in- 
vestments. But it became obvious, on examining his papers, 
that he knew at least how impaired would be the heritage 
he should bequeath to a son whom he idolized. For that 
reason he had given Graham a profession in diplomacy, and 
for that reason he had privately applied to the Ministry for 
the Viceroyalty of India, in the event of its speedy vacancy. 
He was eminent enough not to anticipate refusal; and with 
economy in that lucrative post much of his pecuniary diffi- 
culties might have been redeemed, and at least an independ- 
ent provision secured for his son. 

Graham, like Alain de Rochebriant, allowed no reproach 
on his father's memory . indeed, with more reason than Alain, 
for the elder Vane's fortune had at least gone on no mean 
and frivolous dissipation. 

It had lavished itself on encouragfment to art . on great 
objects of public beneficence . on public-spirited aid of polit- 
ical objects ; and even in mere selfish enjoapents there was 
a certain grandeur in his princely hospitalities, in his munifi- 

I. 4 

 VjOOQIC 



74 THE PABISIAKS. 

cent generosity, in a warm-hearted carelessness for money. 
No indulgence in petty follies or degrading vices aggravated 
the offense of the magnificent squanderer. 

"Let me look on my loss of fortune as a gain to myself," 
said Graham, manfully. " Had I been a rich man, my' expe- 
rience of Paris tells me that I should most likely have been 
a very idle one. Now that I have no gold, I must dig in 
myself for iron." 

The man to whom he said this was an uncle-in-law . ^if I 
may use that phrase . the Right Honorable Richard King, 
popularly styled " the blameless King." 

This gentleman had married the sister of Graham's moth- 
er, whose loss in his infancy and boyhood she had 4;enderly 
and anxiously sought to supply. It is impossible to con- 
ceive a woman more fitted to invite love and reverence than 
was Lady Janet King, her manpers were so sweet and gen- 
tle, her whole nature so elevated and pure. 

Her father had succeeded to the dukedom when she mar- 
ried Mr. King, and the alliance was not deemed quite suita- 
ble. Still it was not one to which the Duke would have 
been fairly justified in refusing his assent. 

Mr. King could not, indeed, boast of noble ancestry, nor 
was he even a landed proprietor ; but he was a not undistin- 
guished member of Parliament, of irreproachable character, 
and ample fortune inherited from a distant kinsman, who 
had enriched himself as a merchant. It was on both sides a 
marriage of love. 

It is popularly said that a man uplifts a wife to his own 
rank ; it as often happens that a woman uplifts her husband 
to the dignity of her own character. Richard King rose 
greatly in public estimation after his marriage with Lady 
Janet. 

She united to a sincere piety a very active and a very en- 
lightened benevolence. She guided his ambition aside from 
mere party politics into subjects of social and religious in- 
terest, and in devoting himself to^these he achieved a posi- 
tion more popular and more respected than he could ever 
have won in the strife of party. 

When the government of which the elder Vane became 
a leading minisiip was formed, it was considered a great 
object to secure a name so high in the religious world, so 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 76 

beloved by the working classes, as that of Richard King ; 
and he accepted one of those places which, though not in 
the Cabinet, confer the rank of privy councilor. 

When that brief-lived administration ceased, he felt the 
same sensation of relief that Yane had felt, and came to the 
same resolution never again to accept office, but from differ- 
ent reasons, all of which need not now be detailed. Among 
them, however, certainly this : He was exceedingly sensitive 
to opinion, thin-skinned as to abuse, and very tenacious of 
the respect due to his peculiar character of sanctity and 
philanthropy. He writhed under every newspaper article 
that had made "the blameless King" responsible for the 
iniquities of the government to which he belonged. In the 
loss of office he seemed to recover his former throne. 

Mr. King heard Graham's resolution with a grave approv- 
ing smile, and his interest in the young man became greatly 
ihcreased. He devoted himself strenuously to the object of 
saving to Graham some wrecks of his paternal fortunes ; and 
having a clear head and great experience in the transaction 
of business, he succeeded beyond the most sanguine expec- 
tations formed by the family solicitor. A rich manufacturer 
was found to purchase at a fancy price the bulk of the es- 
tate with the palatial mansion, which the estate alone could 
never have sufficed to maintain with suitable establish- 
ments. 

So that when all the debts were paid, Graham found him- 
self in possession of a clear income of about 600 a year, in- 
vested in a mortgage secured on a part of the hereditary 
lands, on which was seated an old hunting-lodge bought by 
a brewer. 

With this portion of the property Graham parted very 
reluctantly. It was situated amidst the most picturesque 
scenery on the estate, and the lodge itself was a remnant 
of the original residence of his ancestors before it had been 
abandoned for that which, built in the reign of Elizabeth, 
had been expanded into a Trentham-like' palace by the last 
owner. 

But Mr. King's argument reconciled him to the sacrifice. 
" I can manage," said the prudent adviser, " if you insist on 
it, to retidn that remnant of the hereditary estate which you 
are so loath to part with. But how ? by mortgaging it to 



 



 



76 THE PABISIANS. 

an extent that will scarcely leave you 60 a year net from 
the i*ents. This is not all. Your mind will then be dis- 
tracted from the large object of a career to the small ob- 
ject of retaining a few family acres ; you will be constantly 
hampered by private anxieties and fears : you could do noth- 
ing for the benefit of those around you . could not repair a 
farm-house for a better class of tenant . could not rebuild a 
laborer's dilapidated cottage. Give up an idea that might 
be very well for a man whose sole ambition was to remain a 
squire, however beggarly. Launch yourself into the larger 
world of metropolitan life with energies wholly unshackled, 
a mind wholly undisturbed, and secure of an inc6me which, 
however modest, is equal to that of most young men who 
enter that world as your equals." 

Graham was convinced, and yielded, though with a bitter 
pang. It is hard for a man whose fathers have lived on the 
soil to give up all trace of their whereabouts. But nonS 
saw in him any morbid consciousness of bhange of fortune, 
when, a year after his father's death, he re-assumed his place 
in society. If before courted for his expectations, he was 
still courted for himself; by many of the great who had 
loved his father, perhaps even courted more. 

He resigned the diplomatic career, not merely because the 
rise in that profession is slow, and in the intermediate steps 
the chances of distinction are slight and few, but more be- 
cause he desired to cast his lot in the home country, and re- 
garded the courts of other lands as exile. 

It was not true, however, as Lemercier had stated on re- 
port, that he lived on his pen. Curbing all his old extrava- 
gant tastes, SdO a year amply supplied his wants. But he 
had by his pen gained distinction, and created great belief 
in his abilities for a public career. He had written critical 
articles, read with much praise, in periodicals of authority, 
and had published one or two essays on political questions, 
which had created yet more sensation. It was only the 
graver literature, connected more or less with his ultimate 
object of a public career, in which he had thus evinced his 
talents of composition. Such writings were not of a nature 
to bring him much money, but they gave him a definite and 
solid station. In the old time, before the first Reform Bill, 
his reputation would have secured him at once a seat in 



 VjOOQIC 



THE PAKISIANS. 77 

Parliament ; but the ancient nurseries of statesmen are gone, 
and their place is not supplied. 

He bad been invited, however, to stand for more than one 
large and populous borough, with very fair prospects of suc- 
cess ; and whatever the expense, Mr. King had offered to de- 
fray it. But Graham would not have incurred the latter 
obligation ; and when he learned the pledges which his sup- 
porters would have exacted, he would not have stood if suc- 
cess had been certain and the cost nothing. " I can not," he 
said to his friends, "go into the consideration of what is best 
for the country with my thoughts manacled ; and I can not 
be both representative and slave of the greatest ignorance of 
the greatest number. I bide my time, and meanwhile I pre- 
fer to write as I please, rather than vote as I don't please." 

Three years went by, passed chiefly in England, partly in 
travel ; and at the age of thirty Graham Vane was still one 
of those of whom admirers say,*" He will be a great man 
some day ;" and detractors reply, " Some day seems a long 
way off" 

The same fastidiousness which had operated against that 
entrance into Parliament to which his ambition not the less 
steadily adapted itself, had kept him free from the perils of 
wedlock. In his heart he yearned for love and domestic 
lift, but he had hitherto met with no one who realized the 
ideal he had formed. With his person, his accomplishments, 
his connections, and his repute, he might have made many an 
advantageous marriage. But somehow or other the charm 
vanished from a fair face if the shadow of a money-bag fell 
on it ; on the other hand, his ambition occupied so large a 
share in his thoughts that he would have fled in time from 
the temptation of a marriage that would have overweighted 
him beyond the chance of rising. Added to all, he desired 
in a wffe an intellect that, if not equal to his own, could be- 
come so by sympathy . a union of high culture and noble 
aspiration, and yet of loving womanly sweetness which a 
man seldom finds out of books ; and when he does flifd it, 
perhaps it does not wear the sort of face that he fancies. 
Be that as it may, Graham was still unmarried and heart- 
whole. 

And now a new change in his life befell him. Lady Janet 
died of a fever contracted in her habitual rounds of charity 

 VjOOQIC 



78 THE PABISIAKS. 

among the houses of the poor. She had heen to him as the 
most tender mother, and a lovelier soul than hers never 
alighted on the earth. His grief was intense; but what 
was her husband's ? . one of those griefs that kill. 

To the side of Richard King his Janet had been as the 
guardian angel. His love for her was almost worship . 
with her, every object in a life hitherto so active and useful 
seemed gone. He evinced no noisy passion of sorrow. He 
shut himself up, and refused to see even Graham. But after 
some weeks had passed, he admitted the clergyman in whom, 
on spiritual matters, he habitually confided, and seemed con- 
soled by the visits ; then he sent for his lawyer, and made 
his will; after which he allowed Graham to call on him 
daily, on the condition that there should be no reference to 
his loss. He spoke to the young man on other subjects, 
rather drawing him out about himself, sounding his opinion 
on various grave matter8,*watching his face while he ques- 
tioned, as if seeking to dive into his heait, and sometimes 
pathetically sinking into silence, broken but by sighs. So 
it went on for a few more weeks ; then he took the advice 
of his physician to seek change of air and scene. He went 
away alone, without even a servant, not leaving word where 
he had gone. After a little while he returned, more ailing, 
more broken than before. One morning he was found In- 
sensible . stricken by paralysis. He regained consciousness, 
and even for some days rallied strength. He might have re- 
covered, but he seemed as if he tacitly refused to live. He 
expired at last, peacefully, in Graham's arms. 

At the opening of his will, it was found that he had left 
Graham his sole heir and executor. Deducting government 
duties, legacies to servants, and donations to public charities, 
the sum thus bequeathed to his lost wife's nephew was two 
hundred and twenty thousand pounds. 

With such a fortune, opening indeed was made for an am- 
bition so long obstructed. But Graham affected no change 
in hfc mode of life ; he still retained his modest bachelor's 
apartments . engaged no servants . bought no horses . in 
no way exceeded the income he had possessed before. He 
seemed, indeed, depressed rather than elated by the succes- 
sion to a wealth which he had never anticipated. 

Two children had been born from the marriage of Rich- 
 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 79 

ard King ; they had died young, it is true, but Lady Janet, 
at the time of her own decease, was not too advanced in 
years for the reasonable expectation of other offspiing ; and 
even after Richard King became a widower, he had given 
to Graham no hint of his testamentary dispositions. The 
young man was no blood-relation to him, and naturally sup- 
posed that such relations would become the heirs. But in 
truth the deceased seemed to have no near relations . none 
had ever been known to visit him . none raised a voice to 
question the justice of his will 

Lady Janet had been buried at Kensal Green; her hus- 
band's remains were placed in the same vault. 

For days and days Graham went his way lonelily to the 
cemetery. He might be seen standing motionless by that 
tomb, with tears rolling down his cheeks ; yet his was not a 
weak nature . not one of those that love indulgence in irre- 
mediable grief. On the contrary, people who did not know 
him well said ^^ that he had more head than heart,'' and the 
character of his pursuits, as of his writings, was certainly not 
that of a sentimentalist. He had not thus visited the tomb 
till Richard King had been placed within it. Yet his love 
for his aunt was unspeakably greater than that which he 
could have felt for her husband. Was it, then, the husband 
that he so much more acutely mourned ; or was there some- 
thing that, since the husband's death, had deepened his rev- 
erence for the memory of her whom he not only loved as a 
mother, but honored as a saint ? 

These visits to the cemetery did not cease till Graham was 
confined to his bed by a very grave illness . the only one he 
had ever known. His physician said it was nervous fever, 
and occasioned by moral shock or excitement; it was at- 
tended with delirium. His recovery was slow, and when it 
was sufficiently completed he quitted England ; and we find 
him now, with his mind composed, his strength restored, and 
his spirits braced, in that gay city of Paris, hiding, perhaps, 
some earnest purpose amidst his participation in its holiday 
enjoyments. 

He is now, as I have said, seated before his writing-table 
in deep thought. He takes up a letter which he had already 
glanced over hastily, and reperuses it with more care. 

The letter is from his cousin, the Duke of Alton, who had 



 



 



80 THE PASISIAXS. 

succeeded a few years since to the family honors . an able 
man, with no si^all degree of information, an ardent politi- 
cian, but of very rational and temperate opinions ; too much 
occupied by the cares of a princely estate to covet office for 
himself; too sincere a patriot not to desire office for those to 
whose hands he thought the country might be most safely 
intrusted . an intimate friend of Graham's. The contents 
of the letter are these : 

" My dear Gsaham, . I trust that you will welcome the 
brilliant opening into public life which these lines are in- 
tended to announce to you. Vavasour has just been with 
me to say that he intends to resign his seat for the county 
when Parliament meets ; and agreeing with me that there is 
no one so fit to succeed him as yourself, he suggests the 
keeping his intention secret until you have arranged your 
committee and are prepared to take the field. You can not 
hope to escape a contest ; but I have examined the Register, 
and the party has gained rather than lost since the last elec- 
tion, when Vavasour was so triumphantly returned. 

" The expenses for this county, where there are so many 
out-voters to bring up, and so many agents to retain, are 
always large in comparison with some other counties ; but 
that consideration is all in your favor, for it deters Squire 
Hunston, the only man who could beat you, from starting ; 
and to your resources a thousand pounds more or less are 
a trifle not worth discussing. You know how difficult it is 
nowadays to find a seat for a man of moderate opinions like 
yours and mine. Our county would exactly suit you. The 
constituency is so evenly divided between the urban and 
rural populations, that its representative must fairly consult 
the*interests of both. He can be neither an ultra-Tory nor 
a violent Radical. He is left to the enviable freedom, to 
which you say you aspire, of considering what is best for 
the country as a whole. 

"Do not lose so rare an opportunity. There is but one 
drawback to your triumphant candidature. It will be said 
that you have no longer an acre in the county in which 
the Vanes have been settled so long. That drawback can 
be removed. It is true that you can never hope to buy 
back the estates which you were compelled to sell at your 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 81 

father's death . the old manufacturer gripes them too firmly 
to loosen his hold; and after all, even were your income 
double what it is, you would be overhoused in the vast pile 
in which your father buried so large a share of his fortune. 
But that beautiful old hunting-lodge, the Stamm ScMosa 
of your family, with the adjacent farms, can be now repur- 
chased very reasonably. The brewer who bought them is 
afflicted with, an extravagant son, whom he placed in the 

Hussars, and will gladly sell the property for 5000 

more than he gave : well worth the difference, as he has im- 
proved the farm-buildings and raised the .rental. I think, in 
addition to the sum you have on mortgage, 23,000 will be 
accepted, and as a mere investment pay you nearly three per 
cent. But to you it is worth more than double the money ; 
it once more identifies your ancient name with the county. 
.You would be a greater personage with that moderate hold- 
ing in the district in which your race took root, and on which 
your father's genius threw such a lustre, than you would be 
if you invested all your wealth in a county in which every 
squire and farmer would call you 'the new man.' Pray 
think over this most seriously, and instruct your solicitor to 
open negotiations with the brewer at once. But rather put 
yourself into the train, and come back to England straight 
to me. I will ask Vavasour to meet you. What news from 
Paris ? Is the Emperor as ill as the papers insinuate ? And 
is the revolutionary party gaining ground ? Your affection- 
ate cousin, Alton." 

As he put down this letter, Graham heaved a short impa- 
tient sigh. 

"The old Stamm Schloss^^ he muttered . "a foot on the 
old soil once more! and an entrance into the great arena 
with hands unfettered. Is it possible ! . is it . is it ?" 

At this moment the door-bell of the apartment rang, and 
a servant whom Graham'had hired at Paris as a laquais de 
place announced " Ce Monsieur,'*^ 

Graham hurried the letter into his port-folio, and said, 
" You mean the person to whom I am always at home ?" 

"The same, monsieur." 

"Admit him, of course." 

There entered a wonderfully thin man, middle-aged, clothed 

 VjOOQIC 



82 THE PARISIANS. 

in black, his face cleanly shaven, his hair cut very short, with 
one of those faces which, to use a French expression, say 
"nothing." It was absolutely without expression . it had 
not even, despite its thinness, one salient feature. If you 
had found yourself anywhere seated next to that man, your 
eye would have passed him over as too insignificant to no- 
tice ; if at a cafi^ you would have gone on talking to your 
friend without lowering your voice. What mattered it 
whether a hUe like that overheard or not ? Had you been 
asked to guess his calling and station, you ihight have said, 
minutely observing the freshness of his clothes and the un- 
deniable respectability of his t(Mt ensembiU^ "He must be 
well off, and with no care for customers on his mind . a d- 
devant chandler who has retired on a legacy." 

Graham rose at the entrance of his visitor, motioned him 
courteously to a seat beside him, and^ waiting till the laquais- 
had vanished, then asked, " What news ?" 

" None, I fear, that will satisfy monsieur. I have certainly 
hunted out, since I had last the lionor to see you, no less than 
four ladies of the name of Duval; but only one of them took 
that name from her parents, and was also christened Louise." 

"Ah. Louise." 

"Yes, the daughter of a perfumer, aged twenty- eight. 
She, therefore, is not the Louise you seek. Permit me to 
refer to your instructions." Here M. Renard took out a 
note-book, turned over the leaves, and resumed . " Wanted, 
Louise Duval, daughter of Auguste Duval, a French draw- 
ing-master, who lived for many years at Tours, removed to 

Paris in 1846, lived at No. 12 Rue de S at Paris for 

some years, but afterward moved to a different guartieir of 

the town, and died, 1848, in Rue L , No. 39. Shortly 

ailer his death, his daughter Louise left that lodging, and 
could not be traced. In 1849 official documents reporting 
her death were forwarded from Munich to a person (a friend 
of yours, monsieur). Death, of course, taken for granted; 
but nearly ^y^ years afterward, this very person ebcounter- 
ed the said Louise Duval at Aix-la-Chapelle, and never heard 
nor saw more of her. Demande submitted, to find out said 
Louise Duval or any children of here born in 1848-9; sup- 
posed in 1852-3 to have one child, a girl, between four and 
five years old. Is that right, monsieur?" 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 83 

"Quite right." 

"And this is the whole information given to me. Mon- 
sieur, on giving it, asked me if I thought it desirable that he 
should commence inquiries at Aix-la-Chapelle, where Louise 
Duval was last seen by the person interested to discover her. 
I reply, Na; . pains thrown away. Aixrla-Chapelle is not 
a place where any Frenchwoman not settled there by mar- 
riage would remain. Nor does it seem probable that the 
said Duval would venture to select for her residence Munich, 
a city in which she had contrived to obtain certificates of 
her death. A Frenchwoman who has once known Paris al- 
ways wants to get back to it ; especially, monsieur, if she 
has the beauty which you assign to this lady. I therefore 
suggested that our inquiries should commence in this capi- 
tal. Monsieur agreed with me, and I did not grudge the 
time necessary for investigation." 

"You were most obliging. Still I am beginning to be 
impatient if time is to be thrown away." 

"Naturally. Permit me to return to my notes. Mon- 
sieur informs me that twenty-one years ago, in 1848, the 
Parisian police were instructed to find out this lady and 
failed, but gave hopes of discovering her through her rela- 
tions. He asks me to refer to o* archives; I tell him that 
is no U86. However, in order to oblige him, I do so. No 
trace of such inquiry . ^it must have been, as monsieur led 
me to suppose, a strictly private one, unconnected with 
crime or with politics ; and as I have the honor to tell mon- 
sieur, no record of such investigations is preserved in the 
Rue Jerusalem. Great scandal would there be, and injury 
to the peace of families, if we preserved the results of pri- 
vate inquiries intrusted to us . by absurdly jealous hus- 
bands, fQ4 instance. Honor, monsieur, honor forbids it. 
Next, I suggest to monsieur that his simplest plan would 
be an advertisement in the French journals, stating, if I un- 
derstand him right, that it is for the pecuniary interest of 
Madame or Mademoiselle Duval, daughter of Augtiste Du- 
val, artiste en dessin, to come forward. Monsieur objects to 
that." 

" I object to it extremely ; as I have told you, this is a 
strictly confidential inquiry, and an advertisement, which in 
all likelihood would be practically useless (it proved to be 



 



 



84 THB FABISIANS. 

SO in a former inquiry), would not be resorted to unless all 
else failed, and even then with reluctance." 

" Quite so. Accordingly, monsieur delegates to me, who 
have been recommended to him as the best person be can 
employ in that department -of our police which is not con- 
nected with crime or political surveiUancey a task the most 
<lifficult. I have, through strictly private investigations, to 
discover the address and prove the identity of a lady bear- 
ing a name among the most common in France, and of whom 
nothing has been heard for fifteen years, and then at so mi- 
gratory an endroit as Aix-la-Chapelle. You will not or can 
not inform me if, since that time, the lady has changed her 
name by marriage." 

" I have no reason to think that she has ; and there are 
reasons against the supposition that she married after 1849." 

" Permit me to observe that the more details of informa- 
tion monsieur can give me, the easier my task of research 
will be." 

" I have given you all the details I can, and, aware of the 
difficulty of tracing a person with a name so much the re- 
verse of singular, I adopted your advice in our first inter- 
view, of asking some Parisian friend of mine, with a large 
acquaintance in the miscttlaneous societies of your capital, 
to inform me of any ladies of that name whom he might 
chance to encounter ; and he, like you, has lighted upon one 
or two, who, alas ! resemble the right one in name, and noth- 
ing more." 

" You will do wisely to keep him on the watch as well as 
/myself. If it were but a murderess or a political incendiary, 
then you might trust exclusively to the enlightenment of our 
corpSy but this seems an affair of sentiment, monsieur. Senti- 
ment is not in our way. Seek the trace of that in^he haunts 
of pleasure." 

M. Renard, having thus poetically delivered himself of 
that philosophical dogma, rose to depart. 

Graham slipped into his hand a bank-note of sufficient 
value to justify the profound bow he received in return. 

When M. Renard had gone, Graham heaved another impa- 
tient sigh, and said to himself, ** No, it is not possible. at 
least not yet." 

Then, compressing his lips, as a man who forces himself to 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 85 

something he dislikes, he dipped his pen into the inkstand, 
and wrote rapidly thus to his kinsman : 

" My deak Cousin, . I lose not a post in replying to your 
kind and considerate letter. It is not in my power at pres- 
ent to return to England. I need not say how fondly I cher- 
ish the hope of representing the dear old county some day. 
K Vavasour could be induced to defer his resignation of the 
seat for another session, or at least for six or seven months, 
why then I might be free to avail myself of the opening; at 
present I am not. Meanwhile I am sorely tempted to buy 
back the old Lodge . probably the brewer would allow me 
to leave on mortgage the sura I myself have on the proper- 
ty and a few additional thousands. I have reasons for not 
wishing to transfer at present much of the money now in- 
vested in the funds. I will consider this point, which prob- 
ably does not press. 

" I reserve all Paris news till my next ; and begging you 
to forgive so curt and unsatisfactory a reply to a letter so 
important that it excites me more than I like to own, believe 
me, your affectionate friend and cousin, Graham." 



CHAPTER IL 

At about the same hour on the same day in which the 
Englishman held the conference with the Parisian detective 
just r^ted, the Marquis de Rochebriant found himself by 
appointment in the cabinet d'affaires of his anou^ M. Gan- 
drin: that gentleman had hitherto not found time to give 
him a definitive opinion as to the case submitted to his judg- 
ment. The a'ocnjik received Alain with a kind of forced civil- 
ity, in which the natural intelligence of the Marquis, despite 
bis inexperience of life, discovered embarrassment. 

^^ Monsieur le Marquis,''^ said Gandrin, fidgeting among 
the papers on his bureau, " this is a very complicated busi- 
ness. I have given not only my best attention to it, but to 
your general interests. To be plain, your estate, though a 
fine one, is fearfully ejcurabered . fearfully . ^frightfuUy." 

" Sir," said the Marquis, haughtily, " that is a fact which 
was never disguised from you." 



 



 



86 THE PABISIANS. 

" I do not say that it was, Marquis ; bat I scarcely real- 
ized the amount of the liabilities nor the nature of the prop- 
erty. It will be difficult . nay, I fear, impossible . to find 
any capitalist to advance a sum that will cover the mort- 
gages t an interest less than you now pay. As for a com- 
pany to take the whole trouble off your hands, clear off the 
ittortgages, manage the forests, develop the fisheries, guaran- 
tee you an adequate income, and at the end of twenty-one 
years or so render up to you or your heirs the free enjoy- 
ment of an estate thus improved, we must dismiss that pros- 
pect as a wild dream of my good fnend M. H6bert's. Peo- 
ple in the provinces do dream ; in Paris every body is wide 
awake." 

"Monsieur," said the Marquis, with that inborn imper- 
turbable loftiness of acmg-froid which has always in adverse 
circumstances characterized the French noblesse, "be kind 
enough to restore my papeiu I see that you are not the 
man for me. Allow me only to thank you, and inquire the 
amount of my debt for the trouble I have given." 

" Perhaps you are quite justified in thinking I am not the 
man for yow. Monsieur le Marquis; and your papers shall, 
if you decide on dismissing me, be returned to you this even- 
ing. But as to my accepting remuneration where I have 
rendered no service, I request M. le Marquis to put that out 
of the question. Considering myself, then, no longer your 
avou^, do not think I take too great a liberty in volunteer- 
ing my counsel as a friend . or a friend at least to M. Hubert, 
if you do not vouchsafe my right so to address youij^lf." 

M. Gandrin spoke with a certain dignity of voice and man- 
ner which touched and softened his listener. 

"You make me your debtor far more than I pretend to 
repay," replied Alain. " Heaven knows I want a friend, and 
I will heed with gratitude and respect all your counsels in 
that character." 

" Plainly and briefly, my advice is this : Monsieur Louvier 
is the principal mortgagee. He is among the six richest ne- 
gotiators of Paris. He does not, therefore, want money, but, 
like most self-made men, he is very accessible to social van- 
ities. He would be proud to think he had rendered a serv- 
ice to a Rochebriant. Approach him either through me, or, 
far better, at once introduce yourself, and propose to consol- 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 87 

idate all your other liabilities in one mortgage 16 him, at a 
rate of interest lower than that which is now paid to some 
of the small mortgagees. This would add considerably to 
yoiir income, and would carry out M. Hubert's advice." 

" But does it not strike you, dear M. Gandrin, that such 
going cap in hand to one who has power over my fate, while 
I have none over his, would scarcely be consistent with my 
self-respect, not as Rochebriant only, but as Frenchman?" 

''It does not strike me so in the least; at all events, I 
could make the proposal on your behalf without compro- 
mising yourself, though I should be faV more sanguine of 
success if you addressed M. Louvier in person." 

"I should nevertheless prefer leaving it in your hands; 
but even for that I must take a few days to consider. Of 
all the mortgagees, M. Louvier has bepn hitherto the se- 
verest and most menacing, the one whom Hubert dreads the 
most; and should he become sole mortgagee, my whole 
estate would pass to him if, through any succession of bad 
seasons and failing tenants, the interest was not punctually 
paid." 

"It could so pass to him now." 

" No ; for there have been years in which the other mort- 
gagees, who are Bretons, and would be loath to ruin a Roche- 
briant, have been lenient and patient." 

"If Louvier has not been equally so, it is only because he 
knew nothing of you, and your father no doubt had often 
sorely tasked his endurance. Come, suppose we manage to 
break the ice easily. Do me the honor to dine here to meet 
him ; you will find that he is not an unpleasant man." 

The Marquis hesitated, but the thought of the sharp and 
seemingly hopeless struggle for the retention of his ances- 
tral home to which he would be doome'H if he returned from 
Paris unsuccessful in his errand overmastered his pride. He 
felt as if that self-conquest vras a duty he owed to the very 
tombs of his fathers. . " I ought not to shrink from the face 
of a creditor," said he, smiling somewhat sadlyj^and I accept 
the proposal you so graciously make." 

"You do well. Marquis, and I will write at once to Lou- 
vier to ask him to give me his first disengaged day." 

The Marquis had no sooner quitted the house than M. 
Gandrin opened a door at the side of his office, and a large 



 



 



88 THB PARISIANS. 

* 

portly maft strode into the room . stride it was rather than 
step . firm, self-assured, arrogant, masterful. 

" Well, mon ami^'^ said this man, taking his stand at the 
hearth, as a king might take his stand in the hall of his vas- 
sal . " and what says our petit rauscadin .^" 

" He is neither petit nor mu%cadin^ Monsieur Louvier," re- 
plied Gandrin, peevishly ; " and he will task your powei^p to 
get him thoroughly into your net. But I have persuaded 
him to meet you here. What day can you dine with me? 
I had better ask no one else." 

"To-morrow I dihe with my friend O , to meet the 

chiefs of the Opposition," said M. Louvier, with a sort of 
careless rollicking pomposity. "Thursday with Periera . 
Saturday I entertain at home. Say Friday. Your hour?" 

"Seven." 

" Good ! Show me those Rochebriant papers again ; there 
is something I had forgotten to note. Never mind me. Gk) 
on with your work as if I were not here." 

Louvier took up the papers, seated himself in an arm-chair 
by the fire-place, stretched out his legs, and read at his ease, 
but .with a very rapid eye, as a practiced lawyer skims 
through the technical forms of a case to fasten upon the 
marrow of it. 

"Ah ! as I thought. The farms could not pay even the 
interest on my present mortgage; the forests come in for 
that. If a contractor for the yearly sale of the woods was 
bankrupt and did not pay, how could I get my interest? 
Answer me that, Gandrin." 

" Certainly you must run the risk of that chance." 

" Of course the .chance occurs, and then I foreclose* . ^I 
seize . Rochebriant and its seigneuHes are mine." 

As he spoke he laughed, not sardonically . a jovial laugh 
. and opened wide, to reshut as in a vise, the strong iron 
hand which had doubtless closed over many a man's all. 

" Thanks. On Friday, seven o'clock." He tossed the pa- 
pers back on the bureau, nodded a royal nod, and strode 
forth imperiously as he had strided in. 

* For the sake of the general reader, English technical words are here, as 
elsewhere, substituted as much as possible for French. 



 



 



THE PABIBIAKS. 89 



CHAPTER m. 



Mbanwhilb the young Marquis pursued his way thought- 
fully through the streets, and entered the Champs Elys6es. 
Since we first, nay, since we last saw him, he is stnkingly 
improved in outward appearances. He has unconsciously 
acquired more of the easy grace of the Parisian in gait and 
hearing. You would no longer detect the provincial . per- 
haps, however, because he is now dressed, though very sim- 
ply, in habiliments that belong to the style of the day. 
Rarely among the loungera in the Champs Ely86es could be 
seen a finer form, a comelier face, an air of more unmistaka- 
ble distinction. 

The eyes of many a passing fair one gazed on him, ad- 
miringly or coquettishly. But he was still so little the true 
Parisian that they got no smile, no look in return. He was 
wrapped in his own thoughts; was he thinking of M. Louvier? 

He had nearly gained the entrance of the Bois de Boulogne, 
when he was accosted by a voi<5e behind, and, turning round, 
saw his friend Lemercier arm in arm with Graham Yane. 

^^ Bon-jour, Alain," said Lemercier, hooking his disengaged 
arm into Rochebriant's. " I suspect we are going the same 
way.'* 

Alain felt himself change countenance at this conjecture, 
and replied, coldly, "I think not; I have got to the end of 
my walk, and shall turn back to Paris ;" addressing himself 
to the Englishman, he said, with formal politeness, " I re- 
gret not to have found you at home when I called some 
weeks ago, and no less so to have been out when you had 
the complaisance to return my visit." 

"At all events," replied the Englishman, "let me not lose 
the opportunity of improving our acquaintance which now 
offers. It is true that our friend Lemercier, catching sight 
of me in the Rue de Rivoli, stopped his coupk and carried 
me off for a promenade in the Bois. The fineness of the day 
tempted us to get out of his carriage as the Bois came in 
sight. But if you are going back to Paris, I relinquish the 
Bois, and offer myself as your companion." 



 



 



90 THE PARISIANS. t 

Frederic (the name is so familiarly English that the read- 
er might think me pedantic did I accentuate it as French) 
looked from one to the other of the two friends, half amused 
and half angry. 

"And am I to be left alone to achieve a conquest, in 
which, if I succeed, I shall change into hate and envy the 
affection of my two best friends ? . ^Be it so. 

** * U veritable amant ne connait point d'amis.* " 

" I do not comprehend your meaning,^' said the Marquis, 
with a compressed lip and a slight frown. 

" Bah !" cried Frederic ; " come, franc Jew. cards on the 
table . M. Grarm-Varn was going into the Bois at my sug- 
gestion on the chance of having another look at the pearl- 
colored angel ; and you, Rochebriant, can't deny that you 
were going into the Bois for the same object." 

" One may pardon an enfant terrihUJ^ said the English- 
man, laughing, " but an ami terrible should be sent to the 
galleys. Come, Marquis, let us walk back and submit to 
our fate. Even were the lady once more visible;^ we have 
no chance of being observed by the side of a Lovelace so 
accomplished and so audacious !" 

"Adieu, then, recreants . ^I go alone. Victory or death." 

The Parisian beckoned his coachman, entered his carriage, 
and, with a mocking grimace, kissed his hand to the com- 
panions thus deserting or deserted. 

Rochebriant touched the Englishman's arm, and said, 
" Do you think that Lemercier could be impertinent enough 
to accost that lady ?" 

" In the first place," returned the Englishman, " Lemercier 
himself tells me that the lady has for several weeks relin- 
quished her walks in the Bois, and the probability is, there- 
fore, that he will not have the opportunity to accost her. 
In the next place, it appears that when she did take her sol- 
itary walk she did not stray far from her carriage, and was 
in reach of the protection of her laquais and coachman. But 
to speak honestly, do you, who know Lemercier better than 
I, take him to be a man who would commit an impertinence 
to a woman unless there were viveurs of his own sex to see 
him do it ?" 

Alain smiled. " No. Frederic's real nature is an adinira- 



 



 



THB PARISIANS. 91 

ble one ; and if he ever do any thing that he ought to be 
ashamed of, 'twill be from the pride of showing how finely 
he can do it. Such was his character at college, and such it 
still seems at Paris, But it is true that the lady has for- 
saken her former walk ; at least I . I have not seen her since 
the day I first beheld her in company with Frederic. Yet 
. yet, pardon me, you were going to the Bois on the chance 
of seeing her. Perhaps she has changed the direction of her 
walk, and . and . ^" 

The Marquis stopped short, stammering and confused. 

The Englishman scanned his countenance with the rapid 
glance of a practiced observer of men and things, and after 
a short pause said : " If the lady has selected some other 
spot for her promenade, I am ignorant of it ; nor have I 
even volunteered the chance of meeting with her since I 
learned . first from Lemercier, and afterward from others . 
that her destination is the stage. Let us talk frankly. Mar- 
quis. I am accustomed to take^uch exercise on foot, and 
the Bois is my favorite resort ; one day I there found my- 
self in the (zllie which the lady we speak of used to select 
for her promenade, and there saw her, Somethi^ig in her 
face impressed me; how shall I describe the impression? 
Did you ever Qpen a poem, a romance, in some style whol- 
ly new to you, and before you were quite certain wheth- 
er or not its merits justified the interest which the novelty 
inspired, you were summoned away, or the book was taken 
out of your hands ? If so, did you not feel an intellectual 
longing to have another glimpse of' the book ? That i.&- 
tration describes my impression, and I own that I twice 
again went to the same all^. The last time I only caught 
sight of the young lady as she was getting into her car- 
riage. As she was then borne away, I perceived one of the 
custodians of the Bois ; and learned, on questioning him, that 
the lady was in the habit of walking always alone in the 
same oMe at the same hour on most fine days, but that he 
did not know her name or address. A motive of curiosity . 
perhaps an idle one . then made me ask Lemercier, who 
boasts of knowing his Paris so intimately, if he could inform 
me who the lady was. He undertook to ascertain." 

" But," interposed the Marquis, " he did not ascertain who 
she was ; he only ascertained where she lived, and that she 



 VjOOQIC 



92 THE PARISIANS. 

and an elder companion were Italians, whom he suspected, 
without sufficient ground, to be professional singers." 

" True ; but since then I ascertained more detailed partic- 
ulars from two acquaintances of mine who happen to know 
her . M. Savarin, the distinguished writer, and Mrs. Morley, 
an acoraplished and beautiful American lady, who is more 
than an acquaintance. I may boast the honor of ranking 

among her friends. As Savarin's villa is at A , I asked 

him incidentally if he knew the fair neighbor whose face 
had so attracted me ; and Mrs. Morley, being present, and 
overhearing me, I learned from both what I now repeat to 
you. 

"The young lady is a Signorina Cicogna . at Paris ex- 
changing (except among particular .friends), ^s is not unusu- 
al, the outlandish designation of signorina for the more conr 
ventional one of mademoiselle. Her father was a member 
of the noble Milanese family of the same name, therefore the 
young lady is well born. .Her father has been long dead ; 
his widow married again an English gentleman settled in 
Italy, a scholar and antiquarian ; his name was Selby. This 
gentleman, also dead, bequeathed the signorina a small but 
sufficient competence. She is now an orphan, and residing 
with a companion, a Signora Venosta, who was once a singer 
of some repute at the Neapolitan Theatre, in the orchestra 
of which her husband was principal performer ; but she re- 
linquished the stage several years ago on becoming a wid- 
o\^and gave lessons as a teacher. She has the character of 
beWg a scientific musician, and of unblemished private re- 
spectability. Subsequently she was induced to give up gen- 
eral teaching, and undertake the musical education and the 
social charge of the young lady with her. This girl is said 
to have early given promise of extraordinary excellence as a * 
singer, and excited great interest among a coterie of literary 
critics and musical cognoscenti. She was to have come out 
at the Theatre of Milan a year or two ago, but her career 
has been suspended in consequence of ill health, for which 
she is now at Paris under the care of an English physician, 
who has made remarkable cures in all complaints of the 

respiratory organs. M , the great composer, who knows 

her, says that in expression and feeling she has no living 
superior, perhaps no equal since Malibran." 



 



 



THE PARISIANS^ 93 

'^ You seem, dear monsieur, to have taken much pains to 
acquire this information." 

"No great pains were necessary; but had they been I 
might have taken them, for, as I have owned to you. Made- 
moiselle Cicogna, while she was yet a mystery to me, strange- 
ly interested my thoughts or my fancies. That interest has 
now ceased. The world of actresses and singers lies apart 
from mine." 

" Yet," said Alain, in a tone of voice that implied doubt, 
" if I understand Lemercier aright, you were going with him 
to the Bois on the chance of seeing again the lady in whom 
your interest has ceased." 

"Lemercier's account was not strictly accurate. He 
stopped his carriage to speak to me on quite another sub- 
ject, on which I have consulted him, and then proposed to 
take me on to the Bois. I assented ; and it was not till we 
were in the can-iage that he suggested the idea of geeing 
whether the pearly-robed lady had resumed her walk in the 
aUee. You may judge how indifferent I was to that chance 
when I preferred turning back with you to going on with 
him. Between you and me Marquis, to men of our age, who 
have the business of life before them, and feel that if there be 
aught in which noblesse oblige it is a severe devotion to noble 
objects, there is nothing more fatal to such devotion than 
allowing the heart to be blown hither and thither at every 
breeze of mere fancy, and dreaming ourselves into love with 
some fair creature whom we never could marry consistently 
with the career we have set before our ambition. I could 
not marry an actress . neither, I presume, could the Marquis 
de Rochebriant ; and the thought of a courtship which ex- 
cluded the idea of marriage, to a young orphan of name un- 
blemished . of virtue unsuspected . would certainly not be 
compatible with ' devotion to noble objects.' " 

Alain involuntarily bowed his head in assent to the prop- 
osition, and, it may be, in submission to an implied rebuke. 
The two men walked in silence for some minutes, and Gra- 
ham first spoke, changing altogether the subject of conver- 
sation. 

" Lemercier tells me you decline going much into this world 
of Paris . ^the capital of capitals . which appears so irresist- 
ibly attractive to us fbreigners." 



 



 



94 THE PABISIANS. 

" Possibly ; but, ta borrow your words, I have the business 
of life before me." 

" Business is a good safeguard against the temptations to 
excess in pleasure, in which Paris abounds. But there is no 
business which does not admit of some holiday, and all bus- 
iness necessitates commerce with mankind. Apropos^ I was 
the other evening at the Duchess de Tarascon's . a brilliant 
assembly, filled with ministers, senators, and courtiers. I 
heard your name mentioned." 

"Mine?" 

" Yes ; Duplessis, the rising financier . who, rather to my 
surprise, was not only present among these official and dec- 
orated celebrities, but apparently quite at home among them 
. asked the Duchess if she had not seen you since your ar- 
rival at Paris. She replied, 'No; that though you were 
among her nearest connections, you had uot called on her ;* 
and bade Duplessis tell you that you were a monatre for not 
doing so. Whether or not Duplessis will take that liberty, 
I know not ; but you must pardon me if I do. She is a very 
charming woman, full of. talent ; and that stream of the world 
which reflects the stars, with all their mythical influences on 
fortune, flows through her salonsJ*^ 

" I am not bom under those stars. I am a Legitimist." 

"I did not forget your political creed; but in England the 
leaders of opposition attend the salons of the Prime Ministei. 
A man is not supposed to compromise his opinions because 
he exchanges social courtesies with those to whom his opin- 
ions ai-e hostile. Pray excuse me if I am indiscreet . I speak 
as a traveler who asks for information . but do Legitimists 
really believe that they best serve their cause by declining 
any mode of competing with its opponents ? Would there 
not be a fairer chance for the ultimate victory of their prin- 
ciples if they made their talents and energies individually 
prominent . if they were known as skillful generals, practical 
statesmen, eminent diplomatists, brilliant writers? . could 
they combine . not to sulk and exclude themselves from the 
great battle-field of the world . but in their several ways to 
render themselves of such use to their country that some 
day or other, in one of those revolutionary crises to which 
France, alas I must long be subjected, they would find them- 
selves able to turn the scale of undecided councils and con- 
flicting jealousies ?" 

 VjOOQIC 



THB PASI8IANS. 95 

"Monsieur, we hope for the day when the Divine Disposer 
of events will strike into the hearts of our fickle and erring 
countrymen the conviction that there will be no settled re- 
pose for France save under the sceptre of her rightful kings. 
But meanwhile we are . I see it more clearly since I havo^ 
quitted Bretagne . we are a hopeless minority." 

" Does not history tell us that the great changes of the 
world have been wrought by minorities? but on the one 
condition that the minorities shall not be hopeless ? It is 
almost the other day that the Bonapartists were in a mi- 
nority that their adversaries called hopeless, and the major- 
ity for the Emperor is now so preponderant that I tremble 
for his safety. When a majority becomes so vast that in- 
tellect disappears in the crowd, the date of its destruction 
commences ; for by the law of reaction the minority is in- 
stalled against it. It is the nature of things that minorities 
are always more intellectual than multitudes, and intellect is 
ever at work in sapping numerical force. What your party 
want is hope, because without hope there is no energy. I re- 
member hearing my father say that when he met the Count 
de Chambord at Ems, that illustrious personage delivered 
himself of a belle phrase much admired by his partisans. The 
Emperor was then President of the Republic, in a very doubt- 
ful and dangerous position. France seemed on the verge of 
another convulsion. A certain distinguished politician rec- 
ommended the Count de Chambord to hold himself ready to 
enter at once as a candidate for the throne. And the Count, * 
with a benignant smile on his handsome face, answered, 'All 
wrecks come to the shore . the shore does not go to the 
wrecks.' " 

" Beautifully said I" exclaimed the Marquis. 

" Not if IjC beau est toujours le vrai. My father, no in- 
experienced nor unwise politician, in repeating the royal 
words, remarked : ' The fallacy of the Count's argument is 
in its metaphor. A man is not a shore. Do you not think 
that the seamen on board the wrecks would be more grate- 
ful to him who did not complacently compare himself to a 
shore, but considered himself a human being like themselves, 
and risked his own life in a boat, even though it were a 
cockle-shell, in the chance of saving theirs ?" 

Alain de Bochebriant was a brave man, with that intense 



 



 



96 THE PARISIANS. 

sentiment of patriotism which characterizes Frenchmen of ev- 
ery rank and persuasion, unless they belong to the Interna- 
tionalists ; and without pausing to consider, he cried, " Tour 
father was right." 

The Englishman resumed : " Need I say, my dear Marquis, 
that I am not a Legitimist ? I am not an Imperialist, nei- 
ther am I an Orleanist nor a Republican. Between all those 
political divisions it is for Frenchmen to make their choice, 
and for Englishmen to accept for France that government 
which France has established. I view things here as a sim- 
ple observer. But it strikes me that, if I were a Frenchman 
in your position, I should think myself unworthy my ances- 
tors if I consented to be an insignificant looker-on." 

"You are not in my position," said the Marquis, half 
mournfully, half haughtily, " and you can scarcely judge of 
it even in imagination." 

" I need not much task my imagination ; I judge of it by 
analogy. I was very much in your position when I entered 
upon what I venture to call my career; and it is the curious 
similarity between us in circumstances that made me wish 
for your friendship when that similarity was made known 
to me by Lemercier, who is not less garrulous than the true 
Parisian usually is. Permit me to say that, like you, I was 
reared in some pride of no inglorious ancestry. I was rear- 
ed also in the expectation of great wealth. Those expecta- 
tions were not realized : my father had the fault of noble 
natures . generosity pushed to imprudence: he died poor, 
and in debt. You* retain the home of your ancestors; I had 
to resign mine." 

The Marquis had felt deeply interested in this narrative, 
and as Graham now paused, took his hand and pressed it. 

" One of our most eminent personages said to me about 
that time, ' Whatever a clever man of your age determines 
to do or to be, the odds are twenty to one that he has only 
to live on inr order to do or to be it.' Don't you think he 
spoke truly ? I think so." 

" I scarcely know what to think," said Rochebriant ; " I 
feel as if you had given me so rough a shake when I was in 
the midst of a dull dream, that I do not yet know whether I 
am asleep or awake." 

Just as be said this, and toward the Paris end of the 



 



 



 



 




*Do TOF NOT BSOOGNIZE HTM BY HIB WONDKETUL LIKBWBSfl TO THE FIBBT NaPOL 
HIM ON HOR8EUA0K, T^U^INO TO LOUVIBB, THB OBBAT Fl^ANOIBE?'" 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 99 

Champs Elys^es, there was a halt, a sensation among the 
loungers round them : many of them uncovered in salute. 

A man on the younger side of middle age, somewhat in- 
clined to corpulence, with a very striking countenance, was 
riding slowly by. He returned the salutations he received 
with the careless dignity of a personage accustomed to re- 
spect, and then reined in his horse by the side of a barouche, 
and exchanged some words with a portly gentleman who 
was its sole occupant. The loungers, still halting, seemed 
to contemplate this parley . between him on horseback and 
him in the carriage . with very eager interest. Some put 
their hands behind their ears and pressed forward, as if try- 
ing to overhear what was said. 

" I wonder," quoth Graham, " whether, with all his clev- 
erness, the Prince has in any way decided what he means to 
do or to be." 

" The Prince !" said Rochebriant, rousing himself from rev- 
erie ; " what Prince ?" 

**Do you not recognize him by his wonderful likeness to 
the first Napoleon . him on horseback talking to Louvier, 
the great financier ?" 

"Is that stout bourgeois in the carriage Louvier . my 
mortgagee, Louvier ?" 

" Your mortgagee, my dear Marquis ? Well, he is rich 
enough to be a very lenient one upon pay-day." 

^^Hein! . I doubt his leniency," said Alain. "I have 
promised my avouk to meet him at dinner. Do you think 
I did wrong ?" 

" Wrong ! of course not ; he is likely to overwhelm you 
with civilities. Pray don't refuse if he gives you an invita- 
tion to his soirie next Saturday . ^I am going to it. One 
meets there the notabilities most interesting to study . art- 
ists, authors, politicians, especially those who call themselves 
Republicans. He and the Prince agree in one thing . viz., 
the cordial reception they give to the men who would de- 
stroy the state of things upon which Prince and financier 
both thrive, Hillol here comes Lemercier on return from 
the Bois." 

Lemercier's coup^ stopped beside the foot-path. "What 
tidings of the BeUe Inconmte .^" asked the Englishman. 

"None; she was not there. But I am rewarded . such 

 VjOOQIC 



100 THE PARISIANS. 

an adventure . a dame of the haiUe voUe . I believe she is a 
duchess. She was walking with a lap-dog, a pure Pomera- 
nian. A strange poodle flew at the Pomeranian. I drove 
off the poodle, rescued the Pomeranian, received the most 
gracious thanks, the sweetest smile : femme superhe^ middle- 
aged. I prefer women of forty. Au revoir, I am due at the 
club." 

Alain felt a sensation of relief that Lemercier had not seen 
the lady in the pearl-colored dress, and quitted the English- 
man with a lightened heart. 



CHAPTER IV. 

"PiccoLA, jt?^cco?a/ coni* ^ cortese! another invitation from 
M. Louvier for next Saturday . conversazione,'^^ This was 
said in Italian by an elderly lady bursting noisily into the 
room . elderly, yet with a youthful expression of face, owing 
perhaps to a pair of very vivacious black eyes. She was 
dressed, after a somewhat slatternly fashion, in a wrapper 
of crimson merino much the worse for wear, a blue handker- 
chief twisted turban-like round her head, and her feet en- 
cased in list slippers. The person to whom she addressed 
herself was a young lady with dark hair, which, despite its 
evident redundance, was restrained into smooth glossy braids 
over the forehead, and at the crown of the small graceful 
head into the simple knot which Horace has described as 
"Spartan." Her dress contrasted the speaker's by an ex- 
quisite neatness. We have seen her before as the lady in 
the pearl-colored robe, but seen now at home she looks much 
younger. She was one of those whom, encountered in the 
streets or in society, one might guess to be married . proba- 
bly a young bride; for thus seen there was about her an air 
of dignity and of self possession which suits well with the 
ideal of chaste youthful matronage ; and in the expression 
of the face there was a pensive though tfulness beyond her 
years. But as she now sat by the open window arranging 
flowers in a glass bowl, a book lying open on her lap, you 
would never have said, " What a handsome woman !" you 
would have said, " What a charming girl !" All about her 
was maidenly, innocent, and fresh. The dignity of her beai* 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 101 

ing was lost in household ease, the pensiveness of her ex- 
pression in an untroubled serene sweetness. . 

Perhaps mai^ of my readers may have known friends en- 
gaged in some absorbing cause of thought, and who are in 
the habit when they go out, especially if on solitary walks, 
to take that cause of thought with them. The friend may 
be an orator meditating his speech, a poet his verses, a law- 
yer a difficult case, a physician an intricate malady. If you 
have such a friend, and you observe him thus away from his 
home, his face will seem to you older and graver. He is ab- 
sorbed in the care that weighs on him. When you see him 
in a holiday moment at his own fireside, the care is thrown 
aside ; perhaps he mastered while abroad the difficulty that 
had troubled him; he is cheerful, pleasant, sunny. This 
appears to be very much the case with persons of genius. 
When in their own houses we usually find them very play- 
ful and child-like. Most persons of real genius, whatever 
they may seem out-of-doors, are very sweet-tempered at 
home, and sweet temper is sympathizing and genial in the 
intercourse of private life. Certainly, observing this girl as 
she now bends over the flowers, it would be difficult to be- 
lieve her to be the Isaura Cicogna whose letters to Madame 
de Grantmesnil exhibit the doubts and struggles of an un- 
quiet, discontented, aspiring mind. Only in one or two 
passages in those letters would you have guessed at the 
writer in the girl as we now see her. It is in those passages 
where she expresses her love of harmony, and her repug- 
nance to contest . those were characteristics you might have 
read in her face. 

Certainly the girl is very lovely . what long dark eye- 
lashes, what soft, tender, dark blue eyes . now that she looks 
up and smiles, what a bewitching smile it is ! . by what sud- 
den play of rippling dimples the smile is enlivened and re- 
doubled! Do you .notice one feature? in very showy beau- 
ties it is seldom noticed ; but I, being in my way a physiog- 
nomist, consider that it is always worth heeding as an index 
of character. It is the ear. Remark how delicately it is 
formed in her . none of that heaviness of lobe which is a 
sure sign of sluggish intellect and coarse perception. Hers 
is the artist's ear. ^ote next those hands . how beautifully 
shaped ! small, bul; not doll-like hands . ready and nimble, 



 



 



102 THE PARISIANS. 

firm and nervous hands, that could work for a helpmate. 
By no means ibery white, still less red, but somewhat em- 
browned as by the sun, such as you may S.|| in girls reared 
in southern climates, and in her perhaps betokening an im- 
pulsive character which bad not accustomed itself, when at 
sport in the open air, to the thralldom of gloves . very im- 
pulsive people, even in cold climates, seldom do. 

In conveying to us by a few bold strokes an idea of the 
sensitive, quick-moved, warm-blooded Henry 11., the most 
impulsive of the Plantagenets, his contemporary chronicler 
tells us that rather than imprison those active hands of his, 
even in hawking-gloves, he would suffer his falcon to fix its 
sharp claws into his wrist No doubt there is a difference 
as to what is befitting between a burly bellicose creature 
like Henry IL and a delicate young lady like Isaura Ci- 
cogna ; and one would not wish to see those dainty wrists 
of hers seamed and scarred by a falcon's claws. But a girl 
may not be less exquisitely feminine for slight heed of artifi- 
cial prettinesses. Isaura had no need of pale bloodless hands 
to seem one of Nature's highest grade of gentlewomen even 
to the most fastidious eyes. About her there wa^ a charm 
apart from her mere beauty, and often disturbed instead of 
heightened by her mere intellect : it consisted in a combina- 
tion of exquisite artistic refinement, and of a generosity of 
character by which refinement was animated into vigor and 
warmth. 

The room, which was devoted exclusively to Isaura, had 
in it much that spoke of the occupant. That room, when 
first taken furnished, had a good deal of the comfortless 
showiness which belongs to ordinary furnished apartments 
in France, especially in the Parisian suburbs, chiefly let for 
the summer . thin limp muslin curtains that decline. to draw, 
stiff mahogany chairs covered with yellow Utrecht velvet, a 
tall secretaire in a dark corner, an oval buhl table set in taw- 
dry ormolu, islanded in the centre of a poor but gaudy Scotch 
carpet, and but one other table of dull walnut- wood standing 
clothless before a sofa to match the chairs ; the eternal or- 
molu clock flanked by the two eternal ormolu candelabra on 
the dreary mantel-piece. Some of this garniture had been 
removed, others softened into cheeriness and comfort. The 
room somehow or other . thanks partly to a very moderate 



 



 



THB PARISIANS. 103 

expenditure in pretty twills with pretty borders, gracefully 
simple table-covers, with one pr two additional small tables 
and easy-chairs, two simple vases filled with flowers . thanks 
still more to a nameless skill in re-arrangement, and the dis- 
posal of the slight knickknacks and well -bound volumes, 
which, even in traveling, women, who have cultivated the 
pleasure of taste, carry about with them . ^had been coaxed 
into that quiet harmony, that tone of consistent subdued 
color, which corresponded with the characteristics of the in- 
mate. Most people might have been puzzled where to place 
the piano, a semi-grand, so as not to take up too much space 
in the little room ; but where it was placed it seemed so at 
home that you might have supposed the room had been 
built for it. 

There are two kinds of neatness . one is too evident, and 
makes every thing about it seem trite and cold and stiff, and 
another kind of neatness disappears ^om our sight in a sat- 
isfied sense of completeness . like some exquisite, simple, fin- 
ished style of writing. an Addison's or a St. Pierre's. 

This last sort of neatness belonged to Isaura, and brought 
to mind the well-known line of Catullus, when, on recrossing 
his threshold, he invokes its welcome . a line thus not inele- 
gantly translated by Leigh Hunt . 

"Smile every dimple on the cheek of Home." 

I entreat the reader's pardon for this long descriptive digres- 
sion ; but Isaura is one of those characters which are called 
many-sided, and therefore not very easy to comprehend. 
She gives us one side of her character in her correspond- 
ence with Madame de Grantmesnil, and another side of it in 
her own home with her Italian companion . h^lf nurse, half 
chaperon,, 

" Monsieur Louvier is indeed very courteous," said Isaura, 
looking up from the flowers with the dimpled smile we have 
noticed. " But I think, Madre^ that we should do well to 
stay at home on Saturday . not peacefully, for I owe you 
your revenge at euchre,^^ 

" You can't mean it, Piccola /" exclaimed the signora, in 
evident consternation. " Stay at home I . why stay at 
home ? JEMchre is very well when there is nothing else to 
do ; but change is pleasant . U bon Dieu likes it . 



 



 



104 THE PABISIAKS. ^ 

' Ne caldo ne gelo 
Besta mai in cido.' 

And such beautiful ices one gets at M. Louvier's, Did you 
taste the Pistachio ice ? What fine rooms, and so well lit 
up ! . ^I adore light. And the ladies so beautifully dressed 
. one sees the fashions. Stay at home . play at euchre in- 
deed! Piccola^ you can not be so cruel to yourself. you 
are young." 

"But, dear Jf<3w;&'6, just consider . we are invited because 
we are considered professional singers; your reputation as 
such is of course established . mine is not; but still I shall 
be asked to sing as I was asked before ; and you know Br. 

C forbids me to do so except to a very small audience ; 

and it is so ungracious always to say ' No ;' and besides, did 
you not yourself say, when we came away last time from M. 
Louvier's, that it was very dull . that you knew nobody . 
and that the ladies had such superb toilets that you felt 
mortified . and . " 

" Zitto I zitto I you talk idly, IHccoia . very idly. I was 
mortified then in my old black Lyons silk ; but have I not 
bought since then ray beautiful Greek jacket . scarlet and 
gold-lace ? and why should I buy it if I am not to show it ?'' 
. " But, dear Madre^ the jacket is certainly very handsome, 
and will make an effect in a little dinner at the Savanns', or 
Mrs. Morley's. But in a great formal reception like M. Lou- 
vier's will it not look . " 

" Splendid !" interrupted the signora. 

" But singoUiTeP 

"So much the better; did not that great English lady 
wear such a jacket, and did not every one admire her. ;^2i^ 
tosto invidia che compassione .^" 

Isaura sighed. Now the jacket of the signora was a sub- 
ject of disquietude to her friend. It so happened that a 
young English lady of the highest rank and the rarest beau- 
ty had appeared at M. Louvier's, and indeed generally in the 
beau monde of Paris, in a Greek jacket that became her very 
much. That jacket had fascinated, at M. Louvier's, the eyes 
of the signora. But of this Isaura was unaware. The sign- 
ora, on returning home from M. Louvier's, had certainly la- 
mented much over the mesquin appearance of her own old- 
fashioned Italian habiliments compared with the brilliant toi- 



 



Google 



THE PARISIANS. 105 

let of the gay Parisiennes ; and Isaura. quite woman enough 
to sympathize with woman in such womanly vanities . pro- 
posed the next day to go with the signora to one of the 
principal couturi^es of Pans, and adapt the signora's cos- 
tume to the fashions of the place. But the signora having 
predetermined on a Greek jacket, and knowing by instinct 
that Isaura would be disposed to thwart that splendid pre- 
dilection, had artfully suggested that it would be better to 
go to the couturidre with Madame Savarin, as being a more 
experienced adviser . and the coup& only held two. 

As Madame Savarin was about the sanife age as the sign- 
ora, and dressed as became her years, and in excellent taste, 
Isaui*a thought this an admirable suggestion ; and pressing 
into her chaperon^s hand a billet de banque sufficient to re- 
equip her cap-d-pie, dismissed the subject from her mind. 
But the signora was much too cunning to submit her pas- 
sion for the Greek jacket to the discouraging comments of 
Madame Savarin. Monopolizing the coupe^ she became ab- 
solute mistress of the situation. She went to no fashionable 
cotUuri^re^s, She went to a magasin that she had seen ad- 
vertised in the Petitea Affiches as supplying superb costumes 
for fancy balls and amateur performers in private theatric- 
als. She returned home triumphant, with a jacket still more 
dazzling to the eye than that of the English lady. 

When Isaura first beheld it, she drew back in a sort of su- 
perstitious terror, as of a comet or other blazing portent. 

" Cosa stupenda /" . (stupendous thing !) She might well 
be dismayed when the signora proposed to appear thus at- 
tired in M. Louvier's salon. What might be admired as co- 
quetry of dress in a young beauty of rank so great that even 
a vulgarity in her would be called distinguh^ was certainly 
an audacious challenge of ridicule in the elderly ci-devant 
music-teacher. 

But how could Isaura, how can any one of common hu- 
manity, say to a woman resolved upon wearing a certain 
dress, " You are not young and handsome enough for that ?" 
Isaura could otily murmur, " For many reasons I would rath- 
er stay at home, dear Madre?'* 

" Ah ! I see you are ashamed of me," said the signora, in 
softened tones : " very natural. When the nightingale sings 
no more, she is only an ugly brown bird:" and therewith 

5* 

 VjOOQIC 



106 THE PARISIANS. 

the Signora Venosta seated hei'self submissively, and began 
to cry. 

On this Isaura sprang up, wound her arms round the sign- 
ora's neck, soothed her with coaxing, kissed and petted her, 
and ended by saying, " Of course we will go ;" and, " but let 
me choose you another dress . a dark green velvet trimmed 
with blonde . blonde becomes you so well." 

" No, no . ^I hate green velvet ; any body can wear tbat. 
JPiccola^ I am not clever like thee ; I can not amuse myself 
like thee with books. I am in a foreign land. I have a poor 
head, but I have a^big heart" (another burst of tears) ; " and 
that big heaii) is set on my beautiful Greek jacket." 

" Dearest Madre^^ said Isaura, half weeping too, " forgive 
me ; you are right. The Greek jacket is splendid ; I shall be 
so pleased to see you wear it. Poor Mcidre . so pleased to 
think that in the foreign land you are not without something 
that pleases you^ 



CHAPTER V. 

Conformably with his engagement to meet M. Louvier, 
Alain found himself on the day and at the hour named in 
M. Gandrin's salon. On this occasion Madame Gandrin did 
not appear. Her husband was accustomed to give diners 
d^homnies. The great man had not yet arrived. " I think. 
Marquis," said M. Gandrin, " that you will not regret having 
followed my advice : my representations have disposed Lou- 
vier to regard you vnth much favor, and he is certainly flat- 
tered by being permitted to make your personal acquaint- 
ance." 

The avcme had scarcely finished this little speech when M. 
Louvier was announced. He entered with a beaming smile, 
which did not detract from his imposing presence. His flat- 
terers had told him that he had a look of Louis Philippe ; 
therefore he had sought to imitate the dress and bonhomie 
of that monarch of the middle class. He wore a wig, elab- 
orately piled up, and shaped his whiskers in royal harmony 
ora,'otf pjroyal wig. Above all, he studied that social frank- 
raented mucher with which the able sovereign dispelled awe 
fashioned Italia or dread of his astuteness. Decidedly he was 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 107 

a man very pleasant to converse and to deal with . so long 
as there seemed to him something to gain and nothing to 
lose by being pleasant. He returned Alain's bow by a cor- 
dial offer of both expansive hands, into the grasp of which 
the hands of the aristocrat utterly disappeared. " Charmed 
to make your acquaintance, Marquis . still more ch aimed if 
you will let me be useful during your s^our at Paris. Ma 
foi^ excuse my bluntness, but you are a fort heo/u gar^on. 
Monsieur, your father, was a handsome man, but you beat 
him hollow. Gandrin, my friend, would not you and I give 
half our fortunes for one year of this fine fellow's youth spent 
in Paris? Pestel what love-letters we should have, with no 
need to buy them by biUeta de hanqtieP'* Thus he ran on, 
much to Alain's confusion, till dinner was announced. Then 
thefe was something grandiose in the frank bourgeois style 
wherewith he expanded his napkin and twisted one end into 
his waistcoat . it was so manly a renunciation of the fash- 
ions which a man so r&pandu in all circles might be supposed 
to follow . as if he were both too great and too much in ear- 
nest for such frivolities. He was evidently a sincere bon vi- 
vant^ and M. Gandrin had no less evidently taken all requi- 
site pains to gratify his taste. The Montrachet served with 
the oysters was of precious vintage. The vin de mad^e 
which accompanied the potage d la bisque would have con- 
tented an American. And how radiant became Louvier's 
face, when among the entries he came upon laitances de 
carpes I " The best thing in the world," he cried, " and one 
gets it so seldom since the old Rocher de Cancale has lost 
its renown. At private houses, what does one get now ? . 
Uanc de poulet . flavorless trash. After all, Gandrin, when 
we lose the love-letters, it is some consolation that laitances 
de carpes and satU&s de foie gras are still left to fill up the 
void in our hearts. Marquis, heed my counsel; cultivate 
betimes the taste for the table ; that and whist are the sole 
resources of declining years. You never met my old friend 
Talleyrand . ah, no I he was long before your time. He cul- 
tivated both, but he made two mistakes. No man's intel- 
lect is perfect on all sides. He confined himself to one meal 
a day, and he never learned to play well at whist. Avoid 
his errors, my young friend . avoid them. Gandrin, I guess 
this pine-apple is English . it is superb." 



 



 



108 THE PABISIANS. 

" You are right . a present from the Marquis of H ." 

" Ah ! instead of a fee, I wager. The Marquis gives noth- 
ing for nothing, dear man ! Droll people the English. You 
have never visited England, I presume, cker Rochebriant ?" 

The affable financier had already made vast progress in 
familiarity with his' silent fellow-guest. 

When the dinner was over and the three men had re-en- 
tered the salon for coffee and liqueurs, Gandrin left Louvier 
and Alain alone, sajing he was going to his cabmet for cigai-s 
which he could recommend. Then Louvier, lightly patting 
the Marquis on the shoulder, said, with what the French call 
effusion^ " My dear Rochebriant, your father and I did not 
quite understand each other. He took a tone of grand seign- 
eur that sometimes wounded me; and I in turn was per- 
haps too rude in asserting my rights . as creditor, shall I 
say ? . ^no, as fellow-citizen ; and Frenchmen are so vain, so 
oversusceptible . ^fire up at a word . take offense when none 
is meant. We two, my dear boy, should be superior to such 
national foibles. Bref . I have a mortgage on your lands. 
Why should that thought mar our friendship ? At my age, 
though I am not yet old, one is flattered if the young like us 
. pleased if we can oblige them, and remove from their ca- 
reer any little obstacle in its way. Gandnn tells me you 
wish to consolidate all the charges on your estate into one 
on lower rate of interest. Is it so ?" 

" I am so advised," said the Marquis. 

"And very rightly advised; come and talk with me about 
it some day next week. I hope to have a large sum of 
money set free in a few days. Of course mortgages on land 
don't pay like speculations at the Bourse; but I am rich 
enough to please myself. We will see . we will see." 

Here Gandrin returned with the cigars ; but Alain at that 
time never smoked, and Louvier excused himself, with a 
laugh and a sly wink, on the plea that he was goihg to pay 
his respects . as doubtless that joli gar^on was going to do, 
likewise . to a belle dame who did not reckon the smell of 
tobacco among the perfumes of Houbigant or Arabia. 

"Meanwhile," added Louvier, turning to Gandrin, "I 
have something to say to you on business about the con- 
tract for that new street of mine. No hurry . after our 
young friend has gone to his 'assignation.'" 



 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 109 

Alain could not misinterpret the hint ; and in a few mo- 
ments took leave of his host more surprised than disappoint- 
ed that the financier had not invited him, as Graham had 
assumed he would, to his soirie the following evening. 

When Alain was gone, Louvier's jovial manner disappear- 
ed also, and became bluffly rude rather than bluntly cordial. 

" Gandrin, what did you mean by saying that that young 
man was no muscadinf Muscadin . aristocrat . offensive 
from top to toe." 

"You amaze me . you seemed to take to him so cordi- 
ally." 

"And pray, were you too blind to remark with what cold 
reserve he responded to my condescensions? How he 
winced when I called him Rochebriant! how he colored 
when I called him 'der boy !' These aristocrats think we 
ought to thank them on our knees when they take our 
money, and" . here Louvier's face darkened . "seduce our 
women." 

"Monsieur Louvier, in all France I do not know a greater 
aristocrat than yourself." 

I don't know whether M. Gandrin meant that speech as a 
compliment, but M. Louvier took it as such . laughed com- 
placently and rubbed his hands. "Ay, ay, millionnaires are 
the real anstocrats, for they have power, as my beau Mar- 
quis will soon find. I must bid you good-night. Of course 
I shall see Madame Gandrin and yourself to-morrow. Pre- 
pare for a motley gathering . lots of democrats and foreign- 
ers, with artists and authors, and such creatures." 

" Is that the reason why you did not invite the Marquis ?" 

" To be sure ; I would not shock so pure a Legitimist by 
contact with the sons of the people, and make him still colder 
to myself. Nq ; when he comes to my house he shall meet 
lions and viveurs of the haut ton, who will play into my 
hands by teaching him how to ruin himself in the quickest 
manner and in the genre Louis XY, Bonsoir, mon vieux,^'^ 



 



 



110 THE PABI8IANS. 



CHAPTER VI. 

The next night Graham in vain looked roand for Alain in 
M. Louvier's salons^ and missed his high-bred mien and mel- 
ancholy countenance. M. Louvier had been for some four 
years a childless widower, but his receptions were not the less 
numerously attended, nor his establishment less magnificent- 
ly montk for the absence of a presiding lady : very much the 
contrary ; it was noticeable how much he had increased his 
status and prestige as a social personage since the death of 
his unlaraented spouse. . 

To say truth, she had been rather a heavy drag on his 
triumphal car. She had been the heiress of a man who had 
amassed a great deal of money ; not in the higher walks of 
commerce, but in a retail trade. 

Louvier himself was the son of a y ich money-lender ; he 
had entered life with an ample fortune and an intense desire 
to be admitted into those more brilliant circles in which for- 
tune can be dissipated with ^dat He might not have at- 
tained his object but for the friendly countenance of a young 
noble who was then 

"The glass of fashion and the mold of form." 

But this young noble, of whom later we shall hear more, 
came suddenly to grief; and when the money-lender's son 
lost that potent protector, the dandies, previously so civil, 
showed him a very cold shoulder. 

Louvier then became an ardent democrat,^and recruited 
the fortune he had impaired by the aforesaid marriage, 
launched into colossal speculations, and became enormously 
rich. His aspirations for social rank now revived, but his 
wife sadly interfered with them. She was thrifty by na- 
ture ; sympathized little with her husband's genius for ac- 
cumulation ; always said he would end in a hospital ; hated 
Republicans ; despised authors and artists ; and by the ladies 
of the beau monde was pronounced common and vulgar. 

So long as she lived, it was impossible for Louvier to re- 



 



 



^HJC FABISIANS. Ill 

alize his ambition of having one of the salons which at Paris 
established celebrity and position. He could not then com- 
mand those advantages of wealth which he especially cov- 
eted. He was eminently successful in doing this now. As 
soon as she was safe in P^re la Chaise, he enlarged his h6tel 
by the purchase and annexation of an adjoining house ; re- 
decorated and refurnished it, and in this task displayed, it 
must be said to his credit, or to that of the administrators 
he selected for the purpose, a nobleness of taste parely ex- 
hibited nowadays. His collection of pictures was not large, 
and consisted exclusively of the French school, ancient and 
modern, for in all things Louvier affected the patriot. But 
each of those pictures was a gem; such Watteaus! such 
Greuzes! such landscapes by Patel! and, above all, such 
masterpieces by Ingres, Horace Vernet, and Delaroche, were 
worth all the doubtful originals of Flemish and Italian art 
which make the ordinary boast of private collectors. 

These pictures occupied two rooms of moderate size, built 
for their reception, and lighted from above. The great salon 
to which they led contained treasures scarcely less precious ; 
the walls were covered ,with the richest silks which the 
looms of Lyons could produce. Every, piece of furniture 
here was a work of art in its way : console-tables of Floren- 
tine mosaic, inlaid with pearl and lapis lazuli ; cabinets in 
which the exquisite designs of the renaissance were carved 
in ebony ; colossal vases of Russian malachite, but wrought 
by French artists. The very knickknacks scattered careless- 
ly about the room might have been admired in the cabi- 
nets of the Palazzo Pitti. Beyond this room lay the saUe de 
danse^ its ceiling painted by , supported by white mar- 
ble columns, the glazed balcony and the angles of the room 
filled with tiers of exotics. In the dining-room, on the same 
floor, on the other side of the landing-place, were stored in 
glazed buffets, not only vessels and salvers of plate, silver and 
gold, but, more costly still, matchless specimens of Sevres 
and Limoges, and mediaeval varieties of Venetian glass. 
On the ground-floor, which opened on the lawn of a large 
garden, Louvier had his suit of private apartments, furnish- 
ed, as he said, " simply according to English notions of 
comfort." Englishmen would have said, "according to 
French notions of luxury." Enough of these details, which 



 VjOOQIC 



112 THE PARISIANS. 

a writer cam not give without feeling himself somewhat vul- 
garized in doing so, but without a loose general idea of 
which a reader would not have an accurate conception of 
something not vulgar. of something grave, historical, pos- 
sibly tragical, the existence of a Parisian miUionnaire at the 
date of this narative. 

The evidence of wealth was everywhere manifest at M. 
Louvier's, but it was- everywhere refined by an equal evi- 
dence of taste. The apartments devoted to hospitality min- 
istered to the delighted study of artists, to whom free access 
was given, and of whom two or three might be seen daily 
in the " show-rooms," copying pictures or taking sketches 
of rare articles of furniture or effects for palatian interiors. 

Among the things which lich English visitors of Pans 
most coveted to see was M. Louvier's h6tel ; and few among 
the richest left it without a sigh of envy and despair. Only 
in such London houses as belonged to a Sutherland or a 
Holford could our metropolis exhibit a splendor as opulent 
and a taste as refined. 

M. Louvier had his set evenings for popular assemblies. * 
At these were entertained the Liberals of every shade, from 
tricolor to rouge, with the artists and writere most in vogue, 
pMe-mUe with decorated diplomatists, ex-ministers, Orlean- 
ists, and Republicans, distinguished foreigners, plutocrats of 
the Bourse, and lions male and female from the arid nurse 
of that race, the Chauss6e d'Antin. Of his more select re- 
unions something will be said later. 

"And how does this poor Paris metamorphosed please 
Monsieur Vane ?" asked a Frenchman with a handsome in- 
telligent countenance, very carefully dressed, though in a 
somewhat by-gone fashion, and carrying off his tenth lus- 
trum with an air too sprightly to evince any sense of the 
weight. 

This gentleman, the Vicomte de Brez6, was of good birth, 
and had a legitimate right to his title of Vicomte, which is 
more than can be said of many vicomtes one meets at Paris.- 
He had no other property, however, than a principal share 
in an influential journal, to which he was a lively and spark- 
ling contributor. In his youth, under the reign of Louis 
Philippe, he had been a chief among literary exquisites, and 
Balzac was said to have taken him more than once as his 



 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 113 

model for those brilliant yonog vauriens who figure in the 
great novelist's comedy of Human Life, The Vicomte's 
fashion expired with the Orleanist dynasty. 

"Is it possible, my dear Vicomte," answered Graham, 
*' not^to be pleased with a capital so marvelously embellish- 
ed?" 

" Embellished it may be to foreign eyes," said the Vicomte, 
sighing, " but not improved to the taste of a Parisian like 
me.* I miss the dear Paris of old . ^the streets associated 
with my beavx joura are no more. Is there not something 
drearily monotonous in those interminable perspectives? 
How frightfully the way lengthens before one's eyes ! In 
the twists and curves of the old Paris one was relieved from 
the pain of seeing how far one had to go from one spot to 
another . each tortuous street had a separate idiosyncrasy; 
what picturesque diversities, what interesting recollections 
. all swept away! Mon Dieul and what for? Miles of 
florid fa^des^ staring and glaring at one with goggle-eyed 
pitiless windows. House rents trebled ; and the conscious- 
' ness that, if you venture to grumble, under-ground railways^ 
like concealed volcanoes, can burst forth on you at any 
moment with an eruption of bayonets and muskets. This 
maudit empire seeks to keep its hold on France much as a 
grand seigneur seeks to enchain a nymph of the ballet, tricks 
her out in finery and baubles, and insures her infidelity the 
moment he fails to satisfy her whims." 

" Vicomte," answered Graham, " I have had the honor to 
know you since I was a small boy at a preparatory school 
home for the holidays, and you were a guest at my father's 
country house. You were then f^tk as one of the most prom- 
ising writers among the young men of the day, especially 
fisivored by the princes of the reigning family. I shall never 
forget the impression made on me by your brilliant appear- 
ance and your no less brilliant talk." 

*'^Ahl ces beaux Jours f ce ban Louis Philippe, ce cher petit 
Jbinville^^ sighed the Vicomte. 

" But at that day you compared le bon Louis Philippe to 
Robert Macaire. You described all his sons, including, no 
doubt, ce cher petit Jbinville, in terms of resentful contempt, 
as so many plausible gamins whom Robert Macaire was 
training to cheat the public in the interest of the family 



 VjOOQIC 



114 THB PABISIANS. 

firm. I rememoer my father ^ying to you in answer, 'No 
royal house in Europe has more sought to develop the lit- 
erature of an epoch, and to signalize its representatives by 
social respect and bfficial honors, than that of the Orleans 
dynasty ; you, M. de Br^z6, do but imitate your elde^ in 
seeking to destroy the dynasty under which you flourish; 
should you succeed, you hommes de plume will be the first 
sufferers and the loudest complainers.' " 

" Cher Monsieur Vane^^ said the Vicomte, smiling com- 
placently, ^' your father did me great honor in classing me 
with Victor Hugo, Alexandre Dumas, Emile de Girardin, 
and the other stars of the Orleanist galaxy, including our 
friend here, M. Savarin. A very superior man was your fa- 
ther." 

"And," said Savarin, who, being an Orleanist, had listened 
to Graham's speech with an approving smile . " and if I re- 
member right, my dear De Br^ze, no one was more severe 
than yourself on poor De Lamartine and the Republic that 
succeeded Louis Philippe; no one more emphatically ex- 
pressed the yearning desire for another Napoleon to restore 
order at home and renown abroad. Now you have got an- 
other Napoleon." 

. "And I want change for my Napoleon," said De Br6z6, 
laughing. 

"My dear Vicomte," said Graham, "one thing we may 
all grant, that in culture and intellect you are far superior 
to the mass of your fellow-Parisians ; that you are therefore 
a favorable type of their political character." 

"-4A, man cher^ vous Ues trop aimable,'* 

" And therefore I venture to say this, if the archangel Ga- 
briel were permitted to descend to Paris and form the best 
government for France that the wisdom of seraph could de- 
vise, it would not be two years . ^I doubt if it would be six 
months . before out of this Paris, which you call the Foyer 
dee Idkes^ would emerge a powerful party, adorned by your- 
self and other hommes deplum^^ in favor of a revolution for 
the benefit of ce hon Satan and ce cher petit Beelzebub." 

" What a pretty vein of satire you have, m,on cher /" said 
the Vicomte, good-humoredly ; " there is a sting of truth in 
your witticism. Indeed, I must send you some articles of 
mine in which I have said much the same thing . lea beaux 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 115 

eaprits se reneontrent The fault of us French is impatience 
. desire of change ; but then it is that desire which keeps 
the world going and retains our place at the head of it. 
However, at this time we are all living too fast for our mon- 
ey to keep up with it, and too slow for our intellect not to 
flag. We vie with each other on the road to ruin, for in lit- 
erature all the old paths to fame are shut up." 

Here a tall gentleman, with whom the Vicomte had been 
conversing before he accosted Vane, and who had remained 
beside De Brez6 listening in silent attention to this colloquy, 
interposed, speaking in the slow voice of one accustomed to 
measure his words, and with a slight but unmistakable Ger- 
man accent : " There is that, M. de Br6z6, which makes one 
think gravely of what you say so lightly. Viewing things 
with the unprejudioed eyes of a foreigner, I recognize much 
for which France should be grateful to the Emperor. Un- 
der his sway her material resources have been marvelously 
augmented; her commerce has been placed by the treaty 
with England on sounder foundations, and is daily exhibit- 
ing richer life; her agriculture has made a prodigious ad- 
vance wherever it has allowed room for capitalists, and es- 
caped from the curse of petty allotments and peasant pro- 
prietors . a curse which would have ruined any country less 
blessed by N^ature; turbulent factions have been quelled; 
internal order maintained ; the external prestige of France, 
up at least to the date of the Mexican war, increased to an 
extent that might satisfy even a Frenchman's amowrjt?rojw6/ 
and her advance in civilization has been manifested by the 
rapid creation of a naval power which shoujd put even En- 
gland on her mettle. But, on the other hand . " 

"Ay, on the other hand," said the Vicomte. 

" On the other hand, there are in the imperial system two 
causes of decay and of rot silently at work. They may not 
be the faults of the Emperor, but they are such misfortunes 
as may cause the fall of the empire. The first is an absolute 
divorce between the political system and the intellectual 
culture of the nation. The throne and the system rest on 
universal suffrage . on a suffrage which gives to classes the 
most ignorant a power that preponderates over all the 
healthful elements of knowledge. It is the tendency of all 
ignorant multitudes to personify themselves, as it were, in 



 



 



116 THB PARISIANS. 

one individual. They can not comprehend you when you 
argue for a principle; they do comprehend you when you 
talk of a name. The Emperor Napoleon is to them a name, 
and the prefects and officials who influence their votes are 
paid for incorporating all principles in th^ shibboleth of that 
single name. You have thus sought the well-spring of a po- 
litical system in the deepest stratum of popular ignorance. 
To rid popular ignorance of its normal revolutionary bias, 
the rural peasants are indoctrinated with the conservatism 
that comes from the fear which appertains to property. 
They have their roods of land or their shares in a national 
loan. Thus you estrange the crassitude of an ignorant de- 
mocracy still more from the intelligence of the educated 
classes by combining it with the most selfish and abject of 
all the apprehensions that are ascribed to aristocracy and 
wealth. What is thus imbedded in the depths of your soci- 
ety makes itself shown on the surface. Napoleon HI. has 
been compared to Augustus; and there are many startling 
similitudes between them in character and in fate. Each 
succeeds to the heritage of a great name that had contrived 
to unite autocracy with the popular cause. Each subdued 
all rival competitoi*s, and. inaugurated despotic rule in the 
name of freedom. Each mingled enough of sternness with 
ambitious will to stain with bloodshed the commencement 
of his power; but it would be an absurd injustice to fix the 
same degree of condemnation on the coup di^kJtat as humanity 
fixes on the earlier cruelties of Augustus. Each, once firm in 
his seat, became mild and clement : Augustus perhaps from 
policy. Napoleon III. from a native kindliness of disposition 
which no fair critic of character can fail to acknowledge. 
Enough of similitudes ; now for one salient difference. Ob- 
serve how earnestly Augustus strove, and how completely 
he succeeded in the task, to rally round him all the leading 
intellects in every grade and of every party . the follQwers 
of Antony, the friends of Brutus . every great captain, every 
great statesman, every great writer, every man who could 
lend a ray of mind to his own Julian constellation, and make 
the age of Augustus an era in the annals of human intellect 
and genius. But this has not been the good fortune of your 
Emperor. The result of his system has been the suppression 
of intellect in every department. He has rallied round h^im 



 



 



THE PABISIA19S. 117 

not one great statesman ; his praises are hymned by not one 
great poet. The cUkbrit^ of a former day stand aloof, or, 
preferring exile to constrained allegiance, assail him with 
unremitting missiles from their asylum in foreign shores. 
His reign is sterile of new ciKbritia. The few that arise en- 
list themselves against him. Whenever he shall venture to 
give full freedom to the press and to the legislature, the in- 
tellect thus suppressed or thus hostile will burst forth in col- 
lected volume. His partisans have not been trained and dis- 
ciplined to meet such assailants. They will be as weak as 
no doubt they will be violent. And the worst is that the . 
intellect thus rising in mass against him will be warped and 
distorted, like captives who, being kept in chains, exercise 
their limbs, on escaping, in vehement jumps without definite 
object. The directors of emancipated opinion may thus be 
terrible enemies to the Imperial Government, but they will 
be very unsafe councilors to France. Concurrently with 
this divorce between the imperial system and the national 
intellect . a divorce so complete that even your salons have 
lost their wit, and even your caricatures their point . a cor- 
ruption of manners which the empire, I own, did not origi- 
nate, but inherit, has become so common that every one 
owns and nobody blames it. The gorgeous ostentation of 
the Court has perverted the habits of the people. The in- 
telligence obstructed from other vents betakes itself to spec- 
ulating for a fortune, and the greed of gain and the passion 
for show are sapping the noblest elements of the old French 
manhood. Public opinion stamps with no opprobrium a 
minister or favorite who profits by a job ; and I fear you 
will find that jobbing pervades all your administrative de- 
. partments.'' 

"All very true," said De Brez6, with a shrug of the shoul- 
ders, and in a tone of levity that seemed to ridicule the as- 
sertion he volunteered. " Virtue and Honor, banished froni 
courts and salons and the cabinets of authors, ascend to fair- 
er heights in the attics of ouvriers.^^ 

" The ouvrierSf ouvriers of Paris I" cried this terrible Ger- 
man. 

"Ay, Monsieur le Comte, what can you say against our 
ouvriers? A German count can not condescend to learn 
any thing about cespetUs gensP 

 VjOOQIC 



118 THK PABISIANB. 

" Monsieur," replied the German, " in the eyes of a stat< 
man there are no petUs g&tis^ and in those of a philosopl] 
* no petitea choses. We in Germany have too many diffici 
problems affeoting our working classes to solve, not to ha 
indaced me to glean all the information I can as to the c 
vriera of Paris. They have among them men of aspiratio 
as noble as can animate the souls of philosophers and poe 
perhaps not the less noble because common sense and ex{ 
rience can not follow their flight. But as a body, the c 
vriers of Paris have not been elevated in political morali 
by the benevolent aim of the Emperor to find them amj 
work and good wages independent of the natural laws th 
regulate the markets of labor. Accustomed thus to consid 
the state bound to maintain them, the moment the state fa 
in that impossible task, they will accommodate their hon( 
ty to a rush upon property under the name of social refori 
Have you not noticed how largely increased within the la 
few years is the number of those who cry out, 'ia Jh^opri^ 
c^est h volP Have you considered the rapid growth of t 
International Association ? I do not say that for all the 
evils the empire is exclusively responsible. To a certain c 
gree they are found in all rich communities, especially whe 
democracy is more or less in the ascendant. To a certa 
extent they exist in the large towns pf Germany ; they a 
conspicuously increasing in England ; they are acknowledg 
to be dangerous in the United States of America ; thej ai 
I am told on good authority, making themselves visible wi 
the spread of civilization in Russia. But under the Fren< 
empire they have become glaringly rampant, and I ventu 
to predict that the day is not far off when the rot at wo 
throughout all layers and strata of French society will insu 
a fall of the fabric at the sound of which the world will rin 

"There is many a fair and stately tree which continues 
throw out its leaves and rear its crest till suddenly the wii 
smites it, and then, and not till then, the trunk which seer 
so solid is found to be but the rind to a mass of crumbL 
powder." 

*' Monsieur le Comte," said the Vicomte, " you are a b 
vere critic and a lugubrious prophet. But a German is 
safe from revolution that he takes alarm at the stir of mo\ 
ment which is the normal state of the French espriV^ 



C^OOQlC 



THE PABI6IANS. 119 

"French esprit may soon evaporate into Parisian bitise. 
As to Germany being safe from revolution, allow me to re- 
peat a saying of Goethe's . but has M. le Comte ever heard 
of Goethe?" 

" Goethe, of course . tr^ joli kcrivain,^'* 

"Goethe said to some one who was making much the 
same remark as yourself, ' We Germans are in a state of 
revolution now, but we do things so slowly that it will be 
a hundred years before we Germans shall find it out. But 
when completed, it will be the gieatest revolution society 
has yet seen, and will last like the other revolutions that, 
beginning, scarce noticed, in Germany, have transformed the 
world.'" 

^^Diable, M. le Comte ! Germans transformed the world I 
r What revolutions do you speak of?" 
I *'The invention of gunpowder, the invention of printing, 
I and the expansion of a monk's quarrel with his Pope into 
\the Lutheran revolution." 

Here the German paused, and asked the Vicomte to intro- 
duce him to Vane, which De Br4z6 did by the title of Count 
von Rndesheim. On hearing Vane's name, the Count in- 
quired if he were related to the orator and statesman, George 
Graham Vane, whose opinions, uttered in Parliament, were 
still authoritative among German thinkers. This compli- 
ment to his deceased father immensely gratified, but at the 
same time considerably surprised, the Englishman. His fa- 
ther, no doubt, had been a man of much influence in the 
British House of Commons . a very weighty speaker, and, 
while in office, a first-rate administrator ; but Englishmen 
know what a House of Commons reputation is . how fugi- 
.tive, how little cosmopolitan; and that a German count 
should ever have heard of his father delighted but amazed 
him. In stating himself to be the son of George Graham 
Vane, he intimated not only the delight, but the amaze, 
with the frank savoir vivre which was one of his salient 
characteristics. 

" Sir," replied the German, speaking in very correct En- 
glish, but still with his national accent, " every German 
reared to political service studies England as the school for 
practical thought distinct from impracticable theories. Long 
oiay you allow us to do so ; only excuse me one remark : 



 



 



120 THE PABISIANS. 

never let the selfish element of the practical sapersede the 
generous element. Your father never did so in his speeches, 
and therefore we admired him. At the present day we don't 
so much care to study English speeches. They may be in- 
sular . they are not European. I honor England ; Heaven 
grant that you may not be making sad mistakes in the be- 
lief that you can long remain England if you cease to be 
European." Herewith the German bowed, not uncivilly . 
on the contrary, somewhat ceremoniously . and disappeared 
with a Prussian secretaup of embassy, whose arm he linked 
in his own, into a room less frequented. 

" Vicomte, who and what is your German count ?" asked 
Vane. 

"A solemn pedant," answered the lively Vicomte . "a 
German count, gice votdez-vous deplits?^^ 



CHAPTER VIL 

A LITTLE later Graham found himself alone among the 
crowd. Attracted by the sound of music, he had strayed 
into one of the rooms whence it came, and in which, though 
his range of acquaintance at Paris was, for an Englishman, 
large and somewhat miscellaneous, he recognized no famil- 
iar countenance. A lady was playing the piano-forte . play- 
ing remarkably well . with accurate science, with that equal 
lightness and strength of finger which produces brilliancy 
of execution. But to appreciate her music one should be 
musical one's self. It wanted the charm that fascinates the 
uninitiated. The guests in the room were musical connois- 
seurs . a class with whom Graham Vane had nothing in 
common. Even if he had been more capable of enjoying 
the excellence of the player's performance, the glance he di- 
rected toward her would have sufficed to chill him into in- 
difference. She was not young, and, with prominent fea- 
tures and puckered skin, was twisting her face into strange 
sentimental grimaces, as if terribly overcome by the beauty 
and pathos of her own melodies. To add to Vane's displeas- 
ure, she was dressed in a costume wholly antagonistic to his 
views of the becoming . in a Greek jacket of gold and scar- 
let, contrasted by a Turkish turban. 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 121 

Muttering "What she - mountebank have we here?" he 
sank into a chair behind the door, and fell into an absorbed 
reverie. From this he was aroused by the cessation of the 
music, and the hum of subdued approbation by which it was 
followed. Above the hum swelled the imposing voice of M. 
Louvier, as he rose from a seat on the other side of the piano, 
by which his bulky form had been partially concealed. 

"Bravo! perfectly played . excellent! Can we not per- 
suade your channing young country-woman to gratify us 
even by a single song?" Then turning aside and address- 
ing some one else invisible to Graham, he said, " Does that 
tyrannical doctor still compel you to silence, mademoiselle ?" 

A voice so sweetly modulated that if there were any sar- 
casm in the words it was lost in the softness of pathos, an- 
swered, " Nay, M. Louvier, he rather overtasks the words at 
my command in thankfulness to those who, like yourself, so 
kindly regard me as something else than a singer." 

It was not the she-mountebank who thus spoke. Graham 
rose and looked round with instinctive curiosity. He met 
the face that he said had haunted him. She too had risen, 
standing near the piano, with one hand tenderly resting on 
the she-mountebank's scarlet and gilded shoulder . the face 
that haunted him, and yet with a difference. There was a 
faint blush on the clear pale cheek, a soft yet playful light 
in the grave dark blue eyes, which had not been visible in 
the countenance of the young lady in the pearl-colored robe. 
Graham did not hear Louvier's reply, though no doubt it was 
loud enough for him to hear. He sank again into reverie. 
Other guests now canie into the room, among them Frank | 
Morley, styled Colonel weminent military titles in the States j 
do not always denote eminent military services), Y\weal thy ' 
American, and his sprightly ^nd beautiful wife, -'^he Col- . 
onel was a clever man, rather stiff in his deportment, and 
grave in speech, but by ncf means without a vein of dry hu- 
mor. By the French he was esteemed a high-bred specimen 
of the kind of grand seigneur which democfktic republics en- 
gender. He spoke French like a Parisian, had an imposing 
presence, and spent a great deal of money with the elegance 
of a man of taste and the generosity of a man of heart. His 
high breeding was not quite so well understood by the En- 
glish, because the English are apt to judge breeding by lit- 

 VjOOQIC 



122 THB PABISIANS. 

tie conventional rules not observed by the American colonel. 
He had a slight nasal twang, and introduced " sir " with re- 
dundant ceremony in addressing Englishmen, however inti- 
mate he might be with them, and had the habit (perhaps 
with a sly intention to startle or puzzle them) of adorning 
his style of conversation with quaint Americanisms. 

Nevertheless, the genial amiability and the inherent dig- 
nity of his character made him acknowledged as a thorough 
gentleman by every Englishman, however conventional in 
tastes, who became admitted into his intimate acquaintance. 

Mrs. Morley, ten or twelve years younger than her hus- 
band, had no nasal twang, and employed no Americanisms 
in her talk, which was frank, lively, and at times eloquent. 
She had a great ambition to be esteemed of a masculine un- 
derstanding: Nature unkindly frustrated that ambition in 
rendering her a model of feminine grace. Graham was inti- 
mately acquainted with Colonel Morley ; and with Mra Mor- 
ley had contracted one of those corcfial friendships which, 
perfectly free alike from polite flirtation and Platonic attach- 
ment, do sometimes spring up between persons of opposite 
sexes without the slightest danger of changing its honest !i 
character into morbid sentimentality or unlawful passioni>V^"^^^ 
The Morleys stopped to accost Graham, but the lady had 
scarcely said three words to him before, catching sight of 
the haunting face, she darted toward it. Her husband, less 
emotional, bowed at the distance, and said, " To my taste, 
sir, the Signorina Cicogna is the loveliest girl in the present 
^,* and full of mind, sir." 

"Singing mind," said Graham, sarcastically, and in the ill- 
natured impulse of a man striving to check his inclination to 
admire. 

" I have not heard her sing^" replied the American, dryly ; 
" and the words ' singing mind' are doubtless accurately En- 
glish, since you employ them ; biit at Boston the collocation 
would be deemed barbarous. You fly off the handle. The 
epithet, sir, is nof in concord .with the substantive." 

" Boston would be in the right, my dear Colonel. I stand 
rebuked ; mind has little to do with singing." 

* Bee, a common expression in " the West *' for a meeting or gathering of . 
people. 



 



 



THB PARISIANS. 123 

" I take leave to deny that, sir. You fire into the wrong 
flock, and would not hazard the remark if you had conversed 
as I have with Signorina Cicogna." 

Before Graham could answer, Signorina Cicogn^ stood be- 
fore him, leaning lightly on Mrs. Morley's arm. 

"Frank, you must take us into the refreshment-room," said 
Mrs. Morley to her husband ; and then, turning to Graham, 
added, " Will you help to make way for us?" 

Graham bowed, and offered his arm to the fair speaker. 

" No," said she, taking her husband's. " Of course you 
know the signorina, or, as we usually call her. Mademoiselle 
Cicogna. No ? allow me to present you . ^Mr. Graham Vane 
. Mademoiselle Cicogna. Mademoiselle speaks English like 
a native." 

And thus abruptly Graham was introduced to the owner 
of the haunting face. He had lived too much in the great 
world all his life to retain the innate shyness of an English- 
man, but he certainly was confused and embarrassed when 
his eyes met Isaura's, and he felt her hand on his arm. Be- 
fore quitting the room, she paused and looked back . Gra- 
ham's look followed her own, and saw behind them the lady 
with the scarlet jacket escorted by some portly and decora- 
ted connoisseur. Isaura's face brightened to another kind of 
brightness . a pleased and tender light. 

" Poor dear Madre^'* she murmured to herself, in Italian. 

^^Madre^'* echoed Graham, also in Italian. "I have been 
misinformed, then : that lady is your mother?" 

Isaura laughed a pretty, low silvery laugh, and replied in 
English, "She is not my mother, but I call her Madre, for 1 
know no name more loving." ' ' 

Graham was touched, and said, gently, " Tour own moth- 
er was evidently very dear to you." 

Isaura's lip quivered, and she made a slight movement as 
if she would have withdrawn her hand from his arm. He 
saw that he had offended or wounded her, and with the 
straightforward, frankness natural to him, resumed, quickly, 

" My remark was impertinent in a stranger ; forgive it." 

" There is nothing to forgive, monsieur." 

The two now threaded their way through the crowd, both 
silent At last Isaura, thinking she ought to speak first in 
order to show that Graham had not offended her, said, 

 VjOOQIC 



124 THE PARISIANS. 

" How lovely Mrs. Morley is !" 

" Yes, and I like the spirit and ease of her American man- 
ner : have you known her long, mademoiselle ?" 

" No ; we met her for the first time some weeks ago at M. 
Savariu's." 

" Was she very eloquent on the rights of women ?" 

" What I you have heard her on that subject ?" 

" I have rarely heard her on any other, though she is the 
best and perhaps the cleverest friend I have at Paris ; but 
that may be my fault, for I like to start it. It is a relief to 
the languid small-talk of society to listen to any one thor- 
oughly in earnest upon turning the world topsy-turvy." 

" Do you suppose poor Mrs. Morley would seek to do that 
if she had her rights ?" asked Isaura, with her musical laugh. 

" Not a doubt of it ; but perhaps you share her opinions." 

" I scarcely know what her opinions are, but . " 

"Yes. but. " 

" There is a . what shall I call it ? . a pereuasion . a senti- 
ment . out of which the opinions probably spring that I do 
share." 

" Indeed ? a persuasion, a sentiment, for instance, that a 
woman should have votes in the choice of legislators, and, I 
presume, in the task of legislation ?" 

" No, that is not what I mean. Still, that is an opinion, 
right or wrong, which grows out of the sentiment I speak 
of." 

" Pray explain the sentiment." 

" It is always so difficult to define a sentiment, but does 
it not strike you that in proportion as the tendency of mod- 
ern civilization has been to raise women more and more to 
an intellectual equality with men . in proportion as they 
read and study and think . an uneasy sentiment, perhaps 
querulous, perhaps unreasonable, grows up within their 
minds that the conventions of the world- are against the 
complete development of the faculties thus aroused and 
the ambition thus animated ; that they can not but rebel, 
though it may be silently, against the notions of the former 
age, when women were not thus educated ; notions that the 
aim of the sex should be to steal through life unremarked ; 
that it is a reproach to be talked of; that women are plants 
to be kept in a hot-house, and forbidden the frank liberty of 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 125 

growth in the natural air and sunshine of heaven ? This, at 
least, is a sentiment which has sprung up within myself, 
and I imagine that it is the sentiment which has given birth 
to many of the opinions or doctrines that seem absurd, and 
very likely are so to the general public. I don't pretend 
even to have considered those doctrines. I don't pretend to 
say what may be the remedies for the restlessness and un- 
easiness I feel. I doubt if on this earth there be any reme- 
dies ; all I know is that I feel restless and uneasy." 

Graham gazed on her countenance as she spoke, with an 
astonishment not unmingled with tenderness and compas- 
sion . astonishment at the contrast between a vein of reflec- 
tion so hardy, expressed in a style of language that seemed 
to him so masculine, and the soft velvet dreamy eyes, the 
gentle tones, and delicate purity of hues rendered younger 
still by the blush that deepened their bloom. 

At this moment they had entered the refreshment-room; 
but a dense group being round the table, and both perhaps 
forgetting the object for which Mrs. Morley had introduced 
them to each other, they had mechanically seated themselves 
on an ottoman in a recess while Isaura was yet speaking. It 
must seem as strange to the reader as it did to Graham that 
such a speech should have been spoken by so young a girl 
to an acquaintance so new. But in truth Isaura was very 
little conscious of Graham's presence. She had got on a 
subject that perplexed and tormented her solitary thoughts 
. she was but thinking aloud. 

"I believe," said Graham, after a pause, "that I compre- 
hend your sentiment much better than I do Mrs. Morley's 
opinions ; but permit me one observation. You say, truly, 
that the course of modern civilization has more or less af- 
fected the relative position of woman cultivated beyond 
that level on which she was formerly contented to stand . 
the nearer perhaps to the heart of man because not lifting 
her head to his height . and hence a sense of restlessness, 
uneasiness, but do you suppose that, in this whirl and 
dance of the atoms which compose the rolling ball of the 
civilized world, it is only women that are made restless and 
uneasy ? Do you not see, amidst the masses congregated in 
the wealthiest cities of the world, writhings and struggles 
against the received order of things ? In this sentiment of 

 VjOOQIC 



126 THS PABISIANS. 

discontent there is a certain truthfulness, because it ii 
element of human nature ; and how best to deal with it 
problem yet unsolved. But in the opinions and doctr 
to which, among the masses, the sentiment gives birth, 
wisdom of the wisest detects only the certainty of a c 
mon ruin, offering for reconstruction the same building 
terials as the former edifice . materials not likely to be 
proved because they may be defaced. Ascend from 
working classes to all others in which civilized culture ] 
vails, and you will find that- same restless feeling . the f 
tering of untried wings against the bars between wider sp 
and their longings. Gould you poll all the educated an 
tious young men in England . perhaps in Europe . at le 
half of them, divided between a reverence for the past an 
curiosity as to the future, would sigh, ' I am born a centi 
too late or a century too soon !' " 

Isaura listened to this answer with a profound and abso 
ing interest. It was the first time that a clever young m 
talked thus sympathetically to her, a clever young girl. 

Then rising, he said, " I see your Madre and our Americ 
friends are darting angry looks at me. They have ma 
room for us at the table, and are wondering why I shoo 
keep you thus from the good things of this little life. O 
word more ere we join them : Consult your own mind, ai 
consider whether your uneasiness and unrest are caused sole 
by conventional shackles on your sex. Are they not equj 
ly common to the youth of ours ? . common to all who se( 
in art, in letters, nay, in the stormier field of active life, 
clasp as a reality some image yet seen but as a dream ?" * 



CHAPTER VHL 



No further conversation in the way of sustained dialogii 
took place that evening between Graham and Isaura. 

The Americans and the Savarins clustered round Isaar 
when they quitted the refreshment-room. The party wa 
breaking up. Vane would have offered his arm again t 
Isaura, but M. Savarin had forestalled him. The America] 
was dispatched by his wife to see for the carriage ; and Mrs 
Morley said, with her wonted sprightly tone of command, 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. * 12'i' 

" Now, Mr. Vane, you have no option but to take care of 
me to the shawl-room." 

Madame Savarin and Signora Venosta had each found their 
cavaliers, the Italian still retaining hold of the portly con- 
noisseur, and the Frenchwoman accepting the safeguard of 
the Vicomte de Br^ze. As they descended the stairs, Mrs. 
Morley asked Graham what he thought of the young lady 
to whom she had presented him. 

" I think she is charming," answered Graham. 

"Of course; that is the stereotyped answer to all such 
questions, especially by you Englishmen. In public or in 
private, England is the mouth-piece of platitudes." 

" It is natural for an American to think so. Every child 
that has just learned to speak uses bolder expressions than 
its grandmamma; but I am rather at a loss to know by what 
novelty of phrase an American would have answered your 
question." 

"An American would have discovered that Isaura Ci- 
cogna had a soul, and his answer would have confessed it." 

" It strikes me that he would then have uttered a platitude 
more stolid than mine. Every Christian knows that the 
dullest human being has a soul. But, to speak frankly, I 
grant that my answer did not do justice to the signorina, 
nor to the impression she makes on me; and putting aside 
the charm of the face, there is a charm in a mind that seems 
to have gathered stores of reflection which I should scarce- 
ly have expected to find in a young lady brought up to be 
a professional singer." 

"You add prejudice to platitude, and are horribly prosaic 
to-night; but here we are in the shawl-room. I must take 
another opportunity of attacking you. Pray dine with us 
to-morrow; you will meet our minister and a few other 
pleasant friends." 

"I suppose I must not say, *I shall be charmed,'" an- ^ 
sweredVane; "but I shall be." 

^^JBon Dieu I that horrid fat man has deserted Signora 
Venosta . looking for his own cloak, I dare say. Selfish 
monster ! . go and hand her to her carriage . quick, it is an- 
nounced !" 

Graham, thus ordered, hastened to offer his arm to the 
she-mountebank. Somehow she had acqui^^^d dignity in his 



 



 



128 THE PARISIANS. 

eyes, and he did not feel the least ashamed of being in con- 
tact with the scarlet jacket. 

The signora grappled to him with a confiding familiarity. 

*' I am afraid," she said, in Italian, as they passed along the 
spacious hall to the porte coch^e . " I am afraid that I did 
not make a good effect to-night . I was nervous: did not 
you perceive it ?" 

" 1^0, indeed ; you enchanted us all," replied the dissimu- 
lator. 

" How amiable you are to say so I . you must think that 
I sought for a compliment. So I did . you gave me more 
than I deserve. Wine is the milk of old men, and praise of 
old women. But an old man may be killed by too much 
wine, and an old woman lives all the longer for too much 
praise . buona notte,^^ 

Here she sprang, lithesomely enough, into the carriage, 
and Isaura followed, escorted by M. Savarin. As the two 
men returned toward the shawl-room, the Frenchman said, 
^' Madame Savarin and I complain that you have not let us 
see so much of you as we ought. No doubt you are great- 
ly sought after; but are you free to take your soup with ns 
the day after to-morrow ? You will meet a select few of 
my confr^res.^^ 

" The day after to-morrow I will mark with a white stone. 
To dine with M. Savarin is an event to a man who covets 
distinction." 

" Such compliments reconcile an author to his trade. You 
deserve the best return I can make you. You will meet la 
belle Isaure. I have just engaged her and her chaperon. She 
is a girl of true genius, and genius is like those objects of 
virtu which belong to a former age, and become every day 
more scarce and* more precious." 

Here they encountered Colonel Morley and his wife hur- 
. rying to their carriage. The American stopped Vane, and 
whispered, " I am glad, sir, to hear from my wife that you 
dine with us to-morrow. Sir, you will meet Mademoiselle 
Cicogna, and I am not without a kinkle* that you will be 
enthused." 

" This seems like a fatality," soliloquized Vane, as he walk- 

. * A notion. 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 129 

ed through the deserted streets toward his lodging. "I 
strove to banish that haunting face from my mind. I had 
half forgotten it, and now . " Here his murmur sank into 
silence. He was deliberating in very conflicted thought 
whether or not he should write to refuse the two invitations 
he had accepted. 

" Pooh !" he said at last, as he reached the door of his 
lodging ; " is my reason so weak that it should be influenced 
by a mere superstition? Surely I know myself too well, 
and have tried myself too long, to fear that I should be 
untrue to the duty and ends of my life, even if I found my 
heart in danger of suffering." 

Certainly the Fates do seem to mock our resolves to keep 
our feet from their ambush, and our hearts from their snare. 

How our lives may be colored by that which seems to us 
the most trivial accident, the merest chance ! Suppose that 
Alain de Rochebriant had been invited to that reunion at 
M. Louvier's, and Graham Vane had accepted some other in- 
vitation, and passed his evening elsewhere, Alain would prob- 
ably have been presented to Isspra . what then might have 
happened ? The impression Isaura had already made upon 
the young Frenchman was not so deep as that made upon 
Graham; but then Alain's resolution to efface it was but 
commenced that day, and by no means yet confirmed. And 
if he had been the first clever young man to talk earnestly 
to that clever young girl, who can guess what impression he 
might have made upon her? His conversation might have 
had less philosophy and strong sense than Graham's, but 
more of poetic sentiment and fascinating romance. 

However, the history of events that do not come to pass 
is not in the chronicle of the Fates. 

6* 



 



 



130 THE PABISIANS. 



BOOK THIRD. 



CHAPTER L 



The next day the guests at the Morleys' had assembled 
when Vane entered. His apology for unpunctuality was 
cut short by the lively hostess : " Your pardon is granted 
without the humiliation of asking for it ; we know that the 
characteristic of the, English is always to be a little behind- 
hand." 

she then proceeded to introduce him to the American 
minister, to a distinguished American poet, with a coun- 
tenance striking for (mingled sweetness and power, land one 
6r two other of her countrymen sojourning at Paris ; and 
this ceremony over, dinner was announced, and she bade 
Gmham dffer his arm to Mademoiselle Cicogna. 

" Have you ever visited the United States, mademoiselle ?" 
asked Vane, as they seated themselves at the table. 

No. 

" It is a voyage you are sure to make soon." 

"Why so?" 

" Because report says you will create a great sensation at 
the very commencemient of your career, and the New World 
is ever eager to welcome each celebrity that is achieved in 
the Old, more especially that which belongs to your enchant- 
ing art." 

"True, sir," said an American senator, solemnly striking 
into the conversation ; " we are an appreciative people, and 
if that lady be as fine a singer as I am told, she might com- 
mand any amount of dollars." 

Isaura colored, and turning to Graham, asked him, in a low 
voice, if he were fond of music. 

" I ought, of course, to say * yes,' " answered Graham, in the 
same tone ; " but I doubt if that ' yes ' would be an honest one. 
In some moods music . if a kind of music I like . affects me 
very deeply ; in other moods not at all. And I can not bear 



Digitized' by 



 



THE PARISIANS. 131 

much at a time. A concert wearies me shamefully ; even an 
opera always seems to me a great deal too long. But I 
ought to add that I am no judge of music ; that music was 
nev^r admitted into my education ; and between ourselves, 
I doubt if there be one Englishman in five hundred who 
would care for opera or concert if it were not the fashion to 
say he did. Does my frankness revolt you ?" 

" On the contrary, I sometimes doubt, especially of late, if 
I am fond of music myself." 

" Signorina . pardon me . it is impossible that you should 
not be. Genius can never be untrue to itself, and must love 
that in whitjh it excels . that b/ which it communicates 
joy and," he added, with a half-suppressed sigh, " attains to 
glor^." 

" Genius is a divine word, and not to be applied to a sing- 
er," said Isaura, with a humility in which there was an ear- 
nest sadness. 

Graham was touched and startled ; but before he could 
answer, the American minister appealed to him across the 
table, asking him if he had quoted accurately a passage in a 
speech by Graham's distinguished father, in regard to the 
share which England ought to take in the political affairs 
of Europe. 

The conversation now became general ; very political and 
very serious. Graham was drawn into it, and grew animated 
and eloquent. 

Isaura listened to him with admiration. She was struck 
by what seemed to her a nobleness of sentiment which ele- 
vated his theme above the level of commonplace polemics. 
She was pleased to notice, in the attentive silence of his in- 
telligent listeners, that they shared the effect produced on \ 
herself. In fact, Graham Vane was a born orator, and his 
studies had been those of a political thinker. In common 
talk he was but the accomplished man of the world, easy 
and frank and genial, with a touch of good-natured sarcasm. 
But when the subject started drew him upward to those 
heights in which politics become the science of humanity, he 
seemed a changed being. His cheek glowed, his eye bright- 
ened, his voice mellowed into richer tones, his language be- 
came unconsciously adorned. In such moments there might 
scarcely be an audience, even differing from him in opinion, 
which would not have acknowledged his spell. 

 VjOOQIC 



132 THE PABISIANS. 

When the party adjoumed to the salon^ Isaura said, soft- 
ly, to Graham, " I understand why you did not cultivate 
music; and I think, too, that I can now understand what ef- 
fects the human voice can produce on human minds, without 
recurring to the art of song." 

"Ah," said Graham, with a pleased smile, " do -m^ make 
me ashamed of my former rudeness by the revenge of com- 
pliment, and, above all, do not dispamge your own art by 
supposing that any prose effect of voice in its utterance of 
mind can interpret that which music alone can express, even 
to listeners so uncultivated as myself Am I not told truly 
by musical composers, w*hen I ask them to expfain in words 
what they say in their music, that such explanation is im- 
possible, that music has a language of its own untranslatable 
by words ?" 

" Yes," said Isaura, with thoughtful brow but brightening 
eyes, " you are told truly. It was only the other day that I 
was pondering over that truth." 
/ " But what recesses of mind, of heart, of soul, this untrans- 
/ latable language penetrates and brightens up ! How in- 
/ complete the grand nature of man . though man the grand- 
est . would be, if you struck out of his reason the compre- 
hension of poetry, music, and religion ! In each are reach- 
ed and are sounded deeps in his reason otherwise concealed 
from himself. History, knowledge, science, stop at the point 
in which mystery begins. There they meet with the world 
of shadow. Not an inch of that w^orld can they penetrate 
without the aid of poetry and religion, two necessities of in- 
tellectual man much more nearly allied than the votaries of 
the practical and the positive suppose. To the aid and ele- 
vation of both those necessities comes in music, and there has 
never existed a religion in the world which has not demand- 
ed music as its ally. If, as I said frankly, it is only in certain 
moods of my mind that I enjoy music, it is only because in 
certain moods of my mind I am capable of quitting the guid- 
ance of prosaic reason for the world of shadow; that I am so 
susceptible as at every hour, were my nature perfect, I should 
be to the mysterious influences of poetry and religion. Do 
you understand what I wish to express ?" 

" Yes, I do, and clearly." 

" Then, signoiina, you are forbidden to undervalue the gift 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 133 

of song. You must feel its power over the heart when you 
enter the opera-house; over the soul, when you kneel in a 
cathedral." 

" Oh," cried Isaura, with enthusiasm, a rich glow mantling 
: over her lovely face, " how I thank you ! Is it you who say 
you do not love music ? How much better you understand 
, it than I did till this moment !" 

Here Mrs. Morley, joined by the American poet, came to 
the corner in which the Englishman and the singer had niched 
themselves. The poet began to talk, the other guests gath- 
ered round, and every one listened reverentially until the 
party broke up. Colonel Morley handed Isaura to her car- 
riage ; the she-mountebank again fell to the lot of Graham. 

"Signor," said she, as he respectfully placed her shawl 
round her scarlet-and-gilt jacket, " are we so far from Paris 
that you can not spare the time to ^all ? My child does not 
sing in public, but at home you can hear her. It is not every 
.woman's voice that is sweetest at home." 

Graham bowed, and said he^ would call on the morrow. 

Isaura mused in silent delight over the words which had so 
extolled the art of the singer. Alas, poor child ! she could not 
guess that in those words, reconciling her to the profession 
of the stage, the speaker was pleading against his own heart. 

There was in Graham's nature, as I think it commonly is 
in that of most true orators, a wonderful degree of intellect- 
ual conscience, which impelled him to acknowledge the be- 
nignant influences of vsong, and to set before the young singer 
the noblest incentives to the profession to which he deemed 
her assuredly destined. But in so doing he must have felt 
that he was widening the gulf between her life and his own. 
Perhaps he wished to widen it in proportion as he dreaded 
to listen to any voice in his heart which asked if the gulf 
_ might not be overleaped. 



CHAPTER n. 

On the morrow Graham called at the villa at A . The 

two ladies received him in Isaura's chosen sitting-room. 

Somehow or other conversation at first languished. Gra- 
ham was reserved and distant, Isaura shy and embarrassed. 



 



 



134 TH PARISIANS. 

The Venosta had tke/ra** of making talk to herself. Prob- 
ably at another time Graham would have been amused and 
interested in the observation of a character new to him, and 
thoroughly southern . lovable, not more from its naive sim- 
plicity of kindliness than from various little foibles and van- 
ities, all of which were harmless, and some of them endear- 
ing as those of a child whom it is easy to make happy, and 
whom it seems so cruel to pain ; and with all the Venosta's 
deviations from the polished and tranquil good taste of the 
beau mondey she had that indescribable grace which rarely 
deserts a Florentine, so that you might call her odd, but not 
vulgar ; while, though uneducated, except in the way of her 
old profession, and never having troubled herself to read any 
thing but a libretto^ and the pious books commended to her 
by her confessor, the artless babble of her talk every now 
and then flashed out wi^h a quaint humor, lighting up terse 
fragments of the old Italian wisdom which had mysteriously 
embedded themselves in the groundwork of her mind. 

But Graham was not at this time disposed to judge the 
poor Venosta kindly or fairly. Isaura had taken high rank 
in his thoughts. He felt an impatient resentment, mingled 
with anxiety and compassionate tenderness, at a companion- 
ship which seemed to him derogatory to the position he would 
have assigned to a creature so gifted, and unsafe as a guide 
amidst the perils and trials to which the youth, the beauty, 
and the destined profession of Isaura were exposed. Like 
most Englishmen . especially Englishmen wise in the knowl- 
edge of life . he held in fastidious regard the proprieties and 
conventions by which the dignity of woman is fenced round ; 
and of those proprieties and conventions the Venosta natural- 
ly appeared to him a very unsatisfactory guardian and rep- 
resentative. 

Happily unconscious of those hostile prepossessions, the 
elder signora chatted on very gayly to the visitor. She 
was in eixcellent spirits ; people had been very civil to her 
both at Colonel Morley's and M. Louvier's. The American 
minister had praised the scarlet jacket. She was convinced 
she had made a sensation two nights running. When the 
amour propre is pleased the tongue is freed. 

The Venosta ran on in praise of Paris and the Parisians; 
of Louvier and his Boirke and the pistachio ice ; of the Amer- 



. 



 



THE PABISIANS. 135 

icans, and a certain cr^me de marascfmno whjch she hoped 
the Signer Inglese had not failed to taste. The crtme de 
maraschino led her thoughts back to Italy. Then she grew 
moamfal . ^how she missed the native beau del! Paris was 
pleasant, but how absurd to call it ^^l^Paradis des Femmes^^ 
. as if Us JPemmes could find Paradise in a brouiUardf 

" But," she exclaimed, with vivacity of voice and gesticu- 
lation, " the signer does not come to hear the parrot talk. He 
is engaged to come that he may hear the nightingale sing. 
A drop of honey attracts the fly more than a bottle of vine- 
gar." 

Graham could not help smiling at this adage. ^'I sub- 
mit," said he, " to your comparison as regards myself; but 
certainly any thing less like a bottle of vinegar than your 
amiable conversation I can not well conceive. However, the 
metaphor apart, I scarcely know how I dare ask mademoi- 
selle to sing after the confession I made to her last night." 

" What confession ?" asked the Venosta. 

" That I know nothing of music, and doubt if I can honest- 
ly say that I am fond of it." . 

" Not fond of music I Impossible ! You slander yourself. 
He who loves not music would have a dull time of it in 
heaven, f But you are English, and perhaps have only heard 
the music of your own country. Bad, very bad . a heretic's 
music ! Now listen." 

Seating herself at the piano, she began an air from the 
Lucia^ crying out to Isaura to come and sing to her ac- 
companiment.\ 

"Do you really wish it?" asked Isaura of Graham, fixing 
on him questioning, timid eyes. 

" I can not say how much I wish to hear you." 

Isaura moved to the instrument, and Graham stood be- 
hind her. Perhaps he felt that he should judge more impar- 
tially of her voic if not subjected to the charm of her face. 

But the first note of the voice held him spell-bound : in 
itself, the organ was of the rarest order, mellow and rich, 
but so soft that its power was lost in its sweetness, and so 
exquisitely fresh in every note. 

But the singer's charm was less in voice than in feeling . 
she conveyed to the listener so much more than was said by 
the words, or even implied by the music. Her song in this 



 



 



1 36 THE . PARISIANS. 

caught the art of the painter who impresses the mind with 
the consciousness of a something which the eye can not de- 
tect on the canvas. 

She seemed to breathe out from the depths of her heart 
the intense pathos of the original romance, so far exceeding 
that of the opera . the human tenderness, the mystic terror 
of a tragic love-tale more solemn in its sweetness than that 
of Verona. 

When her voice died away no applause came . not even a 
murmur. Isaura bashfully turned round to steal a glance at 
her silent listener, and beheld moistened eyes and quivering 
lips. At that moment she was reconciled to her art. Gra- 
ham rose abruptly and walked to the window. 

" Do you doubt now if you are fond of music ?" cried the 
Venosta. 

" This is more than music," answered Graham, still with 
averted face. Then, after a short pause, he approehed 
Isaura, and said, with a melancholy half smile, 

" I do not think, mademoiselle, that I could dare to hear 
you often ; it would .take me too far from the hard, real 
world ; and he who would not be left behindhand on the 
road that he must journey can not indulge frequent excur- 
sions into fairy-land.'- 

" Yet," said Isaura, in a tone yet sadder, " I was told in 
my childhood, by one whose genius gives authority to her 
words, that beside the real world lies the ideal. The real 
world then seemed rough to me. ' Escape,' said my coun- 
selor, 'is granted from that stony thoroughfare into the 
fields beyond its formal hedge-rows. The ideal world has 
its sorrows, but it never admits despair.' That counsel then, 
methought, decided my choice of life. I know not now if 
it has done so." 

"Fate," answered Graham, slowly and thoughtfully . 
" Fate, which is not the ruler but the servant of Providence, 
decides our choice of life, and rarely from outward circum- 
stances. Usually the motive power is within. We apply 
the word genius to the minds of the gifted few ; but in all 
of us there is a genius that is inborn, a pervading something ' 
which distinguishes our very identity, and dictates to the 
conscience that which we are best fitted to do and to be. 
In so dictating it compels our choice of life ; or if we resist 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 137 

the dictate, we find at the close tliat we have gone astray. 
My choice of life thus compelled is on the stony thorough- 
fares . yours in the green fields." 

As he thus said, his face became clouded and mournful. 

The Yenosta, quickly tired of a conversation in which she 
had no part, and having various little household matters to 
attend to, had during this dialogue slipped unobserved from 
the room ; yet neither Isaura nor Graham felt the sudden 
consciousness that they were alone which belongs to lovers. 

" Why," asked Isaura, with that magic smile reflected in 
countless dimples which, even when her words were those 
of a man's reasoning, made them seem gentle with a wom- 
an's sentiment . "why must your road through the world 
be so exclusively the stony one ? It is not from necessity . 
it can not be from taste. And whatever definition you give 
to genius^ surely it is not your own inboni genius that dic- 
tates to you a constant exclusive adherence to the common- 
place of life." 

" Ah, mademoiselle ! do not misrepresent me.'^ I did not 
say that I could not sometimes quit the real world for fairy- 
lanS . ^I said that I could not do so often. My vocation is 
not that of a poet or artist." 

" It is that of an orator, I know," said Isaura, kindling . 
** 60 they tell me, and I believe them. But is not the orator 
somewhat akin to the poet ? Is not oratory an art ?" 

" Let us dismiss the word orator : as applied to English 
public life, it is a very deceptive expression. The English- 
man who wishes to influence his countrymen by force of 
words spoken must mix with them in their beaten thorough- 
fares; must make himself master of their practical views 
and interests; must be conversant with their prosaic occu- 
pations and business; must understand how to adjust their 
loftiest aspirations to their material welfare; must avoid, 
as the fault most dangerous to himself and to others, that 
kind of eloquence which is called oratory in France, and 
which has helped to make the French the worst politicians 
in Europe. Alas, mademoiselle ! I fear that an English states- 
man wonld appear to you a very dull orator." 

" I see that I spoke foolishly . yes, you show me that the * 
world of the statesman lies apart from that of the artist. 
Yet." 



 



 



138 THE PABISIANS. 

"Yet what?" 

" May not the ambition of both be the same ?" 

"How BO?" 

"To refine the rude, to exalt the mean . to identify. their 
own fame with some new beauty, some new glory, added to 
the treasure-house of all." 

Graham bowed his head reverently, and then raised it with 
the flush of enthusiasm on his cheek and brow. 

" Oh, mademoiselle !" he exclaimed, " what a sure guide 
and what a noble inspirer to a true Englishman's ambition 
nature has fitted you to be, were it not . " He paused ab- 
ruptly. 

This outburst took Isaura utterly by surprise. She had 
been accustomed to the language of compliment till it had 
begun to pall, but a compliment of this kind was the first 
that had ever reached her ear. She had no words in answer 
to it ; involuntarily she placed her hand on her heart, as if to 
still its beatings. But the unfinished exclamation, " Were 
it not," troubled her more than the preceding words had 
flattered, and mechanically she murmured, " Were it not . 
what?" 

" Oh," answered Graham*, affecting a tone of gayety, " I 
felt too ashamed of my selfishness as man to finish my sen- 
tence." 

"Do so, or I shall fancy you refrained lest you might 
wound me as woman." 

"Not so . on the contrary ; had I gone on, it would have 
been to say that a woman of your genius, and more especial- 
ly of such mastery in the most popular and fascinating of all 
arts, could not be contented if she inspired nobler thoughts 
in a single breast . she must belong to the public, or rath- 
er the public must belong to her : it is but a corner of her 
heart that an individual can occupy, and even that individ- 
ual must merge his existence in hers . must be contented to 
reflect a ray of the light she sheds on. admiring thousands. 
Who could dare to say to you, * Renounce your career . con- 
fine your genius, your art, to the petty circle of home?' To 
an actress;. a singer . with whose fame the world rings, 
home would be a prison. Pardon me, pardon . " 

Isaura had turned away her face to hide teai-s that would 
force their way, but she held out her hand to him with a 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 139 

child-like frankness, and said, softly, " I am not offended," 
Graham did not trust himself to continue the same strain 
of conversation. Breaking into a new subject, he said, after 
a constrained pause, " Will you think it very impertinent in 
so new an acquaintance if I ask how it is that you, an Ital- 
ian, know our language as a native, and is it by Italian 
teachers that you have been trained to think and to feel ?" 

" Mr. Selby, my second father, was an Englishman, and did 
not speak any other language with comfort to himself. He 
was very fond of me, and had he been really my father I 
could not have loved him more. We were constant com- 
panions till . till I lost him." 

"And no mother left to console you." Isaura shook her 
head mournfully, and the Venosta here re-entered. 

Graham felt conscious that he had already staid too loijg, 
and took leave. 

They knew that they were to meet that evening at the 
Savarins'. 

Graham did not feel unmixed pleasure at that thought: 
the more he knew of Isaura, the more he felt self-reproach 
that he had allowed himself to know her at all. 

But after he had left, Isaura sang low to herself the song 
which had so affected her listener; then she fell into ab- 
stracted reverie, but she felt a strange and new sort of hap- 
piness. In dressing for M. Savarin's dinner, and twining the 
classic ivy wreath into her dark locks, her Italian servant 
exclaimed, " How beautiful the Signorifia looks to-night I" 



CHAPTER m. 

M. Savariit was one of the most brilliant of that gal- 
axy of literary men which shed lustre on the reign of Louis 
Philippe. 

His was an intellect peculiarly French in its lightness and 
grace. Neither England, nor Germany, nor America has 
produced any resemblance to it. Ireland has, in Thomas 
Moore; but then in Irish genius there is so much that is 
French. 

M. Savarin was free from the ostentatious extravagance 
which had come into vogue with the empire. His house 



 



 



140 TliB PABISIANS. 

and establiBhinent were, modestly maintained within the 
limit of an income chiefly, perhaps entirely, derived from lit- 
erary profits. 

Though he gave frequent dinners, it was but to few at a 
time, and without show or pretise. Yet the dinners, 
though simple, were perfect of their kind ; and the host so 
contrived to infuse his own playful gayety into the teinper 
of his guests that the feasts at his house were considered 
the pleasantest at Paris. On this occasion the party ex- 
tended to ten, the largest number his table admitted. 

All the French guests belonged to the Liberal party, 
though in changing tints of the tricolor. Place aux dames, 
first to be named were the Countess de Craon and Madame 
Vertot . both without husbands. The Countess had buried 
thp Count, Madame Vertot had separated from monsieur. 
The Countess was very handsome, but she was sixty. Ma- 
dame Vertot was twenty years younger, but she was very 
plain. She had quarreled with the distinguished author for 
whose sake she had separated from monsieur, and no man 
had since presumed to think that he could console a lady so 
plain for the loss of an author so distinguished. 

Both these ladies were very clever. The Countess had 
written lyrical poems entitled Cries of IMerty, and a drama 
of which Danton was the hero, and the moral too revolution- 
ary for admission to the stage ; but at heart the Countess 
was not at all a revolutionist . the last person in the world 
to do or desire any thing that could bring a washer-woman 
an inch nearer to a countess. She was one of those persons 
who play with fire in order to appear enlightened. 

Madame Vertot was of severer mold. She had knelt at 
the feet of M. Thiers, and went into the historico-political 
line. She had written a remarkable book upon the modern 
Carthage (meaning England), and more recently a work that 
had excited much attention upon the Balance of Power, in 
which she proved it to be the interest of civilization and the 
necessity of Europe that Belgium should be added to France, 
and Prussia circumscribed to the bounds of its original mar- 
gravate. She shows how easily these two objects could have 
been effected by a constitutional monarch instead of an ego- 
tistical emperor. Madame Vertot was a decided Orleanist. 

Both these ladies condescended to put aside authorship in 



 



 



THE PABI6IANS. 141 

general society. Next among our guests let me place the 
Count de Passy and Madame son kpouse. The Count was 
seventy-one, and, it is needless to add, a* type of Frenchman 
rapidly vanishing, and not likely to find itself renewed. How 
shall I describe him so as to make my English reader under- 
stand ? Let me try by analogy. Suppose a man of great 
birth and fortune, who in his youth had been an enthusiastic 
friend of Lord Byron and a jocund companion of George JTV. 
. who had in him an inimense degree of lofty romantic sen- 
timent with an equal degree of well-bred worldly cynicism, 
but who, on account of that admixture, which is rare, kept a 
high rank in either of the two societies into which, speaking 
broadly, civilized life divides itself . the romantic and the 
cynical. The Count de Passy had been the most ardent 
among the young disciples of Chateaubriand . the most brill- 
ilmt, among the young courtiers of Charles X. Need I add 
that he had been a terrible lady-killer? 

But in spite of his admiration of Chateaubriand and his 
allegiance to Charles X., the Count had been always true to 
those caprices of the French noblesse from which he descend- 
ed . capriceis which destroyed them in the old Revolution . 
caprices belonging to the splendid ignorance of their nation 
in general, and their ftrder in particular. Speaking without 
regard to partial exceptions, the French gerUUhomme is es- 
sentially a Parisian ; a Parisian is essentially impressionable 
to the impulse or fashion of the moment. Is it d la mode 
for the moment to be Liberal or anti-Liberal ? Parisians era- 
brace and kiss each other, and swear through life and death 
to adhere forever to the mode of the moment. The Three 
Days were the mode of the mojnent . the Count de Passy 
became an enthusiastic Orleanist. Louis Philippe was very 
gracious to him. He was decorated ; he was named prefet 
of his department ; he was created senator ; he was about to 
be sent minister to a German court when Louis Philippe fell. 
The republic was proclaimed. The Count caught the pop- 
ular contagion, and after exchanging tears and kisses with 
patriots whom a week before he had called canaille^ he swore 
eternal lit^.elity to the republic. The fashion of the moment 
suddenly became Napoleonic, and with the coup diktat the 
republic was metamorphosed into an empire. The Count 
wept on the bosoms of all the Vieilles Moustaches he could 



 



 



142 THB PABISIANS. 

find, and rejoiced that the son of Austerlitz had re-arisen. 
But after the affair of Mexico the sun of Austerlitz waxed 
very sickly. Imperialism was fast going out of fashion. 
The Count transferred his affection to Jules Favre, and 
joined the ranks of the advanced Liberals. During all these 
political changes the Count had remained very much the 
same man in private life . agreeable, good-natured, witty, 
and, above all, a devotee of the fair sex. When he had 
reached the age of sixty-eight he was still fortjl bel homme 
. unmarried, with a grand presence and charming manner. 
At that age he said, "/6 me ran^6,"and married a young lady 
of eighteen. She adored her husband, and was wildly jeal- 
ous of him, while the Count did not seem at all jealous of 
her, and submitted to her adoration with a gentle shrug of 
the shoulders. 

The three other guests who, with Graham and the tw5 
Italian ladies, made up the complement of ten, were the Ger- 
man Count von Rudesheim, whom Vane had met at M. Lou- 
vier's, a celebrated French physician named Bacourt, and a 
young author whom Savarin had admitted into his clique 
and declared to be of rare promise. This author, whose real 
name was Gustave Rameau, but who, to prove, I suppose, 
the sincerity of that scorn for ancestry which he professed, 
published his verses under the patrician designation of Al- 
phonse de Valcour, was about twenty-four, and might have 
passed at the fii*st glance for younger ; but, looking at him 
closely, the signs of old age were already stamped on his 
visage. 

He was undersized, and of a feeble, slender frame. In the 
eyes of women and artists the defects of his frame were re- 
deemed by the extraordinary beauty of the face. His black 
hair, carefully parted in the centre, and worn long and flow- 
ing, contrasted the whiteness of a high though narrow fore- 
head and the delicate pallor of his cheeks. His features were 
very regular, his eyes singularly bright ; but the expression 
of the face spoke of fatigue and exhaustion ; the silky locks 
were already thin, and interspersed with threads of silver ; 
the bright eyes shone out from sunken orbits; the lines 
round the mouth were marked as they are in the middle 
age of one who has lived too fast. 

It was a countenance that might have excited a compas- 



 



 



THB PABISIAKS. 143 

sionate and tender interest but for something arrogant and ; 
supercilious in the expression . something that demanded i 
not tender pity, but enthusiastic admiration. Yet that ex- / 
pression was displeasing rather to men than to women ; and 
one could well conceive that among the latter the enthusi- 
astic admiration it challenged would be largely conceded. *' 

The conversation at dinner was in complete contrast to 
that at the American's the day before. There the talk, f 
though aniiaated, had been chiefly earnest and serious . S 
here it was all touch and go, sally and repartee. The sub- V 
jects were the light on dits and lively anecdotes of the day, 
not free ffom literature and politics, but both treated as mat- 
ters of persiflage^ hovered round with a jest, and quitted with 
an epigram. The two French lady authors, the Count de 
Passy, the physician, and the host far outshone all the other 
guests. Now and then, however, the Geiman count struck 
in with an ironical remark condensing a great deal of grave 
wisdom, and the young author with ruder and more biting 
sarcasm. If the sarcasm told, he showed his triumph by a 
low-pitched laugh ; if it failed, he evinced his displeasure by 
a contemptuous sneer or a grim scowl. 

Isaura and Graham were not seated near each other, and 
were for the most part contented to be listener. 

On adjourning to the salon after dinner Graham, however, 
was approaching the chair in which Isaura had placed her- 
self, when the young author, forestalling him, dropped into 
the seat next to her, and began a conversation in a voice so 
low that it might have passed for a whisper. The English- 
man drew back and observed them. He soon perceived, 
with a pang of jealousy, not unmingled with scorn, that the 
author's talk appeared to interest Isaura. She listened with 
evident attention ; and when she spoke in return, though 
Graham did not hear her words, he could observe on her ex- 
pressive countenance an increased gentleness of aspect. 

"I hope," said the physician, joining Graham, as most of 
the other guests gathered around Savarin, who was in his 
liveliest vein of anecdote and wit. "I hope that the fair 
Italian will not allow that ink-bottle imp to persuade her 
that she has fallen in love with him." 

*' Do young ladies generally find him so seductive ?" asked 
Graham, with a forced smile. 



 



 



144 THE PARISIANS. 

" Probably enough. He has the reputation of being very 
clever and very wicked, and that is a sort of character which 
has the serpent's fascination for the daughters of Eve.'^ 

" Is the reputation merited ?" 

''As to the cleverness I am not a fair judge. I dislike 
that sort of writing which is neither manlike nor womanlike, 
and in which young Rameau excels. He has the knack of 
finding very exaggerated phrases by which to express com- 
monplace thoughts. He writes verses about love in words 
so stormy that you might fancy that Jove was descending 
upon Semele. But when you examine his wordsj as a sober 
pathologist like myself is disposed to do, your fear for the 
peace of households vanishes . they are 'Fba; etprceterea ni- 
hil . no man really in love would use them. He writes prose 
about the wrongs of humanity. You feel for humanity. 
You say, ' Grant the wrongs, now for the remedy,' and you 
find nothing but balderdash. Still I am bound to say that 
both in verse and prose Gustave Rameau is in unison with 
a corrupt taste of the day, and therefore he is coming into 
vogue. So much as to his writings. As to his wickedness, 
you have only to look at him to feel sure that he is not a 
hundredth part so wicked as he wishes to seem. In a word, 
then, Monsieur Gustave Rameau is a type of that somewhat 
numerous class among the youth of Paris which I call 'the 
Lost Tribe of Absinthe.' There is a set of men who begin to 
live full gallop while they are still boys. As a general rule, 
they are originally of the sickly frames which can scarcely 
even trot, much less gallop, without the spur of stimulants, 
and no stimulant so fascinates their peculiar nervous system 
as absinthe. The number of patients in this set who at the 
age of thirty are more wora out than septuagenarians, in- 
creases so rapidly as to make one dread to think what will 
be the next race of Frenchmen. To the predilection for 
absinthe young Rameau and the writers of his set add the 
imitation of Heine, after, indeed, the manner of caricaturists, 
who effect a likeness striking in proportion as it is ugly. It 
is not easy to imitate the pathos and the wit of Heine, but it 
is easy to imitate his defiance of the Deity, his mockery of 
right and wrong, his relentless war on that heroic standard 
. of thought and action which the writers who exalt their na- 
tion intuitively preserve. Rameau can not be a Heine, but 



 



 



 



 






. :>!. ^ . - y - ..-.> ^. \h . \ 



y<s&Mfe; 




ISAUBA, GbaUAH VaME, ANl> GUSTAYE RauEAU. 



 



Google 



^ 



THE PARISIANS. 147 



he can be to Heine what a misshapen, snarling dwarf is to a 
mangled, blaspheming Titan. Yet he interests the women 
iu general, and he evidently interests the fair signorina in 
especial." 

Jast as Bacourt finished that last sentence Isaura lifted the 
head which had hitherto bent in an earnest listening atti- 
tade that seemed to justify the doctor's remarks, and looked 
round. Her eyes met Graham's with the fearless candor 
which made half the charm of their bright yet soft intelli- 
gence. But she dropped them suddenly with a half start 
and a change of color, for the expression of Graham's face 
was unlike that which she had hitherto seen on it . it was 
hard, stem, somewhat disdainful. A minute or so afterward 
she rose, and in passing across the room toward the group 
round the host, paused at a table covered with books and 
prints near to which Graham was standing . alone. The 
doctor had departed in company with the German count. 

Isaura took up one of the prints. 

"Ah!" she exclaimed, "Sorrento . my Sorrento! Have 
you ever visited Sorronto, Mr. Vane ?" . 

Her question and h^r movement were evidently in con- 
ciliation. Was the conciliation prompted by coquetry, or 
by a sentiment more innocent and artless ?" 

Graham doubted, and replied, coldly, as he bent over the 
print, 

" I once staid there a few days, but my recollection of 
it is not sufficiently lively to enable me to recognize its fea- 
tures in this design." 

"That is the house, at least so they say, of Tasso's father; 
of course you vidited that?" 

" Yes, it was a hotel in my time ; I lodged there." 

"And I too. There I first read The Gerusakmme.'' The 
last words were said in Italian, with a low, measured tone, 
inwardly and dreamily. 

A somewhat sharp and incisive voice speaking in French 
here struck in and prevented Graham's rejoinder : " Qudjoli 
dessin I What is it, mademoiselle ?" 

Graham recoiled : the speaker was Gustave Rameau, who 
had, unobserved, first watched Isaura, then rejoined her 
side. 

"A view of Sorrento, monsieur ; but it does not do justice 



 



 



148 THE PARISIANS. 

to the place. I was pointing out the house which belonged 
to Tasso's father." 

"Tasso! HeinI and which is the fair Eleonora's?" 

"Monsieur," answered Isaura, rather startled at that ques- 
tion from a professed homme de lettres, " Eleonora did not 
live at Sorrento." 

^^ Tant pis pour /Sorrew^^," said the Tiomme de lettreSy care- 
lessly. No one would care for Tasso if it were not for Eleo- 
nora." 

" I should rather have thought," said Graham, " that no 
one would have cared for Eleonora if it were not for Tasso." 

Rameau glanced at the Englishman superciliously. 

^^Pardofiy monsieur^ in every age a love-story keeps its in- 
terest ; but who cares nowadays for le clinquatit du Tasse .^" 

."Xe dinquarit du Tasse P^ exclaimed Isaura, indignantly. 

" The expression \& Boileau's, mademoiselle, in ridicule of 
the ^JSot de qualiti,^ who prefers 

*Ze clinquant du Tasse a tout Vor de Virgile,* 

But for my part, I have as little faith in the last as the first." 

" I do not know Latin, and have therefore not read Vir- 
gil," said Isaura. 

" Possibly," remarked Graham, " monsieur does not know 
Italian, and has therefore not read Tasso." 

" If that be meant in sarcasm," retorted Rameau, " I con- 
strue it as a compliment. A Frenchman who is contented 
to study the mastei^pieces of modern literature need learn 
no language and read no authors but his own." 

Isaura laughed her pleasant silvery laugh. " I should ad- 
mire the frankness of that boast, monsieur, if in our talk just 
now you had not spoken as contemptuously of what we are 
accustomed to consider French masterpieces as you have 
done of Virgil and Tasso." 

"Ah, mademoiselle! it is not my fault if you have had 
teachers of taste so rococo as to bid you find masterpieces in 
the tiresome stilted tragedies of Corneille and Racine. Po- 
etry of a court, not of a people . one simple novel, one sim- 
ple stanza that probes the hidden recesses of the human 
heart, reveals the sores of this wretched social state, de- 
nounces the evils of superstition, kingcraft, and priestcraft . 
is worth a library of the rubbish which pedagogues call * the 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 149 

classics.' We agree, at least, in one thing, mademoiselle . 
we both do homage to the genius of your friend, Madame 
de Grantmesnil." 

"Tour friend, signorina!" cried Graham, incredulously; 
" is Madame de Grantmesnil your friend ?" 

" The dear#b I have in the world." 

Graham^s face darkened; he turned away in silence, and . 
in another minute vanished from the room, persuading him- 
self that he felt not one pang of jealousy in leaving Gustave 
Rameau J^y the side of Isaura. " Her dearest friend, Madame 
de Grantmesnil !" he muttered. 

A word now on Isaura's chief correspondent. Madame 
de Grantmesnil was a woman of noble birth and ample for- 
tune. She had separated from her husband in the second 
year after marriage. She was a singularly eloquent writer, 
surpassed among contemporaries of her sex in popularity 
and renown only by George Sand. 

At least as fearless as that great novelist in the frank ex- 
position of her views, she had commenced her career in let- 
ters by a work of astonishing power and pathos, directed 
against the institution of mandate as regulated in Roman 
Catholic communities. I do not know that it said more on 
this delicate subject than the English Milton has said ; but 
then Milton did not write for a Roman Catholic community, 
nor adopt a style likely to captivate the working classes. 
Madame de Grantmesnil's first book was deemed an attack 
on the religion of the country, and captivated those among 
the working classes who had already abjured that religion. 
This work was followed up by others more or less in defiance 
of " received opinions ;" some with political, some with social 
revolutionary aim and tendency, but always with a singular 
purity of style. Search all her books, and however you might 
revolt from her doctrine, you could not find a hazardous ex- 
pressipn. The novels of English young ladies are naughty 
in comparison. Of late years, whatever might be hard or 
audacious in her pqlitical or social doctrines softened itself 
into charm amidst the golden haze of romance. Her writ- 
ings had grown more and more purely artistic . poetizing 
what is good and beautiful in the realities of life rather than 
creating a false ideal out of what is vicious and deformed. 
Such a woman, separated young from her husband, could 



 



 



150 THE PABISIANS. 

not enunciate such opinions and lead a life so independent 
and uncontrolled as Madame de Grantmesnil had done with- 
out scandal, without calumny. Nothing, however, in her 
actual life had ever been so proved against her as to lower 
the high position she occupied in right of birth, fortune, re- 
nown. Wherever she went she was fSt^-fkiS in England 
foreign princes, and in America foreign authors, are fit&s. 
Those who knew her well concurred in praise of her lofty, 
generous, lovable qualities. Madame de Grantmesnil had 
known Mr. Selby ; and when at his death Isaura, in the in- 
nocent age between childhood and youth, had been left the 
most sorrowful and most lonely creature on the face of the 
earth, this famous woman, worshiped by the rich for her in- 
tellect, adored by the poor for her beneficence, came to the 
orphan's Mendless side, breathing love once more into her 
pining heart, and waking for the first time' the desires of 
genius, the aspirations of art, in the dim self-consciousness 
of a soul between sleep and waking. 

But, my dear Englishman, put yourself in Graham's place, 
and suppose that you were beginning to fall in love with a 
girl whom for many good reasons you ought not to marry ; 
suppose that in the same hour in which you were angrily con- 
scious of jealousy on account of a man whom it wounds your 
self-esteem to consider a rival, the girl tells you that her 
dearest friend is a woman who is famed for her hostility to 
the institution of marriage ! 



CHAPTER IV. 

On the same day in which Graham dined with the Sava- 
rins, M. Louvier assembled round his table the Mite of the 
young Parisians who constitute the oligarchy of fashion, to 
meet whom he had invited his new friend the Marquis de 
Rochebriant. Most of them belonged to the Legitimist, 
party . the noblesse of the faubourg; those who did not, be- 
longed to no political party at all . indifferent to the cares 
of mortal states as the gods of Epicurus. Foremost among 
this jeunesse dorie were Alain's kinsmen, Raoul and Enguer- 
rand de Vandemar. To these Louvier introduced him with 
a burly parental bonhomiCy as if he were the head of the 



 



 



THB PABI8IANS. 151 

family. " I need not bid you, young folks, to make friends 
with each other. A Yandemar and a Rochebriant are not 
made friends . they are born 'friends." So saying he turned 
to his other guests. 

Almost in an instant Alain felt his constraint melt away 
in the cordial warmth with which his cousins greeted him. 

These young men had a striking family likeness to each 
other, and yet in feature, coloring, and expression, in all save 
that strange family likeness, they were contrasts. 

Raoul was tall, and though inclined to be slender, with 
sufficient breadth of shoulder to indicate no inconsiderable 
strength of frame. His hair worn short, and his silky beard 
worn long, were dark, so were his eyes, shaded by curved 
drooping eyelashes ; his complexion was pale, but clear and 
healthful. In repose the expression of his face was that of a 
somewhat melancholy indolence, but in speaking it became 
singularly sweet, with a smile of the exquisite urbanity 
which no artificial politeness can bestow : it must emanate 
from that native high breeding which has its source in good- 
ness of heart. 

Enguerrand was fair, with curly locks of golden chestnut. 
He wore no beard, only a small mustache, I'ather darker than 
his hair. His complexion might in itself be called effemi- 
nate, its blopm was so fresh and delicate, but there was so 
much of boldness and energy in the play of his countenance, 
the hardy outline of the lips, and the open breadth of the 
forehead, that " effeminate " was an epithet no one ever as- 
signed to his aspect. He was somewhat under the middle 
height, but beautifully proportioned, carried himself well, 
and somehow or other did not look short even by the side 
gf tall men. Altogether he seemed formed to be a mother's 
darling, and spoiled by women, yet to hold his own among 
men with a strength of will more evident in his look and 
his bearing than it was in those of his graver and statelier 
brother. 

Both were considered by their young co-equals models in 
dress, but in Raoul there was no sign that care or thought 
upon dress had been bestowed ; the simplicity of his cos- 
tume was absolute and severe. On his plain shirt-front 
there gleamed not a stud, on his fingers there sparkled not 
a ring. Enguerrand, on the contrary, was not without pre- 



 



 



152 THE PABISIANS. 

tension in his attire ; Jhe broderie in his shirt-front seemed 
woven by the queen of the fairies. His rings of turquoise 
and opal, his studs and wrist btittons of pearl and brilliants, 
must have cost double the rental of Rochebriant, but proba- 
bly they cost him nothing. He was one of those happy Lo- 
tharios to whom Calistas make constant presents. All about 
him was so bright that the atmosphere around seemed gayer 
for his presence. 

In one respect, at least, the broth^^ closely resembled 
each other . in that exquisite graciousness of manner for 
which the genuine French noble is traditionally renowned 
. a graciousness that did not desert them even when they 
came reluctantly into contact with roturiers or republicans ; 
but the graciousness became kgalM^ fratemitk toward one 
of their caste and kindred. 

" We must do our best to make Paris pleasant to you," 
said Raoul, still retaining in his grasp the hand he had taken. 

^^Vilain cousin^^^ said the livelier Enguerrand, "to have 
been in Paris twenty-four hours, and without letting us 
know." 

"Has not your father told you that I called upon him?" 

" Our father," answered Raoul, " was not so savage as to 
conceal that fact, but he said you were only here on busi- 
ness for a day or two, had declined his invitation, and would 
not give your address. JPauvrep^ef we scolded him well 
for letting you escape from us thus. My mother has not 
forgiven him yet ; we must present you to her to-morrow. 
I answer for your liking her almost as much as she will like 
you." 

Before Alain could answer dinner was announced. 
Alain's place at dinner was between his cousins. How 
pleasant they made themselves ! It was the first time in 
which Alain had been brought into such familiar conversa- 
tion with countrymen of his own rank as well as his own 
age. His heart warmed to them. The general talk of the 
other guests was strange to his ear; it ran much upon 
horses and races, upon the opera and the ballet; it was en- 
livened with satirical anecdotes of persons whose names 
were unknown to the provincial . not a word was said that 
showed the smallest interest in politics or the slightest ac- 
quaintance' with literature. The world of these well-bom 



 



 



TH PARISIANS. 153 

guests seemed one frdm which all that concerned the great 
mass of mankind was excluded, yet the talk was that which 
could only be found in a very polished society ; in it there 
was not n\uch wit, but there was a prevalent vein of gay- 
.ety, and the gayety was never violent, the laughter was 
never loud; the scandals circulated might imply cynicism 
the most absolute, but in language the most refined. The 
Jockey Club of Paris has its perfume. 

Raoul did not mix in the general conversation; he de- 
voted himself pointedly to the amusement of his cousin, 
explaining to him the point of the anecdotes circulated, or 
hitting off in terse sentences the characters of the talkers. 

Enguerrand was evidently of temper more vivacious than 
his brother, and contributed freely to the current play of 
light gossip and mirthful sally. 

Louvier, seated between a duke and a Russian prince, said 
little, except to recommend a wine or an entrke^ but kept his 
'eye constantly on the Vandemars and Alain. 

Immediately after coffee the guests departed. Before 
they did so, however, Raoul introduced his cousin to those 
of the party most distinguished by hereditary rank or social 
position. With these the name of Rocheb riant was too his- 
torically famous not to insure respect of its owner ; they 
welcomed him among them as if he were their brother. 

The French duke claimed him as a connection by an alli- 
ance in the fourteenth century; the Russian prince had 
known the late Marquis, and " trusted that the son would 
allow him to improve into friendship the acquaintance he 
had formed with the father." 

Those ceremonials over, Raoul linked his arm in Alain's, 
and said, "I am not going to release you so soon after we 
have caught you. You must come with me to a house in 
which I, at least, spend an hour or two every evening. I 
am at home there. Bah ! I take no refusal Do not sup- 
pose I carry you off to Bohemia, a country which, I am sor- 
ry to say, Enguerrand now and then visits, but which is to 
me as unknown as the mountains of the moon. The house 
I speak of is comme ilfaut to the utmost. It is that of the 
Contessa di Rimini . a charming Italian by marriage, but 
by birth and in character French . jusqu^au bout des angles. 
My mother adores her." 

 VjOOQIC 



154 THB PABISIA17S. 

That dinner at M. Louviei-'s had already effected a great 
change in the mood and temper of Alain de Rochebriant ; 
he felt, as if by magic, the sense of youth, of rank, of station, 
which had been so suddenly checked and stifled, warmed to 
life within his veins. He should have deemed himself a booik 
had he refused the invitation so frankly tendered. But on 
reaching the c(mp& which the brothers kept in common, and 
seeing it only held two, he drew back. 

" Nay, enter, man cher^'* said .Raoul, divining the cause of 
his hesitation ; " Enguerrand has gone on to his club." 



CHAPTER V. 

" Tell me," said Raoul, when they were in the carriage, 
" how you came to know M. Louvier ?" 

" He is my chief mortgagee." 

"H'm! that explains it. But you might be in worse 
hands ; the man has a character for liberality." 

'' Did your father mention to you my circumstances, and 
the reason that brings me to Paris ?" 

" Since you put the question point-blank, my dear cousin, 
he did." 

"He told you how poor I am, and how keen must be my 
life-long struggle to keep Rochebriant as the home of my 
race." 

"He told us all that could make us still more respect the 
Marquis de Rochebriant, and still more eagerly long to know 
our cousin and the head of our house," answered Raoul, with 
a certain nobleness of tone and manner. 

Alain pressed his kinsman's hand with grateful emotion. 

" Yet," he said, falteringly, " your father agreed with me 
that my circumstances would not allow me to . " 

" Bah !" interrupted Raoul, with a gentle laugh ; " my fa- 
ther is a very clever man, doubtless, but he knows only the 
world of his own day, nothing of the world of ours. I and 
Enguerrand will call on you to-morrow, to take you to my 
mother, and before doing so to consult as to affairs in gen- 
eral. On this last matter Enguerrand is an oracle. Here 
we are at the Contessa's." 



 



 



THB PARISIANS. 155 



CHAPTER YI. 

The Contessa di Rimini received her visitora in a boudoir 
furnished with much apparent simplicity, but a simplicity 
by no means inexpensive. The draperies were but of chintz, 
and the walls covered with the same material, a lively pat- 
tern, in which the prevalent tints were rose-color and white ; 
but the ornaments on the mantel-piece, the china stored in 
the cabinets or arranged in the shelves, the small knick- 
knacks scattered on the tables, were costly rarities of art. 

The Contessa herself was a woman who had somewhat 
passed her thirtieth year, not strikingly handsome, but ex- 
quisitely pretty. "There is," said a great French writer, 
" only one way in which a woman can be handsome, but a 
hundred thousand ways in which she can be pretty ;" and it 
* would be impossible to reckon up the number of ways in 
which Adeline di Rimini carried off the prize in prettiness. 

Yet it would be unjust to the personal attractions of the 
Contessa to class them all under the word "prettiness." 
When regarded more attentively, there was an expression 
in her countenance that mi^ht almost be called divine, it 
spoke so unmistakably of a sweet nature and an untroubled 
soul. An English poet once described her by repeating the 
old lines: 

"Her face is like the Milky Way i' the sky . 
A meeting of gentle lights without a name." 

She was not alone ; an elderly lady sat on an arm-chair by 
the fire engaged in knitting, and a man, also elderly, and 
whose dress proclaimed him an ecclesiastic, sat at the oppo- 
site corner, with a large Angora cat on his lap. 

" I present to you, madame," said Raoul, " my new-found 
cousin, the seventeenth Marquis de Rochebriant, whom I am 
proud to consider, on the male side, the head of our house, 
representing its eldest branch : welcome him for my sake . 
in future he will be welcome for his own." 

The Contessa replied very graciously to this introduction, 
and made room for Alain on the divan from which she had 
risen. 



 



 



156 THE PARISIANS. 

The old lady looked up from her knitting, the ecclesiastic 
removed the cat from his lap. Said the old lady, "I an- 
nounce myself to M. le Marquis; I knew his mother well 
enough to be invited to his christening; otherwise I have 
no pretension to the acquaintance of a cavalier si beau^ be- 
ing old . rather deaf . very stupid^-exceedingly poor . " 

"And," interrupted Raoul, "the woman in all Paris the 
most adored for bont^^ and consulted for savoir vivre by the 
young cavaliei'S whom she deigns to receive. Alain, I pre- 
sent you to Madame de Maury, the widow of a distinguish- 
ed author and academician, and the daughter of the brave 
Henri de Gerval, who fought for the good cause in La Ven- 
dee. I present you also to the Abb6 Vertpr^, who has pass- 
ed his life in the vain endeavor to make other men as good 
as himself." 

"Base flatterer!" said the Abbe, pinching Raoul's ear 
with one hand, while he extended the other to Alain. " Do 
not let your cousin frighten you from knowing me, M. le 
Marquis. When he was my pupil he so convinced me of 
the incorrigibility of perveree human nature that I now 
chiefly address myself to the moral improvement of the 
brute creation. Ask the Contessa if I have not acJhieved a 
beau Sliced with her Angora cat. Three months ago that 
creature had the two worst propensities of man. He was 
at once savage and mean ; he bit, he stole. Does he ever 
bite now ? No. Does he ever steal ? No. Why ? I have 
awakened in that cat the dormant conscience, and that done, 
the conscience regulates his actions: once made aware of 
the difference between wrong and right, the cat maintains 
it unswervingly, as if it were a law of nature. But if, with 
prodigious labor, one does awaken conscience in a human 
sinner, it has no steady. effect on his conduct . he continues 
to sin all the same. Mankind at Paris, Monsieur le Marquis, 
is divided between two classes . one bites and the other 
steals: shun both; devote yourself to cats." 

The Abb6 delivered his oration with a gravity of mien 
and tone which madef it difficult to guess whether he- spoke 
in sport or in earnest . in simple playfulness or in latent sar- 
casm. 

But on the brow and in the eye of the priest there was a 
general expression of quiet benevolence, which made Alain 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 157 

incline to the belief that he was only speaking as a pleasant 
humorist; and the Marquis replied, gay ly, 

"Monsieur I'Abb^, admitting the superior virtue of cats, 
when taught by so intelligent a preceptor, still the business 
of human life is not transacted by cats ; and since men must 
deal with men, permit me, as a preliminary caution, to in- 
quire in which class I.must rank yourself. Do you bite, or 
do you steal ?" 

This sally, which showed that the Marquis was a\^'eady 
shaking off his provincial reserve, met with great success. 

Kaoul and the Contessa laughed merrily; Madame de 
Maury clapped her hands, and cried, ^^Bien .'" 

The Abb6 replied, with unmoved gravity, *VBoth. I am 
a priest ; it is my duty to bite the bad and steal from the 
good, as you will see, M. le Marquis, if you will glance at 
this paper." 

Here he handed to Alain a memorial on behalf of an af- 
flicted family who had been burned out of their home, and 
reduced from comparative ease to absolute want. There 
was a list appended of some twenty subscribers, the last 
being the Contessa, fifty francs, and Madame de Maury, five. 

"Allow me. Marquis," said the Abb6, " to steal from you ; 
bless you twofold, monfiU /" (taking the napoleon Alain ex- 
tended to him) . " first, for your charity ; secondly, for the 
effect -of its example upon the heart of your cousin. Raoul 
de Yandemar, stand and deliver. Bah ! . what ! only ten 
francs." 

Raoul made a sign to the Abb6, unperceived by the rest, 
as he answered, " Abb6, 1 should excel your expectations of 
my career if I always continue worth half as much as my 
cousin." 

Alain felt to the bottom of his heart the delicate tact of 
his richer kinsman in giving less than himself, and the Abbe 
replied, " Niggard, you are pardoned. Humility is a more 
difficult virtue to produce than charity, and in your case an 
instance of it is so rare that it merits encouragement." 

The " tea equipage " was now served in what at Paris is 
called the English fashion; the Contessa presided over it, 
the guests gathered round the table, and the evening passed 
away in the innocent gayety of a domestic circle. The talk, 
if not especially intellectual, was, at least, not fashionable . 



 



 



158 THE PASISIANS. 

books were not discussed, neither were scandals ; yet some- 
how or other it was cheery and animated, like that of a hap- 
py family in a country house. Alain thought still the better 
of Kaoul that, Parisian though he was, he could appreciate 
the charm of an evening so innocently spent. 

On taking leave, the Contessa gave Alain a general invitar 
tion to drop in whenever he was not better engaged. 

" I except only the opera nights," said she. " My husband 
has gone to Milan on his affairs, and during his absence I do 
not go to parties; the opera I can not resist." 

Raoul set Alain down at his lodgings. ^'Au revoir; to- 
morrow at one o'clock expect Enguerrand and myself." 



CHAPTER VII. 

Raoul and Enguerrand called on Alain at the hour fixed. 

"In the first place," said Raoul, "I must beg you to ac- 
cept my mother's regrets that she can not receive you to- 
day. She and the Contessa belong to a society of ladies 
formed for visiting the poor, and this is their day; but to- 
morrow you must dine with us enfamiUe, Now to business. 
Allow me to light my cigar while you confide the whole state 
of affairs to Enguerrand : whatever he counsels I am sure to 
approve." 

Alain, as briefly as he could, stated his circumstances, his 
mortgages, and the hopes which his avouk had encouraged 
him to place in the friendly disposition of M. Louvier. When 
he had concluded, Enguerrand mused for a few moments be- 
fore replying. At last he said, " Will you trust me to call on 
Louvier on your behalf? I shall but inquire if he is inclined 
to take on himself the other mortgages ; and if so, on what 
terms. Our relationship gives me the excuse for my inter- 
ference ; and, to say truth, I have had much familiar inter- 
course with the man. I too am a speculator, and have often 
profited by Louvier's advice. You may ask what can be 
his object in serving me ; he can gain nothing by it. To this 
I answer, the key to his good offices is in his character. Au- 
dacious though he be as a speculator, he is wonderfully pru- 
dent as a politician. This heUe Prance of ours is like a staije 
tumbler ; one can never be sure whether it will stand on its 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 159 

head or its feet. Louvier very wisely wishes to feel himself 
safe, whatever party comes uppermost. He has no faith in 
the duration of the empire ; and as, at all events, the empire 
will not confiscate his millions, he takes no trouble in concil- 
iating Imperialists. But on the principle which induces cer- 
tain savages to worship the devil and neglect the bon Dieu^ 
because the devil is spiteful and the hon Dieu is too benefi- 
cent to injure them, Louvier, at heart detesting as well as 
dreading a republic, lays himself out to secure friends with 
the Republicans of all classes, and pretends to espouse their 
cause. Next to them he is very conciliatory to the Orlean- 
ists. Lastly, though he thinks the Legitimists have no chance, 
he desires to keep well with the nobles of that party, because 
they exercise a considerable influence over that sphere of 
opinion which belongs to fashion ; for fashion is never pow- 
erless in Paris. Raoul and myself are no mean authorities 
in salons and clubs ; and a good word from us is worth hav- 
ing. 

" Besides, Louvier himself in his youth set up for a dandy ; 
and that deposed ruler of dandies, our unfortunate kinsman, 
Victor de Maul^on, shed some of his own radiance on the 
money-lender's son. But when Victor*s star was eclipsed, 
Louvier ceased to gleam. The dandies cut him. In his heai-t 
he exults that the dandies now throng to his soir&es. Bref^ 
the miMonnaire is especially civil to me . the more so as I 
know intimately two or three eminent journalists ; and Lou- 
vier takes pains to plant garrisons in the press. I trust I 
have explained the grounds on which I may be a better 
diplomatist to employ than your avoui; and with your 
leave I will go to Louvier at once." 

" Let him go," said Raoul. " Enguerrand never fails in 
any thing he undertakes, especially," he added, with a smile 
half sad, half tender, " when one wishes to replenish one's 
purse." 

" I, too, gratefully grant such an ambassador all powers to 
treat," said Alain. "I am only ashamed to consign to him 
a post so much beneath his genius," and " his birth " he was 
about to add, but wisely checked himself. Enguerrand said, 
shrugging his shoulders, " You can't do me a greater kind- 
ness than by setting my wits at work. I fall a martyr to 
ennui when I am not in action," he said, and was gone. 



 



 



160 THE PARISIANB. 

" It makes me very melancholy at times," said Raonl, fling- 
ing away the end of his cigar, " to think that a man so clever 
and so energetic as Enguerraud should be as much excluded 
from the service of his country as if he were an Iroquois In- 
dian. He would have made a great diplomatist" 

"Alas!" replied Alain, with a sigh, "I begin to doubt 
whether we Legitimists are justified in maintaining a useless 
loyalty to a sovereign who renders us morally exiles in the 
land of our birth." 

" I have no doubt on the subject," said Raoul. " We are 
not justified on the score of policy, but we have no option at 
present on the score of honor. We should gain so much for 
ouraelves if we adopted the state livery and took the state 
wages that no man would esteem us as patriots ; we should 
only be despised as apostates. So long as Henry V. lives, 
and does not resign his claim, we can not be active citizens ; 
we must be mournful lookers-on. But what matters it? 
We nobles of the old race are becoming rapidly extinct. 
Under any form of government likely to be established in 
France we are equally doomed. The French people, aiming 
at an impossible equality, will never again tolerate a race 
of gentilshommea. They can not prevent, without destroying 
commerce and capital altogether, a quick succession of men 
of the day, who form nominal aristocracies much more op- 
posed to equality than any hereditary class of nobles. But 
they refuse these fleeting substitutes of bom patricians all 
permanent stake in the country, since whatever estate they 
buy must be subdivided at their death. My poor Alain, you 
are making it the one ambition of your life to preserve to 
your posterity the home and lands of your forefathers. How 
is that possible, even supposing you could redeem the mort- 
gages? You marry some day . you have children, and 
Rochebriant must then be sold to pay for their separate por- 
tions. How this condition of things, while rendering us so 
ineffective to perform the nominal functions of a noblesse in 
public life, affects us in private life, may be easily conceived. 

" Condemned to a career of pleasure and frivolity, we can 
scarcely escape from the contagion of extravagant luxury 
which forms the vice of the time. With grand names to 
keep up, and small fortunes whereon to keep them, we read- 
ily incur embarrassment and debt. Then neediness con- 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 161 

quers pride. We can not be great merchants, but we can 
be small gamblers on the Bourse, or, thanks to the Crkdit 
Mobilier^ imitate a cal^inet minister, and keep a shop under 
another name. Perhaps you have heard that Enguerrand and 
I keep a shop. Pray buy your gloves there. Strange fate 
for men whose ancestors fought in the first Crusade . mats 
qtce vaulez votes .^" . 

" I was told of the shop," said Alain, " but the moment I 
knew you I disbelieved the story." 
 " Quite true. Shall I confide to you why we resorted to 
that means of finding ourselves in pocket-n^ney ? My father 
gives us rooms in his hotel ; the use of his table, which we 
do not much profit by ; and an allowance, on which we could 
not live as young men of our class live at Paris. Enguer- 
rand had his means of spending pocket-money, I mine ; but 
it came to the same thing . the pockets were emptied. We 
incurred debts. Two years ago my father straitened him- 
self to pay them, saying, * The next time you come to me 
with debts, however small, you must pay them yourselves, or 
you must marry, and leave it to me to find you wives.' This 
threat appalled us both. A month afterward, Enguerrand 
made a lucky hit at the Bourse, and proposed to invest the 
proceeds in a shop. I resisted as long as I could, but En- 
guerrand triumphed over me, as he always does. He found 
an excellent deputy in a bonne who had nursed us in child- 
hood, and married a journeyman perfumer who understands 
the business. It answers well ; we are not in debt, and wo 
have preserved our freedom." 

After these confessions Raoul went away, and Alain fell 
into a mournful reverie, from which he was roused by a loud 
ring at his bell. He opened the door and beheld M. Louvier. 
The burly financier was much out of breath after making 
so steep an ascent. It was in gasps that he muttered, "^on- 
jour; excuse me if I derange you." Then entering and 
seating himself on a chair, he took some minutes to recover 
speech, rolling his eyes staringly round the meagre, unlux- 
urions room, and then concentrating their gaze upon its oc- 
cupier. 

^'Peste^ my dear Marquis !" he said at last ; " I hope the next 
time I visit you the ascent may be less arduous. One would 
think you were in training to ascend the Himalaya." 



 



 



162 THB PABISIANS. 

The haughty noble wiithed under this jest, and the spirit 
inborn in his order spoke in his answer : 

^* I am accustomed to dwell on heights, M. Louvier ; the 
castle of Rochebriant is not on a level with the town." 

An angry gleam shot from the eyes of the miUionnairey 
but there was no other sign of displeasure in his answer : 

^^JBien dit^ mon dier: how you remind .me of your father ! 
Now give me leave to speak on affairs. I have seen your 
cousin, Enguerrand de Vandemar. Homme de moyens^ though 
joli gar^on. He proposed that you should call on me. I 
said *no' to the c^ petit Enguerrand.a visit from me was 
due to you. To cut matters short, M. Gandrin has allowed 
me to look into your papers. I was disposed to serve you 
from the first . I am still more disposed to serve you now. 
I undertake to pay off all your other mortgages, and become 
sole mortgagee, and on terms that I have jotted down on 
this paper, and which I hope will content you." . 

He placed a paper in Alain's hand, and took out a box, 
from which he extracted a jujube, placed it in his mouth, 
folded his hands, and reclined back in his chair, with his 
eyes half closed, as if exhausted alike by his ascent and his 
generosity. 

In effect, the terms were unexpectedly liberal. The re- 
duced interest on the mortgages would leave the Marquis 
an income of 1000 a year instead of 400. Louvier pro- 
posed to take on himself the legal cost of transfer, and to 
pay to the Marquis 25,000 francs, on the completion of the 
deed, as a bonus. The mortgage did not exempt the build- 
ing-land, as Hebert desired. In all else it was singularly 
advantageous, and Alain could but feel a thrill of grateful 
delight at an offer by which his stinted income was raised 
to comparative affluence, 

" Well, Marquis," said Louvier, " what does the castle say 
to the town ?" 

" M. Louvier," answered Alain, extending his hand with 
cordial eagerness, " accept my sincere apologies for the in- 
discretion of my metaphor. Poverty is proverbially sensi- 
tive to jests on it. I owe it to you if I can not hereafter 
make that excuse for any words of mine that may displease 
you. The terms you propose are most liberal, and I close 
with them at once." 



 



 



THB PAJRISIAIfS. 163 

^^Bon^^ said Louvier, shaking vehemently the hand offer- 
ed to him ; " I will take the paper to Gandrin, and instruct 
him accordingly. And now/ may I attach a condition to 
the agreement which is not put down on paper? It may 
have surprised you, perhaps, that I should propose a gratuity 
of 25,000 francs on completion of the contract. It is a droll 
thing to do, and not in the ordinary way of business ; there- 
fore I must explain. Marquis, pardon the liberty I take, 
but you have inspired me with an interest in your future. 
With your birth, connections, and figure, you should push 
your way in the world far and fast. But you can't do so in 
a province. You must find your opening at Paris. I wish 
you to spend a year in the capital, and live, not extrava- 
gantly, like a nouveau riche^ but in a way not unsuited to 
your rank, and permitting you all the social advantages 
that belong to it. These 25,000 francs, in addition to your 
improved income, will enable you to gratify my wish in this 
respect. Spend the money in Paris : you will want every 
sou of it in the course of the year. It will be money well 
spent. Take my advice, cher Marquis, Au plauir,^^ 

The financier bowed himself out. The young Marquis 
forgot all the mournful reflections with which Raoul's con- 
versation had inspired him. He gave a new touch to his 
toilet, and sallied forth with the air of a man on whose 
morning of life a sun heretofore clouded has burst forth and 
bathed the landscape in its light. 



CHAPTER VIIL 



SiNCB the evening spent at the Savarins', Graham had 
seen no more of Isaura. He had avoided all chance of see- 
ing her ; in fact, the jealousy with which he had viewed her 
manner toward Rameau, and the angry amaze with which 
he had heard her proclaim her friendship for Madame de 
Grantmesnil, served to strengthen the grave and secret rea- 
sons which made him desire to keep his heart yet free and 
his hand yet unpledged. But, alas ! the heart was enslaved 
already. It was under the most fatal of all spells . first love 
conceived at first sight. He was wretched; and in his 
wretchedness his resolves became involuntarily weakened. 



 



 



164 THS PABISIAKS. 

He found himself making excuses for the beloved. What 
cause had he, after all, for that jealousy of the young poet 
which had so offended him ? and if, in her youth and inex- 
peiience, Isaura had made her dearest friend of a great 
writer by whose genius she might be dazzled,* and of whose 
opinions she might scarcely be aware, was it a crime that 
necessitated her eternal banishment from the reverence 
which belongs to all manly love? Certainly he found no 
satisfactory answers to such self- questionings. And then 
those grave reasons known only to himself, and never to be 
confided to another . why he should yet reserve his hand 
unpledged . were not so imperative as to admit of no com- 
promise. They might entail a sacrifice, and not a small one 
to a man of Graham's views and ambition. But what is love 
if it can think any sacrifice short of duty and honor too 
great to offer up unknown, uncomprehended, to the one be- 
loved? Still, while thus softened in his feelings toward 
Isaura, he became, perhaps in consequence of such softening, 
more and more restlessly impatient to fulfill the object for 
which he had come to Paris, the great step toward which 
was the discovery of the un discoverable Louise Duval. 

He had written more than once to M. Renard since the 
interview with that functionary already recorded, demand- 
ing whether Renard had not made some progress in the re- 
search on which he was employed, and had received short 
unsatisfactory replies preaching patience and implying hope. 

The plain truth, however, was, that M. Renard had taken 
no further pains in the matter. He considered it utter 
waste of time and thought to attempt a discovery to which 
the traces were so faint and so obsolete. If the discovery 
were effected, it must be by one of those chances which oc- 
cur without labor or forethought of our own. He trusted 
only to such a chance in continuing the charge he had un- 
dertaken. But during the last day or two Graham had be- 
come yet more impatient than before, and peremptorily re- 
quested another visit from this dilatory confidant. 

In that visit, finding himself pressed hard, and though 
naturally willing, if possible, to retain a client unusually 
generous, yet being, on the whole, an honest member of his 
profession, and feeling it to be somewhat unfair to accept 
large remuneration for doing nothing, M. Renard said frank- 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 165 

ly, "Monsieur, this affair is beyond me; the keenest agent 
of onr police could make nothing of it. Unless you can tell 
me more than you have done, I am utterly without a clue. 
I resign, therefore, the task with which you honored me, 
willing to restime it again if you can give me information 
that could render me of use." 

" What sort of information ?" 

"At least the names of some of the lady's relations who 
may yet be living." 

" But it strikes me that, if I could get at that piece of 
knowledge, I should not require the services of the police. 
The relations would tell me what had become of Louise 
Duval quite as readily as they would tell a police agent." 

" Quite true, monsieur. It would really be picking your 
pockets if I did not at once retire from your service. Nay, 
monsieur, pardon me . no further payments ; I have already 
accepted too much. Your most obedient servant." 

Graham, left alone, fell into a very gloomy reverie. He 
could not but be sensible of the difficulties in the way of the 
object which had brought him to Paris, with somewhat san- 
guine expectations of success, founded on a belief in the om- 
niscience of the Parisian police, which is only to be justified ' 
when they have to deal with a murderess or a political in- 
cendiary. But the name of Louise Duval is about as com- 
mon in France as that of Mary Smith in England ; and the 
Engli^ reader may judge what would be the likely result 
of inquiring through the ablest of our detectives after some 
Mary Smith of whom you could give little more information 
than that she was the daughter of a drawing-master who had 
died twenty years ago, that it was about fifteen years since 
 any thing had been heard of her, that you could not say if, 
through marriage or for other causes, she had changed her 
name or not, and you had reasons for declining resort to pub- 
lic advertisements. In the course of inquiry so instituted, 
the probability would be that you might hear of a great 
many Mary Smiths, in the pursuit of whom your employ^ 
would lose all sight and scent of the one Mary. Smith for 
whom the chase was instituted. 

In the midst of Graham's despairing reflections his laqicais 
announced M. Frederic Lemercier. 

" Cher Grarm-Varn. A thousand pardons if I disturb you 



 



 



166 THE PARISIANS. 

at this late hour of the evening ; but you remember the re- 
quest you made me when you first arrived in Paris this sea- 
son?" 

" Of course I do . ^in case you should ever chance in your 
wide round of acquaintance to fall in with u Madame or 
Mademoiselle Duval of about the age of forty, or a year or 
so less, to let me know ; and you did fall in with two ladies 
of that name, but they were not the right one . not the per- 
son whom my friend begged me to discover . ^both much too 
young." 

"^A Men^ mon cher. If you will come with me to the bcU 
champStre in the Champs Mys6es to-night, I can show yon 
a third Madame Duval : her Christian name is Louise, too, 
of the age you mention . though she does her best to look 
younger, and is still very handsome. You said your Duval 
was handsome. It was only last evening that I met this lady 
at a soir&e given by Mademoiselle Julie Caumartin, coryphbe 
distingic^, in love with young Rameau." 

" In love with young Rameau ? I am very glad to hear 
it. He returns the love ?" 

" I suppose so. He seems very proud of it. But apropos 
of Madame Duval, she has been long absent from Paris . jnst 
returned . and looking out for conquests. She says she has 
a great penchant for the English ; promises me to be at this 
ball. Come." 

" Hearty thanks, my dear Lemercier. I am at your 
service." 



CHAPTER IX. 

The bal ehampUre was gay and brilliant, as such festal 
scenes are at Paris. A lovely night in the midst of May . 
lamps below and stars above : the society mixed, of course. 
Evidently, when Graham has singled out Frederic Lemercier 
from all his acquaintances at Paris, to conjoin with the offi- 
cial aid of M. Renard in search of the mysterious lad ^^ l fe 
had conjeqtured the probability that she might be found-in 
the Bohemian world so familiar to Frederic . if not as an 
inhabitant, at least as an explorer. Bohemia was largely 
represented at the Ixd champ%t/re^ but not without a fair 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 167 

sprinkling of what we call the "respectable classes," espe- 
cially English and Americans, who brought their wives there 
to take care of them. Frenchmen, not needing such care, 
prudently left their wives at home. Among the French- 
men of station were the Comte de Passy and the Vicomte 
de Br6z6. 

On first entering the gardens, Graham's eye was attracted 
and dazzled by a brilliant form. It was standing under a 
festoon of flowers extended from tree to tree, and a gas jet 
opposite shone full upon the face . the face of a girl in all 
the fi'eshness of youth. If the freshness owed any thing to 
art, the -art was so well disguised that it seemed nature. 
The beauty of the countenance was Hebe-like, joyous, and 
radiant, and yet one could not look at the girl without a 
sentiment of deep mournfulness. She was surrounded by a 
group of young men, and the ring of her laugh jarred upon 
Graham's ear. He pressed Frederic's arm, and, directing his 
attention to the girl, asked who she was. 

" Who ? Don't you know ? That is Julie Caumartin. A 
little while ago her equipage was the most admired in the 
Bois, and great ladies condescended to copy her dress or her 
coiffure. But she has lost her splendor, and dismissed the 
rich admirer who supplied the fuel for its blaze, since she 
fell in love with Gustave Rameau. Doubtless she is expect- 
ing him to-night. You ought to know her : shall I present 
you?" 

" Ko," answered Graham, with a compassionate expression 
in his manly face. " So young ; seemingly so gay. How I 
pity her !" 

"What! for throwing herself away on Rameau? True. 
There is a great deal of good in that girl's nature, if she had 
been properly trained. Rameau wrote a pretty poem on her, 
which turned her head and won her heart, in which she is 
styled the * Ondine of Paris ' . a nymph-like type of Paris 
itself." 

" Vanishing type, like her namesake ; bom of the spray, 
nil vanishing soon into the deep," said Graham. " Pray go 
and look for the Duval : you will find me seated yonder." 

Graham passed into a retired alley, and threw himself on 
a solitary bench, while Lemercier went in search of Madame 
Duval. In a few minutes the Frenchman re-appeared. By 



 



 



168 THE PARISIANS. 

his side was a lady well dressed, and as she passed under the 
lamps Graham perceived that, though of a certaiti age, she 
was undeniably handsome. His heart beat more quickly. 
Surely this was the Louise Duval he sought. 

He rose from his seat, and was presented in due form to 
the lady, with whom Frederic then discreetly left him. 

" Monsieur Lemercier tells me that you think that we were 
once acquainted with each other." 

" Nay, madame ; I should not fail to recognize you were 
that the case. A friend of mine had the honor of knowing 
a lady of your name; and should I be fortunate enough to 
meet that lady, I am charged with a commission that may 
not be unwelcome to her. M. Lemercier tells* me your nom 
de baptime is Louise." 

" Louise Corinne, monsieur." 

"And I presume that Duval is the name you take from 
your parents." 

" No ; my father's name was Bernard. I married, when 
I was a mere child, M. Duvalj in the wine trade at Bor- 
deaux. 

"Ah, indeed !" said Graham, much disappointed, but look- 
ing at her with a keen, searching eye, which she met with a 
decided frankness. Evidently, in his judgment, she was 
speaking the truth. 

" You know English, I think, madame," he resumed, ad- 
dressing her in that language. 

"A leetle . speak unpeu.^^ 

"Only a little?" 

Madame Duval looked puzzled, and replied in French, with 
a laugh, "Is it that you were told that I spoke English by 
your countryman. Milord Sare Boulby? I^etit scelirat^ I 
hope he is well. He sends you a commission for me . so he 
ought : he behaved to me like a monster." 

"Alas ! I know nothing of Milord Sir Boulby. Were you 
never in England yourself?" 

" Never " . with a coquettish side-glance . " I should like 
so much to go. I have a foible for the English in spite of 
that vUain petit Boulby. Who is it gave you the commis- 
sion for me ? Ha ! I guess . le Capitaine Nelton." 

" No. What year, madame, if not impertinent, were you 
at.Aix-la-Chapelle?" 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 169 

" You mean Baden ? I was there seven years ago, when 
I met le Capitaine Neltou . bd homme aux cheveux rouges.^'* 

" But you have been at Aix ?" 

"Never." 

" I have, then, been mistaken, madame, and have only to 
offer my most humble apologies." 

" But perhaps you will favor me with a visit, and we may 
on further conversation find that you are not mistaken. 1 
can't stay now, for I am engaged to dance with the Belgian, 
of whom, no doubt, M. Lemercier has told you." 

" No, madame, he has not." 

" Well, then, he will tell you. The Belgian is very jeal- 
ous. But I am always at home between three and four. 
This is my card." 

Graham eagerly took the card, and exclaimed, " Is this 
your own handwriting, madame ?" 

"Yes, indeed." 

"2V^ helle fon'i^wrg," said Graham, and receded with a cer- 
emonious bow. "Any thing so unlike her handwriting. An- 
other disappointment," muttered the Englishman, as the lady 
went back to the ball. 

A few minutes later Graham joined Lemercier, who was 
talking with De Passy and De Br6z4 

" Well," said Lemercier, when his eye rested on Graham, 
" I hit the right nail on the head this time, eh ?" 

Graham shook his head. 

"What 1 Is she not the right Louise Duval ?" 

"Certainly not." 

The Count de Passy overheard the name, and turned. 
" Louise Duval," he said ; " does Monsieur Vane know a 
Louise Duval ?" 

"No; but a friend asked me to inquire after a lady of 
that name whom he had met many years ago at Paris." 

The Count mused a moment, and said, " Is it possible that 
your friend knew the family of De Maul^on?" 

" I really can't say. What then ?" 

" The old Vicomte de Maul^on was one of my most inti- 
mate associates. In fact, our houses are connected. And 
he was extremely grieved, poor man, when his daughter 
Louise married her drawing-master, Auguste Duval." 

" Her drawing-master, Auguste Duval ? Pray say on. I 



!.. 8 n:.t..HKyGOOgk 



 > 



170 THE PABISIANS. 

think the Louise Duval my friend knew must have been her 
daughter. She was the only child of a drawing-master or 
artist named Auguste Duval, and probably enough her Chris- 
tian name would have been derived from her mother. A 
Mademoiselle de Maul6on, then, married M. Auguste Duval ?" 

" Yes ; the old Vicomte had espoused en premises nocea 
Mademoiselle Oamille de Chavigny, a lady of birth equal to 
his own . had by her one daughter, Louise. I recollect her 
well . a plain girl, with a high nose and a sour expression. 
She was just of age when the first Vicomtess died, and by 
the martiage settlement she succeeded at once to her moth- 
er's fortune, which was not large. The Vicomte, was, how- 
ever, so poor that the loss of that income was no trifle to 
him.. Though much past fifty, he was still very handsome. 
Men of that generation did not age soon, monsieur," said the 
Count, expanding his fine chest and laughing exultingly. 

" He married, en secondea noces, a lady of still higher birth 
than the first, and with a much larger dot, Louise was in- 
dignant at this, hated her stepmother ; and when a son was 
bom by the second marriage she left the paternal roof, went 
to reside with an old female relative near the Luxembourg, 
and there married this drawing-master. Her father and the 
family did all they could to prevent it; but in these demo- 
cratic days a woman who has attained her majority can, if 
she persist in her determination, marry to please herself, and 
disgrace her ancestors. After that miaaUiance her father 
never would see her again. I tried in vain to soften him. 
All his parental affections settled on his handsome "Victor. 
Ah ! you are too young to have known Victor de Manleon 
during his short reign at Paris . as roi dea viveuraJ*^ 

" Yes, he was before my time ; but I have heard of him as 
a young man of great fashion . said to be very clever, a duel- 
ist, and a sort of Don Juan." 

"Exactly." 

"And then I remember vaguely to have heard that he 
committed, or was said to have committed, some villainous 
action connected with a great lady's jewels, and to have 
left Paris in consequence." 

" Ah, yes . a sad scrape. At that time there was a politt 
ic'al crisis; we were under a Republic; any thing against a 
noble was believed. But I am sure Victor de Maulion was 



 



 



 VjOOQIC 




. . Thk 'Ondinb' of Paris. bhk had jubt pound Gubtavk Ramkait; amd was cling- 
ing TO HIS ABM WITH A LOOK OF UAPPINKS8 IN HB FAOK, FRANK AND INNOOBNT AS A 
0JUIJ)'8." 



 



 



THE PAKISIANS. 173 

not the man to commit a larceny. However, it is quite true 
that he left Paris, and I don't know what has become of him 
since." Here he touched De Br6z6, who, though still near, 
had not been listening to this conversation, but interchang- 
ing jest and laughter with Lemercier on the motley scene 
of the dance. 

"De Br^ze, have you ever heard what became of poor 
dear Victor de Mauleon ? You knew him." 

"Knew him? I should think so. Who could be in the 
great world and not know le beau Victor? No; after he 
vanished I never heard more of him. doubtless long since 
dead. A good-hearted fellow in spite of alF his sins." 

" My dear M. de Br4z6, did you know his half-sister ?" ask- 
ed Graham . " a Madame Duval ?" 

" No ; I never heard he had a half-sister. Halt there : I 
recollect that I met Victor once, in the garden at Versailles, 
walking arm in arm with the most beautiful girl I ever saw ; 
and when I complimented him afterward at the Jockey Club 
on his nw conquest, he replied, very gravely, that the young 
lady was, his niece. 'Niece!' said I; *why, there can't be 
more than five or six years between you.' * About that, I 
suppose,' said he ; ' my half-sister, her mother, was more 
than twenty years older than I at the time of my birth.' I 
doubted the truth of his story at the time; but since you 
say he really had a sister, my doubt wronged him." 

" Have you never seen that same young lady since ?" 

"Never." 

" How many years ago was this ?" 

"Let me see . about twenty or twenty-one years ago. 
How time flies !" 

Graham still continued to question, but could leara no 
further particulars. He turned to quit the gardens just as 
the band was striking up for a fresh dance, a wild German 
waltz air, and mingled with that German music his ear 
caught the sprightly sounds of the French laugh, one laugh 
distinguished from the rest by a more genuine ring of light- 
hearted joy . ^the laugh that he had heard on entering the 
gardens, and the sound of which had then saddened him. 
Looking toward the quarter from which it came, he again 
saw the " Ondine of Paris." She was not now the centre 
of a group. She had just found Gustave Rameau; and was 



 



 



174 . THB PABI8IANS. 

clinging to his arm with a look of happiness in her face, 
frank and innocent as a child's. And so they passed amidst 
the dancers down a solitary lamp-lit alley, till lost to the 
Englishman's lingering gaze. 



CHAPTER X. 

The next morning Graham sent again for M. Renard. 

" Well," he cried, when that dignitary appeared and took 
a seat heside him, " chance has favored me." 

"I always counted on chance, monsienr. Chance has 
more wit in its little finger than the Paris police in its whole 
body." 

" I have ascertained the relations, on the mother's side, 
of Louise Duva], and the only question is how to get at 
them." 

Here Graham related what he had heard, and ehded by 
saying, "This Victor de Maul6on is therefore my Louise 
Duval's uncle. He was, no doubt, taking charge of her in 
the year that the persons interested in her discovery lost 
sight of her in Paris ; and surely he must know what be- 
came of her afterward." 

" Very probably ; and chance may befriend us yet in the 
discovery of Victor de Maul^on. You seem not to know 
the particulars of that story about the jewels which brought 
him into some connection with the police, and resulted in 
his disappearance from Paris." 

" No ; tell me the particulars." 

" Victor de Maul^on was heir to some 60,000 or 70,000 
francs a year, chiefly on the mother's side ; for his father, 
though the representative of one of the most ancient houses 
in Normandy, was very poor, having little of his own ex- 
cept the emoluments of an appointment in the court of 
Louis Philippe. 

"But before, by the death of his parents, Victor came 
into that inheritance, he very largely forestalled it. His 
tastes were magnificent. He took to * sport ' . kept a famous 
stud, was a great favorite with the English, and spoke their 
language fluently. Indeed, he was considered very accom- 



 



 



THE PABISIANB. 175 

plished, and of considerable intellectual powers. It was 
generally said that some day or other, when he had sown 
his wild oats, he would, if he took to politics, be an eminent 
man. Altogether he was a very strong creature. That was 
a very strong age under Louis Philippe. The viveurs of 
Paris were fine types for the heroes of Dumas and Sue . full 
of animal life and spirits. Victor de Maul^on was a romance 
of Dumas . ^incarnated." 

" M. Renard, forgive me that I did not before do justice 
to your taste in polite literature." 

" Monsieur, a man in my profession does not attain even 
to my humble eminence if he be not something else than 
a professional. He must study mankind wherever they are 
described . even in les romans. To return to Victor de 
Maul6on. Though he was a ' sportman,' a gambler, a Don 
Juan, a duelist, nothing was ever said against his honor. 
On the contrary, on matters of honor he was a received 
oracle ; and even though he had fought several duels (that 
was the age of duels), and was reported without a superior, 
almost without an equal, in either weapon . the sword or 
the pistol . he is said never to have wantonly provoked an 
encounter, and to have so used his skill that he contrived 
never to slay, nor even gravely to wound, an antagonist. 

" I remember one instance of his generosity in this respect, 
for it was much talked of at the time. One of your country- 
men, who had never handled a fencing-foil nor fired a pistol, 
took offense at something M. de Maul6on had said in dis- 
paragement of the Duke of Wellington, and called him out. 
Victor de Maul^on accepted the challenge, discharged his 
pistol, not in the air . that might have been an affront . but 
so as to be wide of the mark, walked up to the lines to be 
shot at, and, when missed, said, ^ Excuse the susceptibility 
of a iFrenchman, loath to believe that his countrymen can 
be beaten save by accident, and accept every apology one 
gentleman can make to another for having forgotten the re- 
spect due to one of the most renowned of your national 
heroes.' The Englishman's name was Vane. Could it have 
been your father?" 

** Very probably ; just like my father to call out any man 
who insulted the honor of his country, as represented by its 
men. I hope the two combatants became friends ?" 

 VjOOQIC 



176 THE PABISIANS. 

" That I Dever heard ; the duel was over . there my story- 
ends." 

"Pray go op." 

" One day . it was in the midst of political events which 
would have silenced most subjects of private gossip . the 
beau monde was startled by the news that the Yicomte (he 
was then, by his father's death, Yicomte) de Maul6on had 
been given into the custody of the police on the charge of 

stealing the jewels of the Duchesse de (the wife of a 

distinguished foreigner). It seems that, some days before 
this event, the Due, wishing to make madame his spouse an 
agreeable surprise, had resolved to have a diamond necklace 
belonging to her, and which was of setting so old-fashioned 
that she had not lately worn it, reset for her birthday. He 
therefore secretly possessed himself of the key to an iron 
safe in a cabinet adjoining her dressing-room (in which safe 
her more valuable jewels were kept), and took from it the 
necklace. Imagine his dismay when the jeweler in the Rue 
Vivienne to whom he canied it recognized the pretended 
diamonds as imitation paste which he himself had some days 
previously inserted into an empty setting brought to him 
by a monsieur with whose name he was unacquainted. The 
Duchesse was at that time in delicate health; and as the 
Due's suspicions naturally fell on the servants, especially 
on the femme de chambre^ who was in great favor with his 
wife, he did not like to alarm madame, nor through hereto 
put the servants on* their guard. He resolved, therefore, to 
place the matter in the hands of the famous * * *, who was 
then the pride and ornament of the Parisian police. And 
the very night afterward the Vicorate de Mauleon was 
caught and apprehended in the cabinet where the jewels 
were kept, and to which he had got access by a false key, 
or at least a duplicate key, found in his possession. I should 
observe that M. de Mauleon occupied the entresol in the 
same hotel in which the upper rooms were devoted to the 
Due and Duchesse and tbeir suite. As soon as this charge 
against the Yicomte was made known (and it was known 
the next morning), the extent of his debts and the uttemess 
of his ruin (before scarcely conjectured or wholly unheeded) 
became public through the medium of the journals, and 
furnished an obvious motive for the crime of which he was 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 177 

accased. We Parisians, monsieur, are subject to the most 
startling reactions of feeling. The men we adore one day 
we execrate the next. The Vicomte passed at once from 
the popular admiration one bestows on a hero, to the pop- 
ular contempt with which one regards a petty larcener. 
Society wondered how it had ever condescended to receive 
into its bosom the gambler, the duelist, the Don Juan. 
However, one compensation in the way of amusement he 
might still afford to society for the grave injuries he had 
done it. Society would attend his trial, witness his de- 
meanor at the bar, and watch the expression of his face 
when he was sentenced to the galleys. But, monsieur, this 
wretch completed the measure of his iniquities. He was 
not tried at all. The Due and Duchesse quitted Paris for 
Spain, and the Due instructed his lawyer to withdraw his 
charge, stating his conviction of the Vicomte's complete 
innocence of any other offense than that which he himself 
had confessed." 

"What did the Vicomte confess? you omitted to state 
that." 

" The Vicomte, when apprehended, confessed that, smitten 
by an insane passion for the Duchesse, which she had, on his 
presuming to declare it, met with indignant scorn, he had 
taken advantage of his lodgment in the same house to ad- 
mit himself into the cabinet adjoining her dressing-room by 
means of a key. which he had procured, made from an im- 
pression of the key-hole taken in wax. 

" No evidence in support of any other charge against the 
Vicomte was forth-coming . nothing, in short, beyond the in- 
fraction du domicile caused by the madness of youthful love, 
and for which there was no prosecution. The law, therefore, 
could have little to say against him. But society was more 
rigid ; and, exceedingly angry to find that a man who had 
been so conspicuous for luxury should prove to be a pauper, 
insisted on believing that M. de Maul4on was guilty of the 
meaner, though not perhaps, in the eyes of husbands and 
fathers, the more heinous, of the two offenses. I presume 
that the Vicomte felt that he had got into a dilemma from 
which no pistol-shot or sword-thrust could free him, for he 
left Paris abruptly, and has not since re-appeared. The 
sale of his stud and effects sufficed, I believe, to pay his 

s* 

 VjOOQIC 



178 THE PARISIANS. 

debts, for I will do him the jastice to say that they were 
paid." 

"But though the Yicomte de Maul6on has disappeared, 
he must have left relations at Paris, who would, perhaps, 
know what has become of him and of his niece." 

" I doubt it. He had no very near relations. The near- 
est was an old cUibataire of the same name, from whom he 
had some expectations, but who died shortly after this esdan- 
dre^ and did not name the Vicomte in his will M. Victor 
had numerous connections among the highest families . the 
Rochebriants, Chavignys, Vandemars, Passys, Beauvilliers. 
But they are not likely to have retained any connection with 
a ruined vaurieuy and still less with a niece of his who was 
the child of a drawing-master. But now you have given me 
a clue, I will try to follow it up. We must find the Vicomte, 
and I am not without hope of doing so. Pardon me if I de- 
cline to say more at present. I would not raise false expec- 
tations. But in a week or two I will have the honor to call 
again upon monsieur." 

" Wait one instant. You have really a hope of discovering 
M. de Maul6on f ' 

" Yes. I can not say more at present." 

M. Renard departed. 

Still that hope, however faint it might prove, served to re- 
animate Graham ; and with that hope his heart, as if a load 
had been lifted from its mainspring, returned instinctively 
to the thought of Isaura. Whatever seemed to promise an 
early discharge of the commission connected with the dis- 
covery of Louise Duval seemed to bring Isaura nearer to 
him, or at least to excuse his yearning desire to see more of 
her . to understand her better. Faded into thin air was the 
vague jealousy of Gustave Rameau which he had so unrea- 
sonably conceived ; he felt as if it were impossible that the 
man whom the ' Ondine of Paris ' claimed as her lover could 
dare to woo or hope to win an Isaura. He even forgot the 
friendship with the eloquent denouncer of the marriage bond, 
which a little while ago had seemed to him an unpardonable 
offense : he remembered only the lovely face, so innocent, yet 
so intelligent; only the sweet voice which had for the first 
time breathed music into his own soul ; only the gentle hand 
whose touch had for the first time sent through his veins the 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 179 

thrill which distinguishes from all her sex the woman whom 
we love. He went forth elated and joyous, and took his way 
to Isaura's villa. ^ As he went, the leaves on the trees under 
which he passed seemed stirred by the soft May breeze in 
sympathy with his own delight. Perhaps it was rather the 
reverse : his own silent delight sympathized with all delight 
in awakening nature. The lover seeking reconciliation with 
the loved one from whom some trifle has unreasonably es- 
tranged him, in a cloudless day of May . if he be not happy 
enough to feel a brotherhood in all things happy . a leaf in 
bloom, a bird in song^then indeed he may call himself lov- 
er, but he does not know what is love. 



 



 



ISO THE PABISIANS. 



BOOK FOURTH. 

CHAPTER I. 

FBOM ISAUBA CICOGNA TO MADAME DE GBANTMESKIL. 

" It is many days since I wrote to you, and but for your 
delightful note just received, reproaching me for silence, I 
should still be under the spell of that awe which certain 
words of M. Savarin were well fitted to produce. Chancing 
to ask him if he had written to you lately, he said, with that 
laugh of his, good-hnmoredly ironical, ' No, mademoiselle, I 
am not one of the Mtcheux whom Moli^re has immortalized. 
If the meeting of lovers should be sacred from the intrusion 
of a third person, however amiable, more sacred still should 
be the parting between an author and his work. Madame 
de Grantmesnil is in that moment so solemn to a genius 
earnest as hers . she is bidding farewell to a companion 
with whom, once dismissed into the world, she can never 
converse familiarly again ; it ceases to be her companion 
when it becomes ours. Do not let us disturb the last hours 
they will pass together.' 

" These words struck me much. I suppose there is truth 
in them. I can comprehend that a work which has long been 
all in all to its author, concentrating his thoughts, gather- 
ing round it the hopes and fears of his inmost heart, dies, 
as it were, to him when he has completed its life for others, 
and launched it into a world estranged from the solitude in 
which it was born and formed. I can almost conceive that, 
to a writer like you, the very fame which attends the work 
thus sent forth chills your own love for it. The characters 
you created in a fairy-land, known but to yourself, must lose 
something of their mysterious charm when you hear them 
discussed and caviled at, blamed or praised, as if they were 
really the creatures of streets and salons. 

** I wonder if hostile criticism pains or enrages you as it 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 181 

seems to do such other authors as I have known. M. Sava- 
rin, for instance, sets down in his tablets as an enemy to 
whom vengeance is due the smallest scribbler who wounds 
his self-love, and says, frankly, * To me praise is food, dis- 
praise is poison. Him who feeds me I pay; him who poi- 
sons me I break on the wheel.' M. Savarin is, indeed, a 
skillful and energetic administrator to his own reputation. 
He deals with it as if it were a kingdom . establishes forti- 
fications for its defense . enlists soldiers to .fight for it. He 
is the soul and centre of a confederation in which each is 
bound to defend the territory of the othere, and all *those 
territories united constitute the imperial realm of M. Sava- 
rin. Don't think me an ungracious satirist in what I am 
thus saying of our brilliant friend. It is not I who here 
speak ; it is himself. He avows his policy with the naivety 
which makes the . charm of his style as writer. ' It is the 
greatest mistake,' he said to me yesterday, ' to talk of the 
Republic of Letters, Every author who wins a name is a 
sovereign in his own domain, be it large or small. Woe to 
any republican who ^ants to dethrone me !' Somehow or 
other, when M. Savarin thus talks, I feel as if he were be- 
traying the cause of genius. I can not bring myself to re- 
gard literature as a craft . to me it is a sacred mission ; and 
in hearing this * sovereign' boast of the tricks by which he 
maintains his state, I seem to listen to a priest who treats as 
imposture ^ihe religion he professes to teach. M. Savarin's 
favorite U^ve now is a young contributor to his journal, 
named Gustave Rameau. M. Savarin said the other day in 
my hearing, *I and my set were Young France . Gustave 
Rameau and his set are New Paris,'* 

" *And what is the distinction between the one and the 
other ?' asked my American friend, Mrs. Morley. 

" ' The set of " Young France," ' answered M. Savarin, 
' had in it the hearty consciousness of youth : it was bold 
and vehement, with abundant vitality and animal spirits ; 
whatever may be said against it in other respects, the power 
of thews and sinews must be conceded to its chief repre- 
sentatives. But the set of " New Paris " has very bad health, 
and tery indifferent spirits. Still, in its way, it is very 
clever ; it can sting and bite as keenly as if it were big and 
strong. Rameau is the most promising member of the set. 



 



 



182 THE PABISIANS. 

He will be popular in his time, because he represents a good 
deal of the mind of his time . viz., the mind and the time 
of "New Paris."' 

" Do you know any thing of this young Rameau's writ- 
ings ? Tou do not know himself, for he told me so, express- 
ing a desire that was evidently very sincere, to find some 
occasion on which to render you his homage. He said this 
the first time I met him at M. Savarin's, and before he knew 
how dear to me itre yourself and your fame. He came and 
sat by me after dinner, and won my interest at once by ask- 
ing me if I had heard that you were busied on a new work; 
and then, without waiting for my answer, he launched forth 
into praises of you, which made a notable contrast to the 
scorn with which he spoke of all your contemporaries, ex- 
cept indeed M. Savarin, who, however, might not have been 
pleased to hear his favorite pupil style him * a great writer 
in small things.' I spare you his epigrams on Dumas and 
Victor Hugo and my beloved Lamartine. Though his talk 
was showy, and dazzled me at firsts I soon got rather tired 
of it. even the first time we met. Since then I have seen 
him very often, not only at M. Savarin's, but he calls here 
at least every other day, and we have become quite good 
friends. He gains on acquaintance so far, that one can not 
help feeling how much he is to be pitied. He is so envious I 
and the envious must be so unhappy. And then he is at 
once so near and so far from all the things that he envies. 
He longs for riches and luxury, and can only as yet earn a 
bare competence by his labors. Therefore he hates the rich 
and luxurious. His literary successes, instead of pleasing 
him, render him miserable by their contrast with the fame 
of the authors whom he envies and assails. He has a beauti- 
ful head, of which he is conscious, but it is joined to a body 
without strength or grace. He is conscious of this too : but 
it is cruel to go on with this sketch. You can see at once 
the kind of person who, whether he inspire affection or dis- 
like, can not fail to create an interest . painful but compas- 
sionate. 

" You will be pleased to hear that Dr. C considers my 

health so improved that I may next year enter fairly on the 
profession for which I was intended and trained. Yet I still 
feel hesitating and doubtful To give myself wholly up to 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 183 

the art io which I am told I could excel, must alienate me 
entirely from the ambition that yearns for fields in which, 
alas ! it may perhaps never appropriate to itself a rood for 
culture . only wander, lost in a vague fairy-land, to which it 
has not the &iry's birthright. Oh, thou great Enchantress, 
to whom are equally subject the streets of Paris and the 
realm of Faerie . thou who hast sounded to the deeps that 
circumfluent ocean called 'practical human life,' and hast 
taught the acutest of its navigators to consider how far its 
courses are guided by orbs in heaven . canst thou solve this 
riddle which, if it perplexes me, must perplex so many? 
What is the real distinction between the rare genius and 
the commonalty of human souls that feel to the quick all the 
grandest and divinest things which the rare genius places be- 
fore them, sighing within themselves, ' This rare genius does 
but express that which was previously familiar to us, so far 
as thought and sentiment extend.' Nay, the genius itself, 
however eloquent, never does, never can, express the whole 
of the thought or the sentiment it interprets : on the contra- 
ry, the greater the genius is, the more it leaves a something 
of incomplete satisfaction on our minds . it promises so much 
more than it performs . it implies so much more than it an- 
nounces. I am impressed with the truth of what I thus say 
in proportion as I reperuse and restudy the greatest writers 
that have come within my narrow range of reading. And 
by thef^reatest writers I mean those who are not exclusive- 
ly reasonei*s (of such I can not judge), nor mere poets (of 
whom, so far as concerns the union of words with music, I 
ought to be able to judge), but the few who unite reason 
and poetry, and appeal at once to the common sense of the 
multitude and the imagination of the few. The highest type 
of this union to me is Shakspeare ; and I can comprehend the 
justice of no criticism on him which does not allow this sense 
of incomplete satisfaction, augmenting in proportion as the 
poet soars to his highest. I ask again. In what consists this 
distinction between the rare genius and the commonalty of 
minds that exclaim, * He expresses what we feel, but never 
the whole of what we feel ?' Is it the mere power over lan- 
guage, a larger knowledge of dictionaries, a finer ear for pe- 
riod and cadence, a more artistic craft in casing our thoughts 
and sentiments in well-selected words ? Is it true what Buf- 



 



 



184 THE PABISIAN6. 

fon says, * that the style is the man ?' Is it true what I am 
told Goethe said, ' Poetry is form ?' I can not believe this ; 
and if you tell me it is trae, then I no longer pine to be a 
writer. But if it be not true, explain to me how it is that 
the greatest genius is popular in proportion as it makes it- 
self akin to us by uttering in better words than we employ 
that which was already within us, brings to light what in 
our souls was latent, and does but correct, beautify, and 
publish the correspondency which an ordinary reader carries 
on privately every day, between himself and his mind or his 
heart. If this superiority in the genius be but style and 
form, I abandon iny dream of being something else than a 
singer of words by another to the music of another. But 
then, what then ? My knowledge of books and art is won- 
derfully small. What little I do know I gather from very 
few books, and from what I hear said by the few worth lis- 
tening to whom I happen to meet; and out of these, in sol- 
itude and reverie, not by conscious effort, I arrive at some 
results which appear to my inexperience original. Perhaps, 
indeed, they have the same kind of originality as the musical 
compositions of amateurs who effect a cantata or a quartette 
made up of borrowed details from great masters, and consti- 
tuting a w^hole so original that no real master would deign 
to own it. Oh, if I could get you to understand how unset- 
tled, how struggling, my whole nature at this moment is ! I 
wonder what is the sensation of the chrysalis which Wls been 
a silk- worm, when it first feels the new wings stirring within 
its shell . wiAgs, alas! that are but those of the humblest 
and shortest-lived sort of moth, scarcely born into daylight 
before it dies. Could it reason, it might regret its earlier 
life, and say, * Better be the silk-worm than the moth.' " 



FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME. 

" Have you known well any English people in the course 
of your life ? I say well, for you must have had acquain^ 
ance with many. But it seems to me so diflScult to know 
an Englishman well. Even I, who so loved and revered Mr. 
Selby . ^I, whose childhood was admitted into his companion- 
ship by that love which places ignorance and knowledge, in- 
fancy and age, upon ground so equal that heart touches heart 



 



 



THB PABISIANS. 185 

. can not say that I understand the English character to any 
thing like the extent to which I fancy I understand the Ital- 
ian and the French. Between ns of the Continent and them 
of the island the British Channel always flows. There is an 
Englishman here to whom I have been introduced, whom I 
have met, though but seldom, in that society which bounds 
the Paris world to me. Pray, pray tell me, did you ever 
know, ever meet him ? His name is Graham Vane. He is 
the only son, I am told, of a man who was a cU^briti in En- 
gland as an orator and statesman, and on both sides he be- 
longs to the haute aristocrcUie. He himself has that inde- 
scribable air and mien to which we apply the epithet ^ dis- 
tinguished.' In the most crowded salon the eye would fix 
on him, and involuntarily follow his movements.^ Yet his 
manners are frank and simple, wholly without the stiffiiess 
or reserve which is said to characterize the English. There 
is an inborn dignity in his bearing which consists in the ab- 
sence of all dignity assumed. But what strikes me most in 
this Englishman is an expression of countenance which the 
English depict by the word * open ' . that expression which 
inspires you with the belief in the existence of sincerity. 
Mrs. Morley said of him, in that poetic extravagance of 
phrase by which the Americans startle the English, * That 
man's forehead would light up the Mammoth Cave.' Do 
you not know, Eulalie, what it is to us cultivators of art . 
art being the expression of truth through fiction . to come 
into the atmosphere of one of those souls in which Truth 
stands out bold and beautiful in itself, and needs no ideal- 
ization through fiction? Oh, how near we should be to 
heaven, could we live daily, hourly, in the presence of one 
the honesty of whose word we could never doubt, the au- 
thority of whose word we could never disobey ! Mr. Vane 
professes not to understand music . not even to care for it, 
except rarely . and yet he spoke of its influence over others 
with an enthusiasm that half charmed me once more back to 
my destined calling . nay, might have charmed me wholly, 
but that he seemed to think that I . that any public singer 
. must be a creature apart from the world . ^the world in 
which such men live. Perhaps that is true." 



 



 



186 THB PABISIANB. 



CHAPTER IL 

It was one of those lovely noons toward the end of May 
in which a rural suburb has the mellow charm of summer to 
him who escapes a while from the streets of a crowded capi- 
tal The Londoner knows its charm when he feels his tread 
on the softening swards of the Vale of Health, or, pausing 
.at Richmond under the budding willow, gazes on the river 
glittering in the warmer sunlight, and hears from the villa 
gardens behind him the brief trill of the blackbird. But the 
suburbs round Paris are, I think, a yet more pleasing relief 
from the metropolis ; they are more easily reached, and I 
know not why, but they seem more rural, perhaps because 
the contrast of their repose with the stir left behind . of 
their redundance of leaf and blossom, compared witU the 
prim efflorescence of trees in the Boulevards and Tuileries . 
is more striking. However that may be, when Graham 
reached the pretty suburb in which Isaura dwelt, it seemed 
to him as if all the wheels of the loud, busy life were sudden- 
ly smitten stilL The hour was yet early ; he felt sure that 
he should find Isaura at home. The garden gate stood un- 
fastened and ajar ; he pushed it aside and entered. I think 
I have before said that the garden of the villa was shut out 
from the road and the gaze of neighbors, by a wall and 
thick belts of evergreens; it stretched behind the house 
somewhat far for the garden of a suburban villa. He paused 
when he had passed the gate-way, for he heard in the dis- 
tance the voice of one singing . singing low, singing plain- 
tively. He knew it was the voice of Isaura ; he passed on, 
leaving the house behind him, and tracking the voice till he 
reached the singer. 

Isaura was seated within an arbor toward the farther end 
of the garden . an arbor which, a little later in the year, must 
indeed be delicate and dainty with lush exuberance of jas- 
mine and woodbine ; now into its iron trellis- work leaflet and 
flowers were insinuating their gentle way. Just at the en- 
trance one white rose . a winter rose that had mysteriously 



 



 



THB PARISIANS. 187 

survived its relations . opened its pale hues frankly to the 
noonday sun. Graham approached slowly, noiselessly, and 
the last note of the song had ceased when he stood at the 
entrance of the arbor. Isaura did not perceive him at first, 
for her face was bent downward musingly, as was often her 
wont after singing, especially when alone. But she felt 
that the place was darkened, that something stood between 
her and the sunshine. She raised her face, and a quick flush 
mantled over it as she uttered his name, not loudly, not as 
in surprise, but inwardly and whisperingly, as in a sort of 
fear. 

" Pardon me, mademoiselle," said Graham, entering ; " but 
I heard your voice as I came into the garden, and it drew 
me onward involuntarily. What a lovely airl and what 
simple sweetness in such of the words as reached me I I am 
so ignorant of music that you must not laugh at me if I ask 
whose is the music and whose are the words ? Probably 
both are so well known as to convict me of a barbarous ig- 
norance.'' 

^' Oh no," said Isaura, with a still heightened color, and 
in accents embarrassed aiid hesitating. "Both the words 
and music-are by an unknown and very humble composer, 
yet not, indeed, quite original ; they have not even that 
merit . at least they were suggested by a popular song in 
the Neapolitan dialect which is said to be very old." 

"I don't know if I caught the true meaning of the. words, 
for they seemed to me to convey a more subtle and refined 
sentiment than is common in the popular songs of Southern 
Italy." 

"The sentiment in the original is changed in the para- 
phrase, and not, I fear, improved by the change." 

" Will you explain to me the sentiment in both, and let 
me judge which I prefer?" 

" In the Neapolitan song a young fisherman, who has 
moored his boat under a rock on the shore, sees a beautiful 
face below the surface of the waters ; he imagines it to be 
that of a Nereid, and casts in his net to catch this supposed 
nymph of the ocean. He only disturbs the water, loses the 
image, and brings up a few common fishes. He returns 
home disappointed, and very much enamored of the supposed 
Nereid. The next day he goes again to the same place, and 



 



 



188 THB PARISIANS. 

discovers that the face which had so charmed him was that 
of a mortal girl reflected on the waters from the rock behind 
him, on which she had been seated, and on which she had 
her home. The original air is arch and lively ; just listen to 
it.'' And Isaura warbled one of those artless and somewhat 
meagre tunes to which light-stringed instruments are the 
fitting accompaniment. 

" That," said Graham, " is a different music indeed from 
the other, which is deep and plaintive, and goes to the 
heart." 

" But do you not see how the words have been altered ? 
In the song you first heard me singing, the fisherman goes 
again to the spot, again and again sees the face in the water, 
again and again seeks to capture the Nereid, and never 
knows to the last that the face was that of the mortal on 
the rock close behind him, and which he passed by without 
notice every day. Deluded by an ideal image^ the real one 
escapes from his eye." 

^^ Is the verse that is recast meant to symbolize a moral in 
love?" 

" In love ? nay, I know not ; but in life, yes . at least the 
life of the artist." 

"The paraphrase of the original is yours, signorina . 
words and music both. Am I not right ? Your silence an- 
swers * Yes.' Will you pardon me if I say that, though 
there can be no doubt of the new beauty you have given to 
the old song, I think that the moral of the old was the 
sounder one, the truer to human life ? We do not go on to 
the last duped by an illusion. If enamored by the shadow 
on the waters, still we do look around us and discover the 
image it reflects." 

Isaura shook her head gently, but made no answer. On 
the table before her there were a few myrtle sprigs and one 
or two buds from the last winter rose, which she had been 
arranging into a simple nosegay ; she took up these, and ab- 
stractedly began to pluck and scatter the rose leaves. 

" Despise the coming May-flowers if you will, they will 
soon be so plentiful," said Graham ; " but do not cast away 
the few blossoms which winter has so kindly spared, aud 
which even summer will not give again ;" and, placing his 
hand on the winter buds, it touched hers . lightly, indeed. 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 189 

but she felt the touch, shrank from it, colored, and rose from 
her seat. 

*^ The sun has left this side of the garden, the east wind is 
rising, and you must find it chilly here," she said, in an alter- 
ed tone ; " will you not come into the house ?" 

" It is not the air that I feel chilly," said Graham, with a 
half smile ; '^ I almost fear that my prosaic admonitions have 
displeased you." 

" They were not prosaic ; and they were kind and very 
wise," she added, with her exquisite laugh . laugh so won- 
derfully sweet and musical. She now had gained the en- 
trance of the arbor ; Graham joined her, and they walked 
toward the house. He asked her if she had seen much of 
the Savarins since they had met. 

" Once or twice we have been there of an evening." - 

^^And encountered, no doubt, the illustrious young min- 
strel who despises Tasso and Corneille ?" 

" M. Rameau ? Oh yes ; he is constantly at the Savarins'. 
Do not 1^ severe on him. He is unhappy . he lA struggling 
. he is soured. An artist has thorns in his path which look- 
ers-on do not heed." 

"All people have thorns in their path, and I have no great 
respect for those who want lookers-on to heed them when- 
ever they are scratched. But M. Rameau seems to me one 
of those writers very common nowadays in France, and even 
in England ; writers who have never read any thing worth 
studying, and are, of course, presumptuous in proportion to 
their ignorance. I should not have thought an artist like 
yourself could have recognized an artist in a M. Rameau 
who despises Tasso without knowing Italian." 

Graham spoke bitterly ; he was once more jealous. 

"Are you not an artist yourself? Are you not a writer? 
ML Savarin told me you were a distinguished man of letters." 

*' M. Savarin flatters me too much. I am not an artist, 
and I have a great dislike to that word as it is now hack- 
neyed and vulgarized in England and in France. A cook 
calls himself an artist ; a tailor does the game ; a man writes 
a gaudy melodrame, a spasmodic song, a sensational novel, 
and straightway he calls himself an artist, and indulges in 
a pedantic jargon about * essence' and 'form,' assuring us 
that a poet we can understand wants essence, and a poet we 

]\ :i {. :.! ' ^^ : t .^. . : ,' , .- Digitizec/by Google 



190 THE PABISIANS. 

can scan wants form. Thank Heaven, I am not vain enough 
to call myself artist I have written some very dry lucubra- 
tions in periodicals, chiefly political, or critical upon other 
subjects than art. But why, d propos of M. Rameau, did 
you ask me that question respecting myself?'' 

'^ Because much in your conversation," answered Isaura, 
in rather a mournful tone, ^'made me suppose you had more 
sympathies with art and its cultivators than you cared to 
avow. And if you had such sympathies, you would compre- 
hend what a relief it is to a poor aspu*ant to art like myself 
to come into communication with those who devote them- 
selves to any art distinct from the common pursuits of the 
world ; what a relief it is to escape from the ordinary talk 
of society. There is a sort of instinctive freemasonry among 
us, including masters and disciples, and one art has a fellow- 
ship with other arts ; mine is but song and music, yet I feel 
attracted toward a sculptor, a painter, a romance-writer, a 
poet, as much as toward a singer, a musician. Do yon un- 
derstand why I can not contemn M. Rameau as wi do ? I 
differ from his tastes in literature ; I do not miron admire 
such of his writings as- 1 have read; I grant that he over- 
estimates his own genius, whatever that be . yet I like to 
converse with him : he is a straggler upward, though with 
weak wings, or with erring footsteps, like myself." 

" Mademoiselle," said Graham, earnestly, " I can not say 
how I thank you for this candor. Do not condemn me for 
abusing it . if." He paused. 

"If what?" 

" If I, so much older than yourself. I do not say only in 
years, but in the experience of life . I, whose lot is cast 
among those busy and ^ positive ' pursuits which necessarily 
quicken that unromantic faculty called common sense . ^if, I 
say, the deep interest with which you must inspire all whom 
you admit into an acquaintance, even as unfamiliar as that 
now between us, makes me utter one caution, such as might 
be uttered by a friend or brother. Beware of those artistic 
sympathies which you so touchingly confess ; beware how, 
in the great events of life, you allow fancy to misguide your 
reason. In choosing friends on whom to rely, separate the 
artist from the human being. Judge of the human being 
for what it is in itself. Do not worship the face on the war 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 191 

ters, blind to the image on the rock. In one word, never 
see in an artist like a M. Rameau the human being to whom 
you could intinist the destinies of your life. Pardon me, 
pardon me; we may meet little hereafter, but you are a 
creature so utterly new to me, so wholly unlike any woman 
I have ever before encountered and admired, and to me seem 
endowed with such wealth of mind and soul, exposed to 
such hazard, that . that . ^" Again he paused, and his voice 
trembled as he concluded . " that it would be a deep sorrow 
to me if, perhaps years hence, I should have to say, 'Alas! 
by what mistake has that wealth been wasted!' " 

While they had thus conversed, mechanically they had 
turned away from the house, and were again standing be- 
fore the arbor. 

Graham, absorbed in the passion of his adjuration, had not 
till now looked into the face of the companion by his side. 
Now, when he had concluded, and heard no reply, he bent 
down and saw that Isaura was weeping silently. 

His heart smote him. 

"Forgive me," he exclaimed, drawing her hand into his; 
"I have, had no right to talk thus; but it was not from 
want of respect ; it was . it was . " 

The hand which was yielded to his pressed it gently, tim- 
idly, chastely. 

" Forgive !" murmured Isaura ; " do you think that I, an 
orphan, have never longed for a friend who would speak to 
me thus?" And so saying, she lifted her eyes, streaming 
still, to his bended countenance . eyes, despite their tears, 
so clear in their innocent limpid beauty, so ingenuous, so 
frank, so virgin-like, so unlike the eyes of " any other woman 
he had encountered and admired." 

"Alas !" he said, in quick and hurried accents, " you may 
remember, when we have before conversed, how I, though so 
uncultured in your art, still recognized its beautiful influence 
upon human breasts ; how I sought to combat your own de- 
preciation of its rank among the elevating agencies of human- 
ity ; how, too, I said that no man could venture to ask you to 
renounce the boards, the lamps . resign the fame of actress, 
of singer. WeU, now that you accord to me the title of 
friend, now that you so touchingly remind me that you are 
an orphan . thinking of all the perils the young and the beau- 



 



 



192 THE PARISIANS. 

tiful of your sex must encounter when they abandon private 
life for public . I think that a true friend might put the ques- 
tion, * Can you resign the fame of actress, of singer?'" 

"I will answer you frankly. The profession which once 
seemed to me so alluring began to lose its charms in my eyes 
some months ago. It was your words, very eloquently ex- 
pressed, on the ennobling effects of music and song upon a 
popular audience, that counteracted the growing distaste to 
rendering up my whole life to the vocation of the stage. But 
now I think I should feel grateful to the friend whose advice 
interpreted the voice of my own heait, and bade me relinquish 
the career of actress." 

Graham's face grew radiant. But whatever might have 
been his reply, it was arrested ; voices and footsteps were 
heard behind) He turned round and saw the Venosta, the 
Savarins, and Gustave Rameau. 

Isaura heard and saw also, started in a sort of alarmed 
confusion, and then instinctively retreated toward the arbor. 

Graham hurried on to meet the signora and the visitors, 
giving time to Isaura to compose herself by arresting them 
in the pathway with conventional salutations. 

A few minutes later Isaura joined them, and there was talk 
to which Graham scarcely listened, though he shared in it by 
abstracted monosyllables. He declined going into the* house, 
and took leave at the gate. In parting, his eyes fixed them- 
selves on Isaura. Gustave Rameau was by her side. That 
nosegay which had been left in the arbor was in her hand ; 
and though she was bending over it, she did not now pluck 
and scatter the rose leaves. Graham at that moment felt no 
jealousy of the fair-faced young poet beside her. 

As he walked slowly back, he muttered to himself, " But 
am I yet in the position to hold myself wholly free? Am I, 
am I? Were the sole choice before me that between her and 
anabition and wealth, how soon it would be made ! Ambi- 
tion has no prize equal to the heart of such a woman ; wealth 
no sources of joy equal to the treasures of her love." 



 



 



TH PABISIANS. 193 



CHAPTER m. 

FKOM ISAITBA CICOGNA TO MADAME DB GRANTME8NIL. 

" Thb day after I posted my last, Mr. Vane called on us. 
I was in our little garden at the time. Our conversation 
was brief, and soon interrupted by visitors . the Savarins 
and M. Rameau. I long for your answer. I wonder how 
he impressed you, if you have met him ; how he would im- 
press, if you met him now. To me he is so different from all 
others; and I scarcely know why his words ring in my ears, 
and his image rests in my thoughts. It is strange altogeth- 
er ; for though he is young, he speaks to me as if he were so 
much older than I . so kindly, so tenderly, yet as if I were a 
child, and much as the dear Maestro might do if he thought 
I needed caution or counsel. Do aot fancy, Eulalie, that there 
is any danger of my deceiving myself as to the nature of such 
interest as he may take in me. Oh no ! There is a gulf be- 
tween us there which he does not lose sight of, and which we 
could not pass. How, indeed, I could interest him at all I 
can not guess. A rich, high-born Englishman, intent on po- 
litical life ; practical, prosaic . ^no, not prosaic ; but still with 
the kind of sense which does not admit into its range of vis- 
ion that world of dreams which is familiar as their daily home 
to Romance and to Art. It has always seemed to me that 
for love, love such as I conceive it, there must be a deep and 
constant sympathy between two persons . not, indeed, in the 
usual and ordinary trifles of taste and sentiment, but in those 
essentials which form the root of character, and branch out 
in all the leaves and blooms that expand to the sunshine 
and shrink from the cold . that the worldling should wed the 
worldling, the artist the artist. Can the realist and the ideal- 
ist blend together, and hold together till death and beyond 
death ? If not, can there be true love between them ? By 
true love I mean the* love which interpenetrates the soul, and 
once given, can never die. Oh, Eulalie . answer me . answer ! 

"P.S. . I have now fully made up my mind to renounce 
all thought of the stage." 

^'~^  Google 



194 THB PABISIAJfS. 



FBOM MADAME DS GBANTMSSNIL TO I6AUBA CIC06NA. 

" My deab Child, . How your mind has grown since you 
left me, the sanguine and aspiring votary of an art which, of 
all arts, brings the most immediate reward to a successful 
cultivator, and is in itself so divine in its immediate effects 
upon human souls ! Who shall say what may be the after- 
results of those effects which the waiters on posterity pre- 
sume to despise because they are immediate? A dull man, 
to whose mind a ray of that vague starlight undetected in 
the atmosphere of work-day life has never yet traveled ; to 
whom the philosopher, the preacher, the poet, appeal in vain 
. ^nay, to whom the conceptions of the grandest master of 
instrumental music are incomprehensible; to whom Bee- 
thoven unlocks no portal in heaven ; to whom Rossini has 
no mysteries on earth unsolved by the critics of the pit . 
suddenly hears the human voice of the human singer, and at 
the sound of that voice the walls which inclosed him fall. 
The something far from and beyond the routine of his com- 
monplace existence becomes known to him. He* of himself, 
poor ma&, can make nothing of it. He can not put it down 
on paper, and say the next morning, ^ I am an inch nearer to 
heaven than I was last night ;' but the feeling that he is an 
inch nearer to heaven abides with him. Unconsciously he is 
gentler, he is less earthly, and, in being nearer to heaven, he 
is stronger for earth. You singers do not seem to me to un- 
derstand that you have . to use your own word, so much 
in vogue that it has become abused and trite . a miasiont 
When you talk of missions, from whom comes the mission? 
Not from men. If there be a mission from man to men, it 
must be appointed from on high. 

" Think of all this ; and in being faithful to your art, be 
true to yourself. K you feel divided between that art and 
the art of the writer, and acknowledge the firet to be too ex- 
acting to admit a rival, keep to that in which you are sure 
to excel. Alas, my fair child ! do not imagine that we 
writers feel a happiness iu our pursuits and aims more com- 
plete than that which you can command. If we care for 
fame (and, to be frank, we all do), that fame does not come 
before us face to face . a real, visible, palpable form, as it 
does to the singer, to the actress. I grant that it may be 



 



 



THS FAiaSIANS: 195 

more enduring, but an endurance on the length of which we 
dare not reckon. A writer can not be sure of immortality 
till his language itself be dead ; and then he has but a share 
in an uncertain lottery. Nothing but fragments remains 
of the Phrynichus, who rivaled JEschylus; of the Agathon, 
who perhaps excelled Euripides ; of the AIcsbus, in whom 
Horace acknowledged a master and a model ; their renown 
is not in their works, it is but in their names. And, after 
all, the names of singers and actors last, perhaps, as long. 
Greece retains the name of Polus, Rome of Roscius, England 
of Garrick, France of Talma, Italy of Pasta, more lastingly 
than posterity is likely to retain mine. Tou address to me 
a question, which I have often put to myself.* What is the 
distinction between the writer and the reader, when the 
reader says, " These are my thoughts, these are my feelings ; 
the writer has stolen them, and clothed them in his own 
words ?" * And the more the reader says this, the more 
wide is the audience, the more genuine the renown, and, 
paradox though it seems, the more consummate the origi- 
nality of the writer. But no, it is not the mere gift of ex- 
pression, it is not the mere craft of the pen, it is not the 
mere taste in arrangement of word and cadence, which thus 
enables the one to interpret the mind, the heart, the soul of 
the many. It is a power breathed into him as he lay in his , 
cradle, and a power that gathered around itself, as he grew j 
up, all the influences he acquired, whether from observation! 
of external nature, or from study of men and books, or fromi 
that experience of daily life which varies with every hu-:, 
man being. No education could make two intellects exact- '. 
ly alike, as no culture can make two leaves exactly alike. 
How truly you describe the sense of dissatisfaction which 
every writer of superior genius communicates to his admir- 
ers! how truly do you feel that the greater is the dissatis- 
faction in proportion to the writer's genius, and the admir- 
er's conception of it ! But that is the mystery which makes 
. ^let me borrow a German phrase . the cUmdrland between 
the finite and the infinite. The greatest philosopher, intent 
on the secrets of Nature, feels that dissatisfaction in Nature 
herself. The finite can not reduce into logic and criticism 
the infinite. 
" Let us dismiss these matters, which perplex the reason. 



 



 



196 THE PASISIANS. 

and approach that which touches the heart . which in yoar 
case, my child, teaches the heart of woman. You speak of 
love, and deem that the love which lasts . the household, the 
conjugal love . should be based upon such sympathies of 
pursuit that the artist should wed with the artist. 

" This is one of the questions you do well to address to 
me ; for whether from my own experience, or from that 
which I have gained from observation extended over a wide 
range of life, and quickened and intensified by the class of 
writing that I cultivate, and which necessitates a calm study 
of the passions, I am an authority on such subjects, better 
than most women can be. And alas, my child, I come to 
this result : there is no prescribing to men or to women whom 
to select, whom to refusa I can not refute the axiom of the 
ancient poet, * In love there is no wherefore.' But there is a 
time . ^it is often but a moment of time . in which love is not 
yet a master, in which we can say, *I toiU love . I will not 
love.' 

" Now, if I could find you in such a moment, I would say 
to you, * Artist, do not love . do not marry . an artist.' 
Two artistic natures rarely combine. The artistic nature 
is wonderfully exacting. I fear it is supremely egotistical . 
so jealously sensitive that it writhes at the touch of a rival. 
Racine was the happiest of husbands ; his wife adored his 
genius, but could not understand his plays. Would Racine 
have been happy if he had married a Comeille in petticoats ? 
I who speak have loved an artist, certainly equal to myself 
I am sure that he loved me. That sympathy in pursuits of 
which you speak drew us together, and became very soon 
the cause of antipathy. To both of us the endeavor to co- 
alesce was misery. 

^^I don't know your M. Ramean. Savarin has sent me 
some of his writings ; from these I judge that his only chance 
of happiness would be to marry a commonplace woman, 
with aiparation de Mens. He is, believe me, but one of the 
many with whom New Paris abounds, who, because they 
have the infiniiities of genius, imagine they have its strength. 

"I come next to the Englishman. I see how serious is 
your questioning about hiirf. You not only regard him as a 
being distinct from the crowd of a sedan; he stands equally 
apart in the chamber of your thoughts . ^you do not mention 



 



 



THE PAJBISIANS. 197 

him in the same letter as that which treats of Rameau and 
Savarin. He has become already an image not to be light- 
ly mixed up with others. You would rather not have men- 
tioned him at all to me, but you could not resist it. The 
interest yon feel in him so perplexed you that in a kind of 
feverish impatience you cry out to me, * Can you solve the 
riddle? Did you ever know well Englishmen? Can an 
Englishman be understood out of his island ?' etc., etc. Yes, 
I have known well many Englishmen. In affairs of the 
heart they are much like all other men. No ; I do not know 
this Englishman in particular, nor any one of his name. 

" Well, my child, let us frankly grant that this foreigner 
has gained some hold on your thoughts, on your fancy, per- 
haps also on your heart. Do not fear that he will love you 
less enduringly, or that you will become alienated from him, 
because he is not an artist. If he be a strong nature, and 
with some great purpose in life, your ambition will fuse it- 
self in his ; and knowing you as I do, I believe you would 
make an excellent wife to an Englishman whom you hon- 
ored as well as loved ; and sorry though I should be that 
you relinquished the singer's fame, I should be consoled in 
thinking you safe in the woman's best sphere . a contented 
home, safe from calumny, safe from gossip. I never had 
thfit home ; and there has been no part in my author's life 
in which I would not have given all the celebrity it won for 
the obscure commonplace of such woman lot. Could I move 
human beings as pawns on a chess-board, I should indeed 
say that the most suitable and congenial mate for you, for a 
woman of sentiment and genius, would be a well-born and 
well-educated German ; for such a German unites, with do- 
mestic habits and a strong sense of family ties, a romance of ; 
sentiment, a love of art, a predisposition toward the poetic, 
side of life, which is very rare among Englishmen of the same 
class. But as the German is not forth-coming, I give myi 
vote for the Englishman, provided onlywyou love him. Ah,' 
child, be sure of that. Do not mistake fancy for love. All 
women do not require love in marriage, but without it that 
which is best and highest in you would wither and die. 
Write to me often and tell me all. M. Savarin is right. My 
book is no longer my companion. It is gone from me, and 
I am once more alone in the world. . Yours affectionately. 



 



 



198 THB PARISIANS. 

"P.S. . Is not your postscript a woman's? Does it not 
require a woman's postscript in reply? You say in yours 
that you have fully made up your mind to renounce all 
thoughts of the stage.. I ask in mine, ' What has the En- 
glishman to do with that determination ?' " 



CHAPTER IV. 

Some weeks have passed since Graham's talk with Isaura 
in the garden ; he has not visited the villa since. His cous- 
ins the D'Altons have passed through Paris on their way to 
Italy, meaning to stay a few days ; they stgi^nearly a month, 
and monopolized much of Graham's companionship. Both 
these were reasons why, in the hahitnal society of the Duke, 
Graham's persuasion that he was not yet free to court the 
hand of Isaura became strengthened, and with that persua- 
sion necessarily came a question equally addressed to his 
conscience : " If not yet free to court her hand, am I free to 
expose myself to the temptation of seeking to win her affec- 
tion ?" But when his cousin was gone, his heart began to 
assert its own rights, to argue its own case, and suggest 
modes of reconciling its dictates to the obligations which 
seemed to oppose them. In this hesitating state of mind> he 
received the following note : 

"Villa , Lac d'Ekghien. 

"My deab Mb. Vane, . We have retreated from Paris to 
the banks of this beautiful little lake. Come and help to 
save Frank and myself from quarreling with each other, 
which, until the Rights of Women are firmly established, 
married folks always will do when left to themselves, espe- 
cially if they are still lovers, as Frank and I are. Love is a 
terribly quarrelsome thing. Make us a present of a few days 
out of your wealth of time. We will visit Montmorency and 
the hau|}ts of Rousf*au . sail on the lal^e at moonlight.dine 
at gypsy restaurants under trees not yet embrowned by sum- 
mer heats. discuss literature and- politics . * Shakspeare and 
the musical glasses ' . and be a sociable and pleasant as Boc- 
caccio's tale-tellers at Fiesole. We shall be but a small par- 
ty, only the Savarins, that unconscious sage and humorist 
Signora Yenosta, and that dimple-cheeked Isaura, who em- 

 VjOOQIC 



THB PABISIANS. 199 

bodies the song of nightiDgales and the smile of summer. Re- 
fuse, and Frank shall not have an easy moment till he sends 
in his claims for thirty millions against the Alabama, 

" Yours, as you behave, Lizzie Moblby." 

Graham did not refuse. He went to Eiighien for four days 
and a quarter. He was under the same roof as Isaura. Oh, 
those h^py days! . so happy that they defy description. 
But though to Graham the happiest days he had ever known, 
they were happier still to Isaura. There were drawbacks to 
his happiness, none to hers . drawbacks partly from reasons 
the weight of which the reader will estimate later; partly 
from reasons the reader may at once comprehend and assess. 
In the sunshine of her joy, all the vivid colorings of Isaura's 
artistic temperament came forth^ so that what I may call the 
homely, domestic woman side of her nature faded into shad- 
ow. If, my dear reader, whether you be man or woman, you 
have come into familiar contact with some creature of a ge- 
nius to which, even assuming that you yourself have a genius 
in its own way, you have no special affinities, have you not 
felt shy with that creature ? Have you not, perhaps, felt 
how intensely you could love that creature, and doubted if 
that creature could possibly love you? Now I think that 
shyness and that disbelief are common with either man or 
woman, if, however conscious of superiority in the prose of 
life, he or she recognizes inferiority in the poetry of it. And 
yet this self-abasement is exceedingly mistaken. The poetic- 
al kind of genius is so grandly indulgent, so inherently defer- 
ential, bows with such unaffected modesty to the supeiiority 
in which it fears it may fail (yet seldom does fail) . the supe- 
riority of common sense. And when we come to women, 
what marvelous truth is conveyed by the woman who has 
had no superior in intellectual gifts among her own sex! 
Corinne, crowned at the Capitol, selects out of the whole 
Vorld, as the hero of her love, no rival poet and enthusiast, 
but a cold-blooded, sensible Englishman. 

Graham Vane, in his strong masculine form of intellect . 
Graham Vane, from whom I hope much, if he live to fulfill 
his rightful career . had, not unreasonably, the desire to 
dominate the life of the woman whom he selected as the 
partner of his own. But the life of Isaura seemed to escape 



 



 



200 THE PARISIANS. 

him. If at moments, listeDing to her, he would say to him- 
self, "What a companion! life could never be- dull with 
her" . at other moments he would say, "True, never dull, 
but would it be always safe ?" And then comes in that mys- 
terious power of love which crushes all beneath its feet, and 
makes us end sell^commune by that abject submission of 
reason, which only murmurs, "Better be unhappy with the one 
you love, than happy with one whom you do not." ^AU sujch 
self-communes were unknown to Isaura. She lived in the 
bliss of the hour. If Graham could have read her heart, he 
would have dismissed all doubt whether he could dominate 
her life. Could a Fate or an angel have said to her, " Choose 
. on one side I promise you the glories of a Catalani, a Pasta, 
a Sappho, a De Stael, a George Sand . all combined into one 
immortal name ; or on the other side, the whole heart of the 
man who would estrange himself from you if you had such 
combination of glories" . her answer would have brought 
Graham Vane to her feet ; all scruples, all doubts would 
have vanished ; he would have exclaimed, with the gene- 
rosity inherent in the higher order of man, " Be glorious, 
if your nature wills it so. Glory enough to me that you 
would have resigned glory itself to become mine." But 
how is it that men worth a woman's loving become so diffi- 
dent when they love intensely ? Even in ordinjiry cases of 
love there is so ineffable a delicacy in virgin woman, that a 
man, be he how refined soever, feels himself rough and rude 
and coarse in comparison. And while that sort of delicacy 
was pre-eminent in this Italian orphan, there came, to in- 
crease the humility of the man so proud and so confident in 
himself when he had only men to deal with, the conscious- 
ness that his intellectual nature was hard and positive beside 
the angel-like purity and the fairy-like play of hers. 

There was a strong wish on the part of Mrs. Morley to 
bring about the union of these two. She had a great regard 
and a great admiration for both. To her mind, unconscious 
of all Graham's doubts and prejudices, they were exactly 
suited to each other. A man of intellect so cultivated as 
Graham's, if married to a commonplace English "Miss," 
would surely feel as if life had no sunshine and no flowers. 
The love of an Isaura would steep it in siinshine, pave it 
with flowers. Mrs. Morley admitted . all American Repub- 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 201 

licans of gentle birth do admit . the instincts which lead 
" like " to match with " like " an equality of blood and race./ 
With all her assertion of the Rights of Woman, I do notl 
think that Mrs. Morley would ever have conceived the pos-\ 
sibility of consenting that the richest, and prettiest, and \ 
cleverest girl in the States could become the wife of a son | 
of hers if the girl had the taint of negro blood, even though ) 
shown nowhere save the slight distinguishing hue of her 
finger-nails. So, had Isaura's ments been threefold what 
they were, and she had been the wealthy heiress of a re- 
tail grocer, this fair Republican would have opposed (more 
strongly than many an English duchess, or at least a Scotch 
duke, would do, the wish of a son) the thought of an alliance 
between Graham Vane and the grocer's daughter I But 
Isaura was a Cicogna . an offspring of a very ancient and 
very noble house. Disparities of fortune, or mere worldly 
position, Mrs. Morley supremely despised. Here were the 
great parities of alliance . parities in years and good looks 
and mental culture. So, in short, She, in the invitation given 
to them, had planned for tbe union between Isaura and Gra- 
ham. 

To this plan she had an antagonist, whom she did not 
even guess, in Madame Savarin. That lady, as much at- 
' tached to Isaura as was Mrs. Morley herself, and till more 
desirous of seeing a girl, brilliant and parentless, transferred 
from the companionship of Signora Venosta to the protection 
of a husband, entertained no belief in the serious attentions 
of Graham Vane. Perhaps she exaggerated his worldly ad- 
vantages . perhaps she undervalued the warmth of his affec- 
tions ; but it was not within the range of her experience, con- 
fined much to Parisian life, UQr in harmony with her notions 
of the frigidity and morgue of the English national charac- 
ter, that a rich and high-born young man, to whom a great 
career in practical public life was predicted, should form a 
matrimonial alliance with a foreign orphan girl who, if of 
gentle birth, had no useful connections, would bring no cor- 
reBpondent dot, and had been reared and intended for the 
profession of the stage. She much more feared that the re- 
sult of any attentions on the part of such a man would be 
rather calculated to compromise the orphan's name, or at 
least to mislead her expectations, thah to secure her the 

 VjOOQIC 



202 THB PABISIANS. 

shelter of a wedded- home. Moreover, she had cherished 
plahs of her own for Isaara's future. Madame Savarin had 
conceived for Gustave Rameau a friendly regard, stronger 
than that which Mrs. Morley entertained for Graham Vane, 
for it was more motherly. Gustave had been familiarized 
to her sight and her thoughts since he had first been launch- 
ed into the literary world under her husband's auspices ; he 
had confided to her his mortification in his failures, his joy 
in his successes. His beautiful countenance, his delicate 
health, his very infirmities and defects, had endeared him to 
her womanly heart. Isaura was the wife of all others wlio, 
in Madame Savarin's opinion, was made for Rameau. Her 
fortune, so trivial beside the wealth of the Englishman, 
would be a competence to Rameau ; then that competence 
might swell into vast riches if Isaura succeeded on the stage. 
She found with extreme displeasure that Isaura's mind had 
become estranged from the profession to which she had been 
destined, and divined that a deference to the Englishman's 
prejudices had something to do with that estrangement. It 
was not to be expected that a Frenchwoman^ wife to a 
sprightly man of letters, who had intimate friends and allies 
in every department of the artistic world, should cherish any 
prejudice whatever against the exercise of an art in which 
success achieved riches and renown. But she was preju- 
diced, as most Frenchwomen are, against allowing to unmar- 
ried girls the same freedom and independence of action that 
are the rights of women . French women . when marned. 
And she would have disapproved the entrance of Isaura on 
her professional career until she could enter it as a wife . ^the 
wife of an artist . the wife of Gustave Rameau. 

Unaware of the rivalry between these friendly diploma- 
tists and schemers, Graham and Isaura glided hourly tSore 
and more down the current, which as yet ran smooth. No 
words by which love is spoken were exchanged between 
them ; in fact, though constantly together, they were very 
rarely, and then but for moments, alone with each other. 
Mrs. Morley artfully schemed more than once to give them 
such opportunities for that mutual explanation of heart which, 
she saw, had not yet taken place ; with art more practiced 
and more watchful, Madame Savarin contrived to baffle her 
hostess's intention. But, indeed, neither Graham nor Isaura 



 



 



THE PABIftlANS. 203 

songht to make opportunities for themselves. He, as we 
know, did not deem himself wholly justified in uttering the 
words of love by which a man of honor binds himself for 
life ; and she 1 . what girl, pure-hearted and loving truly, does 
not fihrink from seeking the oppoi*tunities which it is for 
the man to coi^rt ? Yet Isaura needed no words to tell her 
that she wad loved . no, nor even a pressure of the hand, a 
glance of the eye; she felt it instinctively, mysteriously, 
by the glow of her own being in the presence of her lover. 
She knew that she herself could not so love unless she were 
beloved. 

Here woman's wit is keener and truthfuler than man's. 
Graham, as I have said, did not feel confident that he had 
reached the heart j)f Isaura : he was conscious that he had 
engaged her inter^ts, that he had attracted her fancy ; but 
often, when charmed by the joyous play of her imagination, 
he would sigh to himself, " To natures so gifted what single 
mortal can be the all in all ?" 

They spent the summer mornings in excursions round the 
beautiful neighborhood, dined early, and sailed on the caljn 
lake at moonlight. Their talk was such as might be expect- 
ed from lovers of books in summer holidays. Savarin was 
a critic by profession ; Graham Vane, if not that, at least 
owed such literary reputation as he had yet gained to es- 
says in which the rare critical faculty was conspicuously de 
veloped. ^ 

It was pleasant to hear the clash of these two minds en- 
countering each other; they differed perhaps less in opin- 
ions than in the mode by which opinions are discussed. The 
Englishman's range of reading was wider than the French- 
man's, and his scholarship more accurate ; but the French- 
man had a compact neatness of expression, a light and nim- 
ble grace, whether in the advancing or the retreat of his 
argument, which covered deficiencies, and often made them 
appear like merits. Graham was compelled, indeed, to re- 
linquish many of the forces of superior knowledge or graver 
eloquence which, with less lively antagonists, he could have 
brought into the field, for the witty sarcasm of Savarin 
would have turned them aside as pedantry or declamation. 
But though Graham was neither dry nor diffuse, and the 
happiness at his heart brought out the gayety of humor 



 



 



204 THE <ABISIAXS. 

which had been his early characteristic, and yet rendered 
his familiar intercourse genial and playful, still there was 
this distinction between his humor and Savarin's wit, that 
IB the firat there was always something earnest, in the last 
always something mocking. And in criticism Graham seem- 
ed ever anxious to bring out a latent beauty, even in writers 
comparatively neglected. Savarin was acutest when drag- 
ging forth a blemish never before discovered in writers uni- 
versally read. 

Graham did not, perhaps, notice the profound attention 
with which Isaura listened to him in these intellectual 
skirmishes with the more glittering Parisian. There was 
this distinction she made between him and Savarin: when 
the last spoke she often chimed in withsome happy senti- 
ment of her own ; but she never interrupted Graham . never 
intimated a dissent from his theories of art, or the deduc- 
tions he drew from them ; and she would remain silent and 
thoughtful for some minutes when his voice ceased. There 
was passing from his mind into hers an ambition which she 
imagined, poor girl, that he would be pleased to think he 
had inspired, and which might become a new* bond of sym- 
pathy between them. But as yet the ambition was vague 
and timid . an idea or a dream to be fulfilled in some in- 
definite future. 

The last night of this short-lived holiday-time the party, 
after staying out on the lake to a later hour than usual, 
stood lingering still on the lawn of the villa ; and their host, 
who was rather addicted to superficial studies of the posi- 
tive sciences, including, of course, the most popular of all, 
astronomy, kept his guests politely listening to speculative 
conjectures on the probable size of the inhabitants of Sirius 
. that very distant and very gigantic inhabitant of heaven 
who has led philosophers into mortifying reflections upon 
the utter insignificance of our own poor little planet, capar 
ble of producing nothing greater than Shakspeares and New- 
tons, Aristotles and CsBsars . manikins, no doubt, beside in- 
tellects proportioned to the size of the world in which they 
flourish. 

As it chanced, Isaura and Graham were then standing 
close to each other and a little apart from the rest. " It is 
very strange," said Graham, laughing low, "how little I 



 VjOOQIC 



THE PABISIAXS. 205 

care about Sinus. He is the sun of some other system, and 
is perhaps not habitable at all, except by salamanders. He 
can not be one of the stars with which I have established 
familiar acquaintance, associated with fancies and dreams 
and hopes, as most of us do, for instance, with Hesperus, the 
moon^s harbinger and comrade. But amidst all those stars 
there is one . not Hesperus . which has always had, from 
my childhood, a mysterious fascination for me. Knowing 
as little of astrology as I do of astronomy, when I gaze upon 
that star I become credulously superstitious, and fancy it has 
an influence on my life. Have you, too, any favorite star ?" 

" Yes," said Isaura ; " and I distinguish it now, but I do 
not even know its name, and never would ask it." 

" So like me. I would not vulgarize my unknown source 
of beautiful illusions by giving it the name it takes in tech- 
nical catalogues. For fear of learning that name, I never 
have pointed it out to any one before. I too at this moment 
distinguish it apart from all its brotherhood. Tell me which 
is yours." 

Isaura pointed and explained. The Englishman was 
startled. By what strange coincidence could they both 
have singled out from all the host of heaven the same favor- 
ite star ? 

" Cher Vane," cried Savarin, " Colonel Morley declares that 
what America is to the ten*estrial system Sirius is to the 
heavenly. America is to extinguish Europe, and then Sirius 
is to extinguish the world." 

" Not for some millions of years ; time to look about us," 
said the Colonel, gravely. " But I certainly differ from those 
who maintain that Sirius recedes from us. I say that he ap- 
proaches. The principles of a body so enlightened must be 
those .f progress." Then, addressing Graham in English, he 
added, " There will be a mulling in this fogified planet some 
day, I predicate. Sirius is a keener P'^ 

" I have not imagination lively enough to interest myself 
in the destinies of Sirius in connection with our planet at a 
date so remote," said Graham, smiling. Then he added in a 
whisper to Isaura, " My imagination does not carry me fur- 
ther than to wonder whether this day twelvemonth . the 8th 
of July . we two shall both be singling out that same star, 
an4 ga^ng on it as now, side by side," 



 



 



206 THE PABISIAl^a 

This was the sole utterance of that sentiment in which the 
romance of love is so rich that the Englishman addressed to 
Isaura daring those memorable summer days at Enghien. 



CHAPTER V. 

The next morning the party broke up. Letters had been 
delivered both to Savarin and to Qraham which, even had 
the day for departure not been fixed, would have summoned 
them away. On reading his letter, Savarin's brow became 
clouded. He made a sign to his wife after breakfast, and 
wandered away with her down an alley in the little garden. 
His trouble was of that nature which a wife either soothes 
\or aggravates, according sometimes to her habitual frame of 
mind, sometimes to the mood of temper in which she may 
chance to be . a household trouble, a pecuniary trouble. 

Savarin was by no means an extravagant man. His mode 
of living, though elegant and hospitable, was modest com- 
pared to that of many Fi-ench authors inferior to himself in 
the fame whidi at Paris brings a very good retuni in francs. 
But his station itself at the head of a powerful literary clique 
necessitated many expenses which were too congenial to his 
extreme good-nature to be regulated by strict prudence. His 
hand was always open to distressed writers and struggling 
artists, and his sole income was derived from his pen and a 
journal in which he was chief editor and formerly sole pro- 
prietor. But that journal had of late not prospered. He 
had sold or pledged a considerable share in the proprietor- 
ship. He had been compelled also to borrow a sijm large 
for him, and the debt, obtained from a retired hourgeaie who 
lent out his moneys " by way," he said, " of maintaining an 
excitement and interest in life," would in a few days become 
due. The letter was not from that creditor, but it was from 
his publisher, containing a very disagreeable statement of 
accounts, pressing for settlement, and declining an offer of 
Savarin's for a new book (not yet begun) except upon terms 
that the author valued himself too highly to accept Alto- 
gether, the situation was unpleasant. There were many 
times in which Madame Savarin presumed to scold her dis- 



 



 



THB PARISIANS. 207 

tinguished husband for his want of prudence and thrift. But 
those were never the times when scolding could be of no 
use. It could clearly.be of no use now. Now was the mo- 
ment to cheer and encourage him, to re-assure bim as to his 
own undiminished powers and popularity, for he talked de- 
jectedly of himself as obsolete and passing out of fashion ; 
to convince hin^ also of the impossibility that the ungrateful 
publisher whom Savarin's more brilliant successes had en- 
riched could encounter the odium of hostile proceedings ; 
and to remind him of all the authors, all the artists, whom 
he, in their earlier difficulties, had so liberally assisted, and 
from whom a sum sufficing to pay off the howrgeoU creditor 
when the day arrived could now be honorably asked and 
would be readily contributed. In this last .suggestion the 
homely prudent good sense of Madame Savarin failed her. 
She did not comprehend that delicate pride of honor which, 
with air his Parisian frivolities and cynicism, dignified the 
Parisian man of genius. Savarin could not, to save his neck 
from a rope, have sent round the begging-hat to friends whom 
he had obliged. Madame Savarin was one of those women 
with large-lobed ears, who can be wonderfully affectionate, 
wonderfully sensible ; admirable wives and mothers, and yet 
are deficient in artistic sympathies with artistic natures. 
Still, a really good honest wife is such an incalculable bless- 
ing to her lord, that, at the end of the talk in the solitary 
a^^Jthis man of ex(\m%\te finesse^ of the nndefinable high- 
bred temperament, and, alas ! the painfully morbid susceptibil- 
ity, which belong to the genuine artistic characterJbmerged 
into the open sun-lit lawn with his crest uplifted, his 1ip curved 
upward in its joyous mockery, and perfectly persuaded that 
somehow or other he should put down the offensive publish- 
er, and pay off the offending creditor when the day for pay- 
ment came. Still, he had judgment enough to know that to 
do this he must get back to Paris, and could not dawdle 
away precious hours in discussing the principles of poetry 
with Graham Vane. 

There was only one thing, apart from "the begging-hat," 
in which Savailn dissented from his wife. She suggested his 
starting a new journal in conjunction with Gustave Rameau, 
upon -^hose genius and the expectations to be formed from 
it-(here she was tacitly thinking of Isaura wedded to Rameau, 



 



 



208 THE PABISIANS. 

and more than a Malibran on the stage) she insisted vehement- 
ly. Savarin did not thus estimate Gustave Rameau . thought 
him a clever, promising young writer ui a very bad school of 
writing, who might do well some day or other. But that a 
Rameau could help a Savarin to make a fortune! "No; at 
that idea he opened his eyes, patted his wife's shoulder, and 
called her "en/an^." 
Gi-ahara's letter was from M. Renard, and ran thus : 

" Monsieur, . I had the honor to call at your apartment 
this morning, and I write this line to the address given to me 
by your concierge to say that I have been fortunate enough 
to ascertain that the relation of the missing lady is now at 
Paris. I shall 4iold myself in readiness to attend your sum- 
mons. . Deign to accept, monsieur, the assurance of my pro- 
found consideration, J. Renard.'^ 

This communication sufficed to put Gi*aham into very high 
spirits. Any thing that promised success to his research 
seemed to deliver his thoughts from a burden and his will 
from a fetter. Perhaps in a few days he might frankly and 
honorably say to Isaura words which would justify his re- 
taining longer, and pressing more ardently, the delicate hand 
which trembled in his as they took leave. 

On arriving at Pans, Graham dispatched a note to M. 
Renard requesting to see him, and received a brief lipe in 
reply that M. Renard feared he should be detained on other 
and important business till the evening, but hoped to call at 
eight o'clock. A few minutes before th^ hour he entered 
Graham's apartment. 

" You have discovered the uncle of Louise Duval !" ex- 
claimed Graham. " Of course you mean M. de Maul6on, and 
he is at Paris ?" 

" True so far, monsieur ; but do not be too sanguine as to 
the results of the information I can give you. Permit me, 
as briefly as possible, to state the circumstances. When 
you acquainted me with the fact that M. de Maul6on was 
the unci* of Louise Duval, I told you that I* was not with- 
out hopes of finding him out, though so long absent from 
Paris. I will now explain why. Some months ago one of 
my colleagues engaged in the political department (whiclfl 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 209 

am not) was sent to Lyons, in consequence of some suspicions 
conceived by the loyal authorities there of a plot against 
the Emperor's life. The suspicions were groundless, the plot 
a mare's-nest. But my colleague's attention was especially 
drawn toward a man, not mixed up with the circumstances 
from which a plot had been inferred, but deemed in some 
way or other a dangerous enemy to the Government. Osten- 
sibly, he exercised a modest and small calling as a sort of 
courtier or agent de change; but it was noticed that certain 
persons familiarly frequenting his apartment, or to whose 
houses he used to go at night, were disaffected to the Gov- 
ernment . not by any means of the lowest rank . some of 
them rich malcontents who had been devoted Orleanists; 
others, disappointed aspirants to office or the ' cross ;' one or 
two well-born and opulent fanatics dreaming of another re- 
public. Certain very able articles in the journals of the ex- 
citable Midi^ though bearing another signature, were com- 
posed or dictated by this man . articles evading the censure 
and penalties of the law, but very mischievous in their tone. 
All who had come into familiar communication with this 
person were impressed with a sense of his powers ; and also 
with a vague belief that he belonged to a higher class in 
breeding and education than that of a petty agent de change. 
My colleague set himself to watch the man, and took occa- 
sions of business at his little office to enter into talk with 
him. Not by personal appearance, but by voice, he came 
to a conclusion that the man was not wholly a stranger to 
him ; a peculiar voice with a slight Norman breadth of pro- 
nunciation, though a Parisian accent ; a voice very low, yet 
very distinct . very masculine, yet very gentle. My col- 
league was puzzled, till late one evetiing he observed the 
man coming out of tlie house of one of these rich malcon- 
tents, the rich malcontent himself accompanying him. My 
colleague, availing himself of the dimness of light, as the two 
passed into a lane which led to the agent's apartment, con- 
trived to keep close behind and listen to their conversation. 
But of this he heard nothing . only, when at the end of the 
lane, the rich man turned abruptly, shook his companion 
warmly by the hand, and parted from him, saying, * Never 
fear; all shall go right with you, my dear Victor.' At the 
Bound of that name ' Victor,' my colleague's memories, be- 



 VjOOQIC 



210 THS PAfilSIAKS. ' 

fore BO confused, became instantaneously clear. Previous 
to entering our service, he had been in the horse business . 
a votary of the turf; as such he had often seen the brilliant 
' sportmany Victor de Maul6on ; sometimes talked to him. 
Yes, that was the voice . the slight Norman intonation 
(Victor de Maul^on's father had it strongly, and Victor had 
passed some of his early childhood in Normandy), the sub- 
dued modulation of speech which had made so polite the 
offense to men, or so winning the courtship to women . that 
was Victor de Maul^on. But why there in that disguise ? 
What was his real business and object ? My confrh'e had 
no time allowed to him to prosecute such inquiries. Wheth- 
er Victor or the rich malcontent had observed him at their 
heels, and feared he might have overheard their words, I 
know not ; but the next day appeared in one of the popular 
journals circulating among the ouvriers, a paragraph stating 
that a Paris spy had been seen at Lyons, warning all hon- 
est men against his machinations, and containing a tolerably 
accurate description of his person. And that very day, on 
venturing forth, my estimable colleague suddenly found 
himself hustled by a ferocious throng, from whose hands he 
was with great difficulty rescued by the municipal guard. 
He left Lyons that night ; and for recompense of his services 
received a sharp reprimand from his chief. He had com- 
mitted the worse offense in our profession, trqp de z^. Hav- 
ing only heard the outlines of this story from another, I re- 
paired to my confrhre^ after my last interview with monsieur, 
and learned what I now tell you irom his own lips. As he 
was not in my branch of the service, I could not order him 
to return to Lyons ; and I doubt whether his chief would 
have allowed it. Bat I went to Lyons myself, and there 
ascertained that our supposed Vicom^ had left that town 
for Paris some months ago, not long after the adventure of 
my colleague. The man bore a very, good character generally 
. was said to be very honest and inoffensive; and the no- 
tice taken of him by persons of higher rank was attributed 
generally to a respect for his talents, and not on account of 
any sympathy in political opinions. I found that the ccynr 
frhre mentioned, and who alone could identify M. de Mau- 
14on in the disguise which the Vicomte had assumed, was 
absent on one of those missions abroad in which he is chiefly 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 211 

employed. I had to wait for his return, and it was only the 
day before yesterday that I obtained the following particu- 
lars : M. de Maul^on bears the same name as he did at Ly- 
ons . that name is Jean Lebeau ; he exercises the ostensible 
profession of * a letter- writer,' and a sort of adviser on busi- 
ness among the workmen and petty bourgeoisie^ and he night- 
ly frequents the Caf& Jean Jacques^ Rue , Faubourg 

Montmartre. It is not yet quite half-past eight, and, no 
doubt, you could see him at the cafi this very night, if you 
thought proper to go." 

" Excellent ! I will go ! Describe him !" 

** Alas ! that is exactly what I can not do at present. For 
after hearing what I now tell you, I put the same request 
you do to my colleague, when, before he could answer me, 
he was summoned to the bureau of his chief, promising to 
return and give me the requisite description. He did not 
return. And I find that he was^ compelled, on quitting his 
chief, to seize the first train starting for Lille upon an im- 
portant political investigation which brooked no delay. He 
will be back in a few days, and then monsieur shall have the 
description." 

" Nay ; I think I will seize time by the forelock, and try 
my chance to-night. If the man be really a conspirator, 
and it looks likely enough, who knows but what he may see 
quick reason to take alarm and vanish from Paris at any 

hour? Cafi Jean Jacques^ R^ue ; I will go. Stay ; you 

have seen Victor de Maul6on in his youth : what was he like 
then?" 

" Tall . slender . but broad-shouldered . very erect . car- 
rying his head high . a profusion of dark curls . a small black 
mustache . fair clear complexion . light -colored eyes with 
dark lashes. ;/br^ bd homme. But he will not look like that 
now." 

" His present age ?" 

" Forty-seven or forty-eight. But before you go, I must 
beg you to consider well what you are about. It is evident 
that M. de Maul^on has some strong reason, whatever it be, 
for merging his identity in that of Jean Lebeau. I presume, 
therefore, that you could scarcely go up to M. Lebeau, when 
you have discovered him, and say, * Pray, M. le Vtcomtey can 
you give me some tidings of your niece, Louise Duval ?' If 



 



 



212 THE PABI8IAKS. 

yon thus accosted him, yoa might possibly bring some dan* 
get on yourself, but you would certainly gain no information 
from him." 

"True." 

^' On the other hand, if you make his acquaintance as M. 
Lebeau, how can you assume him to know any thing about 
Louise Duval ?" 

^^Parbleul M. Renard, you try to toss me aside on both 
horns of the dilemma ; but it seems to me that, if I once make 
his acquaintance as M. Lebeau, I might gradually and cau- 
tiously feel my way as to the best mode of putting the ques- 
tion to which I seek reply. I suppose, too, that the man 
must be iil very poor circumstances to adopt so humble a 
calling, and that a small sum of money may smooth all dif- 
ficulties." # 

"I am not so sure of that," said M. Renard, thoughtfully; 
" but grant that money may do so, and grant also that the 
Vicomte, being a needy man, has become a very unscrupu- 
lous one . is there any thing in your motives for discovering 
Louise Duval which might occasion you trouble and annoy- 
ance, if it were divined by a needy and unscrupulous man ? 
. any thing which might give him a power of threat or ex- 
action ? Mind, I am not asking you to tell me any secret 
you have reasons for concealing, but I suggest that it might 
be prudent if you did not let M. Lebeau know your real name 
and rank . if, in short, you could follow his example, and 
adopt a disguise. But . no ; when I think of it, you would 
doubtless be so unpracticed in the art of disguise that he 
would detect you at once to be other than you seem; and 
if suspecting you of spying into his secrets, and if those se- 
crets be really of a political nature, your very life might not 
be safe." 

"Thank you for your hint . the disguise is an excellent 
idea, and combines amusement with precaution. That this 
Victor de Maul^on must be a very unprincipled and danger- 
ous man is, I think, abundantly clear. Granting that he was 
innocent of all design of robbery in the affair of the jewels, 
still, the offense which he did own . that of admitting him- 
self at night by a false key into the rooms of a wife whom 
he sought to surprise or terrify into dishonor . was a villain- 
ous action ; and his present course of life is sufficiently mys- 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 213 

terfbus to warrant the most unfavorable supposition. Be- 
sides, there is another motive for concealing my name from 
him : you say that he once had a duel with a Vane, who 
was very probably my father, and I have no wish to expose 
myself to the chance of his turning up in London some day, 
and seeking to renew there the acquaintance that I had court- 
ed at Paris. As for my skill in playing any part I may ^as- 
sume, do not fear. I am no novice in that. In my younger 
days I was thought clever in private theatricals, especially 
in the transformations of appearance which belong to light 
comedy and farce. Wait a few minutes, and you shall see." 

Graham then retreated into his bedroom, and in a few 
minutes re-appeared so changed that Renard at first glance 
took him for a stranger. He had doffed his dress . which 
habitually, when in capitals, was characterized by the quiet, 
indefinable elegance that to a man of the great world, high- 
bred and. young, seems "to the manner born" . for one of 
those coarse suits which Englishmen are wont to wear in 
their travels, and by which they are represented in French 
or German caricatures . loose jacket of tweed, with redun- 
dant pockets, waistcoat to match, short dust-colored trow- 
sers. He had combed his hair straight over his forehead, 
which, as I have said somewhere before, appeared in itself 
to alter the character of his countenance, and, without any 
resort to paints or cosmetics, had somehow or other given to 
the expression of his face an impudent, low-bred expression, 
with a glass screwed on to his right eye; such a look as a 
cockney journeyman, wishing to pass for a " swell " about 
town, may cast on a servant-maid in the pit of a subui-ban 
theatre. 

" Will it do, old fellow ^" he ^exclaimed, in a rollicking, 
swaggering tone of voice, speaking French with a villainous 
British accent. 

"Perfectly," said Renard, laughing. "I offer my compli- 
ments, and if ever you are ruined, monsieur, I will promise 
you a place in our police. Only one caution. ^take care not 
to overdo your part." 

"Right. A quarter to nine . ^I'm off." 



 



; 



214 THB PABISIANS. 



CHAPTER VI. 

Thsbb is generally a brisk exhilaration of spirits in the 
ret'ui'D to any special amusement or light accomplishment 
associated with the pleasant memories of earlier youth ; and 
remarkably so, I believe, when the amusement or accom- 
plishment has been that of the amateur stage-player. Cer^ 
tainiy I have known persons of very grave pursuits, of very 
dignified character and position, who seem to regain the vi- 
vacity of boyhood when disguising look and voice for a part 
in some drawing-room comedy or charade. I might name 
statesmen of solemn repute rejoicing to raise and to join in 
a laugh at their expense in such travesty of their habitual 
selves. 

The reader must not, therefore, be surprised, nor, I trust, 
deem it inconsistent with the more serious attributes of 
Graham's character, if the Englishman felt the sort of joy- 
ous excitement I describe, as, on his way to the Cafe Jean 
Jacques^ he meditated the r6le he had undertaken ; and the 
joyousness was heightened beyond the mere holiday sense 
of humoristic pleasantry by the sanguine hope that much to 
affect his lasting happiness might result from the success of 
the object for which his disguise was assumed. 

It was just twenty minutes past nine when he arrived at 
the Caf^ Jean Jacqvss. He dismissed th^Jiaore and entered. 
The apartment devoted to customers comprised two large 
rooms. The first was the fafi properly speaking ; the sec- 
ond, opening on it, was t^e billiard - room. Conjecturing 
that he should probably find the person of whom he was in 
quest employed at the billiard-table, Graham passed thither 
at once. A tall man, who might be seven-and-forty, with a 
long black beard slightly grizzled, was at play with a young 
man of perhaps twenty-eight, who gave him odds . as bet- 
ter players of twenty-eight ought to give odds to a player, 
though originally of equal force, whose eye is not so quick, 
whose hand is not so steady, as they were twenty years ago. 
Said Graham to himself " The bearded man is my Vicomte.** 



 



 



THB FABISIAN8. 215 

He called for a cup of coffee, and seated himself on a bench 
at the end of the room. 

The bearded man was far behind in the game. It was his 
turn to play; the balls were placed in the most awkward 
position for him. Graham himself was a fair billiard-player, 
both in the English and the French game. He said to him- 
self, '* No man who can make a cannon there should accept 
odds." The bearded man made a cannon ; the bearded man 
continued to make cannons; the bearded man did not stop 
till he had won the game. The gallery of spectators was 
enthusiastic. Taking care to speak in very bad, very En- 
glish French, Graham expressed to one of the enthusiasts 
seated beside him his admiration of the bearded man's play- 
ing, and ventured to ask if the bearded man were a profes- 
sional or an amateur player. 

" Monsieur," replied the enthusiast, taking a short cutty- 
pipe from his mouth, " it is anr amateur, who has been a 
great player in his day, and is so proud that he always takes 
less odds than he ought of a younger man. It is' not once 
in a month that he comes out as he has done to-night ; but 
to-night he has steadied his hand. He has had six petite 
verres,^^ 

"Ah, indeed ! Do you know his name ?" 

" I should think so ; he buried my father, my two aunts, 
and my wife." 

" Buried ?" said Graham, more and more British in his 
accent; " I don't understand." 

" Monsieur, you are English." 

"I confess it." 

"And a stranger to the Faubourg Montmartre." 

"True." 

" Or you would have heard of M. Giraud, the liveliest 
member of the State Company for conducting funerals. 
They are going to play Za Powfo." 

Much disconcerted, Graham retreated into the ca/i^ and 
seated himself hap-hazard at one of the small tables. Glan- 
cing round the room, he saw no one in whom he could con- 
jecture the once brilliant Vicomte. 

The company appeared to him sufficiently decent, and 
especially what may be called local. There were some 
Nausea drinking wine, no doubt of the cheapest and thin- 



 



 



216 THB PABISIAKS. 

nest ; some in rough, coarse dresses, drinking been These 
were evidently English, Belgian, or Gennan artisans. At one 
table four young men, who looked like small journeymen, 
were playing cards. At three other tables men older, bet- 
ter dressed, probably shop-keepers, were playing dominoes. 
Graham scrutinized these last, but among them all could 
detect no one corresponding to his ideal of the Vicomte de 
Maul6on. " Probably," thought he, " I am too late, or per- 
haps he will not be here this evening. At all events, I will 
wait a quarter of an hour." Then, the gargon approaching 
his table, he deemed it necessary to call for something, and, 
still in strong English accent, asked for lemonade and an 
evening journal. The gar^n nodded, and went his way. 
A monsieur at the round table next his own politely handed 
to him the Qcdignani^ saying in very good English, though 
unmistakably the good English of a Frenchman, " The En- 
glish journal, at your service." 

Graham bowed his head, accepted the Galignani, and in- 
spected Ws courteous neighbor. A more respectable-looking 
man no Englishman could see in an English country town. 
He wore an unpretending flaxen wig, with limp whiskers 
that met at the chin, and might originally have been the 
same color as the wig, but were now of a pale gray . no 
beard, no mustache. He was dressed with the scrupulous 
cleanliness of a sober citizen . a high white neckcloth, with 
a large old-fashioned pin, containing a little knot of hair, 
covered with glass or crystal, and bordered with a black 
frame- work, in which were inscribed letters . evidently a 
mourning-pin, hallowed to the memory of lost spouse or 
child . a man who, in England, might be the mayor of a 
cathedral town, at least the town-clerk. He seemed suffer- 
ing from some infirmity of vision, for he wore green spec- 
tacles. The expression of his face was very mild and gen- 
tle; apparently he was about sixty years old . somewhat 
more. 

Graham took kindly to his neighbor, insomuch that, in re- 
turn for the Galignani, he offered him a cigar, lighting one 
himself. 

His neighbor rftfused politely. 

^^Mercif I never smoke . never; mon mideein forbids it. 
If I could be tempted, it would be by an English cigar. Ah, 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. . 217 

how you English beat us in all things . your ships, your iron, 
your tdbac . which you do not grow !'' 

This speech, rendered literally as we now render it, may 
give the idea of a somewhat vulgar speaker. But there was 
something in the man's manner, in his smile, in his courtesy, 
which did not strike Graham as vulgar ; on the contrary, he 
thought within himself, "How instinctive Jio all Frenchmen 
good-breeding is !" 

Before, however, Graham had time to explain to his ami- 
able neighbor the politico-economical principle according to 
which England, growing no tobacco, had tobacco much bet- 
ter than France, which did grow it, a rosy, middle-aged mon- 
sieur made his appearance, saying hurriedly to Graham's 
neighbor, " I'm afraid I'm late, but there is still a good half- 
hour before us if you will give me my revenge." 

" Willingly, M. Georges. * ^dr^bn^ the dominoes." 

"Have you been playing at billiards?" asked M. Georges. 

" Yes, two games." 

"With success?" 

" I won the first, and lost the second through the defect of 
my eye-sight ; the game depended on a stroke which would 
have been easy to an infant . I missed it." 

Here the dominoes arrived, and M. Georges began shuf- 
fling them ; the other turned to Graham and asked politely 
if he understood the game. 

"A little, but not enough to comprehend why it is said to 
require so much skill." 

" It is chiefly an aflair of memory with me ; but M. Georges, 
my opponent, has tte talent of combination, which I have 
not." 

" Nevertheless," replied M. Georges, gruffly, " you are not 
easily beaten ; it is for you to play first, M. Lebeau." 

Graham almost started. Was it possible ! This mild, 
limp-whiskered, flaxen-wigged man, Victor de Maul^on, the 
Don Juan of his time ; the last person in the room he should 
have guessed. Yet, now examining his neighbor with more 
attentive eye, he wondered at his stupidity in not having rec- 
ognized at once the ci-devant gentilhomme and beau gar^on. 
It happens frequently that our imagination plays us this 
trick ; we form to ourselves an idea of some one eminent 
for good or for evil . a poet, a statesman, a general, a mur- 

I.. 10 

 VjOOQIC 



218 . THE PABISIANS. 

derer, a swindler, a thief: the man is before us, and our ideas 
have gone into so diffei*ent a groove that he does not excite 
a suspicion. We are told who he is, and immediately de- 
tect a thousand things that ought to have proved his iden- 
tity. 

Looking thus again with rectified vision at the false Le- 
beau, Graham observed an elegance and delicacy of feature 
which might, in youth, have made the countenance very 
handsome, and rendered it still good-looking, nay, prepos- 
sessing. He now noticed, too, the slight Norman accent, 
its native harshness of breadth subdued into the modulated 
tones which bespoke the habits of polished society. Above 
all, as M. Lebeau moved his dominoes with one hand, not 
shielding his pieces with the other (as M. Georges warily 
did), but allowing it to rest carelessly on the table, be de- 
tected the hands of the French aristocrat ; hands that had 
nevet done work . never (like those of the English noble of 
equal birth) been imbrowned or freckled, or roughened or 
enlarged by early practice in athletic sports ; but hands sel- 
dom seen save in the higher circles of Parisian life . partly 
perhaps of hereditary formation, partly owing their texture 
to great care begun in early yoitth, and continued mechan- 
ically in after-life . with long taper fingers and polished 
nails ; white and delicate as those of a woman, but not 
slight, not feeble; nervous and sinewy as tl^ose of a prac- 
ticed swordsman. 

Graham watched the play, and Lebeau good-naturedly ex- 
plained to hina its complications as it proceeded ; though the 
explanation, diligently attended to by M. Georges, lost Le- 
beau the game. 

The dominoes were again shuffled, and during that opera- 
tion M. Georges said, " By-the-way, M, Lebeau, you promised 
to find me a locataire for my second floor; have you suc- 
ceeded ?'' 

" Not yet. Perhaps you had better advertise in Zes Pe- 
tites Affiches, You ask too much for the hdbitu^ of this 
neighborhood . one hundred francs a month." 

" But the lodging is furnished, and well too, and has four 
rooms. One hundred francs are not much." 

A thought flashed upon Graham . " Pardon, monsieur," he 
said, " have you an appartement de gar^n to let furnished ?" 



 



 




'* Abovk alt-, as M. Lrbeav movbd ni8 domimoeb witu onb hand, not shieldino his 

PIS0E8 WITH THB OTUER (aS M. GEOBeEB WABILY DID), BUT ALLOWING IT TO REST OABB- 
LB88I.Y ON THB TABLE, HE DETECTED THE HANDS OF THB FbENOU ABISTOCBAT." 



 



 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 219 

" Yes, monsieur, a charming one. Are you in search of an 
apartment ?" 

" I have some idea of taking one, but only by the month. 
I am but just arrived at Paris, and I hav business which 
may keep me here a few weeks. I do but require a bed- 
room and a small cabinet, and the rent must be modest. I 
am not a milord.^^ 

" I am sure we could arrange, monsieur,*' said M. Gteorges, 
though I could not well divide my logement. But one hun- 
dred francs a month is not much !'' 

** I fear it is more than I can afford ; however, if you will 
give me your address, I will call and see the rooms . say the 
day after to-morrow. Between this and then I expect let- 
ters which may more clearly decide my movements." 

^ If the apartments suit you," said M. Lebean, you will at 
least be in the house of a very honest man, which is more 
than can be said of every one who lets furnished apartments. 
The house, too, has a concierge^ with a handy wife who will 
arrange your rooms and provide *you with coffee . or tea, 
which you English prefer . if you breakfast at home." 

Here M. Georges handed a card to Graham, and asked 
what hour he would call 

"About twelve, if that hour is convenient," said Graham, 
rising. "I presume there is a restaurant in the neighbor- 
hood where I could dine reasonably." 

"cTe crois Men . ^half a dozen. I can recommend to you 
one where you can dine en prince for thirty sous. And if 
you are at Paris on business, and want any letters written 
in private, I can also recommend to you my friend here, M. 
Lebeau. Ay, and on affairs his advice is as good as a law- 
yer's, and his fee a bagatelle.^^ 

" Don't believe all that M. Georges s<T flatteringly says of 
me," put in M. Lebeau, with a modest half smile, and in En- 
glish. " I should tell you that I, like yourself, am recently 
arrived at Paris, having bought the business and good-will 
of my predecessor in the apartment I occu^ ; and it is only 
to the respect due to his antecedents, and on the score of a 
few letters of recommendation which I bring from Lyons, 
that I can attribute the confidence shown to mg, a stranger 
in this neighborhood. Still I have some knowledge of the 
world, and I am always glad if I can be of service to the En- 

 VjOOQIC 



220 THE PABISIAN8. 

glish. I love the English :" he said this with a sort of mel- 
ancholy earnestness which seemed sincere, and then added in 
a more careless tone, '^ I have met with much kindness from 
them in the coi^rse of a checkered life." 

" You seem a very good fellow . in fact, a regular trump, 
M. Lebeau," replied Graham, in the same language. " Give 
me your address. To say truth, I am a very poor French 
scholar, as you must have seen, and am awfully bother- 
headjed how to manage some correspondence on matters 
with which I am intrusted by my employer, so that it is a 
lucky chance which has brought me acquainted with you.*' 

M. Lebeau inclined his head gracefully, and drew from a 
very neat morocco case a card, which Graham took and 
pocketed. Then he paid for his coffee and lemonade, and 
returned home well satined with the evening's adventure. 



CIUPTER VII. 

The next morning Graham sent for M. Renard, and con- 
sulted with that experienced functionary as to the details of 
vthe plan of action which he had revolved during the hours 
of a sleepless night. 

" In conformity with your advice," said he, " not to ex- 
pose myself to the chance of future annoyance, by confiding 
to a man so dangerous as the false Lebeau my name and ad- 
dress, I propose to take the lodging offered to me, as Mr. 
Lamb, an attorney's clerk, commissioned to get in certain 
debts, and transact other matters of business, on behalf of 
his employer's clients. I suppose there will be no difiiculty 
with the police in this change of name, now that passports 
for the English are not necessary ?" 

"Certainly not. You will have no trouble in that re- 
spect." 

"I shall thus be enabled very naturally to improve ac- 
quaintance witb the professional letter-writer, and find an 
easy opportunity to introduce the name of Louise Duval*. 
My chief difficrlty, I fear, not being a practical actor, \f^l 
be to keep up consistently the queer sort of language I have 
adopted, both in French and in English. I have too sharp 
a critic in a. man so consummate himself in stage trick and 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 221 

disguise as M. Lebeau, not to feel the necessity of getting 
through my rdle as quickly as I can. Meanwhile, can you 
recommend me to some magaairi where I can obtain a suit- 
able change of costume? I can't 'always wear a traveling 
suit, and I must buy Jinen of coarser texture than mine, and 
with the initials of my new name inscribed on it." 

" Quite right to study such details ; I will introduce you 
to a magdSin near the Temple, where you will find all you 
want." 

" Next, have you any friends or relations in the provinces 
unknown to M. Lebeau, to whom I might be supposed to 
write about debts or business matters, and from whom I 
might have replies ?" 

" I will think over it, and manage that for you very easily. 
Tour letters shall find their way to me, and I will dictate 
the answers." 

After some further conversation on that business, M, Re- 
nard made an appointment to meet Graham at a cafe near 
th'e Temple later in the afternoon, and took his departure. 

Graham then informed his laquaia de place that, though 
he kept on his lodgings, he was going into the country for 
a few days, and should not want the man's services till he 
returned. He therefore dismissed and paid him off at once, 
so that the laquais might not observe, when he quitted his 
rooms the next day, that he took with him no change of 
clothes, etc. 



CHAPTER VHI. 

Gbaham Vane has been for some days in the apartment 
rented \)fM. Georges. He takes it in the name of Mr. Lamb 
. la name wisely chosen, less common than Thomson and 
Smith, less likely to be supposed an assumed name, yet com- 
mon enough not to be able easily to trace it to any special 
family. He appears, as he had proposed, in the character 
of an agent employed by a solicitor in London tg execute 
sundry commissions, and to collect certain outstanding debts. 
There is no need to mention the name of the solicitor; if 
there were, he could give the name of his own solicitor, to 
whose discretion he could trust implicitly. He dresses and 



 



 



222 THE PARISIANS. 

acts up to bis assumed character with the skill of a man who, 
like the illustrious Charles Fox, has, though in private rep- 
resentations, practiced the stage-play in which Demosthenes 
said the triple art of Qratory consisted . who has seen a 
great deal of the world, and has that adaptability of intel- 
lect which knowledge of the world lends to one who is so 
thoroughly in earnest as to his end that he agrees to be 
sportive as to his means. 

The kind of language he employs when speaking English 
to Lebeau is that suited to the rdle of a dapper young under- 
ling of vulgar mind habituated to vulgar companionships. I 
feel it due, if not to Graham himself, at least to the memory 
of the dignified orator whose name he inherits, so to modify 
and soften the hardy style of that peculiar diction in which 
he disguises his bhth and disgraces his culture, that it is 
only here and there that I can venture to indicate the gen- 
eral tone of it. But in order to supply my deficiencies 
therein, the reader has only to call to mind the forms of 
phraseology which polite novelists in vogue, especially 
young lady novelists, ascribe to well-born gentlemen, and 
more emphatically to those in the higher ranks of the Peer- 
age. No doubt Graham in his capacity of critic had been 
compelled to read, in order to review, those contributions to 
refined literature, and had familiarized himself to a vein of 
conversation abounding with " swell," and " stunner," and 
" awfully jolly," in its libel on manners and outrage on taste. 

He has attended nightly the Caf& Jean Jacques; he has 
improved acquaintance with M. Georges and M. Lebeau; 
he has played at billiards, he has played at dominoes, with 
the latter. He has been much surprised at the unimpeach- 
able honesty which M. Lebeau has exhibited in both these 
games. In billiards, indeed, a man can not cheat except by 
disguising his strength ; it is much the same in dominoes . 
it is skill combined with luck, as in whist; but in whist 
there are modes of cheating which dominoes do not allow . 
you can't mark a domino as you can a card. It was per- ^ 
fectly clear to Graham that M. Lebeau did not g^n a liveli- 
hood by billiards or dominoes at the * Cafk Jean Jacques, 
In the former he was not only a fair but a generous player. 
He played exceedingly well, despite his spectacles; but he 
gave, with something of a Frenchman's lofty /aw/aronwtwfe, 



 



 



THE PAKISIANS. 223 

larger odds to his adversary than his play jastified. In 
dominoes, where such odds could not well be given, he in- 
sisted on playing such small stakes as two or three francs 
might cover. In short, M. Lebeau puzzled Graham. All 
about M. Lebeau, his manner, his talk, was irreproachable, 
and baffled suspicion ; except in this, Graham gradually dis- 
covered that the cafe had a quasi political character. List- 
ening to talkers round him, he overheard much that might 
well have shocked the notions of a moderate Liberal ; much 
that held in disdain the objects to which, in 1869, an English 
Radical directed his aspirations. Vote by ballot, universal 
suffrage, etcf. . such objects the French had already attained. 
By the talkers at the Cafi Jean Jacques they were deemed 
to be the tricky contrivances of tyranny. In fact, the talk 
was more scornful of what Englishmen understand by radi- 
calism or democracy than Graham ever heard from the lips 
of an ultra- Tory. It assumed a strain of philosophy far 
above the vulgar squabbles of ordinary party politicians . a 
philosophy which took for its fundamental principles the de- 
struction of religion and of private property. These two 
objects seemed dependent the one on the other. The phi- 
losophers of the Jean Jacques held with that expounder of 
Internationalism, Eugene Dupont,. " Nous ne voulons plus 
de religion, car les religions 6touffent I'intelligence."* Now 
and then, indeed, a dissentient voice was raised as to the 
existence of a Supreme Being, but, with one exception, it 
soon Bank into silence. No voice was raised in defense of 
private property. These sages appeared for the most part 
to belong to the class of ouvriers^ or artisans. Some of them 
were foreigners . Belgian, German, English; all seemed 
well off for their calling. Indeed, they must have had com- 
paratively high wages, to judge by their dress and the mon- 
ey they spent on regaling themselves. The language of 
several was well chosen, at times eloquent. Some brought 
with them women who Seemed respectable, and who often 
joined in the conversation, especially when it turned upon 
the law of marriage as a main obstacle to all personal liberty 
and social improvement. If this was a subject on which the 

* Disconrs par Eugene Dupont k la Cli&tare da Congr^s de Bnixelles, 
September 8, 1868. 

10* ^ , 

 VjOOQIC 



224 THE PARISIANS. 

women did not all agree, still they discussed it, without 
prejudice and with admirable sang-froid. Yet many of 
them looked like wives and mothers. Now and then a 
young journeyman brought with him a young lady of more 
doubtful aspect, but such a couple kept aloof from the others. 
Now and then, too, a man evidently of higher station than 
that of ounriefr^ and who was received by the philosophers 
with couitesy and respect, joined one of the tables and or- 
dered a bowl of punch for general participation. In such 
occasional visitors, Q rah am, still listening, detected a writer 
of the press ; now and then a small artist, or actor, or medi- 
cal student. Among the habUids there was 'one man, an 
ouvrier^ in whom Graham could not help feeling an interest. 
He was called Monnier, sometimes more familiarly Armand, 
bis baptismal appellation. This man had a bold and honest 
expression of countenance. He talked like one who, if he 
had not read much, had thought much on the subjects he 
loved to discuss. He argued against the capital of employ- 
ers quite as ably as Mr. Mill has argued against the rights 
of property in land. He was still more eloquent against the 
laws of marriage and heritage. But his was the one voice 
not to be silenced in favor of a Supreme Being. He had at 
least the courage of his opinions, and was always thoroughly 
in earnest. M. Lebeau seemed to know this man, and hon- 
ored him with a nod and a smile, when passing by him to 
the table he generally occupied. This familiarity with a man 
of that class, and of opinions so extreme, excited Graham's 
curiosity. One evening he said to Lebeau, "A queer fellow 
that you have just nodded to." 

"How so?" 

" Well, he has queer notions." 

" Notions shared, I believe, by many of your countrymen ?" 

" I should think not many. Those poor simpletons yonder 
may have caught them from their French fellow-workmen, 
but I don't think that even the * gobemouches in our Na- 
tional Reform Society open their mouths to swallow such 
wasps." 

" Yet I believe the association to whi^h most of those 
ouvriers belong had its origin in England.'* 

" Indeed ! what associ^Uiion ?" 

" The International." 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 225 

. " Ah, I have heard of that." 

Lebeau turned his green spectacles fuH on Graham's face 
as he said, slowly, "And what do you think of it ?" 

Graham prudently checked the disparaging reply that first 
occurred to him, and said, "I know so little about it that I 
would rather ask you." 

" I think it might become formidable if it found able lead- 
ers who knew how to use it. Pardon me . how came you to 
know of this cafe? Were you recommended to it?" 

" No ; I happened to be in this neighborlyod on business, 
and walked in, as I might into aiiy other ca/S." 

" You don't interest yourself in the great social questions 
which are agitated below the surface of this best of all pos- 
sible worlds ?" 

"I can't say that I trouble my head much about them." 

"A game at dominoes before M. Georges arrives?" 

"Willingly. Is M. Georges one of those agitators below 
the surface ?" 

"No, indeed. It is for you to play." 

Here M. Georges arrived, and no further conversation on 
political or social questions ensued. 

Graham bad already called more than once at M. Lebeau's 
oflSce, and asked him to put into good French various letters 
on matters of business, the subject of which had been fur- 
nished by M. Renard. The office was rather imposing and 
stately, considering the modest nature of M. Lebeau's osten- 
sible profession. It occupied the entire ground - floor of a 
comer house, with a front door at one angle and a back door 
at the other. The anteroom to his cabinet, and in which 
Graham had generally to wait some minutes before he was 
introduced, was generally well filled, and not only by per- 
sons who, by their dress and outward appearance, might be 
fairly supposed sufficiently illiterate to require his aid as po- 
lite letter-writers.not only by servant-maids and griaettes^ 
by sailors, zouaves, and journeymen workmen . but not un- 
frequently by clients evidently belonging to a higher, or at 
least a richer, class of societjr . men with clothes made by a 
fashionable tailor . men, again, who, less fashionably attired, 
looked like opulent tradesmen and fathers of well-to-do fam- 
ilies . the first generally young, the last generally middle- 
aged^ All these deuizens of a higher world w^re introduced 

 VjOOQIC . 



226 THE PABISIANS. 

by a saturnine clerk into M. Lebeau's reception-room very 
quickly, and in precedence of the ouvHers and grisettes. 

" What can this mean ?" thought Grahanu " Is it really 
that this humble business avowed is the cloak to some polit- 
ical conspiracy concealed . the International Aasociation ?" 
And, so pondering, the clerk one day singled him from the 
crowd and admitted him into M. Lebeau's cabinet. Graham 
thought the time had now arrived when he might safely ap- 
proach the subject that brought him to the Faubourg Mont- 
martre. 

" You* are vfry good," said Graham, speaking in the En- 
glish of a young earl in our elegant novels . " you are very 
good to let me in while you have so many swells and nobs 
waiting for you in the other room. But I say, old fellow, 
you have not the cheek to tell me that they want you to 
correct their cocker or spoon for them by proxy ?" 

" Pardon me," answered M. Lebeau in French, " if I prefer 
my own language in replying to you. I speak the English 
I leaiiied many years ago, and your language in the beau 
monde, to which you evidently belong, is strange to me. 
You are quite right, however, in your surmise that I have 
other clients than those who, like yourself, think I could cor- 
rect their verbs or their spelling. I have seen a great deal 
of the world . I know something of it, and something of the 
law ; so that many persons come to me for advice and for 
legal information on terms more moderate than those of an 
avoicL But my antechamber is full ; I am pressed for time ; 
excuse me if I ask you to say at once in what I can be agree- 
able to you to-day." 

"Ah I" said Graham, assuming a very earnest look, "you 
do know the world, that is clear; and you do know the law 
of France. eh?" 

"Yes, a little." 

" What I wanted to say at present may have something 
to do with French law, and I meant to ask you either to rec- 
ommend to me a sharp lawyer, or to tell me how I can best 
get at your famous police here." 

"Police?" 

" I think I may require the service of one of those officers 
whom we in England call detectives ; but if you are busy 
now, I can call to-morrow." 



 



 



THB PABISIANS. 22V 

" I spare you two minutes. Say at once, dear monsieur, 
what you want with law or police." 

" I am instructed to find out the address of a certain Louise 
Duval, daughter of a drawing-master named Adolphe Duval, 
living in the Rue in the year 1848." 

Graham, while he thus said, naturally looked Lebeau in 
the face . not pryingly, not significantly, but as a man gen- 
erally does look in the face the other man whom he accosts 
seriously. The change in the face he regarded was slight, 
but it was unmistakable. It was the sudden meeting of the 
eyebrows, accompanied with the sudden jerk of the shoulder 
and bend of the neck, which betoken a man taken by sur- 
prise, and who pauses to reflect before he replies. His pause 
was but momentary. 

" For what object is this address required ?" 

" That I don't know ; but evidently for some advantage 
to Madame or Mademoiselle Duval, if still alive, because my 
employer authorizes me to spend no less than 100 in ascer- 
taining where she is, if alive, or where she was buried, if 
dead ; and if other means fail, I am instructed to advertise 
lo the effect . *That. if Louise Duval, ol^ in case of her death, 
any children of hers living in the year 11849, will communi- 
cate with some person whom I may appoint at Paris . such 
intelligence, authenticated, may prove to the advantage of 
the party advertised for.' I am, however, told not to resort 
to this means, without consulting either with a legal adviser 
or the police." 

" Hem ! . have you inquired at the house where this lady 
was, you say, living in 1 848 ?" 

" Of course I have done that ; but very clumsily, I dare 
say . through a friend . and learned nothing. But I must 
not keep you now. I think I shall apply at once to the po- 
lice. What should I say when I get to the bureau .^" 

"Stop, monsieur, stop. I do not advise you to apply to 
the police. It would be waste of time and money. Allow 
me to think ov^r the matter. I shall see you this evening 
at the Caji Jean Jacques at *eight o'clock. Till then do 
nothing." 

"All right: I obey you. The whole thing is out of my 
way of business . awfully. BonjourP 



 



 



228 . THE PASISIANS. 



CHAPTER IX. 

PuNcrruALLY at eight o'clock Graham Vane had taken his 
seat at a corner table at the remote end of the Cafe Jean 
Jacques^ called for his cup of coffee and his evening journal, 
and awaited the arrival of M. Lebeau. His patience was not 
tasked logg. In a few minutes the Frenchman entered, paused 
at the comptoiVy as \f as his habit, to address a polite saluta- 
tion to the well-dressed lady who there presided, nodded as 
usual to Armand Monnier, then glanced round, recognized 
Graham with a smile, and approached his table with the 
quiet grace of movement by which he was distinguished. 
Seating himself opposite to Graham, and speaking in a voice 
too low to be heard by others, and in French, he then said : 

" In thinking over your communication this morning, it 
strikes me as probaj^le, perhaps as certain, that this Louis^ 
Duval, or her children, if she have any, must be entitled to 
some moneys bequeathed to her by a relation or friend in 
England. What say you to that assumption, M. Lamb ?'* 

" You are a sharp fellow," answered Graham. " Just what 
I say to myself. Why else should I be instructed to go to 
such expense in finding her out ? Most likely, if one can't 
trace her, or her children born before the 4ate named, any 
sucU moneys will go to some one else ; and that some one 
else, whoever he be, has commissioned my employer to find 
out. But I don't imagine any sum due to her or her heirs 
can be much, or that the matter is very important ; for, if so, 
the thing would not be carelessly left in the hands of one of 
the small fry like myself, and clapped in along with a lot of 
other business as an off-hand job." 

" Will you tell me who employed you ?" 

" No, I don't feel authorized to do that ai present ; and I 
don't se the necessity of it. It seems to me, on considera- 
tion, a matter for the police to ferret out ; only, as I asked 
before, how should I get at the police?" 

"That is not difficult. It is just possible that I might 
help you better than any lawyer or any detective." 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 229 

" Why, did you ever know this Louise Duval ?" 

" Excuse me, M. Lamb ; you refuse me your full confi- 
dence ; allow me to imitate your reserve." 

" Oho !" said Graham ; " shut up as close as you like ; it 
is nothing to me. Only observe, there is this difference be- 
tween us, that I am employed by another. He does not 
authorize me to name him ; and if I did commit that indis- 
cretion, I might lose my bread- and -cheese. Whereas you 
have nobody's secret to guard but your own in saying 
whether or not you ever knQ,w a Madame or Mademoiselle 
Duval. And if you have some reason fgr not getting me 
the information I am instructed to obtain, that is also a rea- 
son for not troubling you further. And after all, old boy " 
(with a familiar slap on Lebeau's stately shoulder) . " after 
all, it is I who would employ you ; you don't employ me. 
And if you find out the lady, it is you who would get the 
100, not L" 

M. Lebeau mechanically brushed, with a light movement 
of the hand, the shoulder which the Englishman had so 
pleasantly touched, drew himself and chair some inches back, 
and said, slowly, 

" M. Lamb, let us talk as gentleman to gentleman. Put 
aside the question of money altogether, I must first know 
why your employer wants to hunt out this poor Louise Du- 
val. It may be to her injury, and I would do her none if 
you ofiTered thousands where you offer pounds. I forestall 
the condition of mutual confidence ; I own that I have known 
her . it is many years ago ; and, M. Lamb, though a French- 
man veiy often injures a woman from love, he is in a worse 
plight for bread-and-cheese than I am if he injures her for 
money." 

" Is he thinking of the duchess's jewels ?" thought Graham. 

" Bravo, ni(m vieux^^ he said, aloud ; " but as I don't know 
what my employer's motive in his commission is, perhaps 
you can enlighten me. How could his inquiry injure Louise 
Duval?" 

**I can not say; but you English have the power to di- 
vorce your wives. Louise Duval may have married an En- 
glishman, separated from him, and he wants to know where 
he can find, in order to criminate and divorce her, or it may 
be to insist on her return to him." 

 VjOOQIC 



230 THE PABISIANS. 

. " Bosh ! that is not likely." 

" Perhaps, then, some English friend she may have known 
has left her a bequest, which would of course lapse to some 
one else if she be not living." 

' " By gad !" cried Graham, " I think you hit the right nail 
on the head: c^est cela. But what then?" 

" Well, if I thought any substantial benefit to Louise Du- 
val might result from the success of your inquiry, I would 
really see if it were in my power to help you. But I must 
have time to consider." 

"How long?" 

" I can't exactly say ; perhaps three or four days." 

^^Bont I will wait Here comes M. Georges. I leave 
you to dominoes and him. Good-night." 

Latt that night M. Lebeau was seated alone in a chamber 
connected with the cabinet in which he received visitors. 
A ledger was open before him, which he scanned with care- 
ful eyes, no longer screened by spectacles. The survey 
seemed to satisfy him. He murmured, "It suffices . the 
time has come ;" closed the book, returned it to his bureau, 
which he locked up, and then wrote in cipher the letter here 
reduced into English : 

"Dbab and noblb Fbibnd, . Events march; the empire 
is everywhere undermined. Our treasury has thriven in my 
hands; the sums subscribed and received by me through 
you have become more than quadrupled by advantageous 
speculations, in which M. Georges has been a most trust- 
worthy agent. A portion of them I have continued to em- 
ploy in the mode suggested . viz., in bringing together men 
discreetly chosen as being in their various ways representa- 
tives and ringleaders of the motley varieties that, when 
united at the right moment, form a Parisian mob. But from 
that right moment we are as yet distant. Before we can 
call passion into action, we must prepare opinion for change. 
I propose now to devote no inconsiderable portion of pur 
fund toward the inauguration of a journal which shall grad- 
ually give voice to our designs. Trust to me to insure its 
success, and obtain the aid of writers who will have no no- 
tion of the uses to which they ultimately contribute. Now 
that the time has come to establish for ourselves ^n orgtfn io 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 231 

the press, addressing higher orders of intelligence than those 
which are needed to destroy, and incapable of reconstructing, 
the time has also arrived for the re-appearance in his prop- 
er name and rank of the man in whom you take so gracious 
an interest. In vain you have pressed him to do so before ; 
till now he had not amassed together, by the slow process 
of petty gains and constant savings, with such additions as 
prudent speculations on his own account might contribute, 
the modest means necessary to his resumed position. And 
as he always contended against your generous offers, no con- 
sideration should ever tempt him either to appropriate to 
his personal use a single sou intrusted to him for a pub- 
lic purpose, or to accept from friendship the pecuniary aid 
which would abase him into the hireling of a cause. No ! 
Victor de Mauleon despises too much the tools that he em- 
ploys to allow any man hereafter to say, ' Thou also wert a 
tool, and hast been paid for thy uses.' 

"But to restore the victim of calumny to his rightful 
place in this gaudy world, stripped of youth and reduced in 
fortune, is a task that may well seem impossible. To-mor- 
row he takes the first step toward the achievement of the 
impossible. Expenence is no bad substitute for youth, and 
ambition is made stronger by the goad of poverty. 

" Thou shalt hear of his new^s soon." 



 



 



232 THE PARISIANS. 



BOOK FIFTH. 



CHAPTER L 

The next day at noon M. Louvier was closeted in his stady 
- with M. Ganftrin. 

" Yes," crkd Louvier, " I have behaved very handsomely 
to the beau Marquis. No one can say to the contrary." 

" True," answered Gandrin. " Besides the easy terms for 
the transfer of the mortgages, that free bonus of 1000 louis 
is a generous and noble act of munificence." 

^* Is it not ! and my youngster has already began to do 
with it as I meant and expected. -He has taken a fine apart- 
ment; he has bought a coup$ and horses; he has placed 
himself in the hands of the Chevalier de Finisterre; he is en- 
tered at the Jockey Club. ParUeu^ the 1000 louis will be 
soon gone." 

"And then?" 

" And then I . why, he will have tasted the sweets of Pa- 
risian life. He will think with disgust of the vieux manoir. 
He can borrow no more. I must remain sole mortgagee, 
and I shall behave as handsomely in buying his estates as I 
have behaved in increasing his income." 

Here a clerk entered and said " that a monsieur wished to 
see M. Louvier for a few minutes, in private, on urgent busi- 
ness." 

" Tell him to send in his card." 

" He has declined to do so, but states that he has already 
the honor of your acquaintance." 

" A writer in the press, perhaps ; or is he an artist ?" 

" I have not seen him before, monsieur, but he has the air 
trba comme UfauV* 

" Well, you may admit him. I will not detain you longer, 
my dear Gandrin. My homages to madame. Bonjoury 

Louvier bowed out M. Gandrin, and then rtlbbed his hands 
complacently. He was in high spirits. "Aha, my dear 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PABISIANS. 233 

Marquis, thou art in my trap now. Would it were thy 
father instead," he muttered, ehucklingly, and then took his 
stand on the health, with his back to the fireless grate. 
There entered a gentleman, exceedingly well dressed . 
dressed according to fashion, but still as became one of ripe 
middle age, not desiring to pass for one younger than he 
was. 

He was tall, with a kind of lofly ease in his air and his 
movements; not slight of frame, but spare enough to dis- 
guise the strength and endurance which belong to sinews 
and thews of steel, freed from, all supei'fluous flesh, broad 
across the shoulders, thin in the flanks. His dark hair had 
in youth been luxuriant in thickness and curl; it was now 
clipped short, and had become bare at the temples, but it 
still retained the lustre of its color and the crispness of its 
ringlets. He wore neither beard nor mustache, and the 
darkness of his hair was contrasted by a clear fairness of 
complexion, healthful, though somewhat pale, and eyes of 
that rare gray tint which has in it no shade of blue . peculiar 
eyes, which give a very distinct character to the face. The 
man must have been singularly handsome in youth ; he was 
handsome still, though probably in his forty-seventh or forty- 
eighth year, doubtless a very different kind of comeliness. 
The form of the features and the contour ofHhe- face were 
those that suit the rounded beauty of the Greek outline, and 
such beauty would naturally have been the attribute of the 
countenance in earlier days. But the cheeks were now thin, 
and with lines of cafe or sorrow between nostril and lip, so 
that the shape of the face seemed lengthened, and the feat- 
ares had become more salient. 

Louvier gazed at his visitor with a vague idea that he had 
seen him before, and could not remember where or when ; 
'but, at all events, he recognized at the first glance a man of 
rank and of the great world. 

" Pray be seated, monsieur !" he said, resuming his own 
easy-chair. 

The vifiitor obeyed the invitation with a very graceful 
bend of his head, drew his chair near to the financier's, 
stretched his limbs with the ease of a man making himself at 
home, and fixing his calm bright eyes quietly on Louvier, 
said, with a bland smile. 

 VjOOQIC 



284 THB PABISUNS. 

" My dear old friend, do you not remember me ? You are 
less altered than I am." 

Louvier stared hard and long ; his lip fell, his cheek paled, 
and at last he faltered out, "C^/ is it possible! Victor . 
the Vicomte de Maul6on?" 

" At your service, my dear Louvier." 

There was a pause ; the financier was evidently confused 
and embarrassed, and not less evidently the visit of the 
" dear old friend " was unwelcome. * < 

'' Vicomte," he said at last, ^'this is indeed a surprise; I 
thought you had long since quitted Paris for good." 

^^^L^hommepropoaey etc. I have returned, and mean to 
enjoy the rest of my days in the metropolis of the Graces 
and the Pleasures.. What though we are not so young as 
we were, Louvier . ^we have more vigor in us than the new 
generation ; and though it may no longer befit us to renew 
the gay carousals of old, life has still excitements as vivid 
for the social temperament and ambitious mind. Yes, the 
foi des viveurs returns to Paris for a more solid throne than 
he filled before." 

" Are you serious ?" 

" As serious as the French gayety will permit one to be." 

" Alas, M. le Vicomte ! Can yau flatter yourself that you 
will regain tiie society you have quitted, and the name you 
have . " 

Louvier stopped short; something in the Vicomte's ey^ 
daunted him. 

" The name I have laid aside for (Xmvenience of travel. 
Princes travel incognito, and so may a simple gentilhomme. 
* Regain my place in society,' say you ? Yes ; it is not that 
which troubles me." 

''What does?" 

" The consideration whether on a very modest income I 
can be sufficiently esteemed for myself to render that society 
more pleasant than ever. Ah, man cker / why recoil ? why 
so frightened? Do you think I am going to ask you for 
money? Have I ever done sO since we parted? 4tnd did I 
ever do so before without repaying you ? Bah ! you rotu- 
riers are worse than the Bourbons. You never learn nor 
unlearn. ^J^ors non mutat genus? " 

The magnificent miUionnaire^ accustomed to the homage 



 



 



THE FABISIANS. 235 

of grandees from the Fanbonrg and lions from the Chanss^e 
d'Antin, rose to his feet in superb wrath, less at the taunting 
words than at the haughtiness of mien with which they were 
nttered. 

" Monsieur, I can not permit you to address me in that 
tone. Do you mean to insult me ?" 

" Certainly not. Tranquilize your nerves, reseat yourself, 
and listen. Reseat yourself, I say." 

Eouvier dropped into his chair. 

" No," resumed the Vicomte, politely, " I do not come 
here to insult you, neither do I come to ask money ; I assume 
that I am in my rights when I ask M. Louvier what has be- 
come of Louise Duval?" 

"Louise Duval ! I know nothing about her." 

"Possibly not now; but you did know her well enough; 
when we two parted, to be a candidate for her hand. You 
did know her enough to solicit my good offices in promotion 
of your suit ; and you did, at my advice, quit Paris to seek 
her at Aix-la-Chapelle." 

" What ! have you, M. de Maul6on, not heard news of her 
since that day ?" 

" I decline to accept your question as an answer to mine. 
You went to Aix-la-Chapelle ; you saw Louise Duval ; at my 
urgent request she condescended to accept your hand." 

"No, M. de Maul6on, she did not accept my hand. I did 
not even see her. The day before. I arrived at Aix-la-Cha- 
pelle she had lefl it . not alone . left it with her lover." 

*' Her lover ! You do not mean the miserable Englishman 
who." 

" No Englishman," interrupted Louvier, fiercely. " Enough 
that the step she took placed an eternal barrier between her 
and myself. ' I have never even sought to hear of her since 
that day. Vitsomte, that woman was the one love of my life. 
I loved her, as you must have known, to folly . to madness. 
And how was my love requited ? Ah ! you open a very 
deep wound, M. le Vicoiflte." 

"Pardon me, Louvier; I did not give you credit for feel- 
ings so keen xtnd so genuine, nor did I think myself thus easi- 
ly affected by matters belonging to a past life so remote 
from the present. For whom did Louise foilsake you ?" 

" It matters not. Tie is dead." 

 VjOOQIC 



236 THE . PABI8IANS. 

" I regret to hear that ; I might have avenged you." 

"I need no one to avenge -my wrong. Let this pass." 

"Not yet. Louise, you say, fled with a seducer? So 
proud as she was, I can scarcely believe it." 

" Oh, it was not with a roturier she fled ; her pride would 
not have allowed that." 

" He must have deceived her somehow. Did she continue 
to live with him ?" 

'"That question, at least, I can answer; for though I lost 
all traces of her life, his life was pretty well known to me 
till its end ; and a very few months after she fled he was en- 
chained to another. Let us talk of her no more." 

" Ay, ay," muttered De Maul^on, " some disgraces are not 
to.be redeemed, and therefore not to be discussed. To me, 
though a relation, Louise Duval was but little known, and 
after what you tell me, I can not dispute your right to say, 
* talk of her no more.' Yon loved her, and she wronged you. 
My poor Louvier, pardon me if I made an old wound bleed 
afresh." 

These words were said with a certain pathetic tenderness ; 
they softened Louvier toward the speaker. 

After a short pause the Vicorate swept his hand over hia 
brow, as if to dismiss from his mind a painful and obtrusive 
thought ; then, with a changed expression of countenance . 
an expression frank and winning . with voice and with man- 
ner in which no vestige remained of the irony or the haught- 
iness with which he had resented the frigidity of his recep- 
tion, he drew his chair still nearer to Louvier's, and resumed : 
" Our situations, Paul Louvier, are much changed since .we 
two became friends. I then could say, * Open, sesame,' to 
whatever recesses, forbidden to vulgar footsteps, the advent- 
urer whom I took by the hand might wish to explore. In 
those days my heart was warm ; I liked you, Louvier . ^hon- 
estly liked you. I think our personal acquaintance com- 
menced in some gay gathering of young "viveurs^ whose be- 
havior to you offended my sense of gDod-te'eeding ?" 

Louvier colored, and muttered inaudibly. 

De Maul^on continued: "I felt it due to you to rebuke 
their incivilities, the more so as you evinced^ on that oc<msion 
your own superiority in sense and temper, permit me to add, 
with no lack of becoming spirit." . 



 



 



THE FABISIANS. 237 

Louvier bowed his head, evidently gratified. 

" From that day we became familiar. If any obligation 
to me were incurred, you would not have been slow to re- 
turn it. On more than one occasion when I was rapidly 
wasting money . and money was plentiful with you . you 
generously offered me your purse. On more than one occa- 
sion I accepted the offer; and you would never have asked 
repayment if I had not insisted on repaying. I was no less 
grateful for your aid." 

Louvier made a movement as if to extend his hand, but he 
checked the impulse. 

"There was another attraction which drew me toward 
you. I recognized in your character a certain power in sym- 
pathy with that power which I imagined lay donnant in my- 
self, and not to be found among the frelu^uets and lions who 
were my more habitual associates. Do you not remember 
some hours of serious talk we have had together when we 
lounged in the Tuileries, or sipped our coffee in the garden 
of the Palais Royal . hours when we forgot that those were 
the haunts of idlers, and thought of the stormy actions af- 
fecting the history of the world of which they had been the 
scene . hours when I confided to you, as I confided to no 
other man, the ambitious hopes for the future which my 
follies in the present, alas ! were hourly tending to frustrate ?" 

" Ay, I remember the star-lit night ; it was not in the 
gardens'of the Tuileries nor in the Palais Royal . ^it was on 
the Pont de la Concorde, on which we had paused, noting 
the starlight on the waters, that you said, pointing toward 
the walls of the Corps Z&gislcUif, * Paul, when I once get into 
the Chamber, how long will it take me to become First Min- 
ister of France ?' " 

" Did I say so ? . possibly ; but I was too young then for 
admission to the Chamber, and I fancied I had so many years 
yet to spare in idle loiterings at the Fountain of Youth. 
Pass over these circumstances. You became in love with 
Louise. I told you her troubled history ; it did not diminish 
your love; and then I frankly favored your suit. You set 
out for Aix-la-Chapelle a day or two afterward . then fell the 
thunder-bolt which shattered my existence . and we have 
never met again till this hour. You did not receive me 
kindly, Paul Louvier." 



 



 



238 THE PABISIAKS. 

"But/' said Louvier, falteringly . '*but, since you refer to 
that thunder-bolt, you can not but be aware that . that . ^" 

" I was subjected to a calumny which I did expect those who 
have known me as well as you did to assist me now to refute." 

"If it be really a calumny.'* 

** Heavens, man I could you ever doubt tJiatf^ cried De 
Maul6on, with heat; "ever doubt that I would rather have 
blown out my brains than allowed them even to conceive 
the idea of a crime so base?" 

"Pardon me," answered Louvier, meekly, "but I did not 
return to Paris for months after you had disappeared. My 
mind was unsettled by the news that awaited me at Aix ; I 
sought to distract it by travel . visited Holland and En- 
gland ; and when I did return to Paris, all that I heard of 
your story was the darker side of it. I willingly listen to 
your own account. You never took, or at least never ac- 
cepted, the Duchesse de 's jewels; and your friend M. de 

N never sold them to one jeweler and obtained their 

substitutes in paste from another?" 

The Vicomte made a perceptible effort to repress an im- 
pulse of rage ; then reseating himself in his chair, and with 
that slight shrug of the shoulder by which a Frenchman im- 
plies to himself that rage would be out of place, replied, 
calmly, " M. de N did as you say, but of course not em- 
ployed by me, nor with my knowledge. Listen : the truth 
is this . the time has come to tell it.^ Before* you left Paris 
for Aix I found myself on the brink of ruin. I had glided 
toward it with my characteristic recklessness . with that 
scorn of money for itself. that sanguine confidence in the 
favor of fortune which are vices common to every rjd dea 
viveurs. Poor mock Alexanders that we spendthrifts are in 
youth I we divide all we have among others, and when ask- 
ed by some prudent friend, ' What have you left for your 
own share ?' answer, ' Hope.* I knew, of course, that my pat- 
rimony was rapidly vanishing ; but' then my horses were 
matchless. I had enough to last me for years on their chance 
of winning . of course they would win. But you may recol- 
lect when we parted that I was troubled . creditors' bills be- 
fore me, usurers' bills too . and you, my dear Louvier, pressed 
on me your purse . were angry when I refased it. How 
could I accept ? All my chance of repayment ^t^as in the 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 239 

speed of a horse. I believed in that chance for myself; but 
for a trustful friend, no. Ask your own heart, now . ^nay, I 
will not say heart . ask your own common-sense, whether a 
man who then put aside your purse . spendthrift, vaurien 
though he might be . was likely to steal or accept a wom- 
an's jewels . Fa, mon pauvre JLouvier^ again I say, ' Fors non 
mutab genus,'' " ^ 

Despite the repetition of the displeasing patrician motto, 
such reminiscences of his visitor's motley character . ^irregu- 
lar, turbulent, the reverse of severe, but, in its own loose way, 
grandly generous and grandly brave . struck both on the 
common-sense and the heart of the listener ; and the French- 
man recognized the Frenchman. Louvier doubted Maul6on's 
word no more, bowed his head, and said, " Victor de Mau- 
leon, I have wronged you . ^go on." 

" On the day after you left for Aix came that horse-race 
on which my all depended : it was lost. The loss absorbed 
the whole of my remaining fortune ; it absorbed about 20,000 

francs in excess, a debt of honor to M. de N , whom you 

called my friend : friend he was not ; imitator, follower, flat- 
terer, yes. Still I deemed him enough my Mend to say to 
him, * Give me a little time to pay the money ; I must sell 
my stud, or write to my only living relation from whom I 
have expectations.' Tou remember that relation . Jacques 

de Maul6on, old and unmarried. By De N 's advice I 

did write to my kinsman. No answer came ; but what did 
come were fresh bills from creditors. I then calmly calcu- 
lated my assets. The sale of my stud and effects might suf- 
fice to pay every sou that I owed, including my debt to De 

N ; but that was not quite certain . at all events, when 

the debts were paid I should be beggared. Well, you know, 
Louvier, what we Frenchmen are : how Nature has denied 
to us the quality of patience ; how involuntarily suicide pre- 
sents itself to. us when hope is lost . and suicide seemed to 
me here due to honor . viz., to the certain discharge of my 
liabilities . for the stud and effects of Victor de Mauleon, roi 
des viveurSy would command much higher prices if he died 
like Cato than if he ran away from his fate like Pompey. 

Doubtless De N guessed my intention from my words 

or my manner; but on the very day in which I had made 
all preparations for quitting the world from which sunshine 

 VjOOQIC 



240 THE PABISIANS. 

had vanished I received in a blank envelope bank-notes 
amounting to 70,000 francs, and the postmark on the envel- 
ope was that of the town of Fontainebleau, near to which 
lived my rich kinsman Jacques. I took it for granted that 
the sum came from him. Displeased as he might have been 
with my wild career, still I was his natural heir. The sum 

sufficed to pay my debt to De N , to^all creditors, and 

leave a surplus. My sanguine spirits returned. I would 
sell my stud; I would retrench, reform, go to my kinsman 
as the penitent son. The fatted calf would be killed, and I 
should wear purple yet. You understand that, Louvier ?" 

" Yes, yes ; so like you. Go on." 

" Now, then, came the thunder-bolt. Ah ! in those sunny 
days you used to envy me for being so spoiled by women. 
The Duchesse de had conceived for me one of those ro- 
mantic fancies which women without children, and with am- 
ple leisure for the waste of affection, do sometimes conceive 
for very ordinary men younger than themselves, but in whom 
they imagine they discover sinners to reform or heroes to 
exalt. I had been honored by some notes from the Duchesse, 
in which this sort of romance was owned. I had not replied 
to them encouragingly. In truth, my heart was then de- 
voted to another . the English girl whom I had wooed as 
my wife . who, despite her parents' retractation of their con-^ 
sent to our union when they learned how dilapidated were 
my fortunes, pledged herself to remain faithful to me, and 
wait for better days." Again De Maul6on paused in sup- 
pressed emotion, and then went on, hurriedly: "No, the 
Duchesse did not inspire me with guilty passion, but she did 
inspire me with an affectionate respect. I felt that she was 
by nature meant to be a great and noble creature, and was, 
nevertheless, at that moment wholly misled from her right 
place among women by an illusion of mere imagination about 
a man who happened then to be very much talked about, 
and perhaps resembled some Lothario in the novels which 
she was always reading. We lodged, as you may remem- 
ber, in the same house." 

" Yes, I remember. I remember how you once took me to 
a great ball given by the Duchesse ; how handsome I thought 
her, though no longer young ; and you say right . how I did 
envy you that night !" 



 



 



THE FABISIANS. 241 

" From that nigut, however, the Due, not unnaturally, be- 
came jealous. He reproved the Duchesse for her too amia- 
ble manner toward a mauvais sujet like myself, and forbade 
her in future to receive my visits. It was then that these 
notes became frequent and clandestine, brought to me by 
her maid, who took back my somewhat chilling replies. 

" But to proceed. In the flush of my high spirits, and in 

the insolence of magnificent ease with which I paid De N 

the tiifle I owed him, something he said made my heart stand 
still. I told him that the money received had come from 
Jacques de Maul6on, and that I was going down to his house 
that day to thank him. He replied, ' Don't go ; it did not 
come from him.' * It must ; see the postmark of the envel- 
ope . ^Fontainebleau.' *I posted it at Fontainebleau.' * You 
sent me the money . you I' ' Nay, that is beyond my means. 
Where it came from,' said this misirahle^ ' much more may 
yet come ;' and then he narrated, with that cynicism so in 
vogue at Paris, how he had told the Duchesse (who knew 
him as my intimate associate) of my stress of circumstance, 
of his fear that I meditated something desperate ; how she 
gave him the jewels to sell and to substitute ; how, in order 
to baflie my suspicion and frustrate my scruples, he had gone 
to Fontainebleau, and there posted the envelope containing 
the bank-notes, out of which he secured for himself the pay- 
ment he deemed otherwise imperiled. De N , having 

made this confession, hurried down the stairs swiftly enough 
to save himself a descent by the window. Do you believe 
me still?" 

" Yes ; you were always so hot-blooded, and De N so 

considerate of self. I believe you implicitly." 

" Of course I did what any man would do . I wrote a hasty 
letter to the Duchesse, stating all my gratitude for an act of 
pure friendship so noble, urging also the reasons that ren- 
dered it impossible for a man of honor to profit by such an 
act. Unhappily, what had been sent was paid away ere I 
knew the facts, but I could not bear the thought of life till 
my debt to her was acquitted ; in short, Louvier, conceive 
for youraelf the sort of letter which I . which any honest man 
. would write under circumstances so cruel." 

" H'm !" grunted Louvier. 

"Something, however, in my letter, conjoined with what 



 



 



242 THB PABISIANS. 

De N had told her as to my state of mind, alarmed this 

poor woman, who had deigned to take in me an interest so 
little deserved. Her reply, very agitated and incoherent, 
was brought to me by her maid, who had taken my letter, 
and by whom, as I before said, onr.correspondence had been 
of late carried on. In her reply she implored me to decide, 
to reflect on nothing till I had seen her; stated how the rest 
of her day was pre-engaged ; and, since to visit her openly 
had been made impossible by the Dnc'& interdict, inclosed 
the key to the private entrance to her rooms, by which I 
coald gain an interview with her at ten o'clock that night, 
an hour at which the Due had informed her he should be out 
till late at his club. Now, however great the indiscretion 
which the Duchesse here committed, it is due to her mem- 
ory to say that I am convinced that her dominant idea was 
that I meditated self-destruction ; that no time was to be lost 
to save me from it ; and for the rest she trusted to the influ- 
ence which a woman's tears and adjurations and reasonings 
have over even the strongest and hardest men. It is only 
one of those coxcombs in whom the world of fashion abounds 
who could have admitted a thought that would have done 
wrong to the impulsive, generous, imprudent eagerness of a 
woman to be in time to save from death by his own hand a 
fellow-being for whom she had conceived an interest. I so 
construed her note. At the hour she named I admitted my- 
self into the rooms by the key she sent. You know the rest : 
I was discovered by the Due and by the agents of police in 
the cabinet in which the Dnchesse's jewels were kept. The 
key that admitted me into the cabinet was found in my pos- 
session." 

De Maul^on's voice here faltered, and he covered his face 
with a convulsive hand. Almost in the same breath he re- 
covered from visible sign of emotion, and went on, with a 
half laugh : 

"Ah! you envied me, did you, for being spoiled by the 
women? Enviable position, indeed, was mine that night. 
The Due obeyed the first impulse of bis wrath. He imagined 
that I had dishonored him : he would dishonor me in return. 
Easier to his pride, too, a charge against the robber of jew- 
els than against a favored lover of his wife. But when I, 
obeying the first necessary obligation of honor, invented on 



 



Google 



THE PARISIANS. 243 

the spur of the moment the story by which the Duchesse's 
reputation was cleared from suspicion, accused myself of a 
frantic passion and the trickery of a fabricated key, the Due's 
true nature of gentilhomme came back. He retracted the 
charge which he could scarcely even at the first blush have 
felt to be well founded ; and as the sole charge left was sim- 
ply that which men comme UfatU do not refer to criminal 
courts and police investigations, I was left to make my bow 
unmolested, and retreat to my own rooms, awaiting there 
such communications as the Due might deem it right to con- 
vey to me on the morrow. 

'' But on the morrow the Due, w^th his wife and personal 
suit, quitted Paris en route for Spain; the bulk of his retinue, 
including the offending abigail, was discharged ; and, wheth- 
er through these servants or through the police, the story be- 
fore evening was in the mouth of every gossip in club or caf& 
. exaggerated, distorted, to my ignominy and shame. My de- 
tection in the cabinet, the sale of the jewels, the substitution of 

paste by De N , who was known to be my servile imitator, 

and reputed to be my abject tool, all my losses on the turf, 
my debts . all these scattered fibres of flax were twisted to- 
gether in a rope that would have hanged a dog with a much 
better name than mine. If some disbelieved that I could be 
a thief, few of those who should have known me best held 
me guiltless of a baseness almost equal to that of theft . the 
exaction of profit from the love of a foolish woman." 

*But you could have told your own tale, shown the letters 
you had received from the Duchesse, and cleared away every 
stain on your honor." 

"How? . shown her letters, ruined her character, even 
stated that she had caused Her jewels to be sold for the uses 
of a young rou&f Ah, no, Louvier. I would rather have 
gone to the galleys I" 

" H'm !" grunted Louvier again. 

" The Due generously gave me better means of righting 
myself. Three days after he quitted Paris I received a let- 
ter from him, very politely written, expressing his great re- 
gret that any words implying the suspicion too monstrous 
and absurd to need refutation should have escaped him in 
the surprise of the moment ; but stating that since the offense 
I had owned was one that he could not overlook, he was under 



 



 



244 THE PABISIANS. 

the necessity of asking the only reparation I could make. 
That if it ' deranged ' me to quit Paris, he would return to it 
for the purpose required ; but that if I would give him the 
additional satisfaction of suiting his convenience, he should 
prefer to await my arrival at Bayonne, where he was detained 
by the indisposition of the Duchesse." 

" You have still that letter ?" asked Louvier, quickly. 

" Yes ; with other more important documents constituting 
what I may call mj pieces justijicatives, 

" I need not say that I replied, stating the time at which I 
should arrive at Bayonne, and the hotel at which I should 
await the Due's command. Accordingly I set out that same 
day, gained the hotel named, dispatched to the Due the an- 
nouncement of my arrival, and was considering how I should 
obtain a second in some officer quartered in the town . for 
my soreness and resentment at the marked coldness of my 
former acquaintances at Paris had forbidden me to seek a sec- 
ond among any of that faithless number . when the Due him- 
self entered my room. Judge of my amaze at seeing him in 
person ; judge how much greater the amaze became when he 
advanced, with a grave but cordial smile, offering me his hand ! 

" ' M. de Maul^on,' said he, * since I wrote to you, facts have 
become known to me which would induce me rather to ask 
your friendship than call on you to defend your life. Ma- 
dame la Duchesse has been seriously ill since we left Paris, and 
I refrained from all explanations likely to add to the hyster- 
ical excitement under which she was suffering. It is only 
this day that her mind became collected, and she herself then 
gave me her entire confidence. Monsieur, she insisted on my 
reading the letters that you addressed to her. Those letters, 
monsieur, suffice to prove your iflhocence of any design against 
my peace. The Duchesse has so candidly avowed her own 
indiscretiouj has so clearly established the distinction between 
indiscretion and guilt, tiiat I have granted her my pardon 
with a lightened heart, and a firm belief that we shall be hap- 
pier together than we have been yet.' 

"The Due continued his journey the next day ; but he sub- 
sequently honored me with two or three letters, written as 
friend to friend, and in which you will find repeated the sub- 
stance of what I have stated him to say by word of mouth." 

" But why not, then, have returned to Paris ? Such letters, 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 245 

at least, you might have shown, and in braving your calum- 
niators you would have soon lived them down." 

" You forget that I was a ruined man. When, by the sale 
of my hdrses, etc., my debts, including what was owed to the 
Duchesse, and which I remitted to the Due, were discharged, 
the balance left to me would not have maintained me a week 
at Paris. Besides, I felt so sore, so indignant. Paris and the 
Parisians had become to me so hateful. And to crown all, 
that girl, that English girl whom I had so loved, on whose 
fidelity I had so counted . well, I received a letter from her, 
gently but coldly bidding me farewell forever. I do not think 
she believed me guilty of theft, but doubtless the offense I 
had confessed, in order to save the honor of the Duchesse, 
could but seem to her all-sufficient ! Broken in spirit, bleed- 
ing at heai-t to the very core, still self-destruction was no 
longer to be thought of. I would not die till I could once 
more lift up my head as Victor de Maul^on." 
" What, then, became of you, my poor Victor?" 
" Ah ! that is a tale too long for recital. I have played so 
many parts that I am puzzled to recognize my own identity 
with the Victor de Maul^on whose name I abandoned. I 
have been a soldier in Algeria, and won my cross on the field 
of battle . that cross and my colonel's letter are among my 
pieces justiflcativea. I have been a gold-digger in California, 
a speculator in New York, of late in callings obscure -and hum- 
ble. But in all my adventures, under whatever name, I have 
earned testimonials of probity, could manifestations of so vul- 
gar a virtue be held of account by the enlightened people of 
Paris. I come now to a close. The Vicomte de Maul6on is 
about to reappear in Paris, and the first to whom he announces 
that sublime avatar is Paul Louvier. When settled in some 
modest apartment, I shall place in your hands mj pieces Jtss- 
tijicatives, I shall ask you to summon my surviving relations 
or connections, among which are the Counts de Vandemar, 
Beauvilliers, De Passy, and the Marquis de Rochebriant, with 
any friends of your own who sway the opinions of the Great 
World. You will place my justification before them, express- 
ing your own opinion that it suffices; in a word, you will 
give me the sanction of your countenance. For the rest, I 
trust to myself to propitiate the kindly and to silence the 
calumnious. I have spoken ; what say you ?" 

 VjOOQIC 



246 THE PABISIANS. 

"You overrate my power in society. Why not appeal 
yourself to your high-born relations ?" 

" No, Louvier ; I have too well considered the case to alter 
my decision. It is through you, and you alone, that I shall 
approach my relations. My vindicator must be a man of 
whom the vulgar can not say, * Oh, he is a relation . a fellow- 
noble : those aristocrats whitewash each other.' It must be 
an authority with the public at large . Sk bottrgeds^ a million^ 
naire, 3iroidela Bourse. 1 choose you, and that ends the dis- 
cussion." 

Louvier could not help laughing good-humoredly at the 
sang-froid of the Vicomte. He was once more under the 
domination of a man who had for a time dominated all with 
whom he lived. 

De Maul6on continued : " Your task ^ill be easy enough. 
Society changes rapidly at Paris. Few persons now exist 
who have more than a vague recollection of the circum- 
stances, which can be so easily explained to my complete 
vindication when the vindication comes from a man of your 
solid respectability and social influence. Besides, I have 
political objects in view. You are a Liberal; the Vande- 
mais and Rochebriants are Legitimists. I prefer a godfather 
on the Liberal side. Pardieu^ mon am% why such coquet- 
tish hesitation ? Said and done. Your hand on it." 

"There is my hand, then. I will do all I can to help you." 

"I know you will, old friend; and you do both kindly 
and wisely." Here De Mauleon cordially pressed the hand 
he held, and departed. 

On gaining the street the Vicomte glided into a neighbor- 
ing court-yard, in which h had left his^acr^, and bade the 
coachman drive toward the Boulevard Sebastopol. On the 
way he took from a small bag that he had left in the car- 
riage the flaxen wig and pale whiskers which distinguished 
M. Lebeau, and mantled his elegant habiliments in an im- 
mense cloak, which he had also left in the fidcre. Arrived 
at the Boulevard Sebastopol, he drew up the collar of the 
cloak so as to conceal much of his face, stopped the driver, 
paid him quickly, and, bag in hand, hurried on to another 
stand oi fiacres at a little distance, entered one, drove to tl*e 
Faubourg Montmartre, dismissed the vehicle at the mouth 
of a street not far from M, Lebeau's office, and gained on foot 



 



 



THE PABISIANB. 247 

the private side-door of- the house, let himself in with his 
latch-key, entered the private room on the inner side of his 
office, locked the door, and proceeded leisarely to exchange 
the brilliant appearance which the Yicomte de Manl^on had 
borne on his visit to the miUionnaire for the sober raiment 
and bourgeois air of M. Lebeau, the letter-writer. 

Then, after locking up his former costume in a drawer of 
his secretaire, he sat himself down and wrote the following 
lines: 

" Deas M. Geobges, . ^I advise you strongly, from infor- 
mation that has just reached me, to lose no time in pressing 
M. Savarin to repay the sum I recommended you to lend 
him, and for which you hold his bill due this day. The 
scandal of legal measures against a writer so distinguished 
should be avoided, if possible. He will avoid it and get the 
money somehow. But he must be urgently pressed. If 
you neglect this warning, my responsibility is past. . Agriez 
mes serUimena lea plus sinc^es, J. L." 



CHAPTER n. 

The Marquis de Rochebriant is no longer domiciled in an 
attic in the gloomy faubourg. See him now in a charming 
appartement de garpon au premier in the Rue du Helder, 
close by the promenades and haunts of the mode. It had 
been furnished and inhabited by a brilliant young provin- 
cial from Bordeaux, who, coming into an inheritance of 
100,000 francs, had rushed up to Paris to enjoy himself, and 
make his million at the Bourse. He had enjoyed himself 
thoroughly . he had been a darling of the demi-monde. He 
had been a successful and an inconstant gall%ot. Zelie had 
listened to his vows of eternal love, and his offers of unlimit- 
ed cachemires. Desir^e, succeeding Z^lie, had assigned to 
him her whole heart, or all that was left of it, in gratitude for 
the ardor of his passion, and the diamonds and coupk which 
accompanied and attested the ardor. The superb Hortense, 
supplanting Desir^e, received his visits in the charming 
iipai*tment he furnished for her, and entertained him and his 
friends at the most delicate little suppers, for the moderate 

 VjOOQIC 



248 THE PARISIANS. 

sam of 4000 francs a month. Tes, he had enjoyed himself 
thoroughly, hut he had not made a million at the Bourse. 
Before the year was out the 100,000 francs were gone. 
Compelled to return to his province, and hy his hard-hearted 
relations ordained, on penalty of starvation, to marry the 
daughter of an avot^, for the sake of her dot and a share in 
the hated drudgery of the avou&s business, his apartment 
was to be had for a tenth part of the original cost of its fur- 
niture. A certain Chevalier de Finisterre, to whom Louvier 
had introduced the Marquis as a useful fellow, who knew 
Paris, and would save him from being cheated, had secured 
this bijou of an apartment for Alain, and concluded the bar- 
gain for the bagatelle of 600. The Chevalier took the same 
advantageous occasion to purchase the English well-bred 
hack, and the neat coupi and horses which the Bordelais was 
also necessitated to dispose of. These purchases made, the 
Marquis had some 5000 francs (200) left out of Louvier's 
premium of 1000. The Marquis, however, did not seem 
alarmed or dejected by the sudden diminution of capital so 
expeditiously effected, The easy life thus commenced seem- 
ed to him too natural to be fraught with danger ; and easy 
though it was, it was a very simple and modest sort of life 
compared with that of many other men of his age to whom 
Enguerrand had introduced him, though most of them had 
an income less than his, and few, indeed, of them were his 
equals in dignity of birth. Could a Marquis de Rochebriant, 
if he lived at Paris at all, give less than 3000 francs a year 
for his apartment, or mount a more humble establishment 
than that confined to a valet and a tiger, two horses for his 
coupi and one for the saddle ? " Impossible," said the Chev- 
alier de Finisterre, decidedly; and the Marquis bowed to 
so high an authority. He thought within himself, " If I find 
in a few mon^s that I am exceeding my means, I can but 
dispose of my rooms and my horses, and return to Rochebri- 
ant a richer man by far than I left it." 

To say truth, the brilliant seductions of Paris had already 
produced their effect, not only on the habits, bat on the 
character and cast of thought, which the young noble had 
brought with him from the feudal and melancholy Bretagne. 

Warmed by the kindness with which, once introduced by 
his popular kinsmen, he was everywhere received, the re- 



Digittzed by 



 



THE PARISIANS. 249 

# 

serve or shyness which is the compromise between the 
haughtiness of self-esteem and the painful doubt of apprecia- 
tion by others rapidly melted away. He caught insensibly 
the polished tone, at once so light and so cordial, of his new- 
itlade friends. With all the efforts of the democrats to es- 
tablish equality and fraternity, it is among the aristocrats 
that equality and fraternity are most to be found. All gen- 
tUhommea in the best society are equals, and whether they 
embrace or fight each other, they embrace or fight as broth- 
ers of the same family. But with the tone of manners Alain 
de Rochebriant imbibed still more insensibly the lore of that 
philosophy which young idlers in pursuit of pleasure teach 
to each other. Probably in all civilized and luxurious cap- 
itals that philosophy is very much the same among the same 
class of idlers at the same age; probably it flourishes in Pe- 
kin not less than at Paris. K Paris has the cre<fit, or dis- 
credit, of it more than any other capital, it is because in Par- 
is more than in any other capital it charms the eye by grace 
and amuses the ear by wit. A philosophy which takes the 
things of this life very easily . which has a smile and a shrug 
of the shoulders for any pretender to the Heroic . which sub- 
divides the wealth of passion into the pocket-money of ca- 
prices . ^is always in or out of love, ankle-deep, never ventur- 
ing a plunge . which, light of heart as of tongue, tunis " the 
solemn plausibilities" of earth into subjects for epigrams 
and bona mots . it jests at loyalty to kings, and turns up its 
nose at enthusiasm for commonwealths . it abjures all grave 
studies . it shuns all profound emotions. We have crowds 
of such philosophers in London; but there they are less no- 
ticed, because the agreeable attributes of the sect are there 
dimmed and obfuscated. It is not a philosophy that flowers 
richly in the reek of fogs and in the teeth of east winds ; it 
wants for full 4#velopment the light atmosphere of Paris. 
Now this philosophy began rapidly to exercise its charms 
upon Alain de Rochebriant. Even in the society of pro- 
fessed Legitimists he felt that faith had deserted the Legit- 
imist creed, or taken refuge only as a companion of religion 
in the hearts of high-born women and a small minority of 
priests. His chivalrous loyalty still struggled to keep its 
ground, but its roots were very much loosened. He saw . 
for his natural intellect was keen -^ that the cause of the 



 



 



250 THE PASIBIANS. 

m 
Bourbon was hopeless, at least for the present, because it 
had ceased, at least for the present, to be a cause. His polit- 
ical creed thus shaken, with it was shaken also that adher- 
ence to the past which had stifled his ambition of a future. 
That ambition began to breathe and to stir, though he own- 
ed it not to others . though, as yet, he scarce distinguished its 
whispers, much less directed its movements toward any def- 
inite object. Meanwhile, all that he knew of his ambition 
was the new-born desire for social success. 

We see him, then, under the quick operation of this change 
in sentiments and habits reclined on the fauteuU before his 
fireside, and listening to his college friend, of whom we have 
so long lost sight, Frederic Lemercier. Frederic had break- 
fasted with Alain . a breakfast such as might have content- 
ed the aj^thor of the Almanack des Gourmands^ and pro- 
vided from the Caf& Anglais. Frederic has just thrown 
aside his regalia. 

^Fardieul my dear Alain. If Louvier has no sinister ob- 
ject in the generosity of his d.ealings with you, he will have 
raised himself prodigiously in my estimation. I shall for- 
sake in his Eivor my allegiance to Duplessis, though that 
clever fellow has just made a wondrous coup in the Egyp- 
tians, and I gain 40,000 francs by having followed his ad- 
vice. But if Duplessis has a head as long as Louvier's, he 
certainly has not an equal greatness of soul. Still, my dear 
friend, will you pardon me if I speak frankly, and in the way 
of a warning homily ?" 

" Speak ; you can not oblige me more.'* 

" Well, then, I know that you can no more live at Paris in 
the way you are doing, or mean to do, without some fresh 
addition to your income, than a lion could live in the Jardin 
des Plantes upon an allowance of two mice a week." 

" I don't see that. Deducting what I py to my aunt . * 
and I can not get her to take more than 6000 francs a year 
. I have 700 napoleons left, net and clear. My rooms and 
stables are equipped, and I have 2500 francs in hand. On 
700 napoleons a year I calculate that I can very easily live 
as I do, and if I fail . ^well, I must return to Rochebriant. 
Seven hundred napoleons a year will be a magnificent rental 
there." 

Frederic shook his head. 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 251 

" You do not know how one expense leads to another. 
Above all, you do not calculate the chief part of one's ex- 
penditure . the unforeseen. You will play at the Jockey 
Club, and lose half your income in a night." 

" I shall never touch a card." 

" So you say now, innocent as a lamb of the force of ex- 
ample. At all events, beau seigneur^ I presume you are not 
going to resuscitate the part of the Ermite de la Chaussee 
d^Antin; and the fair JParisietines are demons of extrava- 
gance." 

" Demons whom I shall not court." 

"Did I say you would? They will court you. Before 
another month has flown you will be inundated with biUeta- 
doux.^^ 

"It is not a shower that will devastate my humble har- 
vest. But, man cher^ we are falling upon very gloomy top- 
ics. JLaisgez-moi tranquiUe in my illusions, if illusions they 
be. Ah, you can not conceive what a new life opens to the 
man who, like myself, has passed the dawn of his youth in 
privation and fear when he suddenly acquires competence 
and hope. Kit lasts only a year, it will be something to 
say 'Vixi.'" 

"Alain," said Frederic, very earnestly, "believe me I 
should not have assumed the ungracious and inappropriate 
task of Mentor if it were only a year's experience at stake, 
or if you were in the position of men like myself . free from 
the encumbrance of a great name and heavily mortgaged 
lands. Should you fail to pay regularly the interest due to 
Louvier, he has the power to put up at public auction, and 
there to buy in for himself, your chdteau and domain." 

" I am aware that in strict law he would have such power, 
though I doubt if he would use it. Louvier is certainly a 
much better and more generous fellow than I could have ex- 
pected, and, if I believe De Finisterre, he has taken a sincere 
liking to me on account of affection to my poor father. But 
why should not the interest be paid regularly? The rev- 
enues from Rochebriant are not likely to decrease, and the 
charge on them is lightened by the contract with Louvier. 
And I will confide to you a hope I entertain of a very large 
addition to my rental." 

"How?" 



 



 



252 THE PARISIANS. 

" A chief part of my rental is derived from forests, and De 
Finisterre has heard of a capitalist who is disposed to make 
a contract for their sale at the fall of this year, and may prob- 
ably extend it to future years, at a price far exceeding that 
which I have hitherto obtained." 

" Pray be cautious. De Finisterre is not a man I should 
implicitly trust in such matters." 

"Why? do you know any thing against him? He is in 
the best society . perfect gentUhomme . and, as his name 
may tell you, a fellow-Breton. You yourself allow, and so 
does Enguerrand, that the purchases he made for me . in this 
apartment, my horses, etc. . are singularly advantageous." 

" Quite true ; the Chevalier is reputed sharp and clever, is 
said to be very amusing, and a first-rate joe^we^player. I 
don't know him personally. I am not in his set. I have no 
valid reason to disparage his character, nor do I conjecture 
any motive he could have to injure or mislead you. Still, I 
say, be cautious how far you trust to his advice or recom- 
mendation." 

" Again I ask why ?" 
/ " He is unlucky to his friends. He attaches himself much 
/ to men younger than himself; and somehow or other I have 
/ observed that most of them have come to grief. Besides, a 
; person in whose sagacity I have great confidence warned me 
against making the Chevalier's acquaintance, and said to me, 
in his blunt way, * De Finisterre came to Paris with nothing ; 
he has succeeded to nothing; he belongs to no ostensible 
profession by which any thing can be made. But evidently 
now he has picked up a good deal ; and in proportion as any 
young associate of his becomes poorer, De Finisterre seems 
mysteriously to become richer. Shun that sort of acquaint- 
ance.' " 

" Who is your sagacious adviser ?" 

" Duplessis." 

" Ah, I thought so. That bird of prey fancies every other 
bird looking out for pigeons. I fancy that Duplessis is, like 
all those money-getters, a seeker after fashion, and De Finis- 
terre has not returned his bow." 

" My dear Alain, I am to blame ; nothing is so irritating 
as a dispute about the worth of the men we like, I began it, 
now let it be dropped ; only make me one promise, that if you 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 253 

should be in arrear, or if need presses, you will come |kt once 
to me. It was very well to be absurdly proud in an attic, 
but that pride will be out of place in your appartement au 
premier, ^^ 

"You are the best fellow in the world, Frederic, and I 
make you the promise you ask," said Alain, cheerfully, but 
yet with a secret emotion of tenderness and gratitude. " And 
now, mon cher^ what day will you dine with me to meet Raoul 
and Enguerrand and some others whom you would like to 
know?" 

" Thanks, and heatrty ones, but we move now in different 
spheres, and I shall not trespass on yours. Je auis trap bour- 
geois to incur the ridicule of le bourgeois gentilhomme.^^ 
r " Frederic, how dare you speak thus ? My dear fellow, 
my friends shall honor you as I do." 

" But that will be on your account, not mine. No ; honest- 
ly, that kind of society neither tempts nor suits me. I am a 
sort of king in my own walk ; and I prefer my Bohemian roy- 
alty to vassalage in higher regions. Say no more of it. It 
will flatter my vanity enough if you will now and then de- 
scend to my coteries, and allow me to parade a Rochebriant 
as my familiar crony, slap him on the shoulder, and call him 
Alain." 

" Fie ! you who stopped me and the English aristocrat in 
the Champs Elys6ejk to humble us with your boast of having 
fascinated une grande dame . I think you said a duchesse.^^ 

" Oh," said Lemercier, conceitedly, and passing his hand 
through his scented locks, " women are different ; love levels 
all ranks. I don't blame Ruy Bias for accepting the love of 
a queen, but I do blame him for passing himself off as a no- 
ble . a plagiarism, by-the-bye, from an English play. I do 
not love the English enough to copy them. Apropos, what 
has become of ce beau Grarm-Varn ? I have not seen him 
of late." 

" Neither have I." 

" Nor the belle lUdienne .^" 

" Nor her," said Alain, slightly blushing. 

At this moment Enguerrand lounged into the roonu Alain 
stopped Lemercier to introduce him to his kinsman. " En- 
guerrand, I present to you M, Lemercier, my earliest and one 
of my dearest friends," 



 



 



254 THS PARISIAN& 

The^oang noble held out bis band with the bright and 
joyous grace which accompanied all his movements, and ex- 
pressed in cordial words his delight to make M. Lemercier's 
acquaintance. Bold and assured as Frederic was in his own 
circles, he was more discomposed than set at ease by the 
gracious accost of a liouj whom he felt at once to be of a 
breed superior to his own. He muttered some confused 
phrases, in which ravi and JkUti were alone audible, and 
evanished. 

"I know M. Lemercier by sight very well," said Enguer- 
rand, seating himself " One sees him very often in the Bois ; 
and I have met him in the Catdisses and the JBcU MaMUe. 
I think, too, that he plays at the Bourse, and is lH with M. 
Duplessis, who bids fair to rival Louvier one of these days* 
Is Duplessis also one of your dearest fiiends ?" 

" No, indeed. I once met him, and was not prepossessed 
in his favor." 

"Nevertheless he is a man much to be admired and re- 
spected." 

"Why so?" 

" Because he understands so well the art of making what 
we all covet . money. I will introduce you to him." 

" I have been already introduced." 

" Then I will reintroduce you. He is much courted in a so- 
ciety which I have recently been permitted by my father to 
frequent . the society of the Imperial Court." 

" You frequent that society, and the Count permits it ?" 

" Yes ; better the Imperialists than the Republicans ; and 
my father begins to own that truth, though he is too old or 
too indolent to act on it." 

"And Raoul ?" 

"Oh, Raoul, the melancholy and philosophical Raoul, has 
no ambition of any kind so long as . thanks, somewhat to 
me . his purse is always replenished for the wants of his 
stately existence, among the foremost of which wants are the 
means to supply the wants of others. That is the true reason 
why he consents to our glove shop. Raoul belongs, with 
some other young men of the faubourg, to a society enrolled 
under the name of Saint Fran9ois de Sales, for the relief of 
the poor. He visits their houses, and is at home by their 
sick-beds as at their stinted boards. Nor does he confine his 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 255 

visitations to the limits of our faubourg ; he extends his trav- 
els to Montmaiijre and Belleville. As to our upper world, he 
does not concern himself muclf with its changes. He says 
that * we have destroyed too much ever to rebuild solidly ; 
and that whatever we do build could be upset any day by a 
Paris mob,' which he declares to be the only institution we 
have left. A wonderful fellow is Raoul ; full of mind, though 
he does little with it ; full of heart, which he devotes to suf- 
fering humanity, and to a poetic, knightly reverence (not to 
be confounded with earthly love, and not to be degraded into 
that sickly sentiment called Platonic affection) for the Com- 
tesse di Rimini, who is six yeara older than himself, and who 
is very faithfully attached to her husband, Raoul's intimate 
friend, whose honor he would guard as his own. It is an 
episode in the drama of Parisian life, and one not so uncom- 
mon as the malignant may suppose. Di Rimini knows and 
approves of his veneration ; my mother, the best of women, 
sanctions it, and deems truly that it preserves Raoul safe 
from all the temptations to which ignobler youth is exposed. 
I mention this lest you should imagine there was any thing in 
Raoul's worship of his star less pure than it is. For the rest, 
Raoul, to the grief and amazement of that disciple of Vol- 
taire, my respected father, is one of the very few men I know 
in our circles who is sincerely religious . an orthodox Cath- 
olic . ^and the only man I know who practices the religion he 
professes ; charitable, chaste, benevolent ; and no bigot, no 
intolerant ascetic. His only weakness is his entire submis- 
sion to the worldly common-sense of his good-for-nothing, 
covetous, ambitious brother Enguerrand. I can not say how 
I love him for that. If he had not such a weakness his ex- 
cellence would gall me, and I believe I should hate him." 

Alain bowed his head at this eulogium. Such had been 
the character that, a few months ago, he would have sought 
as example and model He seemed to gaze upon a flattered 
portrait of himself as he had been. 

" But," said Enguerrand, " I have not come here to indulge 
in the ovei-flow of brotherly affection. I come to take you to 
your relation the Duchess of Tarascon. I have pledged my- 
self to her to bring you, and she is at home on purpose to re- 
ceive you." 

" In that case I can not be such a churl as to refuse. And, 



 



 



256 THE PABISIANS. 

indeed, I no longer feel qaite the same prejudices against her 
and the Imperialists as I brought from Bretagne. Shall I 
order my carriage ?" 

" No ; mine is at the door. Yours can meet you where 
you will later. AUansJ*^ 



CHAPTER m. 

The Duchesse de Tarascon occupied a vast apartment in 
the Rue Royale, close to the Tuileries. She held a high post 
among the ladies who graced the brilliant court of the Em- 
press. She had survived her second husband, the Due, who 
left no issue, and the title died with him. Alain and En- 
guerrand were ushered up the grand staircase, lined with 
tiers of costly exotics as if for 8kfite; but in that and all kinds 
of female luxury the Duchesse lived in a state of fete perpi- 
tueUe. The doors on the landing-place were screened by 
heavy portihrea of Genoa velvet, richly embroidered in gold, 
with the ducal crown and cipher. The two salons through 
which the visitors passed to the private cabinet or boudoir 
were decorated with Gobelin tapestries, fresh, with a mixture 
of roseate hues, and depicting incidents in the career of the 
first Emperor ; while the eflSgies of the late Due's father . 
the gallant founder of a short-lived race . ^figured modestly 
in the background. On a table of Russian malachite within 
the recess of the central window lay, preserved in glass cases, 
the baton and the sword, the epaulets and the decorations, 
of the brave Marshal. On the consoles and the mantel-pieces 
stood clocks and vases of Sevres that could scarcely be eclipsed 
by those in the imperial palaces. Entering the cabinet, they 
found the Duchesse seated at her writing-table, with a small 
Skye terrier, hideous in the beauty of the purest breed, 
nestled at her feet. This room was an exquisite combination 
of costliness and comfort . Luxury at home. The hangings 
were of geranium-colored silk, with double curtains of white 
satin ; near to the writing-table a conservatory, with a white 
marble fountain at play in the centre, and a trellised aviary 
at the back. The walls were covered with small pictures . 
chiefly portraits and miniatures of the members of the im- 
perial family, of the late Due, of his father the Marshal, and 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PABISIAK8. 267 

Madame la Mar6chale, of the present Duchesse herself, and 
of some of the principal ladies of the court. 

The Duchesse was still in the prime of life. She had pass- 
ed her fortieth year, but was so well " conserved " that you 
might have guessed her to be ten years younger. She was 
tall ; not large . ^but with rounded figure inclined to embon- 
point; with dark hair and eyes, but fair complexion, in- 
jured in effect rather than improved by pearl-powdef, and 
that atrocious barbarism of a dark stain on the eyelids which 
has of late years been a baneful fashion ; dressed . I am a 
man, and can not describe her dress . all I know is, that she 
had the acknowledged fame of the best-dressed subject of 
France. As she rose from her seat there was in her look and 
air the unmistakable evidence of grancie dame; a family like- 
ness in feature to Alain himself, a stronger likeness to the pic- 
ture of her first cousin . his mother . which was preserved at 
Rochebriant. Her descent was indeed from ancient and noble 
houses. But to the distinction of race she added that of 
fashion, crowning both with a tranquih consciousness of lofty 
position and unblemished reputation. 

" Unnatural cousin," she said to Alain, offering her hand 
to him, with a gracious smile ; " all this age in Paris, and I 
see you for the first time. But there is joy on earth as in 
heaven over sinners who truly repent. You repent truly . 
ripest ce pas .^" 

It is impossible to describe the caressing charm which the 
Duchesse threw into her words, voice, and look. Alain was 
fascinated and subdued. 

" Ah, Madame la Duchesse," said he, bowing over the 
fair hand he lightly held, " it was not sin, unless modesty be 
a sin, which made a rustic hesitate long before he dared to 
offer his homage to the queen of the graces." 

" Not badly said for a rustic," cried Enguerrand ; " eh, 
madarae?" 

" My cousin,you are pardoned," said the Duchesse. "Com- 
pliment is the perfume of gentUhommerie. And if you 
brought enough of that perfume from the flowers of Roche- 
briant to distribute among: the ladies at court, you will be 
terribly the mode there. Seducer !" . here she gave the Mar- 
quis a playful tap oh the cheek, not in a coquettish but in a 
mother-like familiarity, and looking at him attentively, said : 

 VjOOQIC 



258 THE PAEISIANS. 

'Why, you are even handsomer than your father. I shall 
be^proud to present to their Imperial Majesties so becoming 
a cousin. But seat yourselves here, messieurs, close to my 
arm-chair, cattsons.^^ 

The Duchesse then took up the ball of conversation. She 
talked without any apparent artifice, but with admirable tact- 
put just the questions about Rochebriant most calculated to 
plea^ Alain, shunning all that might have pained him . ask- 
mg him for descriptions of the surrounding scenery^the 
Breton legends; hoping that the old castle would never be 
spoiled by modernizing restorations ; inquiring tenderly after 
his aunt, whom she had in her childhood once seen, and still 
remembered with her sweet, grave face ; paused little for re- 
plies ; then turned to Enguerrand with sprightly small-talk 
on the topics of the day, and every now and then bringing 
Alain into the pale of the talk, leading on insensibly until she 
got Enguerrand himself to introduce the subject of the Em- 
peror, and the political troubles which were darkening a 
reign heretofore so prosperous and splendid. 

Her countenance then changed; it became serious, and 
even grave, in its expression. 

" It is true," she said, " that the times grow menacing . 
menacing not only to the throne, but to order and property 
and France. One by one they are removing all the break- 
waters which the empire had constructed between the execu- 
tive and the most fickle and impulsive population that ever 
shouted ' long live' one day to the man whom they would 
send to the guillotine the next. They are denouncing what 
they call personal government. grant that it has its evils; 
but what would they substitute ? . a constitutional monarchy 
like the English ?^ That is impossible with universal suflPrage 
and without a hereditary chamber. The aearest approach to 
it was the monarchy of Louis Philippe . we know how sick 
they became of that. A republic ? mon Dieu t composed of 
republicans terrified out of their wits at each other. The 
moderate men, mimics of the Girondins, with the Reds, and 
the Socialists, and the Communists, ready to tear them to 
pieces. And then . what then ? . the commercialists, the ag- 
riculturists, the middle class, combining to elect some dic- 
tator who will cannonade the mob, and become a mimic 
Napoleon, grafted on a mimic Necker or a mimic Danton. 



 



Google 



THE PABISIAXS. 259 

Oh, messieurs, I am French to the core ! Tou, inheritors of 
sach names, mast be as French as I am ; and yet you men in- 
sist on remaining more useless to France in the midst of her 
need than I am . ^I, a woman who can but talk and weep." 

The Duchesse spoke with a warmth of emotion which 
startled and profoundly affected Alain. He remained silent, 
leaving it to Enguerrand to answer. 

" Dear madame," said the latter, " I do not see how either 
myself or our kinsman can merit your reproach. We are not 
legislators. I doubt if there is a single department in France 
that would elect us if we offered ourselves. It is not our 
fault if the various floods of revolution leave men of our birth 
and opinions stranded wrecks of a perished world. The Em- 
peror chooses his own advisers, and if they are bad ones, his 
Majesty certainly will not ask Alain and me to replace 
them." 

" You do not answer . you evade me," said the Duchesse, 
with a mournful smile. " You are too skilled a man of the 
world, M. Enguerrand, not to know that it is not only legis- 
lators and ministers that are necessary to the support of a 
throne and the safeguard of a nation. Do you not see how 
great a help it is to both throne and nation when that section 
of public opinion which is represented by names illustrious in 
history, identified with records of chivalrous deeds and loyal 
devotion, rallies round the order established? Let that sec- 
tion of public opinion stand aloof, soured and discontented, 
excluded from active life, lending no counterbalance to the 
perilous oscillations of democratic passion, and tell me if it is 
not an enemy to itself as well as a traitor to the principles it 
embodies ?" 

" The principles it embodies, madame," said Alain, " are 
those of fidelity to a race of kings unjustly set aside, less for 
the vices than the virtues of ancestors. Louis XV. was the 
worst of the Bourbons . ^he was the hien aimi . he escapes ; 
Louis XVI was in moral attributes the best of the Bourbons . 
he dies the death of a felon ; Louis XVllL, against whom much 
may be said, restored to the throne by foreign bayonets, reign- 
ing as a disciple of Voltaire might reign, secretly scoffing alike 
at the royalty and the religion which were crowned in his 
person, dies peacefully in his bed ; Charles X., redeeming the 
errors of his youth by a reign untarnished by a vice, by a re- 

 VjOOQIC 



260 THE PABISIANS. 

ligion earnest and sini^ere, is sent into exile for defending es- 
tablished order from the very inroads which you lament. 
He leaves an heir against whom calumny can not invent a 
tale, and that heir remains an outlaw simply because he de- 
scends from Henry lY., and has a right to reign. Madame, 
you appeal to us as among the representatives of the chival- 
rous deeds and loyal devotion which characterized the old 
nobility of France. Should we deserve that character if we 
forsook the unfortunate, and gained wealth and honor in for- 
saking ?" 

" Your words endear you to me. I am proud to call you 
cousin," said the Duchesse. " But do you, or does any man 
in his senses, believe that if you upset the empire you could 
get back the Bourbons ? that you would not be in imminent 
danger of a government infinitely more opposed to the theo- 
ries on which rests the creed of Legitimists than that of 
Louis Napoleon ? After all, what is there in the loyalty of 
you Bourbonites that has in it the solid worth of an argument 
which can appeal to the comprehension of mankind, except it be 
the principle of a hereditary monarchy ? Nobody nowadays 
can maintain the right divine of a single regal family to im- 
pose itself upon a nation. That dogma has ceased to be a 
living principle ; it is only a dead reminiscence. But the in- 
stitution of monarchy is a principle strong and vital, and ap- 
pealing to the practical interests of vast sections of society. 
Would you sacrifice the principle which concerns the welfare 
of millions, because you can not embody it in the person of 
an individual utterly insignificant in himself? In a word, if 
you prefer monarchy to the hazard of republicanism for such 
a country as France, accept the monarchy you find, since it is 
quite clear you can not rebuild the monarchy you would pre- 
fer. Does it not embrace all the great objects for which you 
call yourself Legitimist? Under it religion is honored, a na- 
tional Church secured, in reality if not in name; under it you 
have united the votes of millions to the establishment of the 
throne ; under it all the material interests of the country . 
commercial, agricultural . have advanced with an unequaled 
rapidity of progress ; under it Paris has become the wonder 
of the world for riches, for splendor, for grace and beauty ; 
under it the old traditional enemies of France have been 
humbled and rendered impotent. The policy of Richelieu 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 261 

has been achieved in the abasement of Austria ; the policy 
of Napoleon I. has been consummated in the salvation of 
Europe from the semi-barbarous ambition of Russia. England 
no longer casts her trident in the opposite scale of the balance' 
of European power. Satisfied with the honor of our alliance, 
she has lost every other ally ; and her forces neglected, her 
spirit enervated, her statesmen dreaming believers in the 
safety of their island, provided they withdraw froui the af- 
fairs of Europe, may sometimes scold us, but will certainly 
not dare to fight. With France she is but an inferior satel- 
lite; without France she is . nothing. Add to all this a 
court mor6 brilliant than that of Louis XIV., a sovereign 
not, indeed, without faults and errors, but singularly mild in 
his nature, warm-hearted to friends, forgiving to foes, whom 
personally no one could familiarly know and not be charmed 
with a bont& of character, lovable as that of Henry IV. . and 
tell me what more than all this could- you expect from the 
reign of a Bourbon ?" 

" With such results," said Alain, " from the monarchy you 
so eloquently praise, I fail to discover what the Emperor's 
throne could possibly gain by a few powerless converts from 
an unpopular, and you say, no doubt truly, from a hopeless 
cause." 

" I say monarchy gains much by the loyal adhesion of 
any man of courage, ability^nd honor. Every new mon- 
archy gains much by conversions from the ranks by which 
the older monarchies were strengthened and adorned. But 
I do not here invoke your aid merely to this monarchy, my 
cousin ; I demand your devotion to the interests of France ; 
I demand that you should not rest an outlaw from her serv- 
ice. Ah, you think that France is in no danger . ^that you 
may desert or oppose the empire as you list, and that society 
will remain safe ! You are mistaken. Ask Enguerrand." 

" Madame," said Enguerrand, " you overrate my political 
knowledge in that appeal; but, honestly speaking, I subscribe 
to your reasonings. I agree with you that the empire sorely 
needs the support of men of honor : it has one cause of rot 
which now undermines it . dishonest jobbery in its adminis- 
trative departments, even in that of the army, which appar- 
ently is so heeded and cared for. I agree with you that 
France is in danger, and may need the swords of all her bet- 



Digrtized by 



 



262 THE PABISIANS. 

ter SODS, whether against the foreigner or against her worst 
enemies . the mobs of her great towns. I myself received a 
military education, and but for my reluctance to separate my- 
self from my father and Raoul, I should be a candidate for 
employments more congenial to me than those of the Bourse 
and my trade in the glove shop. But Alain is happily free 
from all family ties, and Alain knows that my advice to him 
is not hostile to your exhortations." 

" I am glad to think he is under so salutary an influence," 
said the Duchesse ; and seeing that Alain remained silent and 
thoughtfiil, she wisely changed the subject, and shortly after- 
ward the two friends took leave. 



CHAPTER IV. 

Thbeb days elapsed before Graham again saw M. Lebeau. 
The letter^writer did not show himself at the ca/?, and was 
not to be found at his office, the ordinary business of which 
was transacted by his clerk, saying that his master was much 
engaged on important matters that took him from home. 

Graham naturally thought that these matters concerned 
the discovery of Louise Duval, and was reconciled to sus- 
pense. At the cafe^ awaiting Lebeau, he had slid into some 
acquaintance with the (mvWer,^rmand Monnier, whose face 
and talk had before excited his interest. Indeed, the acquaint- 
ance had been commenced by the owvner, who seated him- 
self at a table near to Graham's, and, after looking at him 
earnestly for some minutes, said, " You are waiting for your 
antagonist at dominoes, M. Lebeau . a very remarkable man." 

" So he seems. I know, however, but little of him. You, 
perhaps, have known him longer ?" 

" Several months. Many of your countrymen frequent 
this cafk^ but you do not seem to care to associate with the 

" It is not that ; but we islanders are shy, and don't make 
acquaintance with each other readily. By-the-way, since you 
so courteously accost me, I may take the liberty of saying 
that I overheard you defend the other night, against one of 
my countrymen, who seemed to me to talk great nonsense, 
the existence of U Bon Dieu, You had much the best of it. 



 



 



THB PABISIANS. 263 

I rather gathered from your argument that you went some- 
what farther, and were not too enlightened to admit of Chris- 
tianity." 

Armand Monnier looked pleased . ^he liked praise ; and he 
liked to hear himself talk, and plunged at once into a very 
complicated sort of Christianity . partly Arian, partly St. Si- 
monian, with a little of Rousseau, and a great deal of Armand 
Monnier. Into this we need not follow him ; but, in sum, it 
was a sort of Christianity the main heads of which consisted , 
in the removal of your neighbor's landmarks . ^in the right of 
the poor to appropriate the property of the rich . in the right 
of love to dispense with mamage, and the duty of the state 
to provide for any children that might result from such union, 
the parents being incapacitated to do so, as whatever they 
might leave was due to the treasury in common, Graham 
listened to these doctrines with melancholy not unmixed 
with contempt. " Are these opinions of yours," he asked, 
" derived from reading or your own reflection ?" 

" Well, from both, but from circumstances in life that in- 
duced me to read and reflect. I am one of the many victims 
of the tyrannical law of marriage. When veiy young I mar- 
ried a woman who made me miserable, and then forsook me. 
Morally, she has ceased to be my wife . legally, she is. I 
then met with another woman who suits me, who loves me. 
She lives with me ; I can not marry her; she has to submit 
to humiliations, to be called contemptuously an ouvrier^s mis- 
tress. Then, though before I was only a Republican, I felt 
there was something wrong in society which needed a greater 
change than that of a merely political government ; and then, 
too, when I was all troubled and sore, I chanced to read one 
of Madame de GrantmesniPs books. A glorious genius that 
woman's !" 

" She has genius, certainly," said Graham, with a keen pang 
at his heart ; Madame de Grantmesnil, the dearest friend of 
Isaura! "BuL" he added, "though I believe that eloquent 
author has indirectly assailed certain social institutions, in- 
cluding that of marriage, I am perfectly persuaded that she 
never designed to effect such complete overthrow of the sys- 
tem which all civilized communities have hitherto held in 
reverence as your doctrines would attempt ; and, after all, she 
but expresses her ideas through the medium of fabulous inci- 

1.12 . ^ . 

 VjOOQIC 



264 TUK PABISIAKS. 

dents and characters. And men of your sense should not look 
for a creed in the fictions of poets and romance-writers." 

" Ah," said Monnier, " I dare say neither Madame de Grant- 
mesnil nor even Rousseau ever even guessed the ideas they 
awoke in their readers; but one idea leads on to another. 
And genuine poetry and romance touch the heart so much 
more than dry treatises. In a word, Madame de Grantmes- 
nil's book set me thinking ; and then I read other books, and 
talked with clever men, and educated myself. And so I be- 
came the man I am." Here, with a self-satisfied air, Monnier 
bowed to the Englishman, and joined a group at the other 
end of the room. 

The next evening, just before dusk, Graham Vane was seat- 
ed musingly in his own apartment in the Faubourg Mont- 
martre, when there came a slight knock at his door. He was 
so wrapped in thought that he did not hear the sound, though 
twice repeated. The door opened gently, and M. Lebeau ap- 
peared on the threshold. The room was lighted only by the 
gas-lamp from the street without. 

Lebeau advanced through the gloom, and quietly seated 
himself in the corner of the fire-place opposite to Graham be- 
fore he spoke. .. " A thousand pardons for disturbing your 
slumbers, M. Lamb." 

Startled then by the voice so near hira,*Graham raised his 
head, looked round, and beheld very indistinctly the person 
seated so near him. 

"M. Lebeau?" 

" At your service. I promised to give an answer to your 
question : accept my apologies that it has been deferred so 
long. I shall not this evening go to* our cafk; I took the lib- 
erty of calling." 

" M, Lebeau, you are a brick !" 

" A what, monsieur ! . a hrique .^" 

" I forgot . you are not up to our fashionable London idi- 
oms. A brick means a jolly fellow, and it is ^ry kind in you 
to call. What is your decision ?" 

"Monsieur, I can give you some information, but it is so 
slight that I offer it gratis, and forego all thought of under- 
taking farther inquiries. They could only be prosecuted in 
another country, and it would not be worth my while to leave 
Paris on the chance of gaining so trifling a reward as you 



 



Gopgk 



THE PARISIANS. 265 

propose. Judge for youreelf. In the year 1849, and in tl^ 
month of July, Louise Duval left Paris for Aix-la-Chapelle. 
There she remained some weeks, and then left it. I can learn 
no farther traces of her movements." 

" Aix-la-Chapelle ! . what could she do there ?" 

" It is a Spa in great request . crowded during the summer i 
season with visitors from all countrie4i She might have gone 
there for health or for pleasure." 

" Do you think one could learn more at the Spa itself if 
one went there ?" 

" Possibly. But it is so long . twenty years ago." 

"She might have revisited the place." 

" Certainly ; but I know no more." 

" Was she there undej the same name . ^Duval ?" 

" I am sure of that." 

" Do you think she left it alone or with others ? You tell 
me she was awfully hdk . she might have attracted admir- 
ers." 

" If," answered Lebeau, reluctantly, " I could believe the 
report of my informant, Louise Duval left Aix not alone, but 
with some gallant . not an Englishman. They are said to 
have parted soon, and the man is now dead. But, speaking 
frankly, I do not think Mademoiselle Duval would have thus 
compromised her honor and sacrificed her future. I believe 
she would have scorned all proposals that were not those of 
marriage. But all I can say for certainty is, that nothing is # 
known to me of her fate since she quitted Aix-la-Chapelle." 

"In 1849. she had then a child living?" 

" A child ? I never heard that she had any child ; and I 
do not believe she could have had any child in 1849." 

Graham mused. Somewhat less than five years after 1849 
Louise Duval had been seen at Aixrla-Ohapelle. Possibly she 
found some attraction at that place, and might yet be discov- 
ered there. "Monsieur Lebeau," said Graham, "you know 
this lady by sight ; .you would recognize her in spite of the 
lapse of years. "Will you go to Aix and find out there wh^t 
yon can ? Of course expenses will be paid, and the reward 
will be given if you succeed." 

"I can not oblige you. My interest in this poor lady is 
not very strong, though I should be willing to serve her, and 
slad to know she were alive. I have now business on hand- 



 



 



266 THE PABISIANS. 

#bich interests me much more, and which will take me from 
Paris, but not in the direction of Aix." 

" If I wrote to my employer, and got him to raise the re- 
ward to some higher amount that might make it worth your 
while?" 

" I should still ansi|^ that my affairs will not permit such 
a journey. But if thSibe any chance of tracing Louise Du- 
val at Aix . and there may be . you would succeed quite as 
well as I should. You must judge for yourself if it be worth 
your trouble to attempt such a task ; and if you do attempt 
it, and do succeed, pray let me know. A line to my office 
will reach me for some little time, even if I am absent from 
Paris. Adieu, M. Lamb." 
* Here M. Lebeau rose and departed. 

Graham relapsed into thought, but a train of thought much 
more active, much more concentrated than before. " No " . 
thus ran his meditations . " no, it would not be safe to employ 
that man further. The reasofas that forbid me to offer any 
very high reward for the discovery of this woman operate 
still more strongly against tendering to her own relation a 
sum that might indeed secure his aid, but would unquestion- 
ably arouse his suspicions, and perhaps drag into light all 
that must be concealed. Oh, this cruel mission ! I am, in- 
deed, an impostor to myself till it be fulfilled. I will go to 
Aix, and take Renard with me. I am impatient till I set 
t out, but I can not quit Paris without once more seeing Is^u- 
ra. She consents to relinquish the stage; surely I could 
wean her, too, from intimate friendship with a woman whose 
genius has so fatal an effect upon enthusiastic ipinds. And 
then . and then?" 

He fell into a delightful reverie ; and contemplating Isaura 
as his ftiture wife, he surrounded her sweet image with all 
those attributes of dignity and respect with which an En- 
glishman is accustomed to invest the destined bearer of his 
name, the gentle sovereign of his househirid, the sacred moth- 
er of his children. In this picture the more brilliant quali- 
ties of Isaura found, perhaps, but faint presentation. Her 
glow of sentiment, her play of fancy, her artistic yearnings 
for truths remote, for the invisible fairy-land of beautiful ro- 
mance, receded into the background of the picture. It was 
all these, no doubt, that had so strengthened and enriched 



 



Google 



THE PARISIANS. . 267 

the love at first sight which had shaken the equilibrium of 
his positive existence ; and yet he now viewed all these as 
subordinate to the one image of mild, decorous matronage 
into which wedlock was to transform the child of genius, 
longing for angel wings and unlimited space. 



CHAPTER V. 

On quitting the sorry apartment of the false M. Lamb, Le- 
beau walked on with slow steps and bended head, like a man 
absorbed in thought He threaded a labyrinth of olbscure 
streets, no longer in the Faubourg Montmartre, and dived at 
last into one of the few courts which preserve the cachet of 
the moyen dge untouched by the ruthless spirit of improve- 
ment which, during the Second Empire, has so altered the 
face of Paris. At the bottom of the court stood a large 
house, much dilapidated, but bearing the trace of former 
grandeur in pilasters and fretwork in the style of the Henais- 
sance^ and a defaced coat of arms, surmounted with a ducal 
coronet, over the doorway. The house had the aspect of de- 
sertion : many of. the windows were broken, others were 
jealously closed .ith mouldering shutters. The door stood 
ajar ; Lebeau pushed it open, and the action set in motion a 
bell within a porter's lodge. The house, then, was not unin- 
habited ; it retained the dignity of a concierge. A man with 
a large grizzled beard cut square, and holding a journal in 
his hand, emerged from the lodge, and moved his cap with 
a certain bluff and surly reverence on recognizing Lebeau. 

" What I so early, citizen ?" 

" Is it too early ?" said Lebeau, glancing at his watch. 
" So it is. I was not aware of the time ; but I am tired with 
waiting. Let me into the salon, I will wait for the rest ; I 
shall not be sorry for a littlje repose." 

"jBow," said the porter, sententiously ; ** while man re- 
poses men advance." 

" A profound truth, Citizen Le Roux ; though, if they ad- 
vance on a jreposing foe, they have blundering leaders un- 
less they march through unguarded by-paths and with 
noiseless tread." 

Following the porter up a dingy broad staircase, Lebeau 

 VjOOQIC 



I 



268 . THE PARISIANS. 

was admitted into a larg^ room void of all other furniture 
than a table, two benches at its sides, and a fcmteuil at its 
head. On the mantel-piece there was a huge clock, and 
some iron sconces were fixed on the paneled walls. 

Lebeau flung himself with a wearied air into the /awfeuit 
The porter looked at him with a kindly expression. He had 
a liking to Lebeau, whom he had served in his proper pro- 
fession of messenger or commusionnawe before being placed 
by that courteous employer in the easy post he now held. 
Lebeau, indeed, had the art, when he pleased, of charming 
inferiprs ; his knowledge of mankind allowed him to distin- 
guish peculiarities in each individual, and flatter the amour 
propre by deference to such eccentricities. Marc Le Roax, 
the roughest of "red caps," had a wife of whom he was very 
proud. He would have called the Empress CUoymne Eu- 
genie, but he always spoke of his wife as madame. Lebeau 
won his heart by always asking after madame. 

" You look tired, citizen," said the porter ; " let me bring 
you a glass of wine." 

" Thank you, mon ami, no. Perhaps later, if I have time, 
after we break up, to pay my respects to madame." 

The porter smiled, bowed, and retired, muttering, ^Nbm 
d^un petit bonhomme . il n'y a rien de td que lea beUes mor 
nihres,'*^ 

Left alone, Lebeau leaned his elbow on the table, resting 
his chin on his hand, and gazing into the dim space-^for it 
was now, indeed, night,- and little light cam^ through the 
grimy panes of the one window left unclosed by shutters. 
He was musing deeply. This man was, in much, an enigma 
to himself. Was he seeking to unriddle it? A strange 
compound of contradictory elements. In his stormy youth 
there had been lightning-like flashes of good instincts, of ir- 
regular honor, of inconsistent generosity . ^a puissant wild 
nature . with strong passions of love and of hate, without 
fear, but not without shame. In other forms of society that 
love of applause which had made him seek and exult ia the 
notoriety which he mistook for fame might have settled 
down into some solid and useful ambition. He might have 
become great in the world's eye, for at the service of his de- 
sires there were no ordinary talents. Though too true a Pa- 
risian to be a severe student, still, on the whole, he had ac- 

 VjOOQIC 



THB PARISIANS. 269 

quired much general information, partly from books, partly 
from varied commerce with mankind. He had the gifl, both 
by tongue and by pen, of expressing himself with force and 
warmth . time and necessity had improved that gift. Cov- 
eting, during his brief career of fashion, the distinctions which 
necessitate lavish expenditure, he had been the most reckless 
of spendthrifts, but the neediness which follows waste had 
never destroyed his original sense of personal honor. Cer- 
tainly Victor de Maul6on was not, at the date of his faM^ a 
man to whom the thought of accepting, much less of steal- 
ing, the jewels of a woman who loved him, could have oc- 
curred as a possible question of casuistry between honor and 
temptation. Nor could that sort of question have, through- 
out the sternest trials or the humblest callings to which his 
after-life had been subjected, forced admission into his brain. 
He was one of those men, perhaps the most terrible though 
unconscious criminals, who are the offsprings produced by 
intellectual power and egotistical ambition. If you had of- 
fered to Victor de Maul6on the crown of the CsBsars on con- 
dition of his doing one of those base things which " a gentle- 
man ^ can not do . pick a pocket, cheat at cards . Victor de 
Maul6on would have refused the crown. He would not have 
reftised on account of any laws of morality affecting the 
foundations of the social system, but from the pride of his 
own personality. " I, Victor de Maul^on ! I pick a pocket ! 
I cheat at cards! I!" But when something incalculably 
worse for the interests of society than picking a pocket or 
cheating at cards was concerned . when, for the sake either 
of private ambition, or political experiment hitherto untest- 
ed, and therefore very doubtful, the peace and order and 
happiness of millions might be exposed to the release of the 
most savage passions . rushing on revolutionary madness or 
civil massacre . then this French dare-devil would have been 
just as unscrupulous as any English philosopher whom a 
metropolitan borough might elect as its representative. The 
system of the empire was in the way of Victor de Maul^on . 
in the way of his private ambition, in the way of his polit- 
ical dogmas . and therefore it must be destroyed, no matter 
what nor whom it crushed beneath its ruins. He was one 
of those plotters of revolutions not uncommon in democracies, 
ancient and modern, who invoke popular agencies with the 

 VjOOQIC 



270 THB PABISIANS. 

less scruple because they have a supreme coBtempt for the 
populace. A man with mental powers equal to De Maa- 
Icon's, and who sincerely loves the people and respects the 
grandeur of aspiration with which, in the great upheaving 
of their masses, they so often contrast the irrational creduli- 
ties of their ignorance and the blind fury of their wrath, is 
always exceedingly loath to pass the terrible gulf that di- 
vides reform from revolution. He knows how rarely it hap- 
pms that genuine liberty is not disarmed in the passage, and 
what sufferings must be undergone by those who live by 
their labor during the dismal intervals between the sudden 
destruction of one form of society and the gradual settlement 
of another. Such a man, however, has no type ija a Victor 
de Maul6on. The circumstances of his life had placed this 
strong nature at war with society, and corrupted into misan- 
thropy affections that had once been ardent That misan- 
thropy made his ambition more intense, because it increased 
his scorn for the human instruments he employed. 

Victor de Manleon knew that, however innocent of the 
charges that had so long darkened his name, and however . 
thanks to his rank, his manners, his savoir vivre, the ai4 of 
Louvier's countenance, and the support of his own high-born 
connections . ^he might restore himself to his rightful grade 
in private life, the higher prizes in public life would scarcely 
be within reach, to a man of his antecedents and stinted 
means, in the existent form and conditions of established po- 
litical order. Perforce, the aristocrat must make himself 
democratic if he would become a political chief. Could he 
assist in turning upside down the actual state of things, he 
trusted to his individual force of character to find himself 
among the uppermost in the. general boiUeversemerU. And 
in the first stage of popular revolution the mob has no great- 
er darling than the noble who deserts his order, though in 
the second stage it may guillotine him at the denunciation 
of his cobbler. A mind so sanguine and so audacious as 
that of Victor de Mauleon never thinks of the second step 
if it sees a way to the first. 



 



 



THE PABISIAIfS. 271 



CHAPTER VI. 

The room was in complete darkness, save where a ray 
from a gas -lamp at the mouth of the court came aslant 
through the window, when Citizen Le Roux re-entered, closed 
the window, lighted two of the sconces, and drew forth from 
a drawer in the table implements of writing, which he placed 
thereon noiselessly, as if he feared to disturb M. Lebeau, 
whose head, buried in his hiands, rested on the table. He 
seemed in a profound sleep. At last the porter gently 
touched the arm of the slumberer, and whispered in his ear, 
" It is on the stroke of ten, citizen ; they will be here in a 
minute or so." Lebeau lifted his head drowsily. 

"Eh," said he." what?" 

" You have been asleep." 

" I suppose so, for I have been dreaming. Ha ! I hear the 
door-bell. I am wide awake now." 

The porter left him, and in a few minutes conducted into 
the 8(Um two men wrapped in cloaks, despite the warmth of 
the summer night. Lebeau shook hands with them silently, 
and not less silently they laid aside their cloaks and seated 
themselves. Both these men appeared to belong to the 
upper section of the middle class. One, strongly built, with 
a keen expression of countenance, was a surgeon considered 
able in his profession, but with limited practice, owing to a 
current suspicion against his honor in connection with a 
forged will. The other, tall, meagre, with long grizzled hair 
and a wild, unsettled look about the eyes, was a man of sci- 
ence; had written works well esteemed upon mathematics 
and electricity ; also against the existence of any other crea- 
tive power than that which he called " nebulosity," and de- 
fined to be the combination of heat and moisture. The 
surgeon was about the age of forty, the atheist a few years 
older. In another minute or so a knock was heard against 
the wall. One of the men rose and touched a spring in the 
panel, which then flew back, and showed an opening with a 
narrow stair, by which, one after the other, entered three 

 Vj-OOQIC 



272 THE PARISIANS. 

Other members of the society. Evidently there was more 
than one mode of ingress and exit. 

The three new-comers were not Frenchmen. one might 
see that at a glance ; probably they had reasons for greater 
precaution than those who entered by the front door. One, 
a tall, powerfully built man, with fair hair and beard, dressed 
with a certain pretension to elegance . faded, threadbare el- 
egance . ^^ exhibiting no appearance of linen, was a Pole. 
One, a slight, bald man, very dark and sallow, was an Italian. 
The third, who seemed like an ouvrier in his holiday clothes, 
was a Belgian. 

Lebeau greeted them all with an equal courtesy, and each 
with an equal silence took his seat at the table. 

Lebeau glanced at the clock. " Confr^es^^ he said, " our 
number, as fixed for this aiancey still needs two to be com- 
plete, and doubtless they will arrive in a few minutes. Till 
they come we can but talk upon trifles. Permit me to offer 
you my cigar-case." And so saying, he who professed to be 
no smoker handed his next neighbor, who was the Pole, a 
large cigar-case amply furnished ; and the Pole, helping him- 
self to two cigars, handed the case to the man next him, two 
only declining the luxury, the Italian and the Belgian. But 
the Pole was the only man who took two cigars. 

Steps were now heard on the stairs, the door opened, and 
Citizen Le Roux ushered in, one after the other, two men, 
this time unmistakably French . to an experiences eye un- 
mistakably Parisians: the one a young beardless man, who 
seemed almost boyish, with a beautiful face and a stinted, 
meagre frame ; the other a stalwart man of about eight-and- 
twenty, dressed partly as an ouvrier^ not in his Sunday 
clothes, rather affecting the bloiise . not that he wore that 
antique garment, but that he was in rough costume, un- 
brushed and stained, with thick shoes and coarse stockings, 
and a workman's cap. But of all who gathered round the 
table at which M. Lebeau presided, he had the most distin- 
guished exterior, A virile, honest exterior, a massive open 
forehead, intelligent eyes, a handsome clear-cut incisive pro- 
file, and solid jaw. The expressiop of the face w?i8 stern, but 
not mean . an expression which might have become an an- 
cient baron as well as a modem workman . in it plenty of 
haughtiness and of will, and still more of self-esteem. 

 VjOOQIC 



k 




^^^ 


^^^^^^^K 








- i 


M^ 


'^N- 




t ' 
_ f 












^:, 




r 3 

t H 

* T 

I 

I 






. 


1 vfii':: " . - jii'ililtilfcj^P^^^^^s-^ 




1 .. .-- 


L. 




1 

 GoOglC^^^^ 



 VjOOQIC 



^ THE PABISIANS. 273 

^^ Confrhres^^ said Lebeau, rising, and every eye turned to 
him, " our number for the present siance is complete. To 
business. Since we last met our cause has advanced with 
rapid and not with noiseless stride. I need not tell you that 
Louis Bonaparte has virtually abnegated Lea id&ea Napol^ 
oniennes . a fatal mistake for him^ a glorious advance for us. 
The liberty of the press must very shortly be achieved, and 
with it personal government must end. When the autocrat 
once is compelled to go by the advice of his ministers, look 
for sudden changes. His ministers will be but weather- 
cocks, turned hither and thither according as the wind chops 
at Paris ; and Paris is the temple of the winds. The new 
revolution is almost at hand." (Murmurs of applause.) " It 
would move the laughter of the Tuileries and its ministere, 
of the Bourse and of its gamblers, of every dainty salon of 
this silken city of would-be philosophers and wits, if they 
were told that here within this mouldering haraque .ight 
men, so little blessed by fortune, so littJe known to fame as 
ourselves, met, to concert the fall of an empire. The gov- 
ernment would not deem us important enough to notice our 
existence." 

" I know not that," interrupted the Pole. 
" Ah, pardon," resumed the orator ; " T should have con- 
fined my remark to the Jive of us who are French. I did in- 
justice to the illustrious antecedents of our foreign allies. 
I know that you, Thaddeus Loubisky . that you, Leonardo 
Raselli . ^have been too eminent for hands hostile to tyrants 
not to be marked with a black cross in the books of the po- 
lice. I know that you, Jan Vanderstegen, if hitherto un- 
scarred by those wounds in the defense of freedom whiph 
despots and cowards would fain miscall the brands of the 
felon, still owe it to your special fraternity to keep your 
movements rigidly concealed. The tyrant would suppress 
the International Society, and forbids it the liberty of con- 
gress. To you three is granted the secret entrance to our 
council-hall. But we Frenchmen are as yet safe in our sup- 
posed insignificance. Confr^ree^ permit me to impress on 
you the causes why, insignificant as we seem, we are really 
formidable. In the first place, we are few : the great mis- 
take in most secret associations has been to admit many 
councilors; and disunion enters wherever many tongues can 

 VjOOQIC 



2V4 THE PAEISIANS. 

wrangle. In the next place, though so few in council, we are 
legion when the time comes for action, because we are rep- 
resentative men, each of his own section, and each section is 
capable of an indefinite expansion. 

" You, valiant Pole . you, politic Italian. enjoy the confi- 
dence of thousands now latent in unwatched homes and 
harmless callings, but who, when you lift a finger, will, like 
the buried dragon's teeth, spring up into armed men. You, 
Jan Vanderstegen, the trusted delegate from Verviers, that 
swarming camp of wronged labor in its revolt from the in- 
iquities of capital. you, when tie hour arrives, can touch the 
wire that flashes the telegram * Arise' through all the lands 
in which workmen combine against their oppressors. 

" Of us five Frenchmen let me speak more modestly. You 
. sage and scholar. Felix Ruvigny, honored alike for the 
profundity of your science and the probity of your manners, 
induced to join us by your abhorrence of priestcraft and su- 
perstition . you hav^ a wide connection among all the en- 
lightened reasoners who would emancipate the mind of man 
from, the trammels of Church-born fable. and when the hour 
arrives in which it is safe to say, * Delenda est Roma^ you 
know where to find the pens that are more victorious than 
swords against a Church and a Creed. You" (turning to 
the surgeon) . " you, Gaspard le Noy, whom a vile calumny 
has robbed of the throne in your profession, so justly due to 
your skill . you, nobly scorning the rich and great, have de- 
voted yourself to tend and heal the humble and the penni- 
less, so that you have won the popular title of the ' MSdecin 
des Pauvres^ . when the time comes wherein soldiers shall 
fly before the sans-culottes^ and the mob shall begin the work 
which they who move mobs will complete, the clients of 
Gaspard le Noy will be the avengers of his wrongs. 

" You, Armand Monnier, simple ouvrier^ but of illustrious 
parentage, for your grandsire was the beloved friend of the 
virtuous Robespierre, your father perished a hero and a mar- 
tyr in the massacre of the coup cPUat . you, cultured in the 
eloquence of Robespierre himself, and in the persuasive phi- 
losophy of Robespierre's teacher, Rousseau . you, the idol- 
ized orator of the Red Republicans . you will be indeed a 
chief of dauntless bands when the trumpet sounds for battle. 
Young publicist and poet, Gustavo Rameau . I care not 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 275 

which you are at present, I know what you will be soon . 
you need nothing for the development of your powers over 
the many but an organ for their manifestation. Of that 
anon. I now descend into the bathos of egotism. I am 
compelled lastly to speak of myself. It was at Marseilles 
and Lyons, as you already know, that I first conceived the 
plan of this representative association. For yeara before I 
had been in familiar intercourse with the friends of freedom 
. that is, with the foes of the empire. They are not all poor. 
Some few are rich and generous. I do not say these rich 
and few concur in the ultimate objects of the poor and 
many. But they concur in the first object, the demolition of 
that which exists . the empire. In the course of my spe- 
cial calling of negotiator or agent in the towns of the Mid% I 
formed friendships with some of these prosperous malcon- 
tents. And out of these fidendships I conceived the idea 
which is embodied in this council. 

"According to that conception, while the council may 
communicate as it will with all societies, secret or open, hav- 
ing revolution for their object, the council refuses to merge 
itself in any other confederation : it stands aloof and inde- 
pendent; it declines to admit into its code any special ar- 
ticles of faith in a future beyond the bounds to which it lim- 
its its design and its force. That design unites us; to go 
beyond would divide. We all agree to destroy the Napole- 
onic dynasty ; none of us night agree as to what we should 
place in its stead. All of us here present might say, ' A re- 
public' Ay, but of what kind ? Vanderstegen would have 
it socialistic ; Monnier goes further, and would have it com- 
munistic, on the principles of Fourier ; Le Noy adheres to 
the policy of Danton, and would commence the republic by 
a reign of terror ; our Italian ally abhors the notion of gen- 
eral, massacre, and advocates individual assassination. <^u- 
vigny would annihilate the worship of a Deity; Monnier 
holds, with Voltaire and Robespierre, that * if there were no 
Deity,'it would be necessary to Man to create one.' Bref^ 
we could not agree upon any plan for the new edifice, and 
therefore we refuse to discuss one till the plowshare has 
gone over the ruins of the old. But I have another and 
more practical reason for keeping our council distinct from 
all societies with professed gbjects beyond that of demoli- 

 VjOOQIC 



276 THE PARISIANS. 

tion. We need a certain command of money. It is I who 
bring to you that, and . how ? Not from my own resources ; 
they but suffice to support myself. Not by contributions 
from ouvriera^ who, as you well know, will subscribe only for 
their own ends in the victory of workmen over masters. I 
bring money to you from the coffers of the rich malcontents. 
Their politics are not those of most present : their .politics 
are what they term moderate. Some are, indeed, for a re- 
public, but for a republic strong in defense of order, in sup- 
port of property ; others . and they are the more numerous 
and the more rich . for a constitutional monarchy, and, if 
possible, for the abridgment of universal suffrage, which, in 
their eyes, tends only to anarchy in the towns and arbitrary 
rul^ under priestly influence in the rural districts. They 
would not subscribe a sou if they thought it went to further 
the designs whether of Ruvigny, the atheist, or of Monnier, 
who would enlist the Deity of Rousseau on the side of the 
drapeau rouge . not a sou if they knew I had the honor to 
boast such confrlres as I see around me. T^ey subscribe, as 
we concert, for the fall of Bonaparte. The policy I adopt I 
borrow from the policy of the English Liberals. In England, 
potent miUionnaireSj high-born dukes, devoted Churchmen, 
belonging to the Liberal party, accept the services of men 
who look forward to measures which would ruin capital, 
eradicate aristocracy,' and destroy the Church, provided these 
men combine with them in some immediate step onward 
against the Tories. They have* a proverb which I thus 
adapt to French localities: If a train passes Fontainebleau 
on its way to Marseilles, why should I not take it to Fon- 
tainebleau because other passengers are going on to Mar- 
seilles ? 

"(7on/r^65, it seems to me the moment has come when we 
nuM^venture some of the fund placed at my disposal to oth- 
er purposes than those to which it has been hitherto de- 
voted. I propose, therefore, to set up a journal under the 
auspices of Gustave Raraeau as editor-in-chief . a journal 
which, if he listen to my advice, will create no small sensa- 
tion. It will begin with a tone of impartiality ; it will re- 
frain from all violence of invective; it will have wit ; it will 
have sentiment and eloquence; it will win its way into the 
salons and caf^ of educated men; and then . and then . 



 



 



THB PABISIANS. 277 

when it does change from polished satii*e into fierce denun- 
ciation, and sides with the blouseSy its effect will be startling 
and terrific. Of this I will say more to Citizen Rameau in 
private. To yon I need not enlarge upon the fact that, at 
Paris, a combination of men, though immeasurably superior 
to us in status or influence, without a journal at command, 
is nowhere ; with such a journal, written not to alarm but 
to seduce fluctuating opinions, a combination of men im- 
measurably inferior to us may be anywhere. 

"(7on/r^re5, this affair settled, I proceed to distribute 
among you sums of which each who receives will render me 
an account, except our valued confrhre the Pole. All that 
we can subscribe to the cause of humanity a representative 
of Poland requires for himself." (A suppressed laugh among 
all but the Pole, who looked round with a grave, imposing 
air, as much as to say, " What is there to laugh at ? . a sim- 
ple truth.") 

M. Lebeau then presented to each of his confreres a sealed 
envelope, containing, no doubt, a bank-note, and perhaps also 
private instructions as to its disposal. It was one of his 
rules to make the amount of any sum granted to an individ- 
ual member of the society from the fund at his disposal a 
confidential secret between himself and the recipient. Thus 
jealousy was avoided if the sums were unequal; and un- 
equal they generally were. In the present instance the two 
largest sums were given to the Mkdedn dea Pauvres and to 
the delegate from Verviers. Both were, no doubt, to be dis- 
tributed among " the poor," at the discretion of the trustee 
appointed. 

Whatever rules with regard to the distribution of money 
M. Lebeau laid down were acquiesced in without demur, for 
the money was found exclusively lyr himself, and furnished 
without the pale of the Secret Council, of which he had made 
himself founder and dictator. Some other business was then 
discussed, sealed reports from, each member were handed 
to the president, who placed them unopened in his pocket, 
and resumed : 

" Confr^rea^ our stance is now concluded. The period for 
our next meeting must remain indefinite, for I myself shall 
leave Paris as soon as I have set on foot the journal, on the 
details of which I will confer with Citizen Rameau. I am 

 VjOOQIC 



278 THE PABISIANS. 

Dot satisfied with the progress made by the two traveliug 
missionaries who complete oar Council of Ten ; and though I 
do not question their zeal, I think my experience may guide 
it if I take a journey to the towns of Bordeaux and Mar- 
seilles, where they now ara But should circumstances de- 
manding concert of action arise, you may be sure that I will 
either summon a meeting or transmit instructions to such of 
our members as may be most usefully employed. For the 
present, confrhrea^ you are relieved. Bemaih only you, dear 
young author." 



CHAPTER Vn. 

Left alone with Gustave Rameau, the president of the 
Secret Council remained silently musing for some moments; 
but his countenance was no longer moody and overcast . ^his 
nostrils were dilated, as in triumph . there was a half smile 
of pride on his lips. Rameau watched him curiously and ad- 
mii-ingly. The young man had the impressionable, excitable 
temperament common to Parisian genius . especially when it 
nourishes itself on absinthe. He enjoyed the romance of be- 
longing to a secret society; he was acute enough to recog- 
nize the sagacity by which this small conclave was kept out 
of those crazed combinations for impracticable theories more 
likely to lead adventurers to the Tarpeian Rock than to the 
Capitol, while yet those crazed combinations might, in some 
critical moment, become strong instruments in the hands of 
practical ambition. Lebeau fascinated him, and took colos- 
sal proportions in his intoxicated vision . vision indeed in- 
toxicated at this moment, for before it floated the realized 
image of his aspirations^-a journal of which he was to be the 
editor-in-chief . in which his poetry, his prose, should occupy 
space as large as he pleased . ^through. which his name, hither- 
to scarce known beyond a literary clique, would resound in 
salon and club and ca/%, and become a familiar music on the 
lips of fashion. And he owed this to the man seated there 
. a prodigious man ! 

" Cher poUe^^^ said Lebeau, breaking silence, " it gives me 
no mean pleasure to think I am opening a career to one whose 
talents fit him for those goals on which they who reach write 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 279 

names that posterity shall read. Struck with certain arti- 
cles of youi*s in the journal made celebrated by the wit and 
gayety of Savarin, I took pains privately to inquire into your 
birth, your history, connections, antecedents. All confirmed 
my first impression, that you were exactly the writer I wish 
to secure to our cause. I therefore sought you in your 
rooms, unintroduced and a stranger, in order to express my 
admiration of your compositions. Bref^ we soon became 
friends ; and after comparing minds I admitted you, at your 
request, into this Secret Council Now, in proposing to you 
the conduct of the journal I would establish, for which I am 
prepared to find all necessary funds, I am compelled to make 
imperative conditions. Nominally you will be editor-in- 
chief: that station, if the journal succeeds, will secure you 
position and fortune ; if it fail, you fail with it. But we will 
not speak of failure ; I must have it succeed. Our interest, 
then, is the same. Before that interest all puerile vanities 
fade away. Nominally, I say, you are editor-in-chief; but all 
the real work of editing will at first be done by others." 

"Ah!" exclaimed Rameau, aghast and stunned. Lebeau 
resumed : 

" To establish the journal I propose needs more than the 
genius of youth ; it needs the tact and experience of mature 
years." 

Rameau sank back on his chair with a sullen sneer on his 
pale lips. Decidedly Lebeau was not so great a man as he 
had thought. 

"A certain portion of the journal," continued Lebeau, 
" will be exclusively appropriated to your pen." 

Rameau's lip lost the sneer. 

" But your pen must be therein restricted to compositions 
of pure fancy, disporting in a world ttat does not exist ; or, 
if on graver themes connected with the beings of the world 
that does exist, the subjects will be dictated to you and re- 
vised. Yet even in the higher departments of a journal in- 
tended to make way at its first start, we need the aid not, in- 
deed, of men that write better than you, but of men whose 
fame is established . whose writings, good or bad, the public 
run to read, and will find good even if they are bad. You 
must consign one column to the playful comments and wit- 
ticisms of Savarin." 



 



 



280 THE PABISIANS. 

^* Savario ? Bat he has a jonraal of his own. He will not, 
as an author, condescend to write in one jast set up by me. 
And as a politician, he as certainly will not aid in an ultra- 
democratic revolution. If he care for politics at all, he is a 
constitutionalist, an OrleanisU" 

^^JEhfantl as an author Savarin will condescend to con- 
tribute to your journal, firstly, because it in no way attempts 
to interfere with his own ; secondly . ^I can tell you a secret 
. Savannas journal no longer suffices for his existence ; be 
has sold more than two thirds of its property; he is in debt, 
and his creditor is urgent; and to-morrow you will offer 
Savarin 30,000 francs for one column from his pen, and sign- 
ed by his name^ for two months from the day the journal 
starts. He will accept, partly because the sum will clear off 
the debt that hampers him, partly because he will take 
care that the amount becomes known ; and that will help 
him to command higher terms for the sale of the remaining 
shares in the journal he now edits, for the new book which 
yon told me he intended to write, and for the new journal 
which he will be sure to set up as soon as he has disposed of 
the old one. You say that, as a politician, Savarin, an Or- 
leanist, will not aid in an ultra-democratic revolution. Who 
asks him to do so ? Did I not imply at the meeting that we 
commence our journal with politics the mildest? Though 
revolutions are not made with rose-water, itns rose-water 
that nourishes their roots. The polite cynicism of authors, 
read by those who float on the surface of society, prepares 
the way for the social ferment in its deeps. Had there been 
no Voltaire, there would have been no Camille Desmoulins. 
Had there been no Diderot, there would have been no Marat. 
We start as polite cynics. Of all cynics, Savarin is the po- 
litest. But when I bid high for him, it is his clique that 
I bid for. Without his clique he is but a wit; with his 
clique, a power. Partly out of that clique, partly out of a 
circle beyond it, which Savarin can more or less influence, I 
select ten. Here is the list of them; study it, Entre nous^ 
I esteem their writings as little as I do artificial flies ; but 
they are the artificial flies at which, in this particular season 
of the year, the public rise. You must procure at least five 
of the ten ; and I leave you carte blanche as to the terma 
Savarin gained, the best of them will be proud of being his 

 VjOOQIC 



f 

THB FABISIANS. 281 

associates. Observe, none of these meaaieufrs of brilliant im- 
agination are to write political articles; those will be fur- 
nished to yon anonymously, and inserted without erasure or 
omission. When you have secured Savarin, and five at least 
of the coUadorateurs in the list, write to me at my office. I 
give you four days to do this ; and the day the journal starts 
you enter into the income of 15,000 francs a year, with a rise 
in salary proportioned to profits. Are you contented with 
the terms ?" 

"Of course I am; but supposing I do not gain the aid 
of Savarin, or five at least of the list you give, which I see 
at a glance contains names the most d la mode in this 
kind of writing, more than one of them of high social 
rank, whom it is difficult for me even to approach . if, I say, 
I fail?" 

" What ! with a carte blanche of terms ? fie ! Are you a 
Parisian ? Well, to answer you frankly, if you fail in so easy 
a task you are not the man to edit our journal, and I shall 
find another. AUez, courage/ Take my advice; see Savarin 
the fii-st thing to-morrow morning. Of course my name and 
calling you will keep a profound secret from him as from all. 
Say as mysteriously as you can that parties you are forbid- 
den to name instruct you to treat with M. Savarin, and offer 
him the terms I have specified, the 30,000 francs paid to him 
in advance the moment he signs the simple memorandum of 
agreement. The more mysterious you are, the more you will 
impose . that is, wherever you offer money and don't ask 
for it.'' 

Here Lebean took up his hat, and with a courteous nod of 
adieu, lightly descended the gloomy stairs. 



CHAPTER vnr. 

At night, after this final interview with Lebeau, Graham 
took leave for good of his lodgings in Montmaitre, and re- 
turned to his apartment in the Rue d'Anjou. He spent sev- 
eral hours of the next morning in answering numerous letters 
accumulated during his absence. Late in the afternoon he 
had an. interview with M. Renard, who, as at that season of 
the year he was not overbusied with other affairs, engaged 



 



 



282 THE PABISIANS. 

to obtain leave to place his servioeB at Graham's command 
during the time requisite for inquiries at Aix, and to be in 
readiness to start the next day. Graham then went forth to 
pay one or two farewell visits, and these over, bent his way 
through the Champs lys6es toward Isaura's villa, when he 
suddenly encountered Rochebriant on horseback. The Mar- 
quis courteously dismounted, committing his horse to the 
care of his groom, and linking his arm in Graham's, express- 
ed his pleasure at seeing him again ; then, with some visible 
hesitation and embarrassment, he turned the conversation 
toward the political aspect of France. 

" There was," he said, " much in certain words of yours 
when we last walked together in this very path that sank 
deeply into my mind at the time, and over which I have of 
late still more earnestly i*eflected. You spoke of the duties 
a Frenchman owed to France, and the ' impolicy ' of i-emain- 
ing aloof from all public employment on the part of those 
attached to the Legitimist cause." 

" True, it can not be the policy of any party to forget that 
between the irrevocable past and the uncertain future there 
intervenes the action of the present time." 

'' Should you, as an impartial by-stander, consider it dis- 
honorable in me if I entered the military service under the 
ruling sovereign ?" 

" Certainly not, if your country needed you." 

"And it may, may it not ? I hear vague ramors of coming 
war in almost every salon I* frequent. There has been gun- 
powder in the atmosphere we breathe ever since the battle 
of Sadowa. What think you of German arrogance and am- 
bition ? Will they suffer the swords of France to rust in 
their scabbards ?'' 

" My dear Marquis, I should incline to put the question 
otherwise. Will the jealous amour propre of France permit 
the swords of Germany to remain sheathed ? But in either 
case no politician can see without grave apprehension two 
nations so warlike, close to each other, divided by a border- 
lajQd that one covets and the other will not yield, each aim- 
ed to the teeth ; the one resolved to brook no rival, the other 
equally determined to resist all aggression. And therefore, 
as you say, war is in the atmosphere ; and we may also hear, 
in the clouds that give no sign of dispersion, the growl of 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 283 

the gathering thunder. War may come any day; and if 
France be not at once the victor . ^" 

" France not at once the victor I" interrupted Alain, pas- 
sionately ; " and against a Prussian I Permit me to say no 
Frenchman can believe that." 

"Let no man despise a foe," said Graham, smiling half 
sadly. " However, I must not incur the danger of wounding 
your national susceptibilities. To return to the point you 
raise. If France needed the aid of her best and bravest, a 
true descendant of Henri Quatre ought to blush for his an- 
cient noblesse were a Rochebriant to say, ' Bui I don't like the 
color of the flag.' " 

" Thank you," said Alain, simply ; " that is enough." There 
was a pause, the young men walking on slowly, arm in arm. 
And then there flashed across Graham's mind the recollec- 
tion of talk on another subject in that very path. Here he had 
spoken to Alain in deprecation of any possible alliance with 
Isaura Cicogna, the destined actress and public singer. His 
cheek flushed ; his heart smote him. What ! had he spoken 
slightingly of her . of her ? What . if she became his own 
wife? What! . had he himself failed in the respect which 
he would demand as her right from the loftiest of his high- 
bom kindred ? What, too, would this man, of fairer youth 
than himself, think of that disparaging counsel, when he heard 
that the monitor had won the prize from which he had warn- 
ed another? Would it not seem that he had but spoken in 
the mean canning dictated by the fear of a worthier rival ? 
Stung by these thoughts, he arrested his steps, and, looking 
the Marquis full in the face, said, " You remind me of one 
subject in our talk many weeks since ; it is ray duty to re- 
mind you of another. At that time yo\i, and, speaking frank- 
ly, I myself, acknowledged the charm in the face of a young 
Italian lady. I told you then that, on learning she was in- 
tended for the stage, the charm for me had vanished. I said, 
bluntly, that it should vanish perhaps still more utterly for a 
noble of your illustrious name ; you remember ?" 

" Yes," answered Alain, hesitatingly, and with a look of 
surprise. 

" I wish now to retract all I said thereon. Mademoiselle 
Cicogna is not bent on the profession for which she was edu- 
cated. She would willingly renounce all idea of entering it. 

 VjOOQIC 



284 THE PABISIAKS. 

The only counterweight which, viewed whether by my rea- 
son or my prejudices, could be placed in the opposite scale to 
that of the excellences which might make any man proud to 
win her, is withdrawn. I have become acquainted with her 
since the date of our conversation. Hers is a mind which 
harmonizes with the loveliness of her face. In one word, 
Marquis, I should deem myself honored, as well as blessed, by 
such a bride. It was due to her that I should say this ; it was 
due also to you, in case you retain the impression I sought in 
ignorance to efface. And I am bound, as a gentleman, to 
obey this twofold duty, even though in so doing I bring upon 
myself the affliction of a candidate for the hand to which I 
would fain myself aspire . a candidate with pretensions in 
every way far superior to my own." 

An older or a more cynical man than Alain de Rochebriant 
might well have found something suspicious in a confession 
thus singularly volunteered; but the Marquis was himself so 
loyal that he had no doubt of the loyalty of Graham. . 

" I reply to you," he said, " with a frankness which finds 
an example in your own. The first fair face which attracted 
my fancy since my arrival at Paris was that of the Italian 
demoiselle of whom you speak in terms of such respect. I do 
think if I had then been thrown into her society, and found 
her to be such as you no doubt truthfully describe, that fancy 
might have become a very grave emotion. I was then so 
poor, so friendless, so despondent. Your words of warning 
impressed me at the time, but less durably than you might 
suppose ; for that very night, as I sat in my solitary attic, I 
said to myself: * Why should I shrink, with an obsolete old- 
world prejudice, from what my forefathers #ould have termed 
a misalliance f What is the value of my birthright now ? 
None-^worse than none. It excludes me from all careers; 
my name is but a load that weighs me down. . Why should 
I make that name a curse as well as a burden ? Nothing is 
left to me but that which is permitted to all men. wedded 
and holy love. Could I win to my heart the smile of a wom- 
an who brings me that dower, the home of my fathers would 
lose its gloom.' And therefore, if at that time I had become 
^miliarly acquainted with her who had thus attracted my 
eye and engaged my thoughts, she might have become my 
destiny ; but now !" 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 285 

"But now?" 

" Things have changeTd. I am no longer poor, friendless, 
solitary. I have entered the world of my equals as a Roche- 
briant ; I have made myself responsible for the dignity of my 
name.^ I could not give that name to one, however peerless 
in herself, of whom the world would say, ' But for her mar- 
riage she would have been a singer on the stage !' I will 
own more : the fancy I conceived for the first fair face other 
fair faces have dispelled. At this moment, however, I have 
no thought of marriage ; and having known* the anguish of 
struggle, the privations of poverty, I would ask no woman to 
share the hazard of my return to them. You might present 
me, then, safely to this beautiful Italian . certain, indeed, that 
I should be her admirer, equally certain that I could not be- 
come your rival." 

There was something in this speech that jarred upon Gra- 
ham's sensitive pride. But, on the whole, he felt relieved, 
both in honor and in heart. After a few more words the two 
young men shook hands and parted. Alain remounted his 
horse. The day was now declining. Graham hailed a vacant 
fiacre J and directed the driver to Isaura's villa. 



CHAPTER IX. 

The sun was sinking slowly as Isaura sat at her window, 
gazing dreamily on the rose-hued clouds that made the west- 
ern border-land between earth ana heaven. On the table 
before her lay a few sheets. of MS. hastily written, not yet 
reperused. That restless mind of hers had left its trace on 
the Mw 

It is characteristic, perhaps, of the different genius of the 
sexes that woman takes to written composition more impuls- 
ively, more intuitively, than man . letter-writing, to him a 
task-work, is to her a recreation. Between the age of sixteen 
and the date of marriage six Well-educated, clever girls out 
often keep a journal ; not one well-educated man in ten thou- 
sand does. So, without serious and settled intention of be- 
coming an author, how naturally a girl of ardent feeling and 
vivid fancy -seeks in poetry or romance a confessional . an 
outpouring of thought and sentiment, which are mysteries to 

 VjOOQIC 



286 THB . PABISIAN8. 

herself till she has given them words . ^and which, frankly re- 
vealed on the page, she would not,* perhaps could not, utter 
orally to a living ear. 

During the last few days the desire to create in the realm 
of &ble beings constructed by her own breath, spiritualized 
by her own soul, had grown irresistibly upon this fair child 
of song. . In fact, when Graham's words had decided the re- 
nunciation of her destined career, her instinctive yearnings 
for the utterance of those sentiments or thoughts which can 
only find expression in some form of art, denied the.one vent, 
irresistibly impelled her to the other. And in this impulse 
she was confirmed by the thought that here at least there was 
nothing which her English friend could disapprove . none of 
the perils that beset the actress. Here it seemed as if, could 
she but succeed, her fame would be grateful to the pride of 
all who loved her. Here was a career ennobled by many a 
woman, and side by side in rivalry with renowned men. To 
her it seemed that, could she in this achieve an honored name, 
that name took its place at once amid the higher ranks 6{ 
the social world, and in itself brought a priceless dowry and 
a starry crown. It was, however, not till after the visit to 
Enghien that this ambition took practical life and form. 

One evening after her return to Paris, by an effort so in- 
voluntary that it seemed to her no effort, she had commenced 
a tale . without plan, without method . without knowing in 
QXLe page what would fill the next. Her slight fingers hur- 
riM on as if, like the pretended spirit manifestations, impelled 
by an invisible agency without the pale of the world. She 
was intoxicated by the mere joy of inventing ideal images. 
In her own special art an elaborate artist, here she had no 
thought of art; if art was in her work, it sprang uncoD^liously 
from the harmony between herself and her subject . as it is, 
perhaps, with the early soarings of the genuine lyric poets, 
in contrast to the dramatic. For the true lyric poet is in- * 
tensely personal, intensely subjective. It is himself that he 
expresses . that he represents . and he almost ceases to be 
lyrical when he seeks to go out of his own existence into that 
of others with whom he has no sympathy, no rapport. This 
tale was vivid with genius as yet untutored . genius in its 
morning freshness, full of beauties, full of faults^ Isaura dis- 
tinguished not the faults from the beauties. She felt only a 



 



Google 



THE PABISIANS. 287 

vague persuasion that there was a something higher and 
brighter . a something more true to her own idiosyncrasy . 
than could be achieved by the art that " sings other people's 
words to other people's musia" From the work thus com- 
menced she had now paused. And it seemed to her fancies 
that between her inner self and the scene without, whether 
in the skies and aPand sunset, or in the abodes of men stretch- 
ing far and near, till lost amid the roofs an^ domes of the 
great city, she had fixed and riveted the link of a sympathy 
hitherto fluctuating, unsubstantial, evanescent, undefined. 
Absorbed in her reverie, she did not notice the deepening of 
the short twilight till the servant entering drew the curtains 
between her and the world without, and placed the lamp on 
the table beside her. Then she turned away with a restless 
sigh, her eyes fell on the MS., but the chaim of it was gone. 
A sentiment of distrust in its worth had crept into her 
thoughts, unconsciously to herself, and the page open before 
her at an uncompleted sentence seemed unwelcome and wear- 
isome as a copy-book is to a child condemned to relinquish a 
fairy tale half told, and apply himself to a task half done. 
She fell again into a reverie, when, starting as from a dream, 
she heard herself^ddressed by name, and turning round, saw 
Savarin and Gustave Rameau in the room. 

" We are come, signorina," said Savarin, " to announce to 
you a piece of news, and to hazard a petition. The news is 
this : My young friend here has found a Maecenas who has . 
the good taste so to admire his lucubrations under the nom 
deplume of Alphonse de Valcour as to volunteer the expenses 
for starting a new journal, of which Gustave Rameau is to be 
editor-in-chief; and I have promised to assist him as contrib- 
utor for the first two months. I have given him notes of in- 
troduction to certain otheT feuUletonistes and critics whom he 
has on his list. But all put together would not serv%^ float 
the journal like a short roman from Madame de GrantmesniL 
[nowing your intimacy with that eminent artist, I venture 
to back Rameau's supplication that you would exert your 
influence on his behalf. As to the honoraireSy she has but to 
name them." 

" Carte blanchCy^ cried Rameau, eagerly. 

" You know Eulalie too well, M. Savarin," answered Isau- 
ra, with a smile half reproachful, ^' to suppose that she is a 



 



 



288 THE PARISIANS. 

mercenary in letters, and sells her services to the best bid- 
der." 

" Bah, belle enfant /" said Savarin, with his gay light laugh. 
** Business is business, and books as well as razors are made 
to sell. But, of course, a proper prospectus of the journal 
must accompany your request to write in it Meanwhile 
Rameau will explain to you, as he has doflb to me, that the 
journal in question is designed for circulation among readers 
ofhaiUe dasae: it is to be pleasant and airy, full of bons mots 
and anecdote ; witty, but not ill-natured. Politics to be lib- 
eral, of course, but of elegant admixture . Champagne and 
seltzer-water. In fact, however, I suspect that the politics 
will be a very inconsiderable feature in this organ of fine arts 
and manners; some amateur scribbler in the ^beau monde^ 
will supply them. For the rest, if my introductory letters 
are successful, Madame de Grantmesnil will not be in bad 
company." 

" You will write to Madame de Grantmesnil ?" asked Ra- 
meau, pleadingly. 

" Certainly I will, as soon . " 

'' As soon Bs you have the prospectus, and the names of the 
coUaborateurs,^ interrupted Rameau. "I hope to send you 
these in a very few days." 

While Rameau was thus speaking Savarin had seated him- 
self by the table, and his eye mechanically resting on the 
open MS,, lighted by chance upon a sentence . an aphorism 
. embodying a very delicate sentiment in very felicitous dic- 
tion. One of those choice condensations of thought, suggest- 
ing so much more than is said, which are never found in me- 
diocre writers, and, rare even in the best, come upon us like 
truths seized by surprise. 

"ParWew/" exclaimed Savarin, in the impulse of genuine 
admiration ; ^' but this is beautiful ; what is more, it is origi- 
nal ;" and he read the words aloud. Blushing with shame 
and resentment, Isaura turned and hastily placed her band 
on the MS. 

"Pardon," said Savarin, humbly; "I confess my sin, but 
it was so unpremeditated that it does not merit a severe pen- 
ance. Do not look at me so reproachfully. We all know 
that young ladies keep commonplace-books in which they 
enter passages that strike them in the works they read. And 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 289 

you have bat shown an exquisite taste in selecting this gem. 
Do tell me where you found it. Is it somewhere in Lamar- 
tine?" 

" No," answered Isaura, half inaudibly, and with an effort 
to withdraw the paper. Savarin gently detained her hand, 
and looking earnestly into her tell-tale face, divined her 
secret. 

" It is your own, signorina ! Accept the congratulations 
of a very practiced and somewhat fastidious critic. If the 
rest of what you write resembles this sentence, contribute to 
Rameau's journal, and I answer for its success." 

Rameau approached, half incredulous, half envious. % 

" My dear child," resumed Savarin, drawing away the MS. 
from Isaura's coy, reluctant clasp, " do permit me to cast a 
glance over these papers. For what I yet know, there may 
be here more promise of fame than even you could gain as a 
singer." 

The electric chord in Isaura's heart was touched. Who can 
not conceive what the young writer feels, especially the 
young woman-writer, when hearing the first cheery note of 
praise from the lips of a writer of established fame ? 

" Nay, this can not be wortfi your reading," said Isaura, 
falteringly ; " I have never written any thing of the kind be- 
fore, and this is a riddle to me. I know not," she added, 
with a sweet low laugh, '* why I began, nor how I should 
end it." 

" So much the better," said Savarin ; and he took the MS., 
withdrew to a recess by the farther window, and seated him- 
self there, reading silently and quickly, but now and then 
with a brief pause of reflection. 

Rameau placed himself beside Isaura on the divan, and be- 
gan talking with her earnestly . earnestly, for it was about 
himself and his aspiring hopes. Isaura, on the other hand, 
more woman-like than author-like, ashamed even to seem ab- 
sorbed in herself and her hopes, and with her back turned, in 
the instinct of that shame, against the reader of her MS. . 
Isaura listened and soug)|| to interest herself solely in the 
young fellow-author. Seeking to do so, she succeeded genu- 
inely, for rfeady sympathy was a prevalent characteristic of 
her natura 

" Oh," said Rameau, " I am at the turaing-point of my life. 



 



 



290 THE PABISIANS. 

Ever since boyhood I have been haunted with the words of 
Andre Ch^nier on the morning he was led to the scaffold : 
* And yet there was something here,' striking hb forehead. 
Yes, I, poor, low-bom, launching myself headlong in the 
chase of a name ; I, underrated, nncomprehended, indebted 
even for a hearing to the patronage of an amiable trifler like 
Savarin, ranked by petty rivals in a grade below themselves 
. I now see before me, suddenly, abruptly presented, the 
expanding gates into fame and fortune. Assist me, you !'' 

" But how?" said Isaura, already forgetting her MS. ; and 
certainly Rameau did not refer to that 

^' How !" echoed Rameau. " How ! But do you not see 
. or, at least, do you not conjecture . this journal of which 
Savarin speaks contains my present and my future ? Present 
independence, opening to fortune and renown. Ay . and 
who shall say? . ^renown beyond that of the mere writer. 
Behind the gaudy scaffolding of this rickety empire a new 
social edifice unperceived arises ; and in that edifice the halls 
of state shall be given to the men who helped obscurely to 
build it . to men like me." Here, drawing her hand into his 
own, fixing on her the most imploring gaze of his dark per- 
suasive eyes, and utterly unconscious of bathos in his adjura- 
tion, he added, '' Plead for me with your whole mind and 
heart ; use your uttermost influence with the illustrious writ- 
er whose pen can assure the fate of my journal." 

Here the door suddenly opened, and following the servant 
who announced unintelligibly his name, there entered Gra- 
ham Vane. 



CHAPTER X. 

^^ The Englishman halted at the threshold. His eye, pass- 
ing rapidly over the figure of Savarin reading in the window 
niche, rested upon Rameau and Isaura seated on the same 
divan, he with her hand clasped in both his own, and bend- 
ing his face toward hers so closely that a loose tress of her 
hair seemed to touch his foreheai^ 

The Englishman halted, and no revolution which changes 
the habitudes and forms of states was eve^^ so sudden as that 
which passed without a word in the depths of his unconject- 
ured heart. The heart has Ho history which philosophers can 



 



 




"Tnit Bnolibhman halted at thb THBBsnoLO. His bye passing rapidly otkb thb 

FIGUBE OF SaTAEEN BEADING IN THB WINDOW NICHE, BESTED UPON BaMEAU AND ISAUBA 
SEATED ON THE BAMB DIYAN." 



 



Google 



1 



 VjQOQlC 



THB PABISIANS. 291 

fecognize. An ordinary political observer, contemplating 
the condition of a nation, may very safely tell us what effects ' 
must follow the causes patent to his eyes. But the wisest * *; 
and most far-seeing sage, looking at a man at one o'clock, can 
not tell us what revulsions of his whole being may be made 
ere the clock strike two. V 

As Isaura rose to greet her visitor Savarin came from' the 
window niche, the MS. in his hand. 

" Son of peffidious Albion," said Savaiin, gayly, " we feared 
you had deserted the French alliance. Welcome back to 
Paris, and the entente cordicUe.^^ 

** Would I could stay to enjoy such welcome. But I must 
again quit Payis." 

" Soon to return, n^est ce pas ? Paris is an irresistible mag- 
net to les beaux espHts, Apropos of beaux esprits, be sure to 
leave orders with your bookseller, if you have one, to enter 
your name as subscriber to a new journal." * 

" Certainly, if M. Savarin recommends It." 

^* He recommends it as a matter of coiyse ; he writes in it," 
said Rameau. 

" A sufficient guarantee for its excellence. What is the 
name of the journal ?" 

" Not yet thought of," answered Savarin. " Babes must 
be bom before they are christened ; but it will be instruction 
enough to your bookseller to order the new journal to be ed- 
ited by Gustave Rameau." 

Bowing ceremoniously to the editor in prospeat, Graham 
said, half ironically, " May I hope that in the department of 
criticism you will not be too hard upon poor Tasso ?" 

" Never fear ; the signorina, who adores Tasso, will take 
him under her special protection," said Savarin, interrupting 
Rameau's sullen and embarrassed reply. 

-Graham's brow slightly contracted. " Mademoiselle," he 
said, " is then to be united in the conduct of this journal 
with M. Gystave Rameau ?" 

" No, indeed I" exclaimed Isaura, somewhat frightened at 
the idea. 

" But I hope," said Savarin, " that the signorina may be- 
come a contributor too important for an editor to offend by 
insulting her favorites, Tasso included. Rameau aiid I came 
hither to entreat her influence with her intimate and illustri" 

 VjOOQIC 



292 THE PARISIANS. 

OU8 friend, Madame de Grantmesnil, to insure the success of 
our undertaking by sanctioning the announcement of her 
name as a contributor." 

"Upon social questions . such as the laws of marriage ?*' 
said Graham, with a sarcastic smile, which concealed the 
quiver of his lip and the pain in his voice. 

" Nay," answered Savarin, " our journal will be too sport- 
ive, I hope, for matters so profound. We would rather have 
Madame de GrantmesniPs aid in some shoi*t roman, which 
will charm the fancy of all and offend the opinions of none. 
But since I came into the room I care less for the signorina's 
influence with the great authoress ;" and he glanced signifi- 
cantly at the MS. 

"How so?" said Graham, his eye following the glance. 

"If the writer of this MS. will conclude what she has be- 
gun, we shall be independent of Madame de Grantmesnil." 

" Fie !" cried Isaura, impulsively, her face and neck bathed 
in blushes . " fie ! Such words are mockery." 

Graham gazed at Jier intently, and then turned his eyesx)n 
Savarin. He guessed aright the truth. "Mademoiselle, 
then, is an author ? In the style of her friend Madame de 
Grantmesnil ?" 

" Bah I" said Savarin ; " I should indeed be guilty of mock- 
ery if I paid the signorina so false a compliment as to say 
th^t in a first effort she attained to the style of one of the 
most finished sovereigns of language that ever swayed the 
literature of France. WheA I say, ' Give us this tale com- 
pleted, and I shall be consoled if the journal does not gain 
the aid of Madame de Grantmesnil,' I mean that in these 
pages there is that nameless charm of freshness and novelty 
which compensates for many faults never committed by a 
practiced pen like Madame de GrantmesniPs. My dear 
young lady, go on with this story . ^finish it. When finished, 
do not disdain any suggestions I may offer in the way of cor- 
rection. And I will venture to predict to you so^brilliant a 
career as author, that you will not regret should you resign 
for that career the bravos you^ could command as actress and 
singer." The Englishman pressed his hand convulsively to 
his heart, as if smitten by a sudden spasm. But as his eyes 
rested on Isaura's face, which had become radiant with the 
enthusiastic delight of genius when the path it would select 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 293 

opens before it as if by a flash from heaven, whatever of jeal- 
ous irritation, whatever of selfish pain he might before have 
felt, was gone, merged in a sentiment of unutterable sadness 
and compassion. Practical man as he was, he knew so well 
all the dangers, all the snares, all the sorrows, all the scan- 
dals menacing name and fame, that in the world of Paris must 
beset the fatherless girl who, not less in authorship than on 
the stage, leaves the safeguard of private life forever behind 
her. who becomes a pi*ey to the tongues of the public. At 
Paris, how slender is the line that divides the authoress from 
the jBoh&mienne I He sank into his chair. silently, and passed 
his hand over his eyes, as if to shut out a vision of the future. 
. Isaura in her excitement did not notice the effect on her 
English visitor. She could not have divined such an effect 
as possible. On the contrary, even subordinate to her joy at 
the thought that she had not mistaken the instincts which 
led her to a nobler vocation than that of the singer, that the 
cage-bar was opened, and space bathed in sunshipe was in- 
viting the new-felt wings . subordinate even to that joy was 
a joy more wholly, more simply, woman's. "If," thought 
she in this joy . " if this be true, my proud ambition is real- 
ized ; all disparities of worth and fortune are annulled be- 
tween me. and him to whom I would bring no shame of 
mesalliance r^ Poor dreamer ! poor child ! 

"You will let me see what you have written," said Ife- 
mean, somewhat imperiously, in the shai;p voice habitual to 
him, and which pierced Graham's ear like a splinter of glass. 

" No . not now ; when finished." 

" You ^^/ finish it?" 

" Oh yes ; how can I help it after such encouragement ?" 
She held out her hand to Savarin, who kissed it gallantly ; 
then her eyes intuitively sought Graham's. By this time he 
had recovered his self-possession : he met her look tranquilly 
and with a smile ; but the smile chilled her. she knew not 
why. 

The convereation then passed upon books and authors of 
the day, and was chiefly supported by the satirical pleasant- 
ries of Savarin, who was in high good spirits. 

Graham, who, as we know, had come with the hope o^ 
seeing Isaura alone, and with the intention of uttering words 
which, however guarded, might yet in absence serve as links 



 



 



294 .. THE PABISIAKB. 

of union, now no longer coveted that interview, no longer 
meditated those words. He soon rose to depart. 

" Will you dine with me to-morrow ?" asked Savarin. 
^' Perhaps I may induce the signorina and Rameau to offer 
you the temptation of meeting them." 

" By to-morrow I shall be leagues away.*' 

Isaura's heart sank. This time the MS. was fairly forgotten. 
. " You never said you were going so soon," cried Savapn. 
"When do you come back, vile deserter?" 

'^I can not even guess. Monsieur Rameau, count me 
among your subscribers. Mademoiselle, my best regards to 
Signora Venosta. When I see you again, no doubt you will 
have become famous." 

Isaura here could not control herself. She rose impulsive- 
ly, and approached him, holding out her hand, and attempt- 
ing a smile. 

" But not famous in the way that you warned me from," 
she said, in . whispered tones. "You are friends with me 
still ?" It was like the piteous wail of a child, seeking to 
make it up with one who wants to quarrel, the child l^nows 
not why. . 

Graham was moved, but what could he say? Could he 
have the right to warn her from this profession lso, forbid 
all desires, all roads of fame to this brilliant aspirant ? ven 
a declared and accepted lover might well have deemed that 
that would be to a^ too much. He replied, "Yes, always a 
friend, if you could ever need one." Her hand slid from his, 
and she turned away, wounded to the quick. 

"Have you your coupi at the door?" asked Savarin. 

" Simply 2k fiacre.'*^ 

"And are going back at once to Paris?" 

"Yes." 

" Will you kindly drop me in the Rue de Rivoli ?" 

" Charmed to be of use." 



CHAPTER XI. 

. As t\ie fiacre bore to Pai-is Savarin and Graham, the for- 
mer said, "I can not conceive what rich simpleton could en- 
tertain so high an opinion of Gustave Rameau as to select a 



 



 



. THE PABISIANS. 295 

man so young, and of reputation, though promising, so unde- 
cided, for an enterprise which requires such a degree of tact 
and judgment as the conduct of a new journal, and a jeur- 
nal, too, which is to address itself to the heau monde. How- 
ever, it is not for me to criticise a selection which brings a 
godsend to myself.'* 

"To yourself? You jest; you have a journal of your 
own. It can only be through an excess of good nature that 
you lend your name and pen to the service of M. Gustave 
Rameau." 

"My good nature does not go to that extent. It is Ra- 
meau who confers a service upon me. Peste I man cher^ we 
French authors* have not the rents of you rich English, mi- 
lords. And though I am the most economical of our tribe, 
yet that journal of mine has failed me of late ; and this morn- 
ing I did not exactly see how I was to repay a sum I had 
been obliged to borrow of a money-lender . for I am too 
proud to borrow of friends, and too sagacious to borrow of 
publishers . when in walks ce cher petit Gustave with an of- 
fer for a few trifles toward starting this new-born journal, 
which makes a new man of me. Now I am inlhe undertak- 
ing, my amour propre and my reputation are concerned in 
its success, and. I shall take care that coUaborateura of whose 
company I am not ashamed are in the same boat. But that 
charming girl, Isaura ! What an enigma the gift of the p8i 
is ! No one can ever guess who has it until tried." 

" The younff lady's MS., then, really merits the praise you 
bestowed on it ?" 

" Much more praise, though a great deal of blame, which 
I did not bestow. For in a first work faults insure success 
as much as beauties. Any thing better than tame correct- 
ness. Yes, her fii*st work, to judge by what is written, must 
make a hit . a great hit* And that will decide her career . 
a singer, an actress, may retire, oft^n does when she inames 
an author. But once an author, always an author." 

"Ah ! is it so? If you had a beloved daughter, Savarin, 
would you encourage her to be^an author?" 

" Frankly, no . principally because in that case the chances 
are that she would marry an author ; and French authors, at 
least in the imaginative school, make very uncoiAbrtable 
husbands." 



 



 



296 THB PABISIAI^. ^ 

"Ah 1 you think the signorina will marry one of those un- 
comfortable husbands . M. Rameau, perhaps ?" 

'^Rameau! Heinl nothing more likely. That beautiful 
face of his has its fascination. And to tell you the truth, my 
wife, who is a striking illustration of the truth that what 
woman wills Heaven wills, is bent upon that improvement in 
Gustave's moral life which she thinks a union with Mademoi- 
selle Cicogna would achieve. At all events, the fair Italian 
would have in Rameau a husband who would not suffer her 
to bury her talents under a bushel. If she succeeds as a 
writer (by succeeding I mean making money), he will see 
that her ink-bottle is never empty ; and if she don't succeed 
as a writer, he will take care that the world shall gain an 
actress or a singer. For Oustave Rameau has a 'great taste 
for luxury and show ; and whatever his wife can make, I will 
venture to say that he will manage to spend." 

" I thought you had an esteem and regard for Mademoi- 
selle Cicogna It is madame, your wife, I suppose, who has 
a grudge against her ?" 

" On the contrary, my wife idolizes her." 

" Savages sacrifice to their idols the things they deem of 
value. Civilized Parisians sacrifice their idols themselves . 
and to a thing that is worthTess." 

" Rameau is not worthless ; he has beauty and youth and 
ttlent. My wife thinks more highly of him than I do^; but 
I must respect a man who has found admirera so sincere as 
to set him up in a journal, and give him carte* blanche for 
terms to contributors. I know of no man in* Paris more val- 
uable to me. His worth to me this morning is 80,000 francs. 
I own I .do not think him likely to be a very safe husband ; 
but then French female authors and artists seldom take any 
husbands except upon short leases. There are no vulgar 
connubial prejudices in the pure atmosphere of art. Women 
of genius, like Madame d^ Grantmesnil, and perhaps like our 
charming young friend, resemble canaiy-birds . ^to sing their 
best yon must separate them from their mates." 

The Englishman suppressed a groan, and turned the con- 
versation. 

When he had set down his lively companion. Vane dis- 
missed %sjiacre^ and walked to his lodgings musingly. 

" No," he said, inly ; " I must wrench myself from the very 



 



 



THB PARISIANS. 297 

memory of that haunting face . the friend and pupil of Ma- 
. dame de Grantmesnil, the associate of Gustavo Rameau, the 
rival of Julie Caumartin, the aspirant to that pure atmos- 
phere of art in which there are no vulgar connubial preju- 
dices ! Could I . whether I be rich or poor . see in her the 
ideal of an English wife ? As it is . as it i*. with this mys- 
tery which opj^sses me, which, till solved, leaves my own 
career insoluble . as it is, how fortunate that I did not find 
her alone . did not utter the words that would &in have 
leaped from my heart . did not say, ^ may not be the rich 
man I seem, but in that case I shall be yet more ambitious, 
because struggle and labor are the sinews of ambition ! 
Should I be rich, will you adorn my station ? should I be 
poor, will you enrich poverty with your smile? And can 
you, in either case, forego . really, painlessly forego, as you 
led me to hope . the pride in your own art ?' My ambition 
were killed did I marry an actress, a singer. Better that 
than the hungerer after excitements which are never allayed, 
the struggler in a career which admits of no retirement . the 
woman to whom marriage is no goal . who remains to the 
last the property of the public, and glories to dwell in a 
house of glass into which every by-stander has a right to 
peer. Is this the ideal of an Englishman's wife and home ? 
No, no 1 . woe is me, no !" 



 



 



298 THB PARISIANS. 



BOOK SIXTH. 



CHAPTER I. 



A FEW weeks after^the date of the preceding chapter a 
gay party of men were assembled at sapper in one of the 
private salons of the Maison Dorbe, The sapper was given 
by Frederic Lemercier, and the guests were, though in vari- 
ous ways, more or less distinguished. Rank and fashion 
were not unworthily represented by Alain de Rochebriant 
and Enguerrand de Vandemar, by whose supremacy as 
" lion " Frederic still felt rather humbled, though Alain had 
contrived to bring them familiarly together. Art, Litera- 
ture, and the Bourse had also their representatives . in Henri 
Bernard, a rising young portrait-painter, whom the Emperor 
honored with his patronage, the Vicomte de Brez6, and M. 
Savarin. Science was not altogether forgotten, but contrib- 
uted its agreeable delegate in the person of the eminent phy- 
sician to whom we have been before introduced . ^Dr. Ba- 
comt. Doctors in Paris are not so serious as they mostly 
are in London ; and Bacourt, a pleasant philosopher of the 
school of Aristippus, was no unfrequent nor ungenial guest - 
at any banquet in which the Graces relaxed their zones. 
Martial glory was also represented at that social gathering 
by a warrior, bronzed and decovated, lately arrived from Al- 
giers, on which arid soil he had achieved many laurels and 
the rank of Colonel Finance contributed Duplessis. Well 
it might: for Duplessis had just assisted the host to a splen- 
did coup at the Bourse. 

" Ah, cher M. Savarin," says Enguerrand de, Vandemar, 
whose patrician blood is so pure from revolutionary taint 
that he is always instinctively polite, " what a masterpiece 
in its way is that little paper of yours in the Sens Commun^ 
upon the connection between the national character and the 
national diet, so genuinely witty I . for wit is but truth made 
amusing." 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 299 

" You flatter me," replied Savarin, modestly ; " but I own 
I do think there is a smattering of philosophy in that trifle. 
Perhaps, however, the character of a people depends more on 
its drinks than its food. The wines of Italy. heady, irrita- 
ble, ruinous to the digestion . contribute to the character 
which belongs tp active brains and disordered livem The 
Italians conceive great plans, but they can not digeW them. 
The English common people drink beer, and the beerish 
character is stolid, rude, but stubborn and enduring. The 
English middle class imbibe port and sh/erry ; and with these 
strong potations their ideas become obfuscated. Their char- 
acter has no liveliness ; amusement is not one of their wants; 
they sit at home after dinner and doze away the fumes of 
their beverage in the dullness of domesticity. If the En- 
glish aristocracy is more vivacious and cosmopolitan, it is 
thanks to the wines of France, wjbiph it is the mode with 
them to prefer; but still, like all plagiarists, they are imita- 
tors, not inventors . they borrow our wines and copy our 
manners. The Germans . " 

"Insolent barbarians !" growled the French Colonel, twist- 
ing his mustache; "if the Emperor were not in his dotage, 
their Sadowa would ere this have cost them their Rhine." 

" The Germans," resumed Savarin, unheeding the interrup- 
tion, " drink acrid wines, varied with beer, to which last theiy 
commonalty owes a qua8i-reQemh\B,nce in stupidity and en- 
durance to the English masses. Acrid wines rot the teeth : 
Germans are afflicted with toothache from infancy. AH peo- 
ple subject to- toothache are sentimental. Goethe was a 
martyr to toothache. Werther was written in one of those 
paroxysms which predispose genius to suicide. But the 
German character is not all toothache; beer and tobacco 
step in to the relief of Rhenish acridities, blend philosophy 
with sentiment, and give that patience in detail which dis- 
tinguishes their professors and their generals. Besides, the 
German wines in themselves have other qualities than that 
of acridity. Taken with sauerkraut and stewed prunes, they 
produce fumes of self-conceit. A German has little of French 
vanity ; he has German self-esteem. He extends the esteem 
of self to those around him : his home, his village, his city, 
his country . all belong to him. It is a duty he owes to 
himself to defend them. Give him his pipe and his sabre . 



 



 



800 THE PABISIANS. 

and, M. le Colonel, believe me, you wUl never take the Rhine 
from him." 

 P-r-r," cried the Colonel ; " but we have had the Rhine." 

" We did not keep it. And I should not say I had a franc- 
piece if I borrowed it from your purse and had to give it 
back tJ|g next day." 

Here there arose a very general hubbub of voices, all 
raised against M. Savarin. Enguerrand, like a man of good 
toUy hastened to change the conversation. 

" Let us leave thee^ poor wretches jto their sour wines and 
toothaches. We drinkers of the Champagne, all our own, 
have only pity for the rest of the human race. This new 
journal, Ze Sens Gommuny has a strange title, M. Savarin." 

" Yes ; Xe Sens Commun is not common in Paris, where 
we all have too much genius for a thing so vulgar." 

" Pray," said the young painter, " tell me what you mean * 
by the title, Ze Sens Commun. It is mysterious." 

" True," said Savarin ; " it may mean the Senstis Com- 
munis of the Latins, or the (rood Sense of the English. The 
Latin phrase signifies the sense of the common interest ; the 
English phrase, the sense which persons of understanding 
have in common. I suppose the inventor of our title meant 
the latter signification." 

" And who was the inventor ?" asked Bacourt. 

" That is a secret which I do not know myself," answered 
Savarin. 

'^ I guess," said Enguerrand, ^' that it must be the same 
person who writes the political leaders. They are most re- 
markable ; for they are so unlike the articles in other journals, 
whether, those journals be the best or the worst. For my 
own part, I trouble my head very little about politics, and 
shrug my shoulders at essays which reduce the government 
of flesh and blood into mathematical problems. But these 
articles seem to be written by a man of the world, and, as a 
man of the world myself, I read them." 

" But," said the Vicomte de Br6z6, who piqued himself on 
the polish of his style, " they are certainly not the compo- 
sition of any eminent writer. No eloquence, no sentiment; 
though I ought not tp speak disparagingly of a fellow-Con- 
tributor:" 

" All that may be very true," said Savarin, " but M. Enguer- 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 301 

rand is right. The papers are evidently the work of a man 
of the world, and it is for that reason that they have startled 
the public, and established the success of Le Sena Commun, 
But wait a week or two longer, messieurs, and then tell me 
what you think of a new reman by a new writer, which we 
shall announce in our impression to-morrow. I shall be dis- 
appointed, indeed, if that does not charm you. No lack of 
eloquence and sentiment there." 

" I am rather tired of eloquence and sentiment," said En- 
guerrand. " Your editor, Gustave Rameau, sickens me of 
them with his ' Starlit Meditations in the Streets of Paris,' 
morbid imitations of Heine's enigmatical ' Evening Songs.' 
Your journal would be perfect if you could supDress the 
editor." . 

" Suppress Gustave Rameau !" cried Bernard, the painter; 
** I adore his poems, full of heart for poor suffering human- 
ity." 

" Suffering humanity so far as it is packed up in himself," 
said the physician, dryly, " and a great deal of the suffering 
is bile. But a^()po5 of your new journal, Savarin, there is a 
paragraph in it to-day which excites my curiosity. It says 
that the Vicomte de Maul6on has anived in Paris, after 
many years of foreign travel ; and then, referring modestly 
enough to the reputation for talent which he had acquired 
in early youth, proceeds to indulge in a prophecy of the fut- 
ure political careier of a man who, if he have a grain of mns 
communy must think that the less said about him the better. 
I remember him well : a terrible mauvais sujet, but superbly 
handsome. There was a shocking story about the jewels of 
a foreign duchesse, which obliged him to leave Paris." 

" But," said Savarin, " the paragraph you refer to hints 
that that story is a groundless calumny, and that the true 
reason for De Maul^on's voluntary self-exile was a very com- 
mon one among young Parisians. he had lavished away his 
fortune. He returns when, either by heritage or his own ex- 
ertions, he has secured^-elsewhere a competence." 

"Nevertheless,! can not think that society will receive 
him," said Bacourt. " When he left Paris, there was one 
joyous sigh of relief among all men who wished to avoid 
duels, and ^eep their wives out of temptation. Society may 
welcome back a lost sheep, but not a reinvigorated wolf." 



 



 



302 THE PABISIANS. 

" I beg your pardon, mon cher^'^ said Enguerrand ; '* society 
has already opened its fold to this poor ill-treated wolf. Two 
days ago Louvier summoned to his house the surviving re- 
lations or connections of De Maul6on . among whom are the 
Marquis de Rochebriant, the Counts De Passy, De Beauvil- 
liers, De Chavigny, my father, and of course his two sons . 
and submitted to us the proofs which completely clear the 
Vicomte de Maul6on of even a suspicion of fraud or dishonor 
in the affair of the jewels. The proofs include the written 
attestation of the Duke himself, and letters from that noble- 
man after De Maul6on's disappearance from Paris, expressive 
of great esteem, and, indeed, of great admiration, for the Vi- 
comte's sense of honor and generosity of character. The re- 
sult of ^s family council was, that we all went in a body to 
call on De Maul6on. And he dined with my father that same , 
day. Fou know enough of the Count de Vandemar, and, 
I may add, of my mother, to be sure that they are both, in 
their several ways, too regardful of social conventions to lend 
their countenance even to a relation without well weighing 
the pros and cQn%. And as for Raoul, Bayard himself could 
not be a greater stickler on the point of honor." 

This declaration was followed by a silence that had the 
character of stupor. 

At last Duplessis said, " But what has Louvier to do in 
this goRre f Louvier is no relation of that well-born vaurien. 
Why should Ae summon your family council ?" 

" Louvier excused his interference on the ground of early 
and intimate friendship with De Maul^on, who, he said, came 
to consult him on arriving at Paris, and who felt too proud 
or too timid to address relations with whom he had long 
dropped all intercourse. An intermediary was required, and 
Louvier volunteered to take that part on himself; nothing 
more natural, nor more si^iple. . By-the-way, Alain, you dine 
with Louvier to-morrow, do you not ? . a dinner in honor of 
our rehabilitated kinsman. I and Raoul go." 

" Yes, I shall be charmed to meet again a man who, what- 
ever might be his errors in youth, on which," added Alain, 
slightly coloring, " it certainly does not become me to be 
severe, must have suffered the most poignant anguish a man 
of honor can undergo . viz., honor suspected . and who now, 
whether by years or sorrow, is so changed that I can not reo* 



 



 



THS PABISIANS. 303 

ognize a likeness to tbe character I have just heard given to 
him as mauvais sujet and vaurien.^^ 

" Bravo I" cried Enguerrand ; " all honor to courage . and 
at Baris it requires great courage to defend the absent." 

" Nay," answered Alain, in a low voice. " The gentUhomme 
who will not defend another gentUhomme traduced- would, as 
a soldier, betray a citadel and desert a flag." 

*' You say M. de Mauleon is changed," said De Breze ; 
** yes, he must be growing old. No trace left of his good 
looks ?" 

" Pardon me," said Enguerrand, " he is Men con^frve^ and 
has still a very handsome head and an' imposing presence. 
But one can not help doubting whether he deserved the for- 
niidable reputation he acquired in youth: his manner is so 
singularly mild and gentle, his conversation so winningly 
modest, so void of pretense, and his mode of life is as sim- 
ple as that of a Spanish hidalgo." 

" He does not, then, affect the rdle of Monte Christo," said 
Duplessis, " and buy himself into notice like thiat hero of ro- 
mance ?" 

" Certainly not ; he says very frankly that he has but a 
very small income, but more than enough for his wants . 
richer than in his youth ; for he has learned content. We 
may dismiss the hint in Xe Sens Commun about his future 
political career;* at least he evinces no such ambition." 

"How could he as a Legitimist?" said Alain, bitterly. 
** What department would elect him ?" 

" But is he a Legitimist ?" asked De Brez6. 

" I take it for granted that he must be that," answered 
Alain, haughtily, " for he is a De Mauleon." 

" His father was as good a De Maul6on as himself, I pre- 
sume," rejoined De Br^ze, dryly ; " and he enjoyed a place at 
the Court of Louis Philippe, which a Legitimist would scarce- 
ly Accept. Victor did not, I fancy, trouble his head about 
politics at all, at the time I remember him; but to judge 
by his chief associates, and the notice he received from the 
Princes of the House of Orleans, I should guess that Jie had 
no predilections in favor of Henri V." 

"I should regret to think so," said Alain, yet more ha.ught- 
ily, "since the De Maul6ons acknowledge the head of their 
house in the representative of the Rochebriants." . 



 



 



304 THE PABISIANS. 

"At all events," said Duplessis, " M. de Maul^on appears 
to be a philosopher of rare stamp. A Parisian who has 
known riches and is contented to be poor is a phenomenon I 
should like to,8tudy." 

" You have that chance to-morrow evening, M. Duplessis," 
said Enguerrand. 

" What I at M. Louvier's dinner ? Nay, I have no other 
acquaintance with M. Louyier than that of the Bourse, and 
the acquaintance is not cordial" 

" I did not mean M. Louvier's dinner, but at the Duchesse 
de Tara^on's ball You, as one of her special favorites, will 
doubtless honor,her r^/wow." 

" Yes ; I have promised my daughter to go to the ball. 
But the Duchesse is Imperialist. M. de Maul6on seems to be 
either a Legitimist, according to M. le Marquis, or an Orlean- 
ist, according to our friend De Br6z6.'' 

" What of that ? Can there be a more loyal Bourbonite 
than De Rochebriant ? . ^and he goes to the ball It is given 
out of the season, in celebration of a family marriage. And 
the Duchesse de Tarascon is connected with Alain, and there- 
fore with De Maul6on, though but distantly." ' 

"Ah 1 excuse my ignorance of genealogy." 

"As if the genealogy of noble names were not the history 
of France," muttered Alain, indignantly. 



CHAPTER n. 

Yes, the Sena'Gommun was a success ; it had made a sen- 
sation at starting ; the sensation was on- the increase. It is 
difficult for an Englishman to comprehend the fnll influence 
of a successful journal at Paris ; the station . political, liteiv 
ary, social . which it confers on the contributors who effect 
the success. M. Lebeau had shown much more sagacity in 
selecting Gustave Rameau for the nominal editor than Sava- 
rin supposed or my reader might detect. In the first place, 
Gusta^ himself, with all his defects of information and so- 
lidity of intellect, was not without real genius ; and a sorl^ of 
genius that, when kept in restraint, and its field confined to 
sentiment or sarcasm, was in unison with the temper of the 
day : in \hQ second place, it was only through Gustave that 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 805 

Lebeau conld have got at Savarin ; and the names which that 
brilliant writer had secured at the oatset would have sufficed 
to draw attention to the earliest numbers of the /Sens Com- 
muriy despite a title which did not seem alluring. But these 
names alone could not have sufficed to circulate the new 
journal to the extent it had already reached. This was due 
to the curiosity excited by leading articles of a style new to 
the Parisian public, and of which the authorship defied con- 
jecture. They were signed "Pierre Mrmin" . supposed to 
be a nom deplume, as that name was utterly unknown in the 
world of letters. They affected the tone of an impartial ob- 
server; they neither espoused nor attacked any particular 
party; they laid down no abstract doctrines of government. 
But somehow or other, in language terse yet familiar, some- 
times careless yet never vulgar, they expressed a prevailing 
sentiment of uneasy discontent, a foreboding of some des- 
tined change in things established, without defining the nat- 
ure of such change, without saying whether it would be for 
good or for evil. In his criticisms upon individuals the writer 
was guarded and moderate . ^the keenest-eyed censor of the 
press could not have found a pretext for interference with 
expressions of opinions so polite. Of the Emperor these ar- 
ticles spoke little, but that little was not disrespectful ; yet, 
day after day, the articles contributed to sap the empire. 
All malcontents of every shade comprehended, as by a secret 
of freemasonry, that in this journal they had an ally. Against 
religion not a word was uttered, yet the enemies of religion 
bought that journal ; still, the friends of religion bought it 
tpo, for those articles treated with irony the philosophers on 
paper who thought that their contradictory crotchets could 
. fuse themselves into any single Utopia, or that any social edi- 
fice, hurriedly run up by the crazy few, could become a per- 
manent habitation for the turbulent many,withbut the clamp0 
of a creed. 

The tone of these articles always corresponded with the 
title of the journal . Oommonsense, It was to common-sense 
that it appealed . appealed in the utterance of a man who 
disdained the subtle theories, the vehement declamation, the 
credulous beliefs, or the inflated bombast which constitute so 
large a portion of the Parisian press. The articles rather re- 
sembled certain organs of the English press, which profess to 



 



 



306 THE PABISIANS. 

be blinded by no enthusiasm for any body or any thing, which 
find their sale in that sympathy with ill nature to which Huet 
ascribes the popularity of Tacitus, and, always quietly under- 
raining institutions with a covert sneer, never pretend to a 
spirit of imagination so at variance with common-sense as a 
conjecture how the institutions should be rebuilt or replaced. 

Well, somehow or other the journal, as I was saying, hit 
the taste of the Parisian public. It intimated, with the easy 
grace of an unpremeditated agreeable talker, that French so- 
ciety in all its classes was rotten, and each class was willing 
to believe that all the others were rotten, and agreed that 
unless the others were reformed, there was something very 
unsound in itself 

The ball at the Duchesse de Tarascon's was a brilliant 
event. The summer was far advanced ; many of the Parisian 
holiday-makers had returned to the capital, but the season 
had not commenced, and a ball at that time of the year was 
a very unwonted event. But there was a special occasion for 
this jKte . a marriage between a niece of the Duchesse and 
the son of a great oflScial in high favor at the Imperial Court 

The dinner at Louvier's broke up early, and the music for 
the second Waltz was sounding when Enguerrand, Alain, and 
the Yicomte de Maul6on ascended the stairs. Raoul did not 
accompany them; he went very rarely to any balls . never 
to one given by an Imperialist, however nearly related to him 
the Imperialist might be. But, in the sweet indulgence of 
his good nature, he had no blame for those who did go . not 
for Enguerrand, still less, of course, for Alain. . 

Something, too, might well here be said as to his feelings 
toward Victor de Maul6on. He had joined in the family ac- 
quittal of that kinsman as to the grave charge of the jewels; 
the proofs of inaocence thereon seemed to him unequivocal 
and decisive, therefore he had called on the Vicomte, and ac- 
quiesced in all formal civilities shown to him. 'But, such 
acts of justice to a Mlow-gentilhomme and a kinsman duly per- 
formed, he desired to see as little as possible of the Vicomte 
de Mauleon. He reasoned thus : " Of every charge which 
society made against this \nan he is guiltless. But of all the 
claims to admiration which society accorded to him, before 
it erroneously condemned, there are none whioh make me 
covet his friendship, or suflSce to dispel doubts as to what he 



Digitizeel by VjOOQIC 



..^^ 



THE PARISIANS. ' 307 

may be when society once more receives him. And the mail 
is so captivating that I should dread his influence over my- 
self did I see much of him." 

Raoul kept his reasonings to* himself, for he had that sort 
of charity which indisposes an amiable man to be severe on 
by-gone offenses. In the eyes of Enguerrand and Alain, and 
such young votaries of the mode as they could influence, Vic- 
tor de Mauleon assumed almost heroic proportions. In the 
affair which had inflicted on him a calumny so odious it was 
clear that he had acted with chivalrous delicacy of honor. 
And the turbulence and recklessness of his earlier years, re- 
deemed as they were, in the traditions of his contemporaries, 
l5y courage and generosity, were not offenses to which young 
Frenchmen are inclined to be harsh. All question as to the 
mode in which his life might have been passed during his 
long absence from the capital was merged in the respect due 
to the only facts known, and these were clearly proved in his 
pieces jmtijicatwes. First, That he had served under anoth- 
er name in the ranks of the army in Algiers; had distin- 
guished himself there for signal valor, and received, with 
promotion, the decoration of the cross. His real name was 
known only to his colonel, and on quitting the service the 
colonel placed in his hands a letter of warm eulogy on his 
conduct, and identifying him as Victor de Mauleon. Sec- 
ondly, That in California he had saved a wealthy family from 
midnight murder, fighting single-handed against and over- 
mastering three ruffians, and declining all other reward from 
those he had preserved than a written attestation, of their 
gratitude. In all countries valor ranks high in the list of 
virtues; in no country ^oes it so absolve from vices as it 
does in France. 

But as yet Victor de Maul6on's vindication was only known 
by a few, and those belonging to the gayer circles of life. 
How he might be judged by the sober middle class, which 
constitutes the most impoi^ant section of public opinion to 
a candidate for political trusts and distinctions, was another 
question. 

The Duchesse stood at the door to receive her visitors. 
Duplessis was seated near the entrance, by the side of a dis- 
tinguished member of the Imperial Government, with whom 
he was carrying on a whispered conversation. The eye of 

 VjOOQIC 



308 ' THB PARISIANS. 

the financier, however, tamed toward the doorway as Alain 
and Enguerrand entered, and, passing over, their familiar 
faces, fixed itself attentively on that of a mach older man 
whom Enguerrand was presenting to the Dachesse, and in 
whom Duplessis rightly divined the Vicomte de Maul^on. 
Certainly if no one could have recognized M. Lebeau in the 
stately personage who had visited Louvier, still less could 
one who had heard of the wild feats of the roi des viveurs in 
his youth reconcile belief in such tales with the quiet mod- 
esty of mien which distinguished the cavalier now replying, 
with bended head and subdued accents, to the courteous 
welcome of the brilliant hostess. But for such difference in 
attributes between the past and the present De Maal6oD*, 
Duplessis had been prepared by the conversation at the 
Maison Borke. And now, as the Vicomte, yielding his place 
by the Duchesse to some new-comer, glided on, and, leaning 
against a column, contemplated the gay scene before him 
with that expression of countenance, half sarcastic, half 
mournful, with which men regard, after long estrangement, 
the scenes of departed joys, Duplessis felt that no change in 
that man had impaired the force of character which had 
made him the hero of reckless coevals. Though wearing no 
beard, not even a mustache, there was something emphatical- 
ly masculine in the contour of the close-shaven cheek and res- 
olute jaw, in a forehead broad at the temples, and protuber- 
ant in those organs over the eyebrows which are said to be 
significant of quick perception and ready action^ in the lips, 
when in repose compressed, perhaps somewhat stern in their 
expression, but pliant and mobile when speaking, and jron- 
derfuUy fascinating when they spjiled. Altogether, about 
this Victor de Mauleon there was a nameless distinction, 
apart from that of conventional elegance. You would have 
said, " That is a man of some marked individuality, an em- 
inence of some kind in himself." You would not be surprised 
to hear that he was a party leaTler, a skilled diplomatist, a 
daring soldier, an adventurous traveler, but you wotld not 
guess him to be a student, an author, an artist. 

While Duplessis thus ^observed the Vicomte de Maul6on, 
all the while seeming to lend an attentive ear to the whisper- 
ed voice of the minister by his side, Alain passed on into the 
ball-room. He was fresh enough to feel the exhilaration of 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 309 

the dance. Enguerrand (who had survived that excitement, 
and who habitually deserted any assembly at an early hour 
for the cigar and whist of his club) had made his way to De 
Maul^on, and there stationed himself. The lion of one gen- 
eration has always a mixed feeling of curiosity and respect 
for the lion of a generation before him, and the young Van- 
demar had conceived a strong and almost an affectionate in- 
terest in this discrowned king of that realm in fashion which, 
once lost, is never to be regained ; for it is only Youth that 
can hold its sceptre and command its subjects. 

"In this crowd, Vicomte," said Enguerrand, "there must 
be many old acquaintances of yours?" 

" Perhaps so ; but as yet I have only seen new faces." 

As he thus spoke, a middle-aged man, de(^rated with the 
grand cross of the Legion and half a doz^n foreign orders, 
lending his arm to a lady of the same age radfant in diamonds, 
passed by toward the ball-room, and in some sudden swerve 
of his person, occasioned by a pause of his companion to ad- 
just her train, he accidentally brushed against De Maul6on, 
whom he had not before noticed. Turning round to apolo- 
gize for his awkwardness, he encountered the full gaze of the 
Vicomte, started, changed . countenance, and hurried on his 
con^panion. 

" Do you not recognize his Excellency ?" said Enguerrand, 
smiling. *' His can not be a new face to you." 

" Is it the Baron de Lacy ?" asked De Mauleon. 

" The Baron de Lacy, no^r Count d'Epinay, embassador at 

the Court of ^ and, if report speak true, likely soon to 

exchange that post for the portefeidlle of minister." 

"He has got on in lifei^ince I saw him last, the little Bar- 
on. He was then my devoted imitator, and I was not proud 
of the imitation." 

" He has got on by always clinging to the skirts of some 
one stronger than himself.to yours, I dare say, when, being 
SL parvenu despite his usurped title of Baron, he aspired to the 
entr&e into clubs and salons. The entr&e thus obtained, the 
rest followed easily: he became a miUionnaire through a 
wife's dot^ and an embassador through the wife's lover, who 
is a power in the state." 

" But he must have substance in himself. Empty bags can 
not be made to stand upright. Ah ! unless I mistake, I see 



 



 



310 THB PARISIANS. 

some one I knew better. Yon pale thin man, also with the 
grand cross . surely that is Alfred Hennequin. Is he, too, a 
decorated Imperialist ? I left him a socialistic Republican." 

" But, I presume, even then an eloquent avoccU^ He got 
into the Chamber, spoke well, defended the coup d*kat. He 
has just been made JPrefet of the great department of the 

^ a popular appointment. He bears a high character. 

Pray renew your acquaintance with him ; he is coming this 
way." 

" Will so grave a dignitary renew acquaintance with me ? 
I doubt it." 

But as De Maul6on said this he moved from the column 

and advanced toward the I^Sfet, Enguerrand followed him, 

and saw the Vicomte extend his hand to his old acquaintance. 

^ The Prkfet stared, and said, with fngid courtesy, " Pardon 

me . some mistake." 

" Allow me, M. Hennequin," said Enguerrand, interposing, 
and wishing good-naturedly to save De Maul4on the awk- 
wardness of introducing himself . " allow me to reintroduce 
you to my kinsman, whom the lapse of years may well excuse 
you for forgetting, the Vicomte de Maul6on." 

Still the Ftifet did not accept the hand. He bowed with 
formal ceremony, said, " I was not aware that M. le Vicomte 
had returned to Paris," and, moving to the doorway, made 
his salutation to the hostess and disappeared. 

" The insolent !" muttered Enguerrand. 

"Hush !" said De Maul^on, quietly; "I can fight no more 
duels . especially with a Pr^fet, But I own I am weak enough 
to feel hurt at such a reception from Hennequin, for he owed 
me some obligations . small, perhaps but still they were such 
as might haVe made me select him, rather than Louvier, as 
the vindicator of my name, had I known him to be so high 
placed. But a man who has raised himself into an authority 
may well be excused for forgetting a friend whose character 
needs defense. I forgive him." 

There was something pathetic in the Vicomte's tone which 
touched Enguerrand's warm if light heart. But De Maul6- 
on did not allow him time to answer. He went on quickly 
through an opening in the gay crowd, which immediately- 
closed behind him, and Enguejrand saw him no more that 
evening. 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 311 

Duplessis ere this had quitted his seat by the minister, 
drawn thence by a young and very pretty girl resigned to 
his charge by a cavalier with whom she had been dancing. 
She was the only daughter of Duplessis, and he valued her 
even more than the millions he had made at the Bourse. 
" The Princess," she said, " has been swept off in the train of 
some German Royalty; so^ petit p^re, I must impose myself 
on thee." 

The Princess, a Russian of high rank, was the chaperon that 
evening of Mademoiselle Yal6rie Duplessis. 

"And I suppose I must take thee back into the ball-room," 
said the financier, smiling proudly, " and find thee partners." 

"I don't want your aid for that, monsieur; except this 
quadrille, my list is pretty well filled up." 

" And I hope the partners will be pleasant. Let me know 
who they are," he whispered, as they threaded their way into 
the ball-room. 

The girl glanced at her tablet. 

" Well, the first on the list is milord somebody, with an 
unpronounceable English name." 

"Beau cavalier?" 

" No ; ugly, old too . thirty at least." 

Duplessis felt relieved. He did not wish his daughter to 
fall in love with an Englishman. 

"And the next?" 

" The next," she said, hesitatingly, and he observed that a 
soft blush accompanied the hesitation. 

" Yes, the next. Not English too ?" 

" Oh no ; the Marquis de Rochebriant." 

"Ah ! who presented him to thee?" 

"Thy friend, petit p^re, M. de Br6z6." 

Duplessis- again glanced at his daughter's face ; it was bent 
over her bouquet. 

" Is he ugly also ?" 

"Ugly?" exclaimed the girl, indignantly ; " why, he is." 
She checked hereelf and turned away her head. 

Duplessis became thoughtful. He was glad that he had 
accompanied his child into the ball-room ; he would stay there 
and keep watch on her, and Rochebriant also. 

Tip to that moment he had felt a dislike to Rochebriant. 
That young noble's too obvious pride of race had nettled him. 

 VjOOQIC 



312 THB PABI8IANS. 

not the less that the financier himself was vain of his ances- 
try. Perhaps he still disliked Alain, but the dislike was now 
accompanied with a certain, not hostile, interest ; and if he 
became connected with the race, the pride in it might grow 
contagious. 

They had not been long in the ball-room before Alain came 
up to claim his promised partner. In saluting Duplessis, his 
manner was the same as usual . not more cordial, not less 
ceremoniously distant. A man so able as the financier can 
not be without quick knowledge of the human heart. 

" If disposed to fall in love with Val6rie," thought Duples- 
sis, " he would have taken more pains to please her father. 
Well, thank Heaven, there are better matches to be found for 
her than a noble without fortune, and a Legitimist without 
career." 

In fact, Alain felt no more for Valerie than for any other 
pretty girl in the room. In talking with the Vicomte de 
Br6z6 in the intervals of the dance, he had made some passing 
remark on her beauty ; De Br6z^ had said, " Yes, she is charm- 
ing ; I will present you ;" and hastened to do so before Roche- 
briant even learned her name. So introduced, he could but 
invite her to give him her first disengaged dance ; and when 
that was fixed, he had retired, without entering into conver- 
sation. 

Now, as they took their places in the quadrille, he felt that 
effort of speech had become a duty, if not a pleasure, and, of 
course, he began with the first commonplace which pi*esented 
itself to his mind. 

" Do you not think it a very pleasant ball, mademoiselle ?" 

" Yes," dropped, in almost inaudible reply, from Valerie's 
rosy lips. 

" And not overcrowded, as most balls are." - 

Valerie's lips again moved, but this time quite inaudibly. 

The obligations of the figure now caused a pause. Alain 
racked his brains, and began again : 

"They tell me that the last season was more than usually 
gay ; of that I can not judge, for it was well-nigh over when 
I came to Paris for the first time." 

Valerie looked up with a more animated expression than 
her child-like face had yet shown, and said, this time distinct- 
ly, "This is my first ball. Monsieur le Marquis." 



 



Google 



THE PARISIANS. 313 

" One has only to look at mademoiselle to divine that fact," 
replied Alain, gallantly. 

Again the conversation was interrupted by the dance, but 
the ice between the two was now broken. And when the 
qnadrille was concluded, and Rochebriant led the fair Val6rie 
back to her father's side, she felt as if she had been listening 
to the music of the spheres, and that the music had now sud- 
denly stopped. Alain, alas for her I was under no such pleas- 
ing illusion. Her talk had seemed to him artless indeed, but 
very insipid, compared with the brilliant conversation of the 
wedded JParisiennes with whom he more habitually danced ; 
and it was with rather a sensation of relief that he made his 
parting bow, and receded into the crowd of by-standers. 

Meanwhile De Maul6on had quitted the assemblage, walk- 
ing slowly through the deserted streets toward his apart- 
ment. The civilities he had met at Louvier's dinner-paity, 
and the marked distinction paid to him by kinsmen of rank 
and position so unequivocal as Alain and Enguerrand, had 
softened his mood and cheered hm spirits. He had begun to 
question himself whether a fair opening to his political ambi- 
tion was really forbidden to him under the existent order of 
things, whether it necessitated the employment of such dan- 
gerous tools as those to which anger and despair had recon- 
ciled his intellect. But the pointed way in which he had been 
shunned or slighted by the two men who belonged to polit- 
ical life . to men who in youth had looked up to himself, and 
whose dazzling career of honors was identified with the im- 
perial system . reanimated his fiercer passions and his more 
perilous designs. The frigid accost of Hennequin more es- 
pecially galled him ; it wounded not only his pride, but his 
Impart ; it had the venom of ingratitude, and it is the peculiar 
privilege of ingratitude to wound hearts that have learned 
to harden themselves to the hate or contempt of men to whom 
no services have been rendered. In some private afiair con- 
cerning his property De Maul6on had had occasion to consult 
Hennequin, then a rising young avocat. Out of that consul- 
tation a friendship had sprung up, despite the differing hab- 
its and social grades of the two men. One day, calling on 
Hennequin, he found him in a state of great nervous excite- 
ment. The avocat had received a public insult in the salon 
of a noble, to whom De Maul^on had introduced him, from a 

 VjOOQIC 



314 THE PARISIANS. 

man who pretended to the hand of a young lady to whom 
Hennequin was attached, and, indeed, almost affianced. The 
man was a notorious spadassin . a duelist little less renowned 
for skill in all weapons than De Maul^on himself. The affair 
had been such that Hennequin's iriends assured him he had 
no choice but to challenge this bravo. Hennequin, brave 
enough at the bar, was no hero before sword-point or pistol. 
He was utterly ignorant of the use of either weapon ; his 
death in the encounter with an antagonist so formidable 
seemed to him certain, and life was so precious ; an honora- 
ble and distinguished career opening before him, maiTiage 
with the woman he loved : still he had the Frenchman's point 
of honor. He had been told that he must fight; well, then, 
he must. He asked De Maul6on to be one of his seconds, and 
in asking him, sank in his chair, covered his face with his 
hands, and burst into tears. . 

" Wait till to-morrow," said De Maul^on ; " take no step 
till then. Meanwhile you are in my hands, and I answer for 
your honor." 

On leaving Hennequin, Victor sought the spadassin at the 
club of which they were both members, and contrived, with- 
out reference to Hennequin, to pick a quarrel with him. A 
challenge ensued ; a duel with swords took place the next 
morning. De Maul6on disarmed and wounded his antago- 
nist, not gravely, but sufficiently to terminate the encounter. 
He assisted to convey the wounded man to his apartment, 
and planted himself by his bedside, as if he were a friend. 

" Why on earth did you fasten a quarrel on me ?" asked 
the spadassin/ " and why, having done so, did you spare my 
life ? . for your sword was at my heart when you shifted its 
point, and pierced my shoulder." 

"I will tell you, t[nd in so doing beg you to accept my 
friendship hereafter, on one condition. In the course of the 
day write or dictate a few civil words of apology to M. 
Hennequin. Ma foi ! every one will praise you for a gen- 
erosity so becoming in a man who has given such proofs of 
courage and skill to an avocaZ who has never handled a 
sword nor fired a pistol." 

That same day De Maul^on remitted to Hennequin an 
apology for heated words freely retracted, which satisfied 
all his friends. For the service thus rendered by De Mau- 

/ Google 



 > 



THE PARISIANS. 315 

leou, Hennequin declared himself everlastingly indebted. In 
fact, he entirely owed to that friend his life, his marnage, his 
honor, his career. 

"And now," thought De Maul6on . "now, when he could 
so easily requite me . now he will not even take my hand. 
Is human nature itself at war with me ?" 



CHAPTER III. 



Nothing could be simpler than the apartment of the Vi- 
comte de Maul^on, in the second story of a quiet, old-fashion- 
ed street. It had been furnished at small cost out of his 
savings. Yet, on the whole, it evinced the good taste of a 
man who had once been among the exquisites of the polite 
world. 

You felt that you were in the apartment of a gentleman, 
and a gentleman of somewhat severe tastes, and of sober, 
matured years. He was sitting the next morning in the 
room which he used as a piivate study. Along the walls 
were arranged dw^arf book -cases, as yet occupied by few 
books, most of them books of reference, others cheap editions 
of the French classics in prose . no poets, no romance-writers 
. with a few Latin authors also in prose . Cicero, Sallust, 
Tacitus. He was engaged at his desk writing . a book with 
its leaves open before him, Paul Louis Courier^ that model 
of political irony and masculine style of composition. There 
was a ring at his door-bell. The Vicomte kept no servant. 
He rose and answered the summons. He recoiled a few 
paces on recognizing his visitor in M. Hennequin. 

The Pr'efet this time did not withdraw his hand ; he ex- 
tended it, but it was with a certain awkwardness and timid- 
ity. 

" I thought it my duty to call on you, Vicomte, thus early, 
having already seen M. Enguerrand de Vandemar. He has 
shown me .the copies of the pieces which were inspected by 
your distinguished kinsmen, and which completely clear you 
of the charge that, grant me your pardon when I say, seemed 
to me still to remain unanswered when I had the honor to 
meet you laft night." 

"It appears to me, M. Hennequin, that you, as an avocat 

 VjOOQIC 



316 THE PABISIANS. 

SO emiDent, might have convinced yourself very readily of 
that fact." 

" M. le Vicomte, I was in Switzerland with my wife at the 
time of the unfortunate affair in which yon were involved." 

" But when you returned to Paris you might perhaps have 
deigned to make inquiries so affecting the honor of one you 
had called a friend, and for whom you had professed" . ^De 
Maul6on paused ; he disdained to add, " an eternal grati- 
tude." 

Hennequin colored slightly, but replied with self-posses- 
sion : 

" I certainly did inquire. I did hear that the charge against 
you with regard to the abstraction of the jewels was with- 
drawn . that you were therefore acquitted by law; but I 
heard also that society did not acquit you, and that, finding 
this, you had quitted France. Pardon me again, no one 
would listen to me when I attempted to speak on your be- 
half. . But now that so many years have elapsed, that the 
story is imperfectly remembered-^ that relations so high 
placed receive you so cordially . now I rejoice to think that 
you will have no difficulty in regaining a social position 
never really lost, but for a time resigned." 

" I am duly sensible of the friendly joy you express. I 
was reading the other day in a lively author some pleasant 
remarks on the effects of mMisance or calumny upon our 
impressionable Parisian public. ' If,' says the writer, ' I found 
myself accused of having put the two towers of Notre Dame 
into my waistcoat pocket, I should not dream of defending 
myself; I should take to flight. And,' adds the writer, ' if 
my best friend were under the same accusation, I should be 
so afraid of being considered his accomplice that I should 
put my best friend outside the door.' Perhaps, M. Hennequin, 
I was seized with the first alarm. Why should I blame you 
if seized with the second ? Happily, this good city of Paris 
has its reactions. And you can now offer me your hand. 
Paris has by this time discovered that the two towers of 
Notre Dame are not in my pocket." 

There was a pause. De Mauleon had resettled himself at 
his desk, bending over his papers, and his manner seemed to 
imply that he considered the conversation at amend. 

But a pang of shame, of remorse, of tender remembrance, 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. ?IY 

shot across the heart of the decorous, worldly, self-seeking 
ij^an, who owed all that he now was to the ci-devant vaurien 
before him. Again he stretched forth his hand, and this 
time grasped De Maul6on's warmly. " Forgive me," he said, 
feelingly and hoarsely ; " forgive me. I was to blame. By 
character, and perhaps by the necessities of my career, I am 
over- timid to public opinion, public scandal . forgive me. 
Say if in any thing now I can requite, though but slightly, 
the service I owe you." 

De Mauleon looked steadily at the I^^fet, and said, slowly, 
** Would you serve me in turn ? Are you sincere ?" 

The JPrefet hesitated a moment, then answered, firmly, 
**Yes." 

** Well, then, what I ask of you is a frank opinion . not as 
a lawyer, not as I^^fet, but as a man who knows the present 
state of French society. Give that opinion without respect 
to my*feelings one way or other. Let it emanate solely from 
your practiced judgment." 

" Be it so," said Hennequin, wondering what was to come. 

De Mauleon resumed : 

"As you may remember, during my former career I had 
no political ambition. I did not meddle with politics. In 
the troubled times that immediately succeeded the fall of 
Louis Philippe I was but an epicurean looker-on. Grant 
that, so far as admission to the salons are concerned, I shall 
encounter no difficulty in regaining position. But as regards 
the Chamber, public life, a political career . can I have my 
fair opening under the empire? You pause. Answer as 
you have promised, frankly." 

" The difficulties in the way of a political career would be 
very great." ^ 

"Insuperable?" 

" I fear so. Of course, in my capacity of JPrefet, 1 have no 
small influence in my department in support of a government 
candidate. But I do not think that the Imperial Govern- 
ment could, at this time especially, in which it must be very 
cautious in selecting its candidates, be induced to recommend 
you. The affiair of the jewels would be raked up . your vin- 
dication disputed, denied . the fact that for so many years 
you have acquiesced in that charge without taking steps to 
refute it . your antecedents, even apart from that charge . 



 



 



318 THE PARISIANS. 

your present want of property (M. Engnerrand tells me your 
income is but moderate) . ^the absence of all previous repute 
in public life. No ; relinquish the idea of political contest 
. it would expose you to inevitable mortifications, to a fail- 
ure that would even jeopardize the admission to the salons 
which you are now gaining. You could not be a govem- 
. ment candidate." 

" Granted. I have no desire to be one ; but an opposition 
candidate, one of the Liberal party ?" 

"As an Imperialist," said Hennequin, smiling gravely, 
" and holding the office I do, it would not become me to en- 
-,_^^wirage a candidate against the Emperor's government. 
But, speaking with the frankness you solicit, I should say 
that your chances there are infinitely worse. The opposi- 
tion are in a pitiful minority . the most eminent of the Lib- 
erals can scarcely gain seats for" themselves; great local pop- 
ularity or property, high established repute for estaf^lished 
patriotism, or proved talents of oratory and statesmanship, 
are essential qualifications for a seat in the opposition, and 
even these do not suffice for a third of the persons who pos- 
sess them. Be again what you were before, the hero of sa- 
lons remote from the turbulent vulgarity of politics." 

" I am answered. Thank you once more. The service I 
rendered you once is requited now." 

" No, indeed . no ; but will you dine with me quietly to- 
day, and allow me to present to you my wife and two chil- 
dren ^ born since we parted ? I say to-day, for to-morrow I 
return to my I^Sfecture.^^ 

" I am infinitely obliged by your invitation, but to-day I 
dine with the Count de Beauvilliers to meet some of the 
Corps Diplomatique. I must jjpake good my place in the sa- 
lonSy since you so clearly show me that I have no chance of 
one in the Legislature . unless . " 

"Unless what?" 

" Unless there happen one of those revolutions in which 
the scum comes uppermost." 

" No fear of that. The subterranean barracks and railway 
have ended forever the rise of the scum . the reign of the 
canaiUe and its barricades." 

" Adieu, my dear Hennequin. My respectful hommages d 
madame,^^ 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 319 

After that day the writings of Pierre Firrain in Le Sens 
Commun^ though still keeping within the pale of the law, be- 
came jnore decidedly hostile to the imperial system, still 
without committing their author to any definite programme 
of the sort of government that should succeed it. 



CHAPTER IV. 

The weeks glided on. Isaura's MS. had passed into print ; 
it came out in the French fashion of feuilletons . a small de- 
tachment at a time. A previous flourish of trumpets by Sa- 
varin and the clique at his command insured it attention, if 
not A-om the general public, at least from critical and lit- 
erary coteries. Before the fourth installment appeared it 
had outgrown the patronage of the coteries ; it seized hold 
of the public. It was not in the last school of fashion ; inci- 
dents were not crowded and violent . they were few and 
simple, rather appertaining to an elder school, in which po- 
etry of sentiment and grace of diction prevailed. That very 
resemblance to old favorites gave it the attraction of novel- 
ty. In a word, it excited a pleased admiration, and grea|| 
curiosity was felt as to the authorship. When it oozed out 
that it was by the young lady whose future success in the 
musical world had been so sanguinely predicted by all who 
had heard her sing, the interest wonderfully increased. Pe- 
titions to be introduced to her acquaintance were shower- 
ed upon Savarin: before she scarcely realized her dawning 
famehe was drawn from her quiet home and retired habits; 
^e w2L^fitke and courted in the literary circle of which Sa- 
varin was a chief. That circle touched, on one side, Bo- 
hemia ; on the other, that realm of politer fashion which, in 
every fhtellectual metropolis, but especially in Paris, seeks 
to gain borrowed light from luminaries in art - and letters. 
But the very admiration she obtained somewhat depressed, 
Homewhat troubled her; after all, it did not differ from that 
which was at her command as a singer. 

On the one hand, she shrank instinctively from the caresses 
of female authors and the familiar greetings of male authors, 
who frankly lived in philosophical disdain of the conventions 
respected by sober, decorous mortals. On the other hand. 

 VjOOQIC 



320 THE PARISIANS. 

in the civilities of those who, while they courted a risiDg ce- 
lebrity, still held their habitual existence apart from the ar- 
tistic world, there was a certain air of condescension, x>f pat- 
ronage toward the young stranger with no other protector 
but Signora- Venosta, the ci^levant public singer, and who 
had made her d^ut in a journal edited by M. Gustave Ra- 
meau, which, 'however disguised by exaggerated terms of 
praise, wounded her piide of woman in flattering her vanity 
as author. Among this latter set were wealthy, high-born 
men, who addressed her as woman . as woman beautiful and 
young . with words of gallantry that implied love, but cer- 
tainly no thought of marriage : many of the most ardent were, 
indeed, married already. But once launched into the thick 
of Parisian hospitalities, it was difficult to draw back. The 
Venosta wept at the thought of missing some lively soirie^ 
and Savarin laughed at her shrinking fastidiousness as that 
of a child's ignorance of the world. But still she had her 
mornings to herself; and in those mornings, devoted to the 
continuance of her work (for the commencement was in print 
before a third was completed), she forgot the commonplace 
world that received her in the evenings. Insensibly to her- 
^If the tone of this work had changed as it proceeded. It 
had begun seriously, indeed, but in the seriousness thei*e was 
a certain latent joy. It might be the joy of having found 
vent of utterance ; it might be rather a joy still more latent, 
inspired by the remembrance of Graham's words and looks, 
and by the thought that she had renounced all idea of the 
professional career which he had evidently disapproved. 
Life then seemed to her a bright possession. We haiw seen 
that she had begun her roman without planning how it 
should end. She had, however, then meant it to end, some- 
how or other, happily. Now the lustre had gone from life 
. the tone of the work was saddened . it foreboded ft tragic 
close. But' for the general reader it became, with every 
chapter, still more interesting ; the poor child had a singu- 
larly musical gift of style . a music which lent itself natural- 
ly to pathos. Every very young writer knows how his 
work, if one of feeling, will color itself from the views of 
some truth in his innermost self; and in proportion as it 
does so, how his absorption in the work increases, till it be- 
comes part and parcel of his own mind and heart. The pres- 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 321 

ence of a hidden sorrow m^y change the fate of the beings 
he has created, and. guide to the grave those whom, in a hap- 
pier vein, he would have united at the altar. It is not till a 
later stage of experience and art that the writer escapes 
from the influences of his individual personality, and lives in 
existences that take no colorings from his own. Genius usu- 
ally must pass through the subjective process before it gains 
the objective. Even a Shakspeare represents himself in the 
Sonnets before no trace of himself is visible in a Falstaff or 
*a Lear. 

No news of the Englishman . not a word. Isaura could 
not but feel that in his words, his looks, that day in her own 
garden, and those yet happier days at Enghien, there had 
been more than friendship : there had been love . love enough 
to justify her own pride in whispering to herpelf, "And I 
love too." But then that last parting ! . how changed he 
was . ^how cold ! She conjectured that jealousy of Rameau 
might, in some degree, account for the coldness when he first 
entered the room, but surely not when he left; surely not 
when she had overpassed the reserve of her sex, and implied 
by signs rarely misconstrued by those who love that he had 
no cause for jealousy of another. Yet he had gone . parted 
with her pointedly as a friend, a mere friend. How foolish 
she had been to think this rich, ambitious foreigner could 
ever have meant to be more I In the occupation of her work 
she thought to banish his image; but in that work the im- 
age was never absent; there were passages in which she 
pleadingly addressed it, and then would cease abruptly, sti- 
fled by passionate tears. Still she fancied that the work 
would reunite them; that in its pages he would hear her 
voice and comprehend her heart. And thus all praise of the 
work became very, very dear to her. 

At last, after many weeks, Savarin heard from Gi'aham. 
The letter was dated Aix-la-Chapelle, at which the English- 
man said he might yet be some time detained. In the letter 
Graham spoke chiefly of the new journal : in polke compli- 
ment of Savarin's own effusions ; in mixed praise and con- 
demnation of the political and social articles signed Pierre Fir- 
min . praise of their intellectual power, condemnation of their 
moral cyniciBm. " The writer," he said, " reminds me o.f a 
passage in which Mgntesquieu compares the heathen philos- 



 



 



322 THE PARISIANS. 

opbers to those plants which the earth produces in places 
that have never seen the heavens. The soil of his experience 
does not grow a single belief; and as no community can ex- 
ist without a belief of some kind, so a politician without be- 
lief can but help to destroy ; he can not reconstruct. Such 
writers corrupt a society; they do not reform a system." 
He closed his letter with a reference to Isaura : " Do, in your 
reply, my dear Savarin, tell me something about your friends 
Signora Venosta and the signorina, whose work, so far as yet 
published, I have read with admiring astonishment at the* 
power of a female writer so young to rival the veteran prac- 
titioners of fiction in the creation of interest in imaginary 
characters, and in sentiments which, if they appear somewhat 
over-romantic and exaggerated, still touch very fine chords in 
human nature not awakened in our trite every-day existence. 
I presume that the beauty of the roman has been duly ap- 
preciated by a public so refined as the Parisian, and that the 
name of the author is generally known. No doubt she is 
now much the rage of the literary circles, and her career as 
a writer may be considered fixed. Pray present my congrat- 
ulations to the signorina when you see her." 

Savarin had been in receipt of this letter some days before 
he called on Isaura, and carelessly showed it to her. She 
took it to the window to read, in order to conceal the trem- 
bling of her hands. In a few minutes she returned it si- 
lently. 

" Those Englishmen," said Savarin, " have not the art of 
compliment. I am by no means flattered by what he says 
of my trifles, and I dare say you are still less pleased with 
this chilly praise of your charming tale ; but the man means 
to be civil." 

" Certainly," said Isaura, smiling faintly. 

"Only think of Rameau," resumed Savarin; "on the 
strength of his salary in the Sena Commnn^ and on the %h6r 
teaux en Espagne which he constructs thereon . he has al- 
ready furnished an apartment in the Chauss6e d'Antin, and 
talks of setting up a coupi in order to maiintain the dignity 
of letters when he goes to dine with the duchesses who are 
some day or other to invite him. Yet I admire his self-con- 
fidence, though I laugh at it. A man gets on by a spring in 
his own mechanism, and he should always keep it wound up. 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 323 

Rameau will make a figure. I used to pity him. I begin to 
respect;- nothing succeeds like success. 3ut I see I am 
spoiling your morning. * Au revoir, mon enfantP 

Left alone, Isaura brooded in a sort of mournful wonder- 
ment over the words referring to herself in Graham's letter. 
Read through but once, she knew them by heart. What ! 
did he consider those characters she had represented as 
wholly imaginary ? In one . ^the most prominent, the most 
attractive . could he detect bo likeness to himself? What ! 
did he consider so "over-romantic and exaggerated" senti- 
ments which couched appeals from her heart to his ? Alas ! 
in matters of sentiment, it is the misfortune of us men that 
even the most refined of us often grate upon some sentiment 
in a woman, though she may not be romantic . ^not romantic 
at all, as people go-. some sentiment which she thought must 
be so obvious, if we cared a straw about her, and which, 
though we prize her above the Indies, is, by our dim, horn- 
eyed, masculine vision, undiscernible. It may be something 
in itself the airiest gf trifles : the anniversary of a day in 
which the first kiss was interchanged, nay, of a violet gath- 
ered, a misunderstanding cleared up ; and of that anniver- 
sary we remember no more than we do of our bells and 
coral. But she . she remembers it ; it is no bells and coral 
to her. Of course much is to be said in excuse of man, brute 
though he be. Consider the multiplicity of his occupations, 
the practical nature of his cares. But granting the validity 
of all such excuse, there is in man an original obtuseness of 
fibre as regards sentiment in comparison with the delicacy 
of woman's. It comes, perhaps, from the same hardness of 
constitution which forbids us the luxury of ready tears. 
Thus it is very difficult for the wisest man to understand 
thoroughly a woman. Goethe says somewhere that the high- 
est genius in man must have much of the woman in it. If 
this be true, the highest genius alone in man can compre- 
hend and explain the nature of woman ; because it is not re- 
mote from him, but an integral part of his masculine self. I 
am not sure, however, that it necessitates the highest genius, 
but rather a special idiosyncrasy in genius which the high- 
.est may or may not have. I think Sophecles a higher genius 
than Euripides; but Euripides has that idiosynci'asy, and 
Sophocles not. I doubt whether women would accept 

 VjOOQIC 



324 THE PARISIANS. 

Goethe as their interpreter with the same readiness with 
which they woujd accept Schiller. Shakspeare, no doubt, 
excels all poets in the comprehension of women, in his sym- 
pathy with them in the woman part of his nature which 
Goethe ascribes to the highest genius; but, putting aside 
that " monster," I do not remember any English poet whom 
we should consider conspicuously eminent in that lore, un- 
less it be the prose poet, nowadays generally underrated 
and little read, who wrote the letters of Clarissa Har- 
lowe. I say all this in vindication of Graham Vane, if, though 
a very clever man in his way, and by no means uninstructed 
in human nature, he had utterly failed in comprehending the 
mysteries which to this poor woman-child seemed to need 
no key for one who really loved her. But we have said 
somewhere before in this book that music speaks in a lan- 
guage which can not explain itself except in music. So 
speaks, in the human heart, much which is akin to music. 
Fiction (that is, poetry, whether in form of rhyme or prose) 
speaks thus pretty often. A reader must be more common- 
place than, I trust, m^r gentle readers are, if he suppose that 
when Isaura symbolized tfie real hero of her thoughts in the 
* fabled hero of her romance, she depicted him as one of whom 
the world could say, " That is Graham Vane." I doubt if 
even a male poet would so vulgarize any woman whom he 
thoroughly reverenced and loved. She is too sacred to him 
to be thus unveiled to the public stare ; as the sweetest of 
all ancient love-poets says well . 

"Qw sapit in tacito gaudeat ilk sinu,^* 

But a girl, a girl in her first untold timid love, to let the 
world know, " that is the man I love and would die for !" . 
if such a girl be, she has no touch of the true woman-genius, 
and certainly she and Isaura have nothing in common. Well, 
then, in Isaura's invented hero, though she saw the archetyp- 
al form of Graham Vane . saw him as in her young, vague, 
romantic dreams, idealized, beautified, transfigured . he would 
have been the vainest of men if he had seen therein the re- 
flection of himself. On the contrary, he said, In the spirit of 
that jealousy to which he was too prone, "Alas! thi8,the% 
is some ndeal, already seen perhaps, compared to which how 
commonplace am I !" and thus persuading himself, no won- 



 



 



THB PARISIANS. 325 

der that the sentiments surrounding this unrecognized arche- 
type appeared to him over -romantic, flis taste acknowl- 
edged the beauty of form which clothed them ; his heait en- 
vied the ideal that inspired them. But they seemed so re- 
mote from him ; they put the dream-land of the writer far- 
ther and farther from his work-day real life. 

In this frame of mind, then, he had written to Savarin, and 
the answer he received hardened it still more. Savarin had 
replied, as was his laudable wont in correspondence, the very 
day he received Graham's letter, and therefore before he had 
even seen Isaura. In his reply he spoke much of the success 
her work had obtained ; of the invitations showered upon 
her, and the sensation she caused in the salons; of her future 
career, with hope that she might even rival Madame de Grant- 
nfesnil some day, when her ideas became emboldened by ma- 
tnrer experience, and a closer study of that model of elo- 
quent style . saying that the young editor was evidently be- 
coming enamored of his fair contributor ; and that Madame 
Savarin had ventured the prediction that the signorina's ro- 
man would end in the death of the heroine and the marriage 
of the writer. 



CHAPTER V. 

And still the weeks glided* on; autumn succeeded to sum- 
mer, the winter to autumn; the season of Paris was at its 
height. The wondrous Capital seemed to repay its imperial 
embellisher by the splendor and the joy of il%fUes. But the 
smiles on the face of Paris were hypocritical and hollow. The 
empire itself had passed out of fashion. Grave men and im- 
partial observers felt anxious. Napoleon had renounced les 
i(Ues Ndpolioniennes. He was passing into the category of 
constitutional sovereigns, and reigning, not by his old undi- 
vided prestige, but by the grace of party. The press was 
free to circulate complaints as to the past and demands as to 
the future, beneath which the present reeled . ominous of 
earthquake. People asked themselves if it were possible that 
the empire 'coilld coexist with forms of government not im- 
perial, yet not genuinely constitutional, with a majority daily 
yielding to a min(frity. The basis of universal suffrage was 
sapped. About this time the articles in the JSens Commun, 



 



 



326 THE PABIBIAXa 

 

signed Pierre Firmin, were creating not only considerable 
sensation, bat marked effect on opinion ; and the sale of the 
journal was immense. 

Necessarily the repute and the position of Gustave Rameaa, 
as the avowed editor of this journal, rose with its success. 
Nor only his repute and position ; bank-notes of considerable 
value were transmitted to him by the publisher, with the 
brief statement that they were sent by the sole proprietor of 
the paper as the editor's fair share of profit. The proprietor 
was never named, but Rameaa took it for granted that it was 
M. Lebeau. M. Lebeau he had never seen since the day he 
had brought him the list of contributors, and was then refer- 
red to the publisher, whom he supposed M. Lebeau had se- 
cured, and received the first quarter of his salary in advance. 
The salary was a trifle compared to the extra profits thtis 
generously volunteered. He called at Lebeaa's ojffice, and 
saw only the clerk, who said that his chef was abroad. 

Prosperity produced a marked change for the better, if 
not in the substance of Rameau's character, at least in hi^ 
manners and social converse. He no longer exhibited that 
restless envy of rivals, which is the most repulsive symptom 
of vanity diseased. He pardoned Isaura her success ; nay, he 
was even pleased at it. The nature of her work did not 
clash with his own kind of writing. It was so thoroughly 
woman-like that one could not compare it to a man's. More- 
over, that success had contributed largely to the profits by 
which he had benefited, and to his renown as editor of the 
journal which accorded place to this new-found genius. But 
there was a deeper and more potent cause for sympathy with 
the success of his fair young contributor. He had impercep- 
tibly glided into love with her . a love very different from 
that with which .poor Julie Caumartin flattered herself she 
had inspired the young poet. Isaura was one of those women 
for whom, even in natures the least chivalric, love . ^however 
ardent . can not fail to be accompanied with a certain rever- 
ence . the reverence with which the ancient knighthood, in 
its love for women, honored the ideal purity of womanhood 
itself. Till then Rameau had never revered .ny one. 

On her side, brought so frequently into communication with 
the young conductor of the journal in whi<5h she wrote, Isanra 
entertained for him a friendly, almost sister-like affection. 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 327 

I do not think that, even if she had never known the En- 
glishman, she would have really become in love with Ramean, 
despite the pictnresqae beauty of his countenance, and the 
congeniality of literary pursuits ; but perhaps she might have 
fancied herself in love with him. And till one, whether man 
or woman, has known real love, fancy is readily mistaken for 
it. But little as she had seen of Graham, and that little not in 
itself wholly favorable to him, she knew in her heart of hearts 
that his image would never be replaced by one equally dear. 
Perhaps in those qualities that placed him in opposition to 
her she felt his attractions. The poetical in woman exagger- 
ates the worth of the practical in man. Still for Rameau 
her exquisitely kind and sympathizing nature conceived one 
of those sentiments which in woman are almost angel-like. 
We have seen in her letters to Madam#de Grantmesnil that 
from the first he inspired her with a compassionate inter- 
est ; then the compassion was checked by her perception of 
his more unamiable and envious attributes. But now those 
attributes, if still' existent, had ceased to be apparent to 
her, and the compassion became unalloyed. Indeed, it was 
thus so far increased that it was impossible for any friendly 
observer to look at the beautiful face of this youth, prema- 
turely wasted and worn, without the kindliness of pity. His 
prosperity had brightened and sweetened the expression of 
that face, but it had not effaced the vestiges of decay ; rather 
perhaps deepened them, for the duties of his post necessi- 
tated a regular labor, to which he had been unaccustomed, 
and the regular labor necessitated, or seemed to him to ne- 
cessitate, an increase of fatal stimulants. He imbibed ab- 
sinthe with every thing he drank, and to absinthe he united 
opium. This, of course, Isaura knew not, any more than she 
knew of his liaison with the " Ondine " of his muse ; she saw 
only the increasing delicacy of his face and form, contrasted 
by his increased geniality and liveliness of spirits, and the 
contrast saddened her. Intellectually, too, she felt for him 
compassion. She recognized and respected in him the yearn- 
ings of a genius top weak to perform a tithe of what, in the 
arrogance of y#bth, it promised to its ambition. She saw, too, 
those struggles between a higher and a lower self, to which 
a weak degree of genius, united with a strong degree of ar- 
rogance, is so often subjected. Perhaps she overestimated 



 



 



328 THS PAIUBIANS. 

the'degree of genius, and what, if rightly guided, it could do ; 
but she did, in the desire of her own heavenlier instinct, as- 
pire to guide it heavenward. And, as if she were twenty 
years older than himself, she obeyed that desire in remonstrat- 
ing and warning and urging, and the young man took all theee 
'^ preachments " with a pleased submissive patience. Such, 
as the new year dawned upon the grave of the old one, was 
the position between these two. And nothing more was 
heard from Graham Vane, 



CHAPTER VI. 

It has now become due to Graham Vane, and to his place 
in the estimation of%iy readers, to explain somewhat more 
distinctly the nature of the quest in prosecution of which he 
had sought the aid of the Parisian police, and, under an as-' 
sumed name, made the acquaintance of M. Lebeau. 

The best way of discharging this duty will perhaps be to 
place before the reader the contents of the letter which pass- 
ed under Graham's eyes on the day in which the heart of the 
writer ceased to beat. 

" Confidential. 
To he opened immediately after my deaths and before the pe- 
rusal of my wilL Michard King, 

" To Graham Vanb, Esq. 

" My dbab Gbaham, . By the direction on the envelope of 
this letter, * Before the perusal of my will,' I have wished to 
save you from the disappointment you would naturally- ex- 
perience if you learned my bequest without being prevised 
of thg conditions which I am about to impose upon your 
honor. You will see ere you conclude this letter that you 
are the only man living to whom I could intrust the secret it 
contains and the task it enjoins. 

^' You are aware that I was not bom %o the fortune that 
passed to me by the death of a distant relati^li, who had, in 
my earlier youth, children of his own. I was an only son, 
left an orphan at the age of sixteen with a very slender pit- 
tance. * My guardians designed me for the medical profes- 



 



 



THE PABISIAJfS. 329 

Bion. I began my studies at Edinburgh, and was sent to 
Paris to complete them. It so chanced that there I lodged 
in the same house with an artist named Auguste Duval, who, 
failing to gain his livelihood as a painter, in what . for his 
style was ambitious . is termed the Historical School, had ac- 
cepted the humbler calling of a drawing-master. He had 
practiced in that branch of the profession for several years at 
Tours, having a good client^ among English families set- 
tled there. This dienlMe^ as he frankly confessed, he had 
lost from some irregularities of conduct. He was not a bad 
man, but of convivial temper, and easily led into temptation. 
He had removed to Paris a few months before I made his ac- 
quaintance. He obtained a few pupils, and often lost them 
as soon as gained. He was unpunctual and addicted to 
drink. But he had a small pension, accorded to him, he was 
wont to say mysteriously, by some high-born kinsfolk, too 
proud td own connection with a drawing-master, and on the 
condition that he should never name them. He never did 
name them to me, and I do not know to this day whether 
the story of this noble relationship was trueor false. A pen- 
sion, however, he did receive quarterly from some person or 
other, and it was an unhappy provision for him. It tended 
to make him an idler in his proper calling, and whenever he 
received the payment be spent it in debauch, to the neglect, 
while it lasted, of his pupils. This man had residing with 
him a young daughter, singularly beautiful. You may di- 
vine the rest. I fell in love with her . a love deepened by 
the compassion with which she inspired me. Her father left* 
her so frequently that, living on the same floor, we saw* much 
of each other. Parent and child were often in great need . 
lacking eyen fuel or food. Of course I assisted them to the 
utmost of my scanty means. Much as I was fascinarted by 
Louise Duval, I was not blind to great defects in her charac- 
ter. She was capricious, vain, aware of her beauty, and sigh- 
ing for the pleasures or the gauds beyond her reach. I knew 
that she did not love me . there was little, indeed, to capti- 
vate her fancy in a poor, threadbare medical student . and 
yet I fondly imagined that my own persevering devotion 
would at length win her affections. I spoke to her father 
more than once of my hope some day to make Louise my 
wife. This hope, I must frankly acknowledge, he never en- 



 



 



330 THE PABISIANS. 

couraged. On the contrary, he treated it with scorn . * his 
child with her beauty would look much higher ' . but he con- 
tinued all the same to accept my assistance, and to sanction 
my visits. At length my slender purse was pretty well ex- 
hausted, and the luckless drawing-master was so harassed 
with petty debts that farther credit became impossible. At 
this time I happened to hear from a fellow-student that his 
sister, who was the principal of a ladies' school in Cheltenham, 
had commissioned him to look out for a first-rate teacher of 
drawing, with whom her elder pupils could converse in 
French, but who should be sufficiently acquainted with En- 
glish to make his instructions intelligible to the young. The 
salary was liberal, the school large and of high repute, and 
his appointment to it would open to an able teacher no in- 
considerable connection among privsite families. I commu- 
nicated this intelligence to Duval. He caught at it eagerly. 
He had learned at Tours to speak English fluently* and as 
his professional skill was of high order, and he was popular 
with several eminent artists, he obtained certificates as to 
his talents, whioh my fellow-student forwarded to England 
with specimens of Duval's drawings. In a few days the of- 
fer of an engagement arrived, was accepted, and Duval and 
his daughter set out for Cheltenham. At the eve of their 
departure Louise, profoundly dejected at the prospect of 
banishment to a foreign country, and placing no trust in her 
father's reform to steady habits, evinced a tendeniess for me 
hitherto new . she wept bitterly. She allowed me to believe 
*that her tears flowed at the thought of parting with me, and 
even besought me to accompany them to Cheltenham . if 
only for a few days. You may suppose how delightedly I 
complied with the request. Duval had been aboi^t a week 
at the watering-place, and was discharging the duties he had 
undertaken with such unwonted steadiness and regularity 
that I began sorrowfully to feel I had no longer an excuse 
for not returning to my studies at Paris, when the poor 
teacher was seized with a fit of paralysis. He lost the pow- 
er of movement, and his mind was affected. The medical 
attendant called in said that he might linger thus for some 
time, but that, even if he recovered his intellect, which was 
more than doubtful, he would never be able to resume his 
profession. I could not leave Louise in circumstances so dis- 



Digitized 



J by Google 






THE PABISIAKS. 331 

tressing . ^I remained. The little money Duval had l^ought 
with him from Paris was now exhausted, and when tne day 
on which he had been in the habit of receiving his quarter's 
pension came round, Louise was unable even to conjecture 
how it was to be applied for. It seems he had always gone 
for it in person, but to whom he went was a secret which he 
had never divulged. And at this critical juncture his mind 
was too enfeebled even to comprehend us when we inquired. 
I had already drawn from the small capital on the interest 
of which I had maintained myself; I now drew out most of 
the remainder. But this was a resource that could not last 
long. Nor could I, without seriously compromising Louise's 
character, be constantly in the house with a girl so young, 
and whose sole legitimate protector was thus afflicted. There 
seemed but one alternative to that of abandoning her alto- 
gether . viz., to make her my wife, to conclude the studies 
necessary to obtain my diploma, and purchase some partner- 
ship in a small country practice with the scanty surplus that 
might be left of my capital. I placed this option befove 
Louise timidly, for I could not bear the thought of forcing 
her inclinations. She seemed much moved by what she 
called my generosity: she consented . we were married. I 
was, as you may conceive, wholly ignorant of French law. 
We were married according to the English ceremony and the 
Protestant ritual. Shortly after our marriage we all three 
returned to Paris, taking an apartment in a quarter remote 
from that in which we had before lodged, in order to avoid 
any harassment to which such small creditors as Duval had 
left behind him might subject us. I resumed my studies 
with redoubled energy, and Louise was oacessarily left much 
alone with her poor father in the daytime. The defects in 
her character became more and more visible. She reproach- 
ed me for the solitude to which I condemned her ; our pov- 
erty galled her; she had no kind greeting for- me when I re- 
turned at evening, wearied out. Before marriage she had 
not loved me . ^after marriage, alas ! I fear she hated. We 
had been returned to Paris some months when poor Duval 
died ; he had never recovered his faculties, nor had we ever 
learned from whom the pension had been received. Very 
soon after her father's death I observed a singular change in 
the humor and manner of Louise. She was no longer pee- 
L. 15 

Digitiz#d by VjOOQIC 



332 THE PABISIANS. 

vish, iniscible, reproachful, but taciturn and thoughtful. She 
seemea to me under the influence of some suppressed ex- 
citement: her cheeks flushed and her eyes abstracted. At 
length one evening when I returned I found her gone. She 
did not come back that night nor the next day. It was impos- 
sible for me to conjecture what had become of her. She had 
no friends, so far as I knew . no one had visited at our squal- 
id apartment. The poor house in which we lodged had no 
concierge whom I could question, but the ground-floor was 
occupied by a smaU tobacconist's shop, and the woman at 
the counter told me that for some days before my wife's dis- 
appearance she had observed her pass the shop window in 
going out in the afternoon and returaing toward the even- 
ing. Two terrible conjectures beset me : either in her walks 
she had met some admirer, with whom she had fled, or, una- 
ble to bear the companionship and poverty of a union which 
she had begun to loathe, she had gone forth to drown herself 
in the Seine. On the third day from her flight I received the 
letter I inclose. Possibly the handwriting may serve you as 
a guide in the mission I intrust to you. 

"'MoNSiEXTB, . You have deceived me vilely . taking ad- 
vantage of my inexperienced youth and friendless position to 
decoy me into an illegal marriage. My only consolation un- 
der my calamity and disgrace is that I am at least free from 
a detested bond. You will not see me again . ^it is idle to 
attempt to do so. I have obtained refuge with relations 
whom I have been fortunate enough to discover, and to whom 
I intrust my fate. And even if you could learn the shelter I 
have sought, and h^ye the audacity to molest me, you would 
but subject yourself to the chastisement you so richly de- 
serve. Louise Duval.' 

" At the perusal of this cold-hearted, ungrateful letter, the 
love I had felt for this woman . already much shaken by her 
wayward and' perverse temper . vanished from my heart, 
never to retura. But, as an honest man, my conscience was 
terribly stung. Could it be possible that I had unknowingly 
deceived her . that our marriage was not legal ? 

" When I recovered from the stun which was the first ef- 
feet of her letter, I sought the opinion of an avoui in the 

 VjOOQIC 



THB PARISIANS. 333 

neighborhood, named Sartiges, and, to my dismay, I learned 
that while I, marrying according to the customs of my own 
country, was legally bound to Louise in England, and could 
not marry another, the marriage was in all ways illegal for 
her . being without the consent of her relations while she 
was under age, without the ceremonials of the Roman Cath- 
olic Church, to which, though I never heard any profession 
of religious belief from her or her- father, it might fairly be 
presumed that she belonged, and, above all, without the form 
of civil contract which is indispensable to the legal marriage 
of a French subject. 

** The avou& said that the marriage, therefore, in itself was 
null, and that Louise could, without incurring legal penal- 
ties for bigamy, marry again in France according to the 
French laws ; but that under the circumstances it was prob- 
able, that her next of kin would apply on her behalf to the 
proper court for the fojmal annulment of the marriage, which 
would be the most effectual mode of saving her from any 
molestation on my part, and remove all possible question 
hereafter as to her single state, and absolute right to remar- 
ry. I had better remain quiet, and wait for intimation of 
further proceedings. I knew not what else to do, and neces- 
sarily submitted. 

'' From this wretched listlessness of mind, alternated now 
by vehement resentment against Louise, now by the reproach 
of my own sense of honor, in leaving that honor in so ques- 
tionable a point of view, I was aroused by a letter from the 
distant kinsman by whom hitherto I had been so neglected.^ 
In the previous year he had lost one of his two children ; the 
other was just dead: no nearer relation now surviving stood 
between me and my chance of inheritance from him. He 
wrote word of his domestic affliction with a manly sorrow 
which touched me, said that his health was failing, and 
begged me, as soon as possible, to come and visit him in 
Scotland. I went, and continued to reside with him till his 
death^ some months afterward. By his will I succeeded to 
his ample fortune on condition of taking his name. 

" As soon as the affairs connected with this inheritance per- 
mitted, I returned to Paris, and again saw M. Sartiges. . I had 
never heard from Louise, nor from any one connected with 
her, since the letter you have read. No steps had been taken 

 VjOOQIC 



334 THS PABISIANS. 

to annul the marriage, and safficient time had elapsed to ren- 
der it improbable that such steps would be taken now. Bat 
if no such steps were taken, however free from the marriage- 
bond Louise might be, it clearly remained binding on mysel 
^' At my request M^ Sartiges took the most vigorous pleas- 
ures that occurred to him to ascertain where Louise was, and 
what and who was the relation with whom she asserted she 
had found refuge. The police were employed; advertise- 
ments were issued, concealing names, but sufSiciently clear 
to be intelligible to Louise, if they came under her eye, and 
to the effect that if any informality in our marriage existed, 
she was implored for her own sake to remove it by a second 
ceremonial . answer to be addressed to the avotii. No an- 
swer cai^ ; the police had hitherto failed of discovering her, 
but were sanguine of success, when a few weeks .after these 
advertisements a packet reached M. Sartiges, inclosing the 
certificates, annexed to this letter, of (he death of Louise Du- 
val at Munich. The certificates, as you will see, are to ap- 
pearance officially attested and unquestionably genuine. So 
they were considered by M. Sartiges as well as by myseK 
Here, then, all inquiry ceased . the police were dismissed. I 
was free. By little and little I overcame the painful im- 
pressions which my ill-starred union and the announcement 
of Louise's early death bequeathed. Rich, and of active 
mind, I learned to dismiss the trials of my youth as a gloomy 
dream. I entered into public life ; I made myself a credita- 
ble position ; became acquainted with your aunt ; we were 
wedded, and the beauty of her nature embellished mine. 
Alas ! alas I two years after our marriage . ^nearly ^ve years 
after I had received the certificates of Louise's death . ^I and 
your aunt made a summer excursion into the country of the 
Rhine ; on our return we rested at Aix-la-Chapelle. One day 
while there I was walking alone in the environs of the town, 
when, on the road, a little girl, seemingly about ^ve years 
old, in chase of a butterfly, stumbled and fell just before my 
feet ; I took her up, and as she was crying more* from the 
shock of the fall than any actual hurt, I was still trying my 
best to comfort her, when a lady some paces behind her came 
up, and in taking the child from my arms as I was bending 
over her, thanked me in a voice that made my heart stand 
still ; I looked up, and beheld Louise. 

 VjOOQIC 




Mb. EiNe's Meeting with Louise Duval and tue Child at Aix-la-Chapbllb. 



 



Google 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 335 

" It was not till I had convulsively clasped her hand and 
uttered her name that she recognized me. I was, no doubt, 
the more altered of the two . prosperity and happiness had 
left little trace of the needy, care-worn, threadbare student. 
Bat if she were the last to recognize, she was the first to re- 
cover self-possession. The expression of her face became 
hard and set. I can not pretend to repeat with any verbal 
accuracy the brief <5onverse that took place between us, as 
she placed the child on the grass bank beside the path, bade 
her- stay there quietly, and walked on with me some paces 
as if she did not wish the child to hear what was said. 

"The purport of what passed was to this effect: She re- 
fused to explain the certificates of her death further than 
that, becoming aware of what she called the ' persecution' of 
the advertisements issued and inquiries instituted, she had 
caused those documents to be sent to the address given in 
the advertisement, in order to terminate all further molesta- 
tion. But how they could have been obtained, or by what 
art so ingeniously forged as to deceive the acuteness of a 
practiced lawyer, I know not to this day. She declared, in- 
deed, that she was now happy, in easy circumstances, and 
that if I wished to make some reparation for the wrong I 
had done her, it would be to kave her in peace ; and in case 
. which was not likely . we ever met again, to regard and 
tr^at her as a stranger ; that she, on her part, never would 
molest me, and that the certified death of Louise Duval left 
me as free to marry again as she considered herself to be. 

" My mind was so confused, so bewildered, while she thus 
talked, that I did not attempt to interrupt her. The blow 
had so crushed me that I scarcely struggled under it ; only, 
as she turned to leave me, I suddenly recollected that the 
child, when taken from my arms, had called her * Maman^ 
and, judging by the apparent age of the child, it must have 
been born but a few months after Louise had left me . that 
it must be mine. And so, in my dreary woe, I faltered out, 
' But what of your infant ? Surely that has on me a claim 
that you relinquish for yourself You were not unfaithful 
to me while you deemed you were my wife ?' 

"'Heavens I can you insult me by such a doubt. No!' 
she cried out impulsively and haughtily. ' But as I was not 
legally your wife, the child is not legally yours ; it is mine, 



 



 



336 THS PABISIAKS. 

and only mine. Nevertheless, if you wish to claim it . ' 
Here she paused as in doubt. I saw at once that she was 
prepared to resign to me the child if I had urged her to do 
so. I must own, with a pang of remorse, that I recoiled from 
such a proposal What could I do with the child ? How 
explain to my wife the cause of my interest in it ? If only 
a natural child of mine, I should have shrunk from owning 
to Janet a youthful error. But, as it was . the child by a 
former marriage . the former wife still living . my blood ran 
cold with dread. And if I did take the child . ^invent what 
story I might as to its parentage, should I not expose my- 
self, expose Janet, to terrible constant danger? The moth- 
er's natural affection might urge her at any time to seek 
tidings of the child, and in so doing she might easily discover 
my new name, and, perhaps years hence, establish on me her 
own claim. 

" No, I could not risk such perils. I replied, sullenly, 'You 
say rightly ; the child is yours . only yours.' I was about to 
add an offer of pecuniary provision for it, but Louise had al- 
ready turned scornfully toward the bank on which she had 
left the infant. I saw her snatch from the child's hand 
some wild flowers the poor thing had been gathering; and 
how often have I thought of the rude way in which she did 
it . ^not as a mother who loves her child. Just then other 
passengers appeared on the road . ^two of them I knew . ;an 
English couple very intimate with Lady Janet and myself 
They stopped to accost me, while Louise passed by with the 
infant toward the town. I turned in the opposite direction, 
and strove to collect my thoughts. Terrible as was the dis- 
covery thus suddenly made, it was evident that Louise had 
as strong an interest as myself to conceal it. There was 
little chance that it would ever be divulged. Her dress and 
that of the child were those of persons in the richer classes 
of life. After all, doubtless, the child needed not pecuniary 
assistance from me, and was surely best off under the moth- 
er's care. Thus I sought to comfort and to delude myself. 

*' The next day Janet and I left Aix-la-Chapelle, and re- 
turned to Englancl. But it was impossible for me to banish 
the dreadful thought that Janet was not legally my wife ; 
that could she even guess the secret lodged in my breast 
she would be lost to me forever, even though she died of the 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PABISIANS. 337 

separation (you know well how tenderly she loved me). My 
nature underwent a silent revolution. I had previously 
cherished the ambition common to most men in public life . 
the ambition for fame, for place, for power. That ambition 
left me; I shrunk from the thought of becoming too well 
known, lest Louise or her connections, as yet^norant of my 
new name, might more easily learn what the world knew . 
viz., that I had previously borne another name . ^the name of 
her husband . and finding me wealthy and honored, might 
hereafter be tempted to claim for herself or her daughter the 
ties she abjured for both while she deemed me poor and de- 
spised. But partly my conscience, partly the influence of the 
angel by my side, compelled me to seek whatever meana of 
doing good to others position and circumstances placed at 
my disposal. I was ala]*med when even such quiet exercfse 
of mind and fortune acquired a sort of celebrity. How pain- 
fully I shrunk from it 1 The world attributed my dread of 
publicity to unaiFected modesty. The world praised me, and 
I knew myself an impostor. But the years stole on. I heard 
no more of Louise or her child, and my fears gradually sub- 
sided. Yet I was consoled when the two children born to 
me by Janet died in their infancy. Had they lived, who 
can tell whethei^omething might not have transpired to 
prove them illegitimate ? 

" I must hasten on. At last came the great and crushing 
calamity of my life : I lost the woman who was my all in all. 
At least she was spared the discovery that would have de- 
prived me of the right of tending her death-bed, and leaving 
within her tomb a place vacant for myself. 

"But after the first agonies that followed her loss, the con- 
science I had so long sought to tranquillize became terribly 
reproachful. Louise had forfeited all right to my considera- 
tion, but my guiltless child had not done so. Did it live 
still? If so, was it not the heir to my fortune . the only 
child left to me ? True, I have the absolute right to dispose 
of my wealth : it is not in land ; it is not entailed ; but was 
not the daughter I had forsaken morally the first claimant ? 
Was no reparation due to her ? 'fou remember that my phy- 
sician ordered me, some little time after your aunt's death, to 
seek a temporary change of scene. I obeyed, and went 
away no one knew whither. Well, I repaired to Paris ; there 

 VjOOQI^ 



338 THE PARISIANS. 

I sought M, Sartiges, the avot^. I found he had been long 
dead. I discovered his execators, and inquired if any papers 
or correspondence between Richard Macdonald and himself 
many years ago were in existence. All such documents, 
with others not returned to correspondents at his decease, 
had been buraed by his desire. No possible clue to the 
whereabouts of Louise, should any have been gained since I 
last saw her, was left. What then to do I knew not. I did 
not dare to make inquiries through strangers, which, if dis- 
covering my child, might also bring to light a marriage that 
would have dishonored the memory of my lost saint. I re- 
turned to England feeling that my days were numbered. It 
is to you that I transmit the task of those researches which 
I could not institute. I bequeath to you, with the exception 
of trifling legacies and donations* to public charities, the 
whole of my fortune. But you will understand by this let- 
ter that it is to be held on a trust which I can not specify in 
my will. I could not, without dishonoring the venerated 
name of your aunt, indicate as the heiress of my wealth a 
child by a wife living at the time I married Janet. I can 
not form any words for such a devise which would not arouse 
gossip and suspicion, and furnish ultimately a clue to the 
discovery I would shun. I calculate thaHj after all deduc- 
tions, the sum that will devolve to you will be about two 
hundred and twenty thousand pounds. That which I mean 
to be absolutely and at once yours is the comparatively 
trifling legacy of 20,000. If Louise's child be not living, or 
if you find full reason to suppose that, despite appearances, 
the child is not mine, the whole of my fortune lapses to you; 
but should Louise be surviving and need pecuniary aid, you 
will contrive that she may have such an annuity as you may 
deem fitting, without learning whence it come. You per^ 
ceive that it is your object if possible, even more than mine, 
to preserve free from slur the name and memory of her who 
was to you a second mother. All ends we desire would be 
accomplished could you, on discovering my lost child, feel 
that, without constraining vour inclinations, you could make 
her your wife. She would then naturally share with you 
my fortune, and all claims of justice and duty would be 
quietly appeased. She would now be of age suitable to 
yours. When I saw her at Aix she gave promise of inherit- 



 



dV Google 



THE PARISIANS. 339 

ing no small share of her mother's beauty. If Louise's as- 
surance of her easy circumstances were true, her daughter 
has possibly been educated and reared with tenderness and 
care. You have already assured me that you have no prior 
attachment. But if, on discovering this child, you find her 
already married, or one whom you could not love nor esteem, 
I leave it implicitly to yi)ur honor and judgment to deter- 
mine what share of ihe 200,000 left in your hands should 
be consigned to her. She may have been corrupted by her 
mother's principles. She may . ^heaven forbid ! . ^have fallen 
into vil courses, and wealth would be misspent in her hands. 
In that case a competence mifSicing to save her from further 
degradation, from the temptations of poverty, would be all 
that I desire you to devote from my wealth. On the contrary, 
you may find in her one who, in all respects, ought to be my 
chief inheritor. All this I leave, in full confidence, to you, as 
being, of all the men I know, the one who unites the highest 
sense of honor with the largest share of practical sense and 
knowledge of life. The main difficulty, whatever this lost 
girl may derive from my substance, will be in devising some 
means to convey it to her, so that neither she nor those 
around her may trace the bequest to me. She can never be 
acknowledged as my child . never ! Your reverence for the 
beloved dead forbids that. This difficulty your clear strong 
sense must overcome; mine is blinded by the shades of 
death. You too will deliberately consider how to institute 
the inquiries after mother and child so as not to betray our 
secret. This .will require great caution. You will probably 
commence at Paris, through the agency of the police, to 
whom you will be very guarded in your communications. 
It is most unfortunate that I have no miniature of Louise, 
and that any description of her must be so vague that it 
may not serve to discover her ; but such as it is, it may pre- 
vent your mistaking for her some other of her name. Louise 
was above the common )^ieight, and looked taller than she 
was, with the peculiar combination of very dark hair, very 
j^ir complexion, and light gray eyes. She would now be 
somewhere under the age of forty. She was not without 
accomplishments, derived from the companionship with her 
father. She spoke English fluently; she drew with taste, 
and even with talent. You will see the prudence of con- 



 



 



340 THE PABISIANS. 

fining research at first to Louise, rather than to the child 
who is the principal object of it ; for it is not till you can 
ascertain what has become of her that you can trust the ac- 
curacy of any information respecting the daughter, whom I 
assume, perhaps after all erroneously, to be mine. Though 
Louise talked with such levity of holding herself free to 
marry, the birth of her child might be sufSicient injury to 
her. reputation to become a serious obstacle to such second 
nuptials, not having taken formal steps to annul her marriage 
with myself If not thus remarried, there would be no 
reason why she should not resume her maiden name of Du- 
val, as she did in the signatureof her letter to me . ^finding 
that I had ceased to molest her by the inquiries to elude 
which she had invented the false statement of her death. It 
seems probable, therefore, that she is residing somewhere in 
Paris, and in the name of Duval. Of course the burden of 
uncertainty as to your future can not be left to oppress you 
for an indefinite length of time. If at the end, say, of two 
years, your researches have wholly failed, consider three- 
fourths of my whole fortune to have passed to you, and put 
by the fourth to accumulate, should the child afterward be 
discovered, and satisfy your judgment as to her claims on 
me as her father. Should she not, it will be a reserve fund 
for your own children. But oh, if my child could be found 
in time ! and oh, if she be all that could win your heart, 
and be the wife you would select from free choice ! I can 
say no more. Pity me, and judge leniently of Janet's hus- 
band. , R. K." 

The key to Graham's conduct is now given : the deep sor- 
row that took him to the tomb of the aunt he so revered, 
and whose honored memory was subjected to so great a risk; 
the slightness of change in his expenditure and mode of life, 
after an inheritance supposed to be so ample ; the abnegation 
of his political ambition ; the subject of his inquiries, and the 
cautious reserve imposed upon them ; above all, the position 
toward Isaura in which he was so cruelly placed. . 

Certainly, his first thought in revolving the conditions of 
his trust had been that of marriage with this lost child of 
Richard King's, should she be discovered single, disengaged, 
^nd not repulsive to his inclinations. . Tacitly he subscribed 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 341 

to the reasons for this course alleged by the deceased. It 
was the simplest and. readiest plan of uniting justice to the 
rightful inheritor with care for a secret important to the 
honor of his aunt, of Richard King himself. his benefactor . 
of the illustrious house from which Lady Janet had sprung. 
Perhaps, too, the consideration that by this course a fortune so 
useful to his career was secured was not without influence on 
the mind of a man natumlly ambitious. But on that consid- 
eration he forbade himself to dwell. He put it away from him 
as a sin. Tet to marriage with any one else until his mission 
was fulfilled, and the uncertainty as to the extent of his for- 
tune was dispelled, there interposed grave practical obstacles. 
How could he honestly present himself to a girl and to her 
parents in the light of a rich man, when in reality he might be 
but a poor man? How could he refer to any lawyer the con- 
ditions which rendered impossible any settlement that touch- 
ed a shilling of the large sum which at any day he might 
have to transfer to another ? Still, when once l^Uy conscious 
how deep was the love with which Isaura had inspired him, 
the idea of wedlock with the daughter of Richard King, if 
she yet lived and was single, became inadmissible. The 
orphan condition of the young Italian smoothed away the 
obstacles to proposals of marriage which would have embar- 
rassed his addresses to girls of his own rank, and with par- 
ents who would have demanded settlements. And if he had 
found Isaura alone on that day on which he had seen her last, 
hfe would doubtless have yielded lo the voice of his heart, 
avowed his love, wooed her own, and committed both to the 
tie of betrothal. We have seen how rudely such yearnings 
of his heart were repelled on that last interview. His En- 
glish prejudices were so deeply rooted that, even if he had 
been wholly free from the trust bequeathed him, he would 
have recoiled from marriage with a girl who, in the ardor for 
notoriety, could link herself with such associates as Gustave 
Rameau, by habits a Bohemian, and by principles a Socialist. 
In flying from Paris he embraced the resolve to banish all 
thought of wedding Isaura, and devote himself sternly to the 
task which had so sacred a claim upon him. Not that he 
could endure the idea of marrying another, even if the lost 
heiress should be all that his heart could have worshiped, had 
that heart been his own to give ; but he was impatient of the 



 VjOOQIC " 



342 THE PARISIANS. 

burden heaped on him . of the fortune which might not be 
his, of the uncertainty which paralyzed all his ambitious 
schemes for the future. 

Yet strive as he would . and no man could strive more 
resolutely. he could not succeed in banishing the image of 
Isaura. It was with him always ; and vnth it a sense of ir- 
reparable loss, of a terrible void, of a pining anguish. 

And the success of his inquiries at Aix-la-Chapelle) while 
sufficient to detain him in the place, was so slight, and ad- 
vanced by such slow degrees, that it furnished no continued 
occupation to his restless mind. M. Renard was acute and 
painstaking. But it was no easy matter to obtain any ti*ace 
of a Parisian visitor to so popular a Spa so many years ago. 
The name Duval, too, was so common, that at Aix, as we 
have seen at Paris, time was wasted in the chase of a Du- 
val who proved not to be the lost Louise. At last M. Re- 
nard chanced on a house in which, in the year 1849, two ladies 
from Paris had lodged for three weeks. One was Madame 
Duval, the other Madame Marigny. They were both young, 
both very handsome, and much of the same height and color- 
ing. But Madame Marigny was the handsomer of the two. 
Madame Duval frequented the gaming tables, and was ap- 
parently of very lively temper. Madame Marigny lived very 
quietly, rarely or never stirred out, and seemed in delicate 
health. She, however, quitted the apartment somewhat ab- 
ruptly, and, to the best of the lodging-house keeper's recol- 
lection, took rooms in the' country near Aix . ^she could not 
remember where. About two months after the departure of 
Madame Marigny, Madame Duval also left Aix, and in com- 
pany with a French gentleman who had visited her much of 
late . a handsome man of striking appearance. The lodging- 
house keeper did not know what or who he was. She re- 
membered that he used to be announced to Madame Duval 
by the name of M. Achille. Madame Duval had never been 
seen again by the lodging-house keeper after she had left. 
But Madame Marigny she had once seen, nearly five years 
after she had quitted the lodgings . seen her by chance at the 
railway station, recognized her at once, and accosted her, of- 
fering her the old apartment. Madame Marigny had, howev- 
er, briefly replied that she was only at Aix for a few hours, 
and should quit it the same day. 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 343 

The inquiry now turned toward Madame Marigny. The 
date in which the lodging-house keeper had last seen her 
coincided with the year in which Richard King had met 
Louise. Possibly, therefore, she might have accompanied the 
latter to Aix at that time, and could, if found, give informa- 
tion as to her subsequent history and present whereabouts. 

After a^ tedious search throughout all the environs of Aix, 
Graham himself came, by the merest accident, upon the ves- 
tiges of Louise's friend.- He had been wandering alone in 
the country round Aix, when a violent thunder-storm drove 
him to ask shelter in the house of a small farmer, situated in 
a field, a little off the by-way which he had taken. While 
waiting for the cessation of the storm, and drying his clothes 
by the fire in a room that adjoined the kitchen, he entered 
into conversation with the farmer's wife, a pleasant, well- 
mannered person, and made some complimentary observation 
on a small sketch of the house in water-colors that hung upon 
the wall. " Ah," said the farmer's wife, " that was done by 
a French lady who lodged here many years ago. She drew 
very prettily, poor thing." 

" A lady who lodged here, many years ago . ^how many ?" 

" Well, I guess somewhere about twenty." 

" AK indeed ! Was it a Madame Marigny ?" 

^^JBon Dieu ! That was indeed her name. Did you know 
her ? I should be so glad to hear she is well and . I hope . 
happy." 

" I do not know where she is now, and am making inquiries 
to ascertain. Pray help me. How long did Madame Marig- 
ny lodge with you ?" 

" I think pretty well two months ; yes, two months. She 
left a month after her confinement." 

" She was confined here ?" 

" Yes. When she first came I had no idea that she was 
enceinte. She had a pretty figure, and no one would have 
guessed it, in the way she wore her shawl. Indeed, I only 
began to suspect it a few days before it happened, and that 
.was so suddenly that all was happily over before we could 
s^d for the accoucheur,'^'* 

" And the child lived ? A girl or a boy ?" 

" A girl. the prettiest baby." 

" Did she take the child with her when she went ?" 



 



 



344 THE PARISIANS. 

" No ; it was put out to nurse with a niece of my husband's 
who was confined about the same time. Madame paid liber- 
ally in advance, and continued to send money half yearly, 
till she came herself and took away the little girl." 

" When was that ? . a little less than five years after she 
had left it?" 

" Why, you know all about it, monsieur ; yes, not quite 
five years after. She did not come to see me, which I thought 
unkind, but she sent me, through my. niece-in-law, a real gold 
watch and a shawl. Poor dear lady . for lady she was all 
over . with proud ways, and would not bear to be questioned. 
But I am sure she was none of your French light ones, but an 
honest wife like myself, though she never said o." 

" And have you no idea where she was all the five years 
she was away, or where she went after reclaiming her child?" 

" No, indeed, monsieur." 

** But her remittances for the infant must have been made 
by letters, and the letters would have had postmarks ?" 

" Well, I dare say ; I am no scholar myself. But suppose 
you see Marie Hubert . that is my niece-in-law; perhaps she 
has kept the envelopes." 

" Where does Madame Hubert live ?" 

" It is just a league off by the short path ; you can't miss 
the way. Her husband has a bit of land of his own, but he 
is also a carrier . 'Max Hubert, carrier,' written over the 
door, just opposite the first church you get to. The rain has 
ceased, but it may be too far for you to-day." 

" Not a bit of it. Many thanks." 

" But if you find out the dear lady and see her, do tell her 
how pleased I should be to hear good news of her and the 
little one." 

Graham strode on under the clearing skies to the house in- 
dicated. He found Madame Hubert at home, and ready to 
answer all questions ; but, alas ! she had not the envelopes. 
Madame Marigny, on removing the child, had asked for all 
the envelopes or letters, and carried them away with her. 
Madame Hubert, who was as little of a scholar as her aunt- 
in-law was, had never paid much attention to the postmarks 
on the envelopes, and the only one that she did remember * 
was the first, that contained a bank-note, and that postmark . 
was "Vienna." 



 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 345 

" But did not Madame Marigny's letters ever give you an 
address to which to write with news of her child ?" 

" I don't think she cared much for her child, monsieur. 
She kissed it very coldly when she came to take it away. I 
told the poor infant that that was her own mamma, and 
madame said, ' Yes, you may call me maman^ in a tone of 
voice which . well, not at all like that of a mother. She 
brought with her a little bag which contained some fine 
clothes for the child, and was very impatient till the child 
had got them on." 

"Are you quite sure it was the same lady who left the 
child ?" 

"Oh, there is no doubt of that. She was certainly tr^ 
belky but I did not fancy her as aunt did. She carried her 
head very high, and looked rather scornful.' However, I 
must say she behaved very generously." 

" Still you have not answered my question whether her 
letters contained no address." 

" She never wrote more than two letters. One inclosing 
the first remittance was but a few lines, saying that if the 
child was well and thriving, I need not write ; but if it died 
or became dangerously ill, I might at any time write a line 
to Madame M , Poste Eestante^ Vienpa. She was travel- 
ing about, but the letter would be sure to reach her sooner 
or later. The only other letter I had was to apprise me that 
she was coming to remove the child, and might be expected 
in three days after the receipt of her letter." 

" And all the other communications from her were merely 
remittances in blank envelopes ?" 

"Exactly so." 

Graham, finding he could learn no more, took his depart- 
ure. On his way home, meditating the new idea that his 
adventure that day suggested, he resolved to proceed at 
once, accompanied by M. Benard, to Munich, and there learn 
what particulars could be yet ascertained respecting those 
certificates of the death of Louise Duval, to which (sharing 
Richard King's very natural belief that they had been very 
skillfully forged) he had hitherto attached no importance. 



 



 



340 TUB PABISIANS. 



CHAPTER Vn. 

No satisfactory result attended the inquiries made at Mu- 
nich, save, indeed, this certainty . the certificates attesting 
the decease of some person calling herself Louise Duval had 
not been forged. They were indubitably genuine. A lady 
bearing that name had arrived at one of the principal hotels 
in the evening, and had theriB taken handsome rooms. She 
was attended by no servant, but accompanied by a gentle- 
man, who, however, left the hotel as soon as he had seen her 
lodged to her satisfaction. The books of the hotel still i-e- 
tained the entry of her name . ^Madame Duval, M'anpaise 
rerUi^e, On comparing the handwriting of this entry with 
the letter from Richard King's first wife, Graham found it 
differ; but then it was not certain, though probable, that the 
entry had been written by the alleged Madame Duval her- 
self. She was visited the next day by the same gentleman 
who had accompanied her on arriving. He dined and spent 
the evening with h^r. But no one at the hotel could remem- 
ber what was the gentleman's name, nor even if he were an- 
nounced by any name. He never called again. Two days 
afterward Madame Duval was taken ill ; a doctor y^SkS sent 
for, and attended her till her death. This doctor was easily 
found. He remembered the case perfectly. congestion of 
the lungs, apparently caused by cold caught on her journey. 
Fatal symptoms rapidly manifested themselves, rfnd she died 
on the third day from the seizure. She was a young and 
handsome woman. He had asked her during her short illness 
if he should not write to her friends . if there were no one 
she would wish to be sent for. She- replied that there was 
only one friend, to whom she had already written, and who 
would arrive in a day or two. And on inquiring, it appeared 
that she had written such a letter, and taken it herself to the 
post on the morning of the day she was taken ill. 

She had in her purse not a large sum, but money enough 
to cover all her expenses, including those of her funeral, 
which, according to the law in force at the place, followed 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 347 

very quickly on her decease. The amval of the friend to 
whom she had written being expected, her effects were, in 
the mean while, sealed np. The day after her death a letter 
arrived for her, wHich was opened. It was evidently written 
by a man, and apparently by a lover. It expressed an im- 
passioned regret that the writer was anavoidably prevented 
returning to Munich so soon as he had hoped, but trusted to 
see his dear bouton de rose in the course of the following 
week; it was only signed "Achille," and gave no address. 
Two or three days after a lady, also young and handsome, 
arrived at the hotel, and inquired for Madame Duval. She 
was greatly shocked at hearing of her decease. When suffi- 
ciently recovered to bear being questioned as to Madame 
Duval's relations and position, she appeared confused ; said, 
after much pressing, that she was no relation to the deceased ; 
that she believed Madame Duval had no relation with whom 
she was on friendly terms, at least she had never heard her 
speak of any ; and that her own acquaintance with the de- 
ceased, though cordial, was very recent. She could or would 
not give any clue to the writer of the letter signed Achille, 
and she herself quitted Munich that evening, leaving the im- 
pression that Madame Duval had been one ofthose ladies 
who, in adopting a course of life at variance with conven- 
tional regulations, are repudiated by their relations, and 
probably drop even their rightful names. 

Achille never appeared ; but a few days after a lawyer at 
Munich received a letter from another at Vienna requesting, 
in compliance with a client's instructions, the formal certifi- 
cates of Louise Duval's death. These were sent as directed, 
and nothing more about the ill-fated woman was heard of. 
After the expiration of the time required by law the seals 
were removed from the effects, which consisted of two malles 
and a dressing-case. But they only contained the articles 
appertaining to a lady's wardrobe or toilet. No letters . ^not 
even another note from Achille . no clue, in short, to the 
family or antecedents of the deceased. What trhen had be- 
come of these effects no one at the hotel oould give a clear 
or satisfactory account. It was said by the mistress of the 
hotel, rather sullenly, that they had, she supposed, been sold 
by her predecessor, and by order of the authorities, for the 
benefit of the poor. 



 



 



348 THE PARISIANS. 

If the lady who had represented herself as Louise Duval's 
acquaintance had given her own name, which doubtless she 
did, no one recollected it. It was not entered in the books 
of the lK)tel, for she had not lodged there ; nor did it appear 
that she had allowed time for formal examination by the civil 
authorities. In fact, it was clear that poor Louise Duval had 
been considered as an adventuress by the hotel-keeper and 
the medical attendant at Munich ; and her death had excited 
so little interest that it was strange that even so many par- 
ticulars respecting it could be gleaned. 

After a prolonged but fruitless stay at Munich, Graham and 
M. Renard repaired to Vienna ; there, at least, Madame Ma- 
rigny had given an address, and there she might be heard o 

At Vienna, however, no research availed to discover a 
trace of any such person, and in despair Graham returned to 
'England in the January of 1870, and left the further prose- 
cution of his inquiries to M. Renard, who, though obliged to 
transfer himself to Paris for a time, promised that he would 
leave no stone upturned for the discovery of Madame Ma- 
ngny ; and Graham trusted to that assurance when M. Re- 
nard, rejecting half of the large gratuity offered him, added, 
"eTe suis Fran^i8\; this with me has ceased to be an affair 
of money ; it has become an affair that involves my amour 
proprey 

CHAPTER Vm. 

If Graham Vane had been before caressed and courted for 
himself, he was more than ever appreciated by polite society, 
now that he added the positive repute of wealth to that of a 
promising intellect. Fine ladies said that Graham Vane wad 
a match for any girl Eminent politicians listened to him 
with a more attentive respect, and invited him to selecter 
dinner-parties. His cousin the duke urged him to announce 
his candidature for the county, and purchase back, at least, 
the old Stamm-schloss, But Graham obstinately refused to 
entertain either jiiroposal, continued to live as economically 
as before in his old apartments, and bore with an astonishing 
meekness of resignation the unsolicited load of fashion heaped 
upon his shoulders. At heart he was -listless and unhappy. 
The mission bequeathed to him by Richard King haunted 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 34^ 

his thoughts like a spectre not to be exorcised* Was his 
whole life to be passed in the weary sustainment of an im- 
posture which in itself was gall and wormwood to a nature 
constitutionally frank and open ? Was he forever to appear 
a rich man and live as a poor one ? Was he till his death-bed 
to be deemed a sordid miser whenever he refused a just claim 
on his supposed wealth, and to feel his ambition excluded 
from the objects it earnestly coveted, and which he was to 
appear too much of an Epicurean philosopher to prize ? 

More torturing than all else to the man's innermost heart 
was the consciousness that he had not conquered, could not 
conquer, the yearning love with which Isaura had inspired 
him, and yet that against such Iovq all his reasonings, all his 
prejudices, more stubbornly than ever were combined. In 
the French newspapers which he had glanced over while en- 
gaged in his researches in Germany . nay, in German critical 
journals themselves . he had seen so many notices of the 
young author . ^highly eulogistic, it is true, but which to his 
peculiar notions were more offensive than if they had been 
sufficiently condemnatory of her work to discourage her from 
its repetition . motives which seemed to him the supreme 
impertinences which no man likes exhibited toward the wom- 
an to whom he would render the chivalrous homage of re- 
spect. Evidently this girl had become as much public prop* 
erty as if she had gone on the stage. Minute details of her 
personal appearance . of the dimples on her cheek . of the 
whiteness of her arms . of her peculiar way of dressing her 
hair . anecdotes of her from childhood (of course invented, 
but how could Graham know that ?). of the reasons why she 
had adopted the profession of author instead of that of the 
singer. of the sensation she had created in certain scUons (to 
Graham, who knew Paris so well, salons in which he would 
not hav liked his wife to appear) . of the compliments paid 
to her by grands seigneurs noted for their liaisons with bal- 
let-dancers, or by authors whose genius soared far beyond 
the flammarUia mcenia of a world confined by respect for 
one's neighbors' landmarks . all this, which belongs to ground 
of personal gossip untouched by English critics of female 
writers . ground especially favored by Continental and, I 
am grieved to say, by American journalists . all this was to 
the sensitive Englishman much what the minute inventory 

 VjOOQIC 



^50 THB PABISIANS. 

of Egeria's charms would have been to Numa Pompilius. 
The nymph, hallowed to him by secret devotion, was vulgar- 
ized by the noisy hands of the mob, and by the popular 
voices, which said, "We know more about Egeria than you 
do." And when he returaed to England, and met with old 
friends familiar to Parisian life, who said, " Of course you 
have read the Cicogna's roraaTt, What do you think of it? 
Very fine writing, I dare say, but above me. I go in for Le 
Mystb'es de Paris or Monte Ghristo. But I even find Greorge 
Sand a bore " . then as a critic Graham Vane fired up, ex- 
tolled the roman he would have given his ears for Isaura 
never to have written, but retired from the contest, mutter- 
ing only, " How can I . ^I^ Graham Vane . how can I be such 
an idiot . how can I in every hour of the twenty-four sigh to 
myself, * What are other women to me? . Isaura, Isaura !' " 



END OF VOL. I. 



 



 



 



 




 



 






1 ' t. 









 



 



 



 



THE PAEI8IAN8. 



BT 



EDWARD BULWER, LORD LYTTON, 

.T7TH0B OF "THB COMING BACB,** **KBNBLM CHILLINOLT," "MY NOVEL," 
"A STRANGE STOBY," ETC. 



WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BT SYDNEY HALL. 

IN TWO VOLUBiES. 
VOL. II. 




NEW YORK: 
HARPER fe BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS, 



FBANKLI1V BQUABB. 

.18 7 4. 



 VjOOQIC 



 



 



ILLUSTRATIONS. 



Suddenly, at the Angle of a Street, his Coachman was stopped 

. ^A BOUGH-LOOKING Man afpeabed AT THE DooB Frontispiece. 

The poob Woman made jio reply, but, as he dbew heb to- 

WABD him, she leaned HER HeAD UPON HIS BrEAST AND WEPT 

QUIETLY faces p, 29 

Valerie received her Visitor with a coldness she did not 

ATTEMPT TO DISGUISE foces p. 80 

So the Girl was in the Habit of taking her Work or her 
Book into the Cabinet de Travail faces p, 166 

Db MaULEON ST7DDENLY SNATCHED THE BaBY FROM HER, AND SAID, 
MTITH IMPERTURBABLE GOOD TEMPER, "EXCHANGE OP PRISON- 
ERS! I RESIGN THE MaN, AND I KEEP THE BaBY." foces p, 207 

He sprang forward and seized a hideous-looking Urchin, 

SCARCELY TWELVE YEARS OLD, WHO HELD IN ONE HaND A 
SMALL CRYSTAL LoCKET, SET IN FILIGREE GrOLD, TORN FROM 

' THE Soldier's Breast, and lifted high in the other a 
LONG Case-knife ! faces p, 265 

The Sound oi^x for a moment drowned the Song, but the 
Splintebs struck a Man in a coarse, ragged Dress who 
had stopped to listen to the Singers faces p, 289 

Graham Vane and Isaura at Sorrento " 337 



 



 



 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 



BOOK SEVENTH. 



CHAPTER L 

It is the first week in the month of May, 1870. Celebrities 
are of rapid growth in the a/<?ns of Paris. Gustave Rameau 
has gained the position fot whicfh he ighed. The journal he 
edits has increased its hold on the ptiblic, and his share of 
the profits has been liberally augmented by the secret pro- 
prietor. Rameau is acknowledged as a power in literary 
circles. And as critics belonging to the same clique praise 
each other in Paris,' whatever they may do in communities 
more rigidly virtuous, his poetry has been declared by au- 
thorities in the press to be superior to that of Alfred de Mus- 
set in vigor, to that of Victor Hugo in refinement . neither 
of which assertions would much, perhaps, shock a cultivated 
und^rBtanding. 

It is true ftit it (Gustave's poetry) has not gained a wide 
audience among the public. But with regard tp poetry now- 
adays, there are plefaty of persons who say as Dr. Johnson 
said of the verse of Spratt, " I would rather praise it than 
read." 

At all events, Rameau was courted in gay and brilliant 
circles, and, following the general example of French littera- 
teurs in fashion, lived well up to the income he received, had 
a delightful bachelor's apartment, furnished with artistic ef- 
fect, spent largely on the adornment of his person; kept a 
caupSj and entertained profusely at the Cafe Anglais and the 
^Maison Dorie, A reputation that inspired a graver and more 
unquiet interest had been created by the Vicomte de Mau- 
16on. Recent articles in the Sens Commune written under 
the name of Pierre Firmin, on the discussions on the vexed 

 VjOOQIC 



8 THE PABISIANS. 

question of the Plebiscite had given umbrage to the govern- 
ment, and Bameau had received an intimation that he, as 
editor, was responsible for the compositions of the contribu- 
tors to the journal he edited, and that though, so long as 
Pierre Firmin had kept his caustic spiiit within proper 
bounds, the government had winked at the evasion of the 
law which required every political article in a journal to 
be signed by the real pame of its author, it could do so no 
longer. "Pierre Firmin" was apparently a nom de plume; 
if not, his identity must be proved, or Rameau would pay the^ 
penalty which his contributor seemed bent on incurring. 

Rameau, much alarmed for the journal, that might be sus- 
pended, and for himself, who might be imprisoned, conveyed 
this information through the publisher to his correspondent 
Pierre Firmin, and received the next day an article signed 
Victor de Maul6on, in which the writer proclaimed himself 
to be one and the same with Pierre Firmin, and, taking a yet 
bolder tone than he had before assumed, dared the govern- 
ment to attempt legal measures against him. The govern- 
ment was ptudent enough to disregard that haughty brava- 
do, but Victor de Mauleon rose at once into political impor- 
tance. He had already in his real name and his quiet way 
established a popular and respectable place in Parisian so- 
ciety. But if this revelation created him enemies whom he 
had not before provoked, he was now sufficiently acquitted, 
by tacit consent, of the sins formerly laid to his charge, to 
disdain the assaults of party wrath. His old ^putation for 
personal courage and skill in sword and pistol served, indeed, 
to protect him from such charges as a Parisian journalist 
does not reply to with his pen. If he created some enemies, 
he created many more friends, or, at least, partisans and ad- 
mirers. He only needed fine and imprisonment to become a 
popular hero. 

A few days after he had thus proclaimed himself, Victor de 
Mauleon, who had before kept aloof from Rameau, and from 
salons at which he was likely to meet that distinguished 
minstrel, solicited his personal acquaintance, and asked him 
to breakfast. . 

Rameau joyfully went. He had a very natural curiosity to 
see the contributor whose articles had so mainly insured the 
sale of the Sens Comrmm. 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 9 

In the dark-haired, keen-eyed, well-dressed, middle-aged 
man, with commanding port and courtly address, he failed to 
recognize any resemblance to the flaxen-wigged, long-coat- 
ed, bespectacled, shambling sexagenarian whom he had known 
as Lebeau. Only now and then a tone of voice struck him 
as familiar, but he could not recollect where he had heard 
the voice it resembled. The thought of Lebeau did not 
occur to him; if it had occurred, it would only have struck 
him as a chance coincidence. Rameau, like most egotists, 
was rather a dull observer of men. His genius was not 
objective. 

" I trust. Monsieur Rameau," said the Vicomte, as he and 
his guest were seated at the breakfast-table, "that you are 
not dissatisfied with the remuneration your eminent services 
in the journal have received." 

" The proprietor, whoever he be, has behaved most liber- 
ally," answered Rameau. 

" I take that compliment to myself, cher confrhe^ for though 
the expenses of starting the Sens Commun and the caution 
money lodged were found by a friend of mine, that was as a 
loan, which I have long since repaid, and the property in the 
journal is now exclusively mine. I have to thank you not 
only for your own brilliant contributions, but for those of thB 
colleagues you secured. Monsieur Savarin's piquant criti- 
cisms were most valuable to us at starting. I regret to have 
lost his aid. But as he has set up a new journal of his own, 
even he has not wit enough to spare for another. Apropos 
of our contributors, I shall ask you to present me to the fair 
author of The Artisfs Daughter, I am of too prosaic a nat- 
ure to appreciate justly the merits of a roman ; but I have 
heard warm praise of this story from the young . they are 
the best judges of that kind of literature ; and I can at least 
understand the worth of a contributor who trebled the sale 
of our journal It is a misfortune to us, indeed, that her work 
is completed, but I trust that the sum sent to her through 
our publisher suffices to tempt her to favor us with another 
roman in series." 

"Mademoiselle Cicogna," said Rameau, with a somewhat 
sharper intonation of his shai-p voice, " has accepted for the 
republication of her roman in a separate form terms which 
attest the worth of her genius, and has had offers from other 

1*  Google 



10 THE PABISIANS. 

joiirnalB for a serial tale of even higher amonnt than the 
sum BO generoBftly Bent through your publisher." 

'* Has she aecepted them, Monsieur Rameau ? If so, tant 
pis pour voiis. Pardon me, I mean that your salary Buffers 
in proportion as the Sens Commun declines in sale." 

" She has not accepted them. I advised her not to do so 
until she could compare them with those offered by the pro- 
prietor of the Sens Commun.^^ 

"And your advice guides her? Ah! cher confrhre^ you 
are a happy man . you have influence over this young aspir- 
ant to the fame of a De Stael or a George Sand." 

"I flatter myself that I have some," answered Rameau, 
smiling loftily as he helped himself to another tumbler of Vol- 
ney wine . excellent, but rather heady. 

" So much the better. I leave you free to arrange terms 
with Mademoiselle Cicogna higher than she can obtain else- 
where, and kindly contrive my own personal introduction to 
her . you have breakfasted already ? . permit me to offer you 
a cigar . excuse me if I do not bear you company . I seldom 
smoke ; never of a morning. Now to business, and the state 
of France. Take that easy-chair ; seat yourself comfortably. 
So I Listen ! If ever Mephistopheles revisit the earth, how 
he will laugh at Universal Sufii-age and Vote by Ballot in an 
old country like France, as things to be admired by educated 
men, and adopted by friends of genuine freedom !" 

" I don't underatand you," said Rameau. 

" In this respect, at least, let mef hope that I can furnish 
you with understanding. 

" The Emperor has resorted to a Plebiscite . viz:, a Vote by 
Ballot and Universal Suffi*age . as to certain popular changes 
which circumstances compel him to substitute for his former 
personal rule. Is there a single intelligent Liberal who is 
not against the Plebiscite ? . is there any such who does not 
know that the appeal of the Emperor to Universal Suffrage 
and Vote by Ballot must result in a triumph over all the va- 
riations of free thought, by the unity wliich belongs to Order, 
represented through an able man at the head of the state ? 
The multitude pever comprehend principles; principles are 
complex ideas ; they comprehend a simple idea, and the sim- 
plest idea is a Name that rids their action of all responsibil- 
ity \o thought. 



 



 



THS PARISIANS. 11 

" Well, in France there are principles superabundant which 
you can pit against the principle of imperial rule. But there 
is not one Name you can pit against Napoleon IIL ; therefore 
I steer our little bark in the teeth of the popular gale when* 
I denounce the Plebiscite, and Le Sens Commun will neces- 
sarily fall in sale . it is beginning to fall already. We shall 
have the educated men with us, the rest against. In every 
country, even in China, where all are highly educated, a few 
must be yet more highly educated than the many. Mon- 
sieur Rameau, I desire to overthrow the empire : in order to 
do that, it is not enough to have on my side the educated 
men. I must have the canaille . the canaille of Paris and of 
the manufacturing towns. But I use the canaille for my 
purpose . I don't mean to enthrone it. You comprehend ? . 
the canaille quiescent lis simply mud at the bottom of a 
stream, the canaille agitated is mud at the surface. But no 
man capable of three ideas builds the palaces and senates of 
civilized society out of mud, be it at the top or the bottom 
of an ocean. Can either you or I desire that the destinies 
of France shall be swayed by coxcombical artisans who think 
themselves superior to every man who writes grammar, and 
whose idea of a Commonwealth is the confiscation of private 
property ?" 

Rameau, thoroughly puzzled by this discourse, bowed his 
head, and replied, whisperingly, " Proceed. You are against 
the empire, yet against the populace! What are you for? 
Not, surely, the Legitimists? Are you. Republican, Orlean- 
ist, or what ?" 

"Your questions are very pertinent,"* answered the Yi- 
comte, courteously, " and my answer shall be very frank. I 
am against absolute rule, whether under a Bonaparte or a 
Bourbon. I am for a free state, whether under a constitu- 
tional, hereditary sovereign like the English or Belgian, or 
whether. Republican in name, it be less democratic than Con- 
stitutional Monarchy in practice, like the American. But as 
a man interested in the fate (5f Xe Sens Commun^ I hold in 
profound disdain all crotchets for revolutionizing the ele- 
ments of Human Nature. Enough of this abstract talk. To 
'the point. You are of course aware of the violent meetings 
held by the Socialists, nominally against the Plebiscite, real- 
ly against the Emperor himself?" 

 VjOOQIC . 



12 THE PARISIANS. 

" Yes, I know at least that the working class are extreme- 
ly discontented ; the numerous strikes last month were not 
on a mere question of wages . they were against the exist- 
ing forms of society. And the articles by Pierre Fiimin 
which brought me into collision with the government seem- 
ed to differ from what you now say. They approved those 
sti-ikes ; they appeared to sympathize with the revolutionary 
meetings at Belleville and Montmartre." 

" Of course 1 we use coarse tools for destroying ; we cast 
them aside for finer ones when we want to reconstruct. 

" I attended one of those meetings last night. See, I have 
a pass for all such assemblies, signed by some dolt who can 
not even spell the name he assumes . * jPom-de-Tair,^ A com- 
missary of police sits yawning at the end of the orchestra, 
his secretary by his side, while the orators stammer out frag- 
nients of would-be thunder-bolts. Commissary of police 
yawns more wearily than before ; secretary disdains to use 
his pen, seizes his penknife and pares his nails. Up rises a 
wild-haired, weak-limbed silhouette of a man, and, affecting a 
solemnity of mien* which might have become the virtuous 
Guizot, moves this resolution : ' The French people condemn 
Charles Louis Napoleon III. to the penalty of perpetual hard 
labor.' Then up rises the commissary of police, and says, 
quietly, ' I declare this meeting at an end.' 

"Sensation among the audience . they gesticulate . ^they 
screech . they bellow . the commissary puts on his great- 
coat . the secretary gives a last touch to his nails and pock- 
ets his penknife . the audience disperse . the silhouette of a 
man effaces itself^all is over." 

"You describe the scene most wittily," said Rameau, 
laughing ; but the laugh was constrained. A would-be cynic 
himself, there was a something grave and earnest in the real 
cynic that awed him. 

" What conclusion do you draw from such a scene, cherpo- 
^^6.^" asked De Mauleon, fixing his keen, quiet eyes on Rameau. 

" What conclusions ? Well, that.that." 

" Yes, continue." 

" That the audience were sadly degenerated from the time 
when Mirabeau said to a Master of Ceremonies, ' We are here 
by the power of the French people, and nothing but the point 
of the bayonet shall expel us.' " 

 VjOOQIC 



THB PARISIANS. 13 

" Spoken like a poet, a French poet. I suppose you ad- 
mire M. Victor Hugo. Conceding that he would have em- 
ployed a more sounding phraseology, comprising more abso- 
lute ignorance of men, times, and manners in unintelligible 
metaphor and melodramatic braggadocio, your answer might 
have been his; but pardon me if I add, it would not be that 
of Common-Sense,^'^ 

" Monsieur le Vicomte might rebuke me more politely," 
said Rameau, coloring high. 

"Accept my apologies; I did not mean to rebuke, but to 
instruct. The times are not those of 1789. And Nature, 
ever repeating herself in the production of coxcombs and 
blockheads, never repeats herself in the production of Mira- 
beaus. The empire is doomed . doomed, because it is hostile 
to the free play of intellect. Any government that gives ab- 
solute preponderance to the many is hostile to intellect, for 
intellect is necessarily confined to the few. 

" Intellect is the most revengeful of all the elements of so- 
ciety. It cares not what the materials through which it in- 
sinuates or forces its way to its seat. 

"I accept the aid of Pom-de-Taif, I do not demean my- 
self to the extent of writing articles that may favor the prin- 
ciples of Pom-de-Tair, signed in the name of Victor de Mau- 
l^on or of Pierre Firmin. 

" I will beg you, my dear editor, to obtain clever, smart 
writers who know nothing about Socialists and Intemation- 
alists, who therefore will not commit Ze Sens Commun by 
advocating the doctrines of those idiots, but who will flatter 
the vanity of the canaille . vaguely . write any stuff they 
please about the renown of Paris, * the eye of the world,' 
' the sun of the European system,' etc. . of the artisand of 
Paris as supplying soul to that eye and fuel to that sun . 
any blague of that sort . genre Victor Hugo, But nothing 
definite against life and property . nothing that may not be 
considered hereafter as the harmless extravagance of a po- 
etic enthusiasm. You might write such articles yourself. 
In fine, I want to excite the multitude, and yet not to com- 
mit our journal to the contempt of the few. 

" Nothing is to be admitted that may bring the law upon 
us except it be signed by my name. There may be a mo- 
ment in which it would be desirable for sotnebody to be 

 VjOOQIC 



14 THE PABISIANS. 

sent to prison . ^in that case, I allow no sabstitate, I go my- 
self. 

" Now you have my most secret thoughts. I intnist them 
to your judgment with entire confidence. Monsieur Lebeau 
gave you a high character, which you have hitherto deserved. 
By-the-way, have you seen any thing lately of that bour- 
geois conspirator?" 

" No ; his professed business of letter- writer or agent is 
transferred to a clerk, who says M. Lebeau is abroa4." 

"Ah I I don't think that is true. I fancy I saw him the 
other evening gliding along the lanes of Belleville. He is 
too confirmed a conspirator to be long out of Paris ; no place 
like Paris for seething brains." 

" Have you known M. Lebeau long ?" asked Rameau. 

" Ay, many years. We are both Norman by birth, as you 
may perceive by something broad in our accent." 

"Ha ! I knew your voice was familiar to me ; certainly it 
does remind me of Lebeau's." 

" Normans are like each other in many things besides voice 
and accent . obstinacy, for instance, in clinging to ideas once 
formed ; this makes them good friends and steadfast enemies. 
I would advise no man to make an enemy of Lebeau. 

^Au revoir^ cher confrhre. Do not forget to present me 
to Mademoiselle Cicogna." 



CHAPTER n. 

On leaving De Mauleon and regaining his coup&^ Rameau 
felt at once bewildered and humbled, for he was not prepared 
for the tone of careless superiority which the Vicomte assumed 
over him. He had expected to be much complimented, 
and he comprehended vaguely that he had been somewhat 
snubbed. He was not only irritated . ^he was bewildered; 
for De Maul6on's political disquisitions did not leave any 
clear or definite idea on his mind as to the principles which, 
as editor of the Sens Commun, he was to see adequately rep- 
resented %nd carried out. In truth, Rameau was one of 
those numerous Parisian politicians who have read little and 
reflected less on the government of men and statea Envy 
is said by a great French writer to be the vice of democra- 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PABISIANS. 15 

cies. Envy certainly had made Rameau a democrat. He 
could talk and write glibly enough upon the themes of equal- 
ity and fraternity, and was so far an ultra democrat that he 
thought moderation the sign of a mediocre understanding. 

De Maul^on's talk, therefore, terribly perplexed him. It 
was unlike any thing he had heard before. Its revolution- 
. ary professions accompanied with so much scorn for the mul- 
titude, and the things the multitude desired, were Greek to 
him. He was not shocked by the cynicism which placed 
wisdom in using the passions of mankind as tools for the in- 
terests of an individual; but he did not understand the 
frankness of its avowal. 

Nevertheless, the man had dominated over and subdued 
him. He recognized the power of his contributor without 
clearly analyzing its nature . a power. made up of large ex- 
perience of life. of cold examination of doctrines that heated 
others . of patrician calm . of intellectual sneer . of collected 
confidence in self. 

Besides, Rameau felt, with a nervous misgiving, that in 
this man, who so boldly proclaimed his contempt for the in- 
struments, he used, he had found a master. De Maul6on, 
then, was sole proprietor of the journal from which Rameau 
drew his resources; might at any time dismiss him; might 
at any time involve the journal in penalties which, even if 
Rameau could escape in his official capacity as editor, still 
might stop the Seiis Commuriy a,nd with it Rameau's luxurious 
subsistence. 

Altogether the visit to De Maul6on had been any thing 
but a pleasant one. He sought, as the carriage rolled on, to 
turn his thoughts to more agreeable subjects, and the image 
of Isaura rose before him. To do him justice, he had learned 
to love this girl as well as his nature would permit : he loved 
her with the whole strength of his imagination ; and though 
his heart was somewhat cold, his imagination was very ar- 
dent. He loved her also with the whole strength of his van- 
ity, and vanity was even a more preponderate organ of his 
system than imagination. To carry off as his prize one who 
had already achieved celebrity, whose beauty and fascination 
of manner were yet more acknowledged than her genius, 
would certainly be a glorious triumph. 

Every Parisian of Rameau's stamp looks forward in mar- 



 



Qoogk 



16 THE PARISIANS. 

riage to a brilliant salon. What scUon more brilliant than 
that which he and Isaura united could command ? He had 
long conquered his early impulse of envy at Isaura's success 
. in fact, that success had become associated with his own, 
and had contributed greatly to his enrichment. So that to 
other motives of love he Inight add the prudential one of in- 
terest. Rameau well knew that bis own vein of composi- 
tion, however lauded by the cliques, and however unrivaled 
in his own eyes, was not one that brings much profit in the 
market. He compared himself to those poets who are too 
far in advance of their time to be quite as sure of bread and 
cheese as they are of immortal fame. 

But he regarded Isaura's genius as of a lower order, and 
a thing in itself as very marketable. Marry her, and the 
bread and cheese were so certain that he might elaborate as 
slowly as he pleased the verses destined to immortal fame. 
Then he should be independent of inferior creatures like Vic- 
tor de Maul^on. But while Rameau convinced himself that 
he was passionately in love with Isaura, he could not satisfy 
himself that she was in love with him. 

Though during the past year they had seen each other con- 
stantly, and their literary occupations had produced many 
sympathies between them . though he bad intimated that 
many of his most eloquent love-poems were inspired by her 
. though he had asserted in prose, very pretty prose too, 
that she was all that youthful poets dream of, yet she had 
hitherto treated such declarations with a playful laugh, ac- 
cepting them as elegant compliments inspired by Parisian 
gallantry, and he felt an angry and .sore foreboding that if 
he were to insist too seriously on the earnestness of their 
import, and ask her plainly to be his wife, her refusal would 
be certain, and his visits to her house might be interdicted. 

Still Isaura was unmarried . still she had refused offers of 
marriage from men higher placed than himself. still he di- 
vined no one whom she could prefer. And as he now leaned 
back in his coup^ he muttered to himself, '' Oh, if I could but 
get rid of that little demon Julie, I would devote myself so 
completely to winning Isaura's heart that I must succeed ! . 
but how to get rid of Julie ? She so adores me, and is so 
headstrong ! She is capable of going to I^aura-^showing 
my letters . making such a scene !" 

, ^  VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 17 

Here he checked the carriage at a caf& on the Boulevard, 
descended, imbibed two glasses of abgiathe^^and then feeling 
much emboldened, remounted his coupe^ and directed the 
driver to Isaura's apartment. 



CHAPTER m. 

Yes, celebrities are of rapid growth in the salons of Paris. 
Far more solid than that of Rameau, far more brilliant than 
that of De Maul6on, was the celebrity which Isaura had now 
acquired. She had been unable to retain the pretty suburban 

villa at A . The owner wanted to alter and enlarge it 

for his own residence, and she had been persuaded by Signo^ 
ra Venosta, who was always sighing for fresh salons to con- 
quer, to remove (toward the close of the J)revious year) to 
apartments in the centre of the Parisian beau monde. With- 
out formally professing to receive, on one evening in the 
week her salon was open to those who had eagerly sought 
her acquaintance . comprising maw stars in the world of 
fashion as well as those in the world of art and letters. And 
as she had now wholly abandoned the idea of the profession 
for which her voice had been cultivated, she no longer 
shrunk from the exercise of her surpassing gift of song for 
the delight of private friends. Her physician had withdrawn 
the interdict on such exercise. 

His skill, aided by the rich vitality of her constitution, had 
triumphed over all tendencies to the malady for which he 
had been consulted. To hear Isaura Cicogna sing in her 
own house was a privilege sought and prized by many who 
never read a word of her literary compositions. A good 
critic of a book is rare, but good judges of a voice are num- 
berless. Adding this attraction of song to her youth, her 
beauty, her frank powers of converse . an innocent sweetness 
of manner free from all conventional affectation . and to the 
fresh novelty of a genius which inspired the young with en- 
thusiasm and beguiled the old to indulgence, it was no won- 
der that Isaura became a celebrity at Paris. . 

Perhaps it was a wonder that her head was not turned by 
the adulation that surrounded her. But I believe, be it said 
with diffidence, that a woman of mind so superior that the 

 VjOOQIC 



18 THE PAEISIAKS. 

mind never pretends to -efface the heart is less intoxicated 
with flattery than a man equally exposed to it. 

It is the strength of her heart that keeps her head sober. 
Isaura had never yet overcome her first romance of love ; as 
yet, amid all her triumphs, there was not a day in which 
her thoughts did not wistfully, mournfully fly back to those 
blessed moments in which she felt her cheeks color before a 
look, her heait beat at the sound of a footfall. Perhaps if 
there bad been the customary finis to this young romance . 
the lover's deliberate renunciation, his formal farewell . the 
girl's pride would, ere this, have conquered her affection-t- 
possibly . who knows ? . replaced it. 

But, reader, be you male or female, have you ever known 
this sore trial of affection and pride, that from some cause or 
other, to you mysterious, the dear intercourse to which you 
had accustomed tbe secret of your life abruptly ceases ; you 
know that a something has come between you and the be- 
loved which you can not distinguish, can not measure, can 
not guess, and therefore can not surmount ; and you say to 
yourself at the dead of ^litaiy night, " Oh for an explana- 
tion ! Oh for one meeting more I All might be so easily set 
right ; or if not, I should know the worst, and, knowing it, 
could conquer !" 

This trial was Isaura'a There had been no explanation, 
no last farewell between her and Graham. She divined . no 
woman lightly makes a mistake there . that he loved her* 
She knew that this dread something had intervened between 
her and him when he took leave of her before others so many 
months ago; that this dread something still continued. 
What was it ? She was certain that it would vanish, could 
they but once meet again, and not before others. Oh for 
such a meeting ! 

She could not hereelf destroy hope. She could not piarry 
another. She would have no heait to give to another whilie 
he was free, while in doubt if his heart was still her own. 
And thus her pride did not help her to conquer her affection. 

Of Graham Yane she heard occasionally. He had ceased 
Do correspond with Savarin ; but among those who most fre- 
quented her acdon were the Morleys. Americans so well ed- 
ucated and so well placed as the Morleys knew something 
about every Englishman of the social station of Graham 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 19 

Vane. Isaura learned from them that Graham, after a toar 
on the Continent, had returned to England at the commence- 
ment of the year, had been invited to stand for Parliament, 
had refused, that his name was in the list published by the 
Mormng Post of the Uite whose arrivals in London or whose 
presence at dinner-tables is recorded as an event. That the 
AthencBum had mentioned a rumor that Graham Yane was 
the author of a political pamphlet which, published anony- 
mously, had made no inconsiderable sensation. Isaura sent 
to England for that pamphlet : the subject was somewhat 
dry, and the style, though clear and vigorous, was scarcely 
of the eloquence which wins the admiration of women; and 
yet she learned every word of it by heart. 

We know how little she dreamed that the celebrity wKich 
she hailed as an approach to him was daily making her more 
remote.' The sweet labors she undertook for that celebrity 
continued to be sweetened yet more by secret association with 
the absent one. How many of the passages most admired 
could never have been written had he been never known I 

And she blessed those labors the more that they upheld 
her fi'oiri the absolute feebleness of sickened reverie, beguiled 
her from the gnawing torture of unsatisfied conjecture. She 
did not comply with Madame de GrantmesniPs command . 
did pass from the dusty beaten road of life into green fields 
and along flowery river-banks, and did enjoy that ideal by- 
world. 

But still the one image which reigned over her human 
heart moved beside her in the gardens of faii'y-land. 



CHAPTER IV. 

IsAUBA was seated in her pretty. 5o/on, with the Venosta, 
M. Savarin, the Morleys, and the financier Louvier, when Ra- 
meau was announced. 

** Ha 1" cried Savarin, " we were just discussing a matter 
which nearly concerns you, ch/er poUe. * I have not seen you 
since the announcement that Pierre Firmin is no other than 
Victor de Maul^on. Mafo% that worthy seems likely to be 
as dangerous with his pen as he was once with his sword. 
The article in^vhich he revealed himself makes a sharp lunge 

,  VjOOQIC 



20 THB PABIBIANS. 

on the government. Take care of yourBelf When hawks and 
nightingales fly together, the hawk may escape, and the night- 
ingale complain of the barbarity of kings in a cage: ^Flebi- 
liter gemens Infelix avis.' " 

'^ He is not fit to conduct a journal," replied Rameau, mag- 
niloquently, ^'who will not brave a danger for his body in 
defense of the right to infinity for his thought." 

"Bravo," said Mrs. Morley, clapping her pretty hands. 
"That speech reminds me of home. The French are very 
much like the Americans in their style of oratory." 

" So," said Louvier, " my old friend the Vicomte has come 
out as a writer, a politician, a philosopher ; I feel hurt that 
he i^pt this secret from me despite our intimacy. I suppose 
you knew it from the first, M. Rameau?" 

'^ No ; I was as much taken by surprise as the rest of the 
world. You have long known M. de Maul6on ?" 

" Yes, I may say we began life together . that is, much at 
the same time." 

" What is he like in appearance ?" asked Mrs. Morley. 

"The ladies thought him very handsome when he was 
young," replied Louvier. "He is still a fine-looking man, 
about my height." 

" I should like to know him !" cried Mrs. Morley, " if only 
to tease that husband of mine. He refuses me the dearest 
of woman's rights . ^I can't make him jealous." 

" You may have the opportunity of knowing this ci-devarU 
Lovelace very soon," said Rameau, " for he has begged me 
to present him to Mademoiselle Cicogna, and I will ask her 
permission to do so on Thursday evening when she receives." 

Isaura, who had hitherto attended very listlessly to the con- 
versation, bowed assent. "Any friend of yours will- be wel- 
come. But I own the articles signed in the name of Pierre 
Firmin do not prepossess me in favor of their author." 

" Why so ?" asked Louvier, " Surely you are not an Im- 
perialist ?" 

" Nay, I do not pretend to be a politician at all ; but there 
is something in the writing of Pierre Firmin that pains and 
chills me." 

"Yet the secret of its popularity," said Savarin, "is that 
it saj^ what every one says . only better." 

"lit "b^iow that it is exactly that which displeases me; it 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 21 

is the Paris talk condensed into epigram : the graver it is, 
the less it elevates ; the lighter it is, the more it saddens." 

"That is meant to hit me," said Savarin, with his sunny 
laugh . " me whom you call cynical." 

" No, dear M. Savarin, for above all your cynicism is gen- 
uine gayety, and below it solid kindness. You have that 
which I do not find in M. de Maul6on's writing, nor often in 
the talk of the salons . you have youthfulness." 

" Youthfulness at sixty . ^flatterer I" 

" Genius does not count its years by the almanac," said 
Mrs. Morley. "I know what Isaura means; she is quite 
right ; there is a breath of winter in M. de Maul6on's style, 
and an odor of fallen leaves. Not that his diction wants 
vigor; on the contrary, it is crisp with hoar-frost. But the 
sentiments conveyed by the diction are those of a nature sere 
and withered. And it is in this combination of brisk words 
and decayed feelings that his writing represents the talk and 
mind of Paris. He and Paris are always fault-finding : fault- 
finding is the attribute of old age." 

^ Colonel Morley looked round with pride, as much as to 
say, " Clever talker, my wife." 

Savarin understood that look, and replied to it courteous- 
ly. " Madame has a gift of expression which Emile de Gi- 
rardin can scarcely surpass. But when she blames us for 
fault-finding, can she expect the friends of liberty to praise 
the present style of things ?" 

" I should be obliged to the friends of liberty," said the 
Colonel, dryly, " to tell me how that state of things is to be 
mended. I find no enthusiasm for the Orleanists, none for a 
republic ; people sneer at religion ; no belief in a cause, no 
adherence to an opinion. But the worst of it is that, like all 
people who are hlasks^ the Parisians are eager for strange ex- 
citement, and ready to listen to any oracle who promises a 
relief from indifferentism. This it is which makes the Press 
more dangerous in France than it is in any other country. 
Elsewhere the Press sometimes leads, sometimes follows pub- 
lic opinion. Here there is no public opinion to consult, and 
instead of opinion the Press represents passion." 

" My dear Colonel Morley," said Savarin, " I hear you very 
often say that a Frenchman can not understand America. 
Permit me to observe that an American can not understand 



 



 



22 THE PARISIANS. 

France. or at least Paris. . Apropos of Paris, that is a large 
speculation of yours, Louvier, in the new suburb." 

" And a very ^ound one ; I advise you to invest in it. I 
can secure you at present five per cent, mi the rental; that 
is nothing ; the houses will be worth double when the ' Rue 
de Louvier' is completed." 

" Alas I I have no money ; my new journal absorbs all my 
capital." 

"Shall I transfer the moneys I hold for you, signorina, 
and add to them whatever you may have made by your de- 
lightful roman^ as yet lying idle, to this investment ? I can 
not say more in its favor than this : I have embarked a very 
large portion of my capital in the Rue de Louvier, and I flat- 
ter myself that I am not one of those men who persuade 
their friends to do a foolish thing by setting them the ex- 
ample." 

" Whatever your advice on such a subject," said Isaura, 
graciously, " it is sure to be as wis^ as it is kind." 

" You consent, then ?" 

" Certainly." ^ 

Here the Venosta, who had been listening with great at^ 
tention to Louvier's commendation of this investment, drew 
him aside, and whispered in his ear, " I suppose, M. Louvier, 
that one can't put a little money . a very little, money . 
pocopocopocolinOy into your street." 

" Into my street I Ah, I underatand . into the speculation 
of the Rue de Louvier . certainly you can I Arrangements 
are made on purpose to suit the convenience of the smallest 
capitalists . from 500 francs upward." 

" And you feel quite sure tl^^t we shall double our money 
when the street is completed ? I should not like to have my 
brains in my heels."* 

" More than double it, I hope . long before the street is 
completed." 

" I have saved a little money . very little. I have no rela- 
tions, and I mean to leave it all to the signorina ; and if it 
could be doubled, why, there would be twice as much to 
leave her." 



* ^^Avere il cervdlo ndla calcagna " . viz., to act without prudent reflec- 
tion. 



 VjOOQIC 



THE PABISIANS. 23 

"So there would," said Louvier. "You can't do better 
than put it all into the Rue de Louvier. I will send you the 
necessary papers to-morrow, when I send hers to the sign- 
orina." 

Louvier here turned to address himself to Colonel Morley, 
but finding that degenerate son of America indisposed to 
get cent, per cent, for hjp money when offered by a Parisian, 
he very soon took his leave. The other visitors followed his 
example, except Rameau, who was left alone with the Venos- 
ta and Isaura. The former had no liking for Rameau, who 
showed her none of the attentions her innocent vatnity de- 
manded, and she soon took herself off to her own room to 
calculate the amount of her savings, and dream of the Rue 
de Louvier and " golden joys." 

Rameau, approaching his chair to Isaura's, then com- 
menced conversation, dryly enough, upon pecuniary mat- 
ters ; acquitting himself of the mission with which De Mau- 
16on had charged him, the request for a new work from her 
pen for the Sens Gommun^ and the terms that ought to be 
asked for compliance. The young lady-author shrank from 
this talk. Her private income, though modest, sufficed for 
her wants, and she felt a sensitive shame in the, sale of her 
thoughts and fancies. 

Putting hurriedly aside the mercantile aspect of the ques- 
tion, she said that she had no other work in her mind at pres- 
ent . that whatever her vein of invention might be, it flowed 
at its own will, and could not be commanded. 

" Nay," said Rameau, " this is not true. We fancy in our 
hours of indolence that we must wait for inspiration, but 
once force ourselves to work, and ideas spring forth at the 
wave of the pen. You may believe me here. I speak from 
experience . ^I, compelled to work, and in modes not to ray 
taste : I do my task I know not how. I rub the lamp, ' the 
genius comes.' " 

"I have read in some English author that motive power 
is necessary to continued labor : you have motive power, I 
have none." 

"I do not quite understand you." 

"I mean that a strong ruling motive is required to persist 
in any regular course of action that needs effort : the motive 
with the majority of men is the need of subsistence ; with a 



 



 



24 THE PARISIANS. 

large number (as in trades and professions), not actually 
want, but a desire of gain, and perhaps of distinction in their 
calling : the desire of professional distinction expands into 
the longings for more comprehensive fame, more exalted 
honors, with the few who become great writers, soldiers, 
statesmen, orators." 

" And do you tnean to say you have no such motive ?" 

" None in the sting of want, none in the desire of gain." 

"But fame?" 

" Alas ! I thought so once. I know not now . ^I begin to 
doubt if fame should be sought by women ?" This was said 
very dejectedly. 

" Tut, dearest signorina, what gadfly has stung you ? Your 
doubt is a weakness unworthy of your intellect ; and even 
were it not, genius is destiny, and will be obeyed: you mu8t 
write, despite yourself, and your writing must bring fame, 
whether you wish it or not." 

Isaura was silent, her head drooped on her breast . there 
were tears in her downcast eyes. 

Rameau took her hand, which she yielded to him passive- 
ly, and, clasping it in both his own, he rushed on impulsively. 

" Oh, I know what these misgivings are when we feel our- 
selves solitary, unloved : how often have they been mine ! 
But how different would labor be if shared and sympathized 
with by a congenial mind, by a heart that beats in unison 
with one's own !" 

Isaura's breast heaved beneath her robe ; she sighed softly. 

" And then how sweet the fame of which the one we love 
is proud . how trifling becomes the pang of some malignant 
depreciation, which a word from the beloved one can soothe ! 
Oh, signorina . oh, Isaura, are we not made for each other ? 
Kindred pursuits, hopes, and fears in common ; the same race 
to run, the same goal to win ? I need a motive stronger 
than I have yet known for the persevering energy that in- 
sures success: supply to me that motive. Let me think 
that whatever I win in the strife of the world is^a tribute to 
Isaura. No, do not seek to withdraw this hand; let me 
claim it as mine for life. I love you as man never loved be- 
fore . do not reject my love." 

They say the woman who hesitates is lost. Isaura hesir 
tated, but was not yet lost. The words she listened to 



 



 



THB PABISIANS. 26 

moved her deeply. Offers of marriage she had already re- 
ceived.one from a rich middle-aged noble, a devoted music- 
al virtuoso ; one from a young avoccU fresh from the prov- 
inces, and somewhat calculating on her dot / one from a tim- 
id but enthusiastic admirer of her genius and her beauty, 
himself rich, handsome, and of good birth, but with shy man- 
ners and faltering tongue. 

But these had made their proposals with the formal re- 
spect habitual to French decorum in matrimonial proposals. 
Words so eloquently impassioned as Gustavo Rameau's had 
never before thrilled her eai*s. Yes, she was deeply moved ; 
and yet, by that very emotion, she knew that it was not to 
the love of this wooer that her heart responded. 

There is a circumstance in the history of courtship familiar 
to the experience of many women^ that while the suitor is 
pleading his cause, his language may touch every fibre jn the 
heart of his listener, yet substitute, as it were^ another pres- 
ence for his own. She may be saying to herself, " Oh, that , 
another had said those words !" and be dreaming of the oth- 
er, while she hears the one. 

Thus it was now with Isaura, and not till Rameau^s voice 
had ceased did that dream pass away, and with a flight shiv- 
er she turned her face toward the wooer, sadly and pityingly. 

" It can not be," she said, in a low whisper ; " I were not 
worthy of your love could I accept it. Forget that you have 
so spoken ; let me still be a friend admiring your genius, inter- 
ested in your )3areer. I can not be more. Forgive me if I 
unconsciously led you to think I could . I am so grieved to 
pain you." 

" Am I to understand," said Rameau, coldly, for his amour 
propre was resentful, " that the proposals of another have 
been more fortunate than mine ?" And he named the young- 
est and comeliest of those whom she had rejected. 

" Certainly not," said Isaura. 

Rameau rose and went to the window, turning his face 
from her. In reality, he was striving to collect his thoughts 
and decide on the course it were most prudent for him now 
to pursue. The fumes of the absinthe which had, despite his 
previous forebodings, emboldened him to hazard his avowal, 
had now subsided into the languid reaction which is general- 
ly consequent on that treacherous stimulus, a reaction not un- 

n.-2 n J 

 VjOOQIC 



26 THE PABISIANa 

favorable to passionlesa reflection. He knew that if be said be 
could not conquer bis love, be would still cling to bope, and 
trust to perseverance and time, be sbould compel Isaura to 
forbid bis visits, and break off tbeir familiar intercourse. This 
would be fatal to the cbance of yet winning ber, and would 
also be of serious disadvantage to bis more worldly interests. 
Her literary aid migbt become essential to the journal on 
whicb bis fortunes depended, and, at all events, in ber con- 
versation, in ber encouragement, in ber sympathy with the 
pains and joys of his career, be felt a support, a comfort, 
nay, an inspiration. For the spontaneous gush of her fresh 
thoughts and fancies served to recruit bis own jaded ideas, 
and enlarge bis own stinted range of invention. Ko, be could 
not commit biinself to the risk of banishment from Isaura. 

And mingled with meaner motives for discretion, there 
was ope of which he was but vaguely conscious, purer and 
nobler. In tUe society of this girl, in whom whatever was 
. strong and high in mental organization became so sweetened 
into feminine gmce by gentleness of temper and kindness of 
disposition, Rameau felt himself a better man. The virgin- 
like dignity with whicb she moved, so untainted by a breath 
of scandal, amid aalona in which the envy of virtues doubtless 
sought to bring innocence itself into doubt, wanned into a 
genuine reverence the cynicism of his professed creed. 

While with her, while under ber chastening influence, be 
was sensible of a poetry infused within him far more true to 
the Camoenae than all he had elaborated into vferse. In these 
moments he was ashamed of the vices be bad courted as dis- 
tractions. He imagined that, with ber all his own, it would 
be easy to reform. 

No ; to withdraw wholly from Isaura was to renounce his 
sole cbance of redemption. 

While these thoughts, wbich it takes so long to detail, 
passed rapidly through his brain, he felt a soft touch on bis 
arm, and turning his face slowly, encountered the tender, 
compassionate eyes of Isaura. 

"Be consoled, dear friend,'* she said, 'with a smile, half 
cheering, balf mournful. "Perhaps for all true artists the 
solitary lot is the best." 

" I will try to think so," answered Rameau ; " and mean- 
while I tbank you with a full heart for the sweetness with 



 



Googl^^ 



THB PABISIANS. 27 

which you have checked my presumption . the presumption 
shall not be repeated. Gratefully I accept the friendship you 
deign to tender me. You bid me forget the words I uttered. 
Promise in turn that you will forget them . or at least con- 
sider them withdrawn. You will receive me still as friend ?" 
. " As friend, surely ; yes. Do we not both need friends ?" 
She held out her hand as she spoke ; he bent over it, kissed 
it with respect, and the interview thus closed. 



CHAPTER V. 

. 

It was late in the evening of that day when a man who had 
the appearance of a decent bourgeois, in the lower grades of 
that comprehensive class, entered one of the streets in the 
Faubourg Montmartre tenanted chiefly by artisans. He 
paused at the open doorway of a tall, narrow house, and drew 
back as he heard footsteps descending a very gloomy stair- 
case. 

The light from a gas-lamp on the -street fell full on the face 
of the person thus quitting the house . the face of a young 
and handsome man, dressed with the quiet elegance which 
betokened one of higher rank or fashion than that neighbor- 
hood was habituated to find among its visitors. The first 
comer retreated promptly into the shade, and, as by sudden 
impulse, drew his hat low down over his eyes. 

The other man did not, however, observe him, went his 
way with quick step along the street, and entered another 
house some yards distant. 

* " What can that pious Bourbonite do here ?" muttered the 
first comer. " Can he be a conspirator ? Diable I 'tis as dark 
as Erebus on that staircase." 

Taking cautious hold of the baluster, the man now ascend- 
ed the stairs. On the landing of the first floor there was a 
gas-lamp which threw upward a faint ray that finally died at 
the third story. But at tha* third story the man's journey 
ended ; he pulled a bell at the door to the right, and in another 
moment or so the door was qpened by a young woman of 
twenty-eight or thirty, dressed very simply, but with a cer- 
tain neatness not often seen in the wives of artisans in the 
Faubourg Montmartre. Her face, which, though pale and 



 



 



28 THE PABISIANa 

delicate, retained much of the beauty of youth, became cloud- 
ed as she recognized the visitor; evidently, the visit was not 
welcome to her. 

" Monsieur Lebeau again !" she exclaimed, shrinking back. 

" At your service, ch^re dame. The goodman is of course 
at home? Ah, I catch sight of him;" and sliding by the 
woman, M. Lebeau passed the narrow lobby* in which she 
stood, through the open door conducting into the room in 
which Armand Monnier was seated, his chin propped on his 
hand, his elbow resting on a table, looking abstractedly into 
space. In a comer of the room two small children were play- 
ing languidly with a set of bone tablets inscribed with the 
letters of the alphabet. But whatever the children were do- 
ing with the alphabet, they were certainly not learning to 
read from it. 

The room was of fair size and height, and by no means 
barely or shabbily furnished. There was a pretty clock on 
the mantel-piece. On the wall were hung designs for the 
decoration of apartments, and shelves on which were ranged 
a few books. 

The window was open, and on the sill were placed flower- 
ppts ; you could scent the odor they wafted into the room. 

Altogether it was an apartment suited to a skilled artisan 
earning high wages. From the room we are now in branched 
on one side a small but commodious kitchen ; on the other 
side, on which the door was screened by aporttkrey with a bor- 
der prettily worked by female hands . some years ago, for it 
was faded now . was a bedroom, communicating with one of 
less size in which the children slept. We do not enter those 
additional rooms, but it may be well here to mention them as 
indications of the comfortable state of an intelligent, skilled 
artisan of Paris, who thinks he can better that state by some 
revolution which may ruin his employer. 

Monnier started up at the entrance of Lebeau, and his face 
showed that he did not share the dislike to the visit which 
that of the female partner of his life had evinced. On the 
contrary, his smile was cordial, and there was a hearty ring 
in the voice which cried out, 

" I am glad to see you. Something to do, eh ?" 

" Always ready to work for liberty, mon brave.^ 

" I hope so. What's in the wind now ?" 

 VjOO_^1C 

/ J__ 



 VjOOQIC 




^'THX poos woman made mo BIPLY, BUT AB HB DBBW HXB TOWABD HIM, BBS UKAMKD 
BBS QBAD UPON HIS BBBABT AMD WBVT QUIBTLT." 



 



GoogTe 



THE PARISIANS. 29 

" Oh, Armand, be prudent . be prudent," cried the woman, 
piteously. " Do not lead him into further mischief. Monsieur 
Xiebeau." As she faltered forth the last words, she bowed 
her head over the two little ones, and her voice died in sobs. 

"Monnier," said Lebeau, gravely, "madame is right. I 
ought not to lead you into further mischief. There are three 
in the room who have better claims on you than . ^" 

" The cause of the millions," interrupted Monnier. 

"No." 

He approached the woman, and took up one of the children 
very tenderly, stroking back its curls and kissing the face, 
which,*if before sui^prised and saddened by the mother's sob, 
now smiled gayly under the father's kiss. 

"Canst thou doubt, my HeloXse," said the artisan, mildly, 
^^ that, whatever I do, thou and these are not uppermost in 
my thoughts ? I act for thine interest and theirs . the world 
as it exists is th& foe of you three. The world I would re- 
place it by will be more friendly." 

The poor woman made no reply, but as he drew her to- 
ward him, she leaned her head upon his breast and wept qui- 
etly. Monnier led her thus from the room, whispering words 
of feoothing. The children followed the parents into the ad- 
joining chamber. In a few minutes Monnier returned, shut- 
ting the door behind him and drawing the portiere close. 

" You will excuse me, citizen, and my poor wife . wife she 
is to me and to all who visit here, though the law says she 
is not." 

" I respect madame the more for her dislike to myself," said 
Lebeau, with a somewhat melancholy smile. 

" Not dislike to you personally, citizen, but dislike to the 
business which she connects with your visits ; and she is more 
than usually agitated on that subject this evening, because, 
jusX before you came, another visitor had produced a great 
effect on her feelings. poor dear H^loXse." 

-** Indeed! How?" 

" Well, I was employed in the winter in redecorating the 
salon and boudoir of Madame de Vandemar; her son, M. Ra- 
oul, took great interest in superintending the details. He * 
would somethnes talk to me very civilly, not only on my 
work, but on other matters. It seems that tnadame now 
wants something done to the saHe-d-manger^ and asked old 



 VjOOQIC 



30 THB PABISIANS. 

Gerard . ^my late master, you know . ^to send me. Of coarse 
he said that was impossible . for, though I was satisfied with 
my own wages, I had induced his other men to strike, and 
was one of the ringleaders in the recent strike of artisans in 
general, a dangerous man, and he would have nothing more 
to do with me. So M. Raoul came to see and talk with me 
. scarce gone before you rang at the bell . you might have 
almost met him on the stairs.'' 

" I saw a beau monsieur come out of the house. And so 
his talk has affected madame." 

" Very much ; it was quite brother-like. He is one of the 
religious set, and they always get at the weak sidef of the 
soft sex." 

" Ay," said Lebeau, thoughtfully, " if religion were banish- 
ed from the laws of men, it would still find a refuge in the 
hearts of women. But Raoul de Yandemar did not presume 
to preach to madame upon the sin of loving you and your 
children?" 

" I should like to have heard him preach to her," cried 
Monnier, fiercely. " No ; he only tried to reason with me 
about matters he could not undei*stand." 

"Strikes?" 
. " Well, not exactly strikes . he did not contend that we 
workmen had not full right to combine and to strike for ob- 
taining fairer money's worth for our work; but he tried to 
persuade me that where, as in my case, it was not a matter 
of wages, but of political principle . of war against capitalists 
. I could but injure myself and mislead others. He wanted 
to reconcile me to old G6rard, or to let him find me employ- 
ment elsewhere ; an^ when I told him that my honor forbade 
me to make terms for myself till those with whom I was 
joined were satisfied, he said, ' But if this lasts much longer, 
your children will not look so rosy ;' then poor H^lolse be- 
gan to wring her hands and cry, and he took me aside and 
wanted to press money on me as a loan. He spoke so kindly 
that I could not be angry ; but when he found I would take 
nothing, he asked me about some families in the street of 
whom he had a list, and who, he was informed, were in great 
distress. That is true ; I am feeding ^teie of them myself 
out of my savings. You see, this young monsieur belongs to 
a society of men, many as young as he is, which visits the 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 31 

poor and dispenses charity. I did not feel I bad a right to 
refuse aid for others, and* I told him where his money would 
be best spent. I suppose he went there when he left me." 

"I know the society you mean, that of St.'Fran9ois de 
Sd>les. It comprises some of the most ancient of that old no- 
blest to which the ouvriers in the great Revolution were so 
remorseless." 

" We ouvriers are wiser now; we see that in assailing theniy 
we gave ourselves worse tyrants in the new aristocracy of 
the capitalists. Our quarrel now is that of aitisans against 
employera." 

" Of course I am aware of that. But, to leave general poli- 
tics, tell me fi'ankly. How has the strike affected you as yet ? 
. ^I mean in purse. Can you stand its pressure ? If not, you 
are above the false pride of not taking help from me, a fel- 
low-conspirator, thoifgh you were justified in refusing it when 
offered by Raoul de Vandemar, the servant of the Church." 

" Pardon, I refuse aid from any one, except for the common 
cause. But do not fear for me ; I am not pinched as yet. I 
have had high wages for some years, and since I and H^loise 
came together I have not wasted a sou out-of-doors, except 
in the way of public duty, such as making converts at the 
tfean Jacques and elsewhere : a glass of beer and a pipe don't 
cost much. And H^loSse is such a housewife, so thrifty . 
scolds me if I buy her a ribbon, poor love ! No wonder that 
I would pull down a society that dares to scoff at her . dares 
to say she is not my wife, and her children are base-born. 
No, I have some savings left yet. War to society, war to 
the knife !" 

"Monnier," said Lebeau, in a voice that evinced emotion, 
" listen to me : I have received injuries from society which, 
when they were fresh, half maddened me . that is twenty 
years ago. I would then have thrown myself into any plot 
against society that proffered revenge; but society, my 
friend, is a wall of very strong masonry, as it now stands ; it 
may be sapped in the course of a thousand years, but stormed 
in a day . no. You dash your head against it . you scatter 
your brains, and you dislodge a stone. Society smiles in 
scorn, effaces the stain, and replaces the stone. I no longer 
war against .society. I do war against a system in that so- 
ciety which is hostile to me . systems in France are easily 

2* 

 VjOOQIC 



82 THE PABISIAKS. 

overthrown. 'I say this because I want to use you, and I do 
not want to deceive." 

" Deceive me . ^bah ! You are an honest man," cried Mon- 
nier ; and he seized Lebeau's hand, and shook it with warmth 
and vigor. " But for you I should have been a mere grumbler. 
No doubt I should have cried out where the shoe pinched, 
and railed against laws that vex me ; but from the moment 
you first talked to me I became a new man. You taught 
me to act, as Rousseau and Madame de Grantmesnil had 
taught me to think and to feel. There is my brother, a gj*um- 
bler too, but professes to have a wiser head than mine. He 
is always warning me against you, against joining a strike, 
against doing any thing to endanger my skin. I always 
went by his advice till you taught me that it is well enough 
for women to talk and complain ; men should dare and do." 

" Nevertheless," said Lebeau, " your ifc-other is a safer coun- 
selor to a phre de famiUe than L I repeat what I have so often 
said before : I desire, and I resolve, that the empire pf M. Bo- 
naparte shall be overthrown. I see many concurrent circum- 
stances to render that desire and resolve of practicable fulfill- 
ment^, You desire and resolve the same thing. Up to that 
point we cao work together. I have encouraged your action 
only so far as it served my design ; but I separate from you 
the moment you ask me to aid your design in the hazard of 
experiments which the world has never yet favored, and, 
trust me, Monnier, the world never will favor." 

" That remains to be seen," said Monnier, with compress- 
ed, obstinate lips. " Forgive me, but you are not young ; 
you belong to an old school." 

" Poor young man !" said Lebeau, readjusting his specta- 
cles, " I recognize in you the genius of Paris, be the genius 
good or evil. Paris is never warned by experience. Be it 
so. I want you so much, your enthusiasm is so fiery, that I 
can concede no more to the mere sentiment which makes me 
say to myself, * It is a shame to use this great-hearted, wrong- 
headed creature for my personal ends.' I come at once to 
the point . that is, the matter on which I seek you this even- 
ing. At my suggestion, you have been a ringleader in strikes 
which have terribly shaken the imperial system, more than 
its ministers deem. Now I want a man like yqu to assist in 
a bold demonstration against the imperial resort to a niral 



 



 



THB PARISIANS. 33 

priest-ridden suffrage, on the part of the enlightened working 
class of Paris." 

" Good !" said Monnier. ^ 

" In a day or two the result of the Plebiscite will be known. 
The result of universal suffrage will be enormously in favor 
of the desire expressed by one man." 

" I don't believe it," said Monnier, stoutly. " France can 
not be so hoodwinked by the priests." 

"Take what I say for granted," resumed Lebean, calmly. 
"On the eighth of this month we shall know the amount of 
the majority . some millions of French votes. I want Paris 
to separate itself from France, and declare against those blun- 
dering millions. I want an imeute^ or rather a menacing dem- 
onstration . not a premature revolution, mind. You must 
avoid bloodshed." 

" It is easy to say Ihat beforehand ; but when a crowd of 
men once meets in the streets of Paris . ^" 

"It can do much by meeting, and cherishing resentment 
if the meeting be dispersed by an armed force, which it would 
be waste of life to resist." 

"We shall see when the time. comes," said Monnier, with 
a fierce gleam in his bold eyes. 

" I tell you, all that is required at this moment is an evi- 
dent protest of the artisans of Paris against the votes of the 
'ruralf ' of France. Do you comprehend me?" 

" I think so ; if not, I obey. What we ouvriers want is 
what we have not got . a head to dictate action to us." 

" See to this, then. Rouse the men you can command. I 
will take care that you have plentiful aid from foreigners. 
We may trust to the confrhreB of our council to enlist Poles 
and Italians; Gaspard le Koy will turn but the volunteer 
rioters at his command. Let the imeute be within, say, a 
week after the vote of the Plebiscite is taken. You will need 
that time to prepare." 

" Be contented . it shall be done." 

" Good-night, then." Lebeau leisurely took up his hat and 
drew on his gloves ; then, as if struck by a sudden thought, ^ 
he turned briskly on the artisan and said, in quick, blunt 
tones, 

" Armand Monnier, explain to me why it is that you, a Pa- 
risian artisan, the type of a class the most insubordinate, the 

 VjOOQIC 



84 THE PABISIANS. 

most self-conceited, that exists on the face of earth, take with- 
out question, with so docile a sabmission, the orders of a man 
who plainly tells you he does not sympathize in your ulti- 
mate objects, of whom you really tno w very little, and whose 
views you candidly own you think are those of an old and 
obsolete school of political reasoners." 

" You puzzle me to explain," said Monnier, with an in- 
genuous laugh, that brightened up features stem and hard, 
though comely when in repose. " Partly because you are so 
straightforward, and do not talk hlagve; partly because I 
don't think the class I belong to would stir an inch unless we 
had a leader of another class . and you give me at least that 
leader. Again, you go to that first stage which we all agree 
to take, and . Well, do you want me to explain more ?" 

"Yes.'' 

hienl you have warned me, like an honest man ; like 
an honest man, I warn you. That first step we take to- 
gether. I want to go a step further. You retreat ; you say, 
' No.' I reply, * You are committed ;' that further step you 
must take, or I cry, * TVal^re/ . d la lantemeP You talk of 
* superior experience :' bah I what does experience really tell 
you ? Do you suppose that Louis Egalit^, when he began 
to plot against Louis XVI., meant to vote for his kinsman's 
execution by the guillotine? Do you suppose that Robes- 
p^rre, when he commenced his career as the foe of Capital 
punishment, foresaw that he should be the Minister of the 
Reign of Terror? Not a bit of it. Each was committed by 
his use of those he designed for his tools. So must you be . 
or. you perish." 

Lebeau, leaning against the door, heard the frank avowal 
he had courted without betraying a change of countenance. 
But when Armand Monnier had done, a slight movement of 
his lips showed emotion. Was it of fear or disdain ? 

"Monnier," he said, gently, " I am so much obliged to you 
for the manly speech you have made. The scruples which 
my conscience had before entertained are dispelled. I dread- 
, ed lest I, a declared wolf, might seduce into peril an innocent 
sheep. I see I have to deal with a wolf of younger vigor 
and sharper fangs than myself; so much the better; obey 
my orders now; leave it to time to say whether I obey yours 
later. Au revoir,^^ ^ 



 



Google 



THE pabisia:ns. 35 



CHAPTER VT. 

Isauba's apartment, on the following Thursday evening, 
was more filled than usual. Besides her habitual devotees 
in the artistic or literary world, there were diplomatists and 
. deputies commixed with many fair chiefs of la Jeunease doree; 
among the latter the brilliant Enguerrand de Vandemar, who, 
deeming the acquaintance* of every celebrity essential to his 
own celebrity, in either Carthage, the beau monde or the de- 
mi-monde^ had, two Thursdays before, made Louvier attend 
her 8oir^ and present him, Louvier, though gathering to 
his own salons authors and artists, very rarely favored their 
rooms with his presence; he did not adorn Isaura^s party 
that evening. But Duplessis was there, in compensation. It 
had chanced that Valerie had met Isaura at some house in 
the past winter, and conceived an enthusiastic affection for 
her : since Valerie came very often to see her, and made a 
point of dragging with her to Isaura's Thursday reunions 
her obedient father. Soir^, musical or literacy, were not 
much in his line ; but he had no pleasure like that of pleas- 
ing his spoiled child. Our old friend Frederic Lemercier was 
also one of Isaura's guests that night. He had become more 
and more intimate with Duplessis, and Duplessis had intro- 
duced him to the fair Valerie as " w jeune homme plein de 
moyens^ qtd ira loin,^^ 

Savarin was there of course, and brought with him an En- 
glish gentleman of the name of Bevil, as well known at Paris 
as in London . invited every where. popular every where . 
one of those welcome contributors to the luxuries of civilized 
society who trade in gossip, sparing no pains to get the pick 
of it, and exchanging it liberally sometimes for a haunch of 
venison, sometimes for a cup of tea. His gossip, not being 
adulterated with malice, was in high repute for genuine 
worth. 

If Bevil said, **This story is a fact," you no more thought. 
of doubting him than you would doubt Rothschild if he said, 
"ThisisLafitteofMS." 



 



 



36 THE PARISIANS. 

Mr. Bevil was at present on a very short stay at Paris, and, 
naturally wishing to make the most of his time, he did not 
tarry beside Savarin, but, after being introduced to IsaurS, 
flitted here and there through the assembly. 

"Apis Matinoe . 
More modoqne . 
Grata carpentis tfajma." 

The bee proffers honey, but bears a sting. 

The room was at its fullest when Gustave Ramean enter- 
ed, accompanied by Monsieur de Mauleon. 

Isaura was agreeably surprised by the impression made on 
her by the Vicomte's appearance and manner. His writings, 
and such as she had heard of his earlier repute, had prepared 
her to see a man decidedly old, of withered aspect and sar- 
donic smile . aggressive in demeanor . ^forward or contempt- 
tiouB in his politeness . a Mephistopheles ingrafted on the 
stem of a Don Juan. She was startled by the sight of one 
who, despite his forty-eight years . and at Paris a man is 
generally older at forty-eight than he is elsewhere . seemed 
in the zenith of ripened manhood . startled yet more by the 
singular modesty of a deportment too thoroughly high-bred 
not to be quietly- simple . startled most by a melancholy ex- 
pression in eyes that could be at times soft, though always 
so keen, and in the grave pathetic smile which seemed to dis- 
arm censure of past faults in saying, " I have known sor- 
rows." 

He did not follow up his introduction to his young hostess 
by any of the insipid phrases of compliment to which she was 
accustomed, but, after expressing in grateful terms his thanks 
for the honor she had permitted Rameau to confer on him, 
he moved aside, as if he had no right to detain her from other 
guests more worthy her notice, toward the doorway, taking 
his place by Enguerrand amid a group of men of whom Du- 
plessis was the central figure. 

At that time . the first week in May, 1870 . all who were 
then in Paris will remember there were two subjects upper- 
most in the mouths of men : first, the Plebiscite ; secondly, 
the conspiracy to murder the Emperor . which the disaffect- 
ed considered to be a mere fable, a pretense got up in time 
to serve the Plebiscite and prop the empire. 

Upon this latter subject Dnplessis had been expressing 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. . 87 

himself with unwonted animation. A loyal and earnest Im- 
perialist, it was only with effort that he could repress his 
scorn of that meanest sort of gossip which is fond of ascrib- 
ing petty motives to eminent men. 

To him nothing could be more clearly evident than the 
reality . of this conspiracy, and he had no tolerance for the 
malignant absurdity of maintaining that the Emperor or his 
ministers could be silly and wicked enough to accuse seventy- 
two persons of a crime which the police had been instructed 
to invent. 

As De Maul6on approached, the financier brought his 
speech to an at rapt close. He knew in the Vicomte de 
Maul6on the writer of articles which had endangered the 
government, and aimed no pointless shafts against its impe- 
rial head. 

" My cousin," said Enguerrand, gayly, as he exchanged^a 
cordial shake of the hand with Victor, " I congratulate you 
on the fame of journalist, into which you have vaulted, armed 
cap-^-pie, like a knight of old into his saddle ; but I don't 
sympathize with the means you have taken to arrive at that 
renown. I am not myself an Imperialist . a Vandemar can 
be scarcely that. But if I am compelled to be on board an 
ship, I don't wish to take out its planks and let in an Qcean, 
when all offered to me instead is a crazy tub and a rotten 
rope." 

" TV^s bien,'*^ said Duplessis, in parliamentary tone and 
phrase. 

" But," said De Maul6on, with his .calm smile, " would you 
like the captain of the ship, when the sky darkened and the 
sea rose, to ask the common sailors whether they approved 
his conduct on altering his course or shortening his sail? 
Better trust to a crazy tub and a rotten rope than to a ship 
in which the captain consults a Plebiscite." 

" Monsieur," sai^ Duplessis, " your metaphor is ill chosen 
. ^no metaphor, indeed, is needed. The head of the state 
was chosen by the voice of the people, and, when required 
to change the form of administration which the people had 
sanctioned, and inclined to do so from motives the most pa- 
triotic and liberal, he is bound again to consult the people 
from whom he holds his power. It is not, however, of the 
Plebiscite we were conversing so much as of the atrocious 



 



 



38 THB PABI8IANS. 

conspiracy of assassins . so happily discovered in time. I 
presume that Monsieur de Mauleon must share th& indigna- 
tion which true Frenchmen of every party must feel against 
a combination united by the purpose of murder." 

The Vicomte bowed, as in assent. 

" But do you believe," asked a Liberal Deput^^ " that such 
a combination existed, except in the visions of the police or 
the cabinet of a minister ?" 

Duplessis looked keenly at De Maul6on while this question 
was put to him. Belief or disbelief in the conspiracy was 
with him, and with many, the test by which a sanguinary 
revolutionist was distinguished from an honest politician. 

^^Mafoiy^ answered De Maul6on, shrugging his shbulders, 
" I have only one belief left ; but that is boundless. I be- 
lieve in the folly of mankind in general, and of Frenchmen 
in particular. That seventy-two men should plot the assas- 
sination of a sovereign on whose life interests so numerous 
and so watchful depend, and imagine they could keep a 
secret which any drunkard among them would blab out, any 
tatterdemalion would sell, is a bitise so gross that I think it 
highly probable. But pardon me if I look upon the politics 
of Paris much as I do upon its mud . one must pass through 
it when one walks in the street. One changes one's shoes 
before entering the salon. . A word with you, Fnguerrand ;" 
and taking his kinsman's arm, he drew him aside from the 
circle. " What has become of your brother ? I see nothing 
of him now." 

" Oh, Raoul," answered Enguerrand, throwing himself on a 
couch in a recess, and making room for De Maul6on beside 
him. " Raoul is devoting himself to the distressed ouvriers 
who have chosen to withdraw from work. When he fails 
to persuade them to iveturn, he forces food and fuel on ^their 
wives and children. My good mother encourages him in 
this costly undertaking, and no one but jou who believe in 
the infinity of human folly would credit me when I tell you 
that his eloquence has drawn from me all the argent depoche 
I get from our shop. A for himself, he has sold his horses, 
and even grudges a cab fare, saying, ' That is a meal for a 
family.' Ah I if he had but gone into the Church, what a 
saint would have deserved canonization !" 

^^ Do not lament ; he will probably have what is a better 



 



 



THK PAEISIANa 39 

claim than mere saintsliip on Heaven . martyi'dom,'* said De 
Maul6on, with a smile in which sarcasm disappeared in mel- 
ancholy. " Poor Raoul ! And what of my other cousin, the 
heau Marquis? Several months ago his Legitimist faith 
seemed vacillating . he talked to me very fairly about the 
duties a Frenchman owed to France, and hinted that he 
should place his sword at the command of Napoleon III. I 
have not yet heard of him as a aoldat de France . I hear a 
great deal of him as a mimir de Paris?'* 

" Don't you know why his desire for a military career was 
frost-bitten?" 

"No! Why?" 

" Alain came from Bretagne profoundly ignorant of most 
things known to z, gamin of Paris. When he conscientiously 
overcame the scruples natural to one of his name, and told 
the Duchesse de Tarascon that he was ready to fight under 
the flag of France, whatever its color, he had a vague remi- 
niscence of ancestral Rochebriants earning early laurels at 
the head of their regiments. At all events, he assumed as a 
matter of course that he, in the firet rank as gentilhomme^ 
would enter the army, if as a sous-lieutenant^ still as gentil- 
homme. But when told that, as he had been at no Military 
College, he could only enter the ranks as a private soldier . 
herd With private soldiers . for at least two years before, 
passing through the grade of corporal, his birth, education, 
habits of life, could, with great favor, raise him to the station 
of a sous-lieutenant^ you may conceive that the martial ardor 
of a Rochebriant was somewhat cooled." 

"If he knew what the dormitory of French privates is, and 
how difficult a man well-educated, well brought up, finds it, 
first, to endure the coai*sest ribaldry and the loudest blasphe- 
my, and then, having endured and been compelled to share 
them, ever enforce obedience and discipline as a superior 
among those with whom just before he was an equal, his ar- 
dor would not have been merely cooled . it would have been 
changed into despair for the armies of France, if hereafter 
they are met by those whose officers have been trained to be 
officers from the outset, and have imbibed from their cradle 
an education not taught to the boy pedants from school . the 
twofold education how with courtesy to command, how with 
dignity to obey. To return to Rochebriant, such salons as I 



 



 



40 ' THE PABISIAN8. 

frequent are somewhat formal . as befits my grave years and 
my modest income ; I may add, now that you know my vo- 
cation, befits me also as a man who seeks rather to be in- 
structed than amused. In those salona I did last year some- 
times, however, meet Rochebriant . as I sometimes still meet 
you ; but of late he has deserted such sober reunions^ and I 
hear with pain that he is drifting among those rocks against 
which my own youth was shipwrecked. Is the report true ?" 

^^ I fear,'' said nguerrand, reluctantly, ^' that at least the 
report is not unfounded. And my conscience accuses me of 
having been to bligne in the first instance. You see, when 
Alain made terms with Louvier by which he obtained a very 
fair income, if prudently managed, I naturally wished that 
a man of so many claims to social distinction, and who 
represents the oldest branch of my family, should take his 
right place in our world of Paris. I gladly, therefore, pre- 
sented him to the houses and -the men most d la mode . ad- 
vised him as to the sort of establishment, in apartments, 
horses, etc., which it appeared to me that he might reasona- 
bly afford . I mean such as, with his means, I should have 
prescribed to myself . " 

^^Ahl I understand. But you, dear EngueiTand, are a 
born Parisian, every inch of you ; and* a bom Parisian is, 
whatever be thought to the contrary, the best manager in 
the world. He alone achieves the difficult art of uniting 
thrift with show. It is your provincial who comes tp Paris, 
in the freshness of undimmed youth, who sows his whole life 
on its barren streets. I guess the rest : Alain is ruined.'' 

Enguerrand, who certainly was so far a born Parisian that, 
with all his shrewdness and savoir /aire, he had a wonder- 
fully sympathetic heart, very easily moved, one way or the 
other . Enguerrand winced at his elder kinsman's words, 
complimentarily reproachful, and said, in unwonted tones of 
humility, " Cousin, you are cruel, but you are in the right 
I did not calculate sufficiently on the chances of Alain's head 
being turned. Hear my excuse. He seemed to me so much 
more thoughtful than mot at our age are, so much more 
stately and proud . well, also so much more pure, so impress- 
ed with the responsibilities of station, so bent on retaining 
the old lands in Bretagne . by habit and rearing so simple 
and self-denying . that I took it for granted he was proof 



 



 



\ 

\ 

VHE PARISIANS. 41 

against stronger temptavions than those which a light nature 
like my own puts aside \^ith a laugh. And at first I had no 
reason to think myself deceived, when, some months ago, I 
heard that he was getting into debt, losing at play, paying 
court to female vampires, who drain the life-blood of those 
on whom they fasten their fatal lips. Oh, then I spoke to 
him earnestly !" 

" And in vain ?" 

" In vain. A certain Chevalier de FinisteiTe, whom you 
may have heard of . " 

*' Certainly, and met ; a fiiend of Louvier's . ^" 

"The same man . has obtained over him an influence which 
so far subdues mine that he almost challenged me when 
I told him his friend was a scamp. In fine, though Alain 
and I have not actually quarreled, we pass each other with 
^'^onjour, mon amV " 

"Hum! My dear Enguerrand, you have done all you 
could. Flies will be flies, and spiders spiders, till, the earth 
is destroyed by a comet. Nay, I met a distinguished natur^l- 
is^ in America who maintained that we shall find flies and 
spiders in the next world." 

" You have been in America ? Ah, true, I remember, Cal- 
ifornia !" 

" Where have I not been ? Tush ! mnsi<; . shall I hear our 
fair hostess sing ?" . " 

" I am afraid not to-night, because Madame S is to 

favor us, and the signorina makes it a rule not to sing at her 
own house when professional artists do. You must hear the 
Cicogna quietly some day ; such a voice . nothing like it." 

Madame S . - . , who, since she had learned that there was 
no cause to apprehend that Isaura might become her pro- 
fessional rival, conceived for her a wonderful affection, and 
willingly contributed her magnificent gifts of song to the 
charms of Isaura's salon, now began a fragment from I Puri- 
tanic which held the audience as silent as the ghosts listen- 
ing to Sappho ; and when it was over, several of the guests 
slipped away, especially those who disliked music, and feared 

Madame S might begin again. Enguerrand was not 

one of such soulless recreants, but he had many other places 
to go to. Besides, Madame S was no novelty to him. 

De Maul^on now approached Isaura, who was seated next 



 



 



42 TH PABISIANB; 

to Valerie, and after well -merited eulogiam on Madame 
S 's performance, slid into some critical comparisons be- 
tween that singer and those of a former generation, which 
interested Isaura, and evinced to her quick perceptions that 
kind of love for mnsic which has been refined by more knowl- 
edge of the art than is common to mere amiiteurs. 

"You have studied music, Monsieur de Maul^on," she 
said. " Do you not perform yourself?" 

" I ? . no. But music has always had a fatal attraction for 
me. I ascribe half the errors of my life to that temperament 
which makes me too fascinated by harmonies . too revolted 
by discords.'* 

"I should have thought such a temperament would have 
led from errors . are not errors discords ?" 

" To the inner sense, yes ; but to the outer sense not al- 
ways. Virtues are often harsh to the ear . errors are sweet- 
voiced. The sirens did not sing out of tune. Bet*ter to stop 
one's ears than glide on Scylla or be merged into Chary bdis." 

," Monsieur," cried Val6rie, with a pretty bru8qt4erie which 
became her well, " you talk like a Vandal" 

" It is, I think, by Mademoiselle Duplessis that I have the 
honor to be rebuked. Is monsieur your father very suscep- 
tible to music ?" 

"Well, I can not say that he cares much for it But 
* then his mind is so practical . " 

" And his life so successful. No Scylla, no Chary bdis for 
him. However, mademoiselle, I am not 'quite the Vandal 
you suppose. I do not say that susceptibility to the influ- 
ence of music may not be safe, nay, healthful, to others . it 
Was not so to me in my youth. It can do me no harm now," 

Here Duplessis came up, and whispered his daughter "it 
was time to leave ; they had promised the Duchesse de Ta- 
rascon to assist at the soir^ she gave that night." Valerie 
took her father's arm with a brightening smile and a height- 
ened color. Alain de Rochebriant might probably be at the 
Duchesse's. 

" Are you not going also to the H6tel de Tarascon, M de 
Maul^on ?" asked Duplessis. 

" No ; I was never there but once. The Duchesse is an 
Imperialist, at once devoted and acute, and no doubt very 
soon divined my lack of faith in her idols." 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 43 

Daplessis frowned, and hastily led Val6rie away. 

In a few minutes the room was comparatively deserted. 
De Maul^on, however, lingered by the side of Isaura till all 
the other guests were gone. Even then he lingered still, and 
renewed the interrupted conversation with her, the Venosta 
joining therein ; and so agreeable did he make himself to her 
Italian tastes by a soft of bitter-sweet wisdom like that of 
her native proverbs. -comprising much knowledge of man- 
kind on the unflattering side of humanity in that form of 
pleasantry which has a latent sentiment of pathos . that the 
Venosta exclaimed, 

" Surely you must have been brought up in Florence 1" 

There was that in De Mauleon's talk hostile to all which 
we call romance that excited the imagination of Isaura, and 
compelled her instinctive love for whatever is more sweet, 
more beautiful, more ennobling on the many sides of human 
life, to oppose what she deemed the paradoxes of a man who 
had taught himself to belie even his own nature. She be- 
came eloquent, and her countenance, which in ordinary mo- 
ments owed much of its beauty to an expression of medita- 
tive gentleness, was now lighted up by the energy of earnest 
conviction . the enthusiasm of an impassioned zeal. 

Gradually De Maul6on relaxed his share in the dialogue, 
and listened to her, rapt and dreamingly, as in his fiery youth 
he had listened to the songs of the sirens. No siren Isaura ! 
She was defending her own cause, though unconsciously . de- 
fending the vocation of art as the embellisher of external 
nature, and more than embellisher of the nature which 
dwells, crude but plastic, in the soul of man ; indeed, therein 
the creator of a new nature, strengthened, expanded, and 
brightened in proportion as it accumulates the ideas that 
tend beyond the boundaries of the visible and material nat- 
ure, which is finite, forever seeking in the unseen and the 
spiritual the goals in the infinite which it is their instinct to 
divine. "That which you contemptuously call romance," 
said Isaura, " is not essential only to poets and artists. The 
most real side of every life, from the earliest dawn of mind 
in the infant, is the romantic. When the child is weaving 
flower chains, chasing butterflies, or sitting apart and dream- 
ing what it will do in the future, is not that the child's real 
life, and yet is it not also the romantic ?" 



 



 



44 THB PARISIANS. 

" But there comes a time when we weave no flower chains, 
and chase no buttei-flies." 

^' Is it so ? Still on one side of life flowers and bnttei-flies 
may be found to the last ; and at least to the last are there 
no dreams of the future ? Have you no such dreams at this 
moment ? And without the romance of such dreams, would 
there be any reality to human life which could distinguish it 
,from the life of the weed that rots on Lethe?" 

^'Alas, mademoiselle," said De Maul6on, rising to take 
leave, " your argument must rest without answer ; I would 
not, if I could, confute the beautiful belief that belongs to 
youth, fusing into one rainbow all the tints that can color 
the world. But the Siguora Venosta will acknowledge the 
truth of an old saying, expressed in every civilized language, 
but best, perhaps, in that of the Florentine . ^ You might as 
well physic the dead as instruct the old.' " 

" But you are not old," said the Venosta, with Floi'entine 
politeness . " yoa ! not a gray hair." 

*' 'Tis not by the gray of the hair that one knows the age 
of the heart," answered De Maul^on, in another paraphrase 
of Italian proverb, and he was gone. 

As he walked homeward, through deserted sti'eets, Vic- 
tor de Maul6on thought to himself, " Poor girl, how I pity 
her ! Married to a Gustave Ramean . married to any man 
. nothing in the nature of man, be he the best and the clev- 
erest, can ever realize the dream of a girl who is pure and 
has genius. Ah, is not the converse true ? What girl, the /. i . . ti 
best and the cleverest, comes up to the ideal of even a com-/( | ' I ' 
monplace man . if^ie^ ^er dreamed of an ideal! " Then he 
paused, and in a moment or so afterward his thougl^t knew 
such questionings no more. It turned upon personalities, on 
stratagems and plots, on ambition. The man had more than 
his share of that peculiar susceptibility which is one of the 
characteristics of his countrymen . susceptibility to immedi- 
ate impulse . susceptibility to fleeting impressions. It was a 
key to many mysteries in his character when he owned his 
subjection to the influence of music, and in music recognized 
not the seraph's harp, but the siren's song. If you could 
have permanently fix^d Victor de Mauleon in one of the 
good moments of his life even now . some moment, of exqui- 
site kindness, of superb generosity, of dauntless courage . 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 45 

you would have secured a very rare specimen of noble hu- 
manity. But so to fix him was impossible. 

That impulse of the moment vanished the moment after, 
swept aside by the force of his very talents . talents concen- 
trated by his intense sense or individuality . sense of wrongs 
or of rights . interests or objects personal to himself. He 
extended the royal saying, ^^L^Hat^c^est moi^^ to words far 
more grandiloquent . " The universe, 'tis I." The Venosta 
would have understood him and smiled approvingly, if he 
had said, with a good-humored laugh, " I dead, the world is 
dead !" That is an Italian proverb, and means much the 
same thing. 



 



 



40 THE PARISIANS. 



BOOK EIGHTH. 



CHAPTER L 

On the 8th of May the vote of the Plebiscite was recorded 
. between seven and eight millions of Frenchmen in support 
of the imperial programme . in plain words, of the Emperor 
himself. against a minority of 1,500,000. Bat among the 
1,600,000 were the oM throne-shakers . those who compose 
and those who lead the mob of Paris. On the 14th, as Ra- 
mean was about to quit the editonal bureau of his printing- 
office, a note was brought in to him, which strongly excited 
his nervous system. It contained a request to see him forth- 
with, signed by those two distinguished foreign members T>f 
the Secret Council of Ten, Thaddeus Loubisky and Leonardo 
Raselli. 

The meetings of that Council had been. so long suspended 
that Rameau had almost forgotten its ezistenca He gave 
orders to admit the conspirators. The two men entered . 
the Pole, tall, stalwart, and with mai*tial stride ; the Italian, 
small, emaciated, with skulking, noiseless, cat-like step . ^both 
looking wondrous threadbare, and in that state called *^ shab- 
by genteel,'' which belongs to the man who can not work for 
his livelihood, and assumes a superiority over the man who 
can. Their outward appearance was in notable discord with 
that of the poet-politician . ^he all new in the last fashions 
of Parisian elegance, and redolent of Parisian prosperity and 
extrait de MoiMseiine I 

" Gonfrhre^'* said the Pole, seating himself on the edge of 
the table, while the Italian leaned against the mantel-piece^ 
and glanced round the room with furtive eye, as if to detect 
its innermost secrets, or decide where safest to drop a lucifer 
match for its coiiflagration . " confrhrey^ said the Pole, " yoar 
country needs you . " 

'^ Rather the cause of all countries," interposed the Italian^ 
softly . " Humanity." 



 



 



THE PASISIAKS. 47 

"Please to explain yourselves. But stay; wait a mo- 
ment," said Rameau ; and rising, he went to the door, opened 
it, looked forth, ascertained that the coast was clear, then 
reclosed the door as cautiously as a prudent man closes 
his pocket whenever shabby-genteel visitors appeal to him in 
the cause of his country, still more if they appeal in that of 
Humanity. 

^^ Confrhre^'^ said the Pole, " this day a movement ia to be 
made . a demonstration on behalf of your country . ^" 

"Of Humanity," again softly interposed the Italian. 

" Attend and share it," said the Pole. 

" Pardon me," said Rameau, " I do not know what you 
mean. I am now the editor of a journal in which the pro- 
prietor does not countenance violence ; and if you come to 
me as a member of the Council, you must be aware that I 
should obey no orders but that of its president, whom I 
have not seen for nearly a year ; indeed, I know not if the 
Council still exists," 

"The Council exists, and with it the obligations it im- 
poses," replied Thaddeus. " Pampered with luxury " . here 
the Pole raised his voice . " do you dare to reject the voice 
of Poverty and Freedom ?" 

" Hush, dear but too vehement confrbre^^ murmured the 
bland Italian ;" permit me to dispel the reasonable doubts 
of our confrere f'^ and he took out of his breast pocket a pa- 
per, which he presented to Rameau. On it were written these 
words : 

"This evening, May 14. Demonstration. . Faubourg du 
Temple. . Watch events, under orders of A. M. Bid the 
youngest member take that first opportunity to test nerves 
and discretion. He is not to act, but to observe." 

No name was appended to this instruction, but a cipher 
intelligible to all members of the Council as significant of its 
president, Jean Lebeau. 

" If I err not," said the Italian, " Citizen Rameau is our 
youngest confrhre^^ 

Rameau paused. The penalties for disobedience to an or- 
der of the President of the Council were too formidable to 
be disregarded. There could be no doubt that, though his 
name was not mentioned, he, Rameau, was accurately desig- 
nated the youngest member of the Council. Still, however 

II.-3 

 VjOOQIC 



48 THE PABISIANS* 

he might have owed his present position to the recommenda- 
tion of Lebeau, there was nothing in the conversation of M. 
I>fe Manl6on which would warrant participation in a popular 
imeute by the editor of a joutnal belonging to that mocker 
of the mob. Ah I but . and here again he glanced over the 
paper . he was asked " not to act, but to observe." To ob- 
serve was the duty of a journalist. He might go to the 
demonstration as De Maul^on confessed he had gone to the 
Communist Club. a philosophical spectator. 

" You do not disobey this order ?" said the Pole, crossing 
his arms. 

" I shall certainly go into the Faubourg du Temple this even- 
ing," answered Rameau, dryly. " I have business that way." 

''BonP' said the Pole. "I did not think you would fail 
us, though you do edit a journal which says not a word on 
the duties that bind the French people to the resuscitation 
of Poland." 

"And is not pronounced in decided accents upon the cause 
of the human mce," put in the Italian, whispering. 

" I do not write the political articles in Le Sens Commun^'^ 
answered Rameau ; " and I suppose that our president is sat- 
isfied with them, since he recommended me to the preference 
of the person who does. Have you more to say ? Pardon 
me, my time is precious, for it does not belong to me." 

" Eno I" said thd Italian ; " we will detain you no longer," 
Here, with bow and smile, he glided toward the door. 

" Confrhre^'^ muttered the Pole, lingering, " you must have 
become very rich ! Do not forget the wrongs of Poland . 
I am their Representative . I . speaking in that character, 
not as myself individually . i"have not breakfasted I" 

Rameau, too thoroughly Parisian not to be as lavish of his 
own money as he was enitious of another's, slipped some pieces 
of gold into the Pole's hand. The Pole's bosom heaved with 
manly emotion. " These pieces bear the eflSgies of the tyrant 
. I accept tliem as redeemed from disgrace by their uses to 
Freedom." 

" Share them with Signer Raselli in the name of the same 
cause," whispered Rameau, with a smile he might have 
plagiarized from De Maul^on. 

The Italian, whose ear was inured to whispers, heard and 
turned round as he stood at the threshold. 



 



 



THB PABISIANS. 49 

"No, confrere of France . no, confrere of Poland . I am 
Italian. All ways to take the life of an enemy are honor- 
able . no way is honorable which begs money from a friend." 

An hour or so later Rameau was driven in his comfortable 
coupk to the Faubourg du Temple. 

Suddenly, at the angle of a street, his coachman was stop- 
ped . a rough-looking man appeared at the door . ^^Descendy 
tnon petit hourgeoUP Behind the rough-looking man were 
menacing faces. 

Rameau was not physically a coward . very few French-* 
men are, still fewer Parisians; and still fewer, no matter 
what their birthplace, the men whom we call_ vain .^ the 
men who overmuch covet distinction, and overmuch dread 
reproach. 

" Why should I descend at your summons ?" said Rameau,* 
haughtily. ^^Bahl Coachman, drive on !" 

The rough-looking man opened the door, and silently ex- 
tended a hand to Rameau, saying, gently, " Take my ad- 
vice, mon bourgeois. Get out . we want your carriage. It 
is a day of barricades . every little helps, even your coupe P^ 

While this man spoke, others gesticulated ; some shrieked 
out, "He is an employer; he thinks he can drive jover the 
employed 1" Some leader of the crowd . a Parisian crowd 
always has a classical leader' who h^s never read the clas- 
sics . ^thundered forth, " Tarquin's car !". " Down with Tar-* 
quin !" Therewith came a yell, "-4 la lanteme . TarquinP'^ 

We Anglo-Saxons, of the Old Country or the New, are not 
familiai-ized to the dread roar of a populace delighted to 
have a Roman authority for tearing us to pieces ; still Ameri- 
cans know what is Lynchlaw. Rameau was in danger of 
Lynch-law, when suddenly a face not unknown to him inter- 
posed between himself and the rough-looking man. 

" Ha I" cried this new-comer. " My young confrhre^ Gus- 
tave Rameau, welcome ! Citizens, make way. I answer 
for this patriot . I, Armand Monnier. He comes to help us. 
Is this the way you receive him ?" Then in low voice to 
Rameau, "Come out. Give your cmip'e to the barricade. 
What matters such rubbish ? Trust to me . I expected you. 
Hist ! . Lebeau bids me see that you are safe." 

Rameau then, seeking to drape himself in majesty . as the 
aristocrats of journalism in a city wherein no other aristoc- 

 VjOOQIC 



60 THE PARISIANS. 

racy is recognized naturally and commendably do when ig- 
norance combined with physical strength asserts itself to be 
a power beside which the power of knowledge is what a 
learned poodle is to a tiger . Rameau then descended from 
his coupe^ and said to this Titan of labor, as a !Fench mar- 
quis might have said to his valet, and as when the French 
marquis has become a ghost of the past the man who keeps 
a coupi says to the man who mends his wheels, "Honest 
fellow, I trust you/' 

Monnier led the journalist through the mob to the rear 
of the barricade hastily constructed. Here were assembled 
very motley groups. 

The majority being ragged boys, the gamins of Paris, 
commingled with several women of no reputable appearance, 
*8ome dingily, some gaudily appareled, the crowd did not 
appear as if the business in hand was a very serious one. 
Amidst the din of voices the sound of laughter rose predom- 
inant, jests and bons mots flew from lip to lip. The aston- 
ishing good-humor of the Parisians was not yet excited into 
the ferocity that grows out of it by a street contest. It was 
less like a popular ^meute than a gathering of school-boys, 
bent not less on fun than on mischief. But still amidst this 
gayer crowd were sinister, lowering faces ; the fiercest were 
not those of the very, poor, lint rather of artisans who, to 
judge by their dregs, seemed well off.of men belonging to 
yet higher grades. Rameau distinguished among these the 
M&decin des Pauvres^ the philosophical atheist, sundry young 
long-haired artists, middle-aged writers for the Republican 
press, in close neighborhood with ruffians of villainous aspect, 
who might have been newly returned from the galleys. 
None were regularly armed, still revolvers and muskets and 
long knives were by no means unfrequently interspersed 
among the rioters. The whole scene was to Rameau a con- 
fused panorama, and the dissonant tumult of yells and laugh- 
ter, of menace and joke, began rapidly to act on his impres- 
sionable nerves. He felt that which is the prevalent charac- 
ter of a Parisian riot . the intoxication of an impulsive sym- 
pathy. Coming there as a reluctant spectator, if action com- 
menced, he would have been borne readily into the thick of 
the action . he could not have helped it ; already he grew 
impatient of the suspense of strife. Monnier having depos- 

 VjOOQIC 



THB PABISIANS. 51 

ited him safely with his back to a wall, at the corner of a 
street handy for flight, if flight became expedient, had left 
him for several minutes, having business elsewhere. Sud- 
denly the whisper of the Italian stole into his ear . " These 
men are fools. This is not the way to do business . this 
does not hurt the Robber of Nice . Garibaldi's Nice. They 
* should have left it to me." 

"What would you do?" 

"I have invented a new machine," whispered the Friend 
of Humanity ; "it would remove all at one blow . lion and 
lioness, whelp and jackals . and then the Revolution if you 
will! . not this paltry tumult. The cause of the human 
race is being frittered away. I am disgusted with Lebeau. 
Thrones are not overturned by gamins^ 

Before Rameau could answer, Monnier rejoined him. The 
artisan's face was overcast . his lips compressed, yejb quiver- 
ing with indignation. "Brother," he said to Rameau, " to- 
day the cause is betrayed" . (the word trahi was just then 
coming into vogue at Paris) . " the blouses I counted on are 
recreant I have just learned that all is quiet in the other 
Quartiers where the rising was to have been simultaneous 
with this. We are in a guet-apens . the soldiers will be 
down on us in a few minutes . hark! don't you hear the 
distant tramp? Nothing for us but to die like men. Our 
blood will be avenged later. Here !" and he thrust a re- 
volver into Rameau's hand. Then, with a lusty voice that 
rang through the crowd, he shouted, " Vive lepeupleP^ The 
rioters caught and re-echoed the cry, mingled with other 
cries, "Fzve la M^mhlique I Vive le drapeaii rovge .'" 

The shouts were yet at their full when a strong hand 
grasped Monnier's arm, and a clear, deep but low voice 
thrilled through his ear . " Obey ! . I warned you. No fight 
to-day. Time not ripe. All that is needed is done . do not 
undo it. Hist ! the Sergens de Vtlle are force enough to 
disperse the swarm of those gnats. Behind the Sergens come 
soldiers who will not fraternize. Lose not one life to-day. 
The morrow when we shall need every man . nay, every 
gamin . will dawn soon. Answer not. Obey I" The same 
strong hand, quitting its hold on Monnier, then seized Ra- 
meau by the wrist, and the same deep voice said, " Come 
with me." Rameau, turning in amaze, not unmixed with 



 



 



52 THB PAJlISlASfS. 

anger, saw beside him a tall man with sombrero hat pressed 
close over his head, and in the blouse of a laborer, but through 
such disguise he recognized the pale gray whiskers and green 
spectacles of Lebeau. He yielded passively to the grasp that 
led him away down the ideserted street at the angle. 

At the further end of that street, however, was heard the 
steady thud of hoofs. 

" The soldiers are taking the mdb at-its rear," said Lebeau, 
calmly ; " we have not a moment to lose . this way;" and he 
plunged into a dismal court, then into a labyrinth of lanes, 
followed mechanically by Rameau. They issued at last on 
the Boulevards, in which the usual loungers were quietly 
sauntering, wholly unconscious of the riot elsewhere. " Now 
take that ^acre and go home ; write down your impressions 
of what you have seen, and take your MS. to M. de Mau- 
16on." Lebeau here quitted him. 

Meanwhile all happened as Lebeau had predicted. The 
Sergens de ViUe showed themselves in front of the baiti- 
\$ades ; a small troop of mounted soldiers appeared in the 
rear. The mob greeted the first with yells and a shower of 
stones ; at the sight of the last they fled in all directions ; 
and the Sergens de ViUe^ calmly scaling the barricades, car- 
ried off in triumph, as prisoners of war, four gamins^ three 
women, and one Irishman, loudly protesting innocence, and 
shrieking, " Murther !" So ended that first inglorious rise 
against the PUbisoite and the empire, on the 14th of May, 
1870. 

FEOM ISAUBA CICOGNA TO MADAME DE GRANTMESNIL. 

*. Saturday, May 21, 1870. 
"I am still, dearest Eulalie, under the excitement of im- 
pressions wholly new to me. I havQ this day witnessed one 
of those scenes which take us out of our private life, not into 
the world of fiction, but of history, in which we live as in 
the life of a nation. You know how intimate I have become 
with Valerie Duplessis. She is in herself so charming in her 
combination of petulant willfulness and guileless ncCiveti that 
she might sit as a model for one of your exquisite heroines. 
Her father, who is in great favor at court, had tickets for the 
Salle dea Etats of the Louvre to-day . when, as the journals 
will tell you, the results of the FUbiscite were formally ai- 



 



 



THB PABISIANS. 53 

nounced to the Emperor . and I accompanied him and Va- 
16rie. I felt, on entering the hall, as if I had been living for 
months in an atmosphere of false rumors, for those I chiefly 
meet in the circles of artists and men of letters, and the wits 
and fldneurs who haunt such circles, are nearly all hostile to 
the Emperor. They agree, at least, in asserting the decline 
of his popularity, the failure of his intellectual powers . in 
predicting his downfall, deriding the notion of a successor in 
his son. Well, I know pot how to reconcile these statements 
with the spectacle I have beheld to-day. 

" In the chorus of acclamation amidst which the Emperor 
entered the hall it seemed as if one heard the voice of the 
France he had just appealed to. . If the Fates are really 
weaving woe and shame in his woof, it is in hues which, to 
mortal eyes, seem brilliant with glory and joy. 

" You will read the address of the President of the Corps 
L6gislatif. I wonder how it will strike you. I own fairly 
that me it wholly carried away. At each sentiment I mur- 
mured to myself, *Is not this true? and, if true, are France 
and human nature ungrateful T 

"*It is now,' said the president, 'eighteen years since 
France, wearied with confusion and anxious for security, 
confiding in your genius and the Napoleonic dynasty, placed 
in your hands, together with the Imperial Crown, the au- 
thority which the publkj necessity demanded.' Then the 
address proceeded to enumerate the blessings that ensued . 
social order speedily restored . the welfare of all classes of 
society promoted . advances in commerce and manufactures 
to an extent hitherto unknown. Is not this true ? and if so, 
are you, noble daughter of France, ungrateful ? 

" Then came words which touched me deeply . me, who, 
knowing nothing of politics, still feel the link that unites 
Art to Freedom. *But from the first your Majesty has 
looked forward to the time when this concentration of pow- 
er would no longer correspond to the aspirations of a tran- 
quil and re-assured country, and foreseeing the progress of 
modem society, yon proclaimed that '^ Liberty must be the 
crowning of the edifice." ' Passing then over the previous 
gradual advances in popular government, the president came 
to the ^present self-abnegation, unprecedented in history,' 
and to the vindication of that JPl^iadte which I have heard 



 



Google 



54 THB PAKISIANB. 

SO assailedf. viz., Fidelity to the great principle upon which 
the throne was founded required that so important a modi- 
fication of a power bestowed by the people should not be 
made without the participation of the people themselves. 
Then, enumerating the millions who had welcomed the new 
form of government, thp president paused a second or two, 
as if with suppressed emotion, and every one present held 
his breath, till, in a deeper voice, through which there ran 
a quiver that thrilled through the l^all, he concluded with, 
* France is with you ; France places the cause of liberty un- 
der the protection of your dynasty and the great bodies of 
the state.' Is France with hito ? I know not ; but if the 
malcontents of France had been in the hall at that moment, 
I believe they would have felt the power of that wonderful 
sympathy which compels all the hearts in great audiences 
to beat in accord, and would have answered, ' It is true.' 

"All eyes now fixed on the Emperor, and I noticed few 
eyes which were not moist with tears. You know that calm, 
uni^vealing face of his . a face which sometimes disappoints 
expectation. But there is that in it which I have seen in 
no other, but which I can imagine to have been common to 
the Romans of old, the dignity that arises from self-control 
. an expression which seems removed from the elation of 
joy, the depression of sorrow . not unbecoming to one who 
has known great vicissitudes of Fortune, and is prepared 
alike for her frown* or her smiles. 

" I had looked at that face while M. Schneider was read- 
ing the address . it moved not a muscle ; it mfght have been 
a face of marble : even when at moments the words were 
drowned in applause, and the Empress, striving at equal 
composure, still allowed us to see a movement of her eyelids 
. a tremble on her lips. The boy at his right, heir to his 
dynasty, had his looks fixed on the president, as if eagerly 
swallowing each word in the address, save once or twice, 
when he looked round the hall furiously, and with a smile, 
as a more child might look. He struck me as a mere child. 
Next to the Prince was one of those countenances which, 
once seen, are never to be forgotten . the true Napoleonic 
type, brooding, thoughtful, ominous, beautiful, but not with 
the serene energy that characterizes the head of the first 
Napoleofi when Emperor, and wholly without the restless 



 



 



THB PAEISIANS* 65 

eagerness for action which is stamped in the lean outline 
of Napoleon when First Consul. No ; in Prince Napoleon 
there is the beauty- to which, as woman, I could never give 
my heart . were I man, the intellect that would not com- 
mand my trust. But, nevertheless, in beauty it is signal, 
and in that beauty the expression of intellect is predominant. 

" Oh, dear Eulalie, how I am digressing ! The Emperor 
spoke . and believe me, ^ulalie, whatever the journals or 
your compatriots may insinuate, there is in that man no signs 
of declining^ intellect or failing health. I care not what may 
be his years, but that man is in mind and in health as young 
at Caesar when he crossed the Rubicon. 

"The old cling to the past . they^do not go forward to 
the future. There was no going back in that speech of 
the Emperor. There was something grand and something 
young in the modesty with which he put aside all references 
to that which his empire had done. in the past, and said, with 
a simple earnestness of manner which I can not adequately 
describe : 

"' We must more than ever look fearlessly forward to the 
future. Who can be opposed to the progressive march of a 
regime founded by a great people in the midst of political 
disturbance, and -which now is fortified by liberty V 

"As he closed, the walls of that vast hall seemed to rock 
with an applause that must have been heard on the other 
eide of the Seine. 

" * 'Vive rMnpereurP 

" ' Vive rimperatrice P 

" * Vive le JPrince Imperial P And the last cry was yet 
more prolonged than the others, as if to affirm the dynasty. 

" Certainly I can imagine no court in the old days of chiv- 
alry more splendid than the audience in that grand hall of 
the Louvre. To the right of the throne all the embassadors 
of the civilized world in the blaze of their rich costumes and 
manifold orders. In the gallery at the left, yet more behind, 
the dresses and jewels of the dames d^honneur and of the 
great officers of state. And when the Empress rose to depart, 
certainly my fancy can not picture a more queen-like image, 
or one that seemed more in unison with the representation 
of royal pomp and power. The very dress, of a color which 
would have been fatal to the beauty of most women equally 

3* 

 VjOOQIC 



56 THS PABISIANS. 

fiiir . a deep golden color (Valerie profanely called it buff) 
. seemed so to suit the splendor of the ceremony and the 
day ; it seemed as if that stately form stood in the midst of 
a sunlight reflected from itself Day seemed darkened when 
that sunlight passed away. * 

'^ I fear you will think I have suddenly grown servile to 
the gauds and shows of mere royalty. I ask myself if that 
be so . I think not. Surely it is a higher sense of greatness 
which has been impressed on me by the pageant of to-day : 
I feel as if there were brought vividly before me the majesty 
of France, through the representation of the ruler she has 
crowned. . . 

^' I feel also as if there, in that hall, I found a refuge from 
all the warring contests in which no two seem to me in 
agreement as to the sort of government to be established in 
place of the present. The ' Liberty ' clamored for by one 
would cut the throat of the * Liberty ' worshiped by another. 

'^ I see a thousand phantom forms of Libbbtt, but only 
one living symbol of Obdeb . that which spoke from a throne 
to-day." 

. .  4e *  . 

Isaura left her letter uncompleted. On the following 
Monday she was present at a crowded soiree given by M. 
Louvier. Among the guests were some of the most eminent 
leaders of the Opposition, including that vivacious master 

of sharp sayings, M. P , whom Savarin entitled "the 

French Sheridan." If laws could be framed in epigrams, he 
would be also the French Solon. 

There, too, was Victor de Maul6on, regarded by the Re- 
publican party with equal admiration and distrust. For 
the distrust he himself pleasantly accounted in talk with 
Savarin. 

" How can I expect to be trusted ? I represent * Common 
Sense.' Every Parisian likes Common Sense in print, and 
cries, ^Je suis trahiy when Common Sense is to be put into 
action." 

A group of admiring listeners had collected round one 
(perhaps the most brilliant) of those oratorical lawyers by 
whonr, in France, the respect for all law has been so often 
talked away. He was speaking of the Saturday's ceremonial 
with eloquent indignation. It n^as a mockery to France to 



 



 



THB PA:BISXANS. 57 

talk of her placing Liberty ander the protection of the em- 
pire. 

There was a flagrant token of the military force under 
which civil freedom was held in the very dress of the Em- 
peror and his insignificant son : the first in the uniform of a 
General of Division ; the second, forsooth, in that of a Sous- 
Zfieutenant. Then other liberal chiefs chimed in. . '^ The 
army," said one, '^ was an absurd expense ; it must be put 
down." " The world was grown too civilized for war," said 
another. " The Empress was priest-ridden," said a third. 
" Churches might be tolerated . Voltaire built a church, but 
a church simply to the God of Nature, not of priestcraft." 
And so oh. 

Isaura, whom any sneer at religion pained and revolted, 
here turned away from the oratoi's to whom she had before 
been listening with earnest attention, and her eyes fett on the 
countenance of De Maul^on, who was seated opposite. The 
countenance startled her, its expression was so angrily scorn- 
ful. That expression, however, vanished at once as De Mau- 
16on*s eye met her own, and drawing his chair near to her, 
he said, smiling, " Your look tells me that I almost fright- 
ened you by the ill-bred frankness with which my face must 
have betrayed my anger at hearing such imbecile twaddle 
from mn who aspire to govern our turbulent France. You 
remember that after Lisbon was destroyed by an earthquake 
a quack advertised ^ pills against earthquakes.' These, mes- 
sieurs are not so cunning as the quack ; he did not name the 
ingredients of his pills." 

" Butj M. de Maal^on," said Isaura, V if you, being opposed 
to the empire, think so ill of the wisdom of thbse who would 
destroy it, are you prepared with remedies for earthquakes 
more efficacious than their pills ?" 

^^I reply as a famous English statesman, when in opposi- 
tion, replied t^a somewhat similar question, 'I don't pre- 
scribe till I'm called in.' " 

"To judge by the seven millions and a half whose votes 
were announced on Saturday, and by the enthusiasm with 
which the Emperor was greeted, there is too little fear of 
an earthquake for a good trade to the pills of these mes- 
sieurs, or for fair play to the remedies you will not disclose 
till called in." 



 



 



58 THE PABISIAKS. 

^' Ab, mcutemoiseBe^ playfal wit from lips not formed for pol- 
itics makes me forget all about emperors and earthquakes. 
Pardon that commonplace compliment. Kemember I am a 
Frenchman, and can not help being frivolous." 

" You rebuke my presumption too gently. True, I ought 
not to intrude political subjects on one like you . ^I under- 
stand 0 little about them . but this is my excuse, I so desire 
to know more." 

M. de Maul^on paused, and looked at her earnestly with a 
kindly, half-compassionate look, wholly free from the impjBr- 
tinence of gallantry. " Young poetess," he said, softly, " you 
care for politics I Happy indeed is he . and whether he suc- 
ceed or fail in his ambition abroad, proud should he be of an 
ambition crowned at home . ^he who has made yon desire to 
know more of politics !" 

The girl felt the blood surge to her temples. How could 
she have been so self-confessed I She made no reply, nor 
did M. de Mauleon seem to xpect one. With that rare del- 
icacy of high-breeding which appears in France to belong 
to a former generation he changed his tone, and went on as 
if there had been no interruption to the question her words 
implied : . 

" You think the empire secure . that it is menaced by no 
earthquake ? You deceive yourself. The Emperor began 
with a fatal mistake, but a mistake it needs many years to 
discover. He disdained the slow, natural process of adjust- 
ment between demand and supply . employer and M^orkmen. 
He desired . no ignoble ambition . ^to make Paris the won- 
der of the world, the eternal monument f his reign. In so 
doing he sought to create artificial modes of content for rev- 
olutionary workmen. Never has any ruler had such tender 
heed of manual labor to the disparagement of intellectual cul- 
ture. Paris is embellished ; Paris is the wonder of the world. 
Other great towns have followed its exampl^; they too have 
their rows of palaces and temples. Well, the time comes 
when the magician can no longer give work to the spirits 
he raises ; then they must fall on him and rend : out of the 
very houses he built for the better habitation of workmen 
will flock the malcontents who cry, *Down with the em- 
pire!' On the 21st day of May you witnessed the pompous 
ceremony which announces to the empire a vast majority 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 59 

of v(5tes that will be utterly useless to it, except as food for 
gunpowder in the times that are at hand. Seven days be- 
fore, on the 14th of May, there was a riot in the Faubourg 
du Temple . easily put down . you scarcely hear of it. That 
riot was not the less necessary to those who ivould warn 
the empire that it is mortal. True, the riot disperses ; but 
it is unpunished : riot unpunished is a revolution begun. 
The earthquake is nearer than you think; and for that earth- 
quake what are the pills yon quacks advertise? They prate 
of an age too enlightened for war ; they would mutilate the 
army . nay, disband it if they could . with Prussia next door 
to France. Prussia, desiring, not unreasonably, to take that 
place in the world which France now holds,' will never chal- 
lenge Franfte . ^if she did she would be too much in the wrong 
to find a second ; Prussia, knowing that sbe has to do with 
the vainest, the most conceited, the rashest antagonist that 
ever flourished a rapier into the face of a spadassin . Prus- 
sia will make France challenge her. 

"And how do ces messieitrs deal with the French army? 
Do they, dare say to the ministers, 'Reform it?' Do they 
dare say, 'Prefer for men whose first duty it is to obey . 
discipline to equality ; insist on the distinction between the 
officer and the private, and never confound it ; Prussian of- 
ficers are well-educated gentlemen . see that yours are?' 
Oh no! they are democrats too staunch not to fraternize 
with an armed mob ; they content themselves with grudg- 
ing ah extra sou to the Commissariat, and winking at the 
millions fraudulently pocketed by some 'Liberal contractor.' 
Dieu des dieuxf France to be beaten, not as at Waterloo 
by hosts combined, but in fair duel by a single foe ! Oh, 
the shame ! the shame ! But as the French army is now 
organized, beaten she must be, if sbe meets the march of the 
German." 

"You appall me with your sinister predictions," said 
Isaura; " but, happily, there is no sign of war. M. Duples- 
sis, who is in the confidence of the Emperor, told us only the 
other day that Napoleon, on learning the result of the Pl^- 
biscitef said, ' The foreign journalists who' have been insist- 
ing that the empire can not co-exist with free institutions 
will no longer hint that it can be safely assailed from with- 
out.' And more than ever I may say, L^Mnpire c^est lapaixP^ 



 



 



60 THE PABISIANS. 

Monsieur de Maul^on shrugged his shoulders. " The old 
story . Troy and the wooden hprse." 

" Tell me, M. de Mauleon, why do you, who so despise the 
Opposition, join with it in opposing the empire?" 

" Mademoiselle, the empire opposes me. While it lasts I 
can not be even a D^ut^ ; when it is gone . ^Heaven knows 
what I may be, perhaps Dictator . one thing you may rely 
upon, that I would, if not Dictator myself, support any man 
who was better fitted for that task." 

" Better fitted to destroy the liberty which he pretended 
to fight for!" 

" Not exactly so," replied M. de Mauleon, imperturbably. 
" Better fitted to establish a good goverament in lieu of the 
bad one he had fought against, and the much wofee govern- 
ments that would seek to turn France into a mad-house, and 
make the maddest of the inmates the mad doctor." He 
turned away, and here their conversation ended. 

But it so impressed Isaura that the same night she con- 
cluded her letter to Madame de Grantmesnil by giving a 
sketch of its substance, prefaced by an ingenuous c^mfession 
that she felt l^ss sanguine confidence in the importance of 
the applauses which had greeted the Emperor at the Satur- 
day's ceremonial, and ending thus: "I can but confusedly 
transcribe the words of this singular man, and can give you 
no notion of the manner and the voice which made them elo- 
quent. Tell me, can there be any truth in his gloomy pre- 
dictions ? I try not to think so, but they seem to rest over 
that brilliant hall of the Louvre like an ominous thunder- 
cloud." 



CHAPTER IL 

The Marquis de Rochebriant was seated in his pleasant 
apartment, glancing carelessly at the envelopes of many 
notes and letters lying yet unopened on his breakfast-table. 
He had risen late at noon, for he had not gone to bed till 
dawn. ^ The night had been spept at his club . oner the 
card-table . by no means to the pecuniary advantage of the 
Marquis. The reader will have learned through ihe conver- 
sation recorded in a former chapter between De Maul^n 



 



 



TBB PABISIAKS. 61 

and Engnerrand de Yandemar that the austere Seigneur 
Breton had become a fast Viveur of Paris. He had long 
since spent the remnant of Loavier^s premium of 1000, and 
he owed a yearns interest. For this last there was an ex 
cuse . M. Collot, the contractor, to whom he had been ad- 
vised to sell the yearly fall of his forest trees, had removed 
the trees, but had never paid a sou beyond the preliminary 
deposit ; so that the revenue, out of which the mortgagee 
should be paid his interest, was not forth -coming. Alain 
had instructed M. Hubert to press the contractor ; the con- 
tractor had replied that if not pressed he could soon settle 
all claims, if pressed he must declare himself bankrupt. The 
Chevalier de Finisterre had laughed at the alarm which 
Alain conceived when he first found himself in the condition 
of debtor for a sum he could not pay . creditor for a sum he 
could not recover. 

''BagatdUP' said the Chevalier. "Tschu ! Collot, if you 
give him time, is as safe as the Bank of France, and Louvier 
knows it. Louvier will not trouble you . Louvier, the best 
fellow in the world. I'll call on him and explain matters." 

It is to be presumed that the Chevalier did so explain, for 
though both at the first, and quite recently at the second 
default of payment, Alain received letters from M. Louvier's 
professional agent as reminders of interest due, and as re- 
quests for its payment, the Chevalier assured him that these 
applications were formalities of conventipn . that Louvier, 
in fact, knew nothing, about them ; and when dining with 
the great financier himself, and cordially welcomed and call- 
ed "JbToTi cAer," Alain had taken him aside and commenced 
explanation and excuse, Louvier had cut him short. ^^Peste! 
don't mention such trifles. There is such a thing as business 
. that concerns my agent ; such a thing as friendship . that 
concerns me. AUez /" 

Thus M. de Bochebriant, confiding in debtor and in cred- 
itor, had suffered twelve months to glide by without much 
heed of either, and more than lived up to an income amply 
Bufiicient, indeed, for the wants of an ordinary bachelor, 
"but needing more careful thrift than could well be expect- 
ed from the head of one of the most illustrious houses in 
France, cast so young into the vortex of the most expensive 
capital in the world. 



 



 



62 THB PABISIAN8. 

The poor Marquis glided into the grooves that slant down- 
ward, much as the French Marquis of tradition was wont to 
slide ; not that he appeared to live extravagantly, but he 
needed all he had for his pocket-money, and had lost that 
dread of being in debt which he had brought up from the 
purer atmosphere of Bretagne. 

But there were some debts which, of course, a Rochebriant 
must pay-rdebts of honor . and Alain had on the previous 
night incurred such a debt, and must pay it that day. He 
had been strongly tempted, when the debt rose to the figure 
it had attained, to risk a change of luck ; but whatever his 
imprudence, he was incapable of dishonesty. If the luck did 
not change, and he lost more, he would be without means 
to meet his obligations. As the debt now stood, he cal- 
culated that he could just discharge it by the sale of his 
cotipi and horses. It is no wonder he left his letters un- 
opened, however charming they might be ; he was quite sure 
they would contain no check which would enable him to 
pay his debt and retain his equipage. 

The door opened, and the valet announced M. le Chevalier 
de Finisterre . a man with smooth countenance and air dis- 
tinguSy a pleasant voice and perpetual smile. 

" Well, man cher^^^ cried the Chevalier, " I hope that you 
recovered the favor of Fortune before ^ou quitted her green- 
table last night. When I left she seemed very cross with 
you." 

"And so continued to the end," answered Alain, with 
well-simulated gayety . much too bon gentilhomme to be- 
tray rage or anguish for pecuniary loss. 

"After all," said De Finisterre, lighting his cigarette, ** the 
uncertain goddess could not do you much harm ; the stakes 
were small, and your adversary, the Prince, never goes 
double or quits." 

" Nor I either. * Small,' however, is a word of relative im- 
port ; the stakes might be small to you, to me large. MUre 
nou8,cher am% I am' at the end of my purse, and I have only 
this consolation . I am cured of play; not that I leave the 
complaint . ^the complaint leaves me; it can no more feed 
on me than a fever can feed on a skeleton." 

" Are you serious ?" 

"As serious as a mourner who has just buned his all." 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 63 

" His all ? Tat, with such an estate as Kochebriant !* 

For the first time in that talk Alain's countenance became 
overcast. 

"And how long will Rochebriant be mine? You know 
that I hold it at the mercy of the mortgagee, whose interest 
has not been paid, and who could, if he so pleased, issue no- 
ticCy take proceedings . that . ^" 

^^PesteP^ interrupted De Finisterre; "Louvier take pVo- 
ceedings! Louvier, the best fellow in the world! But 
don't I see his handwriting on that envelope? No doubt 
an invitation to dinner." 

Alain took up the letter thus singled forth from a miscel- 
lany of epistles, some in female handwritings, unsealed but 
ingeniously twisted into Gordian knots ; some also in female 
handwritings, carefully sealed; others in ill-looking enve- 
lopes, addressed in bold, legible, clerk-like epigraphy. Taken 
altogether, these epistles had a character m common ; they 
betoken the correspondence of a " viveur ".regarded from 
the female side as young, handsome, well born ; on the male 
side as a viveur who had forgotten to pay his hosier and 
tailor. 

Louvier wrote a small, not very intelligible, but very 
masculine hand, as most men who think cautiously and act 
promptly do write. The letter ran thus : 

" Cher petit Marquis " (at that commencement Alain haugh- 
tily raised his head and bit his lips). 

^^ Cher petit Marquis^ . It is an age since I have seen you. 
No doubt my humble soiries are too dull for a beau seigneur 
80 courted. I forgive you. Would I were a beau seigneur 
at your age ! Alas ! I am only a commonplace man of busi- 
ness, growing old, too aloft from the world in which I dwell. 
ITou can scarcely be &ware that I have embarked a great 
part of my capital in building speculations. There is a 
Rue de Louvier that rgns its drains right through my 
purse. I am obliged to call in the moneys due to me. My 
agent informs me that I am just 7000 louis short of the to- 
tal I need . all other debts being paid in . and that there is 
a trifle more than 7000 louis owed to me as interest on my 
hypothlque on Kochebriant : kindly pay into his hands be- 
fore the en^ of this week that sum. You have been too 



 



 



64 THB PABISIANS. 

leni^t to CoUot, who must owe you more than that. Send 
agent to him. Dhcle to trouble you, and am au disespoir 
to think that my own pressing necessities compel me to 
urge you to take so much trouble. Mais que faire f The 
Rue de Louvier stops the ' way, and I must leave it to my 
agent to clear it. 

'^ Accept all my excuses, with the assurance of my senti- 
mcihts the most cordial ^ Paul Louvibr." 

Alain tossed the letter to De Finisterre. "Read that 
from the best fellow in the world.*' 

The Chevalier laid down his cigarette and read, "2>^a- 
hU /" he said, when he returned the letter and resumed the 
cigarette . ^^DiabUl Louvier must be much pressed for 
money, or he would not have written in this strain. What 
does it matter ? Collot owes you more than 7000 louis. Let 
your lawyer gpt them, and go to sleep with both ears on 
your pillow." 

"Ah ! you think Collot can pay if he will ?" 

"JIfa foi I did not M. Gandrin tell you that M. Collot 
was safe to. buy your wood at more money than any one 
else would give ?" 

" Certainly," said Alain, comforted. " Gandrin left that 
impression on my mind. I will set him on the man. All 
will come right, I dare say ; but if it does not come right, 
what would Louvier do ?" 

" Louvier do ?" answered Finisterre, reflectively. " Well, 
do you ask my opinion and advice ?" 

" Earnestly, I ask." 

" Honestly, then, I answer. I am a little on the Bourse 
myself. most Parisians are. Louvier has made a gigantic 
speculation in this new street, and with so many other irons 
in the fire he must want all the m6hey he can get at. I 
dare say that if you do not pay him what you owe, he must 
leave it to his agent to take step for announcing the sale 
of Rochebriant. But he detests scandal ; he hates the no- 
tion of being severe ; rather than that, in spite of his diffi- 
culties, he will buy Rochebriant of you at a better price 
than it can command at public sale. Sell it to him. Ap- 
peal to him to act generously, and you wiU flatter him. You 
will get more than the old place is worth. Invest the Bur- 



Digitized 



bf 



THE FABISIANS. 65 

plus . ^live as you have done, or better . and marry an keiiv 
ess. Marhleu! a Marquis de Rochebriant, if he were sixty 
years old, would rank high in the matrimonial market. The 
more the democrats have sought to impoverish titles and 
laugh down historical names, the more do rich democrat 
fathers-in-law seek to decorate their daughters with titles 
and give their grandchildren the heritage of historical names. 
You look shocked, joawtjre ami. Let us hope, then, that Col- 
lot will pay. Set your dog . I mean your lawyer . at him ; 
seize him by the throat I" 

Before Alain had recovered from the stately silence with 
which he had heard this veiy practical counsel the valet 
again appeared, and ushered in M, Frederic Lemercier. 

There was no cordial acquaintance between the visitors. 
Lemercier was chafed at finding himself supplanted in Alain's 
intimate companionship by so new a friend, and De Finis- 
terre affected to regard Lemercier as a would-be exquisite 
of low birth and bad taste. Alain, too, was a little discom- 
posed at the sight of Lemercier, remembering the wise cau- 
tions which thafr old college friend had wasted on him at the 
commencement of his Parisian career, and smitten with vain 
remoi*se that the cautions had been so arrogantly slighted. 

It was with some timidity that he extended his hand to 
Frederic, and he was surprised as well as moved by the 
more than usual warmth with which it was grasped by the 
friend he had long neglected. Such affectionate greeting 
was scarcely in keeping with the pride which characterized 
Frederic Lemercier. 

^^MafoiP'* said the Chevalier, glancing toward the clock, 
" how time flies ! I had no idea it was so late. I must leave 
you now, my dear Rochebriant. Perhaps we shall meet at 
the club later . I dine there to-day. Au plaisir^ M. Lemer- 



CHAPTER in. 

When the door had closed on the Chevalier, Frederic's 
countenance ibecame very grave. Drawing his chair near 
to Alain, he said : " We have not seen much of each other 
lately . nay, no excuses; I am well aware that it could 



 



 



66 THE PABISIANS. 

scarcely be otherwise. Paris has grown so large and so 
subdivided into sets that the best friends belonging to dif- 
ferent sets become as divided as if the Atlantic flowed be- 
tween them. I come to-day in consequence of something I 
have just heard from Duplessis. Tell me, have you got the 
money for the wood you sold to M. CoUot a year ago?" 

" No," said Alain, falteringly. 

" Good heavens ! none of it ?" 

" Only the deposit of ten per cent., which, of course, I 
spent, for it formed the greater part of my income. What 
of Collot ? Is he really unsafe ?" 

" He is mined, and has fled the country. His flight was 
the talk of the Bourse this morning. Duplessis told me of 
it." 

Alain's face paled. " How is Louvier to be paid ? Read 
that letter !" 

Lemercier rapidly scanned his eye over the contents of 
Louvier's letter. 

" It is true, then, that you owe this man a year's interest 
. ^more than YOOO louis?" 

"Somewhat more . yes. But that is not the firet care 
that troubles me . Rochebriant may be lost, but with it not 
my honor. I owe the Russian Prince 300 louis, lost to him 
last night at ^artL I must find a purchaser for my coup^ 
and horses ; they cost me 600 louis last year . do you know 
any one who will give me three ?" 

" Pooh ! ^ will give you six ; your al^zan alone is worth 
half the money !" 

" My dear Frederic, I will not sell them to you on any 
account. But you have so many friends . ^" 

"Who would give their soul to say, 'I bought these 
horses of Rochebriant.' Of course I do. Ha I young Ra- 
meau . you are acquainted with him?" 

" Raraeau ! I never heard of him !" 

" Vanity of vanities, then what is fame ! Rameau is the 
editor of Xe Sms Commun. You read that journal !" 

" Yes, it has clever articles, and I remember how I was 
absorbed in the eloquent roman which appeared in it." 

"Ah ! by the Signora Cicogna, .with whofti I think you 
were somewhat smitten last year." 

" Last year . was I ? How a year can alter a man ! But 



 



Google 



THE PABISIANS. 67 

my debt to the Prince. Whai; has Le Sens Commun to do 
with my horses ?" 

" I met Kameau at Savarin-s the other evening. He was 
making himself out a hero and a martyr ; his coupe had been 
taken from him to assist in a barricade in that senseless 
imeute ten days ago ; the ^oupS got smashed, the horses 
disappeared. He will buy one of your horses and coupe. 
Leave it to me ! I know where to dispose of the other two 
horses. At what hour do you want the money ?" 

" Before I go to dinner at the club !" 

" You shall have it within two hours ; but you must not 
dine at the club to-day. I have a note from Duplessis to 
invite you to dine with him to-day !" 

" Duplessis ! I know so little of him !" 

" You should know him better. He is the only man who 
can give you sound advice as to this difficulty with Louvier, 
and he will give it the more carefully and zealously because 
he has that enmity to Louvier which one rival financier has 
to another. I dine with him too. We shall find an occasion 
to consult him quietly ; he speaks of you most kindly. What 
a lovely girl his daughter is!" 

"I dare say. Ah ! I wish I had been^ess absurdly fastid- 
ious. I wish I had entered the army as a private soldier six 
months ago ; I should have been a corporal by this time ! 
Still it is not too lat^. When Rochebriant is gone, I can 
yet say with the Mousquetaire in the melodrame, ' I am rich 
. I have my honor and 5iy sword !' " 

"Nonsense! Rochebriant shall be saved; meanwhile 
I hasten to Rameau. Au revoir, at the H6tel Duplessis . 
seven o'clock." 

Lemercier went, and in less than two hours sent the Mar- 
quis bank-notes for 600 louis, requesting an order fm* the de- 
livery of the horses and carriage. 

That order written and signed, Alain hastened to acquit 
himself of his debt of honor, Aid contemplating his probable 
-ruin with a lighter heart, presented himself at the H6tel 
Duplessis. 

Duplessis made no pretensions to vie with the magnificent 
existence of Louvier. His house, though agreeably situated 
and flatteringly styled the H6tel Duplessis, was of moderate 
size, very unostentatiously flirnished ; nor was it accustomed 

 VjOOQIC 



68 THB PABI6IANS. 

to receive tbe brilliant motley crowds which assembled in 
the salons of the elder financier. 

Before that year, indeed, Duplessis had confined such en- 
tertainments as he gave to quiet men of business, or a few 
of the more devoted and loyal partisans of the imperial dy- 
nasty ; but since Valerie came 4o live with him he had ex- 
tended his hospitalities to wider and livelier circles, includ- 
ing some celebrities in the world of art and letters as well ad 
of fashion. Of the party assembled that evening at dinner 
were Isaura, with the Signora Yenosta, one of the imperial 
ministers, the Colonel whom Alain had already met at Le- 
mercier's supper, Diputis (ardent Imperialists), and the 
Duchesse de Tarascon ; these, with Alain and Frederic, made 
up the party. The conversation was not particularly gay. 
Duplessis himself, though an exceedingly well-read and able 
roan, had not the genial accomplishments of a brilliant host. 
Constitutionally grave and habitually taciturn . though there 
were moments in which he was roused out of his wonted 
self into eloquence or wit . he seemed to-day absorbed in 
some engrossing train of thought. The minister, the Diputis^ 
and the Duchesse de Tarascon talked politics, and ridiculed 
the trumpery imeu^ of tbe 14th ; exulted in the success of 
tbe Plebiscite ; and admitting, with indignation, the grow- 
ing strength of Prussia . and with scarcely less indignation, 
but more contempt, censuring tbe selfish egotismof England 
in disregarding the due equilibrium of the European balance 
of power . ^hinted at the necessity of annexing Belgium as a 
set-off against tbe results of Sadowa. 

Alain found himself seated next to Isaura . ^to the woman 
who bad so captivated bis eye and fancy on bis fii%t arrival 
in Paris. 

RemeMibering bis last conversation with Graham nearly 
a year ago, he felt some curiosity to ascertain whether tbe 
rich Englishman had proposed to her, and if so, been re- 
fused or accepted. . 

The first words that passed between them were trite- 
enough, but after a little pause in tbe talk, Alain said : 

^^ I think mademoiselle and myself have an acquaintance 
in common . Monsieur Vane, a distinguished Englishman. 
Do you know if be be in Paris at present ? I have not seen 
him for many months." 



 



 



THE FABISIANS. 69 

" I believe he is in London ; at least Colonel Morley met, 
the other day, a friend of his who said so." 

Though Isaura strove to speak in a tone of indifference, 
Alain's ear detected a ring of pain in her voice ; and watch- 
ing her countenance, he was impressed with a saddened 
change in its expression. He was touched, and his curi- 
osity was mingled with a gentler interest as he said, " When 
I last saw M. Vane, I should have judged him to be too 
much under the spell of an enchantress to remain long with- 
out the pale of the circle she draws around her." 

Isaura turned her face quickly toward the speaker, and 
her lips moved, but she said nothing audibly. 

"Can there have been quarrel or misunderstanding?" 
thought !A.lain ; and after that question his heart asked it- 
self, " Supposing Isaura were free, her affections disengaged, 
could he wish to woo and to win her ?" and his heatt an- 
swered, " Eighteen months ago thou wert nearer to her than 
now. Thou wert removed from her forever when thou didst 
accept the world as a barrier between you ; then, poor as 
thou wert, thou wouldst have preferred her to riches. Thou 
wert then sensible only of the ingenuous impulses of youth ; 
tut the moment thou saidst, * I am Rochebriant, and having 
once owned the claims of birth and station, I can not re- 
nounce them for love,' Isaura became -but a dream. Now 
that niin stares thee in the face . now that thou must grap- 
ple with the sternest difficulties of adverse fate . thou hast 
lost the poetry of sentiment which could alone give to that 
dream the colors and the form of human life." He could 
not again think of that fair creature as a prize that he might 
even dare to covet. And as he met her inquiring eyes, and 
saw her quivering lip, he felt instinctively that Graham was 
dear to her, and that the tender interest with which she in- 
spired himself was untroubled by one pang of jealousy. He 
resumed : 

*' Yes, the last time I saw the Englishman he spoke with 
such respectful homage of one lady, whose hand he would 
deem it the highest reward of ambition to secure, that I can 
not but feel deep compassion for him if that ambition has 
been foiled; and thus only do I account for his absence 
from Paris." 

*' You are an intimate friend of Mr. Vane's ?" 

 VjOOQIC 



10 THE PARISIANS. 

'^ Ko, indeed, I have not that honor; our acquaintance is 
but slight, but it impressed me with the idea of a man of 
vigorous intellect, frank temper, and perfect honor." 

Isaura's face brightened with the joy we feel when we 
hear the praise of those we love. 

At this moment Duplessis, who had been observing the 
Italian and the young Marquis, for the first time during din- 
ner, broke silence. 

^^ Mademoiselle j^^ he said, addressing Isaura across the ta- 
ble, " I hope I have not been correctly informed that your 
literary triumph has induced you to forego the career in 
which all the best judges concur that your successes would 
be no less brilliant ; surely one art does not excluda another.'* 

Elated by Alain's report of Graham's words, b/ the con- 
viction that these words applied to herself, and by the 
thought that her renunciation of the stage removed a bar- 
rier between them, Isaura answered, with a sort of enthusi- 
asm: 

" I know not, M. Duplessis, if one art excludes another . 
if there be desire to excel in each. But I have long lost all 
desire to excel in the art you refer to, and resigned all idea 
of the career in which it opens." 

" So M. Vane told me," said Alain, in a whisper, 

"When?" 

" Last year, on the day that he spoke in terms of admira- 
tion so merited of the lady whom M. Duplessis has just had 
the honor to address." 

All this while Valerie, who was seated at the further end 
of the table beside the minister, who had taken her in to din- 
ner, had been watching, with eyes the anxious tearful sorrow 
of which none but her father had noticed, the low -voiced 
confidence between Alain and the friend whom till that day 
she had so enthusiastically loved. Hitherto she had been 
answering in monosyllables all attempts of the great man to 
draw her into conversation ; but now, observing how Isaura 
blushed and looked down, that strange faculty in women 
which we men call dissimulation, and which in them is timth- 
fulness to their own nature, enabled her to carry off the 
sharpest anguish she had ever experienced by a sudden 
burst of levity of spirit. She caught up some commonplace 
the minister had adapted to what he considered the poverty 



 



Google 



THE PABISIANS. 1l 

of her understanding with a quickness of satii"e which star- 
tled that grave man, and he gazed at her astonished. Up 
to that moment he had secretly admired her as a girl well 
brought up . as girls fresh from a French convent are sup- 
posed to be ; now, hearing her brilliant rejoinder to his stupid 
observation, he said, inly, ^^ Darnel the low birth of a finan- 
cier's daughter shows itself." 

But, being a clever man himself, her retort put him on his 
mettle, and he became, to his own amazement, brilliant him- 
self With that matchless quickness which belongs to Pa- 
risians, the guests around him seized the new esprit de con- 
versation which had been evoked between the statesman and 
the child-like girl beside him ; and as- they caught up the 
ball, lightly flung among them, they thought within them- 
selves how much more sparkling the financier's pretty, live- 
ly daughter was than that dark-eyed young muse, of whom 
all the journalists of Paris were writing in a chorus of wel- 
come and applause, and who seemed not to have a word to 
say worth listening to, excepting to the handsome young 
Marquis, whom, no doubt, she wished to fascinate. 

Valerie fairly outshone Isaura in intellect and in wit ; and 
neither Valerie nor Isaura cared, to the value of a bean straw, 
about that distinction. Each was thinking, only of the prize 
which the humblest peasant women have in common with 
the most brilliantly accomplished of their sex . the heart of 
a man beloved. ' , * 



CHAPTER IV. 

Ok the Continent generally, as^we all know, men do not 
sit drinking wine together after the ladies retire. So when 
the signal was given, all the guests adjourned to the salon, 
and Alain quitted Isaura to gain the ear of the Dachesse de 
Tarascon. 

" It is long . at least long for Paris life," said the Marquis, 
" since my first visit to. you, in company with Enguerrand 
de Yandemar. Much that you then said rested on my mind, 
disturbing; the prejudices I took from Bretagne." 

"I am proud to hear it, my kinsman." 

"You know that I would have taken military service 

II.. 4 ^ . 

 VjOOQIC 



72 THE PABI8IANS. 

ander the Emperor but for the regulation which would have 
compelled me to enter the ranks as a private soldier." 

" I sympathize with that scruple ; but you are aware that 
the Emperor himself could not have ventured to make an 
exception even in your favor." 

" Certainly not. I repent me of my pride ; perhaps I may 
enlist still in some regiment sent to Algiers." 

" No ; there are other ways in which a Rochebriant can 
serve a throne. There will be an office at court vacant soon, 
which would not misbecome your birth." 

"Pardon me . a soldier serves his country, a courtier 
owns a master ; and I can not take the livery of the Emper- 
or, though I could wear the uniform of France." 

"Your distinction is childish, my kinsman," said the 
Duchesse, impetuously. " You talk as if the Emperor had 
an interest apart from the nation. I tell you that he has 
not a corner of his heart . not even one reserved for his son 
and his dynasty . in which the thought of France does not 
predominate." 

" I do not presume, McCdame la Duchesse^ to question the 
truth of what you say; but I have no reason to suppose that 
the same thought does not predominate in the heart of the 
Bourbon. The Bourbon would be the first to say to me, 
* If France needs your sword against her foes, let it not rest 
in the scabbard.' But would the Bourbon say, ' The place 
of a Rochebriant is among, the VaktaiUe of the Cprsican's 
successor ?' " 

"Alas for poor France !" said the Duchesse ; " and alas for 
men like you, my proud cousin^ if the Corsican's successors 
or successor be . " 

" Henry V. ?" inteiTupJed Alain, with a brightening eye. 

"Dreamer! No! Some descendant of the mob -kings 
who gave Bourbons and nobles to the guiUotine.^^ 

While the Duchesse and Alain were thus conversing, 
Isaura had seated herself by Valerie, and, unconscious of the 
offense she had given, addressed her in those pretty caress- 
ing terms with which young lady friends are wont to com- 
pliment each other ; but Val6rie answered curtly or sarcas- 
tically, and turned aside to converse with the minister. A 
few minutes more and the party began to break up. Lemer- 
cier, however, detained Alain, whispering," Duplessis will see 
us on your business so soon as the other guests have gone." 

.  VjOOQ IC 



THE PARISIANS. 73 



CHAPTER V. 

^' Monsieur le Marquis,'' said Duplessis, when the salon 
was cleared of all but himself and the two friends, " Lemer- 
cier has confided to me the state of your affairs in connec- 
tion with M. Louvier, and flatters me by thinking my ad- 
vice may be of some service ; if so, command me." 

" I shall most gratefully accept your advice," answered 
Alain, " but I fear my condition defies even your ability and 
skill." 

" Permit me to hope not, and to ask a few necessary ques- 
tions. M. Louvier has constituted himself your sole mort- 
gagee ; to what amount, at what .interest, and from what 
annual proceeds is the interest paid ?" 

Herewith Alain gave details already furnished to the 
reader. Duplessis listened, and noted down the replies. 

"I see it all," he said, when Alain had finished. "M. 
Louvier had predetermined to possess himself of your estate ; 
he makes himself sole mortgagee at a rate of interest so low 
that I tell you fairly, at the present value of money, I doubt 
if you could find any capitalist who would accept the trans- 
fer of the mortgage at the same rate. This is not like Lou- 
vier, unless he had an object to gain ; and that object is your 
land. The revenue from your estate is derived chiefly from 
wood, out of which the interest due to Louvier is to be paid. 
M. Gandrin, in a skillfully guarded letter, encourages you 
to sell the wood from your forests to a man who offers you 
several thousand francs more than it could command from 
customary buyers. I say nothing against M. Gandrin ; but 
every man who knows Paris as I do knows that M. Louvier 
can put, and has put, a great deal of money into M. Gan- 
4nn'8 pocket. The purchaser of your wood does not pay 
more than his deposit, and has just left the country insolvent. 
Your purchaser, M. Collot, was an adventurous speculator ; 
he would have bought any thing at any price, provided he 
hftd time to pay; if his speculations had been lucky, he 
wonld have paid. M. Louvier knew, as I knew, that M. 



 



 



74 THE PABI6IANS. 

Collot was a gambler, and the chances were that he would 
not pay. M. Louvier allows a year's interest on his hypo- 
thhque to become due . notice thereof duly giveif to you by 
his agent . now you come under the operation of the law. 
Of course you know what the law is ?" 

"Not exactly," answered Alain, feeling frost-bitten by 
the congealing words of his counselor; "but I take it for 
granted that if I can not pay the interest of a sum borrowed 
on my property, that property itself is forfeited." 

"No, not quite that . the law is mild. If the interest, 
which should be paid half-yearly, remains unpaid at the end 
of a year, the mortgagee has a right to be impatient, has he 
not?" 

" Certainly he has." 

" Well, then, on fait un commandement tendant d saisie 
immobilUre . viz., the mortgagee gives a notice that the 
property shall be put up for sale. Then it is put up for 
sale, and in most cases the mortgagee buys it in. Here, cer- 
tainly, no competitors in the mere business way would vie 
with Louvier ; the mortgage at three and a half per cent, 
covers more than the estate is apparently worth. Ah ! but 
stop, M. le Marquis ; the notice is not yet served ; the whole 
process would take six months from the day it is served to 
the taking possession after the sale ; in the mean while, if 
you pay the interest due, the action drops. Courage, M. le 
Marquis 1 Hope yet, if you condescend to call me friend." 

"And me," cried Lemercier; "I will sell out of my rail- 
way shares to-morrow . see to it, Duplessis . enough to pay 
off the damnable interest. See to it, mon arm,^^ 

"Agree to that, M. le Marquis, and you are safe for anoth* 
er year," said Duplessis, folding up the paper on which he 
had made his notes, Tjut fixing on Alain quiet eyes half con- 
cealed under drooping lids. 

"Agree to that!" cried Rochebriant, rising . "agree to 
allow even my woret enemy to pay for me moneys I could 
never hope to repay . agree to allow the oldest and. most 
confiding of my friends to do so . ^M. Duplessis, never ! K 
I carried the porter's knot of an Auvergnat, I should still 
remain gentilhomme and Breton.'*'* 

Duplessis, habitually the driest of men, rose with a moist' 
ened eye and flushing cheek, " Monsieur le Marquis, vouch- 



Digitized 



ed by Google 



THE PAKISIANS. 75 

safe me the honou to shake hands with you. I, too, am by de- 
scent gentilhomme^ by profession a speculator on the Bourse. 
In both capacities I approve the sentiment you have uttered. 
Certainly if our friend Frederic lent you 7000 louis or so this 
year, it would be impossible for you even to foresee the yeau 
in which you could repay it ; but," here Duplessis paused a 
minute, and then lowering the tone of his voice, which had 
been somewhat vehement and enthusiastic, into that of a col- 
loquial good-fellowship, equally rare to the measured reserve 
of the financier, he asked, with a lively twinkle of his gray 
eye, " did you never hear. Marquis, of a little encounter be- 
tween me and M. Louvier ?" 

"Encounter at arms . does Louvier fight?" asked Alain, 
innocently. 

" In his own way he is always fighting ; but I speak meta- 
phorically. You see this small house of mine . so pinched 
in by the houses next to it that I can neither get space for 
a ball-room for Valerie, nor a dining-room for more than a 
friendly party like that which has honored me to-day. Eh 
bien 1 I bought this house a few years ago, meaning to buy 
the one next to it, and throw the two into one. I went to 
the proprietor of the next house, who, as I knew, wished to 
sell * Aha !' he thought, ' this is the rich Monsieur Duples- 
sis;' and he asked me 2000 louis more than the house was 
worth. We men of business can not bear to be too much 
cheated . a little cheating we submit to, much cheating 
raises our gall, ^re/*. this was on Monday. I offered the 
man one thousand louis above the fair price, and gave him 
till Thursday to decide. Somehow or other Louvier bears 
of this. * Hillo !' says Louvier ; * here is a financier who 
desires a hdtel to vie with mine !' He goes on Wednesday 
to my next-door neighbor, * Friend, you want to sell your 
house. I want to buy . the price?' The proprietor, who 
does not know him by sight, says, ^ It is as good as sold. 
M. Duplessis and I shall agree.' ' Bah ! What sum did 
you ask M. Duplessis?' He names the sum . 2000 louis 
more than he can get elsewhere. * But M. Duplessis will 
give me the sum.' ' You asked too little. I will give you 
three thousand. A fig for M. Duplessis ! I am Monsieur 
Louvier.' So when I call on Thursday the house is sold. I 
reconciled myself easily enough to the loss of space for a 



 



 



76 THB PAKISIANS. 

larger dining -room; but though Valerie was then a child 
at a convent, I was sadly disconcerted by the thought that 
I could have no sails de bal ready for her when she came to 
reside with me. Well, I say to myself, patience ; I owe M. 
Lou.vier a good turn ; my time to pay him off will come. It 
does come, and very soon. M. Louvier buys an estate near 
Paris . builds a superb villa. Close to his property is a ris- 
ing forest ground for sala He goes to the proprietor. Says 
the propnetor to himself, * The great Louvier wants this,' and 
adds five thousand louis to its market price. Louvier, like 
myself, can't bear to be cheated egregiously. Louvier offers 
2000 louis more than the man could fairly get, and leaves 
him till Saturday to consider. I hear of this . speculators 
hear of every thing. On Friday night I go to the man and 
I give him 6000 louis, where he had asked 5000. Fancy Lou- 
vier's face the next day ! But there my revenge only be- 
gins," continued Duplessis, chuckling inwardly. " My forest 
looks down on the villa he is building. I only wait till his 
villa is built, in order to send to my architect and say, * Build 
me a villa at least twice as grand as M. Louvier's, then clear 
away the forest trees, so that every morning he may see my 
palace dwarfing into insignificance his own.' " 

" Pravo !" cried Lemercier, clapping his hands. Lemercier 
had the spirit of party, and felt for Duplessisagainst Louvier 
much as in England Whig feels against T^Joy, or vice versa. 

"Perhaps now," resumed Duplessis, more soberly . "per- 
haps now, M. le Marquis, you may understand why I hu- 
miliate you by no sense of obligation if I say that M. Lou- 
vier shall not be the Seigneur de Rochebriant if I can help 
it. Give me a line of introduction to your Breton lawyer 
and to mademoiselle your aunt. Let me have your letters 
early to-morrow. I will take the afternoon train. I know 
not how many days I may be absent, but I shall not return 
till I have carefully examined the nature and conditions of 
your property. If I see my way to save your estate, and 
give d^mauvais quart d^heure to Louvier, so much the better 
for you, M. le Marquis ; if I can not, I will say, frankly, * Make 
the best terms you can with your creditor.' " 

" Nothing can be more delicately generous than the way 
you put it," said Alain ; " but pardon me if I say that the 
pleasantry with which you narrate your grudge against M. 



 



 



TH PABISIANS. 77 

LoQvier does not answer its purpose in diminishing my sense 
of obligation." So, linking his arm in Lemercier's, Alain made 
his bow and withdrew. 

When his gaests had gone, Duplessis remained seated in 
meditation . apparently pleasant meditation, for he smiled 
while indulging it ; he then passed through the reception- 
rooms to one .at the far end, appropriated to Valerie as a 
boudoir or morning-room, adjoining her bed-chamber; he 
knocked gently at the door, and all remaining silent within, 
he opened it noiselessly and entered. Val6rie was reclining 
on the sofa near the window, her head drooping, her hands 
clasped on her knees. Duplessis neared her with tender, 
stealthy steps, passed his arm round her, and drew her head 
toward his bosom. " Child I" he murmured, " my child I my 
only one 1" 

At that soft loving voice, Valerie flung her arms round 
him, and wept aloud like an infant in trouble. He seated 
himself beside her, and wisely suffered her to weep on till 
her passion had exhausted itself; he then said, half fondly, 
half chidingly, " Have you forgotten our conversation only 
three days ago ? Have you forgotten that I then drew forth 
the secret of your heart ? Have you forgotten what I prom- 
ised yon in return for your confidence? And a promise to 
you have I ever yet broken ?" 

" Father ! father ! I am so wretched, and so ashamed of 
myself for being wretched ! Forgive me. No, I do not 
forget your promise, but who can promise to dispose of the 
heart of another ? . and that heart will n^ver be mine. But 
bear with me a little ; I shall soon recover." 

" Valerie, when I made you the promise you now think I 
can not keep, I spoke only from that conviction of power to 
promote thejiappiness of a child which nature implants in 
the heart of parents ; and it may be also from the experience 
of my own strength of will, since that which I have willed I 
have always won. Now I speak on y^ surer ground. Be- 
fore the year is out you shall be the beloved wife of Alain de 
Rochebriant. Dry your tears and smile on me, Val6rie. If 
you will not see in me mother and father both, I have double 
love for you, motherless child of her who shared the poverty 
of my youth, and did not live to enjoy the wealth which I 
hold as a trust for that heir to mine all which she left me." 



 



 



78 THE PARISIANS. 

As this man thus spoke you would scarcely have recog- 
nized in him the cold, saturnine Duplessis, his countenance 
became so beautified by the one soft feeling which care and 
contest, ambition and money-seeking, had left unaltered in 
his heart. Perhaps there is no country in which the love 
of parent and child, especially of father and daughter, is so 
strong as it is in France ; even in the most avid soil, among 
the avaricious, even among the profligate, it forces itself into 
flower. Other loves fade away in the heart of the true 
Frenchman, that parent love blooms to the last. 

Valerie felt the presence of that love as a divine protect- 
ing guardianship. She sank on her knees and covered his 
hand with grateful kisses. 

" Do not torture youinelf, my child, with jealous fears of 
the fair Italian. Her lot and Alain de Rochebriant's can 
never unite ; and whatever you may think of their whispei-ed 
converse, Alain's heart, at this moment, is too filled with 
anxious troubles to leave one spot in it accessible even to a 
frivolous gallantry. It is for us to remove these troubles; 
and then, when he turns his eyes toward you, it will be with 
the gaze of one who beholds his happiness. You do not 
weep now, Valerie !" 



 



 



THE PABISIANb. 79 



BOOK NINTH. 



CHAPTER L 

On waking some morning, have you ever felt, reader, as 
if a change for the brighter in the world, without and with- 
in you, had suddenly come to pass . some new glory has 
been given to the sunshine, some fresh balm to the air . you 
feel younger and happier and lighter in the very beat of 
your heart . you almost fancy you hear the chime of some 
spiritual music far off, as if in the deeps of heaven ? You 
are not at first conscious how or wherefore this change has 
been brought about. Is it the effect of a dream in the gone 
sleep that has made this morning so different from mornings 
that have dawned before ? And while vaguely asking your- 
self that question, you become aware that the cause is no 
mere illusion, that it has its substance in words spoken by 
living lips, in things that belong to the work-day world. 

It was thus that Isaura woke the morning after the con- 
versation with Alain de Rochebriant, and as certain words, 
then spoken, echoed back on her ear, she knew why she was 
so happy, why the world was so changed. 

In those words she heard the voice of Graham Vane . no, 
she had not deceived herself . she was loved ! she was loved I 
What mattered that long, cold interval of absence ? She 
had not forgotten . she could not believe that absence had 
brought forgetfulness. There are moments when we insist 
on judging another's heart by our own. All would be ex- 
plained some day . all would come right. 

How lovely was the face that reflected itself in the glass 
as she stood before it smoothing back her long hair, mur- 
muring sweet snatches of Italian love- song, and blushing 
with sweeter love-thoughts as she sang ! All that had pass- 
ed in that year so critical to her outer life . the authorship, 
the fame, the public career, the popular praise . vanished 
from her mind as a vapor that rolls from the face of a J^-ke 

 VjOOQIC 



80 THE PABISIANS. 

to which the sunlight restores the smile of a brightened 
heaven. 

She was more the girl now than she had ever been since 
the day on which she sat reading Tasso on the craggy shore 
of Sorrento. 

Singing still as she passed from her chamber, and entenng 
the sitting-room, which fronted the east, and seemed bathed 
in the sunbeams of deepening May, she took her bird from 
its cage, and stopped her song to cover it with kisses, which 
perhaps yearned for vent somewhere. 

Later in the day she went out to visit Valerie. Recalling 
the altered manner of her young friend, her sweet nature 
became troubled. She divined that Valerie had conceived 
some jealous pain, which she longed to heal ; she could not 
bear the thought of leaving any one that day unhappy. 
Ignorant before of the girl's feelings toward Alain, she now 
partly guessed them . one woman who loves in secret is 
clairvoyante as to such secrets in another. 

Valerie received her visitor with a coldness she did not 
attempt to disguise. Not seeming to notice this, Isaara 
commenced the conversation with frank mention of Roche- 
briant. '^ I have to thank you so much, dear Valerie, for a 
pleasure you could not anticipate . that of talking about an 
absent friend, and hearing the praise he deserved from one 
so capable of appreciating excellence as liC de Rochebriant 
appears to be." 

"You were talking to M. de Rochebriant of an absent 
friend . ah ! you seemed indeed very much interested in the 
conversation . " ^ 

" Do not wonder at that, Valerie ; an4 do not grudge me 
the happiest moments I have known for months." 

" In talking with M. de Rochebriant I No doubt, Made- 
moiselle Cicogna, you found him very charming." 

To her surprise and indignation, Val6rie here felt the arm 
of Isaura tenderly entwining her waist, and her face drawn 
toward Isaura's sisterly kiss. 

" Listen to me, naughty child . listen and believe. M. de 
Rochebriant can never be charming to me . n^ver touch a 
chord in my Jieart or my fancy, except as friend to another, 
or . kiss me in your turn, Valerie . as suitor to yourself." 

Valerie here drew back her pretty child-like head, gazed 



 



 




*VALVBIK UXOKIVVD HSR TI8ITOB WITH . OOI^DMKHS I^HX DID NOT ATTKM1T TO DIBGUIBB.'' 



 



Google 



1 



 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 81 

keenly a moment into Isaura's eyes, felt convinced by the 
limpid candor of their unmistakable honesty, and, flinging 
herself on her friend's bosom, kissed her passionately, and 
burst in'wO tears. 

The complete reconciliation between the two girls was 
thus peacefully effected; and then Isaura had to listen, at 
no small length, to the confidences poured into her ears by 
Valerie, who was fortunately too engrossed by her own 
hopes and doubts to exact confidences in return. Valerie's 
was one of those impulsive, eager natures that long for a 
confidante. Not so Isaura's. Only when Val6rie had un- 
burdened her heai-t, and been soothed and caressed into hap- 
py trust in the future, did she recall Isaura's explanatorj 
words, and said, archly, "And your absent friend? Tell me 
about him. Is he as handsome as Alain ?" 

" Nay," said Isaura, rising to take up the mantle and hat 
she had laid aside on entering, " they say that the color of a 
flower is in our vision, not in the leaves." Then, with a 
grave melancholy in the look she fixed upon Valerie, she 
added: "Rathr than distrust of me should occasion you 
pain, I have pained myself in making clear to you the reason 
why I felt interest in M. de Rochebriant's conversation. In 
turn, I ask of you a favor. do not on this point question me 
further. There are some things in our past which influence 
the present, but to which we dare not assign a future . on 
which we can not talk to another. What soothsayer can 
tell us if the dream of a yesterday will be renewed on the 
night of a morrow ? All is said . we trust one another, 
dearest." 



CHAPTER n. ^ 

That evening the Morleys looked in at Isaura's on their x^ 
way to a crowded assembly at the house of one of those rich ^, 
Americans who were then outvying the English residents at 
Paris in the good graces of Parisian society. I think the 
Americans get on better with the French than the English 
do . I mean the higher class of Americans. They spend 
more money ; their men speak French better ; the women 
are better dressed, and, as a general rule, have read more 
largely, and converse more frankly. 



 



 



82 THB PABI6IANS. 

Mrs, Morley's affection for Isaura had increased during 
the last few months. As so notable an advocate of the 
ascendency of her sex, she felt a sort of grateful pride in the 
accomplishments and growing renown of so youthful a mem- 
ber of the oppressed sisterhood. But, apart from that sen- 
timent, she had conceived a tender, mother-like interest for 
the girl who stood in the world so utterly devoid of family 
ties, sov destitute of that household guardianship and protec- 
tion which, with all her assertion of the strength and dignity 
of woman, and all her opinions as to woman's right of ab- 
solute emancipation from the conventions fabricated by the 
selfishness of man, Mrs. Morley was too sensible not to val- 
ue for the individual, though she deemed it not needed for 
the mass. Her great desire was that Isaura should marry 
well, and soon. American women usually marry so young? 
that it seemed to Mrs. Morley an anomaly in social life that * 
one so gifted in mind and person as Isaura should already 
have passed the age in which the belles of the great Repub- 
lic are enthroned as wives and consecrated as mothers.7 
We have seen that in the past year she had selected fi*om 
' our unworthy but necessary sex Graham Vane as a suitable 
spouse to her young friend. She had divined the state of 
bis heart . she had more than suspicions of the state of 
Isaura's. She was exceedingly perplexed and exceedingly 
chafed at the Englishman's strange disregard to his happi- 
ness and her own projects. She had counted, all this past 
winter, on his return to Paris ; and she became convinced 
that some misunderstanding, possibly some lovers' quarrel, 
was the cause of his protracted absence, and a cause that, if 
ascertained, could be removed. A good opportunity now 
presented itself. Colonel Morley was going to London the 
next day. He had business there which would detain him 
at least a week. He would see Graham ; and as she con- 
sidered her husband the shrewdest and wisest person in the 
world . ^I mean of the male sex . she had no doubt of his be- 
ing able to turn Graham's mind thoroughly inside out, and 
ascertain his exact feelings, views, and intentions. If the 
Englishman, thus assayed, were found of base metal, then, 
at least, Mrs. Morley would be free to cast him altogether 
aside, and coin for the uses of the matrimonial market some 
nobler effigy in purer gold. 



 



 



THiC PARISIANS. 83 

" My dear child," said Mrs. Morley, in low voice, nestliog 
herself close to Isaura, while the Colonel, duly instructed, 
drew off the Venosta, " have you heard any thing lately of 
our pleasapt friend Mr. Vane ?" 

You can guess with what artful design Mrs. Morley put 
that question point-blank, fixing keen eyes on Isaura while 
she put it. She saw the heightened color, the quivering lip, 
of the girl thus abruptly appealed to, and she said, inly, " I 
was right. she loves him !" 

" I heard of Mr. Vane last night . ^accidentally." 

" Is he coming to Paris soon ?" 

" Not that I know of. How charmingly that wreath be- 
comes you 1 It suits the ear-rings so well too." 

^* Frank chose it ; he has good taste for a man. I trust 
him with my commissions to Hunt and Roskell's, but I limit 
him as to price, he is so extravagant . men are, when they 
make presents. They seem to think we value things accord- 
ing to their cost. They would gorge us with jewels, and 
let us starve for want of a smile. Not that Frank is so bad 
as the rest of them. But a propos of Mr. Vane . ^Frank will 
be sure to see him, and scold him well for deserting us all. 
I should not be surprised if he brought the deserter back 
with him, for I send a little note by Frank inviting him to 
pay us a visit. We have spare rooms in our apartments." 

Isaura's heart heaved beneath her robe, but she replied 
in a tone of astonishing indifference : *' I believe this is the 
height of the London season, and Mr. Vane would proba- 
bly be too engaged to profit even by an invitation so tempt- 
iDg." 

"iVini* verrons. How pleased he will be to hear of your 
triumphs! He admired you so much before you were fa- 
mous . what will be his admiration now ! Men are so vain 
. they care for us so much more when people praise us. 
But, till we have put the creatures in their proper place, we 
must take them for what they are." . 

Here the Venosta, with whom the poor Colonel had ex- 
hausted all the arts at his command for chaining her atten- 
tion, could be no longer withheld from approaching Mrs. 
Morley, and venting her admiration of that lady's wreath, 
ear-rings, robes, fiounces. This dazzling apparition had on her 
the effect which a candle has on a moth . she fluttered round 



 



 



84 TUB PARISIANS. 

it, and longed to absorb herself in its blaze. But the wreath 
especially fascinated her . a wreath which no prudent lady 
with colorings less pure, and features less exquisitely deli- 
cate than the pretty champion of the rights of woman, could 
have fancied on her own brows without a shudder. But the 
Venosta in such matters was not prudent. ^'It can't be, 
dear," she cried, piteously, extending her arms toward Isau- 
ra. " I must have one exactly like. Who made it ? Cava 
dgnora^ give me the address." 

''Ask the Colonel, dear madame; he chose and brought 
it;" and Mrs. Morley glanced significantly at her well-tu- 
tored Frank. 

" Madame," said the Colonel, speaking in English, which 
he usually did with the Venosta, who valued herself on 
knowing that language, and was flattered to be addressed 
in it, while he amused himself by introducing into its forms 
the dainty Americanisms .with which he puzzled the Brit- 
isher . he might well puzzle the Florentine . "Madame, I 
am too anxious for the appearance of my wife to submit to 
the test of a rival screamer like yourself in the same apparel. 
With all the homage due to a sex of which I am enthused 
dreadful, I decline to designate the florist from whom I pur- 
chased Mrs. Morley's head fixings." 

" Wicked man !" cried the Venosta, shaking her finger at 
him coquettishly. " You are jealous ! Fie ! a man should 
never be jealous of a woman's rivalry with woman ;" and 
then, with a cynicism that might have become a gray-beard, 
she added, " but of his own sex every man should be jealous 
. though of his dearest friend. Isn't it so, ColoneUo?^^ 

The Colonel looked puzzled, bowed, and made no reply. 

" That only shows," said Mrs. Morley, rising, " what vil- 
lains the Colonel has the misfortune to call friends and fel- 
low-men." 

" I fear it is time to go," said Frank, glancing at the clock. 

In theory the most rebellious, in practice the most obe- 
dient of wives, Mrs. Morley here kissed Isaura, resettled her 
crinoline, and, shaking hands with the Venosta, retreated to 
the door. 

" I shall have the wreath yet," cried the Venosta, impish- 
ly. ^^Zfa speranza ^femmina^^ (Hope is female). 

"Alas !" said Isaura, half mournfully, half smiling . " alas ! 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 86 

do you not remember what the poet replied when asked 
what disease was most mortal ? . ' the hectic fever caught 
from the chill of hope.' " 



CHAFTER III. 

Gbaham Vanb was musing very gloomily in "his solitary 
apaitment one morning, when his servant announced Col- 
onel Morley. 

He received his visitor with more than the cordiality with 
which every English politician receives an American citizen. 
Graham liked the Colonel too well for what he was in him- 
self to need any national title to his esteem. After some 
preliminary questions and answers as to the health of Mrs. 
Morley,.the length of the Colonel's stay in London, what day 
he could dine with Graham at Richmond or Gravesend, the 
Colonel took up the ball. " We have been reckoning to see 
you at Paris, sir, for the last six months." 

" I am very much flattered to hear that you have thought 
of me at all ; but I am not aware of having warranted the 
expectation you so kindly express." 

" I guess you must have said something to my wife which 
led her to do more than expect . to reckon on your return. 
And, by-the-way, sir, I am charged to deliver to you this 
note from her, and to back the request it contains that you 
will avail yourself of the offer. Without summanzing the 
points, I do so." 

Graham glanced over the note addressed to him : 

"Dear Mr. Vane, . Do you forget how beautiful the en- 
virons of Paris are in May and June ? how charming it was 
last year at the lake of Enghien ? how gay were our little 
dinners out-of-doors in the garden arbors, with the Savarins 
and the fair Italian, and her incomparably amusing chape- 
ron? Frank has my orders to bring you back to renew 
thq^e happy days, while the birds are in their first song, and 
the leaves are in their youngest green. I have prepared 
your rooms chez nous . a chamber that looks out on the 
Champs Elys6es, and a quiet cabinet de travail at the back, 
in which you can read, write, or sulk undisturbed. Come, 



 



 



86 THIB PAmSlANS, 

and we will again visit Engbien and Montmorency. Don't 
talk of engagements. If man proposes, woman disposes. 
Hesitate not. obey. Your sincere little friend, Lizzy." 

" My dear Morley," said Grabam, witb emotion, " I can 
not find words to 4;bank your wife sufficiently for an invita- 
tion so graciously conveyed, Alas ! I can not accept it." 

" Why ?" asked the Colonel, dryly. 

" I have too much to do in London." * 

'' Is that the true reason, or am I to suspicion that there 
is any thing, sir, which makes you dislike a visit to Paris ?" 

The Ameiicans enjoy the reputation of being the frankest 
putters of questions whom liberty of speech has yet edu- 
cated into ks recherches de la verit^y and certainly Colonel 
Morley in this instance did not impair the national reputa- 
tion. 

Graham Vane's brow slightly contracted, and he bit bis 
lip as if stung by a sudden pang ; but after a moment's pause 
he answered, with a good-humored smile, 

'' No man who has taste enough to adraii'e the most beau- 
tiful city, and appreciate the chai-ms of the most brilliant 
society in the world, can dislike Paris." 

" My dear sir, I did not ask if you disliked Paris, but if 
there were any thing that made you dislike coming back to 
it on a visit." 

^^ What a notion ! and what a cross-examiner you would 
have made if you had been called to the bar ! Surely, my 
dear friend, you can understand that, when a man has in one 
place business which he can not neglect, he may decline go- 
ing to another place, whatever pleasure it would give him 
to do so. By-the- way, there is a great ball at one of the 
Ministers' to-night ; you should go there, and I will point 
out to you all those English notabilities in whom Americaos 
naturally take interest. I will call for you at eleven o'clock. 

Lord y who is a connection of mine, would be charmed 

to know you." 

Morley hesitated; but when Graham said, "How yi)ur 
wife will scold you if you lose such an opportunity of tell- 
ing her whether the Duchess of M is as beautiful as re- 
port says, and whether Gladstone or Disraeli seems to your 
phrenological science to have the finer head!" the Colonel 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 87 

gave in, and it was settled that Graham should call for him 
at the Latigham Hotel. 

That matter arranged, Graham probably hoped that his 
inquisitive visitor would take leave for the present, but the 
Colonel evinced no such intention. On the contrary, set- 
tling himself more at ease in his arm-chair, he said, "If I re- 
member aright, you do not object to the odor of tobacco ?" 

Graham rose and presented to his visitor a cigar -box 
which he took from the mantel-piece, 

The Colonel^shook his head, and withdrew from his breast 
pocket a Jeather case, from which he extracted a gigantic 
regalia ; this he lighted from a gold match-box in the shape 
of a locket attached to his watch-chain, and took two or 
three preliminary puffs, with his head thrown back and his 
eyes meditatively intent upon the ceiling. 

We know already that strange whim of the Colonels 
(than whom, if he pleased, no man could speak purer En- 
glish as spoken by the Britisher) to assert the dignity of the 
American citizen by copious use of expressions and phrases 
familiar to the lips of the governing class of the great Re- 
public . delicacies of speech which he would have carefully 
shunned in the polite circles of the Fifth Avenue, in New 
York. Now the Colonel was much too experienced a man 
of the world not to be aware that the commission with 
which his Lizzy had chai'ged him was an exceedingly deli- 
cate one ; and it occurred to his mother- wit that the best- 
way to acquit himself of it, so as to avoid the risk of giving 
or of receiving serious affront, would be to push that whim 
of his into more than wonted exaggeration. Thus he could 
more decidedly and briefly come to the point ; and should 
he, in doing so, appear too meddlesome, rather provoke a 
laugh than a frown . retiring from the ground with the hon- 
ors due to a humorist. Accordingly, in his deepest nasal 
intonation, and withdrawing his eyes from the ceiling, he 
began : 

" You have not asked, sir, after the signorina, or, as we 
popularly call her. Mademoiselle Cicogna?" 

" Have I not ? I hope she is quite well, and her lively 
companion, Signora Venosta." 

" They are not sick, sir ; or at least were not so last night 
when my wife and I had the pleasure to see them. Of 



 



 



88 THE PARISIANS. 

course you have read Mademoiselle Cicogna's book . a 
bright performance, sir, age considered." 

" Certainly, I have read the book ; it is full of unquestion- 
able genius. Is Mademoiselle writing another? But of 
course she is." 

" I am not aware of the fact, sir. It may be predicated ; 
such a mind can not remain inactive ; and I know from M. 
Savarin and that rising young man Gustave Rameau, that 
the publishers bid high for her brains considemble. Two 
translations have already appeared in our country. Her 
fame, sir, will be world-wide. She may be another Gteorge 
Sand, or at least another Eulalie Grantmesnil." 

Graham's cheek became as white as the paper I write on. 
He inclined his head as in assent, but without a word. The 
Colonel continued : 

" We ought to be very proud of her acquaintance, sir, I 
think you detected her gifts while they were yet unconjeo- 
tured. My wife says so. You must be gratified to remem- 
ber that, sir . clear grit, sir, and no mistake." 

"I certainly more than once have said to Mrs. Morley 
that I esteemed Mademoiselle's powera so highly that I 
hoped she would never become a stage singer and actress. 
But this M. Rameau ? You say he is a rising man. It 
struck me when at Paris that he was one of those chai*]atans, 
with a great deal of conceit and very little information, who 
are always found in scores on the ultra-Liberal side of poli- 
tics ; possibly I was mistaken." 

" He is the responsible editor of Le Sens Commune in 
which talented peiiodical Mademoiselle Cicogua's book was 
fii*st raised." 

" Of course I know that ; a journal which, so far as I have 
looked into its political or social articles, certainly Written 
by a cleverer and an older man than M. i[iameau, is for un- 
settling all things and settling nothing. We have writers 
of that kind among ourselves . I have no sympathy with 
them. To me it seems that when a man says, * Off with 
your head,' he ought to let us know what other head he 
would put on our shoulders, and by what process the change 
of heads shall be effected. Honestly speaking, if you and 
your charming wife are intimate friends and admirers of 
Mademoiselle Cicogna, I think you could not do her a 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 89 

greater service than that of detaching her from all connec- 
tion with men like M. Rameau, and journals like Le Sens 
Commun.^^ 

The Colonel here withdrew his cigar from his lips, lower- 
ed his head to a level with Graham's, and relaxing into an 
arch, significant smile, said : " Start to Paris, and dissuade 
her yourselt Start . go ahead . don't be shy . don't see- 
saw on the beam of speculation. You will have more influ- 
ence with that young female than we can boast." 

Never was England in greater danger of quarrel with 
America than at that moment ; but Graham curbed his first 
wrathful impulse, and replied, coldly, 

" It seems to me. Colonel, that you, though very uncon- 
sciously, derogate from the respect due to Mademoiselle Ci- 
cogna. That the counsel of a married couple like yourself 
and Mrs. Morley should be freely given to and duly heeded 
by a girl depnved of her natural advisers in parents is a 
reasonable and honorable supposition ; but to imply that the 
most influential adviser of a young lady so situated is a 
young single man, in no way related to her, appears to me 
a dereliction of that regard to the dignity of her sex which 
is the chivalrous characteristic of your countrymen . and to 
Mademoiselle Cicogna herself, a surmise which she would be 
justified in resenting as an impertinence." 

" I deny both allegations," replied the Colonel, serenely. 
" I maintain that a single man whips all connubial creation 
when it comes to gallantizing a single young woman ; and 
that no young lady would be justified in resenting as im- 
pertinence my friendly suggestion to the single man so de- 
serving of her consideration as I estimate you to be to so- 
licit the right to advise her for life. And that's a caution." 

Here the Colonel resumed his regalia, and again gazed in- 
tent on the ceiling. 

"Advise her for life! You mean, I presume, as a candi- 
date for her hand." 

" You don't Turkey now. Well, I guess you are not wide 
of the mark there, sir." 

" You do me infinite honor, but I do not presume so far." 

" So, so . not as yet. Before a man who is not without 
gumption runs himself for Congress he likes to calculate 
how the votes will run. Well, sir, suppose we are in cau- 



 



 



90 THB PABISIANS. 

CU8, and let ns discuss the chances of the election with closed 
doors." 

Graham con Id not help smiling at the persistent officious- 
ness of his visitor, but his smile was a very sad one. 

'^ Pray change the subject, my dear Colonel Morley . it is 
not a pleasant one to me ; and as regards Mademoiselle Ci- 
cogna, can you think it would not shock her to inppose that 
her name was dragged into the discussions you would pro- 
voke, even with closed doors ?" 

" Sir," replied the Colonel, imperturbably, " since the doore 
are closed, there is no one, unless it be a spirit-listener under 
the table, who can wire to Mademoiselle Cicogna the sub- 
stance of debate. And, for my part, I do not believe in spir- 
itual manifestations. Fact is that I have the most amicable 
sentiments toward both parties, and if there is a misunder- 
standing which is opposed to the union of the States, I wish 
to remove it while yet in time. Now let us suppose that 
you decline to be a candidate ; there are plenty of othera 
who will run ; and as an elector must choose one represent- 
ative or other, so a gal must choose one husband or other. 
And then you only repent when it is too late. It is a great 
thing to be first in the field. Let us approximate to the 
point; the chances seem good. Will yon inin? Yes or 
No?" 

" I repeat. Colonel Morley, that I entertain no such pre- 
sumption." 

The Colonel here, rising, extended his hand, which Gra- 
ham shook with constrained cordiality, and then leisurely 
walked to the door ; there he paused, as if struck by a new 
thought, and said, gravely, in his natural tone of voice, '^ Yon 
have nothing to say, sir, against the young lady's character 
and honor ?" 

" I ! . Heavens, no ! Colonel Morley, such a question in- 
sults me." 

The Colonel resumed his deepest nasal bass : '^ It is only, 
then, because you don't fancy her now so much as you did 
last year . fact, you are soured on her and fly off the handle. 
Such things do happen. The same thing has happened to 
myself, sir. In my days of celibacy there was a gal at Sar- 
atoga whom I gallantized, and whom, while I was at Sara- 
toga, I thought Heaven had made to be Mrs. Morley. I 



 



 



THE PABI8IANS. 91 

was on the very point of telling her so, when I was sudden- 
ly called off to Philadelphia ; and at Philadelphia, sir, I found 
that Heaven had made another Mrs. Morley. I state this 
fact, sir, though I seldom talk of my own affairs, even when 
willing to tender my advice in th^ affairs of another, in or- 
der to prove that I do not intend to censure you if Heaven 
has served you in l^he same manner. Sir, a man may* go 
blind for one gal when he is not yet dry behind the ears, 
and then, when his eyes are skinned, go in for one better. 
All things mortal meet with. a change, as my sister's little 
boy said when, at the age of eight, he quitted the Methodies 
and turned Shaker. Threep and argue as we may, you and 
I are both mortals . more's the pity. Good-morning, sir" 
(glancing at the clock, which proclaimed the hour of 3 p.m.) 
. " I err . good-evening." 

By the post that day the Colonel transmitted a condensed 
and laconic report of his conversation with Graham Vane. 
I can state its substance in yet fewer words. He wrote 
word that Graham positively declined the invitation to Par- 
is ; that he had then, agreeably to Lizzy's instructions, ven- 
tilated the Englishman, in the most delicate terms, as to his 
intentions with regard to Isaura, and that no intentions at 
all existed. The sooner all thoughts of him were relinquish- 
ed, and a new suitor on the ground, the better ^t would be 
for the young lady's happiness jn the only state in which hap- 
piness should be, if not found, at least sought, whether by 
maid or man. 

Mrs. Morley was extremely put out by this untoward re- 
salt of the diplomacy she had intrusted to the Colonel ; and 
when, the next day, came a very courteous letter from Gra- 
ham, thanking her gratefully for the kindness of her invita- 
tion, and expressing his regret, briefly though cordially, at 
his inability to profit by it without the most distant allusion 
to the subject which the Colonel had brought on the tapis^ 
or even requesting his compliments to the Signoras Venosta 
and Cicogna, she was more than put out, more than resentful 
. she was deeply gneved. Being, however, one of those gal- 
lant heroes of womankind who do not give in at the first 
defeat, she began to doubt whether Frank had not rather 
oyerstrained the delicacy which he said he had put hito his 
" soundings." He ought to have been more explicit. Mean- 



 



 



92 THB PABISI4NS. 

while she resolved to call on Isaura, and, without mention- 
ing Graham's refusal of her invitation, endeavor to ascertain 
whether the attachment which she felt persuaded the girl 
secretly cherished for this recalcitrant Englishman were 
something more than th^ first romantic fancy . whether it 
were sufficiently deep to justify farther effort on Mi's. Mor- 
ley'^ part to bring it to a prosperous is^ue. 

She found Isaura at home and alone ; and, to do her jus- 
tice, she exhibited wonderful tact in the fulfillment of the 
task she had set herself. Forming her judgment by manner 
and look . not words . she returned home convinced that 
she ought to seize the opportunity afforded to her by Gra- 
ham's letter. It was one to which she might very natural- 
ly reply, and in that reply she might convey the object at 
her heart more felicitously than the Colonel had done. " The 
cleverest man is," she said to herself, " stupid compared to 
an ordinary woman in the real business of life, which does 
not consist of fighting and money-making." 

Now there was one point she had ascertained by words 
in her visit to Isaura . a point on which all might depend. 
She. had asked Isaura when and where she had seen Gra- 
ham last ; and when Isaura had given her that information, 
and she learned it was on the eventful day on which Isaura 
gave her coftsent to the publication of her MS., if approved 
by Savarin, in the journal to^be set up by the handsome- 
faced young author, she leaped to the conclusion that Gra- 
ham had been seized with no unnatural jealousy, and vf as 
still under the illusive glamoury of that green-eyed fiend. 
She was confirmed in this notion, not altogether an unsound 
one, when, asking with apparent carelessness, "And in that 
last interview did you see any change in Mr. Vane's manner, 
especially when he took leave ?" 

Isaura turned away pale, and involuntarily clasping her 
hands . as women do when they would suppress pain . re- 
plied, in a low murmur, " His manner was changed." 

Accordingly, Mrs. Morley sat down and wrote the follow- 
ing letter: 

" Deab Mr. Vane, . I am very angry indeed with you for 
refusing my invitation. I had so counted, on you . and I 
don't believe a word of your excuse. Engagements ! To 



 



 



THE PABISIAKS. 93 

balls and dinners, I suppose, as if you were not. much too 
clever to care about these silly attempts to enjoy solitude in 
crowds. And as to what you men call business, you have 
no right to have any business at all. You are not in com- 
merce; you are not in Parliament; you told me yourself 
that you had no great landed estates to give you trouble ; 
you are rich, without any necessity to take pains to remain 
rich or to become richer ; you have no business in the world 
except to please yourself; and when you will not come to 
Paris to see one of your truest friends . which I certainly 
am . it simply means that, no matter how such a visit would 
please me, it does not please yourself. I call that abomina- 
bly rude and ungrateful. 

"But I am not writing merely to scold you. I have 
something else on my mind, and it must come out. Certain- 
ly, when you were at Paris last year, you did admire, above 
all other young ladies, Isaura Cicogna, And I honored you 
for doing so. I know no young lady to be called her equal. 
Well, if you admired her then, what would you do now if 
you met her ? Then she was but a girl . very brilliant, very 
charming, it is true, but undeveloped, untested. Now she is 
a woman, a princess among women, but retaining all that is 
most lovable in a girl ; so courted, yet ^o simple . sq gifted, 
yet so innocent. Her head is not a bit turned by all the 
flatteiy that surrounds her. Come and judge for yourself. 
I still hold the door of the rooms destined to you open for 
repentance. 

"My dear Mr. Vane, do not think me a silly match-mak- 
ing little woman when I write to you thus, d coeur ouvert.^ 

" I like you so much that I would fain secure to you the 
rarest prize which life is ever likely to offer to your ambi- 
tion. Where can you hope to find another Isaura? Among 
the stateliest daughters of your English dukes, where is there 
one whom a proud man would be more proud to show to 
the world, saying, ' She is mine !' where one more distin- 
guished . I will not say by mere beauty . there she might 
be eclipsed . ^but by sweetness and dignity combined . in as- . 
pect, manner, every movement, every smile ? 

"And you, who are yourself so clever, so well read . you 
who would be so lonely with a wife who was not your com- 
panion, with whom you could not converse on equal terras 

11.-5 ^ , 

 VjOOQIC 



94 THE PAEISIANS. 

of intellect . my dear friend, where could yon find a com- 
panion in whom you would not miss the poet-soul of Isaura ? 
Of course I should not dare to obtrude all these questionings 
on your innermost reflections, if I had not some idea, right 
or wrong, that since the days when at Enghien and Mout- 
raorency, seeing you and Isaura side by side, I whispered -to 
Frank, * So should those two be through life,' some cloud 
has passed between your eyes and the future on which they 
gazed. Can not that cloud be dispelled ? Were you so un- 
just to yourself as to be jealous of a rival, perhaps of a Gus- 
tavo Rameau ? I write to you frankly-^answer me frankly ; 
and if you answer, ' Mrs. Morley, I don't know what you 
mean; I admired Mademoiselle Cicogna as I might admire 
any other pretty, accomplished girl, but it is really nothing 
to me whether she marries Gustavo Rameau or any one- 
else' . why, then, burn this letter . forget that it has been 
written ; and may you never know the pang of remorseful 
sigh, if, in the days to come, you see her . whose name in 
that case I should profane did I repeat it . the comrade of 
another man's mind, the half of another man's heart, the 
pride and delight of another man's blissful home." 



CHAPTER IV. 

There is somewhere in Lord Lytton's writings^ . writings 
so numerous that I may be pardoned if I can not remember 
where . a critical definition of the difference between dra- 
matic and narrative art of story, instanced by that marvel- 
ous passage in the loftiest of Sir Walter Scott's works, in 
which all the anguish of Ravens wood oii the night before 
he has to meet Lucy's brother in mortal combat is conveyed' 
without the spoken words required in tragedy. It is only to 
be conjectured by the tramp of his heavy boots to and fro 
all the night long in his solitary chamber, heard below by 
the faithful Caleb. The drama could not have allowed that 
.treatment; the drama must have put into words, as i* solilo- 
quy," agonies which the non-dramatic . narrator knows that 
no soliloquy can describe. Humbly do I imitate, then, the 
great master of narrative in declining to put into words the 
conflict between love and reason that tortured the heart of 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 95 

Graham Vane when dropping noiselessly the letter I have 
just transcribed. He covered his face with his hands and 
remained . I know not how long . in the same po'sition, his 
head bowed, not a sound escaping from his lips. 

He did not stir from his rooms that day ; and had there 
been a Caleb's faithful ear to listen, his tread, too, might 
have been heard all that sleepless night passing to and fro, 
but pausing oft, along his solitary floors. 

Possibly love would have borne down all opposing reason- 
ings, doubts, and prejudices, but for incidents that occuiTed 
the following evening. On that evening Graham dined en 
famiUe with his cousins the Altons. After dinner the Duke 
produced the design for a cenotaph inscribed to the memory 
of his aunt, Lady Janet King, which he proposed to place in 
the family chapel at Alton. 

" I know," said the Duke, kindly, " you would wish tbe 
old house from which she sprang to preserve some such 
record of her who loved you as her son; and even putting 
you out of the question, it gratifies me to attest the claim 
of our family to a daughter who continues to be famous for 
her goodness, and made the goodness so lovable that envy 
forgave it for being famous. It was a pang to me when 
poor Richard King decided oh placing her tomb among 
strangers; but in conceding his rights as to her resting- 
place, I retain mine to her name, ^Nbstris Uberis vinftutis ex- 

Graham wrung his cousin's hand . he could mot speak, 
choked by suppressed tears. 

The Duchess, who loved and honored Lady Janet almost 
as much as did her husband, fairly sobbed aloud. She had, 
indeed, reason for grateful memories of the deceased : there 
had been some obstacles to her marriage with the man who 
had won her heart, ansing from political differences and 
family feuds between their parents, which the gentle medi- 
ation of Lady Janet had smoothed away. And never did 
union founded on mutual and ardent love iore belie the as- 
sertions of the great Bichat (esteemed by Dr. Buckle the 
finest intellect which practical philosophy has exhibited 
since Aristotle), that " Love is a sort of fever which does not 
last beyond two years," than that between these eccentric 
specimens of a class denounced as frivolous and heartless by 

 VjOOQIC 



96 THE PABI8IAKS. 

philosophers, English and French, i^ho have certainly never 
heard of Bichat. 

When Ibhe emotion the Duke had exhibited was calmed 
down, his wife pushed toward Graham a sheet of paper, in- 
scribed with the epitaph composed by his hand. ^' Is it not 
beautiful," she said, falteringly . " not a word too much nor 
too little?" 

Graham read the inscription slowly, and with very dimmed 
eyes. It desei^ved the praise bestowed on it ; for the Duke, 
though a shy and awkward speaker, was an incisive and 
graceful writer. 

Yet, in his innermost self, Graham shivered when he read 
that epitaph, it expressed so emphatically the reverential 
nature of the love which Lady Janet had inspired . the ge- 
nial influences which the holiness of a character so active 
in doing good had diffused around it. It brought vividly 
before Graham that image of perfect spotless womanhood. 
And a voice within him asked, " Would that cenotaph be 
placed amidst the monuments of an illustrious lineage if the 
secret known to thee could transpire ? What though the 
lost one were really as unsullied by sin as the world deems, 
would the name now treasured as an heir- loom not be a 
memory of gall and a sound of shame ?" 

He remained so silent after putting down the inscription 
that the Duke said, modestly, " My dear Graham, I see that 
you do not like what I have written. Your pen is stuch 
more practiced than mine. If I did not ask you to compose 
the epitaph, it was because I thought it would please you 
more in coming, as a spontaneous tribute due to her, from 
the representative of her family. But will you correct my 
sketch, or give me another according to your own ideas?" 

" I see not a word to alter," said Graham. " Forgive me 
if my silence wronged my emotion : the truest eloquence is 
that which holds us too mute for applause." 

" I knew you would like it. Leopold is always so dis- 
posed to undeiTate himself," said the Duchess, whose hand 
was resting fondly on her husband's shoulder. "Epitaphs 
are so difficult to write . especially epitaphs on women of 
whom in life the least said the better. Janet was the only 
woman I ever knew whom one could praise in safety." 

"Well expressed," said the Duke, smiling ; "and I wish 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PABISIANB. 97 

you would make that safety clear to some lady friends of 
yours, to whom it might serve as a lesi^on. Proof against 
every breath of scandal herself, Janet King never uttered 
and never encouraged one ill-natured word against another. 
But I am afraid, my dear fellow, that I must leave you to a 
t^te-d-t^te -with Eleanor. You know that I must be at the 
House this evening . I only paired till half-past nine*" 

" I will walk down to the House with you, if you are go- 
ing on foot." 

" No," said the Duchess ; " you must resign yourself to 
me for at least half an hour. I was looking over your aunt's 
letters to-day, and I found one which I wish to show you ; 
it is all about yourself, and written within the last few 
months of her life," Here she put her arm into Graham's, 
and led him into her own private drawing-iK)om, which, 
though others might call it a boudoir, she dignified by the 
name of her study. The Duke remained for some minutes 
thoughtfully leaning his arm on the mantel-piece. It was 
no unimportant debate in the Lords thht night, and on a 
subject in which he took great interest, and the details of 
which he had thoroughly mastered. He had been request- 
ed to speak, if only a few words, for bis high character and 
his reputation for good sense gave weight to the mere ut- 
terance of his opinion. But though no one had more moral 
courage in action, the Duke had a terror at the very thought 
of addressing an audience which made him despise himself. 

"Ah !" he muttered, " if Graham Vane were but in Parlia- 
ment, I could trust him to say exactly what I would rather 
be swallowed up by an earthquake than stand up and say 
for myself. But now he has got money, he seems to think 
of nothing but saving it." 



CHAPTER V. 

Thb letter from Lady Janet, which the Duchess took from 
the 4esk and placed in Graham's hand, was in strange coin- 
cidence with the subject that for the last twenty-four hours 
had absorbed his thoughts and tortured his heart. Speak- 
ing of him in terms of affectionate eulogy, the writer pro- 



 



 



98 THE PABI8IA1TS. 

ceeded to confide her earnest wish that he should not long- 
er delay that chaifge in life which, concentrating so much 
that is vague in the desires and aspirations of man, leaves 
his heart and his mind, made serene by the contentment of 
home, free for the steadfast consolidation of their warmth 
and their light upon the ennobling duties that unite the in- 
dividual to his race. 

*' There is no one," wrote Lady Janet, ^* whose character 
and career a felicitous choice in marriage caii have greater 
influence over than this dear adopted son of mine. I do 
not fear that in any case he will be liable to the errors of 
hid brilliant father. His early reverse of fortune here seems 
to me one of those blessings which Heaven conceals in the 
form of affliction. For in youth, the genial freshness of his 
gay, animalspirits, a native generosity mingled with desire 
of display and thirst for applause, made me somewhat alarmed 
for his future. But though he still retains these attributes 
of character, they are no longer predominant ; they are mod- 
ified and chastened. He has learaed prudence. But what 
I now fear most for him is that which 4ie does not show in 
the world, which neither Leopold nor you seem to detect . 
it is an exceeding sensitiveness of pride. I know not how 
else to describe it. It is so interwoven with the highest 
qualities that I sometimes dread injury to them could it be 
torn away from the faultier ones which it supports. 

" It is interwoven with that lofty independence of spirit 
which has made him refuse openings the most alluring to 
his ambition ; it communicates a touching grandeur to his 
self-denying thrift ; it makes him so tenacious of. his word 
once given, so cautious before he gives it. Public life to 
him is essential; without it he would be incomplete; and 
yet I sigh to think that whatever success he may achieve 
in it will be attended with proportionate pain. Calumny goes 
side by side with fame, and courting fame as a man, he is as 
thin-skinned to calumny as a woman, 

" The wife for Graham should have qualities not, taken in- 
dividually, uncommon in English wives, but in combination 
somewhat rare. 

" She must have mind enough to appreciate his . ncrt to 
clash with it. She must be fitted with sympathies to be 
his dearest companion, his confidante in the hopes and fears 



Digitized'by 



Google 



THE PABISIANS. 99 

^hich the slightest want*of sympathy would make him keep 
ever afterward pent within his breast. In herself worthy 
of distinction, she must merge all distinction in his. You 
have met in the world men who, marrying professed beau- 
ties or professed literary geniuses, are spoken of as the hus- 
band of the beautiful Mrs. A or of the clever Mrs, 

B . Can you fancy Graham Vane in the reflectecblight 

of one of those husbands? I trembled last year when I 
thought he was attracted by a face which the artists raved 
about, and again by a tongue which dropped bans mots that 
went the round of the clubs. I was relieved when, sound- 
ing him, he said, laughingly^ * No, dear aunt, I should be one 
Bore from head to foot if I married a wife that was .talked 
about for any thing but goodness.' * 

" No . Graham Vane will have pains sharp enough if he 
live to be talked about himself. But that tenderest half 
of himself, the bearer of the name he would make, and for 
the dignity of which he alone would be responsible . if that 
were the town-talk, he would curse the hour he gave any 
one th right to take on berself his man's burden of calumny 
and fame. I know not which I should pity the most, Gra- 
ham Vane or his wife. 

" Do you understand me, dearest Eleanor ? No doubt you 
do so far that you comprehend that the women whom men 
most admire are not the women we, as women ourselves, 
would wish our sons or brothers to marry. But perhaps 
you do not comprehend my cause of fear, which is this . 
for in such matters men do not see as we women do . Gra- 
ham abhors, in the girls of our time, frivolity and insipidity. 
Very rightly, you will say. True, but then he is too likely 
to be allured by contrasts. I have seen him attracted by 
the very girls we recoil from more than we do from those 
we allow to be frivolous and insipid. I accused him f ad- 
miration for a certain young lady whom you call ' odious,' 
and whom the slang that has come into vogue calls ' fast ;' 
and I was not satisfied with his answer . ' Certainly I ad- 
mire her; she is not a doll.she has ideas,' I would rather 
of the two see Graham married to what men call a doll than 
to a girl with ideas which are distasteful to women." 

Lady Jaet then went on to question the Duchess about 
a Miss Asterisk, with whom this tale will have nothing to 



 



 



100 THE PABISIANS. 

dOybat who, from the little which *Lady Janet had seen of 
her, might possess all the requisites that fastidious corre- 
spondent would exact for the wife of her adopted son. 
' This Miss Asterisk had been introduced into the London 
world by the Duchess. The Duchess had replied to Lady 
Janet that, if earth could be ransacked, a more suitable wife 
for Gkaham Vane than Miss Asteiisk could not be found. 
She was well bom . an heiress; the estates she inherited 

were in the county of (viz., the county in which the 

ancestors of D^Altons and Vanes had for centuries estab^ 
lished their whereabouts). Miss Asterisk was pretty enough 
to please any man's eye, but nft with the beauty of which 
artists rave; well informed enough to be companion to a 
well-informed man, but certainly not witty enough to sup- 
ply bona mots to the clubs. Miss Asterisk was one of those 
women of whom a husband might be proud, yet with M'hom 
a husband would feel safe from being talked about. 

And in submitting the letter we have i*ead to Graham's 
eye, the Duchess had the cause of Miss Asterisk pointedly 
in view. Miss Asterisk had confided to her friend that, of 
all men she had seen, Mr. Graham Vane was the one she 
would feel the least inclined to refuse. 

So when Graham Vane returned the letter to the Duchess, 
simply saying, " How well my dear aunt divined what is 
weakest in me !" the Duchess replied, quickly, ^' Miss As- 
terisk dines here to-morrow; pray oome; you would like 
her if you knew more of her.'* 

" To-morrow I am engaged . an American friend of mine 
dines with me ; but 'tis no matter, for I shall never (eel more 
for Miss Asterisk than I feel for Mont Blanc." 



CHAPTER VL 

On leaving his cousin's house Graham walked on, be scarce, 
knew or cared whither, the image of the beloved dead so 
forcibly recalled the solemnity of the mission with which he 
had been intrusted, and which hitherto he had failed to ful- 
fill. What if the only mode by which he could, without 
causing questions and suspicions that might result in drs^- 
ging to-day the terrible nature of the trust he held, enrich 



 



Google 



THB PARISIANS. 101 

the daughter of Richard King, repair all wrong hitherto 
done to her, and guard the sanctity of Lady Janet's home, 
should be in that union which Richard King had commend- 
ed to him while his heart was yet free ? 

In such a case, would not gratitude to the dead, duty to 
the living, make that union imperative at whatever sacrifice 
of happiness to himself? The two years to which Richard 
King had limited the suspense of research were not yet ex- 
pired. Then, too, that letter of Lady Janet's. so tenderly 
anxious for his future, so clear-sighted as to the elements of 
his own character in its strength or its infirmities . com- 
bined with graver causes to withhold his heart from its 
yearning impulse, and . no, not steel it agahi^t Isaura, but 
forbid it to realize, in the fair creature and creator of ro- 
mance, his ideal of the woman to whom an earnest, saga- 
cious, aspiring man commits all the destinies involved in the 
serene dignity of his hearth. He could not but own that 
this gifted author . this eager seeker after fame. this brill- 
iant and bold competitor with men on their own stormy 
battle-ground . was the very person from whom Lady Janet 
would have warned away his choice. She (Isaura) merge 
her own distinctions in a husband's ! . she leave exclusively 
to him the burden of fame and calumny ! . she shun " to be 
talked about I" . she who could feel her life to be a success 
or a failure, according to the extetit and the loudness of the 
talk which it courted ! 

While these thoughts racked his mind, a kindly hSind was 
laid on his arm, affd a cheery voice accosted him. " Well 
met, my dear Vane ! I see. we are bound to the same place. 
There will be a good gathering to-night." 

" What do you mean, Bevil ? I am going nowhere, ex- 
cept to my own quiet rooms." 

"Pooh! Come in here at least for a few minutes;" and 
Bevil drew him up to the door-step bf a house close by, 
where, on certain evenings, a well-known club drew togeth- 
er men who seldom meet so familiarly elsewhere . men of 
all callings . a club especially favored by wits, authors, and 
the fldneurs of polite society. 

Graham shook his head, about to refuse, when Bevil add- 
ed, "I have just come from Paris, and Qp,n give you the last 
news, literary, political, and social. By-the-way, I saw Sav- 

 VjOOQIC 



102 THS PABISIAKS. 

arin the other night at the Cicogna^s . ^he introduced me 
there." Graham winced ; he was spelled by the music of a 
name, and followed his acquaintance into the crowded room, 
and after returning many greetings and nOds, withdrew into 
a remote corner, and motioned Bevil to a seat beside him* 
. " So jou met Savarin ? Where, did you say ?" 

"At the house of the new lady author . ^I hate the word 
authoress . Mademoiselle Cicogna! Of course you have 
read her book?" 

"Yes." 

" Full of fine things, is it not ? . though somewhat high- 
flown and sentimental. However, nothing succeeds like suc- 
cess. No book has been more talked about at Paris; the 
only thing more talked about is the lady authcM: herself." 

" Indeed I. and how ?" 

" She doesn't look twenty, a mere girl . of that kind of 
beauty which so arrests the eye that you pass by other faces 
to gaze on it, and the dullest stranger would ask, * Who and 
what is she ?' A girl, I say, like that^who lives as inde- 
pendently as if she were a middle-aged widow, receives ev- 
ery week (she has her Thursdays), with no other chaperon 
than an old ci-devant Italian singing-woman, dressed like a 
guy . ^must set Parisian tongues into play, even if she had 
not written the crack book of the season." 

"Mademoiselle Cicogna receives on Thursdays . ^no harm 
in that ; and if she have no other chaperon than the Italian 
lady you mention, it is because Mademoiselle Cicogna is an 
orphan ; and having a fortune, such as it*s, of her own, I do 
not see why she should not live as independently as many 
an unmarried woman in London placed under similar cir- 
cumstances. I suppose she receives chiefly persons in the 
literary or artistic world ; and *if they ai'e all as respecta- 
ble.as the Savarins, I do not think ill nature itself could find 
fault with her social circle." 

"Ah ! you know the Cicogna, I presume. I am sure I did . 
not wish to say any thing that could offend her best friends, 
only I do think it is a pity she is not married, poor girl 1" 

" Mademoiselle Cicogna, accomplished, beautiful, of good 
birth (the Cicognas rank among the oldest of X^ombard fam- 
ilies), is not likely tq, want offers." 

" Offers of marriage . h'm . well, I dare say, from authors 



 



 



THB PAEISIANS. 103 

and artists. You know Paris better even than I do, but I 
don't suppose authors and artists there make the most desir- 
able husbands ; and I scarcely know a marriage in France 
between a man author and lady author which does not end 
in the deadliest of -all animosities . that of wounded amour 
propre. Perhaps the man admires his own genius too much - 
to do proper homage to his wife's." 

" But the choice of Mademoiselle Cicogna need not be re- 
stricted to the pale of authorehip . doubtless she has many 
admirers beyond that quarrelsome border-land." 

"Certainlj^ . countless adorers. Enguerrand de Vande- 
mar . you know that diamond of dandies ?" 

" Perfectly. Is he an admirer ?" 

" Cela va sans dire . he told me that though she was not 
the handsomest woman in Paris, all other women looked 
less handsonie since he had seen her. But of course, French 
lady-killers like Enguerrand, when it comes to marriage, 
leave it to their parents to choose their wives and arrange 
the terms of the contract. Talking of lady-killers, I beheld 
Y[>\ amidst the throng at Mademoiselle Cicogna's the ci-devant 
I Lovelace whom I remember some twenty-tlii-ee years ago as 
the darling of wives and the terror of husbands . ^Victor de 
Maul^on." 

" Victor de Mauleon at Mademoiselle Cicogna's ! What ! 
is that man restored to society ?" . 

"Ah I you are thinking of the ugly dd story about the 
jewels. -oh yes, he has got over that; al4 his grand rela- 
tipiis, the Vandemars, Beauvilliers, Rochebriant, and others 
took him by the hand when he re-appeared at Paris last 
year ; and though I believe he is still avoided by many, he 
is courted by still more . and avoided, I fancy, rather from 
political than social causes. The Imperialist set, of course, 
execrate and proscribe him. You know he is the writer 
of those biting articles signed 'Pierre Firmin' in Wi^Bens 
Commun; and I am told he is the proprietor of that very 
clever journal, which has become a power." 

"So, so . that is the journal in whiph Mademoiselle Ci- 
cogna's roman first appeared. So, so . Victor de Mauleon 
one of her associates, her counselor and friend . ah !" 

" No, I didn't say that ; on the contrary, he was present- 
ed to her for the first time th evening I was at the house. 



 



 



104 THK PAKISIANS. 

I sav that young silk-haired coxcomb, Gustave Rameau, in- 
troduce* him to her. You don't perhaps know Rameau, 
editor of the Sena Commun . ^^writes poems and criticisms. 
They say he is a Red Republican, but De Maul^on keeps 
truculent French politics subdued, if not suppressed, in his 
cynical journal. Somebody told me that the Cioogna is 
very much in love with Rameau ; certainly he has a hand- 
some face of his own, and that is the reason why she was so 
rude to the Russian Prince X ." 

" How, rude ? Did the Prince propose to her ?" 

" Propose ! you forget. he is married. Doif t you know 
the Princess? Still there are other kinds of. proposals than 
those of marriage which a rich Russian prince may venture 
to make to a pretty novelist brought up for the stage." 

" Bevil !" cried Graham, grasping the man's arm fiercely, 
" how dare you ?" 

"My dear boy," said Bevil, very much astonished, *'I 
really did not know that your interest in the young lady 
was so great. If I have wounded you in relating a mere 
on dit picked up at the Jockey Club, I beg you a thousand 
pardons. Idarfe say there was not a word of truth in it." 

" Not a word of truth, you may be sure, if the on dit was 
injurious to Mademoiselle Cicogna. It is true I hoeoe a 
strong interest in her; any man . any gentleman . would 
have such interest in a giil '^o brilliant and seemingly so 
friendless. It shames one of human nature to think that 
the reward which the world makes to those who elevate its 
platitudes, brighten its dullness, delight its leisure, is . Slan- 
der ! I have had the honor to make the acquaintance of 
this lady before she became a * celebrity,' and I have never 
met in my paths through life a purer heart or a nobler 
nature. What is the wretched on dit you eondescend to 
circulate ? Permit me to add, 

* He who repeats a slander shares the crime.' " 

"Upon my honor, my -dear Vane," said Bevil, seriously 
(he did not want for spirit), " I hardly know you this even- 
ing. It is not because dueling is out of fashion that a man 
should allow himself to speak in a tone that gives offense to 
another who intended none ; and if dueling is out of fash- 
ion in England, it is still posiible in France. JBntre n(m^ I 



 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. * 105 

would rather cross the Channel with you than submit to 
language that conveys unmerited insult." 

Graham's cheek, before ashen pale, flushed into dark red. 
"I understand you," he said, quietly, "and will be at Bou- 
logne to-morrow." 

" Graham Vane," replied Bevil, with much dignity, " you 
and I have known each other a great many years, and 
neither of us has cause to question the courage of the other; 
but I m much older than youi^self. permit me to take the 
melancholy advantage of seniority. A duel between us' in 
consequence of careless words said about a lady in no way 
connetfted with either would be a cruel injury to her ; a duel 
on grounds so slight would little injure me . a man about 
town, who would not sit an hour in the House of Commons 
if you paid him a thousand pounds a minute. But you, 
Graham Vane . yon whose destiny it is to canvass electors 
and make laws . would it not be an injury to you to be 
questioned at the hustings why you broke the law, and why 
you sought another man's life ? Come, come ! shake hands, 
and consider all that seconds, if we chose them, would exact, 
is said, every affront on either side retracted, every apology 
on either side made." 

"Bevil, you disarm and conquer me. I spoke like a hot- 
headed fool; forget it . forgive. But . but . I can listen 
calmly now . what is that cw^ dit .^" 

"One that thoroughly bears out your own very manly 
upholding of the poor young orphan, whose name I shall 
never again mention without such respect as would satisfy 
her most sensitive champion. It was said that the Prince 
X . - boasted that before a week was out Mademoiselle 
Cicogna should appear in his carriage at the Bois de Bou- 
logne, and wear at the opera diamonds he had sent to her ; 
that this boast was enforced by a wager, and the terms of 
the wager compelled the Prince to coi^fess the means he had 
taken to succeed, and produce the evidence that he had lost 
or won. Aocording to this on dit^ the Prince had written 
to Mademoiselle Cicogna, and the letter hrfd been accom- 
panied by a parure that cost him half a million of francs ; 
that the diamonds had been sent back, with a few words of 
such scorn as a queen might address to an upstart lackey. 
But, my dear Vane, it is a mournful position for a girl to re- 

 VjOOQIC 



106 THE FABISIANS. 

ceive such offers ; and you must agree with me iu wishing 
she were safely married, evea to Monsieur {Lapieau, coxcomb 
though he be. Let us hope that they will be an exception 
to French authors, male and female, in general, and live like 
turtle-doves." 



CHAPTER VII. 

n 

A FBW days after the date of the last chapter Colonel 
Morley returned to Paris. He had dinftd#with Graham at 
Greenwich, had met him afterward in society, and paid him 
a farewell visit on the day before the Colonel's departure ; 
but the name of Isaura Cicogna had not again been uttered 
by either. Morley was surprised that his wife did not ques- 
tion him minutely as to the mode in which he had executed 
her delicate commission, and the manner as well as words 
with which Graham had replied to his " ventilations." But 
his Lizzy cut him short when he began his recital. 

"I don't want to hear any thing more about the man. 
He has thrown away a prize richer than his ambition will 
ever gain, even if it gained him a throne." 

"That it can't gain him in the Old Country. The people 
are loyal to the present dynasty, whatever you may be told 
to the contrary." 

"Don't be so horribly literal, Frank; that subject is done 
with. How was the Duchess of M dressed ?" 

But when the Colonel had retired to what the French call 
the cabinet de travail-^&Tid which he more accurately termed 
his " smoke den " . and there indulged in the cigar which, 
despite his American citizenship, was forbidden in the draw- 
ing-room of the tyrant who ruled his life, Mrs. Morley took 
from her desk a letter received three days before, and brood- 
ed over it intently, studying every word. When she had 
thus reperused it, he*' tears fell upon the page. "Poor 
Isaura !" she muttered . " poor Isaura ! . I kngw she loves 
him . and how deeply a nature like hers can love I But I 
must break it to her. If I did not, she would remain nurs- 
ing a vain dream, and refuse every chance of real happiness 
for the sake of nursing it." Then she mechanically folded 
up the letter . I need not say it was from Graham Vane . 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 107 

restored it to the desk, and remained musing till the Colonel 
looked in at the door and said, peremptorily, " Very late . 
come to bed." 

The next day Madame Savarin called on Isaara. 

" Ch^re enfant^'* said she, " I have bad news for you. Poor 
Gustavo is very ill . an attack of the lungs and fever ; you 
know how delicate he is." 

" I am sincerely grieved," said Isaura, in earnest, tender 
tones ; " it must be a very sudden attack r he was here last 
Thursday." 

" The malady only declared itself yesterday morning, but 
surely you must have observed how ill he has been looking 
for several days past. It pained me to see him." 

" I did not notice any change in him," said Isaura, some- 
what conscience - stricken. Wrapped in her own happy 
thoughts, she would not have noticed change in faces yet 
more familiar to her than that of her young admirer. 

" Isaura," said Madan^e Savarin, " I suspect there are mor- 
al causes for oui friend's failing health. Why should I dis- 
guise my meaning? You know well how madly he is in 
love with you ; and have you denied him hope ?" 

" I like M. Rameau as a friend ; I admire him. at times I 
pity him." 

" Pity is akin to love." 

" I doubt the truth of that saying, at all events as you 
apply it now. I could not love M. Rameau ; I never gave 
him cause to think I could." 

" I wish for both your "feakes that you could make me a 
different answer ; for his sake, because, knowing his faults 
and failings, I am persuaded that they would vanish in a 
companionship so pure, so .elevating as yours: you could 
make him not only so much happier, but so much better a 
man. Hush I let me go on ; let roe come to yourself. I say 
for your sake I wish it. Your pursuits, your ambition, are 
akin to his ; you should not marry one who could not sym- 
pathize with you in these. If you did, he might either re- 
strict the exercise of your genius or be chafed at its display. 
The only authoress I ever knew whose married lot was se- 
renely happy to the last was the greatest of English poet- 
esses married to a great English poet. You can not, you 
ought not, to devote yourself to the splendid career to which 



 



 



108 THE PARISIANS. 

your genias irresistibly impels you without that counsel, that 
support, that protection, which a husband alone can give. 
My dear child, as the wife myself of a man of letters, and 
familiarized to all the gossip, all the scandal, to which they 
who give their names to the public are exposed, I declare 
that, if I had a daughter who inherited Savarin's talents, and 
was ambitious of attaining to his renown, I would rather 
shot her up in a convent than let her publish a book that 
was in every one^s hands until she had sheltered her name 
under that of a husband ; and if I say this of my child, with 
a father so wise in the world's ways and so popularly re- 
spected as my honhomme^ what must I feel to be essential 
to your safety, poor stranger in our land ! poor solitary or- 
phan! with no other advice or guardian than the singing 
mistress whom you touchingly call ^MadreP I see how I 
distress and pain you . I can not help it. Listen. The 
other evening Savarin came back from his favorite cafe in a 
state of exQitement that made me think he came to announce 
a revolution. It was about you ; he stormed, he wept . act- 
ually wept . my philosophical, laughing Savarin. He bad 
just heard of that atrocious wager made by a Russian bar- 
barian. Every one praised you for the contempt with which 
you had treated the savage's insolence. But that you should 
have been submitted to such an insult without one male 
friend who had the right to resent and chastise it . you can 
not think how Savarin was chafed and galled. You know 
how he admires, but you can not guess how he reveres you ; 
and since then he says to me eVfery day: 'That girl must 
not remain single. Better marry any man who has a heart 
to defend a wife's honor and the nerve to fire a pistol. Ev- 
ery Frenchman has those qualiflbations !' " 

Here Isaura could no longer restrain her emotions; she 
burst into sobs so vehement, so convulsive, that Madame 
Savarin became alarmed ; but when she attempted to em- 
brace and soothe her, Isaura recoiled with a visible shudder, 
and gasping out, " Cruel, cruel !" turned to the door, and 
rushed to her own room. 

A few minutes afterward a maid entered the salon with a 
message to Madame Savarin that mademoiselle was so un- 
well that she must beg madarae to excuse her return to the 
salon. 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 109 

Later in the day Mrs. Morley called, but Isaura would not 
see her. 

Meanwhile poor Rameau was stretched on his sick-bed, 
and in sharp struggle between life and death. It is diffi- 
cult to disentangle, one by one, all the threads in a nature so 
oomplex as Kameau's ; but, if we may hazard a conjecture, 
the grief of disappointed love was not the immediate cause 
of his illness, and yet it had much to do with it. The goad 
of Isaura's refusal had driven him into seeking distraction 
in excesses which a stronger frame could have courted with 
impunity.* The man was thoroughly Paiisian in many 
things, but especially in impatience of any trouble. Did 
love trouble him . love could be drowned in absinthe ; and 
too much absinthe may be a more immediate cause of con- 
gested lungs than the love which the absinthe had lulled to 
sleep. ^ 

His bedside was not watched by hirelings. When first 
taken thus ill . ^too ill to attend to his' editorial duties . ^in- 
formation was conveyed to the publisher of the Sens Com- 
mwiy and in consequence of that information Victor de 
Maul6on came to see the sick man. By his bed he found 
Savarin, who had called, as it were, by chance, and seen the 
doctor, who had said, " It is grave. He must be well 
nursed." 

Savarin whispered to De Maul^on, " Shall we call in a pro- 
fessional nurse, or a soeur de cJiariti .^" 

De Maul6on replied, also in a whisper, " Somebody told 
me that the pan had a mother." 

It was true . Savarin had forgotten it. Rameau never 
mentioned his parents . he was not proud of them. They 
belonged to a lower class oi^bourgeoiaie^ retired shop-keep- 
ers, aYid a Red Republican is sworn to hate of the hourgeoi- 
sie^ high or low ; while a beautiful young author pushing 
his way into the Chauss6e D"Antin does. not proclaim to 
the world that his parents had sold hosiery in the Rue St. 
Denis. . . 

Nevertheless Savarin knew that Rameau had such par- 
ents still living, and took the hint. Two hours afterward 
Kameau was leaning his burning forehead on his mother's 
breast. 

The next morning the doctor said to the mother, " You 



 



 



110 THE PABISIAKS. 

are worth ten of me. If you can stay here, we shall pull 
him through." 

"Stay here! . my own boy!" cried, indignantly, the poor 
mother. 



CHAPTER Vin. 

The day which had inflicted on Isaura so keen an anguish 
was marked by a great trial in the life of Alain de Rochebriant. 

In the morning he received the notice of " un commande- 
ment tendant d saisie immohilihrey^ on the part .f his cred- 
itor, M. Louvier ; in plain English, an announcement that his 
property at Rochebriant would be put up to public ale on 
a certain day, in case all debts due to the mo].*tgagee were 
not paid before. An hour afterward came d note from Du- 
plessis stating that "he had returned from Bretagne on the 
previous evening, and would be very happy to see the Mar- 
quis de Kochebriant before two o'clock, if not inconvenient 
to call." 

Alain put the " commandement " into his pocket, and re- 
paired to the Hotel Duplessis. 

The financier received him with very cordial civility. 
Then he began : " I am happy to say I left your excellent 
aunt in very good health. She honored the letter of intro- 
duction to her which I owe to your politeaess with the most 
amiable hospitalities ; she insisted on my removing from the 
avherge at which I first put up and becoming a guest under 
your venerable roof-tree . a most agreeable ladv, and a most 
interesting chdteau?^ 

" I fear your accommodation was in striking contrast to 
your comforts at Paris; mj.chdteau is only interesting to 
an antiquanan enamored of ruins." 

"Pardon me, * ruins' is an exaggerated expression. I do 
not say that the chdteau dftes not want some repairs, but 
they would not be costly ; the outer walls are strong enough 
to defy time for centuries to come, and a few internal deco- 
rations and some modem additions of furoiture would make 
the old manoir a home fit for a prince. I have been over 
the whole estate, too, with the worthy M. Hebert . a superb 
property I" 

" Which M. Louvier appears to appreciate," said Alain, 



 



Gdogk 



THE PAEISIANS. Ill 

with a somewhat melancholy smile, extending to Duplessis 
the menacing notice. 

Duplessis glanced at it, and said, dryly, "M. Louvier 
knows what be is about. But I think we had better put 
an immediate stop to formalities which must be painful to a 
creditor so benevolent. I do not presume to offer to pay 
the interest due on the security you can give for the repay- 
ment. If you refused that offer from so old a friend as Le- 
mercier, of course you could not accept it from me. I make 
another proposal, to which you can scarcely object. I do 
not like tt) give my scheming rival on the Bourse the tri- 
umph of so profoundly planned a speculation. Aid me to 
defeat him. Let me take the mortgage on myself, and be- 
come sole mortgagee . hush ! . on this condition, that there 
should be an entire union of interests between us two ; that 
I should be at liberty to make the improvements I desire, 
and, when the improvements be made, there should be a fair 
arrangement as to the proportion of profits due to me as 
mortgagee and improver, to you as original owner. Attend, 
my dear Marquis . I am speaking as a mere man of business. 
I see my way to adding more than a third-^I might even 
say a half. to the present revenues of Rochebriant. The 
woods have been sadly neglected; drainage alone would 
add greatly to their produce. Your orchards might be ren- 
dered magnificent supplies to Paris with better cultivation. 
Lastly, I would devote to building purposes or to market- 
gardens all the lands round the two towns of and , 

I think I can lay my hands on suitable speculators for these 
last experiments. In a word, though the market value of 
Kochebriant, as it now stands, would not be equivalent to 
the debt on it, in five or six years it could be macje worth . 
well, I will not say bow muph . but we shall be both well 
satisfied with the result. Meanwhile, if you allow me to 
find purchasers for your timber, and. if you will not suffer 
the Clievalier de Finisterre to regulate your expenses, you 
need have no fear that the. interest due to me will not be 
regularly paid, even though I shall be compelled, for the firat 
year or two At least, to ask a higher rate of interest than 
Louvier exacted-. say a quarter per cent, more ; and in sug- 
gesting that, you will comprehend that this is now a matter 
of business between us, and not of friendship." 



 



 



112 THE PAEISIANS. 

Alain turned bis head aside to conceal his emotion, and 
then, with the quick, affectionate impulse of the genuine 
French nature, threw himself on the financier's breast and 
kissed him on both cheeks. 

" You save me ! you save the home and tombs of my an- 
cestors! Thank you I can not; but I believe in God . ^I 
pray . I will pray for you as for a father ! And if ever," he 
hurried on, in broken words, " I am mean enough to squan- 
der on idle luxuries one franc that I should save for the debt 
due to you, chide me as a father would chide a graceless 
son." 

Moved as Alain was, Duplessis was moved yet more deep- 
ly. " What father would not be proud of such a son ? Ah, 
if I had such a one !" he said, softly. Then, quickly recov- 
ering his wonted composure, he added, with the sardonic 
smile which often chilled his friends and alarmed his foes, 
" Monsieur Louvier is about to pass that which I ventured 
to promise him, a ' mauvais quart d^heure? Lend me that 
commandement tendant d saisie. I must be off to my avoite 
with instructions. If you have no better engagement, pray 
dine with me to-day, and accompany Valerie and myself to 
the opera." 

I need not say that Alain accepted the invitation. How 
happy Val6rie was that evening ! 



CHAPTER IX 



The next day Duplessis was sui'prised by a visit from M. 
Louvier . that magnate of miUionnairea had never before set 
foot in the house of his younger and less famous rivaL 

The burly man entered the room witi a face much flushed, 
and with more than his usual mixture of jovial brusquerie 
and opulent swagger. * 

" Startled to see me, I dare say," began Louvier, tts soon 
as the door was cl^ed. "I have this morning received a 
communication from your agent containing a check for the 
interest due to me from M. Rochebriant, and B formal notice 
of your intention to pay off the principal on behalf of that 
popinjay prodigal Though we two have not hitherto been 
the best friends in the world, I thought it fair to a man in 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 113 

your station to come to you direct and say, * Cher confrlre^ 
what swindler h^s bubbled you ? You don't know the real 
condition of this Breton property, or you would never so 
throw away your millions. The property is not worth the 
mortgage I have on it by 30,000 louis.' " 

" Then, M. Louvier, you will be 30,000 loui* the richer if 
I take the rnortgage off your hands." 

" I can afford the loss . no offense . better than you can ; 
and I may have fancies which I don't mind paying for, but 
which can not influence another. See, I have brought with 
me the exact schedule of all details respecting this property. 
You need not question their accuracy ; they have been ar- 
ranged by the Marquis's ow agents, M. Gandrin and M. 
Hubert. They contain, you will perceive, every possible 
item of revenue, down to an apple-tree. Now look at that, 
and tell me if you are justified in lending such a sum on 
Buch a property." 

" Thank you very much for an interest in my affairs that 
I scarcely ventured to expect M. Louvier to entertain ; but 
I see that I have a duplicate of this paper, furnished to me 
very honestly by M. Hubert himself. Besides, I too have 
fancies which I don't mind paying for, and among them may 
be a fancy for the lands of Rochebriant." 

" Lool^ you, Duplessis, when a man like me asks a favor, 
you. may be sure that he has the power to repay it. Let ine 
have my whim here, and ask any thing you like from me in 
return !" 

^^DisoJA not to oblige you, but this has become not only a 
whim of mine,Jbut a matter of honor ; and honor, you know, 
my dear M. Louvier, is the first principle of Sound finance. 
I have myself, after careful inspection of the Rochebriant 
property, volunteered to its owner to advance the money 
to pay off your hypothhqm; and what would be said on the 
Bourse if Lucien Duplessis failed i^ an obligation?" . 

" I think I can guess what will one day be said of Lucien 
Duplessis if he make an irrevocable enemy of Paul Louvier. 
Corhleu I mon cJier, a man of thrice your capital, who 
watched every speculation of yours with a hostile eye, might 
some beau jour maike even you a bankrupt !'-' 

" Forewarned, forearmed !" replied Duplessis, imperturba- 
bly. ^^^Faa eat ab hoste doeerV . I mean, ^ It is right to be 



 



 



114 THB PABISIANS. 

taagbt by an enemy ;' and I never remember the day when 
you were otherwise, and yet I am not a bankrupt, though I 
receive you in a house which, thanks to you, is so modest in 
point of size I" 

^' Bah ! that was a mistake of mine . and, ha ! ha ! you 
.* had your rev^age there . that forest l" 

" Well, as a peace-offering, I will give you up the forest, 
and content my ambition as a landed proprietor with this 
bad speculation of Rochebriant !" 

" Confound the forest ! I don't care for it now. I can sell 
my place for more than it has cost me to one of your impe- 
rial favorites. Build a palace in your forest. Let me have 
Rochebriant, and name your terms." 

"A thousand pardons ! but I have already had the honor 
to inform you that I have contracted an obligation which 
does not allow me to listen to terms." 

As a serpent that, after all crawlings and windings, rears 
itself on end, Louvier rose, crest erect . 

" So, then, it is finished. I came here disposed to offer 
peace. You refuse, and declare war." 

"Not at all; I do not declare war; I accept it if forced 
on me." 

" Is that your last word, M. Duplessis?" 

*' Monsieur Louvier, it is." 

"Bonjourr 

And Louvier strode to the door. Here he paused. " Take 
a day to consider." 

" Not a moment." 

" Your servant, monsieur . your very huipble servant.'* 
Louvier vanished. 

Duplessis leaned his large, thoughtful forehead on his thin, 
nervous hand. "This loan will pinch me," he muttered. 
" I must be very wary now with such a foe. Well, why 
should I care to be rich ?^ Valerie's cfo^, Valerie's happiness, 
are secured." 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 115 



CHAPTEU X. 

Madame Savabin wrote a very kind and very apologetic 
letter to Isaura, but no answer was returned to it. Madame 
Savarin did not venture to communicate to her husband the 
substance of a conversation which had ended so painfully. 
He had, in theory, a delicacy of tact which, if he did not al- 
ways exhibit it in practice, made him a very severe critic 
of its deficiency iij others. Therefore, unconscious of the 
offense given, he made a point of calling at Isaura's apart- 
ments, and leaving word with her servant that " he was sure 
she would be pleased to hear M. Rameau was somewhat 
better, though still in danger." 

It was not till the third day after her interview with Ma- 
dame Savsrrin that Isaura left her own room. She did so to 
receive Mrs. Morley. 

The fair American was shocked to see the change in Isau- 
ra's countenance. She was very pale, and with that inde- 
scribable appearance of exhaustion which betrays continued 
want of sleep ; her soft eyes were dim, the play of her lips 
was gone, her light step wtary and languid. 

" My poor darling !" cried Mrs. Morley, embracing her, 
*^ you have indeed been ill ! What is the matter ? Who 
attends you ?" 

"I need no physician ; it was but a passing cold . the air 
of Paris is very trying. Never mind me, dear. What is 
the last news ?" 

Therewith Mrs. Morley ran glibly through the principal 
topics of the hour . the breach threatened between M. OUi- 
vier and his former Liberal partisans ; the tone unexpected- 
ly taken by M. de Girardin ; the speculations as to the re- 
sult of the trial of t'he alleged conspirators against the Em- 
peror's life, which was fixed to take place toward the end of 
that month of June . all matters of no slight importance to 
the interests of an empire. Sunk deep into the recesses of 
her fatUeuil^ Isaura seemed to listen quietly, till, when a pause 
came, she said, in cold, clear tones, 



 



 



116 THE PABISIANS. 

"And Mr. Graham Vane . he has refused your invitation?" 

" I am sorry to say he has . he is so engaged in London." 

" I knew he had refused," said Isaura, with a low, bitter 
laugh. 

"How? Who told yo?" 

" My own good sense told me. One may have good sense, 
though one is a poor scribbler." 

" Don't talk in that way ; it is beneath you to angle for 
compliments." ^ 

" Compliments ! ah ! And so Mr. Vane has refused to 
come to Paris. Never mind; he will come next year. I 
shall not be in Paris then. Did Colonel Morley see Mr. 
Vane?" 

" Oh yes; two or three times." 

"He is well?" 

" Quite well, I believe . at least Frank did not say to the 
contrary ; but, from what I hear, he is not the person I took 
him for. Many people told Frank that he is much changed 
since he came into his fortune . is grown very stingy, quite 
miserly, indeed ; declines even a seat in Parliament because 
of the expense. It is astonishing how money does spoil a 
man." 

" He had come into his fortune when he was here. Money 
had not spoiled him then." 

Isaura paused, pressing her haids tightly together; then 
she suddenly rose to her feet, the color on her cheek man- 
tling and receding rapidly, and fixing on her startled visitor 
eyes no longer dim, but with something half fierce, half im- 
ploring in the passion of their gaze, said, "Your husband 
spoke of me to Mr. Vane : I know he did. What did Mr. 
Vane answer ? Do not evade my question. The truth ! the 
truth ! I only ask the truth !" 

" Give me your hand. Sit here beside me, dearest child." 

" Child ! . no, I am a woman ! . weak as a woman, but 
strong as a woman too I The truth !" 

Mrs. Morley had come prepared to carry out the resolu- 
tion she had formed and " break " to Isaura " the truth,'' 
that which the girl now demanded. But then she had 
meant to break the truth in her own gentle, gradual way. 
Thus suddenly called upon, her courage failed her. She 
bprst into tears. Isaura gazed at her dry-eyed. 



 



Google 



THE PABISIAXS. 117 

" Your tears answer me. Mr. Vane has heard that I have 
been insulted. A man like him does not stoop to love for a 
woman who has known an insult. I do not blame him ; I 
honor him the more . he is right." 

" No . no . no ! . you insulted ! Who dared to insult you ?" 
(Mrs. Morley had never heard the story about the Russian 
Prince.) " Mr. Vane spoke to Frank, and writes of you to 
me as of one whom it is impossible not to admire, to re- 
spect; but . I can not say it . you will have the truth . 
there, read and judge for yourself." And Mrs. Morley drew 
forth and thrust into Isaura's hands the letter she had con- 
cealed from her husband. The letter was not very long ; it 
began with expressions of warm gratitude to Mrs. Morley, 
not for her invitation only, but for the interest she had con- 
ceived in his happiness. It then went on thus : 

" I join with my whole heart in all that you say, with 
such eloquent justice, of the mental and personal gifls so- 
bounteously lavished by nature on the young lady whom 
you name. 

" No one can feel more sensible than I of the charm of so 
exquisite a loveliness ; no one can more sincerely join in the 
belief that the praise which greets the commencement of her 
career is but the whisper of the praise that will cheer its 
progress with louder and louder plaudits. 

" He only would be worthy of her hand who, if not equal 
to herself in genius, would feel raised into partnership with 
it by sympathy with its objects and joy in its triumphs. 
For myself, the same pain with which I should have learned 
she had adopted the profession which she originally contem- 
plated saddened and stung me when, choosing a career that 
confers a renown yet more lasting than the stage, she no 
less left behind her the peaceful immunities of private life. 
Were I even free to consult only my own heart in the choice 
of the one sole partner of ray destinies (which I can not at 
present honestly say that I am, though I had expected to 
be so ere this when I last saw you at Paris) ; could I even 
hope . which I have no right to do . that I could chain to 
myself any private portion of thoughts which now flow into 
the large channels by which poets enrich the blood of the 
world . still (I say it in self-reproach . it may be the fault 
of my English rearing . it may rather be the fault of an 

' n.. 6  Google 



118 THE PABISIANS. 

egotism peculiar to myself) . still I doubt if I could render 
happy any woman whose world could not be narrowed to 
the Home that she adorned and blessed. 

"And yet not even the Jealous tyranny of man's love 
could dare to say to natures like hers of whom we speak, 
* Limit to the household glory of one the light which genius 
has placed in its firmament for the use and enjoyment of 
all.'" 

"I thank you so much," said Isaura, calmly; "suspense 
makes a woman so weak . certainty so strong." Mechan- 
ically she smoothed and refolded the letter . mechanically, 
but with slow, lingering hands . then she extended it to her 
friend, smiling. 

" Nay, will you not keep it yourself?" said Mrs. Morley. 
"The more you examine the narrow-minded prejudices, the 
English arrogant marCs jealous dread of superiority . nay, 
of equality . in the woman he can only value as he does his 
house or his horse, because she is his exclusive property, the 
more you will be rejoiced to find yourself free for a more 
worthy choice. Keep the letter; read it till you feel for the 
writer forgiveness and disdain." 
i>y Isaura took back the letter, and leaned her cheek on her 
hand, looking dreamily into space. It was some moments 
before she replied, and her words then had no reference to 
Mrs. Morley's consolatory exhortation. 

"He was so pleased when he learned that I renounced 
the career on which I had set my ambition. I thought he 
would have been so pleased when I sought in another career 
to raise myself nearer to his level. I see now how sadly -I 
was mistaken. All that perplexed me before in him is ex- 
plained. I did not guess how foolishly I had deceived my- 
self till three days ago . then I did guess it ; and it was that 
guess which tortured me so terribly that I could not keep 
my heart to myself when I saw you to-day ; in spite of all 
womanly pride, it would force its way . ^to the truth. Hush ! 
I must tell you what was said to me by another friend of 
mine . a good friend, a wise and kind one. Yet I was so 
angry when she said it that I thought I could never see her 
more." 

" My sweet darling ! who was this friend, and what did 
she say to you ?" 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PASI6IAKS. 119 

" The friend was Madame Savarin." 

"No woman, loves you more except myself; and she 
said." 

"That she would have suffered no daughter of hers to 
commit her name to the talk of the world as I have done . 
be exposed to the risk of insult as I have been . until she 
had the shelter and protection denied to me. And I, hav- 
ing thus overleaped the bound that a prudent mother would 
prescribe to her child, have become one whose hand men do 
not seek, unless they themselves take the same roads to no- 
toriety. Do you not think she was right ?" 

" Not as you so morbidly put it, silly girl . certainly not 
right But I do wish that you had the shelter and protec- 
tion which Madame Savarin meant to express; I do wish 
that you were happily married to one very different from 
Mr. Vane . one who would be more proud of your genius 
than of your beauty . one who would say, * My name, safer 
far in its enduring nobility than those that depend on titles 
and lands . which are held on the tenure of the popular 
breath . must be honored by posterity, for She has deigned 
to make it hers. No democratic revolution can disennoble 

"Ay, ay, you believe that men will be found to think with 
complacency that they owe to a wife a name that they could 
not achieve for themselves. Possibly there are such men. 
Where? . among those that are already united by sympa- 
thies in the same callings, the same labors, the same hopes 
and fears, with the women who have left behind them the 
privacies of home. Madame de Grantmesnil was wrong. 
Artists should wed with artists. True . true I" 

Here she passed her hand over her forehead . it was a 
pretty way of hers when seeking to concentrate thought . 
and was silent a moment or so. 

" Did you ever feel," she then asked, dreamily, " that there 
are moments in life when a dark curtain seems to fall over 
one's past that a day before was so clear, so blended with 
the present? One can not any longer look behind; the 
gaze is attracted onward, and a track of fire flashes upon the 
future . the future which yesterday was invisible. There is 
a line by some English poet . Mr.'Vane once quoted it, not 
to me, but to M. Savarin, and in illustration of his argument 



 Google 



120 THB PABISIAN& 

. that the most complicated recesses of thought are best 
reached by the simplest forms of expression. I said to my- 
self, * I will study that truth if ever I take to literature as I 
have taken to song;' and . yes . it was that evening that 
the ambition fatal to women fixed on me its relentless fangs 
. at Enghien . we were on the lake . the sun was setting." 

" But you do not tell me the line that so impressed you," 
said Mrs, Morley, with the woman's kindly tact. 

"The line . which line? Oh, I remember; the line was 

this . 

' I see as from a tower the end of all.' 

And now . kiss me, dearest . never a word again to me 
about this conversation ; never a word about Mr. Vane . the 
dark curtain has fallen on the past." 



CHAPTER XI. 

Men and women are much more like each other in certain 
large elements of character than is generally supposed, but 
it is that very resemblance which makes their differences 
the more incomprehensible to each other ; just as in politics, 
theology, or that most disputatious of all things disputable, 
metaphysics, the nearer the reasoners approach each other 
in. points that to an uncritical by-stander seem the most im- 
portant, the more sure they are to start off in opposite direc- 
tions upon reaching the speck of a pin-prick. 

Now there are certain grand meeting-places between maa 
and woman . the grandest of all is on the ground of love, 
and yet here also is the great field of quarrel. And here the 
teller of a tale such as mine ought, if he is sufficiently wise 
to be humble, to know that it is almost profanation if, as a 
man, he presumes to enter the penetralia of a woman's in- 
nermost heart, and repeat, as a man would repeat, all the vi- 
brations of sound which the heart of a woman sends forth 
undistinguishable even to her own ear. 

I know Isaura as intimately as if I had rocked her in her 
cradle, played with her in her childhood, educated and train- 
ed her in her youth ; and yet I can no more tell you faithful- 
ly what passed in her mind during the forty-eight hours that 
intervened between her conversation with that Americau 



 



 



THE PAEI6IANS. 121 

lady and her re-appearance in some commonplace drawing- 
room than I can tell you what the Man in the Moon might . 
feel if the sun that his world reflected were blotted out of 
creation. 

I can only say that, when she re-appeared in that common- 
place drawing-room world, there was a change in her face 
not very perceptible to the ordinary observer. If any thing, 
to his eye she was handsomer . the eye was brighter . the 
complexion (always lustrous . though somewhat pale, the 
limpid paleness that suits so well with dark hair) was yet 
more lustrous . it was flushed into delicate rose hues . hues 
that still better suit with dark hair. What, then, was the 
change, and change not for the better ? The lips, once so 
pensively sweet, had grown hard ; on the brow that had 
seemed to laugh when the lips did there was no longer sym- 
pathy between brow and lip ; there was scarcely seen a fine 
thread-like line that in a few years would be a fuiTOw on 
the space between the eyes; the voice was not so tenderly 
soft; the step was haughtier. What all such change de- 
noted it is for a woman to decide . I can only guess. In 
the mean while Mademoiselle Cicogna had sent her servant 
daily to inquire afber M. Rameau. That, I think, she would 
have done under any circumstances. Meanwhile, too, she 
had called on Madame Savarin . made it up with her . sealed 
the reconciliation by a cold kiss. That, too, under any cir- 
cumstances, I think, she would have done . under some cir- 
cumstances the kiss might have been less cold. 

There was one thing unwonted in her habits. I mention 
it, though it is only a woman who can say if it means any 
thing worth noticing. 

For six days she had left a letter from Madame de Grant- 
mesnil unanswered. With Madame de Grantmesnil was con- 
nected the whole of her innermost life . from the day when 
the lonely, desolute child had seen, beyond the dusty thor- 
oughfares of life, gleams of the faery-land in poetry and art 
. onward through her restless, dreamy, aspiring youth . on- 
ward . onward . till now, through all that constitutes the 
glorious reality that we call romance. 

Never befbre had she left for two days unanswered letters 
which were to her as Sibylline leaves to some unquiet neo- 
phyte yearning for solutions to enigmas suggested whether 



 



 



122 THB PABISIAN8. 

by the world without or by the soul within. For six days 
Madame de GrantmesniPs letter remained unanswered, un- 
read, neglected, thrust out of sight ; just as when some im- 
perious necessity compels us to grapple with a world that 
is, we cast aside the romance which, in our holiday hours, 
bad beguiled us to a world with which we have interests 
and sympathies no more. 



CHAPTER Xn. 

OusTAVB recovered, but slowly. The physician pronounced 
bim out of all immediate danger, but said frankly to him, 
and somewhat more guardedly to his parents, ^' There is am- 
ple cause to beware." "Look you, my young friend," he 
added to Rameau, "mere brain -work seldom kills a man 
once accustomed to it, like you ; but heart- work and stom- 
ach-work and nerve-work, added to brain-work, may soon 
consign to the coffin a frame ten times more robust than 
yours. Write as much as you will . that is your vocation ; 
but it is not your vocation to drink absinthe . to preside at 
orgies in the Maison Dorke. Regulate yourself, and not af- 
ter the fashion of the fabulous Don Juan. Marry . ^live so- 
berly and quietly . and you may survive the grandchildren 
o{viveurs. Go on as you have done, and before the year is 
out you are in JP^re la Chaise.^^ 

Rameau listened languidly, but with a profound convic- 
tion that the physician thoroughly understood his case. 

Lying helpless on his bed, he had no desire for orgies at 
the Maison Dor^; with parched lips thirsty for innocent* 
tisane of lime blossoms, the thought of absinthe was as odi- 
ous to him as the liquid fire of Phlegethon. If ever sinner 
became ^suddenly convinced that there was a good deal to 
be said in favor of a moral life, that sinner, at the moment 
I speak of, was Gustave Rameau. Certainly a moral life. 
"2>omws et pktcens vxor^^ were essential to the poet who, 
aspiring to immortal glory, was condemned to the ailments 
of a very perishable frame. 

"Ah !" he murmured, plaintively, to himsdf, " that girl 
Isaura can have no true syn^)athy with genius! It is no 
ordinary man that she will kill in me 1" 



 



 



THE PABISIANS, 123 

And BO murmuriDg, he fell asleep. When he woke and 
found his head pillowed on his mother's breast, it was much 
as a sensitive, delicate man may wake after having drunk 
too much the night before. Repentant, mournful, maudlin, 
he began to weep, and in the course of his weeping he con- 
fided to his mother the secret of his heart. 

Isaura had refused him . that refusal had made him des- 
perate. 

^^ Ah ! with Isaura how changed would be his habits I how 
pure 1 how healthful I" His mother listened fondly, and did 
her best to comfort him and cheer his drooping spirits. 

She told him of Isaura's messages of inquiry duly twice 
a day. Rameau, who knew more about women in general, 
and Isaura in particular, than his mother conjectured, shook 
his head mournfully. " She could not do less," he said. "Has 
no one offered to do more ?" He thought of Julie when he 
asked that. Madame Rameau hesitated. 

These poor Parisians! it is the mode to preach against 
them ; and before my book closes I shall have to preach . 
no, not to preach, but to imply . plenty of faults to consider 
and amend. Meanwhile I try my best to take them, as the 
philosophy of life tells us to take other people, for wh^t they 
are. 

I do not think the domestic relations of the Parisian hour- 
fieoisie are as bad as they are said to be in French novels. 
Madame Rameau is not an uncommon type of her class. 
She had been when she first married singularly handsome 
. it was from her that Gustavo inherited his beauty; and 
her husband was a very ordinary type of the French shop- 
keeper . very plain, by no means intellectual, but gay, good- 
humored, devotedly attached to his wife, and with implicit 
trust ia her conjugal virtue. Never was trust better placed. 
There was not a happier nor a more faithful couple in the 
quartier in which they resided. Madame Rameau hesitated 
when her boy, thinking of Julie, asked if no one had done 
more than send to inquire after him as Isaura had done. 

After that hesitating pause she said, " Yes . a young lady 
calling hei*self Mademoiselle Julie Caumartin wished to in- 
Btall herself here as your nurse. When I said, ' But I am his 
mother . he needs no other nurses,' she would have retreat- 
ed, and looked ashamed . ^poor thing ! I don't blame her if 



 



 



124 THB PASISIAKS. 

she loved my son. But, my son, I say this . if you love her, 
don't talk to me about that Mademoiselle Cicogna ; and if 
you love Mademoiselle Cicogna, why, then, your father will 
take care that the poor girl who loved you . not knowing 
that you loved another . is not left to the temptation of 
penury. 

Rameau's pale lips withered into a phantom-like sneer. 
Julie! the resplendent Julie! . true, only a ballet-dancer, 
but whose equipage in the Bois had once been the envy of 
duchesses . Julie ! who had sacrificed fortune for his sake . 
who, freed from him, could have miUionnairea again at her 
feet . Julie! to be saved from penury, as a shop-keeper 
would save an erring nurse-maid . Julie! the irrepressible 
Julie ! who had wntten to him, the day before his illness, in 
a pen dipped, not in ink, but in blood from a vein she had 
opened in her arm : " Traitor ! . I have not seen you for 
three days. Dost thou dare to love another ? If so . I care 
not how thou attempt to conceal it . woe to her ! IngrcAl 
woe to thee ! Love is not love, unless, when betrayed by 
love, it appeals to death. Answer me quick . quick. 

"JUUE." 

Poor Gustavo thought of that lettey and groaned. Cer- 
tainly his mother was right . he ought to get rid of Julie : 
but he did not clearly see how Julie was to be got rid of. 
He replied to Madame Rameau, peevishly, " Don't trouble 
your head about Mademoiselle Caumartin ; she is in no want 
of money. Of course, if I could hope for Isaura . but, alas ! ' 
I dare not hope. Give me ray tisane?'* 

When the doctor called next day he looked grave, and, 
drawing Madame Rameau into the next room, he said, ^^ We 
are not getting on so well as I had hoped ; the fever is gone, 
but there is much to apprehend from the debility left be- 
hind. His spirits are sadly depressed." Then added the 
doctor, pleasantly, and with that wonderful insight into our 
complex humanity in which physicians excel poets, and in 
which Parisian physicians are not excelled by any physicians 
in the world, " Can't you think of any bit of good news. r 
that ' M. Thiers raves about your son's last poem ' . that * it 
is a question among the Academicians between him and 
Jules Janin ' . or that * the beautiful Duchesse de has 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 125 

been placed In a lunatic asylum' because she has gone mad 
for love of a certain young Red Republican whose name be- 
gins with R ' . can't you think of any bit of similar good 
news ? If you can, it will be a tonic to the relaxed state of 
your dear boy's amour propre^ compared to which all the 
drugs in the Pharmacopoeia are moonshine and water; and 
meanwhile be sure to remove him to your own house, and 
out of the reach of his giddy young friends, as soon as you 
possibly can." 

When that great authority thus left his patient's case in 
the hands of the mother, she said, " The boy shall be saved." 



CHAPTER XIIL 



IsAURA was seated beside the Venosta . to whom, of late, 
she seemed to cling with greater fondness than ever . ^work- 
ing at some, piece of embroidery . a labor from which she 
had been estranged for years ; but now she had taken writ- 
ing, reading, music, into passionate disgust. Isaura was 
thus seated, silently intent upon her work, and the Venosta 
in full talk, when the servant announced Madame Rameau. 

The name startled both ; the Venosta had never heard 
that the poet had a mother living, and immediately jumped 
to the conclusion that Madame Rameau must be a wife he 
had hitherto kept unrevealed. And when a woman, still 
very handsome, with a countenance grave and sad, entered 
the salon^ the Venosta murmured, " The husband's perfidy 
reveals itself on a wife's face," and took out her handker- 
chief in preparation for sympathizing tears. 

" Mademoiselle," said the visitor^ halting, with eyes fixed 
on Isaura, " pardon my intrusion . my son has the honor to 
be known to you. Every one who knows him must share in 
my sorrow . so young . so promising, and in such danger . 
my poor boy !'? Madame Rameau stopped abruptly. Her 
tears forced their way . she turned aside to conceal them. 

In her twofold condition of being . womanhood and gen- 
ins . Isaui*a was too largely endowed with that quickness of 
sympathy which distinguishes woman from man, and genius 
from talent, not to be wondrously susceptible to pity. 

Already she had wound her arm round the grieving moth- 

 VjOOQIC 



126 THE PABISIANS. 

er . already drawn her to the seat from which she herself 
had risen . and bending over her had said some words . 
true, conventional enough in themselves, but cooed forth in 
a voice the softest I ever expect to hear, save in dreams, on 
this side of the grave. 

Madame Rameau swept her hand over her eyes, glanced 
round the room, and noticing the Venosta in dressing-robe 
and slippers, staring with those Italian eyes, in seeming so 
quietly innocent, in reality so searchingly shrewd, she whis- 
pered, pleadingly, "May I speak to you a few minutes 
alone?" This was not a request that Isaura could refuse, 
though she was embarrassed and troubled by the surmise of 
Madame Rameau^s object in asking it ; accordingly she led 
her visitor into the adjoining room, and making an apolo- 
getic sign to the Venosta, closed the door. 



CHAPTER XIV. 



When they were alone, Madame Rameau took Isaura^s 
hand in both her own, and, gazing wistftilly into her face, 
said, "No wonder you are so loved . yours is the beauty 
that sinks into the heart and rest there. I prLee my boy 
more, now that I have seen you. But oh, mademoiselle I 
pardon me . do not withdraw your hand . pardon the moth- 
er who comes from the sick-bed of her only son and asks if 
you will assist to save him ! A word from you is life or 
death to him !" 

"Nay, nay, do not speak thus, madame; your son knows 
how much I value, how sincerely I return, his friendship ; 
but . but " . she paused a moment, and continued, sadly and 
with tearful eyes, " I have no heart to give to him . ^to any 
one." 

" I do not . ^I would not if I dared . ask what it would be 
violence to yourself to promise. I do not ask you to bid 
me return to n^y son and say,* Hope and recover;' but let 
me take some healing message from your lips. If I tmder- 
stand your words rightly, I at least may say that you do 
not give to another the hopes you deny to him?" 

" So far you understand me rightly, madame. It has been 
said that romance writers give away so much of their hearts 



 



 



^ THE PABISIANS. 127 

to heroes or heroines of their own creation that they leave 
nothing worth the giving to human beings like themselves. 
Perhaps it is so ; yet, madame," added Isaura, with a smile 
of exquisite sweetness in its melancholy, " I have heart 
enough left to /eel for you." 

Madame Rameau was touched. "Ah, mademoiselle, I do 
not believe in the saying you have quoted. But I must not 
abuse your goodness by pressing further upon you subjects 
from which you shrink. Only one word more : you know, 
that my husband and I are but quiet trades-folk, not in the 
society, nor aspiring to it, to which my son's talents have 
raised himself; yet dare I ask that you will not close here 
the acquaintance that I have obtruded on you? . dare I ask 
that I may now and then call on you . that now and then I 
may see you at my own home? Believe that I would not 
here ask any thing which your own mother would disap- 
prove if she overlooked disparities of station. Humble as 
our home is, slander never passed its threshold." 

"Ah, madame, I and the Signora Venosta, whom in our 
Italian tongue I call mother, can but feel honored and grate- 
ful whenever it pleases you to receive visits from us." 

*'It would be a base return for such gracious compliance 
-with my request if I concealed from you the reason why I 
pray Heaven to bless you for that answer. The physician 
says that it may be long before my son is sufficiently conva- 
lescent to dispense with a mother's care, and resume his for- 
mer life Mid occupation in the great world. It is every 
thing for us if we can coax him into coming under our own 
roof- tree. This is difficult, to do. It is natural for a young 
man launched into the world to like his own chez lui. Then 
-what will happen to Gustavo ? ' He, lonely and heart-strick- 
en, will ask friends, young as himself, but far stronger, to 
come and cheer him, or he will seek to distract his thoughts 
by the overwork of his brain : in either case he is doomed. 
But I have stronger motives yet to fix him awhile at our 
hearth. This is just the moment, once lost never to be re- 
gained, when soothing companionship, gentle reproachless 
advice, can fix him lastingly in the habits and modes of life 
which will banish all fears of his future from the hearts of 
his parents. You at least honor him with friendship, with 
kindly interest . you at least would desire to wean him 



 



 



128 THE PABIS1AN6. . 

from all that a friend may disapprove or lament . a crea- 
ture whom Providence meant to be good, and perhaps great. 
If I say to him, ' It will be long before you can go out and 
see your fiiends, but at my house your friends shall come 
and see you . among them Signora Venosta and Mademoi- 
selle Cicogna will now and then drop in ' . my victory is 
gained, and my son is saved." 

" Madame," said Isaura, half-sobbing, " what a blessing to 
have a mother like you ! Love so noble ennobles those who 
hear its voice. Tell your son how ardently I wish him to 
be well and to fulfill more than the promise of his genius; 
tell him also this . how I envy him his mother." 



CHAPTER XV. 

It needs no length of words to infonn thee, my intelligent 
reader, be thou man or woman . ^but more especially woman 
. of the consequences following each other, as wave follows 
wave in a tide, that resulted from the interview with which 
my last chapter closed. Gustave is removed to his parents' 
house. He remains for weeks confined within doors, or, on 
sunny days, taken an hour or so in his own can-iage, drawn 
by the horse bought from Rochebriant, into by-roads remote 
from the fashionable world. Isaura visits his mother, liking, 
respecting, influenced by her more and more : in those visits 
she sits beside the sofa on which Rameau reclines. Gradu- 
ally, gently . moY and more by his mother's lips . ^is im- 
pressed on her the belief that it^ is in her power to save a 
human life, and to animate his career toward those goals 
which are never based wholly upon earth in the earnest eyes 
of genius, or perhaps in the yet more upward vision of pure- 
souled, believing woman. 

And Gustave himself, as he passes through the slow stages 
of convalescence, seems so gratefully to ascribe to her every 
step in his progress . seems so gently softened in character 
. seems so refined from the old affectations . so ennobled 
above the old cynicism . and, above all, so needing her pres- 
ence, so sunless without it, that . well, need I finish the sen- 
tence ? The reader will complete what I leave unsaid. 

Enough that one day Isaura returned home from a visit 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 129 

at Madame Rameaa's with the knowledge that her hand 
was pledged . her future life disposed of . and that, escaping 
from the Venosta, whom she so fondly, and in her hunger for 
a mother's love, called Madre^ the girl shut hereelf up in her 
. own room with looked doors. 

Ah, poor child ! ah, sweet-voiced Isaura ! whose delicate 
image I feel myself too rude and too hard to transfer to this 
page in the purity of its outlines and the blended softnesses 
of its hues! . thou who, when saying things serious in the 
words men use, saidst them with a seriousness so charming, 
and with looks so feminine ! . thou of whom no man I ever 
knew was quite worthy ! . ah ! poor, simple, miserable girl, 
as I see thee now in the solitude of that white-curtained vir- 
ginal room ! Hast thou, then, merged at last thy peculiar 
star into the cluster of all these commonplace girls whose 
lips have said "Ay," when their hearts said " No ?" . thou, 
O brilliant Isaura ! thou, O poor motherless child ! 

She had sunk- into her chair . her own favorite chair . the 
covering of it had been embroidered by Madame de Grant- 
mesnil, and bestowed on her as a birthday present last year 
. the year in which she had first learned what it is to love 
.the year in which she had first learned what it is to strive 
for fame. And somehow uniting, as many young people do, 
love and fame in dreams of the future, that silken seat had 
been to her as the Tripod of Delphi was to the Pythian : 
she had taken to it, as it were intuitively, in all those hours, 
whether of joy or sorrow, when youth seeks to prophesy, 
and does but dream. 

There she sat now, in a sort of stupor . a sort of dreary 
bewilderment . the illusion of the Pythian gone . desire of 
dream and of prophecy alike extinct . pressing her hands 
together, and muttering to herself, "What has happened? 
What have I done ?" 

Three hours later you would not have recognized the same 
face that you se^ now. For then the bravery, the honor, the 
loyalty of the girl's nature had asserted their command. Her 
promise had been given to one man . it could not be recalled. 
Thought itself of any other man must be banished. On her 
hearth lay ashes and tinder . the last remains of every treas- 
ured note from Graham Vane ; of the hoarded newspaper ex- 
tracts that contained his name ; of the dry treatise he had 



 



 



130 THB PABISIAKS. 

published, and which had made the lovely romance writer 
first desire " to know something about politics." Ay, if the 
treatise had been upon fox-hunting, she would have desired 
"to know something about that!" ^bove all, yet distin- 
guishable from the rest . ^as the sparks still upon stem and . 
leaf here and there faintly glowed and twinkled . the with- 
ered flowers which recorded that happy hour in the arbor, 
and the walks of the forsaken garden . the hour in which 
she had so blissfully pledged herself to renounce that ca- 
reer in art wherein fame would have been secured, but which 
would not have united Fame with Love . in dreams ever- 
more over now. 



 



 



THB PABISIAN0. 131 



BOOK TENTH. 



CHAPTER I. 

Gbaham Vane heard nothing for months from M. Renard, 
when one morning he received the letter I translate : 

"MoNSiBiTR,^ . I am happy to inform you that I have at last 
ohtained one piece of information which may lead to a more 
important discovery. When w parted after our fruitless re- 
search in Vienna, we had both concurred in the persuasion 
4;hat, for some reason known only to the two ladies themselves, 
Madame Marigny and Madame Duval had. exchanged names 
. that it was Madame Marigny who had deceased in the 
name of Madame Duval, and Madame Duval who survived 
in that of Marigny. 

" It was clear to me that the leau monsieur who had visit- 
ed the false Duval must have been cognizant of this exchange 
of name, and that, if his name and whereabouts could be as- 
certained, he, in all probability, would know what had be- 
come of the lady who is the object of our research ; and after 
the lapse of so many years he would probably have very 
slight motive to preserve that- concealment of facts which 
might, no doubt, have been convenient at the time. The 
lover of the soi-disant Mademoiselle Duval was by such ac- 
counts as we could gain a man of some rank . very possibly 
a married man ; and the liaison^ in short, was one of those 
tvhich, while they last, necessitate precautions and secrecy. 

^' Therefore, dismissing all attempts at further trace of the 
missing lady, I resolved to return to Vienna as soon as the 
business that recalled me to Paris was concluded, and devote 
myself exclusively to the search after the amorous and mys- 
terious monsieur. 

^^ I did not state this determination to you, because, pos- 
eibly^ I might be in error. or, if not in error, at least too san- 



 



 



132 THE PARISIANS. 

guine in my expectations . and it is best to avoid disappoint* 
ing an honorable client. 

'^ One thing was clear, that at the time of the soi-disarU 
DnvaVs decease the beau monsieur was at Vienna. 

" It appeared also tolerably clear that when the lady friend 
of the deceased quitted Munich so privately, it was to Vien- 
na she repaired, and from Vienna comes the letter demand- 
ing the certificates of Madame Duval's death. Pardon me if 
I remind you of all these circumstances, no doubt fresh in 
your recollection. I repeat them in order to justify the con- 
clusions to which they led me. 

" I could not, however, get permission to absent myself 
from Paris for the time I might require till the end of last 
April. I had meanwhile sought all private means of ascer- 
taining what Frenchmen of rank and station were in that 
capital in the autumn of 1849. Among the list of the very 
few such messieurs, I 'fixed upon one as the most likely to be 
the mysterious Achille. Achille was, indeed, his nom de bap^ 
time. 

"A man of intrigue . d bonnes fortunes . of lavish expend!* 
ture withal ; very tenacious of his dignity, and avoiding any 
petty scandals by which it might be lowered ; just the man 
who, in some passing afiair of gallantry with a lady of doubt- 
ful repute, would never have signed his titular designation to 
a letter, and would have kept himself as much incognito as 
he could. But this man was dead . ^had been dead some 
years. He had not died at Vienna. Never visited that cap* 
ital for some years before his death. He was then, and had 
long been, the ami de la maison of oiie of those grander 
dames of whose intimacy ^rancfo seigneurs axq not ashamed. 
They parade there the bonnes fortunes they conceal else- 
where. Monsieur and the grande dame were at Baden when 
the former died. Now, monsieur, a Don Juan of that stamp 
is pretty sure always to have a confidential Leporello. If I 
could find Leporello alive, I might learn the secrets not to be 
exacted from a Don Juan defunct. I ascertained, in truth, 
both at Vienna, to which I first repaired in order to verify the 
renseignements I had obtained at Paris, and at Baden, to 
which I then bent my way, that this brilliant noble had a 
favorite valet who had lived with him from his youth . an 
Italian, who had contrived in the course of his service to lay 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 133 

by savings enough to set up a hotel somewhere in Italy, sup- 
posed to be Pisa. To Pisa I repaired, but the man had left 
some years ; his hotel had not prospered ; he had left in debt. 
No one could say what had become of him. At last, after a 
long and tedious research, I found him installed as manager 
of a small hotel at Genoa . a pleasant fellow enough ; and 
after friendly intercourse with him (of course I lodged at his 
hotel), I easily led him to talk of his earlier life and advent- 
ures, and especially of his former master, of whose splendid 
career in the army of ' La Belle Diease ' he was not a little 
proud. It was not very easy to get him to the particular 
subject in question. In fact, the affair with the poor false 
Duval had been so brief and undistinguished an episode in 
his master's life that it was not without a strain of memory 
that he reached it. 

"By little and little, however, in the course of two or three 
evenings, and by the aid of many flasks of Orviette or bottles 
of Lacrima (wines, monsieur, that I do not commend to any 
one who desires to keep his stomach sound and his secrets 
safe), I gathered these particulars : 

"Our Don Juan, since the loss of a wife in the fii*st year of 
marriage, had rarely visited Paris, where he had a domicile 
. his ancestral h6tel there he had sold. 

"But happening to visit that capital of Europe a few 
months before we come to our dates at Aix-la-Chapelle, he 
made acquaintance with Madame Marigny, a natural daugh- 
ter of high -placed parents, by whom, of course, she had never 
been acknowledged, but who had contrived that she should 
receive a good education at a convent; and on leaving it 
also contrived that an old soldier of fortune . which means 
an officer without fortune . who had served in Algiers with 
8ome distinction, should offer her his hand, and add the modest 
dot they assigned her to his yet more modest income. They 
contrived also that she should understand the offer must be 
accepted. Thus Mademoiselle ^ Quelgue Chose ' became Ma- 
. dame Marigny, and she, on her part, contrived that a year or 
BO later she should be left a widow. After her marriage, of 
course, the parents washed their hands of her. They had 
done their duty. At the time Don Juan made this lady's ac- 
quaintance nothing could be said against her character ; but 
the milliners and butchers had begun to imply that they would 



 



 



134 THS PABISIANS. 

rather have her money than trust to her character. Don 
Juan fell in love with her, and satisfied the immediate claims 
of milliner and butcher, and when they quitted Paris it was 
agreed that they should meet later at Aix-la-Cbapelle. But 
when he resorted to that sultry and, to my mind, unalluring 
spa, he was surprised by a line from her saying that she had 
changed her name of Marigny for that of Duval. 

" ' I recollect,' said Leporello, * that two days afterward my 
master said to me, " Caution and secrecy. Don't mention my 
name at the house to which I may send you with any note 
for Madame Duval. I dcm't announce my name when I calL 
Za petite Marigny has exchanged her name for that of Louise 
Duval ; and I find that there is a Louise Duval here, her 
friend, who is niece to a relation of my own, and a terrible 
relation to quarrel with . ^a dead shot and unrivaled sworda- 
man . ^Victor de Maul^on." My master was brave enough, 
but he enjoyed life, and he did not think la petite Marigny 
worth being killed for.' 

" Leporello remembered very little of what followed. All 
he did remember is that Don Juan, when at Vienna, said to 
him one morning, looking less gay than usual, ^ It is finished 
with la petite Marigny . she is no more.' Then he ordered 
his bath, wrote a note, and said, with teara in his eyes, * Take 
this to Mademoiselle Celeste : not to be compared to la petite 
Marigny; but la petite Celeste is still alive.' Ah, monsieur! 
if only any man in France could be as proud of his ruler as 
that Italian was of my countryman I Alas I we Frenchmen 
are all made to command . or at least we think ourselves so 
. and we are insulted by one who says to us, ' Serve and 
obey.' Nowadays, in France, we find all Don Juans and no 
Leporellos. 

" After strenuous exertions upon my. part to recall to Le- 
porello's mind the impoitant question whether he had ever 
seen the true Duval, passing under the name of Marigny . 
whether she had not presented herself to his master at Vien- 
na or elsewhere . he rubbed his forehead, and drew from it 
these reminiscences : 

" ' On the day that his Excellency ' (Leporello generally so 
styled his master . ' Excellency,' as you are aware, is the title 
an Italian would give to Satan if taking his wages) * told me 
that la petite Marigny was no more he had received previ- 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PABISIAKS. 135 

onsly a lady veiled and mantled, whom I did not recognize as 
any one I had seen before, but I noticed her way of carrying 
herself . haughtily . her head thrown back ; and I thought 
to myself that lady is one of his grandea dames. She did 
call again two or three times, never announcing her name ; 
then she did not reappear. She might be Madame Duval. 
I can't say.' 

" * But did you never hear his Excellency speak of the real 
Duval after that time ?' 

" *No. won mi ricordo . I don't remember.* 

** * Nor of some living Madame Marigny, though the real 
one was dead ?' 

" ' Stop . ^I do recollect ; not that he ever named such a 
person to me, but that I have posted letters for him to a 
Madame Marigny.- oh yes . even yeare after the said petite 
Marigny was dead ; and once I did venture to say, " Pardon 
me, EcceUenza^ but may I ask if that poor lady is really dead, 
since I have to prepay this letter to her?" " Oh I" said he, 
** Madame Marigny I Of course the one you know is dead, 
but there are others of the same name ; this lady is of my 
family. Indeed,' her house, though noble in itself, recognizes 
the representative of mine as its head, and I am too hon 
prince not to acknowledge and serve any one who branches 
out of my own tree." ' 

"A day after this last conversation on the subject, Lepo- 
rello said to me, *My friend, you certainly have some interest 
in ascertaining what became of the lady who took the name 
of Marigny ' (I state this frankly, monsieur, to show how dif- 
ficult even for one so prudent as I am to beat about a bush 
long but what you let people know the sort of bird you are 
in search of). 

" * Well,' said I, * she does interest me. I knew something 
of that Victor de Maul6on whom his Excellency did not wish 
to quarrel with, and it would be a kindly act to, her relation 
if one could learn what became of Louise Duval.' 

** * I can put you on the way of learning all that his Excel- 
lency was likely to have known of her through correspond- 
ence. I have often heard him quote, with praise, a saying so 
clever that it might have been Italian, " Never write, never 
bum " . that is, never commit yourself by a letter . ^keep all 
letters that could put others in your power. All the letters 

 VjOOQIC 



136 THE PARISIANS. 

he received were carefully kept and labeled. I sent them to 
his son in four large trunks. His sdh, no doubt, has them 
still.' 

" Now, however, I have exhausted my budget. I arrived 
at Paris last night. I strongly advise yon to come hither at 
once, if you still desire to prosecute your search. 

" You, monsieur, can do what I could not venture to do : 
you can ask the son of Don Juan if amid the correspondence 
of his father, which he may have preserved, there be any 
signed Marigny or Duval . any, in short, which can throw 
light on this very obscure complication of circumstances. A 
grand seigneur would naturally be more complaisant to a 
man of your station than he would be to an agent of police. 
Don Juan's son, inheriting his father's title, is Monsieur le 
Marquis de Rochebriant. And permit me to add that at 
this moment, as the journals doubtless inform you, all Paris 
resounds with the rumor of coming war, and Monsieur de 
Rochebriant, who is, as I have ascertained, now in Paris, it 
may be difficult to find any where on earth a month or two 
hence. I have the honor, with profound consideration, etc., 
etc., " L Rbnard.'' 

The day after the receipt of this letter Graham Vane was 
in Paris, 



CHAPTER n. 

Among things indescribable is that which is called ** Agi- 
tation" in Paris . "Agitation" without riot or violence . 
showing itself by no disorderly act, no turbulent outburst. 
Perhaps the cafis are more crowded; passengers in the 
streets stop each other more often, and converse in small 
knots and groups ; yet, on the whole, there is little externally 
to show how loudly the heart of Paris is beating. A traveler 
may be passing through quiet landscapes, unconscious that a 
great battle is going on some miles off, but if he will stop 
and put his ear to the ground he will recognize, by a certain 
indescribable vibration, the voice of the cannon. 

But at Paris an acute observer need not stop and put his 
ear to the ground ; he feels within himself a vibration . ^a 
mysterious inward sympathy which communicates to the in- 



 



 



THE PASISIANS. 137 

dividual a conscious thrill . when the passions of the multi- 
tude are stirred, no matter how sileutly. 

Tortoni's cafi was thronged when Duplessis and Frederic 
Lemercier entered it. It was in vain to order breakfast ; no 
table was vacant either within the rooms or under the awn- 
ings without. 

But they could not retreat so quickly as they had entered. 
On catching sight of the financier several men rose and gath- 
ered round him, eagerly questioning : 

" What do you think, Duplessis ? Will any insult to France 
put a drop of warm blood into the frigid veins of that miser- 
able Ollivier ?" 

^' It is not yet clear that France has been insulted, mes- 
sieurs," replied Duplessis, phlegmatically. 

" Bah ! Not insulted I The very nomination of a Hohen- 
zoUern to the crown ef Spain was. an insult. What would 
you have more ?" 

"I tell you what it is, Duplessis," said the Vicomte de 
Br^ze, whose habitual light good temper seemed exchanged 
for insolent swagger . ^^ I tell you what it is : your friend, the 
Emperor, has no more courage than a chicken. He is grown 
old and infirm and lazy ; he knows that he can^t even mount 
on horseback. But ii^ before this day week, he has not de- 
clared war on the Prussians, he will be lucky if he can get 
off as quietly as poor Louis Philippe did under shelter of his 
umbrella, and ticketed * Schmidt.' Or could you not, M. Du- 
plessis, send him back to London in a bill of exchange ?" 

**For a man of your literary repute, M. le Vicomte," said 
Duplessis, ^^ you indulge in a strange profusion of metaphors. 
But, pardon me, I came here to breakfast, and I can not re- 
main to quarrel. Come, Lemercier, let us take our chance of 
a cutlet at the Trois Mr^reB^ 

" Fox ! Fox !" cried Lemercier, whistling to a poodle that 
had followed him into the cctfi^ and, frightened by the sudden 
movement and loud voices of the habUuia^ had taken refuge 
under the table. 

" Your dog is j^oftron," said De Breze ; " call him Nap." 

At this stroke of humor there was a general laugh, in the 
midst of which Duplessis escaped, and Frederic, having dis- 
covered and caught his dog, followed with that animal ten- 
derly clasped in his arms. 



 



 



138 XHB PASISIAK8. 

" I would not lose Fox for a great deal," said Lemercler, 
with effusion ; " a pledge of love and fidelity from an English 
lady the most distinguished. The lady left me . the dog re- 
mains." 

Dnplessis smiled grimly. " What a thorough-bred Paris- 
ian you are, my dear Frederic. I believe if the trump of 
the last angel were sounding, the Parisians would be divided 
into two sets : one would be singing the Marseillaise^ and pa- 
rading the red flag; the other would be shrugging their 
shoulders, and saying, 'Bah ! as ifle JBon Dieu would have the 
bad taste to injure Paris . ^the Seat of the Graces, the School 
of the Arts, the Fountain of Beason, the Eye of the World-;' 
and so be found by the destroying angel caressing poodles 
and making bons mots about les femmesJ*'* 

"And quite right, too," said Lemercier, complacently. 
" What other people in the world could retain lightnefis of 
heart under circumstances so unpleasant ? But why do you 
take things so solemnly ? Of course there will be war . idle 
now to talk of explanations and excuses. When a Frenchman 
says, ' I am insulted,' he is not going to be told that he is not 
insulted. He means fighting and not apologizing. Bat what 
if there be war ? Our brave soldiers beat the Prussians . take 
the Rhine . return to Paris covered^ with laurels . a new 
* Boulevard de Berlin ' eclipses the Boulevard Sebastopol. By- 
the -way, Duplessis, a * Boulevard de Berlin' will be a good 
speculation . better than the Rue de Louvier. Ah ! is not 
that my English friend, Grarm-Varn?" Here quitting the 
arm of Duplessis, Lemercier stopped a gentleman who was 
about to pass him unnoticing. ^^ BcmjouVy mon umi^Yiovr 
long have you been at Paris ?" 

"I only arrived last evenmg," answered Graham, "and 
my stay may be so short that it is a piece of good lack, my 
dear Lemercier, to meet with you, and exchange a cordial 
shake of the hand." 

" We are just going to breakfast at the TrOis Frires . ^Du- 
plessis and L Pray join us." 

" With great pleasure. . ^Ah ! Monsieur Duplessis, I shall 
be glad to hear from you that the Emperor will be firm. 
enough to check the advances of that martial fever which, 
to judge by the persons I meet, seems to threaten delirium," 

Duplessis looked very keenly at Graham's fece as he re- 



 



 



<rHS PABISIANS. 139 

plied slowly: ''The English, at least, ought to know that 
when the Emperor by his last reforms resigned his personal 
authority for constitutional monarchy, it ceased to be a 
question whether he could or could not be firm in matters 
that belonged to the Cabinet and the Chambers. I presume 
that if Monsieur Gladstone advised Queen Victoria to declare 
war upon the Emperor of Russia, backed by a vast majority 
in Parliament, you would think me very ignorant of consti- 
tutional monarchy and Parliamentary government if I said, 
*I hope Queen Victoria will resist that martial fever.'" 

" You rebuke me very fairly, M. Duplessis, if you can show 
me that the two cases are analogous ; but we do not under- 
stand in England that, despite his last reforms, the Emperor 
has so abnegated his individual ascendency that his will, 
clearly and resolutely expressed, would not prevail in his 
Council and silence opposition in the Chambers. Is it so ? I 
ask for information." 

The three men were walking on toward the Palais Royal 
side by side while this conversation proceeded. 

" That all depends," replied Duplessis, " upon what may 
be the increase of popular excitement in Paris. If it slack- 
ens, the Emperor, no doubt, could turn to wise account that 
favorable pause in the fever. But if it continues to swell, 
and Paris cries ' War,' in a voice as loud as it cried ' Revolu- 
tion' to Louis Philippe, do you think that the Emperor could 
impose on his ministers the wisdom of peace ? His ministers 
would be too terrified by the clam<ir to undertake the re- 
sponsibility of opposing it . they would resign. Where is 
the Emperor to find another Cabinet?. a peace Cabinet? 
What and who are the oratore for peace? What a handful I 
Who ? Gambetta, Jules Favre, avowed Republicans. Would 
they even accept the post of ministers to Louis Napoleon ? 
If they did, would not their first step be the abolition of the 
empire ? !N'lpoleon is, therefore, so far a constitutional mon- 
arch in the same sense as Qtieen Victoria that the popular 
.will in the country (and in France, in such matters, Paris is 
the country) controls the Chambers, controls the Cabinet ; 
and against the Cabinet the Emperor could not contend. I 
say nothing of the army . a power in France unknown to 
you in England, which would certainly fraternize with no 
peace partes. K war is proclaimed, let England blame it if she 



 



 



140 THE PABISIAXS. 

will . she can't lament it more than I should . but let En- 
gland blame the nation ; let her blame, if she please, the form 
of the government which rests upon popular suffrage, but do 
not let her blame our sovereign more than the French would 
blame her own, if compelled by the conditions on which she 
holds her crown to sign a declaration of war which vast 
majorities in a Parliament just elected, and a council of min- 
isters whom she could not practically replace, enforced upon 
her will." 

" Your observations, M. Duplessis, impress me strongly, 
and add to the deep anxieties with which, in common with 
all my countrymen, I regard the menacing aspect of the 
present hour. Let ns hope the best Our government, I 
know, is exerting itself to the utmost verge of its power to 
remove every just ground of offense that the unfortunate 
nomination of a German prince to the Spanish throne could 
not fail to have given to French statesmen." 

" I am glad you concede that such a nomination was a just 
ground of offense," said Lemercier, rather bitterly, " for I 
have met Englishmen who asserted that France had no right 
to resent any choice of a sovereign that Spain might make." 

" Englishmen in general are not very reflective politicians 
in foreign affairs," said Graham ; " but those who are must 
see that France could not, without alarm the most justifiable, 
contemplate a cordon of hostile states being drawn around 
her on all sides . Germany, in itself so formidable since the 
field of Sadowa, on th^ east ; a German prince in the south- 
west; the not improbable alliance between Prussia and the 
Italian kingdom, already so alienated from the France to 
which it owed so much. If England would be uneasy were 
a great maritime power possessed of Antwerp, how much 
more uneasy might France justly be if Prussia could add the 
armies of Spain to those of Germany, and launch them both * 
upon France? But that cause of alarm is ov^. the Hohen- 
zollern is withdrawn. Let us hope for the best." 

The three men had now seated themselves at a table in the 
Trois Frires^ and Lemercier volunteered the task of inspect- 
ing the menu and ordering the repast, still keeping guarid on 
Fox. 

" Observe that man," said Duplessis, pointing toward a 
gentleman who had just entered; ^^ the other dapf he was a 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 141 

popular hero . ^now, in the excitement of threatened war, he 
is permitted to order his hifteck uncongratulated, uncaressed. 
Such is fame at Paris I . ^here to-day and gone to-morrow." 

" How did the man become famous ?" 

"He is a painte^r, and refused a decoration =. the only 
French painter who ever did." 

" And why refuse ?" 

"Because he is more stared at as the man who refused 
than he would have been as the man who accepted. If ever 
the Red Republicans have their day, those among them most 
certain of human condemnation will be the coxcombs who 
have gone mad from the desire of human applause." 

" You are a profound philosopher, M. Duplessis." 

" I hope not ; I have an especial contempt-for philosophers. 
Pardon me a moment . I see a man to whom I would say' a 
word or two." 

Duplessis crossed over to another table to speak to a 
middle-aged man of somewhat remarkable countenance, with 
the red ribbon in his button-hole, in whom Graham recognized 
an ex-minister of the Emperor, differing from most of those 
at that day in his Cabinet, in the reputation of being loyal 
to his master and courageous against a mob. 

Left thus alone with Lemercier, Graham said : 

"Pray tell me where I can find your friend the Marquis de 
Bochebriant. I called at his apartment this morning, and I 
was told that he haid gone on some visit into the country, 
taking his valet, and the concierge could not give me his ad- 
dress. I thought myself so lucky on meeting with you who 
are sure to know." 

" No, I do not ; it is some days since I saw Alain. But Du- 
plessis will be sure to know." Here the financier rejoined 
them. 

" Jf(?n .cher^ Grarm-Varn wants to know for whal Sabine 
shades Rochebriant has deserted the ^fumum opes strepitum- 
gue^ of the capital." 

" Ah ! the Marquis is a friend of yours, monsieur?" 

" I can scarcely boast that honor ; but he is an acquaint- 
ance whom I should be very glad to see again." 

" At this moment he is at the Duchesse de Tarascon's coun- 
try-house near Fontainebleau ; I had a hurried line from him 
two days ago stating that he was going there on her urgent 
II.. 7 

 VjOOQIC 



142 THE PABISIANS. 

invitation. But he may return to-morrow ; at all events, he 
dines with me on the 8th, and I shall be charmed if you will 
do me the honor to meet him at my house.^' 

" It is an invitation too agreeable to refuse, and I thank you 
very much for it." 

Nothing worth recording passed further in conversation 
between Graham and the two Frenchmen. He left them 
smoking their cigars in the garden, and walked homeward 
by the Rue de Rivoli. As he was passing beside the Maga- 
sin du Louvre he stopped and made way for a lady crossing 
.quickly out of the shop toward her carriage at the door. 
Glancing at him with a slight inclination of her head, in ac- 
knowledgment of his courtesy, the lady recognized his feat- 
ures. 

"Ah, Mr. Vane !" she cried, almost joyfully; "you are, then, 
at Paris, though you have not come to see me ?" 

" I only aiTived last night, dear Mr8.Morley," said Graham, 
rather embarrassed ; " and only on some matters of business 
which unexpectedly summoned me. My stay will probably 
be very short." 

" In that case let me rob you of a few minutes . no, not 
rob you even of them ; I can take you wherever you want to 
go, and as my carriage moves more quickly than you do on 
foot, I shall save you the minutes instead of robbing you of 
them." 

" You are most kind ; but I was only going to my hotel, 
which is close by." 

"Then you have no excuse for not taking a short drive 
with me in the Champs Ely sees. Come." 

Thus bidden, Graham could not civilly disobey. He hand- 
ed the fair American into hercarriage, and seated himself by 
her side. 



CHAPTER HI. 

" Me. Vanb, I feel as if I had many apologies to make for 
the interest in your life which my letter to you so indisci-eet- 
ly betrayed." 

" Oh, Mrs. Morley ! you can not guess how deeply that in- 
terest touched me." 

"I should not have presumed so far," continued Mi's. Mor- 



Digitizedtiy 



 



THE FABISIAN8. 143 

ley, unheeding the interruption, " if I had not been altogether 
in error as to the nature of your sentiments in a certain quar- 
ter. In this you must blame my American rearing. With us 
there are many flirtations between boys and girls which come 
to nothing ; but when in my country a man like you meets 
with a woman like Mademoiselle Oicogna there can not be 
flirtation. His attentions, his looks, his manner, reveal to the 
eyes of those who care enough for him to watch, one of two 
things . either he coldly admires and esteems, or he loves 
with his whole heart and soul a woman worthy to inspire 
such a love. Well, I did watch, and I was absurdly mistaken. 
I imagined that I saw love, and rejoiced for the sake of both 
of you to think so. I know that in all countries, bur own as 
well as yours, love is so morbidly sensitive and jealous that 
it is always apt to invent imaginary foes to itself. Esteem 
and admiration never do that. I thought that some misun- 
derstanding, easily removed by the intervention of a third 
person, might have impeded the impulse of two hearts to- 
ward each other, and so I wrote. I had assumed that you 
loved . I am humbled to the last degree . you only admired 
and esteemed." 

" Your irony is very keen, Mrs. Morley, and to you it may 
seem very just." 

" Don't call me Mrs. Morley in that haughty tone of voice. 
Can't you talk to me as you would talk to a friend ? You 
only esteemed and admired . ^there is an end of it." 

" No, there is not an end of it," cried Graham, giving way 
to an impetuosity of passion which rarely, indeed, before an- 
other escaped his self-control ; " the end of it to me is a life 
out of which is ever stricken such love as I could feel for 
woman. To me true love can only come once. It came with 
my first look on that fatal^ face ; it has never left me in 
thought by day, in dreams by night. The end of it to me is 
farewell to all such happiness as the one love of a ^fe can 
promise; but . " 

"But what?" asked Mrs. Morley, softly, and very much 
moved by the passionate earnestness of Graham's voice and 
words. 

" But," he continued, with a forced smile, " we Englishmen 
are trained to the resistance of absolute authority ; we can 
not submit all the elements that make up our being to the 



 



 



144 THE PABISIAKS. 

sway of a efaigle despot. Love is the painter of existence ; 
it should not be its sculptor." 

" I don't understand the metaphor." 

" Love colors our life ; it should not chisel its form." 

"My dear Mr. Vane, that is very cleverly said, but the hu- 
man heart is too large and too restless to be. quietly packed 
up in an aphorism. Do you mean to tell me that if you found 
you had destroyed Isaura Cicogna's happiness as well as re- 
signed your own, that thought would not somewhat deform 
the very shape you would give to your life? Is it color 
alone that your life would lose ?" 

" Ah, Mrs. Morley, do not lower your friend into an ordi- 
nary girl in whom idleness exaggerates the strength of any 
fancy over which it dreamily broods. Isaura Cicogua has 
her occupations . her genius . her fame . her career. Hon- 
estly speaking, I think that in these she will find a happiness 
that no quiet hearth could bestow. I will say no more. I 
feel persuaded that were we two united I could not make her 
happy. With the irresistible impulse that urges the genius 
of the writer toward its vent in public sympathy and ap- 
plause, she would chafe if I said, * Be content to be wholly 
mine.' . And if I said it not, and felt I had no right to say it, 
and allowed the full scope to her natural ambition, what 
the^i?^ She would chafe yet more to find that I had no fel- 
lowship in her aims and ends . that where I should feel pride 
I felt humiliation. It would be so ; I can not help it; 'tis my 
nature." 

" So be it, then. When next year, perhaps, you visit Paris, 
you will be safe from my officious interference . Isaui*a will 
be the wife of another." 

Graham pressed his hand to his heart with the sudden 
movement of one who feels there an agonizing spasm. His 
cheeks, his very lips, were bloodless. 

"I^old you," he said, bitterly, "that your fears of my in- 
fluence over the happiness of one so gifted, and so strong in 
such gifts, were groundless ; you allow that I should be very 
soon forgotten ?" 

" I allow no such thing ; I wish I could. But do you know 
so little of a woman's heart (and in matters of heart I never 
yet heard that genius had a talisman against emotion) . do 
you know so little of a woman's heart as not to know that 



n 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 145 

the very moment in which she may accept a marriage the 
least fitted to render her happy is that in which she lost all 
hope of happiness in another?" 

"Is it indeed so?" murmured Graham. "Ay, I can con- 
ceive it." 

" And have you so little comprehension of the necessities 
which that &me, that career to which you allow she is im- 
pelled by the instincts of genius, impose on this girl . young, 
beautiful, fatherless, motherless ? No matter how pure her 
life, can she guard it from the slander of envious tongues ? 
Will not all her truest friends . ^would not you, if you were 
her brother . ^press upon her by all the arguments that have 
most weight with the woman who asserts independence in 
her modes of life, and yet is wise enough to know that the 
world can only judge of virtue by its shadow . reputation . 
not to dispense with the protection which a husband can 
alone secure ? And that is why I warn you, if it be yet time, 
that in resigning your own happiness you may destroy Isau- 
ra's. She will wed another, but she will not be happy. Wluit 
a chimera of dread your egotism as man conjures up! OIi, 
forsooth ! the qualities that charm and delight a world are to 
unfit a woman to be helpmate to a man. Fie on you ! . ^fie !" 

Whatever answer Graham might have made .to these im- 
passioned reproaches was here checked. 

Two men on horseback stopped the carriage. One was 
Enguerrand de Vandemar, the other was the Algerine Colonel 
whom we met at the supper given at the Maison Dorie by 
Frederic Lemercier. 

"Pardon, Madame Morley," said Enguerrand ; " but there 
are symptoms of a mob epidemic a little farther up ; the 
fever began at Belleville, and is threatening the health of the 
Champs Elys^es. Don't be alarmed . it may be nothing, 
though it may be much. In Paris one can never calculate 
an hour beforehand the exact progress of a politico-epidemic 
fever. At present I say, * Bah ! a pack of ragged boys, ga- 
mins de Paris ;^ but my friend the Colonel, twisting his mous- 
tache en sourierU am^ementj says, ^ It is the indignation of 
Paris at the apathy of the government under insult to the 
honor of France ;' and Heaven only knows how rapidly ga- 
mins grow into giants when colonels talk about the indig- 
nation of Paris and the honor of France !" 



 



 



146 THE PABISIANS. 

" But what has happened ?" asked Mrs. Morley, turning ta 
the Colonel. 

** Madame," replied the warrior, " it is rumored that the 
King of Prussia has turned his back upon the embassador of 
France, and that the p&kin who is for peace at any price . 
M. Ollivier . will say to-morrow in the Chamber that France 
submits to a slap in the face." 

" Please, Monsieur de Vandemar, to tell my coachman to 
drive home," said Mrs. Morley. 

The carriage turned and went homeward. The Colonel 
lifted his hat, and rode back to see what the gamins were 
about. Enguerrand, who had no interest in the gamins^ and 
who looked on the Colonel as a bore, rode by the side of the 
carriage. 

"Is there any thing serious in this?" asked Mrs. Morley. 

"At this moment, nothing. What it may be this hour to- 
morrow I can not say. Ah, Monsieur Vane, bonjour . I did 
not recognize you at first. Once, in a visit at the chateau 
of one of your distinguished countrymen, I saw two game- 
cocks turned out facing each other : they needed no pretext 
for quarreling . neither do France and Prussia; no matter 
which game-cock gave the first offense, the two game-cocks 
must have it out. All that Ollivier can do, if he be wise, is 
to see that the French cock has his steel spurs as long as the 
Prussian's. But this I do say, that if Ollivier attempts to put 
the French cock back into his bag, the empire is gone in for- 
ty-eight hours. That to me is a trifle . I care nothing for the 
empire ; but that which is not a trifle is anarchy and chaos. 
Better war and the empire than peace and Jules Favre. But 
let us seize the present hour, Mr. Vane ; whatever happens 
to-morrow, shall we dine together to-day ? Name your res- 
taurant ?" 

" I am so grieved," answered Graham, rousing himself." I 
am here only on business, and engaged all the evening." 

" What a wonderful thing is this life of oure !" said Enguer- 
rand. " The destiny of France at this moment hangs on a 
thread. I, a Frenchman, say .to an English friend, ' Let us 
dine . a cutlet to-day and a fig for to-morrow ;' and my En- 
glish friend, distinguished native of a country with which we 
have the closest alliance, tells me that in this- crisis of France 
he has business to attend to ! My fether is quite right; he 



 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 147 

aecepts the Voltairean philosophy, and cries,' Vivent lea in- 
differeutsP^ 

"My dear M.deVandemar," said Graham, "in eveiy coun- 
try you will find the same thing. All individuals massed to- 
gether constitute public life. Each individual has a life of 
his own, the claims and the habits and the needs of which do 
not suppress his sympathies with public, life, but imp'eriously 
overrule them. Mrs. Morley, permit me to pull the check- 
string; I get out here." 

"I like the man,"saidEnguerrand,as he continued to ride by 
the fair American ; " in language and esprit he is so French.'* 

" I used to like him better than you^" answered Mrs. Mor- 
ley ; " but in prejudice and stupidity he is so English. As 
it seems you are disengaged, come and partake, pot au feu^ 
with Frank and me." 

" Charmed to do so," answered the cleverest and best bred 
of all Parisian beaiix gar^ns^ " but forgive me if I quit you 
soon. This poor France ! Entre nous, I am very uneasy 
about the Parisian fever. I must run away after dinner to 
clubs and caf&s to learn the last bulletins." 

"We have nothing like that French Legitimist in the 
States," said the fair American to herself, " unless we should 
ever be so silly as to make Legitimists of the ruined gentle- 
men of the South." 

Meanwhile 6i*aham Vane went slowly back to his apart- 
ment. No false excuse had he made to Enguerrand: this 
evening was devoted to M. Renard, who told him little he 
had not known before ; but his private life overruled hia 
public, and all that night he, professed politician, thought 
sleeplessly, not over the crisis to France, which might alter 
the conditions of Europe, but the talk on his private life of 
that intermeddling American woman. 



CHAPTER IV. 

Tbe next day, Wednesday, July 6, commenced one of 
those eras in the world's history in which private life would 
vainly boast that it overrules Life Public. How many pri- 
vate lives does such a terrible time influence, absorb, darken 
with sorrow, crush into graves ? 



 



 



148 THE PAB18IANS. 

It was the day when the Due de Gramont uttered the fatal 
speech which determined the die between peace and war. 
No one not at Paris on that day can conceive the popular 
enthusiasm with which that speech was hailed . the greater 
because the warlike tone of it was not anticipated . ^because 
there had been a rumor amid circles the best informed that 
a speech of pacific moderation was to be the result of the Im- 
pierial Council. Rapturous indeed were the applauses with 
which the sentences that breathed haughty defiance were 
hailed by the Assembly. The ladies in the tribune rose with 
one accord, waving their handkerchiefs. Tall, stalwart, dark, 
with Roman feature^ and lofty presence, the Minister of 
France seemed to say with Catiline in the fine tragedy, " Lo ! 
where I stand I am war !" 

Paris had been hungering for some hero of the hour . the 
Due de Gramont became at once raised to that eminence. 

All the journals, save the very few which were friendly to 
peace because hostile to the Emperor, resounded with pi-aise 
not only of the speech, but of the speaker. It is with a mel- 
ancholy sense of amusement that one recalls now to mind 
those organs of public opinion . with what romantic fondness 
they dwelt on the personal graces of the man who had at last 
given voice to the chivalry of France . "The charming grav- 
ity of his countenance . the mysterious expression pf his eye !" 

As the crowd poured from the Chambers, Victor de Mau- 
16on and Savarin, who had been among the listeners, encoun- 
tered. 

" No chance for my friends the Orleanists now," said Sa- 
varin. " You who mock at all parties are, I suppose, at heart 
for the Republican . small chance, too, for that." 

" I do not agree with you. Violent impulses have quick 
reactions." 

" But what reaction could shake the Emperor after he re- 
turns a conqueror, bringing in his pocket the left bank of the 
Rhine ?" 

"None . when he does that. Will he do it? Does he 
himself think he will do it? I doubt." 

" Doubt the French army against the Prussian ?" 

" Against the German people united . yes, very much." 

" But war will disunite the German people. Bavaria will 
surely assist us . Hanover wilL rise against the spoliator . 



^ VjOOQIC 



THE PAEISIANS. 149 

Austria at our fii*st successes must shake off her present en- 
forced neutrality." 

" You have not been in Germany, and I have. What yes- 
terday was a Prussian army, to-morrow will be a German 
population, far exceeding our own in numbers, in hardihood 
of body, in cultivated intellect, in military discipline. But 
talk of something else. How is my ex-editor . ^poor Gustave 
Rameau ?" 

" Still very weak, but on the mend. You may have him 
back in his office soon." 

" Impossible ! even on his sick-bed his vanity was more 
vigorous than ever. He issued a var-song, which has gone 
the rounds of the war journals, signed by his own name. He 
must have known very well that the name of such a Tyrtaeus 
can not reappear as the editor of ie Sens Commun; that in 
launching his little fire-brand he burned all vessels that could 
waft him back to the port he had quitted. But I dare say 
he has done well for his own interests ; I doubt if Ze Sens 
Commun can much longer hold its ground in the midst of 
the prevalent lunacy." 

" What ! it has lost its subscribers ? Gone off in sale al- 
ready, since it declared for peace?" 

" Of course it has ; and after the article which, if I live 
over to-night, will appear to-morrow, I should wonder if it sell 
enough to cover the cost of the print and paper." 

" Martyr to principle ! I revere, but I do not envy thee." 

" Martyrdom is not my ambition. If Louis Napoleon be 
defeated, what then ? Perhaps he may be the martyr ; and 
the Favres and Gambettas may roast their own eggs on the 
gridiron they heat for his Majesty." 

Here an English gentleman, who was the very able corre- 
spondent to a very eminent journal, and in tliat capacity had 
made acquaintance with De Maul6on, joined the two French- 
men. ' Savarin, however, after an exchange of salutations, 
went his way. 

" May I ask a frank answer to a somewhat rude question, 
M. le Vicomte ?" said the Englishman. " Suppose that the 
Imperial Government had to-day given in their adhesion to 
the peace party, how long would it have been before their 
orators in the Chamber and their organs in the press woujd 
have said that France was governed hy poUrons .^" 



 



 



150 THE PARISIANS. 

" Probably for most of the twenty-four houiu Bat there 
are a few who are honest iu their convictions ; of that few 
I am one." 

" And would have supported the Emperor and his govei'n- 
ment ?" 

" No, monsieur . ^I do not say that." 

" Then the Emperor would have turned many friends into 
enemies, and no enemies into friends." 

" Monsieur, you in England know that a party in opposi- 
tion is not propitiated when the party in power steals its 
measures. Ha! . pardon me . who is that gentleman, evi- 
dently your countrymai^ whom I see yonder talking to the 
secretary of your Embassy ?" 

" He ? . Mr. Vane . Graham Vane. Do you not know him ? 
He has been much in Paris . attached to our Embassy for- 
merly ; a clever man . much is expected from him." 

" Ah I I think I have seen him before, but am not quite 
sure. Did you say Vane ? I once knew a Monsieur Vane, a 
distinguished Parliamentary orator." 

"That gentleman is his son. Would you like to be intro- 
duced to him ?" 

" Not to-day ; I am in some hurry." Here Victor lifted his 
hat in parting salutation, and, as he walked away, cast at 
Graham another glance, keen and scrutinizing. " I have seen 
that man before," he muttered. " Where ? . ^when ? Can it 
be only a family likeness to the father? No, the features are 
different ; the profile is . ^ha ! . Mr. Lamb. Mr. Lamb . but 
why call himself by that name ? . why disguised ? . what can 
he have to do with poor Louise ? Bah ! . these are not ques- 
tions I can think of now. This war . this war. Can it yet 
be prevented ? How it will prostrate all the plans my am- 
bition so carefully schemed ! Oh ! . at least, if I were but in 
the Chambre, Perhaps I yet may be before the war is end- 
ed. The Clavignys have great interest in their department." 



CHAPTER V. 

Graham had left a note with Rochebriant's concierge re- 
questing an interview on the Marquis's return to Paris, and 
on the evening after the day just commemorated he received 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 151 

a line saying that Alain had come back, and would be at 
home at nine o'clock. Graham found himself in the Breton's 
apartment punctually at the hour indicated. 

Alain was in high spirits ; he burst at once into enthusias- 
tic exclamations on the virtual announcement of war. 

" Congratulate me, mon cherP^ he cried ; " the news was a 
joyous surprise to me. Only so recently as yesterday morn- 
ing I was under the gloomy apprehension that the Imperial 
Cabinet would continue to back Ollivier's craven declaration 
' that France had not been affronted !' The Duchesse de Ta- 
rascon, at whose campagne I was a guest, is (as you doubtless 
know) very much in the confidence of the Tuileries. On the 
first signs of war I wrote to her, saying that whatever the 
objections of my pride to enter the army as a private in time 
of peace, such objections ceased on the moment when all dis^ 
tinctions of France must vanish in the eyes of sons eager to 
defend her banners. The Duchesse in reply begged me to 
come to her campagne^ and talk over the matter. I went. 
She then said that if war should break out, it was the inten- 
tion to organize the mobiles^ and officer them with men of 
birth and education, irrespective of previous military service, 
and in that case I might count on my epaulfets. But only 
two nights ago she received a letter . I know not, of course, 
from whom . evidently from some high authority . that in- 
duced her to think the moderation of the council would avert 
the war, and leave the swords of the mobiles in their sfieaths. 
I suspect the decision of yesterday must have been a very 
sudden one. Le cher Oramont! See what it is to have a 
well-born man in a sovereign's councils !" , 

"If war must come, I at least wish all renown to yourself. 
But." 

" Oh, spare your ^butsf England is always too full of them 
where her own interests do not appeal to her. She had no 
* buts ' for war in India or a march into Abyssinia." 

Alain spoke petulantly; at that moment the French were 
very much irritated by the monitory tone of the English 
journals. Graham prudently avoided the chance of rousing 
the wrath of a young hero yearning for his epaulets. 

" I am English enough," said he, with good-humored court- 
esy, " to care for English interests ; and England has no in- 
terest abroad dearer to her than the welfare and dignity of 

 VjOOQIC 



152 THB PABISIAKa 

France. And now let me tell you why I presumed on an ao* 
quaintance less intimate than I could desire to solicit this in- 
terview on a matter which concerns myself, and in which you 
could perhaps render me a considerable service." 

"If I can, count it rendered; move to this sofa; join me 
in a cigar, and let us talk at ease comme de vieux amis^ whose 
fathers or brothers might have fought side by side in the 
Crimea." Graham removed to the sofa beside Rochebri- 
ant, and, after one or two whiffs, laid aside the cigar and be- 
gan: 

" Among the correspondence which monsieur your father 
has left are there any letters of no distant date signed Ma- 
"gny^-Madanie Marigny ? Pardon me, I should state my 
motive in putting this question. I am intrusted with a 
charge the fulfillment of which may prove to the benefit of 
this lady or her child; such fulfillment is a task imposed 
upon my honor. But all the researches to discover this lady 
which I have instituted stop at a certain date, with this in- 
formation . viz., that she corresponded occasionally with the 
late Marquis de Rochebriant ; that he habitually preserved 
the letters of his correspondents ; and that these letters were 
severally transmitted to you at his decease." 

Alain's face had taken a very grave expression while Gra- 
ham spoke, and he now replied, with a mixture of haughti- 
ness and embarrassment.: 

" The boxes containing the letters my father received and 
preserved were sent to me, as you say . the larger portion of 
them were from ladies . sorted and labeled, so that in glanc- 
ing at aay letter in each packet I could judge of the general 
tenor of those in the same packet without the necessity of 
reading them. All packets of that kind. Monsieur Vane, I 
burned. I do not remember any letters signed * Marigny.' " 

" I perfectly understand, my dear Marquis, that you would 
destroy -all letters which your father himself would have de- 
stroyed if his last illness had been sufficiently prolonged. But 
I do not think the letters I mean would have come under that 
classification ; probably they were short, and on matters of 
business relating to some third person . some person, for in- 
stance, of the name of Louise, or of Duval I" 

'* Stop ! let me think. I have a vague remembrance of 
one or two letters which rather perplexed me ; they were 

 VjOOQIC 



THB PARISIANS. 153 

labeled, * Louise D . Mem. : to make further inquiries as 

to the fate of her uncle.' " 

"Marquis, these are the letters I seek. Thank Heaven, 
you have not destroyed them !" 

" No ; there was no reason why I should destroy, though I 
really can not state precisely any reason why I kept them. I 
have a very vague recollection of their existence." 

" I entreat you to allow me at least to glance at the hand- 
writing, and compare it with that of a letter I have about 
me ; and if the several handwritings correspond, I would ask 
you to let me have the address, which, according to your 
father's memorandum, will be found in the letters you have 
preserved." 

" To compliance with such a request I not only can not de- 
mur, but perhaps it may free me from responsibility which I 
might have thought the lettera devolved upon my executor- 
ship. I am sure they did not concern the honor of any woman 
of any family, for in that case I micst have burned them." 

" Ah, Marquis, shake hands there I In such concord be- 
tween man and man there is more entente cordiale between 
England and France than there was at Sebastopol. Now let 
me compare the handwritings." 

" The box that contained the letters is not here ; I left it 
at Rochebriant ; I will telegraph to my aunt to send it ; the 
day after to-morrow it will no doubt arrive. Breakfast with 
me that day . say at one o'clock . and after breakfast the 
box." 

" How can I thank you ?" 

" Thank me ! but you said your honor was concerned in 
your request . requests afl^ting honor between men comrne 
il favJt is a ceremony, of course, like a bow between them. 
One bows, the other returns the bow . no thanks on either 
side. Now that we have done with that matter, let me say 
that I thought your wish for our interview originated in a 
very different cause." 

"What could that be?" 

" Nay, do you not recollect that last talk between us, when 
with such loyalty you spoke to me about Mademoiselle Ci- 
cogna, and supposing that there might be rivalship between 
us, retracted all that you might have before said to warn me 
against fostering the sentiment with which she had inspired 

 VjOOQIC 



154 THE PABISJANS. 

me, even at the first slight glance of a face which can not be 
lightly forgotten by those who have seen it ?" 

"I recollect perfectly every word of that talk, Marquis," 
answered Graham, calmly, but with his hand concealed with- 
in his vest and pressed tightly to his heart. The warning of 
Mrs. Morley flashed apon him. Was this the man to seize 
the prize he had put aside . this man, younger than himself. 
handsomer than himself. higher in rank ? "I recollect* that 
talk. Marquis ! Well, what then ?" 

"In my self-conceit, I supposed that you might have heard 
hqw much I admired Mademoiselle Cicogna . how, having 
not long since met her at the house of Duplessis (who, by- 
the-way, writes me word that I shall meet you c?iez lui to- 
morrow), I have since sought her society wherever there was 
a chance to And it. You may have heard, at our club or else- 
where, how I adore her genius . how, I say, that nothing so 
Breton . that is, so pure and so lofty . has appeared and 
won readers since the days of Chateaubriand . and you, 
knowing that les absens ont toujours torty come to me and ask 
Monsieur de Rochebriant, Are we rivals? I expected^a chal- 
lenge. You relieve my mind. You abandon the field to me ?" 

At the first I warned the reader how improved from his old 
mauvaise honte a year or so of Paris life would make our beau 
Marquis. How a year or two of London life, with its horsey 
slang and its fast girls of the period, would have vulgarized 
an English Rochebriant ! 

Graham gnawed his lips and replied, quietly, " I do not 
challenge ! Am I to congratulate you ?" 

" No ; that brilliant victory is not for me. I thought that 
was made clear in the conversation I have referred to. But 
if you have done me the honor to be jealous, I am exceeding- 
ly flattered. Speaking seriously, if I admired Mademoiselle 
Cicogna when you and I last met, the admiration is increased 
by the respect with which I regard a character so simply no- 
ble. How many women older than she would have been 
spoiled by the adulation that has followed her literary suc- 
cess? . how few women so young, placed in a position so 
critical, having the courage to lead a life so independent, 
would have maintained the dignity of their character free 
from a single indiscretion ? I speak not from my own knowl- 
edge, but from the report of all who would be pleased enough 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PABISIANS. 155 

to censure if they could find a cause. Good society is the 
paradise of mauvaises langtisay 

Graham caught Alain's hand and pressed it, but made no 
answer. 

The young Marquis continued : 

."You will pardon me for speaking thus freely in the way 
that I would wish any friend to speak of the demoiseUe who 
might become my wife. I owe you much, not only for the 
loyalty with which you addressed me in reference to this 
young lady, but for words affecting my own position in 
France, which sunk deep into my mind . saved me from 
deeming myself a poscrit in my own land . filled me with a 
manly ambition, not* stifled amid the thick of many effemi- 
nate follies . and, in fact, led me to the career which is about 
to open before me, and in which my ancestors have left me 
no undistinguished examples. Let us speak, then, d cceur 
ouverty as one friend to another. Has there been any misun- 
derstanding between you and Mademoiselle Cicogna which 
has delayed your return to Paris ? If so, is it over now ?" 

" There has been no such misunderstanding." 

"Do you doubt whether the sentiments you expressed in 
regard to her, when we met last year, are returned ?" 

" I have no right to conjecture her sentiments. You mis- 
take altogether." 

" I do not believe that I am dunce enough to mistake your 
feelings toward mademoiselle . they may be read in your face 
at this moment. Of course I do not presume to hazard a 
conjecture as to those of mademoiselle toward yourself. But 
when I met her not long since at the house of Duplessis, with 
whose daughter she is intimate, I chanced to^ speak to her of 
you ; and if I may judge by looks and manner, I chose no dis- 
pleasing theme. You turn away. I offend you ?" 

" Offend ? . no, indeed ; but on this subject I am not pre- 
pared to converse. I came to Paris on matters of business 
much complicated, and which ought to absorb my attention. 
I can not longer trespass on your evening. The day after 
to-morrow, then, I will be with you at one o'clock." 

*" Yes ; I hope then to have the letters you wish to consult ; 
and, meanwhile, we meet to-morrow at the H6tel Duplessis." 



 



 



156 TUB PABISIANS. 



CHAPTER VL 

Gbaham had scarcely quitted Alaiu, and the young Mar- 
quis was about to saunter forth to his club, when Duplessis 
was announced. 

These two men had naturally seen much of each other 
since Duplessis had returned from Bretagne and delivered 
Alain from the gripe of Louvier. Scarcely a day had passed 
but what Alain had been summoned td enter into the finan- 
cier's plans for the aggrandizement of the Rochebnant es- 
tates, and deliberately made to feel that he had become a 
partner in speculations which, thanks to the capital and the 
abilities Duplessis brought to bear, seemed likely to result 
in the ultimate freedom of his property from all burdens, nd 
the restoration of his inheritance to a splendor correspondent 
with the dignity of his rank. 

On the plea that his mornings were chiefly devoted to 
professional business, Duplessis arranged that these consulta- 
tions should take place in the evenings. From those consul- 
tations Yal6rie was not banished ; Duplessis took her into 
the council as a matter of course. " Valerie," said the finan- 
cier to Alain, " though so young, has a very clear head for 
business, and she is so interested in all that interests myself 
that even where I do not take her opinion, I at least feel my 
own made livelier and brighter by her sympathy." 

So the girl was in the habit of taking her work or her book 
into the cabinet de travailj and never obtruding a suggestion 
unasked . still, when appealed to, speaking with a modest 
good sense which justified her father's confidence and praise ; 
and apropos of her book, she had taken Ch,teaubriand into 
peculiar favor. Alain had respectfully presented ta her bean- 
tifully bound copies of Atala and Ze Ohiie du Christianisme, 
It is astonishing, indeed, how he had already contrived to 
regulate her tastes in literature. Th^ charms of those quiet 
family evenings had stolen into the young Breton's heart. 

He yearned for none of the gayer reunions in which he 
had before sought for a pleasure that his nature had not 

 VjOOQIC 





BO TIUE 6IBL WAS IN TBB QABIT OF TAKING HEB WOBK OB HXB BOOK INTO THE OABl- 
KKT DB TBAVAH.." 



 VjOOQIC 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 157 

fonnd, for amid the amusements of Paris Alain remained in- 
tensely Breton . viz., formed eminently for the simple joys 
of domestic life, associating the sacred hearth-stone with the 
antique religion of his fathers, gathering round it all the 
images of pure and noble affecti6ns which the romance of a 
poetic temperament had evoked from the solitude which 
had surrounded a melancholy boyhood . an uncontaminated 
youth. 

Duplessis entered abruptly, and with a countenance much 
disturbed from its wonted saturnine composure. 

"Marquis, what is this I have just heard from the Duchesse 
de Tarascon? Can it be? You ask military service in this 
ill-omened war ? . you ?" 

" My dear and best friend," said Alain, very much startled, 
"I should have thought that you, of all men in the world, 
would have most approved of my request . you, so devoted 
an Imperialist . you, indignant that the repi'esentative of one 
of those families which the first Napoleon so eagerly and so 
vainly courted should ask for the grade of sous-lieutenant in 
the armies of Napoleon the Third . you, who of all men 
know how ruined are the fortunes of a Rochebriant . you 
feel surprised that he clings to the noblest heritage his an- 
cestors have left to him . their sword ! I do not understand 
you." 

"Marquis," said Duplessis, seating himself, and regarding 
Alain with a look in which were blended the sort of admira- 
tion and the sort of contempt with which a practical man of 
the world, who, having himself gone through certain credu- 
lous follies, has learned to despise the follies, but retahis a 
reminiscence of sympathy with the fools they bewitch . 
"Marquis, pardon me; you talk finely, but you do not talk 
common-sense. I should be extremely pleased if your Legit- 
imist scruples had allowed you to solicit, or rather to accept, 
a civil appointment not unsuited to your rank, under the 
ablest sovereign, as a civilian, to whom France can look for 
rational liberty combined with established order. Such open- 
ings to a suitable career you have rejected ; but who on earth 
could expect you, never trained to military service, to draw 
a sword hitherto sacred to the Bourbons on behalf of a cause 
which the madness, I do not say of France, but of Paris, has 
enforced on a sovereign against whom you would fight to- 



 



 



158 THE PARISIANS. 

morrow if you had a chance of placing the descendant of 
Henry IV. on his throne ?" 

" I am not about to fight for any sovereign, but for my 
country against the foreigner." 

" An excellent answer if the foreigner had invaded your 
country ; but it seems that your country is going to invade 
the foreigner . a very different thing. Chut I all this is dis- 
cussion most painful to me. I feel for the Emperor a person- 
al loyalty, and for the hazards he is about to encounter a 
prophetic dread, as an ancestor of yours might have felt for 
Francis L could he have foreseen Pavia. Let us talk of our- 
selves and the effect the war should have upon our individual 
action. You are aware, of course, that though M. Lonvier 
has had notice of our intention to pay off his mortgage, that 
intention can not be carried into effect for six months; if the 
money be not then forthcoming, his hold on Rochebriaut re- 
mains unshaken. The sum is large." 

"Alas! yes." 

" The war must greatly disturb the money-market, affect 
many speculative adventures and operations when at the 
very moment credit may be most needed. It is absolutely 
necessary that I should be daily at my post on the Bourse^ 
and hourly watch tjie ebb and flow of events. Under these 
circumstances, I had counted . pennit me to count still. on 
your presence in Bretagne. We have already begun nego- 
tiations on a somewhat extensive scale, whether as regards 
the improvement of forests and orchards, or the plans for 
building allotments, as soon as the lands are free for dis- 
posjCi. For all these the eye of a master is required. I en- 
treat you, then, to take up your residence at Rochebriant" 

" My dear friend, this is but a kindly and delicate mode of 
relieving me from the dangers of war. I have, as you must 
be conscious, no practical knowledge of business. Hubert 
can be implicitly trusted, and will carry out your views with 
a zeal equal to mine, and with infinitely more ability." 

" Marquis, pray neither to Hercules nor to H6bert ; if you 
wish to get your own cart out of the ruts, put your own 
shoulder to the wheel." 

Alain colored high, unaccustomed to be so bluntly ad- 
dressed, but he replied, with a kind of dignified meekness: 

" I shall ever remain grateful for what you have done, and 

 VjOOQIC 



THS PABI6IANS. 159 

wish to do, for me. But, assuming that you suppose rightly, 
the estates of Rochebriant would, in your hands, become a 
profitable investment, and more than redeem the mortgage, , 
and the sum you have paid Louvier on my account, let it 
pass to you irrespectively of me. I shall console myself in 
the knowledge that the old place will be restored, and those 
who honored its old owners prosper in hands so strong, 
guided by a heart so generous." 

Duplessis wa^ deeply affected by these simple words ; tjiey 
seized him on the tenderest side of his character . for his 
heart was generous, and no one except his lost wife and his 
loving child had ever before discovered it to be so. Has it 
ever happened to you, reader, to be appreciated on the one 
point of the good or great that is in you. on which secretly 
you value yourself most . ^but for which nobody, not admit- 
ted into your heart of hearts, has given you credit ? If that 
has happened to you, judge what Duplessis felt when the 
fittest representative of that divine chivalry which, if some- 
times deficient in head, owes all that exalts it to riches of 
heart, spoke thus to the professional money-maker, whose 
qualities of head were so acknowledged that a compliment 
to them would be a hollow impertinence, and whose qualities 
of heart had never yet received a compliment I 

Duplessis started from his seat and embraced Alain, mur- 
muring, " Listen to me. I love you . I never had a son . be 
mine . ^Rochebriant shall be my daughter's doV^ 

Alain returned the embrace, and then recoiling, said : 

"Father, your first desire must be honor for your son. 
You have guessed my secret . ^I have learned to love Valerie. 
Seeing her out in the world, she seemed like other girls, fair 
and commonplace ; seeing her at your house, I have said to 
myself, 'There is the one girl fairer than all others in my 
ey8, and the one individual to whom all other girls are 
commonplace.' " 

"Isthattrutf?. isit?" 

"True! . does a gentilhomme ever lie? And out of that 
love for her has grown this immovable desire to be some- 
thing worthy of her . something that may lift me from the 
vulgar platform of men who owe all to ancestors, nothing to 
themselves. Do yoa suppose for one moment that I, sailed * 
from ruin and penury by Valerie's father, could be base 



 



 



160 TUB PARISIANS. 

enough to say to her, ^ In return be Madame la Marquise de 
Rochebriant ?' Do you suppose that I, whom you would 
love and respect as son, could come to you and say, ' I am 
oppressed by your favors, I am crippled with debts . give 
me your millions and we are quits ?' No, Duplessis ! You, 
so well descended yourself . so superior as man among men 
that you would have won name and position had you been 
bom the son of a shoe-black . you would eternally despise 
the, noble who, in days when all that we Br^ptons deem holy 
in noblesse are subjected to ridicule and contempt, should 
vilely forget the only motto which the scutcheons of all 
gentilhommes have in common, ^Noblesse oblige,^ War, with 
all its perils and all its grandeur . war lifts on high the ban. 
ners of France . war, in which every ancestor of mine whom I 
care to recall aggrandized the name that descends to me. 
Let me, then, do as those before me have done ; let me prove 
that I am worth something in myself, and then you and I are 
ais ; and I can say with no humbled crest, ^ Your benefits 
are accepted.' The man who has fought not ignobly for 
France may aspire to the hand of her daughter. Give me 
Valerie ; as to her dot^ be it so, Rochebriant . ^it will pass to 
her children." 

" Alain ! Alain ! my friend ! my son ! . ^but if you fall !** 

" Val6rie will give you a nobler son." 

Duplessis moved away, sighing heavily; but he said no 
more in deprecation of Alain's martial resolves. 

A Frenchman, however practical, however worldly, how- 
ever philodophical he may be, who does not sympathize with 
the follies of honor . who does not concede indulgence to the 
hot blood of youth when he says, " My country is insulted 
and her banner is unfurled," may certainly be a man of ex- 
cellent common-sense ; but if such men had been in the ma- 
jority, Gaul would never have been France . Gaul wQpld 
have been a province of Germany. 

And as Duplessis walked homeward, he, the calmest and 
most far-seeing of all authorities on the Bourse^ the man who, 
excepting only De Maul6on, most decidedly deemed the 
cause of the war a blunder, and most forebodingly antici- 
pated its issues, caught the prevalent enthusiasm. Every- 
where he was stopped by cordial hands, everywhere met by 
congratulating smiles. " How right you have been, Dnples- 

 VjOOQIC 



THB PABISIANS. 161 

sis, when you have laughed at those who have said, ' The 
Emperor is ill, decrepit, done up !' " 

" Vive VEmperearl at last we shall be face to face with 
those insolent Prussians !'' 

Before he arrived at his home^ passing along the Boule- 
vards, greeted by all the groups enjoying the cool night air 
before the ca/&, Duplessis had caught the war epidemic. 

Entering his hotel, he went at once to Valerie's chaihber. 
^' Sleep well to-night, child : Alain has told me that he adores 
thee, and if he will go to the war, it is that he may lay his 
laurels at thy feet. Bless thee, my child ! thou couldst not 
have made a nobler choice." 

Whether after these words Valerie slept well or not 'tis 
not for me to say, but if she did sleep, I venture to guess 
that her dreams were rose-colored. 



CHAPTER Vn. 

All the earlier part of that next day Graham Vane re- 
mained in-doors . a lovely day at Paris, that 8th of July, 
and with that summer day all hearts at Paris were in 
unison. Discontent was charmed into enthusiasm . Belle- 
ville and Montmartre forgot the visions of Communism and 
Socialism, and other isms not to be realized except in some 
undiscovered Atlantis ! 

The Emperor was the idol of the day . the names of Jules 
Favre and Gambetta were by-words of scorn. Even Armand 
Monnier, still out of work, beginning to feel the pinch of 
want, and fierce for any revolution that might turn topsy- 
turvy the conditions of labor . even Armand Monnier was 
found among groups that were laying immortelles at the foot 
of the column in the Place Venddme, and heard to say to a 
fellow-malcontent, with eyes uplifted to the statue of the first 
Napoleon, "Do you not feel at this moment that no French- 
man can be long angry with the little corporal ? He denied 
La Liberti^ but he gave La Ghire.^^ 

Heeding not the stir of the world without, Graham was 
compelling into one resolve the doubts and scruples which 
had so long warred against the heart which they ravaged, 
but could not wholly subdue. 



 



 



162 THE PABISIANS. 

The conversations with Mrs. Morley and Roehebriaat had 
placed in a light in which he bad not before regarded it the 
image of Isaura. He ha^ reasoned from the starting-point 
of his love for her, and had sought to convince himself that 
against that love it was his duty to strive. 

But now a new question was addressed to his conscience 
as well as to his heart. What though he had never formally 
declared to her his affection . never, in open words, wooed 
her as his own . never even hinted to her the hopes of a 
union which at one time he had fondly entertained . still it 
was true that his love had been too transparent not to be 
detected by her, and not to have led her on to return it. 

Certainly he had, as we know, divined that he was not in- 
different to her; at Enghien, a year ago, that he had gained 
her esteem, and perhaps interested her fancy* 

We know also how he had tried to persuade himself that 
the artistic temperament, especially when developed in wom- 
an, is too elastic to suffer the things of real life to have last- 
ing influence over happiness or sorrow; that in the pursuits 
in which her thought and imagination found employ, in the 
Acitement they sustained, and the fame to which they con- 
duced, Isaura would be readily consoled for a momentary 
pang of disappointed affection ; and that a man so alien as 
himself, both by nature and by habit, from the artistic world 
was the very last person who could maintain deep and pei^ 
manent impression on her acti^al life or her ideal dreams. 
But what if, as he gathered from th6 words of the fair Amer- 
ican . what if, in all these assumptions, he was wholly mistak- 
en ? What if, in previously revealing his own heart, he had 
decoyed hers . what if, by a desertion she had no right to 
anticipate, he had blighted her future? What if this brill- 
iant child of genius could love as warmly, as deeply, as en- 
duringly as any simple village girl to whom there is no 
poetry except love ? If this were so, what became the firat 
claim on his honor, his conscience, his duty ? 

The force which but a few days ago his reasonings had 
given to the arguments that forbade him to think of Isaura 
became weaker and weaker as now in an altei*ed mood of re- 
flection he resummoned and reweighed them. 

All those prejudices . which had seemed to him such 
rational common-sense truths when translated from his owa 



 



 



THB PARISIANS. 163 

mind into the words of Lady Janet's letter . was not Mrs. 
Morley right in denouncing them as the crotchets of an inso- 
lent egotism? Was it not rather to the favor than to the 
disparagement of Isaurji, regarded even in the man's narrow- 
minded view of woman's dignity, that this orphan girl could, 
with character so unscathed, pass through the trying ordeal 
. of the public babble, the public gaze . command alike the 
esteem of a woman so pure as Mrs. Mcffley, the reverence of 
a man so chivalrously sensitive to honor as Alain de Roche- 
briant ? 

Musing thus, Graham's countenance at last brightened . a 
glorious joy entered into and possessed him. He felt as a 
man who had burst asunder the swathes and. trammels which 
had kept him galled and miserable with the sense of captiv- 
ity, and from which some wizard spell that took strength 
from his own superstition had forbidden to struggle. 

He was free! . and that freedom was rapture! Yes, his 
resolve was taken. 

The day was now far advanced. He should have just time 

before the dinner with Duplessis to drive to A , where he 

still supposed Isaura resided. How, as his ^acr^ rolled along 
the well-remembered road . how completely he lived in that 
world of romance of which he denied himself to be a denizen ! 

Arrived at the little villa, he found it occupied only by 
workmen . it was under repair. No one could tell him to 
what residence the ladies who occupied it last year had re- 
moved. 

" I shall learn from Mrs. Morley," thought Graham, and at 
her house he called in going back ; but Mi*s. Morley was not 
at home. He had only just time, after regaining his apart- 
ment, to change his dress for the dinner to which he was in- 
vited. As it was, he arrived late, and while apologizing to 
his host for his want of punctuality, his tongue faltered. At 
the farther end of the room he saw a face, paler and thinner 
than when he had seen it last . a face across which a some- 
thing of grief had gone. 

The servant announced that "dinner was served." 

" Mr. Vane," said Duplessis, " will you take in to dinner 
Mademoiselle Cicogna ?" 

n.. 8 



 



 



n 



164 THE PABISIAKS. 



BOOK ELEVEl^TH. 



. CHAPTER t 

Among the frets and checks to the course that " never did 
run smooth" there is one which is sufficiently frequent, for 
many a reader will remember the irritation it caused him. 
You have counted on a meeting with the beloved one un- . 
witnessed by others, an interchange of confessions and vows 
which others may not hear. You have arranged almost 
the words in which your innermost heart is to be expressed ; 
pictured to, yourself the very looks by which those woi'ds will 
have their sweetest reply. The scene you have thus imagined 
appears to you viyid and distinct, as if foreshown in a magic 
glass. And suddenly, after long absence, the meeting takes 
place in the midst of a common companionship : nothing 
that you wished to say can be said. The scene you pictured 
is painted out by the irony of Ghance, and groups and back- 
grounds of which you had never dreamed start forth from 
the disappointing canvas. Happy if that be all ! But some- 
times, by a strange, subtle intuition, you feel that the person 
herself is changed : and sympathetic with that change, a ter- 
rible chill comes over your own heart. 

Before Graham had taken his seat at the table beside 
Isaura he felt that she was changed to him. He felt it by 
her very touch as their hands met at the first greeting . by 
the tone of her voice in the few words that passed between 
them-^by- the absence of all glow in the smile which had 
once lit up her face, as a burst of sunshine lights up a day in 
spring, and gives a richer gladness of color to all its blooms. 
Once seated side by side, they remained for some moments 
silent. Indeed, it would have been rather difficult for any 
thing less than the wonderful intelligence oflovers between 
whom no wall can prevent the stolen interchange of tokens, 
.to have ventured private talk of their own amid the excited 
converse which seemed all eyes, all tongues, all ears, admit- 



 VjOOQIC 



THB PASISIANfi. 165 

ting no one present to abstract himself from the common 
emotion. Englishmen do not recognize the old classic law 
which limited the number of guests where banquets are 
meant to be pleasant to the Nine Muses. They invite guests 
so numerous, and so ^hy of launching talk across the table, 
that you may talk to the percon next to you not less secure 
from listeners than you would be in talking with the stranger 
whom you met at a well in the Sahara. It is not so, except 
on istate occasions, at Paris. Difficult there to retire into 
splitude with your next neighbor. The guests collected by 
Duplessis completed with himself the number of the Sacred 
iNine . ^the host, Valerie, Rochebriant, Oraham, Isaura, Signora 
Yenosta, La Duchesse de Tarascon, the wealthy and high- 
bom Imperialist, Prince , and, last and least, one who 

shall be nameles& 

I have read somewhere, perhaps in one of the books which 
American superstition dedicates to the mysteries of Spiritual- 
ism, how a gifted seer, technically styled medium, sees at the 
opera a box which to other eyes appears untenanted and 
empty, but to him is full of ghosts, well dressed in costume 
de rbgle^ gazing on the boards and listening to the music. 
Like such ghosts are certain beings whom I call Lookers-on. 
Though still living, they have no share in the life they survey. 
They come from another world to hear and to see what is 
passing in ours. In ours they lived once, but that troubled , 
sort pf life they have survived. Still, we amuse them as 
stage-players and puppets amuse ourselves. One of these 
Lookers-on completed the party at the house of Duplessis. 

How lively, how animated the talk was at the financier's 
pleasant table that day, the 8th of July ! The excitement 
of the coming war made itself loud in every Gallic voice, 
and kindled in every Gallic eye. Appeals at every second 
minute were made, sometimes courteous, sometimes sarcas- 
tic, to the Englishman . promising son of an eminent states- 
man, and native of a country in which France is always 
coveting an ally, and always suspecting an enemy. Certain- 
ly Graham could not have found a less propitious moment 
for asking Isaura if she really were changed. And certainly 
the honor of Great Britain was never less ably represented 
(that is saying a great deal) than it was on this occasion by 
the youn^ man reared to diplomacy and aspiring to Parlia- 

DigitiTed by Google 



166 THB PARISIANS. 

mentary distinctiofi. He answered all questions with a con- 
strained voice and an insipid smile . ^all questions pointedly 
addressed to him as to what demonstrations of admiiing sym- 
pathy with the gallantry of Fi*ance might be expected from 
the English government and people ; what his acquaintance 
with the German races led him to suppose would be the effect 
on the southera states of the first defeat of the Prussians ; 
whether the man called Moltke was not a mere strategist on 
paper, a crotchety pedant ; whether, if Belgium became so 
enamored of the glories of France as to solicit fusion with her 
people, England would have a right to offer any objection, 
etc., eta I do not think that during that festival Graham 
once thought one millionth so much about the fates of Prus- 
sia and Fi*ance as he did think, ^^ Why is that girl so changed 
to me ? Merciful Heaven ! is she lost to my life ?" 

By training, by habit, even by passion, the man was a gen- 
uine politician, cosmopolitan as well as patriotic, accustomed 
to consider what effect every^vibration in the balance of Eu- 
ropean power, which no deep thinker can despise, must have 
on the destinies of civilized humanity, and on those of the na- 
tion to which he belongs. But are there not moments in life 
when the human heart suddenly narrows the circumference to 
which its emotions are extended ? As the ebb of a tide, it 
retreats from the shores it had covered on its flow, drawing 
, on with contracted waves the treasure-trove it has selected to 
hoard amid its deeps. 



CHAPTER n. 

On quitting the dining-room the Duchesse de Tarascon 
said to her host, on whose arm she was leaning, " Of course 
you and I must go with the stream. But is not all the fine 
talk that has passed to-day at your table, and in which we 
too have joined, a sort of hypocrisy ? I may say this to you ; 
I would say it to no other." 

" And I say to you, Madame la Duchesse, that which I 
would say to no other. Thinking over it as I sit alone, I find 
myself making a 'terrible hazard ;' but when I go abroad and 
become infected by the general enthusiasm, I pluck up gaye- 
ty of spirit, and whisper to myself, 'True, but it may be an 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PABISIANS. 167 

enormous gain.' To get the left bank of the Rhine is a trifle; 
but to check in our next neighbor a growth which a few years 
hence would overtop us . that is no trifle. And be the gain 
worth the hazard or not, could the Emperor, could any gov- 
ernment likely to hold its own for a week, have declined to 
take the chance of the die ?" 

The Duchesse mused a moment, and meaawhile the two 
seated themselves on a divan in the comer of the Bolon, 
Then she said, very slowly : 

" No government that held its tenure on popular sufi*rage 
could have done so. But if the Emperor had retained the 
personal authority which once allowedr the intellect of one 
man to control and direct the passions of many, I think the 
ivar would have been averted. I have reason to know that 
the Emperor gave his emphatic support to the least bellicose 
members of the council, and that Gramont's speech did not 
contain the passage that prec^itates hostilities when the 
council in which it was framed broke up. These fatal words 
were forced upon him by the temper in which the ministers 
found the Chamber, and the reports of the popular excitement 
which could not be resisted without imminent danger of rev- 
olution. It is Paris that has forced the war on the Emperor. 
But enough of this subject. What must be, must ; and, as 
you say, the gain may be greater than the hazard. I come 
to something else you whispered to me before we went in to 
dinner . a sort of complaint which wounds me sensibly. 
You say I have assisted to a choice of danger, and possibly 
of death, a very distant connection of mine, who might have , 
been a very near connection of yours. You mean Alain de 
Rochebriant ?" 

" Yes ; I accept him as a suitor for the hand of my only 
daughter." 

" I am so glad, not for your sake so much as for his. No 
one can know him well without appreciating in him the finest 
order of the French noble ; but having known your pretty 
Val6rie so long, my congratulations are for the man who can 
win her. Meanwhile hear my explanation : When I promised 
Alain any interest I can command for the grade of officer in 
a regimeot of Mobiles, I knew not that he had formed, or was 
likely to form, ties or duties to keep him at home. I with- 
draw my promise." 



 



 



168 THB PARISIANS. 

^^ No, Daohesse, fblfill it. I should be disloyal indeed if I 
robbed a sovereign under whose tranquil and prosp^ous 
reign I have acquired, with no dishonor, the fortune which 
Order proffers to Commerce, of one gallant defender in the 
hour of need. And, speaking frankly, if Akin were really 
my son, I think I am Frenchman enough to remember that 
France is my mother.'* 

*^Say no more,my friend . say no more," cried the Duchesse, 
with the warm blood of the heart rushing through all the 
delicate coatings of pearl powder. "If every Frenchman felt 
as you do ; if in this Paris of ours all hostilities of class may 
merge in the one thought of the common countiy ; if in 
French hearts there yet thrill the same sentiment as that 
which, in the terrible days whe all other ties were rent asun- 
der, revered France as mother, and rallied her sons to her aid 
against the confederacy of Europe . why, then, we need not 
grow pale with dismay at the sight of a Prussian needle-gun. 
Hist ! look yonder. Is not that a tableau of Youth in Arca- 
dy ? Worlds rage around, and Love, unconcerned, whispers 
to Love I" The Duchesse here pointed to a comer of the ad- 
joining room in which Alain and Val6rie sat apart, he whis- 
pering into her ear, fier cheek downcast, and, even seen a|; 
that distance, brightened by the delicate tenderness of its 
blushes. 



CHAPTER in. 

But in that small assembly there were two who did not 
attract the notice of Duplessis, or of the Lady of the Imperi- 
al Court. While the Prince and the placid Lookeron 

were engaged at a contest of icarti^ with the lively Venosta, 
for the gallery, interposing criticisms and admonitions, Isaura 
was listlessly turning over a collection of photographs strew- 
ed on a table that stood near to an open window in the re- 
*moter angle of the room, communicating with a long and wide 
balcony filled partially with flowers, and overlooking the 
Champs Elys^es, softly lit up by the innumerable summer 
stars. Suddenly a whisper, the command of which she could 
not resist, thrilled through her ear, and sent the l^ood rush- 
ing back to her heart. 

'^ Do you remember that evening at Enghien ? how I said 



 



Google 



THB PABISU17S. 169 

that our imaglDation could not carry us beyond the question 
whether we two should be gazing together that night twelve- 
months on^at star which each of us had singled out from 
the hosts of heaven ? That was the 8th of July. It is the 
8th of July once more. Come and seek for our chosen 
star. Come. I have something to say which say I must. 
Come." 

Mechanically, as it were . mechanically, as they tell us the 
Somnambulist obeys the Mesmerizer . Isaura obeyed that 
summons^ In a kind of dreamy submission she followed his 
steps, and found herself on the balcony, flowers around her 
and star^ above, by the side of the man who had been to her 
that being ever suiTOunded by flowers and lighted by stars 
. ^the ideal of Romance to the heart of virgin Woman. 

^' Isaura," said the Englishman, softly. At the sound of 
her own name for the first time heard from those lips every 
nerve in Ker frame quivered " Isaura, I have tried to live 
without you. I can not. You are all in all to me. With- 
out you it seems to me as if earth had no flowers, and even 
heaven had withdrawn its stars. Are there differences be- 
tween us? differences of taste, of sentiments, of habits, of 
thought? Only let me hope that you can love me a tenth 
part so much as I love you, and such differences cease to be 
discord. Love harmonizes all sounds, blends all colors into 
its own* divine oneness of heart and soul. Look up 1 Is not 
the star which this time last year invited our gaze above . is 
it not still there ? Does it not still invite our gaze ? Isaura, 
speak I" 

^' Hush, hush, hush !" The girl could say no more, but she 
recoiled from his side. 

The recoil did not wound him. There was no hate in it. 
He advanced; he caught her hand, and continued, in one of 
those voices which became so musical in summer nights un- 
der starry skies : 

^^ Isaura, there is one name which I can never utter with- 
out a reverence due to the religion which binds earth to 
heaven . a name which to man should be the symbol of life 
cheered and beautified, exalted, hallowed. That name is 
* wife.' Will you take that name from me ?'* 

And still Isaura made no reply. She stood mute and cold 
' and rigid as a statue of marble* At length, as if conscious- 



 



 



170 THB PARISIANS. 

ness had been arrested and was stniggling back, she sighed 
heavily, and pressed her hands slowly over her forehead. 

" Mockery, mockery !" she said then, with a a^ile half bit- 
ter, half plaintive, on her colorless lips. " Did you wait to 
ask me that question till you knew what my answer must 
be ? I have pledged the name of wife to another." 

" No, no 1 you say that to rebuke, to punish me. Unsay 
it! unsay it!" 

Isaura beheld the anguish of his face with bewildered eyes. 
" How can my words pain you ?" she said, drearily. " Did 
you not write that I had unfitted myself to be wife to you ?" 

"I?" 

" That I had left behind me the peaceful immunities of pri- 
vate life ? I felt you were so right I Yes ! I am affianced 
to one who thinks that in spite of that misfortune . ^" 

" Stop, I command you . stop ! You saw my letter to Mrs* 
Morley. I have not had one moment free from torture and 
remorse since I wrote it. But whatever in that letter yon 
might justly resent . ^" 

" I did not resent . ^" 

Graham heard not the interruption, but hurried on. " You 
would forgive could you read my heart. No matter. Every 
sentiment in that letter, except those which conveyed admi- 
ration, I retract. Be mine, and instead of presuming to check 
in you the irresistible impulse of genius to the first -place in 
the head or the heart of the world, I will teach myself to en- 
courage, to share, to exult in it. Do you know what a diflfer- 
ence there is between the absent one and the present one-* 
between the distant image against whom our doubts, our 
fears, our suspicions raise up hosts of imaginary giants, bai^ 
riers of visionary walls, and the beloved face before the sight 
of which the hosts are fled, the walls are vanished? Isaura, 
we meet again. You know now from my own lips that Hove 
you. I think your lips will not deny that you love me. You 
say that you are affianced to another. Tell the man frankly, 
honestly, that you mistook your heart. It is not yours to 
give. Save yourself, save him, from a union in which there 
can be no happiness." 

" It is too late," said Isaura, with hollow tones, but with 

\ no trace of vacillating weakness on her brow and lips. "Did 

I say now to that other one, ' I break the faith th^t I pledged 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 171 

to you,' I should kill him, body and soul. Slight thing though 
I be, to him I am all in all ; to you, Mr. Vane, to you a mem- 
ory . the memory of one whom a year, perhaps a month 
hence, you will rejoice to think you have escaped." 

She. passed from him . passed away from the flowers and 
the starlight; and when Graham . recovering from the stun 
of her crushing words, and with the haughty mien and step 
of the man who goes forth from the ruin of his hopes, lean- 
ing for support upon his pride . when Graham re-enlered the 
room all the guests had departed save only Alain, who was 
still exchanging whispered words with Valerie. 



CHAPTER IV. 

The next day, at the hour appointed, Graham entered 
Alain's apartment. " I am glad to tell you," said the Marquis, 
gayly, " that the box has arrived, and we will very soon ex- 
amine its contents. Breakfast claims precedence." During 
the meal Alain was in gay spirits, and did not at first notice 
the gloomy countenance and abstracted mood of his guest. 
At length, surprised at the dull response to his lively sallies 
on the part of a man generally so pleasant in the frankness 
of his speech, and the cordial ring of his sympathetic laugh, it 
occurred to him that thechange in Graham must be ascribed 
to something that had gone wrong in the meeting with Isaura 
the evening before; and remembering the ourtness with 
which Graham had implied disinclination to converse about 
the fair Italian, he felt perplexed how to reconcile the impulse 
of his good-nature with the discretion imposed on his good- 
breediug. At all events, a compliment to the lady whom 
Graham had so admired could do no harm. 

" How well Mademoiselle Cicogna looked last night !" 

*' Did she ? It seemed to me that in health at least she did 
not look very well. Have you heard what day M. Thiers 
will speak on. the war?" 

"Thiers? No. Who cares about Thiers ? Thank Heaven, 
his day' is past! I don't know any unmarried woman in 
Paris, not even Valerie . I mean Mademoiselle Duplessis . 
who has so exquisite a taste in dress as Mademoiselle Cicogna. 
Generally speaking, the ta'ste of a female author is atrocious." 

,  VjOOQIC 



172 THE PABISIANS. 

*' Really . ^I did not observe her dress. I am no critic on 
subjects so dainty as the dress of ladies, or the tastes of fe- 
male anthers." 

"Pardon me," said the beau Marquis^ gravely. "As to 
dress, I think that is so essential a thing in the mind of wom- 
an that no man who cares about women ought to disdain 
critical study of it. In woman refinement of character is 
never found in vulgarity of dress. I have only observed that 
truth siMe I came up from Bretagne." 

" I presume, my dear Marquis, that you may have read in 
Brefagne books which very few not being professed scholars 
have ever read at Paris ; and possibly you may remember that 
Horace ascribes the most exquisite refinement in dress, de- 
noted by the untranslatable words ^sirr^lex munditiisy* to a 
lady who was not less distinguished by the ease and. rapidity 
with which she could change her affection. Of course that 
allusion does not apply to Mademoiselle Cicogna ; but there 
are many other exquisitely dressed ladies at Paris of whom 
an ill-fated admirer 

'fidem 
Mutatosqoe deos flebit.* 

Now, with your permission, we will adjourn to the box of 
letters." 

The box being produced and unlocked, Alain looked with 
conscientious care at its contents 4)efore he passed over to 
Graham's inspection a few epistles, in which the Englishman 
immediately detected the same handwriting as that of the 
letter from Louise which Richard King had bequeathed to 
him. 

They were arranged and numbered chronologically. 

Lbiteb I. 
" Dbab M. lb Mabquis, . ^How can I thank you sufficiently 
for obtaining and remitting to me those certificates ? You 
are too aware of the unhappy episode in my life not to know 
how inestimable ia the service you render me. I am saved 
all further molei^tation from the man who had indeed no 
right over my freedom, but whose persecution might compel 
me to the scandal and disgrace of an appeal to the law for 
protection, and the avowal of the illegal marriage into which 
I was duped. I would rather be torn limb from limb by wild 

.  VjOOQIC 



THS FABISUNS. 173 

horses, like the qneen in the history books, than dishonor 
myself and the ancestors which I may at least claim on the 
mother's side by proclaiming that I had lived with that low 
Englishman as his wife, when I was only . O Heavens 1 I can 
not conclude the sentence. 

^' No, M. le Marquis, I am in no want of the pecuniary aid 
you so generously wish to press on me. Though I know not 
where to address my poor dear uncle . though I doubt, even 
if I did, whether I could venture to confide to him the secret 
known only to yourself as to the name I now bear . and if 
he hear of me at all he must believe me dead . yet I have 
enough left of the money he last remitted to me for present 
support ; and when that fails, I think, what with my knowl- 
edge of English and such other slender accomplishments as I 
possess, I could maintain myself as a teacher or governess in 
some German family. At all events, I will write to you again 
soon, and I entreat you to let me know all you can learn 
about my uncle. I feel so grateful to you for your just dis- 
belief of the horrible calumny which must be so intolerably 
galling to a man so proud, and, whatever his errors, so inca- 
pable of a baseness. 

" Direct to me I^oste reatante^ Augsburg. 

" Yours, with all consideration, ^." 



Letter II. 
{Seven months after the date of Letter Z) 

"Augsburg. 
"Deab M. le Mabquis, . I thank you for your kind little 
note informing me of the pains you have taken, as yet with 
no result, to ascertain what has become of my unfortunate 
uncle. My life since I last wrote has been a very quiet one. 
I have been teaoi^ng among a few families here, and among 
my pupils are two little girls of very high birth. They have 
taken so great a fancy to me that their mother has just ask- 
ed me to come and reside at their house as governess. What 
wonderfully kind hearts these Germans have . so simple, so 
truthful I They raise no troublesome questions . accept my 
own story implicitly." (Here follow a few commonplace sen- 
tences about the German character, and a postscript.) " I go 
into my new home next week. When you hear more of my 



 



 



174 THE PABISIANS. 

uncle, direct to me at the Countess von Rudesbeim, Schloss 
N M , near Berlin." 

^'Rudesheim!" Could this be the relation, possibly the 
wife, of the Count von Rudesheim with whom Graham had 
formed acquaintance last year ? 



Letter III. 
{Between three and four years after the date of the last.) 

" You startle me indeed, dear M. le Marquis. My uncle 
said to have been recognized in Algeria, under another name, 
a soldier in the Algerine army ? My dear, proud, luxurious 
uncle ! Ah, I can not believe it any more than you do ; but 
I long eagerly for such further news as you can learn of him. 
For myself, I shall perhaps sui-prise you when I say I am 
about to be married. Nothing can exceed the amiable kind- 
ness I have received from the Rudesheims since I have been 
in their house. For the last year especially I have been 
treated on equal terms as one of the family. Among the 
habitual visitors at the house is a gentleman of noble birth, 
but not of rank too high, nor of fortune too great, to make a 
marriage with the French widowed governess a misalliance. 
I am sure that he loves me sincerely ; and he is the only man 
I ever met whose love I have cared to win. We are to be 
man-ied in the course of the year. Of coui*se he is ignorant 
of my painful history, and will never learn it. And, after all, 

Louise D is dead. In the home to which I am about to 

remove there is no probability that the wretched English- 
man can ever cross my path. My secret is as safe with you 
as in the grave that holds her whom in the name of Louise 

D you once loved. Henceforth I shall trouble you no 

more with my letters ; but if you hear anything decisively 
authentic of my uncle's fate, write to me a line at any time, 
directed as before to Madame M ^ inclosed to the Count- 
ess von Rudesheim. 

" And accept, for all the kindness you have ever shown me, 
as to one whom you did not disdain to call a kinswoman, the 
assurance of my undying gratitude. In the alliance she now 
makes, your kinswoman does not discredit the name through 
which she is connected with the yet loftier line of Roche- 
briant." ^ t 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 175 

To this letter the late Marquis had appended in pencil : 
" Of course a Rochebriant never denies the claim of a kins- 
woman, even though a drawing-master's daughter. Beauti- 
ful creature, Louise, but a termagant ! I could not love Ve- 
nus if she were a termagant. L.'s head turned by the un- 
lucky discovery that her mother was noble. In one form or 
other every woman has the same disease . vanity. Name of 
her intended not mentioned . easily found out." 

The next letter was dated May 7, 1859, on black-edged 
paper, and contained but these lines : 

"I was much comforted by your kind visit yesterday, dear 
Marquis. My affliction has been heavy. But for the last two 
years my poor husband's conduct has rendered my life un- 
happy, and I am recovering the shock of his sudden death. 
It is true that I and the children are left very ill provided 
for ; but I can not accept your generous offer of aid. Have 
no fear as to my future fate. Adieu, my dear Marquis! This 
will reach you just before you start for Naples. Bon voyfuge.^'* 

There was no address on this note . ^no postmark on the 
envelope. evidently sent by hand. 

The last note, dated 1861, March 20, was briefer, than its 
predecessor. 

"I have taken your advice, dear Marquis, and, overcoming 
all scruples, I have accepted his kind offer, on the condition 
that I am never to be taken to England. I had no option in 
this marriage. I can now own to you that my poverty had 
become urgent. 

"Yours, with inalienable gratitude, ^." 

This last note, too, was without postmark, and as evidently 
sent by hand. 

"There are no other letters, then, from this writer?" asked 
Graham; "tind no further clue as to her existence ?" 

" None that I have discovered ; and I see now why I have 
preserved these letters. There is nothing in their contents 
not creditable to my poor father. They show how capable 
he was of good-natured, disinterested kindness toward even 
a distant relation of whom he could certainly not have been 



 



 



176 THB PABISIAKS. 

proud, judging not only by his own penciled note, or by the 
writer's condition as a governess, but by her loose sentiments 
as to the marriage tie. I have not the slightest idea who she 
could be. I never at least heard of one connected, however 
distantly, with my family whom I could identify with the 
writer of these letters." 

" I may hold them a short time in my possession ?'* 

" Pardon me a preliminary question. If I may venture to 
form a conjecture, the object of your search must be con- 
nected with yoiir countryman, whom the lady politely calls 
the * wretched Englishman ;' Jbnt I own I should not like to 
lend, through these letters, a pretense to any steps that may 
lead to a scandal in which my father's name or that of any 
member of my family could be mixed up." 

"Marquis, it is to prevent the possibility of all scandal 
that I ask you to trust these letters to my discretion." 

"J^e de gentilhomme .^" 

"J^i de gentUhomme.^* 

" Take them. When and where shall we meet again ?" 

" Soon, I trust; but I must leave Paris this evening. I am 
bound to Berlin in quest of this Countess von Rudesheim; and 
I fear that in a very few days intercourse between France 
and the German frontier will be closed upon travelers." 

After a few more words not worth recording, the two 
young men shook hands and parted. 



CHAPTER V. 

It was with an interest languid and listless indeed, com- 
pared with that which he would have felt a day before, that 
Graham mused over the remarkable advances toward the 
discovery of Louise Duval which were made in the letters he 
had perused. She had married, then, first a foreigner whom 
she spoke of as noble, and whose name and residence could 
be easily found through the Countess von Rudesheim. The 
marriage did not seem to have been a happy one. Left a 
widow in reduced circumstances, she had married again, evi- 
dently without affection. She was living so late as 1861^ and 
she had children living in 1859. Was the child referred to 
by Richard King one of them ? 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PABISIANS. 177' 

The tone and style of the letters served to throw some 
light on the character of the writer: they evinced pride, 
stubborn self-will, and unamiable hardness of nature ; but 
her rejection of all pecuniary aid from a man like the late 
Marquis de Roche briant betokened a certain* dignity of senti- 
ment. She was evidently, whatever her strange ideas about 
her first marriage with Richard King, no vulgar woman of 
gallantry ; and there must have been some sort of charm 
about her to have excited a friendly interest in a kinsman so 
remote, and a man of pleasure so selfish, as her high-bom 
correspondent. 

But what now, so far as concerned his own happiness, was 
the hope, the probable certainty, of a speedy fulfillment of 
the trust bequeathed to him ? Whether the result, in the 
death of the mother, and more especially of the child, left him 
rich, or, if the last survived, reduced his fortune to a modest 
independence, Isaura was equally lost to him, and fortune 
became valueless. But his first emotions on recovering from 
the shock of hearing from Isaura^s lips that she was irrevo- 
cably affianced to another were not those of self-reproach. 
They were those of intense bitterness against her who, if real- 
ly so much attached to him as he had been led to hope, could 
within so brief a time reconcile her heart to marriage with 
another. This bitterness was- no doubt unjust; but I believe 
it to be natural to men of a nature so proud and of affections 
so intense as Graham's, under similar defeats of hope. Re- 
sentment is the first impulse in a man loving with the whole 
ardor of his soul, rejected, no matter why or wherefore, by 
the woman by whom he had cause to believe he himself was 
beloved; and though Graham's standard of honor was certainly 
the reverse of low, yet man does not view honor in the same 
light as woman does, when involved in analogous difficulties 
of position. Graham conscientiously thought that if Isaura 
so loved him as to render distasteful an engagement to an- 
other which could only very recently have been contracted, 
it would be more honorable frankly so to tell the accepted 
suitor than to leave him in ignorance that her heart was es- 
tranged. But these engagements are very solemn things 
with girls like Isaura, and hers was no ordinary obligation 
of woman-honor. Had the 'accepted one been superior in 
rank . fortune . all that flatters the ambition of woman in 



 



 



178 THE PABISIANS. 

the choice of marriage; had he been resolute and strong and 
self-dependent amid the trials and perils of life . then pos- 
sibly the woman's honor might find excuse in escaping the 
penalties of its pledge. But the poor, ailing, infirm, morbid 
boy-poet, who looked to her as his saving angel in body, in 
mind and soul . to say to him, " Give me back my freedom," 
would be to abandon him to death and to sin. But Graham 
could not of course divine why what he as a man thought 
right was to Isaura as woman impossible ; and he returned 
to his old prejudiced notion that there is no real depth and 
ardor of affection for human lovers in the poetess whose mind 
and heart are devoted to the creation of imaginary heroes. 
Absorbed in reverie, he took his way slowly and with down- 
cast looks toward the British Embassy, at which it was well 
to ascertain whether the impending war yet necessitated spe- 
cial passports for Germany. 

^^Bonjour^ cher ami^'* said a pleasant-voice; "and how long 
have you been at Paris ?" / 

" Oh, my dear M. Savarin ! charmed to see you looking 
so well ! Madame well too, I trust? My kindest regards to 
her. I have been in Paris but a day or two, and I leave this 
evening." 

" So soon ? The war frightens you away, I suppose. Which 
way are you going now ?" 

"To the British Embassy." 

"Well, I will go with you so far . it is in my own direc- 
tion. I have to call at the charming Italian's with congrat- ' 
ulations . on news I only heard this morning." 

" You mean Mademoiselle Cicogna . and the news that de- 
mands congratulations . her approaching marriage !" 

"ilfow Dieul when could you have heard of that?" 

" Last night, at the house of M. Duplessis." 

^^Farhleul I shall scold her well for confiding to her new 
friend Valerie the secret she kept from her old friends, my 
wife and myself." 

" By-the-way," said Graham, with a tone of admirably 
feigned indifference, " who is the happy man ? That part of 
the secret I did not hear." 

" Can't you guess ?" 

"No." 

" Gustavo Rameau." 



 



 



THB PARISIANS. 179 

"Ah I" Graham almost shrieked, so sharp and shrill was 
his cry. "Ah ! I ought indeed to have guessed that !" 

" Madame Savarin, I fancy, helped to make up the mar- 
riage. I hope it may turn out well ; certainly it will be his 
salvation. May it be for her happiness." 

" No doubt of that I Two poets . born for each other, I 
dare say. Adieu, my dear Savarin. Here we. are at the 
Embassy." 

CHAPTER VI. 

That evening Graham found himself in the coupS of the 
express train to Strasburg. He had sent to engage the 
whole coupi to himself, but that was impossible. One place 

was bespoken as far as C , after which Graham might 

prosecute his journey alone on paying for the three places. 

When he took his seat another man was in the further 
corner, whom he scarcely noticed. The train shot rapidly on 
for some leagues. Profound silence in the coup^, save at 
moments those heavy, impatient sighs that come from the 
very depth of the heart, and of which he who sighs is uncon- 

* scions, burst from the Englishman's lips, and drew on him 
the observant side glance of his fellow-traveler. 

At length the fellow-traveler said, in very good English, 
though with French accent, " Would you object, sir, to my 
lighting my little carriage lantern ? I am in the habit of 

* reading in the night train, and the wrttched lamp they give 
us does not permit that. But if you wish to sleep, and my 
lantern would prevent you doing so, consider my request 
unasked." 

" You are most courteous, sir. Pray light your lantern. 
That will not interfere with my sleep." 

As Graham thus answered, far away from the place and 
the moment as his thoughts were, it yet faintly struck him 
that he had heard that voice before. 

The man produced a small lantern, which he attached to 
the window-sill, and drew forth from a small leathern, bag 
sundry newspapers and pamphlets. Graham flung himself 
back, and in a minute or so again came his sigh. "Allow 
me to offer you these evening journals ; you may not have 
had time to read them before starting," gaid the fellow-trav- 



 



 



180 THB FABISIANS. 

eler^ leaning forward, and extending the newspapers with 
one hand, while with the other he lifted his lantern. Graham 
turned, and the faces of the two men were close to each 
other . ^Graham with his traveling-cap drawn over his brows, 
the other with head uncovered. 

"Monsieur Lebeau I" 

"^on 8oir^ Mr. Lamb !" 

Again silence for a moment or so. Monsieur Lebeau then 
broke it : 

" I think, Mr. Lamb, that in better society than that of the 
Faubourg Montmartre you are known under another name." 

Graham had no heart then for the stage-play of a part, and 
answered, with quiet haughtiness, " Possibly. And what 
name?" 

"Graham Vane. And, sir," continued Lebeau, with a 
haughtiness equally quiet, but somewhat moi*e menacing, 
" since we two gentlemen find ourselves thus close, do I ask 
too much if I inquire why you condescended to seek my ac- 
quaintance in disguise ?" 

"Monsieur le Vicomte de Mauleon, when you talk of dis- 
guise, is it too much to inquire why my acquaintance was 
accepted by Monsieur Lebeau ?" 

" Ha 1 Then you confess that it was Victor de Mauleon 
whom you sought when you first visited the Cafi Jean 
Jacques .^" 

" Frankly I confess it." 

Monsieur Lebeau drew himself back, and seemed to reflect 

"I see! Solely for the purpose of learning whether Victor 
de Mauleon could give you any information about Louise 
Duval. Is it so?" 

"Monsieur le Vicomte, you say truly." 

Again M. Lebeau paused as if in refleqtion ; and Graham, 
in that state of mind when a man who may most despise' and 
detest the practice of dueling, may yet feel a thrill of delight 
if some homicide would be good enough to put him out of 
his misery, flang aside his cap, lifted his broad, frank fore- 
head, and stamped his boot impatiently, as if to provoke a 
quarrel. 

M. Lebeau lowered his spectacles, and with those calm, 
keen, searching eyes of his gazed at the Englishman. 

" It strikes me," he said, with a smile, the fascination of 



Qigitized by 



 



THE PARISIANS. 181 

which not even those faded whiskers coald disguise . ^'It 
strikes me that there are two ways in which gentlemen such 
as you and I are can converse : firstly, with reservation and 
guard against each other; secondly, with perfect openness. 
Perhaps of the two I have more need of reservation and 
wary guard against any stranger than you have. Allow me 
to propose the alternative . perfect openness. What say 
yon ?" and he extended his hand. 

" Perfect openness," answered Graham, softened into sud- 
den liking for this once terrible swordsman, and shaking, as 
an Englishman shakes, the hand held out to him in peace by 
the man .from whom he had anticipated quarrel 

" Permit me now, before you address any questions to me, 
to put one to you. How did you learn that Victor de Mau- 
l^on was identical with Jean Lebeau ?" 

"I heard that from an agent of the police." 

"Ah!" 

"Whom I consulted as to the means of ascertaining 
whether Louise Duval was alive . ^if so, where she could be 
found." 

" I thank you very much for your information. I had no 
notion that the police of Paris had divined the original alias 
of poor Monsieur Lebeau, though something occurred at 
Lyons which made me suspect it. Strange that the govern- 
ment, knowing through the police that Victor de Maul^on, a 
writer they had no reason to favor, had been in so humble a 
position, should never, even in their official journals, have 
thought it prudent to say so I But, now I think of it, what 
if they had ? They could prove nothing against Jean Le- 
beau. They could but say, ' Jean Lebeau is suspected to be 
too warm a lover of liberty, too earnest a friend of the people, 
and Jean Lebeau is the editor of Ze Sens Commun.^ Why, 
that assertion would have made Victor de Maul^on the hero 
of the Reds, the last thing a prudent government could de- 
sire. I thank you cordially for your frank reply. Now what 
question would you put to me ?" 

"In one word, all you can tell me about Louise Duval." 

" You shall have it. I had heard vaguely in my young 
days that a half-sister of mine by my father's firet marriage 
with Mademoiselle de Beauvilliers had . when in advanced 
middle life he married a second time . conceived a dislike for 



 



 



182 THE PABISIAN& 

her stepmother; and, being of age, with an independent for- 
tune of her own, had qnitted the house, taken up her resi- 
dence with an elderly female relative, and there had con- 
tracted a marriage with a man who gave her lessons in draw- 
ing. After that marriage, which my father in vain tried to 
prevent, my sister was renounced by her family. That was 
all I knew till, after I came into my inheritance by the death 
of both my parents, I learned from my father's confidential 
lawyer that the drawing - master, M. Duval, had soon dissi- 
pated his wife's fortune, become a widower with one child . 
a girl . and fallen into great distress. He came to my father, 
begging for pecuniary aid. My father, though by no means 
rich, consented to allow him a yearly pension, on condition 
that he never revealed to his child her connection with our 
family. The man agreed to the condition, and calM at my 
father's lawyer quarterly for his annuity. But the lawyer 
informed me that this deduction from my income had ceased, 
that M. Duval had not for a year called or sent for the sum 
due to him, and that he must therefore be dead. One day my 
valet informed me that a young lady wished to see me . in 
those days young ladies very often called on me. I desired 
her to be shown in. There entered a young creature, almost 
of my own age, who, to my amazement, saluted me as uncle. 
This was the child of my half-sister. Her father had been 
dead several months, fulfilling very faithfully the condition 
on which he had held his pension, and the girl never dream- 
ing of the claims that, if wise, poor child, she ought not to 
have cared for . ^viz., to that obsolete, useless pauper birth- 
right, a branch on the Family tree of a French noble. But 
in pinch of circumstance, and from female curiosity, hunting 
among the papers her father had left for some clue to the 
reasons for the pension he had received, she found letters 
from her mother, letters from ray father, which indisputably 
proved that she was grandchild to the feu Vicomte de Mau- 
l^on, and niece to myself. Her story as told to me was very 
pitiable. Conceiving herself to be nothing higher in birth 
than daughter to this drawing -maste/, at his death . ^poor, 
penniless orphan that she was . she had accepted the hand of 
an English student of medicine whom she did not care for. 
Miserable with this man, on finding by the documents I refer 
to that she was my niece, shjs came to me for comfort and 

 VjOOQIC 



THE FABISIANS. 183 

counsel. What counsel could I or any man give to her but 
to make the best of what had happened, and live with her 
husband ? But then she started another question. It seems 
that she had been talking with some one . ^I think her land- 
lady . or some other woman with whom she had made ac- 
quaintance. Was she legally married to this man ? Had he 
not entraji^ed her ignorance into a false marriage? This 
became a grave question, and I sent at once to my lawyer. 
On hearing the circumstances, he at once declared that the 
marriage was not legal, according to the laws of France. 
But, doubtless, her English soi-disant husband was not cog- 
nizant of the French law, and a legal marriage could with 
his assent be at once solemnized. Monsieur Yane, I can not 
find words to convey to you the joy that poor girl showed 
in her face and in her words when she learned that she was 
not bound to pass her life with that man as his wife. It was 
in vain to talk and reason with her. Then arose the other 
question, scarcely less important. True, the marriage was 
not legal, but would it not be better on all accounts to take 
steps to have it formally annulled, thus freeing her from the 
harassment of any claim the Englishman might advance, and 
enabling her to establish the facts in a right position, not in- 
jurious to her^onor in the eyes of any future suitor to her 
hand ? She would not hear of such a proposal. She declared 
that she could not bnng to the family she pined to re-enter 
the scandal of disgrace. To allow that she had made such 
a mkaaUiance would be bad enough in itself; but to pro- 
claim to the world that, though nominally the wife, she had, 
in fact, been only the mistress of this medical student . she 
-would rather throw herself into the Seine. All she desired 
was to find some refuge, some hiding-place for a time, whence 
she could write to the man, informing him that he had no 
lawful hold on her. Doubtless he would not seek then to 
molest her. He would return to his own country, and be ef- 
faced from her life. And then, her story unknown, fihe might 
form a moro suitable alliance. Fiery young creature though 
she was . true De Mauieon in being so fiery . she interested 
me strongly. I should say that she was wonderfully hand- 
some ; and though imperfectly educated, and brought up in 
circumstances so lowly, there was nothing common about her 
. a certain je ne sais quoi of stateliness and race. At all 



 



 



184 THB PABISIAK& 

events, she did with me what she wished. I agreed to aid 
her desire of a refuge and hiding-place. Of coarse, I could 
not lodge her in my own apartment, but I induced a female 
relation of her mother's, an old lady living at Versailles, to 
receive her, stating her birth, but of course concealing her 
illegal marriage. 

" From time to time I went to see her. But. one day I 
found this restless, bnght-plumaged bird flown. Among the 
ladies who visited at her relative's house was a certain Ma- 
dame Marigny, a very pretty young widow. Madame Ma- 
rigny and Louise formed a sudden and intimate friendship. 
The widow was moving from Versailles into an apartment 
at Paris, and invited Louise to share it. She had consented. 
I was not pleased at this; for the widow was too young, and 
too much of a coquette, to be a safe companion to Louise. 
But, though professing much gratitude and great regard for 
me, I had no power of controlling the poor girl's actions. 
Her nominal husband, meanwhile, had left Finance, and noth- 
ing more was heard or known of him. I saw that the best 
thing that could possibly befall Louise was marriage with 
some one rich enough to gratify her taste for luxury and 
pomp ; and that if such a marriage offered itself she might 
be induced to free it from all possible embarrftssment by pro- 
curing the annulment of the former, from which she had 
hitherto shrunk in such revolt. This opportunity presented 
itself. A man already rich, and in a career that promised to 
make him infinitely richer, an associate of mine in those days 
when I was rapidly squandering the remnant of my inherit- 
ance . this man saw her at the opera in company with Ma- 
dame Marigny, fell violently in love with her, and, asceitain- 
ing her relationship to me, besought an introduction. I was 
delighted to give it ; and, to say the truth, I was then so re- 
duced to the bottom of my casket, I felt that it was becom- 
ing impossible for me to continue the aid I had hitherto given 
to Louise . and what then would become of her? I thought 
it fair to tell Louvier . " 

" Louvier . the financier ?" 

"Ah, that was a slip of the tongue, but no matter; there 
is no reason for concealing his name. I thought it r^ht, I 
say, to tell Louvier confidentially the history of the unfor- 
tunate illegal marriage. It did n^t damp his ardor. He 



 



 



THE PABIBIAXS. 185 

wooed her to the best of his power, but she "evidently took 
him into great dislike. One day she sent for me in much ex- 
citement, showed me some advertisements in the French 
journals which, though not naming her, evidently pointed at 
hei% and must have been dictated by her soi-disant husband. 
The advertisements might certainly lead to her discovery if 
she remained in Paris. She entreated my consent to remove 
else \' here. Madame Marigny had her own reason for leav- 
ing Paris, find would accompany her. I supplied her with 
the necessary means, and a day or two afterward she and 
her friend departed, as I understood, for Brussels. I received 
no letter from her ; and my own affairs so seriously preoc- 
cupied me that poor Louise might have passed altogether 
out of my thoughts had it not been for the suitor she had 
left in despair behind. Louvier besought me to ascertain her 
address ; but I conld give him no other clue to it than that 
she said she was going to Brussels, but should soon remove 
to some quiet village. It was not for a long time . I can't 
remember how long . it might be several weeks, perhaps two 
or three.months . that I received a short note from her, stat- 
ing that she waited for a small remittance, the last she would 
accept from me, as she was resolved, so soon as her health 
would permit, to find means to maintain hereelf. and telling 
me to direct to her, Poste restanie, Aix-la-Chapelle. I sent 
her the sum she asked, perhaps a little more, but with a con- 
fession reluctantly wrung from me that I was a ruined man ; 
and I urged her to think very seriously before she refused 
the competence and position which a union with M. Louvier 
would insure. 

** This last consideration so pressed on me that when Lou- 
vier called on me, I think that day or the next, I gave him 
Louise's note, and told him that if he were still as much in 
love with her as ever, les absens out tOKJours tort, and h^ad 
better go to Aix-la-Chapelle and find her out ; that he had 
my hearty. approval of his wooing and consent to his mar- 
i-iage, though I still urged the wisdom and fairness, if she 
would take the preliminary step . ^which, after all, the French 
law frees as much as possible from pain and scandal . of an- 
nulling the iri'egular marriage into which her child-like youth 
had been decoyed. 

" Louvier left me for Aix-la-Chapelle. The very next day 



 



 



186 THE PABISIANS. 

came that crael affliction which made me a prey to the most 
intolerable calumny, which robbed me of every friend, which 
sent me forth from my native country penniless, and resolved 
to be nameless . until . until . well, until my hour could come 
again . every dog, if not hanged, has its day. When that af- 
fliction befell me I quitted France . heard no more of Louvier 
nor of Louise ; indeed, no letter addressed to me at Paris 
would have reached . ^" 

The man paused here, evidently with painful emotion. He 
resumed in the quiet matter-of-faot way in which he had com- 
menced his narrative : 

"Louise had altogether faded out of my remembrance un- 
til your question revived it. As it happened, the question 
came at the moment when I meditated resuming my real 
name and social position. In so doing I should, of course, 
come in contact with my old acquaintance Louvier, and the 
name of Louise was necessarily associated with his. I called 
on him, and made myself known. The slight information I 
gave you as to my niece was gleaned from him. I may now 
say more. It appears that when he arrived at Ai;t-la-Cha- 
pelle he found that Louise Duval had leflb it a day or two 
previously, and, according to scandal, had been for some time 
couited by a wealthy and noble lover, whom she had gone 
to Munich to meet. Louvier believed this tale, quitted Aix- 
la-Chapelle indignantly, and never heard more of her. The 
probability is, M. Vane, that she must have been long dead. 
But if living still, I feel quite sure that she will communicate 
with me some day or other. Now that I have reappeared 
in Paris in my own name . entered into a career that, for 
good or for evil, must ere long bring my name very noisily 
before the public . Louise can not fail to hear of my ex- 
istence and my whereabouts ; and, unless I am utterly mis- 
takg;^ as to her character, she will assuredly inform me of 
her own. Oblige me with your address, and in that case I 
will let you know. Of course I take for granted the assur- 
ance you gave me last year, that you only desire to discover 
her in order to render her some benefit, not to injure or mo- 
lest her?" 

" Certainly. To that assurance I pledge my honor. Any 
letter with which you may favor me had better be dii*ected 
to my London address ; here is my card. But, M. le Vicomt, 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 187 

there is one point on which pray pardon nie if I question you 
still. Had you no suspicion that there was one reason why 
this lady might have quitted Paris so hastily, and have so 
shrunk from the thought of a marriage so advantageous, in 
a worldly point of view, as that with M. Louvier . namely, 
that she anticipated the probability of becoming the mother 
of a child by the man whom she refused to acknowledge as 
a husband?" 

'' That idea did not strike me until you asked me if she had 
a child. Should your conjecture be correct, it would obvi- 
ously increase her ripugnance to apply for the annulment of 
her illegal marriage. But if Louise is still living and comes 
across me, I do not doubt that, the motives for concealment 
no longer operating, she will confide to me the truth. Since 
we have been talking together thus frankly, I suppose I may 
Eiirly ask whether I do not guess con*ectly in supposing that 
this aoirdiaant husband, whose name I forget . ^Mac . some- 
thing, perhaps Scotch . I think she said he was Ecoaaaia . 
is dead, and has left by will some legacy to Louise and any 
child she may have borne to him?" 

" Not exactly so. The man, as you say, is dead ; but he 
bequeathed no legacy to the lady who did not hold herself 
married to him. But there are those connected with him 
who, knowing the history, think that some compensation is 
due for the wrong so unconsciously done to her, and yet mote 
to any issue of a marriage not meant to be irregular or ille- 
gal. Permit me now to explain why I sought yon in anoth- 
er guise and name than my own. I could scarcely place in 
M. Lebeau the confidence which I now unreservedly place in 
the Vicomte de Ma^l6on." 

" Cda va sans dire. You believed, then, that calumny about 
the jewels. You do not believe it now ?" 

^' Now ! my amazement is that any one who had known 
you could believe it." 

" Oh, how often, and with tears of rage, in my exile . my 
wanderings . have I asked that question of myself I That 
rage has ceased ; and I have but one feeling left for the cred- 
ulous, fickle Paris, of which one day I was the idol, the next 
the by-word. Well, a man sometimes plays chess more skill- 
fully for having been long a mere by-stander. He under- 
stands better how to move and when to sacrifice the pieces. 

 VjOOQIC 



188 TBIA PABISIANS. 

Politics, M. Vane, is the only exciting game left to me at my 
years. At yours there is still that of love. How time flies ! 
we are nearing the station at which I descend. I have kins- 
folk of my mother's in these districts. They are not Impe- 
rialists ; they are said to be powerful in the department. But 
before I apply to them in my own name, I think it prudent 
that M. Lebeau should quietly ascertain what is their real 
strength, and what would be the prospects of success if Vic- 
tor de Mauleon offered himself as Diputi at the next elec- 
tion. Wish him joy, M. Vane ! If he succeed, you will hear 
of him some day crowned in the Capitol, or hurled from the 
Tarpeian rock." 

Here the train stopped. The false Lebeau gathered up his 
palters, readjusted his spectacles and his bag, descended light- 
ly, and, pressing Graham's hand as he paused at the door, 
said, " Be sure I will not forget your address if I have any 
thing to say. Bon voyage /" 



CHAPTER Vn. 

Graham continued his journey to Strasburg. On arriving 
there he felt very unwell. Strong though his frame was, the 
anguish and self-struggle through which he had passed since 
the day he had received in London Mrs.Morley's letter, till 
that on which, he had finally resolved on his course of con- 
duct at Paris, and the shock which had annihilated his hopes 
in Isaura's rejection, had combined to exhaust his endurance, 
and fever had already commenced when he took his place in 
the coupS. If there be a thing which % man should not do 
when his system is undermined, and his pulse between nine- 
ty and one hundred, it is to travel all night by a railway ex- 
press. Nevertheless, as the Englishman's will is yet strong- 
er than his frame, he would not give himself more than an 
hour's rest, and again started for Berlin. Long before he got 
to Berlin the will failed him as well as the frame. He was 
lifted out of the carriage, taken to a hotel in a small German 
town, and six hours afterward he was delirious. It was for- 
tunate for him that under such circumstances plenty of money 
and Scott's circular notes for some hundreds were found in 
his pocket-book, so that he did not fail to receive attentive 



 



 



i XHB PABISIANS. 189 

narsing and skillful medical treatment. There, for the pres- 
ent, I must leave him . leave him for how long? But any vil- 
lage apothecary gould say that fever such as his must run its 
couim He was still in bed, and very dimly . and that but 
at times-^-conscious, when the German armies were gather- 
ing round the pen-fold of Sedan. 



CHAPTER Vin. 

When the news of the disastrous day at Sedan reached 
Paris, the firat effect was that of timid consternation. There 
were a few cries of D^hiance/ fewer still of Vive la Bipulh 
liquel among the motley crowds; but they were faint, and 
chiefly by ragged gamins. A small body repaired to Trochu 
and offered him the sceptre, which he politely declined. A 
more important and respectable body . for it comprised the 
majority of the Corps LkgiskUif . urged Palikao to accept 
the temporary dictatorship, which the War Minister declined 
with equal politeness. In both these overtures it was clear 
that the impulse of the proposers was toward any form of 
government rather than republican. The sergens de viUe 
were sufficient that day to put down riot. They did make a 
charge on a mob, which immediately ran away. 

The morning of that day the Council of Ten were summon- 
ed by Lebeau . minus only Rameau, who was still too un- 
well to attend, and the Belgian, not then at Paris ; but their 
places were supplied by the two traveling members, who had 
been absent from the meeting before recorded. These were 
conspirators better known in history than those I have be- 
fore described; professional conspirators . personages who 
from their youth upward had done little else but conspire. 
Following the discreet plan pursued elsewhere throughout 
this humble work, I give their names other than they bore. 
One, a very swarthy and ill-favored man, between forty and 
fifty, I call Paul Grimm . by origin a German, but by rearing 
and character French: from the hair on his head, staring up 
rough and ragged as a bramble -bush, to the soles of small, 
narrow feet, shod with dainty care, he was a personal cox- 
comb, and spent all he could spare on his dress. A clever 
man, not ill-educated . a vehement and effective speaker at a 



 



 



190 THE PARISIANS. 

t * 

W 

club. Vanity and an amorous temperament liad made him a 
conspirator, since he fancied he interested the ladies more in 
that capacity than in any other. His comp^ion, Edgar Fer- 
BJier, wonld have been a journalist, only hitherto ^^s^iMK^"^ 
hjad found no readers : the opinions were those of MWlMHe 
^joiced in thinking that his hour for glory, so long iMM^ed, 
'Iiiid^ now arrived. He was thoroughly sincere: his father 
, and grandfather had died in a mad-house. Both these men, 
indlipnificant in ordinary times, were likely to become of ter- 
rihjp importance in the crisis of a revolution. They both had 
great, power with the elements that form a Parisian mob. 
T^e yistructions given to these members of the council by 
Lebeku were brief: they were summed up in the one word, 
D6ch6ance. The formidable nature of a council apparently 
so meanly constituted became strikingly evident at that mo- 
ment, because it was so small in number, while each one of 
these could put in movement a large section of the popu- 
lace ; secondly, because, unlike a revolutionary club or a nu- 
merdtis association, no time was wasted in idle speeches, and 
B,l\ were under the orders of one man of ctear head and reso- 
lute purpose ; and thirdly, and above all, because one man 
suppiired the treasury, and money for an object desired was 
liberally given and promptly at hand. The meeting did not 
last ten minutes, and about two hours afterward its effect^ 
tirere visible. From Montmartre and Belleville and Montre- 
toiit poured streams of ouvriers^ with whom Armand Monnier 
was a chief, and the Medecin dea Pauvres an oracle. Grimm 
and Ferrier headed other detachments that startled the well- 
dressed idlers on the Boulevards. The stalwart figure of the 
Pole was seen on the Place ' de la Concorde, towering amid 
other refugees, amid which glided the Italian champion of hu- 
manity. The cry oi Dkchiance became louder. But as yet 
there were only few cries of Vive lalt^uhUque . such a cry was 
not on the orders issued by Lebeau. At midnight the crowd 
round the hall of the Corps Z^gislatifis large ; cries of ia Di- 
ch&ance loud . a few cries, very feeble, of Vive la R^puhUquel 
What followed on the 4th . ^the marvelous audacity wMi 
which half a dozen lawyers belonging to a pitiful minoritf^in 
a Chamber elected by universal suffrage walked into the 
H6tel de Ville, and said, '* The republic is established^ tad 
we are its government " . ^hbtory has told too recent^ Ibr 

 VjOOQIC " 



TUB PAEISIANS. 191 

me to narrate. On the evening of the 5 th the Council of Ten 
met again : the Pole ; the Italian radiant ; Grimm and Fer- 
rier much excited and rather drunk; the MMecin des Pauvres 
thoughtful-; and Armand Monnier gloomy. A rumor has 
spread that General Trochu, in accepting the charge imposed 
on him, has exacted from the government the solemn assur- 
ance of respect for God, and for the rights of Family and 
Property. The atheist is very indignant at the assent of the 
government to the first proposition ; Monnier equally indig- 
nant at the assent to the second and third. What has that 
honest ouvrier conspired for . what has he suffered^ for . of 
late nearly starved for . but to marry another man's wife, 
getting rid of his own, and to legalize a participation ip the 
property of his employer ? And now he is no better off than 
before. " There must be another revolution," he whispers to 
the atheist. 

** Certainly," whispers back the atheist ; " he who desires 
to better this world must destroy all belief in another." 

The conclave was assembled when Lebeau entered by the 
private door. He took his place at the head of the table, 
and, fixing on the group eyes that emitted a cold gleam 
through the spectacles, thus spoke : 

" Messieurs, or Citoyens, which ye will . ^I no longer call 
ye confrhres . you have disobeyed or blundered my instruc- 
tions. On such an occasion disobedience and 1)lunder are 
crimes equally heinous." 

Angry murmurs. 

" Silence I Do not%dd mutiny to your other offenses. My 
instructions were simple and short : Aid in the abolition of 
the empira Do not aid in any senseless cry for a republic 
or any other form of government. Leave that to the Legis- 
lature. . What have you done ? You swelled the crowd that 
invaded the Corps Ligialatif, You, Dombinsky, not even a 
Frenchman, dare to mount the president's rostrum, and brawl 
forth your senseless jargon. You, Edgar Ferrier, from whom 
I expected better, ascend the tribune, and invite the ruffians 
^^he crowd to march to the prisons and release the con- 
victs ; and all of you swell the mob at the H6tel de Ville, and 
inaugurate the reign of folly by creating an oligarchy of law- 
yers to resist the march of triumphal armies. Messieure, I 
have done with you. You are summoned for the last time : 
the council is dissolved." ^.^^^^^^ by Google - 



192 THS PABISIAKS. 

With these words Lebeau put od his hat, and turned to 
depart. Bat the Pole, who was seated near him, sprang to 
his feet, exclaiming, '^ Traitor, thoa shalt not escape ! Com- 
rades, he wants to sell us !" 

" I have a right to sell yow, at least, for I boaght you, and 
a very bad bargain I made," said Lebeau, in a tone of with- 
ering sarcasm. 

"Liar!" cried the Pole, and seized Lebeau by the left 
hand, while with the right he drew forth a revolver. Fer- 
rier and Grimm, shouting, " JL has U renigatr would have 
rushed forward in support of the Pole, but Monnier thrust 
himself between them and their intended victim, crying, 
with a voice that dominated their yell, " Back ! . we are not 
assassins." Before he had finished the sentence the Pole was 
on his knees. With a vigor which no one could have ex- 
pected from the seeming sexagenarian, Lebeau had caught 
the right arm of his assailant, and twisted it back so merci- 
lessly as almost to dislocate elbow and shoulder joint. One 
barrel of the revolver discharged itself harmlessly against 
the opposite wall, and the pistol itself then fell from the un- 
nerved hand of the would-be assassin ; and what With the 
pain and the sudden shock, the stalwart Dombinsky fell in 
the attitude of a suppliant at the feet of his unlooked-for 
vanquisher. 

Lebeau released his hold, possessed himself of the pistol, 
pointing the ban'els toward Edgar Fen'ier, who stood with 
mouth agape and lifted arm arrested, and said, quietly, 
"Monsieur, have the goodness to open*that window." Fer- 
rier mechanically obeyed. "Now, hireling," continued Le- 
beau, addressing the vanquished Pole, "choose betweisn the 
door and the window." " Go, my friend," whispered the 
Italian. The Pole did not utter a word ; but rising nimbly, 
and rubbing his arm, stalked to the door. There he paused 
a moment, and said, " I retire overpowered by numbera," and 
vanished.. 

"Messieurs," resumed Lebeau, calmly, "I repeat that the 
council is dissolved. In fact, its object is fulfilled more 
abruptly than* any of us foresaw, and by means which I at 
least had been too long out of Paris to divine as possible. 
I now see that every aben*ation of reason is possible to the 
Parisians. The object that united us was the fall of the em- 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 193 

pire. As I have always frankly told you, with that object 
achieved, separation commences. Each of tis has his own 
crotchet, which differs from the other man's. Pursue yours 
as you will . ^I pursue mine . you will find Jean Lebeau no 
more in Paris : il %^ efface, Auplaisir^ maispas au reooirP 

He retreated to the masked door and disappeared. 

Mare le Roux, the porter, or custos^ of that ruinous council- 
hall, alarmed at the explosion of the pistol, had hurried into 
the room, and now stood unheeded by the door, with mouth 
agape, while Lebeau thus curtly dissolved the assembly. 
But when the president vanished through the secret door- 
way, Le Roux also retreated. Hastily descending the stairs, 
he made as quickly as his legs could carry him for the mouth 
of the alley in the rear of the house, through which he knew 
that Lebeau must pass. He arrived, panting and breathless, 
in time to catch hold of the ex-president's arm. "Pardon, 
citken," stammered he; "but do I understand that you have 
sent the Council of Ten to the devil ?" . 

" I ? Certainly not, my good Marc ; I dismiss them to go 
where they like. If they prefer the direction you* name, it is 
their own choice. I decline to accompany them, and I ad- 
vise you not to do so." 

" But, citizen, have you considered what is to become jof 
madame ? Is she to be turned out of the lodge ? Are my 
wages to stop, and madame to be left without a crust to put 
into her soup ?" 

"Not so bad as that; I have just paid the rent of the 
haraque for three months in advance, and there is your quar- 
ter's pay in advance also. My kind regards to madame, and 
tell her to keep your skin safe from the schemes of these 
lunatics." Thrusting some pieces of gold into the hands of 
the porter, Lebeau nodded his adieu, and hastened along his 
way. 

Absorbed in his own reflections, he did not turn to look 
behind. But if he had, he could not have detected the dark 
form of the porter creeping in the 4eep shadow of the streets 
with distant but watchful footsteps. 



 



 



194 XHB PARISIANS. 



CHAPTER IX. 



The conspirators, when left by their president, dispersed 
in deep, not noisy, resentment. They were, indeed, too 
stunned for loud demonstration ; and belonging to different 
grades of life, and entertaining different opinions, their con- 
fidence in each other s^med lost, now that the chief who had 
brought and kept them together was withdrawn from their 
union. The Italian and the atheist slank away, whispering 
to each other. Grimm reproached Ferrier for deserting 
Dombinsky and obeying Lebeau. Ferrier accused tjlrimm 
of his German origin, and hinted at denouncing him as a 
Prussian spy. Gaspard le Noy linked his ai*m in Monnier's; 
and when they had gained the dark street without, leading 
into a labyrinth of desolate lanes, the Mideein des Pauvres 
said to the mechanic, ^' You are a brave fellow, Monnier. 
Lebeau oWes you a good turn. But for your cry, * We are 
not assassins,' the Pole might not have been left without sup- 
port No atmosphere is so infectious as that in which we 
breathe the same air of revenge : w^ien the violence of one 
man puts into action the anger or suspicion of others, they 
become like a pack of hounds, which follow the spring of the 
first hound, whether on the wild boar or their own master. 
Even I, who am by no means hot-headed, had my hand on 
my case-knife, when the word ^ assassin ' rebuked and dis- 
armed me." " 

"Nevertheless," said Monnier, gloomily,"! half repent the 
impulse which made me intei*fere to save that man. Better 
he should die than live to betray the cause we allowed him 
to lead." 

" Nay, man ami^ speaking candidly, we must confess that he 
never from the first pretended to advocate the cause for which 
you conspired. On the contrary, he always said that with the 
fall of the empire our union would cease, and each become free 
to choose his own way toward his own after-objects." 

" Yes," answered Armand, reluctantly ; " he said that to 
me privately, with still greater plainness than he said it to 
the council But I answered as plainly." 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. IQt*) 

"Howr 

^^I told him that the man who takes the first step in a 
revolution, and persuades others to go along with him, can 
not in safety stand still or retreat when the next step is 
to be taken. It is ' 6w avant ^ or ^d la lanteme,^ So it shall 
be with him. Shall a fellow-being avail himself of the power 
over my mind which he derives from superior education or 
experience . break into wild fragments my life, heretofore 
tranquil, orderly, happy . ^make . use of any opinions, which 
were then but harmless desires, to serve his own purpose, 
which was hostile to the opinions he roused into action . say 
to me, ' Give yourself up to destroy the first obstacle in the 
way of securing a form of society which your inclinations 
prefer,' and then, that first obstacle destroyed, cry, * Halt ! I 
go with you no further ; I will not help you to piece together 
the life I have induced you to shatter ; I will not aid you to 
substitute for the society that pained you the society that 
would please; I leave you . struggling, bewildered, mad- 
dened . in the midst of chaos within and without you?' 
Shall a fellow-being do this, and vanish with a mocking cry, 
'Tooll* I have had enough of thee; I cast thee aside as 
worthless lumber?' Ah! let him beware! The tool is of 
iron, and can be shape4 to edge and point." 

The passion with which this rough eloquence was uttered, 
and the fierce, sinister expression that had come over a coun- 
tenance habitually open and manly, even when grave and 
stem, alarmed and startled Le Noy. " Pooh, my friend !" he 
said, rather falteringly, " you are too excited now to think 
justly. Go home and kiss your children. Never do any 
thing that may make them shrink from their father. And as 
to Lebeau, try and forget him. He says he shall disappear 
from Paris. I believe him. It is clear to me that the man 
is not what he seemed to us. No man of sixty could by so 
easy a sleight of hand have brought that giant Pole to his 
knee. If Lebeau reappear, it will be in some other form. 
Did you notice that in the momentary struggle his flaxen 
wig got disturbed, and beneath it I saw a dark curl? I 
suspect that the man is not only younger than he seemed, 
but of higher rank . a conspirator against one thron6, per- 
haps, in order to be minister under another. There are such 
men." 

 VjOOQIC 



190 THE PABISIANS. 

Before Monnier, who seemed struck by these conjectures, 
collected his thoughts to answer, a tall man in the dress of a 
80U8-Heutenafit stopped under a dim gas-lamp, and catching 
sight of the artisan's face, seized him by the hand, exclaim- 
ing, " Armand, man frhre ! well met ; . strange times, eh ? 
Come and discuss them at the Cafe de Xyon yonder over a 
bowl of punch. I'll stand treat." 

" Agreed, dear Charles." 

" And if this monsieur is a friend of yours, perhaps he will 
join us." 

" You are too obliging, monsieur," answered Le -Noy, not 
ill pleased to get rid of his excited companion ; " but it has 
been a busy day with me, and I am only fit for bed. Be ab- 
stinent of the punch, Armand. You are feverish already. 
Good-night, messieurs." 

The Caf& de JJyon^ in vogue among the National Guard of 
the quartier, was but a few yards off, and the brothers turned 
toward it arm in arm. " Who is the friend ?" asked Charles; 
"I don't remember to have seen him with thee before." 

''He belongs to the medical craft . a good patriot and a 
kind man . attends the poor gratuitously. Yes, Charles, 
these are strange times ; what dost thou think will come of 
them?" 

They had now entered the cafi; and Charles had ordered 
the punch and seated himself at a vacant table before he re- 
plied. "What will come of these times? I will tell thee. 
National deliverance and regeneration through the ascend- 
ency of the National Guard." 

" Eh ? I don't take," said Armand, bewildered. 

" Probably not," answered Charles, with an air of compas- 
sionate conceit ; " thou art a dreamer, but I am a politician." 
He tapped his forehead significantly. "At this custom-house 
ideas are examined before they are passed." 

Armand gazed at his brother wistfully, and with a defers 
ence he rarely manifested toward any one who disputed his 
own claims to superior intelligence. Charles was a few years 
older than Monnier; he was of larger build ; he had shaggy, 
lowering eyebrows, a long obstinate upper lip, the face of a 
.man who was accustomed to lay down the law. Inordinate 
self-esteem often gives that character to a physiognomy oth- 
erwise commonplace. Charles passed for a deep thinker in 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 197 

bis own set, which was a very different set from Arraand's . 
not among workmen, but small shopkeepers. He had risen 
in life to a grade beyond Armand's; he had always looked 
to the main chance ; married the widow of a hosier and 
glover much older than himself, and in her right was a very 
respectable tradesman, comfortably well off; a Liberal, of 
course, but a Liberal bourgeois^ equally against those above 
him and those below. Needless to add that he had no sym- 
pathy with his brother's socialistic opinions. Still he loved 
that brother as well as he could love any one except himselil 
And Armand, who was very affectionate, and with whom 
family ties were very strong, returned that love with ample 
interest.; and though so fiercely at war with the class to 
which Charles belonged, was secretly proud of having a 
brother who was of that class. So in England I have known 
the most violent antagonist of the landed aristocracy . ^him- 
self a cobbler . who interrupts a discourse on the crimes of 
the aristocracy by saying, " Though I myself descend from a 
county family." 

In an evil day Charles Monnier, enrolled in the National 
Guard, hfkd received promotion in that patriotic corps. From 
that date he began to neglect his shop, to criticise military 
matters, and to think that if merit had fair play he should 
be a Cincinnatus or a Washington . he had not decided 
which. 

" Yes," resumed Charles, ladling out the punch, " thou 
hast wit enough to perceive that our generals are imbeciles 
or traitors ; that gredin Bonaparte has sold the army for ten 
millions of francs to Bismarck, and I have no doubt that 
Wimpffen has his share of the bargain. M*Mahon was 
wounded conveniently, and has his own terms for it The 
regular army is nowhere. Thou wilt see . ^thou wilt see . 
they will not stop the marxsh of the Prussians. Trochu will 
be obliged to come to the National Guard. Then we shall 
say, * General, give us our terms, and go to sleep.' I shall be 
summoned to the council of war. I have my plan. I explain 
it . 'tis accepted . it succeeds. I am placed in supreme com- 
mand . ^the Prussians are chased back to their sour-krout 
And I . well . I don't like to boast, but thou'lt see . thou'lt' 
see . what will happen." 

"And thy plan, Cliarles . thou hast formed it already?'^ 

 VjOOQIC 



198 THB PARISIANS. 

" Ay, ay . the really military genius is prompt, mon petit 
Armand . a flash of the brain. Hark ye ! Let the Vandals 
come to Paris and invest it. Whatever their numbers on 
paper, I don't care a button; they can only have a few thou- 
sands at any given point in the vast circumference of the 
capital. Any fool must grant that . thou must grant it, eh?" 

" It seems just." 

" Of course. Well, then, we proceed by sorties of 200,000 
men, repeated every other day, and in twelve days the Prus- 
sians are in full flight.* The country rises on their flight . 
they are cut to pieces. I depose Trochu . the National 
Guard elects the savior of France. I have a place in my eye 
for thee. Thou art superb as a decorator . thou shalt be 
Minister des Beaux Arts, But keep clear of the canaille. 
No more strikes then . thou wilt be an employer . respect 
thy future order." 

Armand smiled mournfully. Though of intellect which, 
had it been disciplined, was far superior to his brother's, it 
was so estranged from practical opinions, so wai'ped, so heat- 
ed, so flawed and cracked in parts, that he did not see the 
ridicule of Charles's braggadocio. Charles had succeeded in 
life, Armand had failed ; and Armand believed in the worldly 
wisdom of the elder born. But he was far too sincere for 
any bribe to tempt him to forsake his creed and betray his 
opinions. And he knew that it must be a very different rev- 
olution from that which his brother contemplated that could 
allow him to marry another man's wife, and his "order" to 
confiscate other people's property. 

" Don't talk of strikes, Charles. What is done, is done. I 
was led into heading a strike, not on my own account, for I 
was well paid and well off, but for the sake of my fellow- 
workmen. I may regret now what I did, for the sake of 
Marie and the little ones. But it is an affair of honor, and I 

* Charles Monnier seems to have indiscreetly blabbed out his ** idea, "for 
it was plagiarized afterward at a meeting of the National Gaard in the Salle 
de la Bourse by Citizen Bochebmne (slain 19th January, 1S71, in the affair 
of Montretout). The plan, which he developed nearly in the same words as 
Charles Monnier, was received with lively applause ; and at the close of his 
speech it was proposed to name at once Citizen Rochebrune Greneral of the 
National Guard, an honor which, unhappily for his country, the citizen had 
the modesty to decline. 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 199 

can not withdraw from the cause till my oi-der, as thou 
namest my class, has its rights." 

"Bah ! thou wilt think better of it when thou art an em- 
ployer. Thou, hast suffered enough already. Remember 
that I warned thee against that eld fellow in spectacles 
whom I met once at thy house. I told thee he would lead 
thee into mischief, and then leave thee to get out of it. I 
saw through him. I have a head ! Va /" 

"Thou wert a true prophet . he has duped me. But in 
moving me he has set others in movement ; and I suspect he 
will find he has duped himself. Time will show." 

Here the brothers were joined by some loungers belonging 
to the National Guard. The talk became general, the pota- 
tions large. Toward daybreak Armand reeled home, drunk 
for the first time in his life. He was one of those whom 
drink makes violent. Marie had been sitting up for him, 
alarmed at his lengthened absence. But Tf^hen she would 
have thrown herself on his breast, her pale face and her pas- 
sionate sobs enraged him. He flung her aside roughly. 
From that night the man's nature was changed. If, as a 
physiognomist has said, each man has in him a portion of the 
wild beast, which is suppressed by mild civilizing circum- 
stances, and comes uppermost when self-control is*lost, the 
nature of many an honest workman, humane and tender- 
hearted as the best of us, commenced a change into the wild 
beast, that raged through the civil war of the Communists, 
on the day when half a dozen Incapables, with no more claim 
to represent the people of Paris than half a dozen monkeys 
would have, were allowed to elect themselves to supreme 
power, and in the very fact of that election released all the 
elements of passion, and destroyed all the bulwarks of order. 



CHAPTER X. 

No man perhaps had more earnestly sought and more 
passionately striven for the fall of the empire than Victor de 
Maul6on, and perhaps no man was more dissatisfied and dis- 
appointed by the immediate consequences of that fall. In 
first conspiring against the empire, he had naturally enough, 
in common with all the more intelligent enemies of the dy- 



 



 



200 THE PABISIAN6. 

nasty, presumed that its fate would be worked out by the 
normal effects of civil causes . the alienation of the educated 
classes, the discontent of the artisans, the eloquence of the 
press and of popular meetings, strengthened in proportion as 
the Emperor had been compelled to relax the former checks 
upon the license of either. And De Maul^on had no less 
naturally concluded that there would be time given for the 
preparation of a legitimate and rational form of government 
to succeed that which was destroyed. For, as has been 
hinted or implied, this remarkable man was not merely an 
instigator of revolution through the secret council, and the 
turbulent agencies set in movement4;hrough the lower strata 
of society . ^he was also in confidential communication with 
men eminent for wealth, station, and political repute, from 
whom he obtained the funds necessary for the darker pur- 
poses of conspiracy, into the elaboration of which tbey did 
not inquire ; and these men, though belonging like himself to 
the Liberal party, were no hot-blooded democrats. Most of 
them were in favor of constitutional monarchy ; all of them 
for forms of government very different from any republic in 
which socialists or communists could find themselves upper- 
most Among these politicians were persons ambitious' and 
able, whi in scheming for the fall of the empire had been 
prepared to undertake the task of conducting to ends com- 
patible with modern civilization the revolution they were 
willing to allow a mob at Paris to commence. The opening 
of the war necessarily suspended their designs. How com- 
pletely the events of the 4th September mocked the calcula- 
tions of their ablest minds, and paralyzed the action of their 
most energetic spirits, will Appear in the conversation I am 
about to record. It takes place between Victor de Maal^n 
and the personage to whom he had addressed the letter 
written on the night before the interview with Louvier, in 
which yictor had announced his intention of reappearing in 
Paris in his proper name and rank. I shall designate this 
correspondent as vaguely as possible ; let me call him the 
Incognito. He may yet play so considerable a part in' the 
history of France as a potent representative of the political 
philosophy of De Tocqueville . ^that is, of liberal principles 
incompatible with the absolute power either of a sovereign 
or a populace, and resolutely opposed to exp^iments on the 



 



 



THB PABISIANS. 201 

foundations of civilized society. that it would be unfair to 
himself and his partisans if, in a work like this, a word were 
said that could lead malignant conjecture to his^ identity 
with any special chief of the opinions of which I here present 
him only as a type. 

The Incognito, entering Victor's apartment : 

"My dear friend, even if I had not received your telegram, 
I should have hastened hither on the news of this astounding 
revolution. It is only in Paris that such a tragedy could be 
followed by such a farce. You were on the spot . a^ specta- 
tor. Explain it if you can." 

De MauiJson. "I was more than a spectator; I was an 
actor. Hiss me . I deserve it. When the terrible news from 
Sedan reached Paris, in the midst of the general stun and 
bewilderment I noticed a hesitating timidity among all those 
who had wares in their shops and a good coat on their backs. 
They feared that -to proclaim the empire defunct would be to 
install the Red Republic with all its paroxysms of impulsive 
rage and all the theories of wholesale confiscation. But 
since it was impossible for the object we had in view to let 
slip the occasion of deposing the dynasty which stood in its 
way, it was necessary to lose no time in using the revolution- 
ai'y part of the populace for that purpose. I assisted in do- 
ing so ; my excuse is this : that in a time of cnsis a man 
of action must go straight to his immediate object, and in 
so doing employ the instruments at his command. I, made, 
however, one error in judgment which admits of no excuse. 
I relied on all I had heard, and all I had observed, of the 
character of Trochu, and I was deceived, in common, I be- 
lieve, with all his admirers, and three parts of the educated 
classes of Paris." 

Incognito. " I should have been equally deceived ! Tro- 
chu's conduct is a riddle that I doubt if he himself can ever 
solva He was master of the position ; he had the military 
force in his hands if he combined with Palikao, which, what- 
ever the jealousies between the two, it was his absolute duty 
to do. He had a prestige . " 

Db MAUiisoN. " And for the moment a still greater popu- 
larity. His ipse dixit could have determined the wavering 
and confused spirits of the population. I was prepared for 
his abandonment of the Emperor. even of the Empress and 



 



 



202 THB PARISIANS. 

the Regency. Bat how could I imagine that he, the man of 
moderate politics, of Orleanistic leanings, the clever writer, 
the fine talker, the chivalrous soldier, the religious Breton, 
could abandon every thing that was legal, every thing that 
could save France against the enemy, and Paris against civil 
discord ; that he would connive at the annihilation of the 
Senate, of the popular Assembly; of every form of govern- 
ment that could be recognized as legitimate at home or 
abroad, accept service under men whose doctrines were op- 
posed to all his antecedents, all his professed opinions, and 
inaugurate a chaos under the name of a republic!^' 

Incognito. " How, indeed I How suppose that the Nation- 
al Assembly, just elected by a majority of seven millions and 
a half, could be hari'ied into a conjunng box, and reappear as 
a travesty of a Venetian oligarchy, composed of half a dozen 
of its most unpopular members ! The sole excuse for Trochn 
is that he deemed all other considerations insignificant com- 
pared with the defense of Paris, and the united action of the 
nation against the invaders. But if that were his honest de- 
sire in siding with this monstrous usurpation of power, he did 
every thing by which the desire could be frustrated. Had 
there been any provisional body composed of men known 
and esteemed, elected by the Chambers, supported by Trochu 
and the troops at his back, there would have been a rallying- 
point for the patriotism of the provinces ; and in the wise 
suspense of any constitution to succeed that government un- 
til the enemy were chased from the field, all partisans . ^Im- 
perialists, Legitimists, Orleanists, Republicans . would have 
equally adjourned their differences. But a democratic re- 
public, proclaimed by a Parisian mob for a nation in which 
sincere democratic Republicans are a handful, in contempt 
of an Assembly chosen by the country at large, headed by 
men in whom the provinces have no trust, and for whom 
their own representatives are violently cashiered . can you 
conceive such a combination of wet blankets supplied by the 
irony of fate for the extinction of every spark of ardor in the 
population from which armies are to be gathered in haste, at 
the beck of usurpers they distrust and despise ? Paris has- 
excelled itself in folly. Hungering for peace, it proclaims a 
government which has no legal power to treat for it. Shriek- 
ing out for allies among the ntonarchies, it annihilates the 



 



 



THE PABIBIANS. 203 

hope of obtaining tbem; its sole chance of escape from siege, 
famine, and bombardment is in the immediate and impassion- 
ed sympathy of the provinces; and it revives all the grudges 
which the provinces have long sullenly felt against the dom- 
ineering pretensions of the capital, and invokes the rural 
populations, which comprise the pith and sinew of armies, in 
the name of men whom I verily believe they detest still more 
than they do the Prussians. Victor, it is enough to make 
one despair of his country ! All beyond the hbyr seems 
anarchy and ruin." 

" Not so !" exclaimed De Maul6on. " Every thing comes 
to him who knows how to wait. The empire is destroyed ; 
the usurpation that follows it has no roots. It will but sierve 
to expedite the establishment of such a condition as we have 
meditated and planned . a constitution adapted to our age 
and our people, not based wholly on untned experiments, 
taking the best from nations that do not allow Freedom 
and Order to be the sport of any popular breeze. From the 
American republic we must borrow the only safeguards 
against the fickleness of the universal suffrage which, though 
it was madness to concede in any ancient comiQunity, once 
conceded can not be safely abolished . viz., the salutary law 
that no article of the Constitution once settled can be alter- 
ed without the consent of two thirds of the legislative body. 
By this law we insure permanence, and that concomitant 
love for institutions which is engendered by time and cus- 
tom. Secondly, the formation of a Senate on such principles 
as may secui^ to it in all times of danger a confidence and 
respect which counteract in public opinion the rashness and 
heat of the popular Assembly. On what principles that 
Senate should be formed, with what functions invested, what 
share of the executive . especially in foreign affairs, decla- 
rations of war, or treaties of peace . should be accorded to 
it, will no doubt need the most deliberate care of the ablest 
minds. But a Senate I thus sketch has alone rescued Amer- 
ica from the rashnes^ of counsel incident to a democratic 
Chamber ; and it is still more essential to France, with still 
more favorable elements for its creation. From England we 
must borrow the great principle that has alone saved her 
from revolution . that the head of the state can do no wrong. 
He leads no armies, he presi^s over no Cabinet. All respon- 



 



 



204 THS PARISIANS. 

sibility rests with his advisers ; and where we upset a dynas- 
ty, England changes an administration. Whether the head 
of the state should have the title of sovereign or president, 
whether he be hereditary or elected, is a question of minor 
importance impossible now to determine ; but I heartily con- 
cur with you that hereditary monarchy is infinitely better 
adapted to the habits of Frenchmen, to their love of show 
and of honors . and infinitely more preservative from all the 
dangers^which result from constant elections to such a dig- 
nity, with parties so heated, and pretenders to the rank so 
numerous . than any system by which a popular demagogue 
or a successful general may have power to destroy the insti- 
tutions he is elected to guard. On these fundamental doc- 
tnnes for the regeneration of France I think we are agreed. 
And I believe when the moment arrives to promulgate them, 
through an expounder of weight like yourself, they will rap- 
idly commend themselves to the intellect of France. For 
they belong to common-sense; and in the ultimate prevar 
lence of common-sense I have a faith which I refuse to medi- 
fiBvalists who would restore the right divine ; a.nd still more 
to fanatical quacks, who imagine that the worship of the 
Deity, the ties of family, and the rights of property are errors 
at variance with the progress of society. Qui vivera^ ven^a,^^ 
Incognito. "In the outlines of the policy you so ably 
enunciate I heartily concur. But if France is, I will not say 
to be regenerated, but to have fair play among the nations 
of Europe, I ^dd one or two items to the programme. France 
must be saved from Paris not by subterraneanjbarracks and 
trains, the impotence of which we see to-day with a general 
in command of the military force, but by conceding to France 
its proportionate share of the power now monopolized by 
Paris. All this system of centralization, equally tyrannical 
and corrupt, must be eradicated. Talk of examples fi*om 
America, of which I know little . ^from England, of which I 
know much . what can we more advantageously borrow 
from England than that difihsion of all her moral and social 
power which forbids the congestion of blood in one vital 
part ? Decentralize ! decentralize I decentralize I will be my 
incessant cry, if ever the time comes when my cry will be 
heard. France can never be a genuine France until Paris has 
no more influence over the destinies of France than London 



 VjOOQIC 



TilE PARISIANS. 205 

has over those of England. But on this theme I could go on 
till midnight. Now to the immediate point : What do you 
advise me to do in this crisis, and what do you propose to do 
yourself?" 

De Maul^on put his hand to his brow, and remained a few 
moments silent and thoughtful. At last he looked up with 
that decided expression of face which was not the least 
among his many attributes for influence over those with 
whom he came into contact. 

" For you, on whom so much of the future depends, my ad- 
vice is brief. have nothing to do with the present. AH who 
join this present mockery of a government will share the fall 
that attends it . a fall from which one or two of their body 
may possibly recover by casting blame on their confrhrea . 
you never could. But it is not for you to oppose that gov- 
ernment with an enemy on its march to Paris. You are not 
a soldier . military command is not in your rdle. The issue 
of events is uncertain ; but whatever it be, the men in power 
can not conduct a prosperous war nor obtain an honorable 
peace. Hereafter you may be the Beus ex machind. No 
personage of that rank' and with that mission appears till the 
end of the play : we are only in the first act. Leave Paris 
at once, and abstain from all action." 

Incognito {dejectedly). "I can not deny the soundness of 
your advice, though in accepting it I feel unutterably sad- 
dened. Still you, the calmest and the shrewdest observer 
among my friends, think there is cause for hop, not despair. 
Victor, 5 have more than most men to make life pleasant, but 
I would lay down life at this moment with yon. You know 
me well enough to be sure that I utter nO melodramatic fic- 
tion when I say that I love my country as a young man loves 
the ideal of his dreams . with my whole mind and heart and 
soul! . and the thought that I can not now aid her in the 
hour of her mortal trial is . is . " 

The man's voice broke down, and he turned aside, veiling 
his face with a hand that trembled. 

De MauiJson. " Courage ! patience ! All Frenchmen have 
the first; set them an example they much need in the second. 
I; too, love my country, though I owe to it little enough, 
Heaven knows. I suppose love of country is inherent in all 
who are not Internationalists. They profess only to love 



 



 



206 THE PARISIANS. 

humanity, by which, if they mean any thing practical, they 
mean a rise in wages." 

Incognito {rousing himsdf^ and with a half &mile). " Al- 
ways cynical, Victor . always belying youreelC But now 
that you have advised my course, what will be your own? 
Accompany me,' and wait for better times." 

" No, noble friend ; our positions are different. Youre is 
made . ^mine yet to make. But for this war I think I could 
have secured a seat in the Chamber. As I wrote you, I 
found that my kinsfolk were of much influence in their de- 
partment, and that my restitution to my social grade, and 
the repute I had made as an Orleanist, inclined them to for- 
get my youthful errors and to assist my career. But the 
Chamber ceases to exist. My journal I shall drop. I can 
not support the government; it is not a moment to oppose 
it. My prudent course is silence." 

Incognito. " But is not your journal essential to your sp- 
port ?" 

De Maul4on. " Fortunately not. Its profits enabled me 
to lay by for the rainy day that has come ; and having re- 
imbursed you and all friends the sums* necessary to start it, I 
stand clear of all debt, and for my slender wants a rich man. 
If I continued the journal I should be beggared, for there 
would be no readers to Common-Sense in this interval of lu- 
nacy. Nevertheless, during this interval I trust to other 
ways for winning a name that will open my rightful path of 
ambition whenever we again have a legislature in which 
Common-Sense can be heard." 

Incognito. "But how win that name, silenced as a 
writer ?" 

Db MAUiijON. " You forget that I have fought in Alge- 
na. In a few days Paris will be in a state of siege ; and 
then . and then," he added, and very quietly dilated on the 
lenown of a patriot or the grave of a soldier. 

" I envy you the chance of either," said the Incognito j and 
after a few more brief words he departed, his hat drawn over 
his brows, and entering a hired carriage which he had left at 
the corner of the quiet street, was consigned to the Station 
du , just in time for the next train. 



 



 



 



 




DB MAULBON SUDDENLY BNATOHBD THB BABY FBOM HEB, AND SAID, WTTH XXPEBTUBBASLB 
OOOD TBMPBB, "SXOHAMGE OF PBI80NXB8 ! I BESIGN THE MAN, AND I KEEP THE BABY.** 



 



 



THB PABISIANS. 207 



CHAPTER XL 

ViCTOB dressed and went out. The streets were crowded. 
Workmen were every where employed in the childish opera- 
tion of removing all insignia, and obliterating all names, that 
showed' where an empire had existed. One greasy citizen, 
monnted on a ladder, was effacing the words " Boulevard 
Haussman," and substituting forHaussman ''Victor Hugo." 

Suddenly De Maul6on came on a group of blouses, inter- 
spersed with women holding babies and ragged boys hold- 
ing stones, collected round a well-dressed slender man, at 
whom they were hooting and gesticulating, with menaces of 
doing something much worse. By an easy effort of his 
strong frame the Vicomte pushed his way through the tor- 
mentors, and gave his arm to their intended victim. 

"Monsieur, allow me to walk home with you." 

Therewith the shrieks and shouts and gesticulations in- 
creased. " Another impertinent ! Another traitor I Drown 
him ! Drown them both ! To the Seine I To the Seine !" 
A burly fellow rushed forward, and the rest made a plunging 
push. The o'utstretched arm of De Maul^on kept the ring- 
leader at bay. " Jfe enfans^'^ cried Victor, with a calm, clear 
voice, " I am not an Imperialist* Many of you have read the 
articles signed Pierre Firmin, written against the tyrant Bo- 
naparte when he was at the height of his power. I am Pierre 
Pirmin . make way for me." Probably not one in the crowd 
had ever read a word written by Pierre Firmin, nor even 
heard of the name. But they did not like to own ignorance ; 
and that burly fellow did not like to encounter that arm of 
iron which touched his throat. So he cried out, " Oh ! if you 
are the great Pierre Firipin, that alters the case. Make way 
for the patriot Pierre !" " But," shrieked a virago, thrusting 
her baby into De Maul6on's face, " the other is the Imperial- 
ist, the capitalist, the vile Duplessis. At least we will have 
him." De Maul6on suddenly snatched the baby from her, 
and said, with imperturbable good temper, " Exchange of 
prisoners ! I resign the man, and I keep the baby." 



 



 



208 THB PABISL4NS. 

No one who does not know the humors of a Parisian mob 
can comprehend the suddenness of popular change, or the 
magical mastery over crowds, which is effected by quiet cour- 
age and a ready joke. The group was appeased at once. 
Even the virago laughed ; and when De Mauleon restored 
the in&nt to her arms, with a gold piece thrust into its tiny 
clasp, she eyed the gold, and cried, "God bless you, citizen !'' 
The two gentlemen made their way safely now. 

" M. de Maul6on," said Duplessis, " I know not how to thank 
you. Without your seasonable aid I should have been in great 
danger of life ; and . would you believe it ? . ^the woman who 
denounced and set the mob on me was one of the objects of 
a charity which I weekly dispense to the poor." 

" Of course I believe that. At the Red clubs no crime is 
more denounced than that of charity. It is the ^ fraud against 
Egalite^ . a vile trick of the capitalist to save to himself the 
millions he ought to share with all by giving a sou to one. 
Meanwhile take my advice, M. Duplessis, and quit Paris with 
your young daughter. This is no place for rich Imperialists 
at present." 

"I perceived that before to-day's adventure. I distrust 
the looks of my very servants, and shall depart with Valerie 
this evening for Bretagne." 

" Ah I I heard from Louvier that you propose to pay off 
his mortgage on Rochebriant, and make yourself sole pro- 
prietor of my young kinsman's property." 

" I trust you only believe half what you hear. I mean to 
save Rochebriant from Louvier, and consign it, free of charge, 
to your kinsman, as the dot of his bride, my daughter." 

" I rejoice to learn such good news for the head of my 
house. But Alain himself. is he not with the prisoners of 
war?" 

" No, thank Heaven. He went forth an officer of a regi- 
ment of Parisian Mobiles . went full of sanguine confidence; 
he came back with his regiment in mournful despondency. 
The undiscipline of his regiment, of the Parisian Mobiles gen- 
erally, appears incredible. Their insolent disobedience to 
their officers, their ribald scoffs at their general . oh, it is sick- 
ening to speak of it I Alain distinguished himself by repress- 
ing a mutiny, and is honored by a signal compliment from 
the commander in a letter of recommendation to Palikao. 



 



 



THE PARI8IAKS. 209 

Bat Palikao is nobody now. Ala\n has already been sent 
into Bretagne, commissioned to assist in organizing a corps 
of Mobiles in his neighborhood. Trocha, as you know, is a 
Breton. Alain is confident of the good conduct of the Bret- 
ons. What will Louvier do ? He i3 an arch Republican. Is 
he pleased now he has got what he wanted ?" 

"I suppose he is pleased, for he is terribly frightened. 
Fright is one of the gi-eat enjoyments of a Parisian. Good- 
day. Your path to your hotel is clear now. Remember me 
kindly to Alain." 

De Maul^on continued his way through streets sometimes 
deserted, sometimes thronged. At the commencement of the 
Rue de Florentin he. encountered the brothers Vandemar 
Valking arm in arm. 

" Ha, De Maul^on !" cried Enguerrand ; " what is the last 
minute's news ?" 

" I can't guess. Nobody knows at Paris how soon one 
folly si^allows up another. Saturn hwQ is always devouring 
one or other of his children." 

" They say that Vinoy, after a most masterly retreat, is al- 
most at our gates with eighty thousand men." 

" And this day twelvemonth we may know what he does 
with them." 

Hei*e Raoul, who seemed absorbed in gloomy reflections, 
halted before the hotel in which the Comtesse di Rimini 
lodged, and with a nod to his brother, and a polite, if not 
cordial, salutation to Victor, entered the porte coch^e. 

" Your brother seems out of spirits . a pleasing contrast to 
the uproarious mirth with which Parisians welcome the ad- 
vance of calamity." 

" Raoul, as you know, is deeply religious. He regards the 
defeat we have sustained, and the peril that threatens us, as 
the beginning of a divine chastisement, justly incurred by 
our sins . ^I mean the sins of Paris. In vain my father re- 
min<^ him of Voltaire's story, in which the ship goes down 
with Sifripon on board. In order to punish thefripon^ the 
honest folks are drowned." 

" Is your father going to remain on board the ship, and 
share the fate of the other honest folks?" 

"Pa ai Mte. He is off to Dieppe for sea-bathing. He 
says that Paris has grown so dirty since the 4th Septem- 

IL. 10 

^  VjOOQIC 



210 THE PABISIANS. 

ber that it is only fit for the feet of the Unwashed. He 
wished my mother to accompany him ; but she replies, * No ; 
there are already too many wounded not to need plenty of 
nurses.' She' is assisting to inaugurate a society of ladies in 
aid of the Soeurs de Chafite. Like Raoul, she is devout, but 
she has not his superstitions. Still his superstitions are the 
natural reaction of a singularly earnest and pure nature from 
the frivolity and corruption which, when kneaded well up 
together with a slice of sarcasm, Paris calls philosophy." 

" And what, my dear Enguerrand, do you propose to do ?" 

" That depends on whether we are really besieged. If so, 
of course I become a soldier." 

" I hope not a National Guard ?" 

" I care not in what name I fight, so that I fight for France.'*' 

As Enguerrand said these simple words his whole counte- 
nance seemed changed. The crest rose ; the eyes sparkled ; 
the fair and delicate beauty which had made him the darling 
of women . the joyou% sweetness of expression and' dainty 
grace of high-breeding which made him the most popular 
companion to men . were exalted in a masculine nobleness 
of aspect, from which a painter might have taken hints for a 
study of the young Achilles separated forever from effemi- 
nate companionship at the sight of the weapons of war. De 
Mauleon gazed on him admiringly. We have seen that he 
shared the sentiments uttered . had resolved on the same 
course of action. But it was with the tempered warmth of 
a man who seeks to divest his thoughts and his purpose of 
the ardor of romance, and who, in serving his country, calcu- 
lates on the gains to his own ambition. Nevertheless he ad- 
mired in Enguerrand the image of his own impulsive and 
fiery youth. 

" And you, I presume," resumed Enguerrand, " will fight 
too, but rather with pen than with sword." 

" Pens will now only be dipped in red ink, and Common- 
Sense never writes in that color; as for the sword, Ijiave 
passed the age of forty-five, at which military service halts. 
But if some experience in active service, some knowledge of 
the art by which soldiers are disciplined and led, will be 
deemed suflScient title to a post of command, however modest 
the grade be, I shall not be wanting among the defenders of 
Paris?" 

VjOOQlC ^ 



THE PABISIANB. 211 

" My dear, brave Vicomte, if you are past the age to serve, 
you are in the ripest age to command ; and with the testi- 
monials and the cross you won in Algeria, your application 
for employment will be received with gratitude by any gen- 
eral so able as Trochu." * 

" I don't know whether I shall apply to Trochu. I would 
rather be elected to command even by the Mobiles or the 
National Guard, of whom I have just spoken disparagingly ; 
and no doubt both corps will soon claim and win the right 
to choose their officers. But if elected, no matter by whom, 
I shall make a preliminary condition : the men under me shall 
train and drill and obey . soldiers of a very different kind 
from the youthful Pekins nourished on absinthe and self-con- 
ceit, and applauding that Bombastes Furioso, M. Hugo, when 
he assures the enemy that Paris will draw an idea from its 
scabbard. But here comes Savarin. JBonjouVy my dear 
poet." 

"Don't say good day/ An evil day for journalists and 
writers who do not out-Herod Blanqui and Pyat. I know 
not how I shall get bread and cheese. My poor suburban 
villa is to be pulled down by way of securing Paris ; my jour- 
nal will be suppressed by way of establishing the liberty of 
the press. It ventured to suggest that the people of France 
should have some choice in the form of their government." 

" That was very indiscreet, my poor Savarin," said Victor ; 
"I wonder your printing-office has not been pulled down. 
We are now at the moment when wise men hold their 
tongues." . 

"Perhaps so, M. de Maul^on. It might have been wiser 
for all of us, you as well as myself, if we had not allowed our 
tongues to be so free before this moment arrived. We live 
to learn ; and if we ever have whsrt may be called a passable 
government again, in which we may say pretty much what 
we like, there is one thing I will not do. I will not undermine 
that government without seeing a very clear way to the gov- 
ernment that is to follow it. What say you, Pierre Fir- 
min ?" 

" Frankly, I say that I deserve your rebuke,".answered De 
Mauleon, thoughtfully. "But of course you are going to 
take or send Madame Savarin out of Paris?" 

" Certainly. We have made a very pleasant party for our 



 



 



212 THK FABISIANS. 

hegira this evening-^Amoiig othera the Morleys. Morley is 
terribly disgusted. A Bed Republican slapped him on the 
shoulder and said, ^American, we have a republic as well as 
you,' ' Pretty much you know about republics,' growled Mor- 
ley ; ^ a Fi;^nch republic is as much like ours as a baboon is 
like a man.' On which the Ked roused the mob, who drag- 
ged the American off to the nearest station of the National 
Guard, where he was accused of being a Prussian spy. With 
some difficulty, and lots of brag about the sanctity of the 
Stars and Stripes, he escaped with a reprimand, and a caution 
how to behave himself in future. So he quits a city in which 
there no longer exists freedom of speech. My wife hoped to 
iuduce Mademoiselle Cicogna to accompany us; I grieve %o 
say she refuses. Yon know she is engaged in marriage to 
Gustavo Kameau ; and his mother dreads the effect that these 
Red clubs and his own vanity may have upon his excitable 
temperament if the influence of Mademoiselle Cicogna be 
withdrawn." 

" How could a creature so exquisite as Is&ura Cicogna ever 
find fascination in Gustave Rameau!" exclaimed Enguer- 
rand. 

" A woman like her," answered De Mauldon, " always finds 
a fascination in self-sacrifice." 

" I think you divine the truth," said Savarin, rather mourn*' 
fully. " But I must bid you good-by. May we live to shake 
hands riunia sotM des meilleurs atispicea.^^ 

Here Savarin hurried off, and the other two men strolled 
into the Champs Elys6es, which were crowded with loungers, 
gay and careless, as if there had been no disaster at Sedan, 
no overthrow of an empire, no enemy on its road to Paris. 

In fact, the Parisians, at once the most incredulous and the 
most credulous of all popurations, believed that the Prussians 
would never be so impertinent as to come in sight of the 
gates. Something would occur to stop them! The King 
had declared he did not make war on Frenchmen, but on the 
Emperor : the Enaperor gone, the war was over. A demo* 
cratic republic was instituted. A horrible thing in its way, 
it is true ; but how could the Pandour tyrant brave the infec- 
tion of democratic doctrines among his own barbarian armies? 
Were not placards, addressed to our "German brethren," 
posted upon the walls of Paris, exhorting the Pandours to 



 



 



THB PARISIANS. . 213 

fraternize with their fellow-creatures ? Was not Victor Hugo 
going to publish " a letter to the German people ?" Had not 
Jules Favre graciously offered peace, with the assurance that 
France would not cede a stone of her fortresses . ^an inch of 
her territory? "She would pardon the invaders, and not 
inarch upon Berlin !" To all these, and many more such in- 
contestable proofs that the idea of a siege was moonshine, 
did Enguerraiid and Victor listen as they joined group after 
group of their fellow-countrymen; nor did Paris cease to 
harbor such pleasing illusions, amusing itself with pioulSly 
laying crowns at the foot of the statue of Strasburg, swearing 
" they Vould be worthy of their Alsacian brethren," till on 
the 19th of September the last telegram was' received, and 
Paris was cut off from the rest of the world by the iron lino 
of the Prussian invaders. " Tranquil and terrible," s^ys Vic- 
tor Hugo, " she awaits the invasion ! A volcano needs no as- 
sistance." 

CHAPTER Xn. 

We left Graham Vane slowly recovering from the attack 
of fever which had arrested his journey to Berlin in quest of 
the Count von Rudesheim. He was, however, saved the pros- 
ecution of that journey, and his direction turned back to 
France, by ai> German newspaper, which infprmed him that 
the King of Prussia was at Rheims, and that the Count von 
Rudesheim was among the eminent persorfages gathered 
there around their sovereign. In conversing the same day 
with the kindly doctor who attended him, Graham ascertained 
that this German noble held a high command in the German 
armies, and bore a no less distinguished reputation as a wise 
political oounselor than he had earned as a military chief As 
soon as he was able to travel, and indeed before the good 
doctor sanctioned his departure, Graham took his way to 
Rheims, uncertain, however, whether the Count would still be 
found there. I spare the details of his journey, interesting as 
they were. On reaching the famous and, in the eyes of the Le- 
gitimists, the sacred city, the Englishman had no difficultyin 
ascertaining the house, not far from the cathedral, in which 
the Count von Rudesheim had taken his temporary abode. 
Walking toward it from the small hotel in which he had been 



 



 



214 . THE PAEISIANS. 

lucky enough to find a room disengaged . slowly, for he was 
still feeble . he was struck by the quiet conduct of the Ger- 
man soldiery, and, save in their appearance, the peaceful as- 
pect of the streets. Indeed, there was an air of festive gay- 
ety about the place, as in an English town in which some 
popular regiment is quartered. The German soldiers throng- 
ed the shops, buying largely ; lounged into the cafes; here 
and there attempted flirtations with the grisettes, who laugh- 
ed at their French and blushed at their compliments; and in 
their good-humored, somewhat bashful cheeriness there was 
no trace of the insolence of conquest. 

But as Graham neared the precincts of the catheSral his 
ear caught a grave and solemn music, which he at first sup- 
posed to come from within the building. But as be paused 
and looked round he saw a group of the German military, on 
whose stalwart forms and fair, manly, earnest faces the set- 
ting sun cast its calm, lingering rays. They were chanting, 
in voices not loud but deep, Luther's majestic hymn, J^un 
danJcet aUe Gott, The chant awed even the ragged beggar 
boys who had followed the Englishman, as they followed any 
stranger, would have followed King William himself, whining 
for alms. " " What a type of the difference between the two 
nations !" thought Graham ; " the Marseillaise^ and Luther's 
Hymn !" While thus meditating and listehing, a man in a 
general's uniform came slowly out of the cathedral, with his 
hands clasped behind his back, and his head bent slightly 
downward, ife, too, paused on hearing the hymn ; then un- 
clasped his hand and beckoned to one of the officers, to 
whom, approaching, he whispered a word or two, and passed 
on toward the Episcopal palace. The hymn hushed, and the 
singers quietly dispersed. Graham divined rightly that the 
general had thought a hymn thanking the God t)f battles 
might wound the feelings of the inhabitants of the vanquish- 
ed city . not, however, that any of them were likely to un- 
derstand the language in which the thanks were uttered. 
Graham followed the measured steps of the general, whose 
hands were again clasped behind his back . the musing habit 
of Von Moltke, as it had been of Napoleon the First. 

Continuing his way, the Englishman soon reached the 
house in which the Count von Rudesheim was lod]ged, and 
sending in his card, was admitted at once through an ante- 



 



 



THE PABI6IANS. 215 

room, in which sat two yonng men, subaltern officers, appar- 
ently employed in draughting maps, into the presence of the 
Count. 

"Pardon me," said Graham, after the firat conventional 
salutation, " if I interrupt you for a moment or so in the 
midst -of events so grave, on a miitter that must seem to you 
very trivial." 

("Nay," answered the Count, "there is nothing so trivial^ 
in this world but what there will be some one to whon\ it J 
will be important. Say how I can serve you." -^ 

" I think, M. le Comte, that you onc^ received in your 
household, as teacher or governess, a French lady, Madame 
Marigny." 

" Yes, I remember her well . a very handsome woman. 
My wife and daughter took great interest in her. She was 
married out of my house." 

" Exactly. And to whom ?" 

" An Italian of good birth, who was then employed by the 
Austrian government in some minor post, and subsequently 
promoted to a better one in the Italian dominion, which then 
belonged to the house of Hapsburg, after which we lost sight 
of him and his Tyfe." 

" An Italian ! What was his name ?" 

" Ludovico Cicogna." 

" Cicogna !" exclaimed Graham, turning very pale. " Are 
you sure that was the name ?" 

" Certainly. He was a cadet of a very noble house, and 
disowned by relations too patriotic to forgive him for ac- 
cepting employment under the Austrian government." 

" Can you not give me the address of the place in Italy to 
which Jie was transferred on leaving Austria ?" 

" No ; but if the information be necessary to you, it can be 
obtained easily at. Milan, where the head of the family re- 
sides, or, indeed, in Vienna, through any ministerial bureau." 

"Pardon me one or two questions more. Had Madame 
Marigny any children by a former husband ?" 

" Not that I know of: I never heard so. Signor Cicogna 
was a widowerj^and had, if I remember right, children by his 
first wife, who was also a Frenchwoman. Before he obtained 
office in Austria he resided, I believe, in France. I do not 
remember how many children he had by his first wife. I 



 



 



216 THB PABISIASiS. 

never saw them. Oar acquaintance began at the baths of 
Toplitz, where he saw and fell violently in love with Madame 
Marigny. After their marriage they went to his post, which 
was somewhere, I think, in the Tyrol. We saw no more of 
them ; but my wife and daughter kept up a correspondence 
with the Signora Cicogna for a short time. It ceased alto- 
gether when she removed into Italy." 

" You do not even know if the signora is still living ?" 

"No." 

" Her husband, I am told, is dead." 

"Indeed! I an^ concerned to hear it. A good-looking, 
lively, clever man. I fear he must have lost all income when 
the Austrian dominion passed to the house of Savoy." 

"Many thanks for your information. I can detain you no 
longer," said Graham, rising. 

" Nay, X am not very busy at this moment ; but I fear we 
Germans have plenty of work on ourjiands." 

"I had hoped that, now the French Emperor, against whom 
your King made war, was set aside, his Prussian Majesty 
would make peace with the French people." 

" Most willingly would he do so if the French people would 
let him. But it must be through a French government le- 
gally chosen Jby the people. And they have chosen none ! 
A mob at Paris sets up a provisional administration, that 
commences by declaring that it will not give up 'an inch of 
its territory nor a stone of its fortresses.' No terms of peace 
can be made with such men holding such talk." After a few 
words more over the state of public affairs . in wbich Gra- 
ham expressed the English side of affairs, which was all for 
generosity to the vanquished, and the Count argued much 
more ably on the German, which was all for security against 
the aggressions of a people that would not admit itself to be 
vanquished . the short interview closed. 

As Graham at night pursued his jouraey to Vienna, there 
came into his mind Isaura^s song of the Neapolitan fisherman. 
Had he, too, been blind to the image on the rock? Was it 
possible that all the while he had been resisting the impulse 
of his heart, until the discharge of the mission intrusted to 
him freed his choice and decided his fortunes, the very per- 
son of whom he was in search had been before him, then to 
be forever won, lost to him now forever? Could Isaura Ci- 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 217 

cogiia be the child of Louise Duval by Richard King ? She 
could not have been her child by Cicogna : the dates forbade 
that hypothesis. Isaura must have been ^ve years old when 
Louise married the Italian. 

Arrived at Milan, Graham quickly ascertained that the 
post to which Ludovico Cicogna had been removed was in 
Verona, and that he had there died eight years ago. Nothing 
was to be learned as to his family or his circumstances at the 
time of his death. The people of whose history we know 
the least are the relations we refuse to acknowledge. Gra- 
ham continued his journey to Verona. There he found on ' 
inquiry that the Cicognas had occupied an apartment in a 
house which stood at the outskirts of the town, and had been 
since pulled down to make way for some public improve- 
ments. But his closest inquiries could gain him no' satisfac- 
tory answers to the all-important questions as to Ludovico 
Cicogna's family. His political alienation from the Italian 
cause, which was nowhere more ardently espoused than at 
Verona, had rendered him very unpopular. He visited at no 
Italian houses. Such society as he had was confined to the 
Austrian military within the Quadrilateral or at Venice, to 
which city he made frequent excursions: was said to lead 
there a free and gay life, very displeasing to the signora, 
whom he left in Verona. She was but little seen, and faintly 
remembered as very handsome and proud- looking. Yet 
there were children . a girl, and a boy several years younger 
than the girl ; but whether she was the child of the signora 
by a former marriage, or whether the signora was only the 
child's step-mother, no one could say. The usual clue in such 
doubtful matters, obtainable through servants, was here miss- 
ing. The Cicognas had only kept two servants, and both 
were Austrian subjects, who had long left the country . their 
very names forgotten. 

Graham now called to mind the Englishman, Selby, for 
wiom Isaura had such grateful affection, as supplying to her 
the place of her father. This must have been the English- 
man whom Louise Duvml had married after Cicogna's death. 
It would be no difficult task, surely, to ascertain where he 
had resided. Easy enough to ascertain all that Grahan^p 
wanted to know from Isaura herself, if a letter could reach 
her. But, as he knew by the journals, Paris was now invest- 

llO* n J 

 VjOOQIC 



218 THS PABISIAKS. 

ed . cut off from all communication with the world beyond. 
Too irritable, anxious, and impatient to wait for the close of 
the siege, though he never suspected it could last so long as 
it did, he hastened to Venice, and there learned through the 
British consul that the late Mr. Selby was a learned anti- 
quarian, an accomplished general scholar, 2kfanaJtico in mu- 
sic, a man of gentle temper, though reserved manners ; had 
at one time lived much at Venice: after his marriage with 
the Signora Cicogna he had taken up his abode near Flor- 
ence. To Florence Graham now went. He found the villa 
on the skirts of Fiesole, at which Mr. Selby had resided. The 
peasant who had officiated as gardener and shareholder in 
the profits of vines and figs was still, with his wife, living on 
the place. Both man and wife remembered the Inglese well; 
spoke of him with great affection, of his wife with great dis- 
like. They said her manners were very haughty, her temper 
very violent; that she led the Inglese a very unhappy life; 
that there were a girl and a boy, both hers by a former mar- 
riage ; but when closely questioned whether they were sure 
that the girl was the signora's child *by the former husbandj 
or whether she was not the child of that husband by a foimer 
wife, they could not tell; they could only say that both were 
called by the same name . Cicogna; that the boy was the 
signora's favorite . that, indeed, he seemed wrapped up in 
him ; that he di^d of a rapid decline a few months after Mr. 
Selby had hired the place, and that shortly after his death 
the signora left the place and never returaed to it ; that it 
was little more than a year that she had lived with her hus- 
band before this final separation took place. The girl re- 
mained with Mr. Selby, who cherished and loved her as his 
own child. Her Christian name was Isaura, the boy's Luigi. 
A few years later Mr. Selby left the villa and went to Na- 
ples, where they heard he had died. They could give no in- 
formation as to what had become of his wife. Since the 
death of her boy that lady had become very much changed 
. ^her spirits quite broken, n# longer violent. She would sit 
alone and weep bitterly. The only person out of her fkmily 
she would receive was the priest; till the boy's death she 
had never seen the priest, nor been known to attend divine 
service. 

" Was the priest living ?'^ 



 VjOOQIC . 



THE PARISIANS. 219 

" Oh no ; lie has been dead two years. A most excellent 
man . a saint," said the peasant's wife. 

"Good priests are like good women," said the peasant, 
dryly; "there are plenty of them, bat they are all under- 
ground." 

On which remark the wife tried to box his ears. The 
contadino had become a freethinker since the accession of 
the house of Savoy. His wife remained a good Catholic. 

Said the peasant, as, escaping from his wife^he walked into 
the high-road with Graham, " My belief, Eecdlema^ is that 
the priest did all the mischief." 

"What mischief?" 

" Persuaded the signora to leave her husband. The Inglese 
was not a Catholic. I heard the priest call him a heretic. 
And the Padre^ who, though not so bad as some of his cloth, 
was a meddling bigot, thought it perhaps best for her soul 
that it should part company with a heretic's person. I can't 
say for sure, but I think that was it. The Padre seemed to 
triumph when the signora was gone." 

Graham mused. The peasant's supposition was not im^ 
probable. A woman suh as Louise Duval appeared to be . 
of vehement passions and ill-regulated mind . was just one 
of those who, in a moment of great sorrow, and estranged 
from the ordinary household affections, feel, though but im- 
perfectly, the necessity of a i*eligion, and, ever in extremes, 
pass at once from indifferentism into superstition. 

Arrived at Haples, Graham heard little of Selbjr except as 
a literary recluse, whose only distraction from books was the 
operatic stage. But he heard much of Isaura ; of the kind- 
ness which Madame de Grantmesnil had shown to her, when 
left b*y Selby's death alone in the world ; of the interest 
which the friendship and the warm Hilogies of one so eminent 
as the great French writer had created for Isaura in the ar- 
tistic circles; of the intense sensation her appearance, her 
voice, h^r universal genius, had made in that society, and the 
briltiant hopes of her subsequent career on the stage the 
cognoscenti had formed. No one knew any thing of her 
mother; no one entertained a doubt that Isaura was by birth 
a Cicbgna. Graham could not learn the present whereabouts 
of Madame de Grantmesnil. She had long left Naples, and 
had been last heard of at Genoa ; was supposed to have re- 



 



 



220 THE PABISIANS. 

turned to France a little before the war. In France she bad 
np fixed residence. 

The simplest mode of ascertaining anthentic information 
whether Isaura was the daughter of Ludovico Cicogna by 
his first wife . namely, by registration of her birth . failed 
him, because, as Yon Rudesheim had said, his first wife was 
a Frenchwoman. The children had been bom somewhere in 
France . no one CQuld even guess where* No one had ever 
seen the first wife, who had never appeared in Italy, nor bad 
even heard what was her maiden name. 

Graham, meanwhile, was not aware that Isaura was still 
in the besieged city, whether or not already married to Gus- 
tave Rameau ; so large a number of the women had quitted 
Paris before the siege began that he had reason to hope she 
was among them. H# heard through an American that the 
Morleys had gone to England before the Prussian invest- 
ment; perhaps Isaura had gone with them. He wrote to 
Mrs.Morley, inclosing his letter to the minister pf the United 
States at the court of St. James, and while still at Naples re- 
ceived her answer. It was short and malignantly J)itter. 
" Both myself and Madame Savarin^ backed by Signora Ve- 
nosta, earnestly entreated Mademoiselle Cicogna to quit Paris, 
to accompany us to England. Her devotion to her affianced 
husband would not permit her to listen to us. It is only an 
Englishman who could suppose. Isaura Cicogna to be one of 
those women who do not insist on sharing the perils of those 
they love.' You ask whether she was the daughter of Ludo- 
vico Ciaogna by his former marriage, or of his second wife 
by him. I can not answer. I don't even know whether 
Signor Cicogna ever had a former wife. Isaura Cicogna 
never spoke to me of her parents. Permit me to ask "what 
business is it of yours .^w ? Is it the English pride that 
makes you wish to learn whether on both sides she is of 
noble family? How can that discovery- alter your relations 
toward the affianced bride of another ?" e 

On receipt of this letter Graham quitted Naples, and short- 
ly afterward found himself at Versailles. He obtained per- 
mission to establish himself there, though the English were 
by no means popular. Thus near to Isaura, thus stemly^sep- 
arated from her, Graham awaited the close of the sitge. 
Few among those at Versailles believed ^hat the ParL^ns 



 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 221 

would endure it much longer. Surely they would capitulate 
before the bombardment, which the Germans themselves dis- 
liked to contemplate as a last resource, could commence. 

In his own mind Graham was convinced that Isaura was 
the child of Richard King. It seemed to him probable that 
Louise Duval, unable to assign any real name to the daughter 
of the marriage she disowned . neither the name borne by 
the repudiated husband, nor her own maiden name . ^would, 
on taking her daughter to her new home, have induced Ci- 
cogna to give the child his name; or that after Cicogna's 
death she herself had so designated the girl. A dispassion- 
ate confidant, could Graham have admitted any confidant 
whatever, might have suggested the more equal probability 
that Isaura was Cicogna's daughter by his former espousal. 
But then what could have become of Richard King's child ? ' 
To part with the future in his hands, to relinquish- all the 
ambitious dreams which belonged to it, cost Graham Vane 
no pang; but he writhed with indignant grief when he 
thought that the wealth of Richard King's heiress was to 
pass to the hands of Gustave Rameau . that this was to be 
the end of his researches . this the result of the sacrifice his 
seni^ of honor imposed on him. And now that there was 
the probability that he must convey to Isaura this large in- 
heritance, the practical difficulty of inventing some reason 
for such a donation, which he had, while at a distance, made 
light of, became seriously apparent. How could he say to 
Isaura that he had 200,000 in trust for her, without naming 
any one so devising it ? Still more, how constitute himself 
her guardian, so as to secure it to herself, independently of 
her husband? Perhaps Isaura was too infatuated with Ra- 
meeu, or too romantically unselfish, to permit the fortune so 
mysteriously conveyed being exclusively appropriated to 
herself. And if he were already married to Rameau, and 
if he were armed with the right to inquire into the source of 
this fortune, bow exposed to the risks of disclosure would be- 
come the secret Graham sought to conceal ! Such a secret 
affecting the memory of the sacred dead, affixing a shame on 
the scutcheon of the living, in the irreverent hands of a Gus- 
tave Rameau . it was too dreadful to contemplate such a 
hazard. And yet, if Isaura were the missing heiress, could 
Graham Vane admit any excuse for basely withholding from 



 



 



222 THE^ PABISIANS. 

her, for coolly retaining to himself, the wealth for which he 
was responsible ? Yet, torturing as were thess communings 
with himself, they were mild in their torture compared to the 
ever-growing anguish of the thought that. in any case the 
only woman he had ever loved. ever could love . who might 
but for his own scruples and prejudices have been the part- 
ner of his life. was perhaps now actually the wife of another ; 
and, as such, in what terrible danger ! Famine within the 
walls of the doomed city: without, the engines of death 
waiting for a signal. So near to her, and yet so far ! So 
willing to die for tter, if for her he could not live ; and with 
all his devotion, all his intellect, all his wealth, so powerless ! 



CHAPTER Xm. 



It is now the middle of November . a Sunday. The day 
has been mild, and is drawing toward its close. The Paris- 
ians have been enjoying the sunshine. Under the leafless 
trees in the public gardens and the Champs Elys6es chil- 
dren have been at play. On the Boulevards the old ele- 
gance of gayety is succeeded by a livelier animation. Itiner- 
ant musicians gather round them ragged groups. Fortune- 
tellers are in great request, especially among the once brill- 
iant Laises and Thaises, now looking more shabby, to whom 
they predict the speedy restoration of Nabobs and Russians, 
and golden joys.' Yonder Punch is achieving a victory over 
the Evil One, who weai*s the Prussian spiked helmet, and 
whose face has been recently beautified into a resemblance 
to Bismarck. Punch draws to his show a' laughing audience 
ofMoblots and recruits to the new companies of the National 
Guard. ^Members of the once formidable police, now thread- 
bare and hunger-pinched, stand side by side with unfortunate 
beggars and sinister-looking patriots who have served their 
time in the jail or galleys. 

Uniforms of all varietyare conspicuous . the only evidence 
visible of an enemy at the walls. But the aspects of the 
wearers of warlike accoutrements are dibonnaire and smiling, 
as of revelers on a holiday of peace. Among these defenders 
of their country at the door of a crowded caf& stands Frederic 
Lemercier, superb in the costume, bran-new, of a National 

.VjOOQlC 



THE PARISIANS. 225 

Guard . his dog Fox tranquilly reposing on its haunches, 
with eyes fixed upon fts fellow-dog philosophically musing 
on the edge of Punch's show, whose master is engaged in 
the conquest of the Bismarck fiend. . 

" Lemercier," cried the Vicomte de Br^z^, approaching the 
cafe^ " I scarcely recognize you in that martial guise. You 
look magnifiqm . thf galona become you. Peate ! an officer 
already?" 

" The National Guard and Mobiles are permitted to choose 
their own officers, as you are aware. I have been elected, but 
to subaltern grade, by the warlike patriots of my department. 
Enguerrand de Vandemar is elected a captain of the Mobiles 
in his, and Victor de Maul^on is appointed to the command 
of a battalion of the National Guard. But I soai* above jeal- 
ousy at such a moment . 

*Rome a choisi mon bras; je n'examine rien.* 

" You have no right to be jealous. De Maul^on has had 
experience and won distinction in actual service, and from all 
I hear is doing wonders with his men . has got them not 
only to keep but to love drill. I heard no less an authority 

than General V say that if all the officers of the National 

Guard were like De Mauleon, that body would give an ex- 
ample of discipline to the line." 

" I say nothing as to the promotion of a real soldier like 
the Vicomte . but a Parisian dandy like Enguerrand de 
Vandemar 1" 

" You forget that Enguerrand received a military educa- 
tion . an advantage denied to you.". 

" What does that matter? Who cares for education now- 
adays ? Besides, have I not been training ever since the 4th 
of September, to say nothing of the hard work on the ram- 
parts?" 

^^Pariez moi de cda: it is indeed hard work on the ram- 
parts. Infandum dolorem quorum pars mctgna fuL Take 
the (fay duty. What with rising at seven o'clock, and being 
drilled between a middle-aged and corpulent grocer on one 
side and a meagre, beardless barber's apprentice on the other ; 
what with going to the. bastions at eleven, and seeing half 
one's companions drunk before twelve ; what' with trying to 
keep* their fists off one's face when one politely asks them not 

 VjOOQIC 



224 Tnfi PABISIAK6. 

to call one's general a traitor or a poltroon . the work of the 
ramparts would be insupportable, if I>did not take a pack of 
cards with me, and enjoy a quiet rubber with three other 
heroes in somt sequestered comer. As for night work, noth- 
ing short of the indomitable fortitude of a Parisian conld 
sustain it ; the .tents made expressly not to be water-proof, 

like the groves of the Muses . . 

*per 
Quos et aquie subeant et aorse/ 

A fellow-companion of mine tucks himself up on my nig, and 
pillows his head on my knapsack. I remonstrate . he swears 
. the other heroes wake up and threaten to thrash us both ; 
and just when peace is made, and one hopes for a wink of 
sleep, a detai^hment of spectators, chiefly gamins, coming to 
see that all is sa& in the camp, strike up the Marseillttise. 
Ah, the world will ring to the end of time with the sublime 
attitude of Paris in the face of the Vandal invaders, especially 
when it learns that the very shoes we stand in are made of 
card-board. In vain we complain. The contractor for shoes 
is a stanch Kepublican, and jobs by right divine. May I 
ask if you have dined yet ?" 

" Heavens I . no ; it is too early. But I am excessively 
hungry. I had only a quarter of jugged cat for breakfast, 
and the brute was tough. In reply to your question, may I 
put another. Did you lay in plenty of stores?" 

"Stores ?. no ; I am a bachelor, and rely on the stores of 
my married friends." 

" Poor De Br6ze ! I sympathize with you, for I am in the 
same boat, and dinner mvitations have become monstrous 
rare." 

" Oh, but you are so confoundedly rich ! What to you 
are forty francs for a rabbit, or eighty francs for a turkey?" 

" Well, I suppose I am rich, but I have no money, and the 
ungrateful restaurants will not give me credit. They don't 
believe in better days." 

" How can j/ou want money ?" . 

" Very naturally. I had invested my capital famously . 
the best speculations . partly in house rents, partly in com- 
pany shares ; and houses pay no rents, and nobody will buy 
company shares. I had 1000 napoleons on hand, it is true, 
when Duplessis left Paris . much more, I thought, than I 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 225 

conld possibly need, for I never believed in the siege. But 
during the first few weeks I played at whist with bad luck, 
and since then so many old friends hav borrowed of me that 
I doubt if I have 200 francs left. I have dispatched four let- 
ters to Duplessis by pigeon and balloon, entreating him to 
send me 25,000 francs by some trusty fellow who will pierce 
the Prussian lines. I have had two answers . first, that he 
will find a man; second, that the man is found and on his 
way. Trust to that man, my dear friend, and meanwhile 
lend me 200 francs." 

^^Mon q/icr, d&8ol& io refuse; but I was about to ask you 
to share your 200 francs with me who live chiefly by my 
pen; and that resource is cut off. SiiWy ilfaut vivrer-one 
must dine." . 

" That is a fact, arid we will dine together to-day at my 
expense, limited liability, though . eight francs a head." - 

" Generous monsieur, I accept. Meanwhile let us take a 
turn toward the Madeleine."- 

The two Parisians quit the caf^^ and proceed up the Boule- 
vard. On their way they encounter Savarin. 

" Why," said De Brez6, " I thought you had left Paris with 
madame." 

" So I did, and deposited her safely with the Morleys at 
Boulogne. Those kind Americans were going to England, 
and they took her with. them. But I quit Paris 1 . ^I ! No : I 
am old; I am growing obese. I have always been short- 
sighted. I can neither wield a sword nor handle .a musket. 
But Paris needs defenders; and every moment I was away 
from her I sighed to myself, ^Bfaut Ure MP I returned be- 
fore the Vandals had possessed themselves of our railways, 
the convoi overcrowded with men like myself, who had re- 
moved thefr wives and families; and when we asked each 
other. why we went back, every answer was the same: ^11 
faut Ure Id P . ^No, poor child, no. I have nothing to give 
you." 

These last words were addressed to a woman, young and 
handsome, with a dress that a few weeks ago might have 
been admired for taste and elegance by the lady leaders of 
the ton^ but was now darned and dirty and draggled. 

" Monsieur, I did not stop you to ask for alms. You do 
not seem to remember me, M. Sai^arin." 



 



 



226 THB PABISIANS. 

^^Bat I do/' said Lemercier; "surely I address Mademoi* 
sella Jalie Oaumartin ?" 

" Ah, excuse me, le petit Fi-ederic," said Julie, with a sickly 
attempt at coquettish sprightliness ; " I had no eyes except 
for AL Savarin." 

" And why only for me, my poor child ?" asked the kind- 
hearted author. 

" Hush 1" She drew him aside. " Because you can give 
me news of that monster Gustave. It is not true, it can not 
be true, that he is going to be married ?" 

"Nay, surely, mademoiselle, all coaneotion be|ween you 
and young Rameau has ceased for months. ceased from the 
date of that illness in July which nearly carried him off." 

"I resigned him to the care #f his mother," said the girl; 
" but when he no longer needs a mother, he belongs to me. 
Oh, consider, M. Savarin, for his sake I refused the most 
splendid offers ! When he sought me, I had my cottpi opera- 
box, my cackemireSy my jewels. The Russians. ithe English 
. vied for my smiles. But I loved the man. I never loved 
before ; I shall never love again ; and after the sacrifices I 
have made for him, nothing shall induce me to give him up. 
Tell me, I entreat,* my dear M. Savarin, where he is hiding. 
He has left the parental roof, and they refused there to give 
me his address." 

" My poor girl, don't be micharUe. It is quite true that 
Gustave Rameau is engaged to be married ; and any attempt 
of yours to create scandal . " 

" Monsieur," interrupted Julie, vehemently, " don't talk to 
me about scandal ! The man is mine, and no one else shall 
have him. His address ?" 

" Mademoiselle," cried Savarin, angrily, " find it out for 
yourself." Then, repentant of rudeness to one so young and 
desolate, he added, in mild expostulatory accents, " Coitie, 
come, md belle enfant^ be reasonable ; Gustave is no loss. He 
is reduced to poverty." 

" So much the better. When he was well off, I never cost 
him more than a supper At the Maison Dor&e; and if he is 
poor, he shall marry me, and I will support him !" 

"You!. and how?" 

" By my profession when peace comes ; and meanwhile I 
have offers from a caf^ to^ recite warlike songs. Ah ! you 



 



 



TUB PARISIANS. 227 

shake your head incredulously. The ballet-dancer recite 
verses ? Yes ! Jie taught me to recite his own Soyez bonpour 
moi. M. Savarin, do<*ay where I can find mon homme.'^'^ 

"No." 

" That is your last word ?" 

"It is." 

The girl drew her thin shawl round her and hurried 
off. Savarin rejoined his friends. " Is that the way you 
console yourself for the absence of madame?" asked De Br6z^, 
dryly. 

"Fie!" cried Savarin, indignantly; "such bad jokes are 
ill-timed. What strange mixtures of good and bad, of noble 
and base, every stratum of Paris life contains ! There is that 
poor girl, in one way contemptible, no doubt, and yet in an- 
other way she has an element of grandeur. On the whole, at 
Paris, the women, with all their faults, are of finer mould 
than the men." 

"French gallantry has always admitted that truth," said 
Lemercier. " Fox, Fox, Fox !" Uttering this cry, he darted 
forward after the dog, who had strayed a few yards to salute 
another dog led by a string, and caught the animal in his 
arms. " Pardon me," he exclaimed, returning to his friends, 
" but there are so many snares fo dogs at present. They 
are just coming into fashion for roasts, and Fox is so plump." 

" I thought," said Savarin, " that it was resolved at all the 
sporting clubs that, be the pinch of famine .ever so keen, the 
friend of man should not be eaten." 

" That was while, the beef lasted ; but since we have to 
come to cats, who shall predict immunity to dogs? Q^id 
intactum nefaati liquimus? Nothing is sacred from the hand 
of rapine." 

The church of the Madeleine now stood before them. Mob- 
lots were playing pttch-and-toss on its steps. 

"I don't wish ypu to accompany, me/ messieurs," said 
Lemercier, apologetically, "but I am going to enter the 
church." 

" To pray ?" asked De Brez6, in profound astonishment. 

"Not exactly; but I want to speak to my friend Roche- 
briant, and I know I shall find him there." 

" Praying ?" again asked De 3r6z4 

"Yes." 



 



 



828 THS PABISIAirS. 

"That ifl curious . a young Parisian exquisite at prayer . 
that is worth seeing. Let us enter too, Savarin.^' 

They enter the church. It is filled, and even the skeptical 
De Brez6 is impressed and awed by the sight. An intense 
fervor pervades the congregation. The majority, it is true, 
are women, manyof them in deep mourning, and many of 
theiv faces mourning deeper than the. dress. Everywhere 
may be seen gushing tears, and everywhere faintly heard the 
sound of stifled sighs. Besides the women were men of all 
ages . young, middle-aged, old, with heads bowed aild hands 
elasped, pale, grave, and earnest. Most of them were evi- 
dently of a superior grade in life . nobles, and the higher 
bourgeoisie : few of the ouvrier class, very few, and these were 
of an earlier generation. I except soldiers, of whom there 
were many, from the provincial Mobiles, chiefly Bretons : you 
knew the Breton soldiers by the little cross worn on their 
k&pis. 

Among them Lemercier at once distinguished the noble 
countenance of Alain de Rochebriant. De Br6z6 and Sava- 
rin looked at each other with solemn eyes. I know not when 
either had last been within a church; perhaps both were 
startled to find that religion still existed in Paris . ^and large- 
ly exist it does, though little seen on the surface of society, 
littl to be estimated by the articles of journals aud the re- 
port of foreigners. Unhappily, those among whom it exists 
are not the ruling class . are of the classes that are dom- 
inated over and obscured in every country the moment the 
populace becomes master. And at that moment the jour- 
nals chiefly read were warring- more against the Deity than 
the Prussians . were denouncing soldiers who attended mass. 
" The Gospel cerfainly makes a bad soldier," writes the pa- 
triot Pyat. 

Lemercier knelt down quietly. The ether two men crept 
noiselessly out, and stood waiting for hint on the steps, 
watching the Mobhts (Parisian Moblots) at play. 

" I should, not wait for the roturier if he had not promised 
me a rotiy'^ said the Yicomte de Br6z6, with a pitiful attempt 
at the patrician wit of the anden regime, 

Savarin shrugged his shoulders. ^^ I am not included in 
the invitation," said he, "^pd therefore free to depart. I 
must go and look up a former confrere who was an enthusiaa- 



 



 



THS PARISIANS. 229 

tic Red Republican, and I fear does not get bo much to eat 
since he has no longer an Emperor to abuse." 

So Savarin went away. A few minutes afterward Lemer- 
cier emerged from the church with Alain. 



CHAPTER XIV. 



" I KNBW I should find you in the Madeleine,** said Lemer- 
cier, " and I wished much to know when you had news from 
Duplessis. He and your fa,ir fiancee are, with your aunt, still 
staying at Rochebriant ?" 

"Certainly. A pigeon arrived this momii% with a few 
lines. All well there." . 

" And Duplessis thinks, despite the war, that he shall be 
able, when the time comes, to pay Louvier the mortgage 
sum?" 

" He never doubts that. His credit in London is so good. 
But of course all works of improvement are stopped." . 

" Pray, did he mention me ? . any thing about the messen- 
ger who was to pierce the Prussian lines ?" 

" What ! has the man not arrived? It is two. weeks since 
he left." 

"The Uhlans have no doubt shot him . the assassins . and 
dinink up my 25,000 francs--the thieves." 

" I hope not. But, in case of delay, Duplessis tells mcl 
am to remit to you 2000 francs for your present wants. I 
will send them to you this evening." 

"How the deuce do you possess such a sum?" 

" I came from Brittany with a purse well filled. Of course 
I could have no scruples in accepting money from my des- 
tined father-in-law." 

"And you can spare this sum ?" 

" Certainly. The state now provides for me ; I am in com- 
mand of a Breton company." 

" True. Come and dine with me and De Br6z6." 

" Alas ! I can not. I h^e to see both the Vanderaars be- 
fore I return to the camp for the night. And now . hush . 
come this way," drawing Frederic further from De Br6z6. 
" I have famous news for you. A sortie on a grand scale is 
imminent; in a few days we may hope for it." 



 



 



230 THE PARISIANS. 

*^ I have heard that so often that I am incredulons.'^ 

" Take it as a feet now." 

" What ! Trocha has at last matured his plan ?" 

^' He has changed its original design, which was to cat 
through the Prussian lines to Rouen, occupying there the 
richest country for supplies, guarding the left bank of the 
Seine, and a water-course to convoy them to Paris. The in- 
cidents of war prevented that ; he has a better plan now. 
The victory of the Army of the Loire at Orleans opens a new 
enterprise. We shall cut our way through the Prussians, 
join that army, and with united forces fall on the enemy at 
the rear. Keep this a secret as yet, but rejoice with me that 
we shall prov% to tlie invaders what men who fight for their 
native soil can do under the protection of Heaven." 

" Fox, Fox, mon cheri^" said Lemercier, as he walked to- 
ward the Cafe Biche with De Br6ze, "thou shalt have a/e- 
tin de Balthazar under the protection of Heaven." 



CHAPTER XV. 

On leaving Lemercier and De Br6z6, Savarin regained the 
Boulevard, and pausing every now and then to exchange a 
few words with acquaintances . the acquaintances of the ge- 
nial author were numerous . turned into the quartier Chans- 
s6e d'Antin, and gaining a small neat house, with a richly 
ornamented /apacfo, mounted very clean, well-kept stairs to a 
thif d story. On one of the doors on the landing-place was 
nailed a card, inscribed, " Gustave Rameau, homme de kUrei*^ 
Certainly it is not usual in Paris thus to afficher one's self as 
"a man of letters." But Genius scorns what is usual. Had 
not Victor Hugo left in the hotel books on the Rhine his des- 
ignation, ^^ homme de lettresP^ Did not the heir to one of 
the loftiest houses in the peerage of England, and who was 
also a first-rate amateur in painting, inscribe on his studio, 

when in Italy, , " artiste .^" Such examples, no doubt, 

were familiar to Gustave Rameau, and ^^ homme de lettres^ 
was on the scrap of pasteboard nailed to his door. * 

Savarin rang ; the door opened, and Gstave appeared. 
The poet was, of course, picturesquely attired. In his day of 
fashion he had worn withiu-doors a very pretty fanciful cos- 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 231 

tame, designed after portraits of the young Raphael ; that 
costume he had preserved . he wore it now. It looked very 
threadbare, and the pourpoint very soiled. But the beauty 
of the poet's face had survived the lustre of the garments. 
True, thanks to absinthe, the cheeks had become somewhat 
puffy and bloated. Gray was distinctly visible in the long 
-ebon tresses. But still the 4;)eauty of the face was of that 
rare type which a Thorwaldsen or a Gibson seeking a model 
for a Narcissus would have longed to fix into marble. 

Gustavo received his former chief witti a certain air of re- 
served dignity ; led him into his chamber, only divided by a 
curtain from his accommodation for washing and slumber, 
and pUced him in an arm-chair beside a drowsy fire . fuel 
had akeady become very dear. 

"Gustavo," said Savarin, "are you in a mood favorable to 
a little serious talk ?" 

" Serious talk from M. Savarin is a novelty too great not to 
command my profouudest interest." 

"Thank you . and to begin: I who know the world and 
mankind advise you, who do not, never to meet a man who 
wishes to do you a kindness with an ungracious sarcasm. 
Iit>ny is a weapon I ought to be skilled in, but weapons are 
used against enemies, and it is only a tyro who flourishes his 
rapier in the face of his friends." 

" I was not aware that M. Savarin still permitted me to re- 
gard him as a friend." 

"Because I discharged the duties of friend . remonstrated, 
advised, and warned. However, let by-gones be by-gones. 
I entreated you not to quit the safe shelter of the paternal 
roof. You insisted on doing so. I entreated you not to 
send to one of the most ferocious of the Red, or, rather, the 
CommuAistic, journals articles very eloquent, no doubt, but 
which would most seriously injure you in the eyes of quiet, 
orderly people, and compromise your future literary career, 
for the sake of a temporary flash in the pan during a very 
evanescent period of revplutionary excitement. You scorned 
my adjurations, but at all events you had the grace not to 
append your true name to those truculent effusions. In lit- 
erature, if literature revive in France, we two are henceforth 
separated. But I do not forego the friendly interest I took 
in you in the days when you were so continually in my house. 

 VjOOQIC 



232 THB PABISIANS. 

My wife, who liked you so cordially, implored me to look 
after you during her absence from Paris, and, enfin^ mon 
pauvre garpon^ it would grieve me very much if, when she 
comes back, I had to say to her, * Gustave Rameau has thrown 
away the chance of redemption and of happiness which you 
deemed was secure to him.' A Peeil mcdade^ la lumi^e nuit.^* 

So saying, he held out his hand kindly. 

Gustave, who was far from deficient in affectionate or ten- 
der impulsefe, took the hand respectfully, and pressed it 
warmly. 

" Forgive me if I have been ungracious, M. Savarin, and 
vouchsafe to hear my explanation." 

" Willingly, mon garpon.'^^ 

" When I became convalescent, well enough to leave my 
father's house, there were circumstances which compelled me 
to do so. A young man accustomed to the life of a garpon 
can't be always tied to his mother's apron-strings." 

" Especially if the apron-pocket does not contain a bottle 
of absinthe," said Savarin, dryly. " You may well color and 
try to look angry ; but I know that the doctor strictly for- 
bade the use of that deadly liqueur^ and enjoined your mother 
to keep strict watch on your liability to its temptations. 
And hence one cause of your ennui under the paternal roof. 
But if there you could not imbibe absinthe, you were privi- 
leged to enjoy a much diviner intoxication. There you 
could have the foretaste of domestic bliss . the society of the 
girl you loved, and who was pledged to become your wife. 
Speak frankly. Did not that society itself begin to be wear- 
isome ?" 

"No," cried Gustave, eagerly, "it was not wearisome, 
but." 

" Yes, but. " 

"But it could not be all-sufficing to a soul of fire like 
mine." 

" Hem !" murmured Savarin . " a soul of fire ! This is very 
interesting ; pray go on." 

"The calm, cold, sister- like affection of a childish, unde- 
veloped nature, which knew no passion except for art, and 
was really so little emancipated from the nursery as to take 
for serious truth all the old myths of religion . such com- 
panionship may be very soothing and pleasant when one is 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 233 

lying on one's sofa, and must live by rule ; but when one re- 
gains the vigor of youth and health . ^" 

"Do not. pause," said Savaiin, gazing with more compas- 
sion than envy on that melancholy impersonation of youth 
and health. " When one regains that vigor of which I my- 
self have no recollection, what happens ?" * 

" The thirst for excitement, the goads of ambition, the ir- 
resistible claims which the world urges upon genius, return." 

*" And that genius, finding itself at the north pole amiA 
Cimmerian darkness in the atmosphere of a childish intellect 
. in other words, the society of a pure-minded virgin, who, 
though a good romance-writer, writes nothing but what a 
virgin may read, and, though a bel esprit^ says her prayers 
and goes to church . then genius . well, pardon my ignorance 
. what does genius do ?" 

" Oh, M. Savarin, M. Savarin ! don't let us talk any more. 
There is no sympathy between us. I can not bear that blood- 
less, mpcking, cynical mode of dealing with grand emotions 
which belongs to the generation of the Doctrinaires. I am 
not a Thiers or a Guizot." 

"Good heavens! who ever accused you of being either? 
I did not mean to be cynical. Mademoiselle Cicogna has 
often said I am, but I did not think you would. Pardon me. 
I quite agree with the philosopher who asserted that the 
wisdom of the past was an imposture, that the meanest intel- 
lect now living is wiser than the greatest intellect which is 
burie*d in P^re la Chaise ; because the dwarf who follows the 
giant, when perched on the shoulders of the giant, sees farther 
than the giant ever could. AUez. I go in for your genera- 
tion. I abandon Guizot and Thiers. Do condescend and 
explain to my dull understanding, as the inferior mortal of a 
former age, what are the grand emotions which impel a soul 
of fire in your wiser generation. The thirst of excitement . 
what excitement ? The goads of ambition . what ambition ?" 

"A new social system is struggling from the dissolving 
elements of the old one, as, in the fables of priestcraft, the 
soul frees itself from the body which has become ripe for the 
grave. Of that new system I aspire to be a champion . a 
leader. Behold the excitement that allures me, the ambition 
that .c:oad8 1" 

" Thank yon," said Savarin, meekly ; " I am answered. I 

II.. 11 

 VjOOQIC 



234 THE PAEISIANS. 

recognize the dwarf perched on the back of the giant. Quit- 
ting these lofty themes, I venture to address to you now one 
simple matter-of-fact question . ^How about Mademoiselle Ci- 
cogna ? Do you think you can induce her to transplant her- 
self to the new social system, which I presume will abolish, 
among other obsolete myths, the institution of marriage ?^ 

" M. Savarin, your question offends me. Theoretically I am 
opposed to the existing superstitions that encumber the very 
simple principle by which may be united two persons so long 
as they desire the union, and separated so soon as the union 
becomes distasteful to either. But I am perfectly aware 
that such theories would revolt a young lady like Mademoi- 
selle Cicogna. I have never even named them to her, and 
our engagement holds good." 

" Engagement of marriage ? No period for the ceremony 
fixed?" 

" That is not my fault. I urged it on Isaura with all ear- 
nestness before I left my father's house." 

" That was long after the siege had begun. Listen to me, 
Gustave. No persuasion of mine, or my wife's, or Mrs. Mor- 
ley's, could induce Isaura to quit Paris while it was yet tima 
She said, very simply, that, having pledged her trQth and 
hand to you, it would be treason to honor and duty if she 
should allow any considerations for herself to be even dis- 
cussed so long as you needed her presence. You were then 
still suffering, and, though convalescent, not without danger 
of a relapse. And your mother said to her . I heafd the 
words . "Tis not for his bodily health I could dare to ask 
you to stay, when every man who can afford it is sending 
away his wife, sisters, daughters. As for that, I should suffice 
to tend him ; but if you go, I resign all hope for the health 
of his mind and his soul.' I think at Paris there may be fe- 
male poets and artists whom that sort of argument would 
not have much influenced. But it so happens that Isaura is 
not a J^isienne, She believes in those old myths which 
you think fatal to sympathies with yourself; and those old 
myths also lead her to believe that where a woman has prom- 
ised she will devote her life to a man, she can not forsake 
him when told by his mother that she is necessary to the 
health of his mind and his soul. Stay. Before you inter- 
rupt me let me finish what I have to say. It appears that. 



 



 



THE PARISIANS, 235 

SO soon as your bodily health was improved, you felt that 
your mind and your soul could take care of themselves ; and 
certainly it seems to me that Isaura Cicogna is no longer of 
the smallest use to either.'' 

Rameau was evidently much disconcerted by this speech. 
He saw what Savarin was driving at . ^the renunciation of all 
bond between Isaura and himself. He was not prepared for 
such renunciation. He still felt for the Italian as much of 
love as he could feel for any woman who did not kneel at his 
feet, as at those of Apollo condescending to the homage of 
Arcadian maids. But, on the one hand, he felt that many 
circumstances had occurred since the disaster at Sedan to 
render Isaura a very much less desirable partie than she had 
been when he had first wrung from her the pledge of be- 
trothal. In the palmy times of a government in which lit- 
erature and art commanded station and insured fortune, Isau- 
ra, whether as authoress or singer, was a brilliant marriage 
for Gustave Kameau. She had also then an assured and 
competent, if modest, income. But when times change, peo- 
ple change with them. As the income for the moment (and 
Heaven only can say how long that moment might last), 
Isaura's income had disappeared. It will be recollected that 
Louvier had invested her whole fortune in the houses to be 
built in the street called after his name. No houses, even 
when built, paid any rent now. Louvier had quitted Paris, 
and Isaura could only be subsisting upon such small sum she 
might have had in hand before the siege commenced. All 
career in such literature and ai-t as Isaura adorned was at a 
dead stop. Now, to do Kameau justice, be was by no means 
an avaricious or mercenary man. But he yearned for modes 
of life to which money was essential. He liked his " com- 
forts ;" and his comforts included the luxuries of elegance 
and show . comforts not to be attained by marriage with 
Isaura under existing circumstances. 

Nevertheless it is quite true that he had urged her to 
marry him at once before he had quitted his father's house;, 
and her modest shrinking from such proposal, however excel- 
lent the reasons for delay in the national calamities of the 
time, as well as the poverty which the calamity threatened, 
had greatly wounded his amour propre. He had always 
felt that her affection for him was not love ; and though he 



 



 



236 THS PABISIANS. 

could reconcile himself to that conviction when many solid 
advantages were attached to the prize of her love, and when 
he was ill and penitent and maudlin, and the calm affection 
of a saint seemed to him infinitely preferable to the vehement 
passion of a sinner . yet when Isaura was only Isaura by her- 
self. Isaura minua all the et ccetera which had previously 
been taken into account . the want of adoration for himself 
very much lessened her value. 

Still, though he acquiesced in the delayed fulfillment of the 
engagement with Isaura, he had no thought of withdrawing 
from the engagement itself, and after a slight pause he re- 
plied: "You do me great injustice if you suppose that the 
occupations to which I devote myself render nie less sensible 
to the merits of Mademoiselle Cicogna, or less eager for our 
union. On the contrary, I will confide to you . as a man of 
the world . one main reason why I quitted my father's house, 
and why I desire to keep my present address a secret. Ma- 
demoiselle Caumartin conceived for me a passion . a caprice 
. which was very flattering for a time, but which latterly 
became very troublesome. Figure to yourself . she daily 
came to our house while I was lying ill, and with the great- 
est difficulty my mother got her out of it. That was not all. 
She pestered me with letters containing all sorts of threats . 
nay, actually kept watch at the house ; and one day when I 
entered the carriage with my mother and Signora Venosta for 
a drive in the Bois (meaning to call for Isaui*a by the way), 
she darted to the carnage door, caught my hand, and would 
have made a scene if the coachman had given her leave to 
do so. Luckily he had the tact to whip on his horses, and 
we escaped. I had some little difficulty in convincing the 
Signora Venosta that the girl was crazed. But I felt the 
danger I incurred of her coming upon me some moment when 
in company with Isaura, and so I left my father's house ; and 
naturally wishing to steer clear of this vehement little demon 
till I am safely married, I keep my address a secret from all 
who are likely to tell her of it." 

"You do wisely if you are really afraid of her, and can not 
trust your nerves to say to her plainly, * I am engaged to be 
married; all is at aa end between us. Do not force me to 
employ the police ta protect myself from unwelcome impor- 
tunities.' " 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 237 

" Honestly speaking, I doubt if I have the nerve to do 
that, and I doubt still more if it would be of any avail. It is 
very ennuyant to be so passionately loved; but, que voulez 
vous? It is my fate." 

" Poor martyr ! I condole with you 5 and, to say truth, it 
was chiefly to warn you X)f Mademoiselle Caumartin's per- 
tinacity that I called this evening." 

Here Savarin i*elated the particulars of his rencontre with 
Julie, and concluded by saying: "I suppose I must take 
your word of honor that you will firmly resist all temptation 
to renew a connection which would be so incompatible with 
the respect due to your^ne^ ^ Fatherless and protector- 
less as Isaura is, I feel bound to act as a virtual guardian to 
one in whom my wife takes so deep an interest, and to whom, 
as she thinks, she had some hand in bringing about your 
engagement : she is committed to no small responsibilities. 
Do not allow poor Julie, whom I sincerely pity, to force on 
me the unpleasant duty of warning jourjlancie of the dan- 
gers to which she might be subjected by marriage with an 
Adonis whose fate it is to be so profoundly beloved by the 
sex in general, and ballet nymphs in particular." 

"There is no chance of so disagreeable a duty being in- 
cumbent on you, M. Savarin. Of course, what I myself have 
told you in confidence is sacred." 

" Certainly. There are things in the life of a garden be- 
fore marriage which would be an affront to the modesty of 
his fianc&e to communicate and discus& But then those 
things must belong exclusively to the past, and cast no shad- 
ow over the future. I will not interrupt you further. No 
doubt you have work for the night before you. Do the Red 
journalists for whom you write pay enough to support you 
in these terribly dear times ?" 

** Scarcely. But I look forward to wealth and fame in the 
future. And you ?" 

"I just escape starvation. If the siege last much longer, 
it is not of the gout I shall dia Good-night to you." 



 



 



238 XHS FABISIANS. 



CHAPTER. XVI. 

IsAUBA had, as we have Been, been hitherto saved by the 
siege and its consequences from the fulfillment of her engage- 
ment to Gustavo Rameau ; and since he had quitted his fa- 
ther's house she had not only seen less of him, but a cei*tain 
chill crept into his converse in the visits he paid to her. The 
compassionate feeling his illness had excited, confirmed by 
the unwonted gentleness of his mood, and the shoiirlived re- 
morse with which he spoke of his past faults and follies, neo- 
essarily faded away in proportion as he regained that kind 
of febrile strength which was his normal state of health, and 
with it the arrogant self-assertion which was ingrained in 
his character. But it was now more than ever that she be- 
came aware of the antagonism between all that constituted 
his inner life and her own. It was not that he volunteered 
in her pi*esence the express utterance of those opinions, social 
or religious, which he addressed to the public in the truculent 
journal to which, under a nom deplume^ he was the most in- 
flammatory contributor. Whether it was that he shrank 
from insulting the ears of the pure virgin whom he had 
wooed as wife with avowals of his disdain of marriage bonds, 
or perhaps from shocking yet more her womanly humanity 
and her religious faith by cries for the blood of anti-Repub- 
lican traitors and the downfall of Christian altars; or whether 
he yet clung, though with relapsing affection, to the hold 
which her promise had imposed on him, and felt that that 
hold would be forever gone, and that she would recoil from 
his side in terror and dismay, if she once learned that the 
man who had implored her to be his saving angel from the 
comparatively mild errors of youth had so belied his assur- 
ance, so mocked her credulity, as deliberately to enter into 
active wai*fare against all that he knew her sentiments re- 
garded as noble and her conscience received as divine . de- 
spite the suppression of avowed doctrine on his part, the total 
want of sympathy between these antagonistic natures made 
itself felt by both . more promptly felt by Isaura. If Gns- 



 



 



t[b pabisians. 239 

tave did not frankly announce to her in that terrible time 
(when all that a little later broke out on the side of the Com- 
munists was more or less forcing ominous way to the lips of 
those who talked with confidence to each other, whether to 
approve or to condemn) the associates with whom he was 
leagued, the path to which he had committed his career . still 
for her instincts for genuine Art . which for its develop- 
ment needs the serenity of peace, which for its ideal needs 
dreams that soar into the Infinite. Gustave had only the 
scornful sneer of the man who identifies with his ambition 
the violent upset of all that civilization has established in 
this world, and the blank negation of all that patient hope 
and heroic aspiration which humanity carries on into the 
next. 

On his side Gustave Rameau, who was not without certain 
fine and delicate attributes in a complicated nature over 
which the personal vanity and the mobile temperament of 
the Parisian reigned supreme, chafed at the restraints imposed 
on him. No matter what a man's doctrines may be . how- 
ever abominable you and I may deem them . man desires to 
find in the dearest fellowship he can establish that sympathy 
in the woman his choice singles out from her sex . deference 
to his opinions, sympathy with his objects, as man. So, too, 
Gustave's sense of honor . and according to his own Paiisian 
code that sense was keen . ^became exquisitely stung by the 
thought that he was compelled to play the part of a mean * ^ 
dissimulator to the girl for whose opinions he had the pro- 
foundest contempt. How could these two, betrothed to each 
other, not feel, though without coming to open dissension, 
that between them had flowed the inlet of water by which 
they had been riven asunder? What man, if he can imagine 
himself a Gustave Hameau, can blame the revolutionist, ab- 
sorbed in ambitious projects for turning the pyramid of so- 
ciety topsy-turvy, if he shrank more and more from the com- 
panionship of a betrothed with whom he could not venture 
to exchange three words without caution and reserve ? And 
what woman can blame an Isaura if she felt a sensation of 
relief at the very neglect of the affianced whom she had com- 
passionated an^could never love ? 

Possibly the reader may best judge of the state of Isaura's 
mind at this time by a few brief extracts from an imperfect 



 



 



240 THB PARISIANS. 

fragmentary journal, in which, amid saddened and lonely 
hours, she held converse with herself. 

" One day, at Enghien, I listened silently to a conversation 
between M. Savarin and the Englishman, who sought to ex- 
plain the conception of duty in which the German poet has 
given such noble utterance to the thoughts of the German 
philosopher . viz., that moral aspiration has the same goal 
as the artistic . the attainment to the calm delight wherein 
the pain of effort disappears in the content of achievement. 
Thus in life, as in art, it is through discipline that we arrive 
at freedom, and duty only completes itself when all motives, 
all actions, are attuned into one harmonious whole, and it is 
not striven for as duty, but enjoyed as happiness. M. Savarin 
treated this theory with the mockery with which the French 
wit is ever apt to treat what it terms German mysticism. 
According to him, duty must always be a hard and difficult 
struggle ; and he said, laughingly, ^ Whenever a man says, 
*' I have done my duty," it is with a long face and a mourn- 
ful sigh.' 

"Ah, how devoutly I listened to the Englishman ! how 
harshly the Frenchman's irony jarred upon my ears ! And 
yet now, in the duty that life imposes on me, to fulfill which 
I strain every power vouchsafed to my nature, and seek to 
crush down every impulse that rebels, where is the promised 
calm, where any approach to the content of achievement ? 
Contemplating the way before me, the Beautiful even of Art 
has vanished. I see but cloud and desert. Can this which 
I assume to be duty really be so? Ah, is it not sin even to 
ask my heart that question ? 

. ....... 

" Madame Rameau is very angry with her son for his neg- 
lect both of his parents and of me. I have had to take his 
part against her. I would not have him lose their love. 
Poor Gustave ! But when Madame Rameau suddenly said 
to-day, * I erred in seeking the union between thee and Gus- 
tave. Retract thy promise ; in doing so thou wilt be justi- 
fied ' . oh, the strange joy that flashed upon me as she spoke ! 
Am I justified ? Am I ? Oh, if that EngllRiman had never 
crossed my path! Oh, if I had never loved! or if in the last 
time we met he had not asked for my love, and confessed his 



 



Google 



THE PARISIANS. 241 

own! Then, I think, I could honestly reconcile my conscience 
with my longings, and say*to Gu8tavTe,*We do not suit each 
other ; be we both released !' But now . ^is it that Gustave 
is really changed from what he was, when in despondence at 
my own lot, and in pitying belief that I might^brighten and 
exalt his, I plighted my troth to him? or is it not rather that 
the choice I thus voluntarily ^lade became so intolerable a 
thought the moment I knew I was beloved and sought by 
another, and from that moment I lost the strength I had be- 
fore . strength to silence the voice at my own heart? What ! 
is it the image of that other one which is persuading me to 
be false . to exaggerate the failings, to be blind to the mer- 
its, of him who has a right to say, * I am what I was when 
thou didst pledge thyself to take me for better or for worse?' 
He * ^fi . m m m m m 

" Gustave has been here after an absence of several days. 
He was not alone. The good Abbe Vertpre and Madame de 
Vandemar, with her son, M. Raoul, were pi'esent. They had 
come on matters connected with our ambulance. They do 
not know of my engagement to Gustave ; and seeing him in 
the uniform of a National Guard, the Abb6 courteously ad- 
dressed to him some questions as to the possibility of check- 
ing the terrible increase of the vice of intoxication, so alien 
till of late to the habits of the Parisians, and becoming fatal 
to discipline and bodily endurance . could the number of the 
carUinea on the ramparts be more limited? Gustave an- 
swered, with rudeness and bitter sarcasm, * Before priests 
could be critics in military matters they must undertake mil- 
itary service themselves.' 

** The Abb^ replied, with unalterable good humor, * But in 
order to criticise the effects of drunkenness, must one get 
drunk one's self?* Gustave was put out, and retired into a 
comer of the room, keeping sullen silence till my other visit- 
ors left. 

" Then, before I could myself express the pain his words 
and manner had given me, he said, abruptly, * I wonder how 
you can tolerate the tartuferie which may amuse on the comic 
stage, but in the tragedy of these times is revolting.' This 
speech roused my anger, and the conversation that ensued 
was the gravest that had ever passed between us. 

"If Gustave were of stronger nature and more concen- 



 



 



242 THE PABIBIANS. 

trated will, I believe that the only feelings I should have for 
him would be antipathy and drea*d. But it is his very weak- 
nesses and inconsistencies that secure to him a certain tender- 
ness of interest. I think he could never be judged without 
great indulgence by women ; there is in him so much of the 
child . wayward, irritating at one moment, and the next pen- 
itent, affectionate. One feels as if persistence in evil were 
impossible to one so delicate both in mind and form. That 
peculiar order of genius to which he belongs seems as if it 
ought to be so estranged from all directions violent or coarse. 
When in poetry he seeks to utter some audacious and defy- 
ing sentiment, the substance melts away in daintiness of ex- 
pression, in soft, lute-like strains of slender music. And when 
he has stung, angered, revolted my heart the most, suddenly he 
subsides into such pathetic gentleness, such tearful remorse, 
that I feel as if resentment to one so helpless, desertion of 
one who must fall without the support of a friendly hand, 
were a selfish cruelty. It seems to me agfif I were dragged 
toward a precipice by a sickly child clinging to my robe. 
/ ^'But in this last convei*sation with him his language in 
j regard to subjects I hold most sacred drew forth from me 
;' words which staitled him, and which maj/ avail to save him 
from that worst insanity of human minds . the mimicry of 
the Titans who would have dethroned a God to restore a 
Chaos. I told him frankly that I had only promised to share 
his fate on my faith in his assurance of my power to guide 
it heavenward, and that if the opinions he announced were 
seriously entertained, and put forth in defiance of heaven it- 
self, we were separated forever. I told him how earnestly, 
in the calamities of the time, my own soul had sought to take 
refuge in thoughts and hopes beyond the earth, and how 
deeply many a sentiment that in former days passed by me 
with a smile in the light talk of the salons now shocked me 
as an outrage on 'the reverence which the mortal child owes 
to the Divine Father. I owned to him how much of comfort, 
of sustainment, of thought and aspiration, elevated beyond 
the sphere of Art in which I had hitheito sought the purest 
air, the loftiest goal, I owed to intercourse with minds like 
that of the Abbi de Vertpr6, and how painfully I felt, as if 
. I were guilty of ingratitude, when he compelled me to listen 
to insults on those whom I recognized as benefactors. 



 



 



THS PABISIANS. 243 

" I wished to speak sternly ; but it is my great misfortune, 
my prevalent weakness, that I can not be stem when I ought 
to be. It is with me in life as in art. I never could on the 
stage have taken the part of a Norma or a Medea. If I at- 
tempt in fiction a character which deserves condemnation, I 
am untrue to poetic justice. I can not condemn and ex- 
ecute ; I can but compassionate and pardon the creature I 
myself have created. I was never in the real world stern 
but to one ; and then, alas 1 it was because I loved where I 
could no longer love with honor, and I, knowing my weak- 
ness, had terror lest I should yield. 

" So Gustave did not comprehend from my voice, my man- 
ner, how gravely I was in earnest. But, himself softened, 
affected to tears, he confessed his own faults . ceased to 
argue in order to praise ; and . and . uttering protestations 
seemingly the most sincere, he left me bound to him still . 
bound to him still. Woe is me !" 

It is true that Isaura had come more directly under the 
influence of religion than she had been in the earlier dates 
of this narrative. There is a time in the lives of most of us, 
and especially in the lives of women, when, despondent of all 
joy in an earthly future, and tortured by conflicts between 
inclination and duty, we transfer all the passion and fervor 
of our troubled souls to enthusiastic yearnings for the Divine 
Love . seeking to rebaptize ourselves in the fountain of its 
mercy, taking thence the only hopes that can cheer, the only 
strength that can sustain us. Such a time had come to Isaura. 
Formerly she had escaped from the griefs of the work-day 
world into the garden-land of Art. Now Art had grown un- 
welcome to her, almost hateftil. Gone was the spell from the 
garden-land ; its flowers were faded, its paths were stony, its 
sunshine had vanished in mist and rain. There are two voices 
of Nature in the soul of the genuine artist . that is, of him 
who, because he can create, comprehends the necessity of the 
great Creator. Those voices are never both silent. When 
one is hushed, the other becomes distinctly audible. The one 
speaks to him of Art, the other of Religion. 

At that period several societies for the relief and tendance 
of the wounded had been formed by the women of Paris . ^the 
earliest, if I mistake not, by ladies of the highest rank . among 



 



 



244 THS PABISIAN& 

whom were the Comtesse de Vandemar and the Contessa di 
Biiuini . thoagh it necessarily included others of station less 
elevated. To this society, at the request of Alain de Roche- 
briant and of Enguerrand, Isaura had eagerly attached her^ 
sell It occupied much of her time ; and in connection with 
it she was brought muah into sympathetic acquaintance with 
Raoul de Vandemar, the most zealous and active member 
of that society of St. Fran9ois de Sales, to which belonged 
other young nobles of the Legitimist creed. The passion of 
Raoul's life was the relief of human suffering. In him was 
personified the ideal of Christian charity. I think all, or 
most of us, have known what it is to pass under the in- 
fluence of a nature that is so &r akin to ours that it desires 
to become something better and higher than it is . that de- 
sire being paramount in ourselves . ^but seeks to be that some- 
thing in ways not akin to, but remote from, the ways in which 
we seek it. When this contact happens, either one nature, by 
the mere force of will, subjugates and absorbs the other, or 
both, while preserving their own individuality, apart and in- 
dependent, enrich themselves by mutual interchange ; and 
the asperities which differences of taste and sentiment in de- 
tail might otherwise provoke melt in the sympathy which 
unites spirits striving with equal earnestness to rise nearer 
to the unseen and unattainable Source, which they equally 
recognize as divine. 

Perhaps, had these two persons met a year ago in the or- 
dinary intercourse of the world, neither would have detected 
the sympathy of which I speak. Raoul was not without the 
prejudice against artists and writers of romance that are 
shared by many who cherish the persuasion that all is vanity 
which does not concentrate imagination and intellect in the 
destinies of the soul hereafter, and Isaura might have excited 
his compassion, certainly not his reverence; while to her his 
views on all that seeks to render the actual life attractive 
and embellished, through the accomplishments of Muse and 
Grace, would have seemed the narrow-minded asceticism of 
a bigot. But now, amid the direful calamities of the time, 
the beauty of both natures became visible to each. To the 
eyes of Isaura tenderness became predominant in the monas- 
tic self-denial of Raoul. To the eyes of Raoul devotion be- 
came predominant in the gentle . thoughtfulness of Isaura. 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 245 

Their intercourse was in ambulance and hospital . in care 
for the wounded, in prayer for the dying. Ah ! it is easy to 
declaim against the frivolities and vices of Paiisian society 
as it appeara on the surface ; and in revolutionary times it 
is the very worst of Paris that ascends in scum to the top. 
But descend below the surface, even in that demoralizing 
suspense of order, and nowhere on eai*th might the angel 
have beheld the image of humanity more amply vindicating 
its claim to the heritage of heaven. 



CHAPTER XVIL 



The warning announcement of some great effort on the 
part of the besieged which Alain had given to Lemeroier was 
soon to be fulfilled. 

For some days the principal thoroughfares were ominously 
lined with military convois. The loungers on the Boulevards 
stopped to gaze on the long defiles of troops and cannon, 
commissariat conveyances, and . saddening accompaniments ! 
. ^the vehicles of various ambulances for the removal of the 
wounded. With what glee the loungers said to each oth- 
er, ^^EnfinP^ Among all the troops that Paris sent forth 
none were so popular as those which Paris had not nurtured 
. the sailors. From the moment they arnved the sailors 
had been the pets of the capital. They soon proved them- 
selves the most notable contrast to that force which Paris 
herself had produced . the National Guard. Their frames 
were hardy, their habits active, their discipline peifect, their 
manners mild and polite. " Oh, if all our troops were like 
these I" was the common exclamation of the Parisians. 

At last burst forth upon Paris the proclamations of Gen- 
eral Trochu and General Ducrot ; the first brief, calm, and 
Breton-like, ending with " Putting our trust in God. March 
on for our country !" the second more detailed, more candid- 
ly stating obstacles and diflloulties, but fiery with eloquent 
enthusiasm, not unsupported by military statistics, in the 400 
cannon, two thirds of which were of the largest calibre, that 
no material object could resist; more than 160,000 soldiers, 
all well armed, well equipped, abundantly provided with mu- 
nitions, and all {J^en ai Peapoir) animated by an irresistible 



 



 



246 THB PARISIANS. 

ardor. ^^ For me,'' concludes the general, '^ I am resolved. I 
swear before you, before the whole nation, that I will not re- 
enter Paris except as dead or victorious." 

At these proclamations who then at Paris does not recall 
the burst of enthusiasm that stirred the surface ? Trochu be- 
came once more popular ; even the Communistic or atheistic 
journals refrained from complaining that he attended mass, 
and invited his countrymen to trust in a God. Ducrot was 
more than popular . ^he was adored. 

The several companies in which De MaulSon and Enguer- 
rand served departed toward their post early on the same 
morning, that of the 28th. All the previous night, while En- 
guerrand was buried in profound slumber, Raoul remained 
in his brother's room; sometimes on his knees before the 
ivory crucifix which had been their mother's last birthday 
gift to her youngest son . sometimes seated beside the bed in 
profound and devout meditation. At daybreak Madame de 
Yandemar stole into the chamber. Unconscious of his broth- 
er's watch, he had asked her to wake him in good time, for 
the young man was a sound sleeper. Shading the candle she 
bore with one hand, with the other she drew aside the cur- 
tain, and looked at Enguerrand's calm, fair face, its lips pair- 
ed in the happy smile which seemed to carry joy with it 
wherever its sunshine played. Her tears fell noiselessly on 
her darling's cheek; she then knelt down and prayed for 
strength. As she rose she felt Raoul's arm around her ; they 
looked at each other in silence ; then she bowed her head, 
and wakened Enguerrand with her lips. ^^Paa de quereSe^ 
mea amiSy'* he murmured, opening his sweet blue eyes drow- 
sily. *' Ah, it was a dream ! I thought Jules and Emile " 
(two young friends of his) " were worrying each other ; and 
you know, dear Raoul, that I am the most officious of peace- 
makers. Time to rise, is it ? No peace-making to-day. Kiss 
me again, mother, and say, ' Bless thee.' " 

" Bless thee, bless thee, my child," cried the mother, wrap- 
ping her arms passionately round him, and in tones choked 
with sobs. 

" Now leave me, maman," said Enguerrand, resorting to 
the infantine ordinary name, which he had not used for years. 
. ** Raoul, stay and help me to dress. I must be tr^ bean 
to-day. . I shall join thee at breakfast, maman. Early for 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 247 

such repast, but Vappetit vient en mangeant. Mind the coffee 
is hot." 

Enguerrand, always careful of each detail of dress, was es- 
pecially so that morning, and especially gay, humming the 
old air, Partant pour la jSyrie. But his gayety was checked 
when Raoul, taking from his breast a holy talisman, which he 
habitually wore there, suspended it with loving hands round 
his brother's neck. It was a small crystal set in IByzantine 
filigree; imbedded in it was a small splinter of wood, said, by 
pious tradition, to be a relic of the Divine Cross. It had been 
for centuries in the family of the Contessa di Rimini, and was 
given by her to Raoul, the only gift she had ever made him, 
as an emblem of the sinless purity of the affection 1hat united 
those two souls in the bonds of the beautiful belief. 

" She bade me transfer it to thee to-day, my brother," said 
Raoul, simply ; " and now without a pang I can gird on thee 
thy soldier's sword." 

Enguerrand clasped his brother in his arms, and kissed 
him with passionate fervor. " Oh, Raoul, how I love thee ! 
how good thou hast ever been to me ! how many sins thou 
hast saved me from I how indulgent thou hast been to those 
from which thou couldst not save ! Think on that, my broth- 
er, in case we do not meet again on earth." 

".Hush, hush, Enguerrand I No gloomy forebodings now ! 
Come. come hither, my half of life . my sunny half of life !" 
And uttenng these words, he led Enguerrand toward the 
crucifix, and there, in deep and more solemn voice, said, " Let 
us pray." So the brothers knelt side by side, and Raoul pray- 
ed aloud as only such souls can pray. 

When they descended into the salon where breakfast was 
set out, they found assembled several of their relations, and 
some of Enguerrand's young friends not engaged in the sortie. 
One or two of the latter, indeed, were disabled from fighting 
by wounds in former fields ; they left their sick-beds to bid 
him good-by. Unspeakable was the affection this genial nat- 
ure inspired in all who came into the circle of its winning 
magic ; and when, tearing himself from them, he descended 
the stair, and passed with light step through the porte co- 
chhre^ there was a crowd around the house . so widely had his 
popularity spread among even the lower classes, from which 
the Mobiles in his regiment were chiefly composed. He de- 



 



 



248 THB PABISIANS. 

}>arted to the place of rendezvous amid a chorus of exhila- 
rating cheers. 

Not thus lovingly tended on, not thus cordially greeted, 
was that equal idol of a former generation, Victor de Mau- 
16on. No pious friend prayed beside his couch, no loving 
kiss waked him irom his slumbers. At the gray of the No- 
vember darwn he rose from a sleep which had no smiling 
dreams, with that mysterious instinct of punctual will which 
can not even go to sleep without fixing befoi*ehand the exact 
moment in which sleep shall end. He, too, like Enguerrand, 
dressed himself with care . unlike Enguerrand, with care 
strictly soldier-like. Then, seeing he had some little time yet 
before him, he rapidly revisited pigeon-holes and drawers, 
in which might be found by prying eyes any thing he would 
deny to their curiosity. All that he found of this sort were 
some letters in female handwriting, tied together with &ded 
ribbon, relics of early days, and treasured throughout later 
vicissitudes : letters from the English girl to whom he had 
briefly referred in his confession to Louvier . the only girl 
he had ever wooed as his wife. She was the only daughter 
of high- bom Roman Catholics, residing at the time of his 
youth in Paris. Reluctantly they had' assented to his propo- 
sals ; joyfully they had retracted their assent when his affairs 
had become so involved ; yet possibly the motive that led 
him to his most ruinous excesses . the gambling of the turf 
. had been caused by the wild hope of a nature, then fatally 
sanguine, to retrieve the fortune that might suffice to satisfy 
the parents. But during his permitted courtship the lovers 
had corresponded. Her letters were full of warm, if inno- 
cent, tenderness . ^till came the last cold farewell The fam- 
ily had long ago returned to England ; he concluded, of 
course, that she had married another. 

Near to these letters lay the papers which had served to 
vindicate his honor in that old affair, in which the unsought 
love of another had brought on him shame and affliction. 
As his eye fell on the last, he muttered to himself: ^ I kept 
t?ie8e to clear my repute. Can I keep thoae^ when, if found, 
they might compromise the repute of her who might have 
been my wife had I been worthy of her? She is doubtless 
now another's ; or, if dead . honor never dies,'' He pressed 
his lips to the letters with a passionate, lingering, mournful 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 249 

kiss ; then raking up the ashes of yesterday's fire, and re- 
kindling them, he placed thereon those leaves of a melan- 
choly romance in his past, and watched them slowly, reluc- 
tantly smoulder away into tinder. Then he opened a draw- 
er in which lay the only paper of a political character which 
he had preserved. All that related to plots or conspiracies, 
in which his agency had committed others it was his habit 
to destroy as soon as received. For the sole document thus 
treasured he alone was responsible ; it was an outline of his 
ideal for the future constitution of France, accompanied with 
elaborate arguments, the .'heads of which his conversation 
with the Incognito made known to the reader. Of the sound- 
ness of this political programme, whatever its merits or faults 
(a question on which I presume no judgment), he had an in- 
tense conviction. He glanced rapidly over its contents, did 
not alter a word, sealed it up in an envelope, inscribed, '^ My 
Legacy to my Countrymen." The papers refuting a calum- 
ny relating solely to himself he carried into the battle-field, 
placed next to his heart . significant of a Frenchman's love 
of honor in this world . as the relic placed round the neck of 
Enguerrand by his pious brother was emblematic of the Chris- 
tian hope of mercy in the next. 



CHAPTER XVin. 



Thb streets swanned with the populace gazing on the 
troops as they passed to their destination. Among those of 
the Mobiles who especially caught the eye were two com- 
panies in which Enguerrand deVandemar and Victor de Mau- 
leon commanded. In the first were many young men of 
good family, or in the higher ranks of the bourgeoisie^ known 
to numerous lookers-on ; there was something inspiriting in 
their gay aspects, and in the easy carelessness of their march. 
Mixed with this company, however, and forming of course 
the bulk of it, were those who belonged to the lower classes 
of the population ; and though they too might seem gay to 
an ordinary observer, the gayety was forced. Many of them 
were evidently not quite sober ; and there was a disorderly 
want of soldiership in their mien and ai'mament which in- 
spired distrust among such vieiix moustaches as, too old for 

Digfzed by Google 



250 THB PABISIANS. 

Other service than that of the ramparts, mixed here and there 
among the crowd. 

Bat when De Maal6on's company passed, the vietix matuh 
taches impalsively touched each other. They recognized the 
march of well-drilled men, the countenances grave and se- 
vere, the eyes not looking on this side and that for admira- 
tion, the step regularly timed, and conspicuous among these 
men the tall stature and calm front of the leader. 

**. These fellows will fight well,'' growled a vieux numstache, 
" Where did they fish out their leader ?" 

" Don't you know ?" said a bamrgeoia, " Victor de Mau- 
16on. He won the cross in Algeria for bravery. I recollect 
him when I was very young ; the very devil for women and 
fighting." 

^^ I wish there were more such devils for fighting and fewer 
for women," growled again le vieux moitstache. 

One incessant roar of cannon all the night of the 29th. 
The populace had learned the names of the French cannons, 
and fancied they could distinguish the several sounds of their 
thunder. "There spits * Josephine!'" shouts an invalid sail- 
or. " There howls our own * Populace I' "* cries a Red Re- 
publican from Belleville. "There sings *Le Chatimentl'" 
laughed Gustave Ramean, who was now become an enthusi- 
astic admirer of the Victor Hugo he had before affected to 
despise. And all the while, mingled with the roar of the 
cannon, came, far and near, from the streets, from the ram- 
parts, the gusts of song . song sometimes heroic, sometimes 
obscene, more often carelessly joyous. The news of General 
Vinoy's success during the early part of the day had been 
damped by the evening report of Ducrot's delay in crossing 
the swollen Marne. But the spirits of the Parisians rallied 
from a momentary depression on the excitement at night of 
that concert of martial musia 

During that night, close under the guns of the double re- 
doubt of Gravelle and La Faisanderie, eight pontoon-bridges 
were thrown over the Maine ; and at daybreak the first col- 
umn of the third army under Blanchard and Renoult crossed 
with all their artillery, and, covered by the fire of the double 
redoubts, of the forts of Vincennes, Nogent, Rossney, and the 

* The '* Populace" had been contribated to the artilleiy, 8<m a jon, by 
the woridng class. 



 



 



THB PABISIANa 251 

batteries of Mont Avron, had an hour before noon carried the 
village of Champigny, and the first ichdon of the important 
plateau of Yill^ers, and were already commencing the work 
of intrench ment, when, rallying from the amaze of a defeat, 
the German forces burst upon them, sustained by fresh bat- 
tenes. The Prussian pieces of artillery established at Ghe&- 
nevi^res and at Neuilly opened fire with deadly execution ; 
while a numerous infantry, descending from the intrench' 
ments of Yilliers, charged upon the troops under Renoult. 
Among the French in that strife were Euguerrand and the 
Mobiles of which he was in command. Dismayed by the 
unexpected fire, these Mobiles gave way, as indeed did many 
of the line. Enguerrand rushed forward to the front . " On, 
mea enfans^ on I What will our mothers and wives say of us 
if we fly ? Vive la France! On 1" Among those of the bet- 
ter class in that company there rose a shout of applause, but 
it found no sympathy among the rest. They wavered ; they 
turned. " Will yon suffer me to go on alone, countrymen ?" 
cried Enguerrand ; and alone he rushed on toward the Prus- 
sian line . rushed, and fell, mortally wounded by a musket- 
ball. " Revenge I revenge I" shouted some of the foremost ; 
'^ Revenge ]j( shouted those in the rear; and, so shouting, 
turned on their heels and fled. But ere they could disperae 
they encountered the march, steadfast though rapid, of the 
troop led by Victor de Maul^on. ^'Poltroons!" he thun- 
dered, with the sonorous depth of his strong voice, '^ halt and 
turn, or my men shall fire on you as deserters." 

" Fa, citoyen^^ said one fugitive, an ofiicer . popularly 
elected, because *he was the loudest brawler in the club of the 
Salle Favre . we have seen him before . Charles, the brother 
of Armand Monnier . ^" men can't fight when they despise 
their generals. It is our generals who are poltroons and 
fools both." m 

" Carry my answer to the ghosts of cowards 1" cried De 
Maul6on, and shot the man dead. 

His followers, startled and cowed by the deed, and the 
voice and the look of the death-giver, halted. The officers, 
who had at first yielded to the panic of their men, took fresh 
courage, and finally led the bulk of the troop back to their 
post ^' enlevis d la halonette^'* to use the phrase of a candid 
iiistorian of that day. 



 



 



252 THB PABISIAHS. 

Day, on the whole, not inglorious to France. It was the 
first, if it was the last, really important success of the be- 
sieged. They remained masters of the ground, the Prussians 
leaving to them the wounded and the dead. 

That night what crowds thronged from Paris to the top of 
the Montmai-tre heights, from the observatory on which the 
celebrated inventor Bazin had lighted up, with some magical 
electric machine, all the plain of Gennevilliers, from Mont 
Val6rien to the Fort de la Briche ! The splendor of the 
blaze wrapped the great city ; distinctly above the roofs of 
the houses soared the D6me des Invalides, the spires of Notre 
Dame, the giant turrets of the Tuileries . and died away on 
resting on the infames dcapulos Acrocerauniay the " thunder 
oi-ags" of the heights occupied by the invading army. 

Lemercier, De Br6z6, and the elder Rameau. who, despite 
his peaceful habits and gray hairs, insisted on joining in the 
aid of la patrie . were among the National Guards attached 
to the Fort de la Briche and the neighboring eminence, and 
they met in conversation. 

" What a victory we have had !" said the old Ranieau. 

" Rather mortifying to your son, M. Rameau," said Le- 
mercier. ^ 

" Mortifying to my son, sir ! . the victory of his country- 
men ! What do you mean ?" 

" I had the honor to hear M. Gustavo 4;he other night at 
the club de la Vengeance^ 

'^ Bon Dieul do you frequent those tragic reunions ?'' 
asked De Br4z6. 

"They are not at all tragic : they are the only comedies 
left us, as one must amuse one's self somewhere, and the club 
d^ la Vengeance is the prettiest thing of the sort going. I 
quite understand why it should fascinate a poet like your 
son, M. Rameau. It is heW in a aaUe de cafe chantant. 
style Louis Quinze . decorated with a pastoral scene from 
Watteau. I and my dog Fox drop in. We hear your son 
haranguing. In what poetical sentences he despaired of the 
republic ! The government (he called them les charlatans 
de VHdtel de ViOe) were imbeciles. They pretended to in- 
augurate a revolution, and did not employ the most obvious 
of revolutionary means. There Fox and I pricked up our 
ears : what were those means ? Your son proceeded to ex- 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 253 

plain : * All mankind were to be appealed to against individ- 
ual interests. The commerce of luxury was to be abolished: 
clearly luxury was not at the command of all mankind. 
Cafes and theatres were to be closed forever . all mankind 
could not go to cafe and theatres. It was idle to expect 
the masses to combine for any thing in which the masses 
ha'd not an interest in common. The masses had no interest 
in any property that did not belong to the masses. Pro- 
grammes of the society to be founded, called the Ligue Cos- 
mopolite Democratique^ should be sent at once into "all the 
states of the civilized world . ^how? by balloons. Money 
corrupts the world as now composed ; but the money at the 
commanfi of the masses could buy all the monarchs and 
courtiers and priests of the universe.' At that sentiment, 
vehemently delivered, the applauses were frantic, and Fox in 
bis excitement began to bark. At the sound of his bark one 
man cried out,* That's a Prussian !' another, * Do wn with the 
spy I' another, * There's an aristo'* present . he keeps alive a 
dog which would be a week's meal for a family I' I snatch 
up Fox at the last cry, and clasp him to a bosom protected 
by the uniform of the National Guard. 

" When the hubbub had subsided, your son, M. Rameau, 
proceeded, quitting mankind in general, and arnving at the 
question in particular most interesting to his audience . ^the 
mobilization of the National Guard ; that is, the call upon 
men who like talking and hate fighting to talk less and fight 
more. *It was the sheerest tyranny to select a certain num- 
ber of free citizens to be butchered. If the fight was for the 
mass, there ought to be la levie en masse. If one did not 
compel^ Svery body to fight, why should any body fight?' 
Here the applause again became vehement, and Fox again 
became indiscreet. I subdued Fox's bark into a squeak by 
pulling his ears. ' What !' cries your poet-son, * la lev^ en 
masse gives us fifteen* millions of soldiers, with which we 
could crush not Prussia alone, but the whole of Europe.' 
(Immense sensation.) * Let us, then, resolve that the charla- 
tans of the H6tel de Ville are incapable of delivering us from 
the Prussians ; that they are deposed ; that the Zigt^e of the 
D^mocratie Cosmopolite is installed; that meanwhile the 
Commune sh|^ be voted the provisional government, and 
shall order the Prussians to retire within three days from the 
soil of Paris.' r^^^^T^ 

 VjOOQIC 



254 THB PABISIANS. 

" Pardon me this long description, my dear M. Rameau ; 
but I trust I have satisfactorily explained why victory ob- 
tained in the teeth of his eloquent opinions, if gratifying to 
him as a Fi'enchman, must be mortifying to him as a poli- 
tician." 

The old Rameau sighed, hung his head, and crept away. 

While, amid this holiday illumination, the Parisians fen- 
joyed the panorama before them, the M-dres Chretiens and 
the attendants of the various ambulances were moving along 
the battle-plains; the first in their large-bnmmed hats and 
sable garbs, the last in strange motley costume, many of them 
in glittering uniform. all alike in their serene indifference to 
danger, often pausing to pick up among the dead their own 
brethren who had been slaughtered in the midst of their 
task. Now and then they came on sinister forms apparently 
engaged in the same duty of tending the wounded and dead, 
but in truth murderous plunderers, to whom the dead and 
the dying were equal harvests. Did the wounded man at- 
tempt to resist the foul hands searching for their spoil, they 
added another wound more immediately mortal, giinning as 
they completed on the dead the robbery they had commenced 
on the dying. 

Raoul de Vandemar had been all the earlier part of the 
day, with the assistants of the ambulance over which he pre- 
sided, attached to the battalions of the National Guard in a 
quarter remote from that in which his brother had fought 
and fallen. When those troops, later in the day, were driven 
from the Montmedy plateau, which they had at first carried, 
Raoul repassed toward the plateau at Villiers, on which the 
dead lay thickest. On the way he heard a vague i-eport of 
the panic which had dispersed the Mobiles of whom Enguer- 
rand was in command, and of Enguerrand's vain attempt to 
inspirit them. But his fate was not known. 

There, at midnight, Raoul is still searching among the 
ghastly heaps and pools of blood, lighted from afar by the 
blaze from the observatory of Montmartre, and more near at . 
hand by the bivouac fires extended along the banks to the 
left of the Marne, while everywhere about the field flitted 
the lanterns of the Frbres ChrHiena. Suddenly, in the dim- 
ness of a spot cast into shadow by an incompleted earth- 
work, he observed a small sinister figure jlK'ched on the 

 VjOOQIC 



 



 




 



 



THE PABISUNS. 255 

breast of some wounded soldier, evidently not to succor. 
He sprang forward and seized a hideous -looking urchin, 
scarcely twelve years old, who held in one hand a small 
crystal locket, set in filigree gold, torn from the soldier's 
breast, and lifted high in the other a long case-knife. At a 
glance Raoul recognized the holy relic he had given to'En- 
guerrand, and, flinging the precocious murderer to be seized 
'by his assistants, he cast himself beside his brother. Enguer- 
rand still breathed, and his languid eyes brightened as he 
knew the dear familiar face. He tried to speak, but his voice 
failed, and he shook his head sadly, but still with a faint 
smile on his lips. They lifted him tenderly, and placed him 
on a litter. The movement, gentle as it was, brought back 
pain, and with the pain strength to murmur, " My mother . 
I would see her once more." 

As at daybreak the loungers on Montmartre and the ram- 
parts descended into the streets . most windows in which 
were open, as they had been all night, with anxious female 
faces peering palely down . they saw the conveyances of the 
ambulances coming dismally along, and many an eye turned 
wistfully toward the litter on which lay the idol of the pleas- 
ure-loving Paris, with the dark, bare-headed figure walking 
beside it . onward, onward, till it reached the H6tel de Van- 
demar, and a woman's cry was heard at the entrance . the 
mother's cry . " My son ! my son !" 
n..12 



 



 



256 THJ? PABISIAN8. 



BOOK TWELFTH. 



CHAPTER L 

The last book closed with the success of the Parisian sortie 
on the 30th of November, to be followed by the terrible en- 
gagements, no less honorable to French valor, on the 2d of 
December. There was the sanguine belief that deliverance 
was at hand ; that Trochu would break through the circle 
of iron, and effect that junction with the army of Aurelles 
de Paladine which would compel the Germans to raise the 
investment . belief rudely shaken by Ducrot's proclamation 
of the 4th, to explain the recrossing of the Marne, and the 
abandonment of the positions conquered, but not altogether 
dispelled till Von Moltke's letter to Trochu on the 6th an- 
nouncing the defeat of the army of the Loire and the recap- 
ture of Orleans. Even then the Parisians did uQt lose hope 
of succor; and even after the desperate and fruitless sortie 
against Le Bourget on the 21st, it was not without witti- 
cisms on defeat and predictions of triumph that Winter and 
Famine settled sullenly on the city. 

Our narrative re-opens with the last period of the siege. 

It was during these dreadful days that if the vilest and 
the most hideous aspects of the Parisian population showed 
themselves at the worst, so all its loveliest, its noblest, its 
holiest characteristics . unnoticed by ordinary observers in 
the prosperous days of the capital . became conspicuously 
prominent. The higher classes, including the remnant of 
the old noblesse^ had during the whole siege exhibited quali- 
ties in notable contrast to those assigned them by the ene- 
mies of aristocracy. Their sons had been foremost among 
those soldiers who never calumniated a leader, never fled, be- 
fore a foe ; their women had been among the most zealous 
and the most tender nurses of the ambulances they had 
founded and served; their houses had been freely opened, 
whether to the families exiled from the suburbs^ or in Bup- 



 VjOOQIC 



I 



THS PABI6IANS. 257 

plement to the hospitals. The amount of relief they afford- 
ed unostentatiously, out of means that shared the general 
failure of accustomed resource, when the famine* commenced, 
would be scarcely credible if stated. Admirable, too, were 
the fortitude and resignation of the genuine Parisian hoaT- 
geoisie . the thrifty trades-folk and small rentiers . that class 
in which, to judge of its timidity when opposed to a mob, 
courage is not the most conspicuous virtue. Courage be- 
came so now . courage to bear hourly increasing privation, 
and to suppress every murmur of suffering that would dis: 
credit their patriotism, and invoke "peace at any price." It. 
waa on this class that the calamities of the siege now press- 
ed the most heavily. The stagnation of trade, and the stop- 
page of the rents, in which they had invested their savings, 
reduced many of them to actual want. Those only of their 
number who obtained the pay of one and a half franc a day 
as National .Guards could be sure to escape from starvation, 
But this pay had already begun to demoralize the receivers. 
Scanty for supply of food, it was ample for supply of drink. 
And drunkenness, hitherto rare in that rank of the Parisians, 
became a prevalent vice, aggravated in the case of a Nation- 
al Guard when it wholly unfitted Jiim for the duties he un- 
dertook, especially such National Guards as were raised from 
the most turbulent democracy of the working class. 

But of all that population, there were two sections in which 
the mo*st beautiful elements of our human nature were most 
touchingly manifest . ^the women and the priesthood, includ- 
ing in the latter, denomination all the various brotherhoods 
and societies which religion formed and inspired. 

It was on the 27th of December that Frederic Lemercier 
stood gazing wistfully on a military report affixed to a blank 
wall, which stated that " the enemy, worn out by a resistance 
of over one hundred days," had commenced the bombard- 
ment. Poor Frederic was sadly altered ; he had escaped the 
Prussian guns, but not the Parisian winter . the severest 
known for twenty years. He was one of the many frozen at 
their posts . ^brought back to the ambulance with Fox in his 
bosom trying to keep him warm. He had only lately been 
sent forth as convalescent . ambulances were too crowded 
to retain a patient longer than absolutely needful . and had 
been hunger-pinched and frost-pinched ever since. The lux- 



 



 



258 THB PARISIANS. 

uiions Frederic had still somewhere or other a capital yield- 
ing above three thousand a year, and of which he coald not 
now realize a franc, the title-deeds to various investments 
being in the hands of Duplessis . the most trustworthy of 
friends, the 'most upright of men, but who was in Bretagne, 
and could not be got at. And' the time had come at Paris 
when you could not get trust for a pound of horse-flesh or 
a daily supply of fuel. And Frederic Lemercier, who had 
long since spent the 2000 francs borrowed from Alain (not 
ignobly,' but somewhat ostentatiously, in feasting any ac- 
. quaintance who wanted a feast), tfnd who had sold to any 
one. who could afford to speculate on such dainty luxuries, 
clocks, bronzes, amber-mouthed' pipes . all that had made the 
envied garniture of his bachelor's apartment . Frederic Le- 
mercier was, so far as the task of keeping body' and soul to- 
gether, worse off than any English pauper who can apply to 
the Union. Of course he might have claimed* his half-pay 
of thirty sous as a National Guard. But he little knows 
the true Parisian who imagines a seigneur of the Chauss^ 
d'Antin, the oracle of those with whom he lived, and one 
who knew life so well that he had preached prudence to a 
seigneur of the faubourg Jike Alain de Rochebriant, stooping 
to apply for the wages of thirty sous. Rations were only 
obtained by the wonderful patience of women, who had chil- 
dren to whom they were both saints and martyrs. The 
hours, the weary hours one had to wait before one could get 
one's place on the line for the distribution of that atrocious 
black bread defeated men . defeated most^wives if only for 
husbands . were defied only by mothers and daughters. 
Literally speaking, Lemercier was starving. Alain had been 
badly wounded in the sortie of the 21st, and was laid up in 
an ambulance. Even if he could have been got at, he had 
probably nothing left to bestow upoti Lemercier. 

Lemercier gazed on the announcement of the bombard- 
ment; and the Parisian gayety, which some French historian 
of the siege calls doitce phUoscphiey lingering on him still, 
he said audibly, turning round to any stranger vflio h^ard: 
"Happiest of mortals that we are! Under the present 
Government we are never warned of any thing disagreeable 
that can happen ; we are only told of it when it has happen- 
ed, and then as rather pleasant than otherwise. I get op. 



 



 



THE PABISIAN8. 259 

I meet a civil gendarme, 'What is that firing? which of 
our provincial armies is taking Prussia in the rear?' * Mon- 
sieur,' says the gendarme^ * it is the Prussian Krupp guns,' 
I look at the proclamation, and my fears vanish, my heart is 
relieved. I read that the bombardment is a sure sign that 
the enemy is worn but." 

Some of the men grouped round Frederic ducked their 
heads in terror; others, who knew that the thunder-bolt 
launched from the plateau of Avron would not fall on the 
pavements of Paris, laughed and joked. But in front, with 
no sign of terror, no sound of laughter, stretched, moving 
inch by inch, thie female procession toward the bakery in 
which the morsel of bread for their infants was doled out. 

"Hist, mon ami^^ said a deep voice beside Lemercier. 
" Look at those women, and do not wound their ears by a 
jest." 

Lemercier, offended by that rebuke, though too suscepti- 
ble to good emotions not to recognize its justice, tried with 
feeble fingers to turn up his mustache, and to turn a defiant 
crest upon the rebuker. He was rather startled to see the 
tall martial form at his side, and to recognize Victor de 
Maul^on. "Don't you think, M. Lemercier," resumed the 
Vicomte, half sadly, " that these women are worthy of bet- 
ter husbands and sons than are commonly found among the 
soldiers whose uniform we wear?" 

"The National Guard ! ' You ought not to sneer at them, 
Vicomte . you whose troop covered itself with glory on the 
great days of Villiers and Champigny . you in whose praise 
even the grumblers of Paris became eloquent, and in whom 
a future Marshal of France is foretold." 

" But, alas I more than half of my poor troop was left on 
the battle-field, or is now wrestling for mangled remains of 
life in the ambulances. And the new recruits with which I 
took the field on the 21st are not likqly to cover themselves 
with glory, or insure to their commander the baton of a 
marshal." 

"Ay, I heard when. I was in the hospital that you had 
publicly shamed some of these recruits, and declared that 
you would rather resign than lead them again to battle." 

" True ; and at .this moment, for so doing, I am the pan 
most hated by the rabble who supplied those recruits." 



 



 



260 THE PABISIANS. 

The meD, while thus conversiDg, had moved slowly on, 
and were now in front of a large cafe^ from the interior of 
which came the sound of loud bravos and clappings of hands. 
Lemercier's curiosity was excited. " For what can be that 
applause ?" he said ; " let us look in and see.'* 

The room was thronged. In the distance, on a small 
raised platform, stood a girl dressed in faded theatrical fin- 
ery, making hlBr obeisance to the crowd. 

" Heavens I" exclaimed Frederic, " can I trust my eyes ? 
Surely that is the once superb Julie: has she been dancing 
herer 

One of the loungers, evidently belonging to the same 
world as Lemercier, overheard the question, and answered, 
politely, " No, monsieur; she has been reciting verses, and 
really declaims very well, considering it is not her vocation. 
She has given us extracts from Victor Hugo and Pe Musset : 
and crowned all with a patriotic hymn by Gustavo Rameaa 
. ^her old lover, if gossip be true." 

Meanwhile De Maul^on, whcJ at first had glanced over the 
scene with his usual air of calm and cold indifference, be- 
came suddenly struck by the girl's beautiful face, and gazed 
on it with a look of startled surprise. . 

" Who and what did you say that poor fair creature is, 
M. Lemercier ?" . 

. " She is a Mademoiselle Julie Caumartin, and w'as a very 
popular coryphee. She has hereditary right to be a good 
dancer as the daughter of a once more fatuous omatnent of 
the ballet,^ heUe L6onie . whom you must have seen in 
your young days." 

" Of course. L^onie . she married a M. Surville, a silly 
bourgeois gentilhomme^ who earned the hatred of Paris by 
taking her off the stage. So that is her daughter ! I see 
no likeness to her mother . much handsomer. Why does 
she call herself Caumartin ?" 

" Oh," said Frederic, " a melancholy but trite story. JA- 
onie was left a widow, and died in want. What could the 
poor young daughter do ? She found a rich protector who 
had influence to get her an appointment in the ballet ; and 
there she did as most girls so circumstanced do. appeared 
under an assumed name, which she has since kept." 

"I understand," said Victor, compassionately. "Poor 



 



 



THK PARISIANS. 261 

thing! she has quitted the platform, and is coming this 
way, evidently to speak to you. I saw her eyes brighten as 
she caught sight of your faca" 

Lemeroier attempted a languid air of modest self-compla- 
cency as the girl now approached him. ^^JSon j<mr^ M, Fre- 
*deric ! Ah, mon Dieu I how thin you have grown I You 
have been ill ?" 

" The hardships of a military life, mademoiselle. Ah, for 
the heaiix jours and the peace we insisted on destroying 
under the Empire, which we destroyed for listening to us ! 
* But you thrive well, I trust. I have seen you better dress- 
ed, but never in greater beauty." 

The girl blushed as she replied, " Do you really think as 
you speak?" 

" I could not speak more sincerely if I lived in the leg- 
endary House of Glass." 

The girl clutched his arm, and said, in suppressed tones, 
" Where -is Gustave ?" 

" Gustave Rameau? I have no idea. Do you never see 
him now ?" ' . 

" Never . perhaps I never shall see* him again ; but when 
you do meet him, say that Julie owes to him her livelihood. 
An honest liveHhood, monsieur. He taught her to love 
verses . told her how to recite them. I am engaged at this 
eafk . you will find me here the same hour every day, in case 
. in case . You are good and kind, and will come and tell 
me that Gustave is well and happy even if he forgets me. 
Au revoir I Stop, you do look, my poor Frederic, as if. as if 
-^pardon me, Monsieur Lemercier,is there any thing I can do? 
Will you condescend to borrow from me ? I am in funds." 

Lemercier at that offer was nearly moved to tears. Fam- 
ished though he was, he could not, however, have touched 
that girl's earnings. 

" You are an angel of goodness, mademoiselle ! Ah, how 
I envy Gustave Rameau ! No, I don't want aid. I am al- 
ways a . rentier?^ 

^^Bienl and if you see -Gustave, you will not forget." 
. "Rely on me. Come away," he said. to De Maul^on. "I 
don't want to hear that girl repeat the sort of bombast the 
poets indite nowadays. It is fustian ; and that girl may 
have a brain of feather, but she has a heart of gold." 



 



 



262 THB PABISIANS. 

" True," said Victor, as they regained the street ; " I over- 
heard what she said to you. What an incomprehensible 
thing is a woman! how more incomprehensible still is a 
woman's love I Ah, pardon me. I must leave you ; I see 
in the procession a poor woman known to me in better 
days.". 

De Maul^on walked toward the woman he spoke of . one 
of the long procession to the bakery . a child clinging to 
her robe. A pale, grief-worn woman, still young,- but with 
the weariness of age on her face, and the shadow of death on 
her child's. 

" I think I see Madame Monnier," said De Maul^on, softly. 

She turned .and looked at him drearily. A year ago, she 
. would have blushed if addressed by a stranger in a name 
not lawfully hers. 

" Well," she said, in hollow accents broken by cough, " I 
don't know you, monsieur." 

" Poor woman I" he resumed, walking beside her as she 
moved slowly on, while the eyes of other women in the pro- 
cession stared at him. hungrily. "And your child looks ill 
too. It is your youngest ?" 

. " My only one ! The others are in P^re la Chaise. There 
are but few children alive in my street now.. God has been 
very merciful, and taken them to himself." 

De Maul^on recalled the scene of a neat, comfortable 
apartment, and the healthful, happy children at play, on the 
floor. The mortality among the little ones, especially in the 
quartier occupied by the working classes, had of late been 
terrible. The want of. food, of fuel, the intense severity Of 
the weather, had swept them off as by a pestilence. 

"And Monnier-^ what of him? No doubt he is a Na- 
tional Guard, and has his pay ?" 

The woman made no answer, but hung down her head. 
She was stifling a sob. Till then her eyes seemed to have 
exhausted the last source of te.ars. 

" He lives still ?" continued Victor, pityingly : " he is not 
wounded?" . . 

"No; he is well.in health, thank you kindly, monsieur.'? 

" But his pay is not enough to help you, and of course he 
can get no work. Excuse me if I stopped you. It is be- 
cause I owed Armand Monnier a little debt for work, and I 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 263 

am ashamed to say that it quite escaped my memory in these 
terrible events. Allow me, madame, to pay it to you," and 
he thrust his purse into her hand. " I think this contains 
about the sum I owed ; if more or less, we will settle the dif- 
ference later. Take care of yourself." 

He wafr turning away, when the- woman caught hold of 
him. 

" Stay, monsieur. May Heaven bless you I but . but . 
tell me what name I am to give to Armand. I can't think 
of any one who owed him money. It must have been be- 
fore that dreadful strike, the beginning of all our woes. Ah, 
if it were allowed to curse any one, I fear my last breath 
would not be a prayer." 

" You would curse the strike, or the master who did not 
forgive Armand's share in it ?" 

" No, no-^the cruel man who talked him into it^into. all 
that has changed the best workman, the kindest heart . the 
. the . ^" again her voice died in sobs. 

"And who was that man?" asked De Maul6on, falteringly, 

" His name was Lebeau. If you were a poor man, I should 
say, * Shun him.'" 

"I have heard of the* name you mention ; but, if we mean 
the same person, Monnier can not have met him lately. He 
has not been in Paris since the siege." 

" I suppose not, the coward ! He ruined us . us who 
were so happy before; and then, as Armand flays, cast 'us 
away as instruments he had done with. But . but if ypu do 
know him, and do see him again, tell him . tell him not to 
complete his wrong--not to bring murder on Armand's soul. 
For Armand isn't what he was . and has becomfe, oh, so vio- 
lent I I dare not take this money withctut saying who gave 
it. He would not take money as alms from an aristocrat. 
Hush ! he beat me for taking money from the good Mon- 
sieur Raoul de Vandemar . my poor Armand beat me !" 

De Maul6on shuddered. " Say that it is from a customer 
whose rooms he decorated in his spare hours on his own ac-^ 
count before the strike. Monsieur ;" here he uttered in- 
distinctly some unpronounceable name, and hurried off, soon 
lost as the streets grew darker. Amidst groups of a high- 
er order of men . military men, nobles, ci-devaht deputies . 
among such ones his name stood very high. Not only his 

 VjOOQIC 



264 THE PARISIANS. 

braVery in the. recent sorties had been signal, bat a strong 
belief in his military talents had become prevalent ; and cod< 
joined with the name he had before established as a polit- 
ical writer, and the remembi-ance of the vigor and sagaci- 
ty with which he had opposed the war, he seemed certain, 
when peace and order became re-established, of a brilliant 
position and career in a future administration. Not less be- 
cause he had steadfastly kept aloof from the existing Govern- 
ment, which It was rumored, rightly or erroneously, that he 
had been solicited to join ; and from every combination of 
the various democratic or discontented factions. 

Quitting t^ese more distinguished associates, he took his 
way alone toward the ramparts. The day was closing ; the 
thunders of the cannon were dying down. 

He passed by a wine-shop round which were gathered 
many of the worst specimens of the MobHots and National 
Guards, mostly drunk, and londly talking, in vehement abuse 
of generals and officers and commissariat. By one of the 
men, as he came nnder the glare of a petroleum lamp (there 
was gas no longer in the dismal city), he was recognized as 
the commander who had dared to insist on discipline, and 
disgrace honest patriots who claimed to themselves the sole ' 
option between fight and flight. The man was one of those 
patriots. one of the new recruits whom Victor had shamed 
and dismissed for mutiny and cowardice. He made a dcunk- 
en* plunge at his former chief, shouting, "^ has Paristo I 
Comrades, this is the coquin De Maul^on, who is paid by the 
Prussians for getting us killed : d la lanteme /"- ^^A la larir 
teme /" -stammered and hiccoughed others of the group ; but 
they did ndt stir to execute their threat. Dimly seen as 
the stern face and sinewy form of the threatened man was 
by their drowsied eyes, the name of De Maul^on, the man 
without fear <5f a foe, and without ruth for a mutineer, suf- 
ficed to protect him from outrage ; and with a slight move- 
ment of his arm that sent his denouncer reeling against the 
.lamp-post, De Manl6on passed on : when another man, in the . 
uniform of a National Guard, bonnded from the door of the 
tavern, crying, with a loud voice, " Who said De Manl^on ? 
Let me look on him :" and Victor, who had strode on with 
slow, lion-like steps, cleaving the crowd, turned, and saw be- 
fore him in the gleaming light a face, in which the bold. 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 266 

frank, intelligent aspect of former days was lost in a wild, 
reckless, savage expression . the face of Armand Monnier. 

" Ha I are you really Victor de Maul.^on ?" asked Monnier, 
not fiercely, but under his breath, in that sort of stage whis- 
per which is the natural utterance of excited men under the 
mingled influence of potent drink and hoarded rage. 

" Certainly ; I am Victor de Maul6on." 

"And you were in command of the Company of the 

National Guard, on the 30th of November, at Champigny 
andVilliers?" 

"I was." 

"And you shot with your own hand an ofiicer belonging 
to another company who refused to join yotlrs ?" 

" I shot a cowardly soldier who ran away from the ene- 
my, and seemed a nngleader of other runaways ; and, in so 
doing, I saved from dishonor the best part of his comrades." 

"The man was no coward. He was an enlightened 
Frenchman, and worth fifty of such ariatos as you ; and he 
knew better than his officei*s that he was to be led to an idle 
slaughter. Idle . I say idle. What was France the better, 
how was Paris the safer, for the senseless butchery of that 
. day ? You mutinied against a wiser general than Saint 
Trochu when you murdered that mutineer." 

" Armand Monnier, you are not quite sober to-night, or I 
would argue with you that question. But you no doubt are 
.brave: how and why do you take the part of a runaway?" 

" How and why ? He was my brother, and you own you 
murdered him : my brother. the sagest bead in Paris. If I 
Jiad listened to him, I should not be . bah I . no matter now 
what I am." 

"I could not know he was your brother; but, if he had 
been mine, I would have done the same." 

Here Victor's lip quivered, for Monnier griped him by the 
arm, and looked him in the face with wild, stony eyes. 

" I recollect that voice ! Yet . yet . you say you are a 
noble, a Vicomte . ^Victor de.Maukon! and you shot my 
brother !" 

Here he passed his left hand rapidly over* his forehead. 
The fumes of wine still, clouded his mind, but rays of intelli- 
gence broke through the cloud. Suddenly he said, in a loud, 
and calm, and natural voice, 



 



 



266 THE PARISIANS. 

" Monsieur le Vicomte, you accost me as Armand Monnier 
. ^pray how do you know my name ?" 

"How should I not know it? I have looked into the 
meetings of the * Clubs rougeaJ* I have heard you speak, 
and naturally asked your name. Bon soir^ M. Monnier ! 
When yon reflect in cooler moments, you will see that, if pa- 
triots excuse Brutus for first dishonoring, and then executing 
his own son, an officer charged to defend his country may be 
surely pardoned for slaying a runaway to whom he was no 
relation, when in slaying he saved the man's name and kin- 
dred from dishonor, unless, indeed, you insist on telling the 
world why he was slain." 

*' I know yout voice . ^I know it. Every sound becomes 
clearer to my ear. And if." 

But while Monnier thus spoke, De Maul^on had hastened 
on. Monnier looked round, saw him gone, but did not pur- 
sue. He was just intoxicated enough to know that his foot- 
steps were not steady, and he turned bagk to the wine-shop 
and asked surlily for more wine. 

Could you have seen him then as he leaned swinging him- 
self to and fro against the wall . had you known the man 
two years ago, you would have been a brute if you felt dis- 
gust. You could only have felt that profound compassion 
with which we gaze or\ a great royalty fallen. For the 
grandest of all royalties is that which takes its crown from 
Nature, needing no accident of birth. And Nature made . 
the mind of Armand Monnier king-like ; endowed it with 
lofty scorn of meanness and falsehood and dishonor,. with 
warmth and tenderness of heart which had glow enough to 
spare from ties of kindred and heailih and home, to extend 
10 those distant circles of humanity over which royal na- 
tures would fain extend the shadow of their sceptre. 

How had the royalty of the man's nature falleji thus? 
Royalty rarely falls from its own constitutional faults. It 
falls when, ceasing to be royal, it becomes subservient to 
bad advisers. And wfcat bad advisers, always appealing to 
his better qualities and so enlisting his worser, had discrown- 
ed this mechanic ? ^ ^ 

** A little knowledge is a dangerous thin^/* 
says the old-fashioned poet. "Not so," says the modem 

. Google 



THE PARISIANS. 2^7 

philosopher; "a little knowledge is safer than no knowl- 
edge." Possibly, as all individuals and all communities 
must go through the stage of a little knowledge before they 
can arrive at that of much knowledge, the philosopher's as- 
sertion may be right in the long, run, and applied to human- 
kind in general. But there is a period, as there is a class, 
ifi which a little knowledge tends to terrible demoralization. 
And Armand Monnier lived in that period and was one of 
that class. The little knowledge that his mind, impulsive 
and ardent, had picked up out of books that warred with 
the great foundations of Existing society, had originated in 
ill advices, A man stored with much knowledge would 
never have let Madame de Grantmesnil's denunciations of 
raarria^^e rites, or Louis Blanc's vindication of Robespierre 
as the representative of the working against the middle 
class, influence his practical, life. He would have assessed 
such opinions at their real worth ; and, whatever that worth 
might seem to him^ would not to such opinions have com- 
mitted the conduct of his life. Opinion is not fateful : con- 
duct is. A little knowledge crazes an earnest, warm-blood- 
ed, powerful creature like Armand Monnier into a fanatic. 
He takes an opinion which pleases him as a revelation from 
the gods; that opinion shapes his conduct; that conduct is 
his fate. Woe to the philosopher who serenely flings before 
the little, knowledge of the artisan dogmas as harmless as 
the Atlantis of Plato if only to be discussed by philosophers, 
arid deadly as the toi*ches of At6 if seized as articles of a 
creed by fanatics ! But thrice woe to the artisan who 
makes himself the zealot of the. Dogma I 
. Poor Armand acts on the opinions he adopts ; proves his 
contempt for the marnage state by living with the wife of 
another; resents, as natures so inherently manly must do, 
the Society that visits on her his defiance of its laws ; throws 
himself, head foremost, against that Society altogether ; nec- 
essarily join^ all who -have other reasons for hostility to So- 
ciety ; he himself having every inducement not to join in- 
discriminate strikes . high wages, a liberal employer, ample 
savings, the certainty of soon becoming employer himself. 
No ; that is not enough to the fanatic : he persists on being 
dupe and victim. He, this great king of labor, crowned by 
Nature, and cursed with, that degree of little knowledge 



 



 



268 THB PABISIANS. 

which does not comprehend how mnch more is required be- 
fcrre a school-boy would admit it to be knowledge at all . ^he 
rushes into the maddest' of all speculations . that of the ar- 
tisan with little knowledge and enormous faith . that which 
intrusts the safety and repose and dignity of life to some 
ambitious adventurer, who uses his warm heart for the ad- 
venturer's frigid purpose, much as the lawyer government 
of September used the Communists . much as, in every rev- 
olution of France, a Bertrand has used a Ratoa. much as, 
till the sound of the last trumpet, men very much worse than 
Victor de Maul6on will use men very much better than Ar- 
raand Monnier, if the Armand Monniers disdain the modesty 
of an Isaac Newton on hearing that a theorem to which he 
had given all the strength of his patient intellect Vas dis- 
puted. " It may be so ;" meaning, I suppose, that it requires 
a large amount of experience .a8cei*tained before a man of 
much knowledge becomes that which a man of little knowl- 
edge is at a jump . the fanatic of an experiment untried. 



CHAPTER n. 

ScABCBLT had De Mauleon quitted Lemercier before the 
latter was joined by two loungers scarcely less . famished 
than himself . Savarin and De Br6z4 Like himself, too, 
both had been sufferers from illness, though not of a nature 
to be consigned to a hospital. All manner of diseases then 
had combined to form the pQStilence which filled the streets 
with unregarded hearses . bronchitis, pneumonia, small-pox, 
a strange sort of spurious dysentery much more speedily fa- 
tal than the genuine. The three men, a year before so sleek, 
looked like ghosts under the withering, sky; yet all three 
retained embers of the native Parisian, humor, which their 
very breatb, on meeting, sufficed to kindle up into jubilant 
sparks or rapid flashes. 

" There are two consolations," said Savarin, as the friends 
strolled, or rather crawled, toward the Boulevards . "two 
consolations for the* gourmet and for the pFoprietor in these 
days of trial for the gourmand, because the price of truffles 
is come down." 

 VjOOQIC 



[ 



THE PARISIANS. 269 

" Truffles !" gasped De Br6z6, with watering mouth ; *^ im- 
possible I They are gone with the age of gold." 

" Not so. I speak on the best authority . my laundress ; 
for she attends the aitccursale in the Rue de Chateaudun ; 
and if the poor woman, being, luckily for me, a childless wid- 
ow, gets a morsel she can spare, she sells it to me." 

" Sells it !" feebly exclaimed Lemercien " Crcesus ! you 
have money, then, and can buy ?" 

" Sells it . on credit I I am to pension her for life if I live 
to have money again. Don't interrupt me. This honest 
woman goes this morning to the ^dccursale. I promise my- 
self a delicious hifteck of horse. She gains the succursaley 
and the employ^ informs her that there is nothing left in his 
store except . truffles. A glut of those in the market allows 
him to offer her a* bargain . 1 francs la hotte. Send me seven 
francs, De Br6z6, and you shall share the banquet." 

De Br^ze shook his head expressively. 

" But," resumed Savarin, " though credit exists no more 
except with my laundress, upon terms of which the usury is 
necessarily proportioned to the risk, yet, as I had the honor 
before to observe, there is comfort for the proprietor. The 
instinct of property is imperishable." 

" Not in the house where I lodge," said Lemercier. "Two 
soldiers were billeted there ; and during my stay in the am- 
bulance they enter my rooms and cart away all of the little 
furniture left there, except a bed and* a table. Brought be- 
fore a court-martial, they defend themselves by saying ' the 
rooms were abandoned.' The excuse was held valid. They 
were let off with a reprimand, and apromise to restore what 
was not already disposed of. They have restored me anoth- 
er table and four chairs." 

" Nevertheless tfcey had the instinct of property, though 
erroneously developed, otherwise they would not have deem- 
ed any excuse for their act necessary. Now for my instance 
of the inherent tenacity of that instinct. A worthy citizen 
in want of fuel sees a door in a garden wall, and naturally 
carries off the door. He is apprehended by a gendarme who 
sees the act. * Yoleur^ he cries to the gendarme^ * do you 
want to rob me of my property ?' ' That door your proper- 
ty ? I saw you take it away.' ' You confess,' cries the citi- 
zen, triumphantly . ' you confess that it is my property ; for 



 



 



270 THE PARISIANS. 

you saw me appropriate it' Thus you see how imperisha- 
ble is the instiuct of property. No sooner does it disappear 
as yours, than it re-appears as mine." 

" I would laugh if I could," said Lemercier, " but such a 
convulsion would be fatal. Dieu des dieux^ how empty I 
am !" He reeled as he spoke, and clung to De Br6z6 for sup- 
port. De Br6z6 had the reputation of being the most selfish 
of men. But at that moment, when a generous man might 
be excused for being selfish enough to desire to keep the lit- 
tle that he had for his own reprieve from starvation, this ego- 
tist became superb, " Friends," he cried, with enthusiasm, 
^' I have something yet in my pocket ; we will dine, all three 
of us." 

"Dine!" faltered Lemercier. "Dine! I have not dined 
since I left the hospital. I breakfasted yesterday . on two 
mice upon toast. Dainty, but not nutritious. And I shared 
them with Fox." 

" Fox ! Fox lives still, then ?" cried De Br^ze, startled. 

" In a sort of way he does. But one mouse since yester- 
day morning is not much ; and he can't expect that every 
day." 

" Why don't you take him out ?" asked Savarin. ". Give 
him a chance of picking up a bone somewhere." 

" I dare not. He would be picked up himself. Dogs are 
c^etting very valuable : they sell for 60 francs apiece. Come, 
De Br^z6, where are We to dine ?" 

" I and Savarin can dine at the London Tavern upon rat 
pdt^ or jugged cat. But it would be impertinence to invite 
a -satrap like yourself, who has a whole dog in his larder . ^a 
dish of 60 francs . a dish for a king. Adieu, my dear Fred- 
eric. AUons, Savarin." 

" I. feasted you on better meats than dog when I could 
afford it," said Frederic, plaintively; "and the first time 
you invite me you retract the invitation. Be it so. -Son 
appetite 

^^BahP^ said De Br4z6, catching Frederic's arm* as he 
turned to depart. " Of course I was but jesting. Only an* 
other day, when my pockets will be empty, dp think what 
an excellent thing a roasted dog is, and make up your mind 
while Fox has still some little fiesh on his bones." 

" Flesh !" said Savarin, detaining them. " Look ! See 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 271 

how right Voltaire was in saying, 'Amusement is the first 
necessity of civilized man.' Paris can do without bread ; 
Paris still retains Polichinello." 

He pointed to the puppet-show, round which a crowd, not 
of children alone, but of men . middle-aged and old . were 
collected, while sous were dropped into the tin handed round 
by a squalid boy. 

"And, mon ami^^ whispered De Br6z6 to Lemercier, with 
the voice of a tempting fiend, " observe how Punch is with- 
out his dog." 

It was true. The dog was gone . its place supplied by a 
melancholy emaciated cat. 

Frederic crawled toward the squalid boy. "What has 
become of Punch's dog.?" 

" We ate him last Sunday. Next Sunday we shall have 
the cat in a pie," said the urchin, with a sensual smack of 
the lips. 

" Oh, Fox ! Fox !" murmured Frederic, as the three men 
went slowly down through the darkening streets . the roar 
of the Prussian guns heard afar, while distinct and near 
rang the laugh of the idlers round the Punch without a dog. 



CHAPTER HI. 

While De Br6ze and his friends were feasting at the Oafe 
Anglais^ and faring better than the host had promised . for 
the. bill of fare. comprised such luxuries as ass, mule, peas, 
fried potatoes, and Champagne (Champagne in some myste- 
rious way was inexhaustible during the time of famine . a 
very different group had assembled in the rooms of Isaura 
Cicogna. ^he and the Venosta had hitherto escaped the 
extreme destitution to which many richer persons had, been 
reduced. It is true that Isaura's fortune, placed in the 
hands of the absent Louvier, and invested in the new street 
that was to have been, brought no return. It was true that 
in that street the Venosta, dreaming of ^ent. per cent., had 
invested all her savings. But the Venosta, at the first an- 
nouncement of war, had insisted on retaining in hand a 
small sum from the amount Isaura had received from her 



T 



 



272 THB PABISIAirS. 

^^Toman^'* that might suffice for current expenses, and with 
yet more acute foresight had laid in stores of provisions and 
fuel immediately after the probability of a siege became ap- 
parent. But even the provident mind of the Yenosta had 
never foreseen that the siege would endure so long, or that 
the prices of all articles of necessity would rise so high. 
And meanwhile all resources . ^money, fuel, provisions . ^had 
been largely drawn upon by the charity and benevolence of 
Isaura, without much remonstrance on the part of .the Ye- 
nosta, whose nature was very accessible to pity. Unfortu- 
nately, too, of late, money and provisions had failed to Mon- 
sieur and Madame Rameau, their income consisting partly 
of rents, no longer paid, and the profits of a sleeping part- 
nership in the old shop, from whigh custom had depart- 
ed \ so that they came to share the fireside and meals at the 
rooms of their son's fiancbe with little scruple, because ut- 
terly unaware that the money retained and the provisions 
stored by the Yenosta were now nearly exhausted. 

The patriotic ardor which had 'first induced the elder 
Rameau to volunteer his services as a National Guard had 
been ere this cooled if not suppressed, first by the hardships 
of the duty, and then by the disorderly Conduct of his as- 
sociates, and their ribald talk and obscene songs. He wa^ 
much beyond the age at which he could be registered.^ His 
son was, however, compelled to become his substitute, though 
from his sickly health and delicate frame attached to that 
portion of the National Guard which took no part in actual 
engagements, and was supposed to do work on the ram- 
parts and maintain order in the city. 

In that duty, sq opposed to his tastes and habits, Gustave 
signalized himself as one of the loudest declaimers against 
the imbecility of the ' Government, and in the demand for 
immediate and energetic action, no matter at what loss of 
life, on the part of all . except the heroic force to which he 
himself was attached. . Still, despite his military labors, Gus- 
tave found leisure to contribute to Red journals, and his 
contributions paid him tolerably well. To do him justice, 
his parents concealed from him the extent of their destitu- 
tion ; they, on their part, not aware that he was so able to 
assist them, rather fearing that he himself had nothing else 
for support but his scanty pay as a National Guard. In 



 



 



:rHE PABISIANB. . 273 

fact, of late the parents and son had seen little of each other. 
M. Kameau, though a Liberal politician, was Liberal as a 
tradesman, not as a Red Republican or a Socialist. And, 
though little heeding his son's theories while the Empire 
secured him from the practical effect of them, he was now as 
sincerely frightened at the chance of the Communists becom- 
ing rampant as most of the Parisian tradesmen were. Ma- 
dame Rameau, on her side, though she had the dislike to aris- 
tocrats which was prevalent with her class, wias a- staunch Ro- 
man Catholic ; and seeing in the disasters that had befallen 
her country the punishment justly incurred by its sins, could 
not but be shocked by the opinions of Gustavo, though she 
little kpew that he was the author of certain articles in cer- 
tain journals, in which these opinions were proclaimed with . 
a vehemence 'far exceeding that which they assumed in his 
conversation. She had spoken to him with* warm anger, 
inixed with passionate tears, on his irreligious principles ; 
and from that moment Gustavo shunned to give her an- 
other opportunity of insulting his pride and depreciating his 
wisdoto. 

Partly to avoid meeting his parents, partly because he re- 
coiled almost as much from the ennui of meetmg the other 
visitors at her apartments . the Paris ladies associated with 
her in the ambulance, Raoul de Vanderaar, whom he espe- 
cially hated, and the Abb6 Vertpr6, who had recently come 
into intimate friendship with both the Italian ladies . his 
visits to Isaura had become exceedingly rare. He made his 
incessant military duties the pretext for absenting himself; 
and now, on this evening, there were gathered round Isau-' 
ra's hearth . on which burned almost the last of the hoard- 
ed fuel . the Venosta, the two Rameaus, the Abb6 Vertpr6, 
who was attached as confessor to the society of which Isau- 
ra was so zealous a member. The old priest and the young 
poetess had become dear fiiends. There is in the nature 
bf a woman (and especially of a woman at once so gifted 
and so child-like as Isaura, combining an innate tendency to- 
ward faith with a restless inquisitiveness of intellect, which 
is always suggesting query or.do.ubt) a craving for some- 
thing afar from the sphere of her sorrow, which can only be 
obtained through that " bridal of the earth and sky " which 
we call religion. And hence to natures like Isaura's, that 



 



Gpogk 



274 THB PABI8IANS. 

link between the woman and the priest, which the philoso- 
phy of France has never been able to dissever. 

" It is growing late," said Madame Rameau ; " I am be- 
ginning to feel uneasy. Our dear Isaura is not yet re- 
turned." 

" You need be under no apprehension," said the Abb4 
'^ The ladies attached to the ambulance of which she is so 
tendeir and zealous a sister incur no risk. There are always 
brave men related to the sick and wounded who see to the 
safe return of the women. My poor Raoul visits that am- 
bulance daily. His kinsman, M. de Rochebriant, is there 
among the wounded." 

" Not seriously hurt, I hope," said the Venosta ; *.* not dis- 
figured ? He was so handsome ; it is only the ugly warrior 
whom a scar on the face improves." 

"Don't be 'alarmed, Signora; the Prussian guns spared 
his face. His wounds in themselves were not dangerous, 
but he lost* a good deal of blood. Raoul aiid the Christian 
brothers found him insensible among a heap of the slain." 

" M. de Vandemar seems to have very soon recovered the 
shock of his poor brother's death," said Madame Rameau. 
" There is very little heart in an aristocrat." 

The Abba's mild brow contracted. " Have more charity, 
my daughter : it is because Raoul's sorrow for his lost broth- 
er is so deep and so holy that he devotes himself more than 
ever to the service of the Father which is in heaven. He 
said, a day or two after the burial, when plans for a monu- 
ment to Enguerrand were submitted to him, 'May my prayer 
*be vouchsafed, and my life be a niemorial of liini more ac- 
ceptable to his gentle spirit than monuments of bronze or 
marble. May I be divinely guided and sustained in my 
desire to do such good acts as he would have done had he 
been spared longer to! earth. And whenever, tempted to 
weary, may my conscience whisper. Betray not the trust left 
to thee by thy brother, lest thou be not re-united to him at 
last.'" 

" Pardon me, pardon !" murmured Madame Rameau, hum- 
bly, while the Venosta burst into tears. 

The Abb6, though a most sincere and earnest ecclesiastic, 
was a cheery and genial man of the world ; and, in order to 
relieve Madame Rameau from the painful self-reproach he 



 



Coogk 



THB PABISIANS. 275 

had before excited, he turned the conversation. "I must 
beware, however," he said, with his pleasant laugh, " as to 
the company in which I interfere in family questions; and 
especially in which I defend my poor Raoul from any charge 
brought against him. For some good friend this day sent 
me a terrible organ of Communistic philosophy, in which 
we humble priests are Very roughly handled, and I myself 
am specially singled out by name as a pestilent intermed- 
dler in the affairs of private households. I am said to set 
the women against the brave men who are friends of the 
people, and am cautioned by very truculent threats to cease 
from such villainous practices." And here, with, a dry hu- 
mor that turned into ridicule what would . otherwise have 
excited disgust and indignation among his listeners, he read 
aloud passages replete with the sort of false eloquence which 
was then the vogue among the Red journals. In these pas- 
sages, not only the Abb6 was pointed out for popular execra- 
tion, but Raoul de Vandemar, though not expressly named, 
was dearly indicated as a pupil of the Abbe's, the type of a 
lay Jesuit. ' ' . 

The Venosta alone did not share in the contemptuous 
laughter with which the inflated style of these diartiribes in- 
spired the Rameaus. Her simple Italian mind was horror- 
stricken by language which the Abbe treated with ridicule. 

"Ah !" said M. Rameau, " I guess the author . that fire, 
brand Felix Pyat."^ 

" No," answered the Abb6 ; " the writer signs himself by 
the name of a more learned atheist-^Diderot Ujeuney 

Here the. door opened, and Raoul entered, accompanying 
Isaura. A change had come over the face of the young 
Vandemar since his brother's death. The lines about the 
piouth had deepened, the cheeks had lost their rounded con- 
tour and grown somewhat hollow. But the expression was 
a*8 serene as ever, perhaps even less pensively melancholy. 
His whole aspect was that of a man who has sorrowed, but 
been supported in sorrow ; perhaps it was more sweet. cer- 
tainly it was more lofty. * 

And, as if there were in the atmosphere of his presence 
something that communicated the likeness of his own soul 
to others, since Isaura.had J^een brought into his companion- 
ship, her own lovely fece had caught the expression that pre- 



 



 



276 THB PABISIAlfS. 

vailed in his . that, too, bad become more sweet . ^tbat^ too, 
bad become more lofty. 

The friendship that had grown up between these two 
yoang mourners was of a very rare nature. It had in it no 
sentiment that could ever warm into the passion of human 
love. Indeed, had Isaura's heart been free to give away, 
love for Raoul de Vandemar would have seemed to her a 
profanation. He was never more priestly than when he was 
most tender. And the tenderness of Raoul toward her was 
that of some saint-like nature toward the acolyte whom it 
attracted upward. He had once, just before Enguerrand's 
death, spoken to Isaura with a touching candor as to his 
own predilection for a monastic life. " The worldly avoca- 
tions that open useful and honorable careers for others have 
no charm for me. I care not for riches nor power, nor hon- 
ors nor fame. The austerities of the conventual life have 
no terror for me ; on the contrary, they have a ch&rm, for 
with them are abstraction from earth and meditation on heav- 
en. In earlier years I might, like other men, have cherish- 
ed dreams of human love, and felicity ill married life, but for 
the sort of veneration with which I regarded one to whom 
I owe . humanly speaking . whatever of good there may be 
in me. Just when first taking my place among the society 
of young men who banish from their life all thought of an- 
other, I came under the influence of a woman who taught 
me to see that holiness was beauty. She gradually asso- 
ciated me with her acts of benevolence, and from her I learn- 
ed to love God too well not to be indulgent to his creatures. 
I know not whether the attachment I felt to her. could have 
been inspired in one who had not from childhood conceived 
a romance, not perhaps justified by history, for the ideal im- 
ages of chivalry. My feeling for her at first was that of the 
pure and poetic homage which a young knight was permit- 
ted, sans reproche^ to render to some fair queen or cJidielidn^ 
whose colors he wore in the lists, whose spotless repute he 
would have periled his life to defend. But soon evett that 
sentiment, pure as it was, became chastened from all breath 
of earthly love, in proportion as the admiration refined itself 
into reverence. She has often urged me to marry, but I have 
no bride on this earth. I do bq^t wajit to see Enguerrand 
happily married, and then I quit the world for the cloister." 



 



 



THE PABISIAIfS. 2^7 

But after EDguerrand's death, Raoul resigned all idea of 
the convent. That eyening, as he attended to their homes 
Isaura and the other ladies attached to the ambulance, he 
said, in answer to inquiries about his mother, '^ She is re- 
signed and calm ; I have promised her I will not, while she 
lives, bury her other son: I renounce my dreams of the mon- 
astei^.'* 

Raoul did not remain many minutes at Isaura's. The 
Abb^ accompanied him on his way home. " I have a request 
to make to you," said the former ; " you know, of course, 
your distant cousin,*the Vicomte de Maul6on ?" 

" Yes. Not so well as I ought, for Enguerrand liked him." 

" Well enough, at all events, to call on him with a request 
which I am commissioned to make, but it might come better 
from you as a kinsman. I am a stranger to him, and I know 
not whether a man of that sort would not regard as an offi- 
cious intermeddling any communication made to him by a 
priest. The matter, however, is a very simple one. At the 

convent of there is a poor nun who is, I fear, dying. 

She has an intense desire to see M. de Maul6on, whom ^he 
declares to be her uncle, and her only surviving* relative. 
The laws of the convent are not too austere to prevent the 
interview she seeks in such a case. I should add that I am 
not acquainted with her previous history. I am not the con- 
fessor of the sisterhood ; he, poor man, was badly wounded 
by a chance ball a few days ago when attached to an ambu- 
lance on the ramparts. As soon as the surgeon would allow 
him to see any one, he sent for me, and bade me go to the 
nun' I speak of . Sister Ursula. It seems that he had irf- 
formed her that M. de Maul6on was at Paris, and had prom- 
ised to ascertain his address. His wound had prevented his 
doing so, but he trusted to me to procure the information. 
I am well acquainted with the Sup6rieure of the convent, 
and I flatter myself that she holds me in esteem. I had 
therefore no difficulty, to obtain her permission to see this 
poor nun, which I did this evening. She implored me for 
the peace of her soul to lose no time in finding out M. de 
Maul^on's address, and entreating him to visit her. Lest he 
should demur, I was to give him the name by which he had 
known her in the world . Louise Duval. Of course I obey- 
ed. The address of a man who has so distinguished himself 



 



 



278 TELB PARISIANS. 

in this unhappy siege I very easily obtained, and repaired at 
once to M. de Maaleou^s apartment. I there learned that he 
was from home, and it was uncertain whether he would not 
spend the night on the ramparts." 

*' I will not fail to see him early in the morning," said 
liaoul, '^ and execute your commission." 



CHAPTER IV. 

Dk Maitleon was somewhat surprised by RaonPs visit 
the next morning. He had no great liking for a kinsman 
whose politely distant reserve toward him, in contrast to 
poor Enguerrand's genial heartiness, had much wounded his 
sensitive self-respect ; nor could he comprehend the religious 
scruples which forbade Raoul to take a soldier's share in the 
battle-field, though in seeking there to save .the lives of oth- 
ers so fearlessly hazarding his own life. 

"Pardon," said Raoul,- with his. sweet, mournful smile, 
" the unseasonable hour at which I disturb youL But your 
duties oii the ramparts and mine in the hospital begin early, 
and I have promised .the Abbe Vertpr6 to communicate a 
message of a nature which perhaps you may deem pressing." 
He proceeded at once to repeat what the Abb4 had commu- 
nicated to him the night before 'relative to the illness and 
the request of the nun. 

" Louise Duval !" exclaimed the Vicomte ; " discovered 
at last, and a rdigieusel Ah ! I now understand why she 
flever sought me out when I re-appeared at Paris. * Tidings 
of that sort do not penetrate the walls of a eonvent. I am 
greatly obliged to you, M. de Vandemar, for the trouble yon 
have so kindly taken. This poor nun is related to me, and I 
will at once obey the summons. But this convent dm . I 
am ashamed to say I know not where it is. A long way off, 
I suppose ?" 

"Allow me to be your guide,". said Raoul; "I shoujd take 
it as a favor to be allowed to see a little more of a man 
whom my lost brother held in such esteem." 

Victor was touched by this conciliatory speech ; and in a 
few minutes move the two men were on their way to the 
convent on the other side of the Seine. 



 



 



THB PARISIANS. 279 

. 

Victor commenced the conversation^ by a warm and heart- 
felt tribute to EngueiTand's character and memory. " I nev- 
er," he said, " knew a nature more rich in the most endear- 
ing qualities of youth ; so gentle, so high-spirited, rendering 
every virtue more attractive, and redeeming such few faults 
or foibles as youth so situated and so tempted can not whol- 
ly escape, with an urbanity not conventional, not artificial, 
but reflected from the frankness of a genial temper and the 
tenderness of a generous heart. Be comforted for his loss, 
my kinsman. A brave death was the proper crown of that 
beautiful life." 

Raoul made no answer, but pressed gratefully* the arn? 
now linked within his own. The companions walked on in 
silence ; Victor's mind settling on the visit he was about to 
make to the niece so long mysteriously lost,, and now so un- 
expectedly found. Louise bad inspired him with a certain 
interest from her beauty and force of character, but never 
with any warm affection. He felt relieved to find that her 
life had found its close in the sanctuary of the convent. He 
had never divested himself of a certain fear, inspired byLou- 
vier's statement, that she might live to bring scandal and 
disgrace on the name he had with so much difficulty, and 
after so lengthened an anguish, partially cleared in his own 
person. 

Raoul left De Maul6on at the gate of the convent, and 
took his way toward the hospitals where he visited, and the 
.poor whom he relieved. 

Victor was conducted silently into the convent parloir; 
and, after waiting there several minutes, the door opened, 
and the Sup6rieure entered. As she advanced toward him, 
with stately step and solemn visage, De Maul^on recoiled, 
and uttered a half-suppressed exclamation that partook both 
of amaze and awe. Could it be possible ? Was this majerf- ^ 
tic woman, with the grave, iqipassible aspect, once the ardent 
girl whose tender letters he had cherished through stormy 
years, and only burned on the night before the most perilous 
of his battle-fields ? This the one, the sole one, whom in his 
younger dreams he had seen as his destined wife ? It was 
so . it was. Doubt vanished when he heard her voice ; and 
yet how difierent every toije, every accent, from those of the 
low, soft, thrilling music that had breathed in the voice of old ! 

,  VjOOQIC 



280 THB PABISIA27S. 

"M. de Maul6on," said the Sup6rieure, calmly, " I grieve 
to sadden you by very mournful intelligence. Yesterday 
evening, when the Abb6 undertook to convey to yon the re- 
quest of our Sister Ursula, although* she was beyond mortal 
hope of recovery . as otherwise you will conceive that I 
could not have relaxed the rules of this house so as to sanc- 
tion your visit . there was no apprehension of immediate 
danger. It was believed that her sufferings would be pro- 
longed for some days. I saw her late last night before retir- 
ing to my cell, and she seemed even stronger than she had 
been for the last week. A sister remained at watch in her 
cell. Toward morning she fell into apparently quiet sleep, 
and in that sleep she passed away." The Sup6rieare here 
crossed herself, and murmured pious words in Latin. 

" Dead ! my, poor niece I" said Victor, feelingly, roused 
from his stun at the first sight of the Sup^rieure by her meas- 
ured tones, and the melancholy information she so composed- 
ly conveyed to him. "I can not, then, even learn why she 
so wished to see me once more, or what she might have re- 
quested at my hands I" 

"Pardon, M. le Vicomte. Such sorrowful consolation I 
have resolved to afford you, not without scruples of con- 
science, but not without sanction of the excellent Abb6 Yert- 
pr6, whom I summoned early this morning to decide my 
duties in the sacred office I hold. As soon as Sister Ursula 
heard of your return to Paris, she obtained my permission 
to address to you a letter, subjected, when finished, to my 
perusal and sanction. She felt that she had much on her 
mind which her feeble state might forbid her to make known 
to you in conversation with sufficient fullness ; and as she 
could Only have seen you in presence of one of the sisters, 
she imagined that there <would also be less restraint in a 
Wiitten communication. In fine, her request was that, when 
you called, I might first place Ijiis letter in your hands, and 
allow you time to read it, before being admitted to her prea* 
ence ; when a few words, conveying your promise to attend 
to the -wishes with which you would then be acquainted, 
would suffice for an interview in ker exhausted condition. 
Do I make myself understood ?" 

" Certainly, madame . ^^and the ietter ?" * 

" She had concluded last evening ; and when I took leave 



 



 



THE PABISIAKS. 281 

of her later in the night, she placed it in my hands for ap- 
proval. M. le Vicomte, it pains me to say that there is much 
in the tone of that letter which I grieve for and condemn. 
And it was my intention to point this out to our sister at 
morning, and tell her that passages must be altered before I 
could give to you the letter. Her sudden decease deprived 
me of this opportunity. I could not, of course, alter or erase 
a line . a word. My only option was to suppress the letter 
altogether, or give it you intact. .The Abb6 thinks that, 
on the whole, my duty does not forbid the dictate of my 
own impulse . my own feelings ; and I now place this letter 
in your hands." 

De Maul6on took a packet, unsealed, from the thin white 
fingers of the Sup6rieure ; and, as he .bent to receive it, lifted 
toward her eyes eloquent with a sorrowful, humble pathos, 
in which it was impossible for the heart of a woman who had 
loved|not to see a reference to the past which the lips did 
not dare to utter. 

A faint, scarce-perceptible blush stole over the marble 
cheek of the nun. But, with an exquisite delicacy, in which 
survived the woman while reigned the nun, she replied to 
the appeal. 

" M, Victor de Maul6on, before, having thus met, we part 
forever, permit a poor religieuse to say with what joy . a 
joy rendered happier because it was tearful . ^I have learned, 
through the Abb6 Vertpr6, that the honor which, as between 
man and man, no one who had once known you could ever 
doubt, you have liv6d to vindicate from calumny." 

"Ah ! you have heard that . ^at last ! at last !" 

"I repeat . of the honor thus deferred I never doubted." 
The Sup6rieure hurried on. " Greater joy it has been to me 
to hear from the same venerable source that, while found 
t)ravest among the defenders of your country, you are clear 
from all alliance with the assailants of your God. Continue 
so, continue so, Victor de Maul^on." 

She retreated to the door, and then turned toward him 
with a look in which all the marble had melted away ; add- 
ing, with words more formally nun-like, yet unmistakably 
woman-like, than those which had gone before, " That to the 
last you may be true to God, is a prayer never by me omit- 
ted." 

 VjOOQIC 



282 THE PARISIANS. 

She spoke, and vanished. 

In a kind of dim and dream-like bewilderment Victor de 
Maul6on found himself without the walls of the convent. 
Mechanically, as a man does when the routine of his life is 
presented to him, from the first Minister of State to the poor 
clown at the suburban theatre, doomed to appear at their 
posts, to prose on a Beer Bill or grin through a horse-collar, 
though their hearts are bleeding at every pore with some 
household or secret aflliction . mechanically De Maul6on 
went his way toward the ramparts, at a section of which he 
daily drilled his raw recruits. Proverbial for his severity to- 
ward those who offended, for the cordiality of his praise of 
those who pleased his soldierly judgment, no change of his 
demeanor was visible that morning, save that he might be 
somewhat milder to the one, somewhat less hearty to the 
other. This routine duty done, he passed slowly toward a 
more deserted because a more exposed part of the defenses, 
and seated himself on the frozen sward alone. The cannon 
thundered around him. He heard unconsciously : from tune 
to time an obus hissed and 'splintered close at his feet ; he 
saw with abstracted eye. His soul was with the past ; and, 
brooding .over all that in the past lay buried there, came 
over him a conviction of the vanity of the human earth- 
bounded objects for which we bum or freeze, far more abso- 
lute than had grown out of the worldly cynicism connect- 
ed with his worldly ambition. The sight of that face, asso- 
ciated with the one pure romance of his reckless youth, the 
face of one so estranged, so serenely alofl from all memories 
of youth, of romance, of passion, smote him in the midst of 
the new hopes of the new career, as the look on the skull of 
. the woman he had so loved and so mourned, when disburied 
from her grave, smote the brilliant noble who became the^ 
stern reformer of La Trappe. And while thus gloomily 
meditating, the letter of the poor Louise Duval was forgot- 
ten. She whose existence had so troubled, and crossed, and 
partly marred the \\9e% of others -r- she, scarcely dead, and 
already forgotten by her nearest of kin. Well . had she not 
forgotten, put wholly out of her mind, all that was due to 
those much nearer to her than is an uncle to a niece ? 

The short, bitter, sunless day was advancing toward its 
decline, before Victor roused himself with a quick, impatient 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 283 

start from his reverie, and took forth the letter from the 
dead nun. 

It began with expressions of gratitude, of joy at the 
thought that she should see him again before she died, thank 
him for his past kindness, and receive, she trusted, his assur- 
ance that he would attend to her last remorseful injunctions. 
I pass over much that followed in the explanation of events 
in her life suflSciently known to the reader. She stated, as 
the strongest reason why she had refused the hand of Lou- 
vier, her knowledge that she should in due time become a 
mother . a fact concealed from Victor, secure that he would 
then urge her not to annul her informal marriage, but rath- 
er insist on the ceremonies that would render it valid. She 
touched briefly on her confidential intimacy with Madame 
Marigny, the exchange of name and papers, her confinement 
in the neighborhood of Aix, the child left to the care of 
the nurse, the journey to Munich to find the false Louise 
Duval was no more. The documents obtained through the 
agent of her easy-tempered kinsman^ the late Marquis de 
Eochebriant, and her subsequent domestication in the house 
of the Von Rudesheims . all this it is needless to do more 
here than briefly recapitulate. The letter then went on: 
" While thus kindly treated by the family with whom nom- 
inally a governess, I was on the terms of a friend with Sign- 
or Ludovico Cicogna, an Italian of noble birth. He was 
the only man I ever cared for. I loved him with frail hu- 
man passion. I could not tell him my true history. I could 
not tell him that I had a child; such intelligence would 
have made him renounce me a^ once. He had a daughter, 
still but an infant, by a former maiTiage, then brought up in 
France. He wished to take her to his house, and his second 
wife to supply the place of her mother. What was I to do 
with the child I had left near Aix? While doubtful and 
distracted, I read an advertisement in the journals to the ef- 
fect that a French lady, then staying in Coblentz, wished to 
adopt a female child not exceeding the age of six : the child 
to be wholly resigned to her by the parents, she undertak- 
ing to rear and provide for it as her own. I resolved to go 
to Coblentz at once. I did so. I saw this lady. She seem- 
ed in affluent circumstances, yet young, but a confirmed in- 
valid, confined the greater part of the day to her. sofa by 



 



 



284 THE PABISIANS. 

some malady of the spine. She told me very* frankly her 
story. She had been a professional dancer on the stage, had 
married respectably, quitted the stage, become a widow, and 
shortly afterward been seized with the complaint that would 
probably for life keep her a secluded prisoner in her room. 
Thus afflicted, and without tie, interest, or object in the 
world, she conceived the idea of adopting a child that she 
might bring up to tend and cherish her as a daughter. In 
this, the imperative condition was that the child should nev- 
er be resought by the parents. She was pleased by my 
manner and appearance: she did not wish her adopted 
daughter to be the child of peasants. She asked me for no 
references, made no inquiries. She said cordially that she 
wished for no knowledge that, through any indiscretion of 
her own, communicated to the child, might lead her to seek 
the discovery of her real parents. In fine, I left Coblentz 
on the understanding that I was to biing the infant, and if 
it pleased Madame Surville, the agreement was concluded. 

" I then repaired t% Aix. I saw Jthe child ! Alas I unnat- 
ural mother that I was, the sight only more vividly brought 
before me the sense of my own perilous position. Yet the 
child was lovely I a likeness of myself, but lovelier far, for it 
was a pure, innocent, gentle loveliness. And they told her 
to call me ^Maman? Oh, did I not relent when I heard 
that name ? No ; it jarred on my ear, as a word of repiDach 
and shame. In walking with the infant toward the railway 
station, imagine my dismay when suddenly I met the man 
who had been taught to believe me dead. I soon discovered 
that his dismay was equal^to my own . that I had nothing 
to fear from his desire to claim me. It did occur to me for 
a moment to resign his child to him. Bat when he shrank 
reluctantly from a half suggestion to that effect, my pride 
.was wounded, my conscience absolved. . And, after all, it 
might be unsafe to my future to leave with him any motive 
for retracing me. I left him hastily. I have nec^er seen nor 
heard of him more. I took the child to Coblentz. Madame 
Surville was charmed with its prettiness and prattle. charm- 
ed still more when I rebuked the poor infant for calling me 
* Maman^ and said, ' Thy real mother is here.' Freed from 
my trouble, I returned to the kind German roof I had quitted, 
and shortly after became the wife of Ludovico Cicogna. 



 



Google 



THE PAEISIANS. . 285 

' "My punishment soon began. His was a light, fickle, 
pleasure-hunting nature. He soon grew weary of me. My 
very love made me unamiable to him. I became irritable, 
jealous, exacting. His daughter, who now came to live 
with us, was another subject of discord. I knew that he 
loved her better than me. I became a harsh stepmother; 
and Ludovico's reproaches, vehemently made, nursed all my 
angriest passions. But a son of this new marriage was born 
to myself. My pretty Luigi ! how my heart became wrap- 
ped up in him ! Nursing him, I forgot resentment against 
his father. Well, poor Cicogna fell ill and died. I mourned 
him sincerely, but my boy was left. Poverty then fell on 
me. poverty extreme. Cicogna's sole income was derived 
from a post in the Austrian dominion in Italy, and ceased 
with it. He received a small pension in compensation ; that 
died wii^h him. 

"At this time an EnglishYnan with whom Ludovico had 
made acquaintance in Venice, and who visited often at our 
house in Yerona, offered me his hand. He had taken an ex- 
traordinary liking to Isaura, Cicogna's daughter by his first 
marriage. But I think his proposal was dictated partly by 
compassion for me, and more by affection for her. For the 
sake of my boy Luigi I married him. He was a good man, 
of retired, learned habits with which I had no sympathy. 
His companionship overwhelmed me with ennui. But I 
bore it patiently for Luigi's sake. God saw that my heart 
was as much as ever estranged from him, and he took away 
my all on earth . my boy. Then, in my desolation,! turned 
to our Holy Chufch for comfort. I found a fi'iend in the 
priest, my confessor. I was startled to learn from him how 
guilty I had been . was still. Pushing to an extreme the 
doctrines of the Church, he would not allow that my first 
marriage, though null by law, was void in the eyes of Heav- 
en. Was not the death of the child I so cherished a penalty 
due to my sin toward the child I had abandoned ? 

" These thoughts pressed on me night and day. With the 
consent and approval ^of the good priest, I determined to 
quit the roof of M. Selby, and to devote myself to the dis- 
covery of jny forsaken Julie. 

" I had a painful interview with M. Selby. I announced 
my intention to separate from him. I alleged as a reason 



 



 



286 THB PARISIANS. 

my conscientious repugnance to live with a professed here- 
tic . an enemy to our Holy CJiurch. When M. Selby found 
that he could not shake my resolution, he lent himself to it 
with the forbearance and generosity which he had always 
exhibited. On our marriage he had settled on me five thou- 
sand pounds, to be absolutely mine in the event of his death. 
He now pr<^osed to concede to me the interest on that cap- 
ital during his life, and ie undertook the charge of my step- 
daughter Isaui*a, and secured to her all the rest he had to 
leave; such landed property as he possessed in England 
passing to a distant relative. 

"So we parted, not with hostility . tears were shed on 
both sides. I set out for Coblentz. Madame Surville had 
long since quitted that town, devoting some years to the 
round of various mineral spas in vain hope of cure. Not 
without some difficulty I traced her to her last residence in 
the neighborhood of Paris, but 'she was then no more . her 
death accelerated by the shock occasioned by the loss of her 
whole fortune, which she had been induced to place in one 
of the numerous fraudulent companies by which so many 
^-have been ruined. Julie, who was with her at the time 
of her death, had disappeared shortly after it . ^none could 
tell me whither ; but from such hints as I could gather, the 
poor child, thus left destitute^ had been betrayed into sinful 
courses. 

" Probably I might yet by searching inquiry have found 
her out ; you will say that it was my duty at least to insti- 
tute such inquiry. No doubt ; I now remorsefully feel that 
it was. . I did not think so at the time. The Italian priest 
had given me a few letters of introduction to French ladies 
with whom, when they had sojourned at Florence, he had 
made acquaintance! These ladies were very strict devotees, 
formal observers of those decorums by which devotion pro- 
claims itself to the world. They had received me not only 
with kindness, but with marked respect. They chose to ex- 
alt into the noblest self-sacrifice the act of my leaving M. 
Selby's house. Exaggerating the s\mple cause assigned to 
it in the priest's letter, they represented me as quitting a 
luxurious home and an idolizing husband ratherthan con- 
tinue intimate intercourse with the enemy of my religion. 
This new sort of flattery intoxicated me with its fumes. I 



.  



 



THE PARISIANS. 287 

recoiled from the thought of shattering the pedestal to which 
I had found myself elevated. What if I should discover my 
daughter in one from the touch of whose robe these holy 
women would recoil as from the rags of a leper ! No ; it 
would be impossible for me to own her . impossible for me 
to give her the shelter of my roof. Nay, if discovered to 
hold any commune with such an outcast, no explanation, no 
excuse short of the actual truth, would avail with these aus- 
tere judges of human error. And the actual truth would be 
yet deeper disgrace. I reasoned away my conscience. , If I 
looked for e:2ftimple in the circles in which I had obtained 
reverential place, I could find no instance in which a girl 
who had fallen from virtue was not repudiated by her near- 
est relatives. Nay, when I thought of my own mother, had 
not her father refused to see her, to acknowledge her child, 
from no other offense than that of a m^cUliance which wound- 
ed the family pride ? That pride, alas ! was in my blood . 
my sole inheritance from the family I sprang from. 

" Thus it went on, till I had grave symptoms of a disease 
which rendered the duration of my life uncertain. My con- 
science awoke and tortured me. I resolved to take the veil. 
Vanity and pride again I My resolution was applatfded by 
those whose opinion had so swayed my mind and my con- 
duct. Before I retired into the convent from which I write, 
I made legal provision as. to the bulk of the fortune whic^, 
by the death of M. Selby, has become absolutely at my dis- 
posal. One thousand pounds 'amply sufficed for dotation to 
the convent : the other four thousand pounds are given in 
trust to the eminent notary, M. Nadaud, Rue , On ap- 
plying to him, you will find that the sum, witK the accumu- 
lated interest, is bequeathed to you . a tribute of gratitude 
for the assistance you afforded me in the time of your own 
need, and the Kindness with which you acknowledged our 
relationship and commiserated my misfortunes. 

" But oh, my unclcj find out . a man can do so with a fa- 
cility not accorded to a woman . what has become of this 
poor Julie, and devote what you may deem right and just 
of the sum thus bequeathed to place her above want and 
temptation. In doing so, I know you will respect my name: 
I would not have it dishonor you, indeed. 

" I have been employed in writing this long letter since 

 VjOOQIC 



288 THE PARISIANS. 

# 

the day I heard you were in Paris. It has exhausted the 
feeble remnants of my strength. It will be given to you be- 
fore the interview I at once dread and long for, and in that 
interview you will not rebuke me. Will you, my kind un- 
cle ? No, you will only soothe and pity ! 

" Would that I were worthy to pray for others, that I 
might add, ^ May the saints have you in their keeping, and 
lead you to faith in the Holy Church, which has power to 
absolve from sins those who repent as I do.' " ^ 

The letter dropped from Victor's l^md. He took it up, 
smoothed it mechanically, and with a dim, abstracted, bewil- 
dered, pitiful wonder. Well might the Sup^rieure have hes- 
itated to allow confessions, betraying a mind so little regu- 
lated by genuine religious faith, to pass into other hands. 
Evidently it was the paramount duty of rescuing from want 
or from sin the writer's forsaken child, that had overborne 
all other considerations in the mind of the Woman and the 
Priest she consulted. 

Throughout that letter, what a strange perversion of un- 
derstanding ! what a half-unconscious confusion of wrong 
and right ! . the duty marked out so obvious and so neglect- 
ed ; effen the religious sentiment awakened by the conscience 
so dividing itself from the moral instinct 1 the dread of be- 
ing thought less religious by obscure comparative strangers 
gtronger than the moral obligation to discover and reclaim 
the child for whose errors, if she had erred, the mother who 
BO selfishly forsook her was alone responsible I even at the 
last, at the approach of death, the love for a name she had 
never made a self-sacrifice to preserve unstained, and that 
concluding exhortation . that reliance on a repentance in 
which there was so qualified a reparation ! 

More would Victor de Maul6on have wondered had he 
known those points of similarity in character, and on the 
nature of their final bequests, between Louise Duval and the 
husband she had deserted. By one of those singular coinci- 
dences which, if this work be judged by the ordinary rules 
presented to the ordinary novel-reader, a critic would not 
unjustly impute to defective invention in the author, the pro- 
vision for this child, deprived of its natural parents during 
their lives, is left to the discretion and honor of trustees, ac- 
companied on the part of the consecrated Louise and " the 

 VjOOQIC 



i 



. 



 VjOOQIC 




 



 



THE PABISIAKS. 289 

blameless king," with the injunction of respect to their world- 
ly reputations . two parents so opposite in condition, in 
creed, in disposition, yet assimilating in that point of indi- 
vidual character in which it touches the wide, vague circle 
of human opinion.. For this, indeed, the excuses of Richard 
King are strong, inasmuch as the secrecy he sought was for 
the sake, not of his own memory, but that of her whom 
the world knew only as his honored wife. The conduct of 
Louise admits no such excuse ; she dies as she had lived, an 
egoist. But, whatever the motives of the parents, what is the 
fate of the deserted child ? What revenge does the worldly 
opinion, which the parents would escape for themselves, in- 
flict on the innocent infent to whom the bulk of their world- 
ly possessions is to be clandestinely conveyed ? Would all 
the gold of Ophir be compensation enough for her ? 

Slowly De Maul6on roused himself, and turned from the 
solitary place where he hid been seated to a more crowd- 
ed part of the ramparts. He passed a group of young Mob- 
lots^ with flowers wreathed round their gun-barrels. " If,'^ 
said one of them, gayly, "Paris wants bread, it never wants 
flowers." His companions laughed merrily^nd burst out 
into a scurrile song in ridicule of St. Trochu. Just then an 
olms fell a few yards before the group. The sound only for 
a mo'ment drowned the song, but the splinters struck a man 
in a coarse, ragged dress, who had stopped to listen to the 
singers. At his sharp cry, two men hastened to his side : 
one was Victor de Maul^on ; the other was a surgeon, who 
quitted another group of idlers . National Guards . attract- 
ed by the shriek that summoned his professional aid. The 
poor man was terribly wounded. The surgeon, glancing at 
De Maul6on, shrugged his shoulders, and muttered, " Past 
help!" The sufferer turned his haggard eyes on the Vi- 
comte, and gasped out, " M. de Maul6on ?" 

"That is my name," answered Victor, surprised, and not 
immediately recognizing the sufferer. ^ 

" Hist, Jean Lebeau I look at me, you recollect me now . 
Marc le Roux, concierge, to the Secret Council. Ay, I found 
out who you were long ago . ^followed you home from the 
last meeting you broke up. But I did not betray yon, or 
you would have been murdered long since. Beware of the 
old set ; beware of. of. " Here his voice broke off" into 



 



 



290 THE PAEISIANS. 

shrill exclamations of pain. Curbing his last agonies with a 
powerfiil effort, he faltered forth, " You owe me a service . 
see to the little one at home . she is starving." The death- 
rdle came on ; in a few moments he was no more. 

Victor gave orders for the removal gf the corpse, and 
hurried away. The surgeon, who had changed countenance 
when he overheard the name in which the dying man had 
addressed De Maul6on, gazed silently after De Mauleon's 
retreating form, and then, also quitting the dead, rejoined 
the group he had quitted. Some of those who composed it 
acquired evil renown later in the war of the Communists, 
and came to disastrous ends : among that number the Pole 
Dombinsky and other members of tfie Secret Council. The 
Italian Rasclli was there too, but, subtler than his French 
confreres, l[\^diYmed the fate of the Communists, and glided 
from it . safe now in his native land, destined there, no 
doubt, to the funereal honors ^d lasting renown which 
Italy bestows on the dust of her sons who have advocated 
^assassination put of love for the human race. 

Amidst this grou|v^o^9 ^^ * National Guard, strayed from 
his proper pa|^'and stretched on the frozen ground ; and, 
early though-tne hour, in the profound sleep of intoxication. 

" So," sa^ Dombinsky, " you have found your errand in 
vain, Citizea le Noy ; another victim to the imbecility of our 
generals." 

"And partly one of ns," replied the MMedn des Pauvres. 
" You remember poor Le Roux, who kept the old baroque 
where the Council of Ten used to meet ^ Yonder he lies." 

" Don't talk of the Council of Ten. What fools and dupes 
we were made by that viettx gredin, Jean Lebeau ! .How I 
wish I could meet him again !" 

Gaspard le Noy smiled sarcastically. "So much the 
worse for you if you did. A muscular and a ruthless fellow 
is that Jean Lebeau !" Therewith he turned to the drunk- 
en sleeper and woke^ him up with a shake and a kick. 

" Armand . Armand Monnier, I say, rise, rub your eyes ! 
What if you are called to your ppst ? What if you are 
shamed as a deserter and a coward ?" 

Armand turned, rose with an effort from the recumbent to 
the sitting posture, and stared dizzily in the face of the Me- 
decin des Pauvres, 



 



Google 



A 



THE PABISIANB. 291 

" I was dreaming that I had caught by the throat," said 
Armand, wildly, " the ariato who shot my brother ; and 
lo, there were two men, Victor de Mauleon and Jean Le- 
beau." 

"Ah ! there is something in dreams," said the surgeon. 
"Oncain a thousand times a dream comes true." 



CHAPTER V. 

The time now came when all provision of food or of fuel 
failed the modest household of Isaura ; and there was not 
only herself and the Venosta to feed and warm . there were 
the servants whom they had brought from Italy, and had not 
the heart now to dismiss to the certainty of ||tmine. True, 
one of the three, the man, had returned to his native land be- 
fore the commencement of the siege ; but the two women had 
remained. They supported themselves now as they could 
on the meagre rations accorded by the government. Still 
Isaura attended the ambulance to wluoh she was attached. 
From the ladies associated with her she '<^li(Hd readily have 
obtained ample supplies ; but they had no conception of her 
real state of destitution, and there was a false pl^e^generally 
prevalent amoQg the respectable classes, which Isaura shared, 
that concealed distress lest alms should be proffered. 

The destitution of the household had been carefmlly con- 
cealed from the parents of Gustavo Rameau, until, one day, 
Madame Rameau, entering at the hour at which she gener- 
ally, and her husband sometimes, came for a place by the fire- 
side and a seat at the board, found on the one only ashes, on 
the other a ration of the black nauseous compound which had 
become the substitute for bread. 

Isaura was absent on her duties at the ambulance hospital 
. ^jjurposely absent, for she shrank from the bitter task of 
making clear to the Mends of her betrothed the impossibility 
of continuing the aid to their support which their son had 
neglected to contribute ; and sti|l more from the comment 
which she knew they would make on his conduct, in absent- 
ing himself so wholly of late, and in the time of such trial 
and pressure, both from them and from herself. Truly, she 
rejoiced at that absence so far as \i affected herself. Every 



 



 



292 THB FABISIAirS. 

hoar of the day she silently asked her conscience whether 
she were not now absolved from a promise won from her 
only by an assurance that she had power to influence for 
good the life that now voluntarily separated itself from her 
own. As she had never loved Gustave, so she felt no resent- 
ment at the indifference his conduct manifested. On the con- 
trary, she hailed it as a sign that the annulment of their be- 
trothal would be as welcome to him as to herself. And if 
so, she could restore to him the sort of compassionate friend- 
ship she had learned to cherish in the hour of his illness and 
repentance. She had resolved to seize the first oppoi*tunity 
he afforded to her of speaking to him with frank and truth- 
ful plainness. But, meanwhile, her gentle nature recoiled 
from the confession of her resolve to appeal to Gustave him- 
self for the rapture of their engagement. 

Thus the Venosta alone received Madame Rameau ; and 
while that lady was still gazing round her with an emotion 
too deep for immediate utterance, her husband entered with 
an expression of face new to him . the look of a man who has 
been stung to anger, and who has braced his mind to %ome 
stern determin||ion. This altered countenance of the ^ood- 
tempered bourgeois was not, however, noticed by the two 
women. The Venosta did not even raise her eyes to it, as 
with humble accents she said, " Pardon, dear monsieur, par- 
don, madame, our want of hospitality ; it is not our hearts 
that fail. We kept our state from you as long as we could. 
Now it speaks for itself: ^ la fame ^,una hraUa featinP^ 

" Oh, madame I and oh, my poor Isaura I" cried Madame 
Rameau, bursting into tears. " So we have been all this 
time a burden on you . aided to bring such want on you! 
How can we ever be forgiven ? And my son . to leave us 
thus . ^not even to tell us where to find him !" 

" Do not degrade us, my wife," said M. Rameau, with un- 
expected dignity, " by a word to imply that we woul^ sloop 
to sue for support to our ungrateful child. No, we will not 
starve ! I am strong enough still to find food for you. I 
will apply for restoration to the National Guard. They have 
augmented the pay to married men; it is now nearly two 
francs and a half a day to a phre de famiMe, and on that pay 
we all can at least live. Courage, my wife ! I will go at 
once for employment. Jiiany men older than I am are at 



 



 



. THE PARISIANS. 293 

watch on the ramparts, and will inarch to the battle on the 
next sortie." 

" It shall not be so," exclaimed Madame Rameau, vehe- 
mently, and winding her arm round her husband's neck. " I 
loved my ^on better than thee once . more the shame to me. 
Now, I would rather lose twenty such sons than peril thy 
life, my Jagques I Madame," she continued, turning to the 
Venosta, " thou wert wiser than I. Thou wert ever opposed 
to the vnion between thy young friend and my son. I felt 
sore with thee for it . a mother is so selfish when she puts 
herself in the place of her child. I thought that only through 
marriage with one so pure, so noble, so holy, Gustave could 
be saved from sin and evil. I am deceived. A man so heart- 
less to his parents, so neglectful of his affianced, is not to be 
redeemed. I brought about this betrothal : tell Isaura that 
I release her from it. I have watched her closely since she 
was entrapped into it. I know how miserable the thought 
of it has made her, though, in her sublime devotion to her 
plighted word, she sought to conceal from me the real state 
of her heart. If the betrothal bring such sorrow, what would 
the union do ! Tell her this fromiae. Come, Jacques, come 
away !" . 

" Stay, madame !" exclaimed the Venosta, her excitable nat- 
ure much affected by this honest outburst of feeling. " It 
is true that I did oppose, so far as I could, my poor Piccolo! 8 
engag^tnent with M. Gustave. But I dare not do your bid- 
ding. Isaura would not listen to me. And let us be justf 
M. Gustave may be able satisfactorily to explain his seeming 
indifference and neglect. His health is always very delicate ; 
perhaps he may be again dangerously ill. He serves in the 
National Guard ; perhaps " . she paused, but the mother con- 
jecturedgbhe word left unsaid, and, clasping her hands, cried 
out in anguish, " Perhaps dead I . and we have wronged him ! 
Oh, Jacques, Jacques ! how shall* we find out . how discover 
our boy? Who can tell us where to search ? at the hospital 
. or in the cemeteries ?" At the last word she dropped into 
a seat, and her whole frame shook with sob^. 

Jacques approached her tenderly, and kneeling by her side, 
said, 

" No, ffHaime^ comfort thyself, if it be indeed comfort to 
learn that thy son is alive and well. For my part, I know 



 



 



294 THE PABISIANS. * 

not if I would not rather he had died in his innocent child- 
hood. I have seen him . spoken to him, I know where he- 
is :to he found." 

" You dp, and concealed it from me^ Oh, Jacques !" 

" Listen to me, wife, and you too, madame ; for what I have 
to say should be made Imown to Mademoiselle Cicogna. 
Some time since, on the night of the famous soiAie, when at 
my post on the ramparts, I was told that Gustave had joined 
himself to the most violent of the Red Republicans, tind had 
uttered at the Chib de la Vengeance sentiments of which I 
will only say that I, his father and a Frenchman, hung my 
head with shame when they were repeated to me. I resolved 
to go to the club myself. I did. I heard him speak . ^heard 
him denounce Christianity as the instrument of tyrants.'* 

"Ah I" cried the two women, with a simultaneous shudder. 

" When the assembly broke up, I waylaid him at the doop. 
I spoke to him seriously. I told him what anguish such an- 
nouncement of blasphemous opinions would inflict on his 
pious mother. I told him I should deem it my duty to in- 
form Mademoiselle Cicogna, and warn her against the union 
on which he had told us his heart was bent^ He appeared 
sincerely moved by wlAt I said ; implored me to keep silence 
toward his mother and his betrothed ; and promised, on that 
condition, to relinquish at once what he called ^ his career as 
an orator,' and appear no 4nore at such execrable clubs. On 
. this understanding I held my tongue. Why, with such other 
.causes of grief and suffering, should I tell thee, poor wife, of 
a sin that I hoped thy son had repented and would not re- 
peat ? And Gustavo kept his word. He has never, so far as 
I know, attended, at least spoken, at the Red clubs since that 
evening." 

^ Thank Heaven so far," murmured Madame Ralleau. 

" So far, yes ; but hear more. A little time after I thus 
met him he changed his loflging, and did not confide to us 
his new address, giving as a reason to us that he wished to 
avoid all clue to his discovery by that pertinacious Mademoi- 
selle Julie." 

Rameau had here sunk his voice into a whisper, intended 
only for his wife, but the ear of the Venosta was fine enough 
to catch the sound, and she repented, " Mademoiselle Julie ! 
Santa Maria ! who is she ?" 



 



Google 



THE PABISIANS. " 295 

" Oh," said M. Rameau, with a shrug of his shoulders, and 
with true Parisian sang froid as to such matters of morality, 
"a trifle not worth considering. Of course a good-looking 
gar^on like Gustave must have his little affairs of the heart 
before he settles for life. Unluckily, aipong those of Oustave 
was one with a violent-tempered girl who persecuted him 
when he left her, and he naturally wished to avoid all chadce 
of a silly scandal, if only out of respect to the dignity of his 
fiancie. But I found that was not the true motive, or at 
least the only one, for concealment. Prepare yourself, my poor 
wife. Thou hast heard of these terrible journals which the 
d&chiance has let loose upon us. Our unhappy boy is the 
principal writer of one of the worst of them, under the name 
of * Diderot le Jeune.' " 

" What !" cried the Venosta. " That monstw ! The good 
Abb6 Vertpr6 was telling us of the writings with that name 
attached to them. The Abb6 himself is denounced by name 
as one of those meddling priests who are to be constrained 
to serve as soldiers, or pointed out to the vengeance of the 
mcanaiUe, Isaura's^awc^e a blasphemer !" 

" Hush, hush !" said Madame Rameau, rising, very pale but 
self-ollected. " How do you know this, Jacques ?" 

" From the lips of Gustave himself. I heard first of it yes- 
terday from one of the young reprobates with whom he used 
to be familiar, and who even complimented me on the rising 
fame of my son, and praised the eloquence of his article that 
day. But I would not believe him. I bought the journal 
. ^here it is; saw the name and address of the printer . went 
this morning to the office . was there told that 'Diderot le 
Jeune' was. within, revising the press . stationed myself by 
the street door, and when Gustave came out I seized his 
arm and as^ed him if he were the author of this infamous 
article . this, which I now bold in my handi He owned 
the authorship with pride ; talked wildly of the great man 
he was . of the great things he was to do; said that, in 
hitherto concealing his true name, he had done all he could 
to defer to the bigoted prejudices of his parents and his^an- 
cie; and that if genius, like fire, would find its way out, he 
could not help it ; that a time was rapidly coming when his 
opinions would be uppermost ; that since October the Com- 
munists wera gaining ascendency, and only waited the end 



 



GDogk 



296 THE PABISIANS. 

of the siege to put down the present government, and with 
it all hypocrisies and shams, religious or social. My wife, he 
was rude to me, insulting ; hut he had been drinking . that 
made him incautious ; and he continued to walk by my side 
toward his own lodging, on reaching which he ironically 
invited me to enter, saying I should meet there men who 
would soon argue me out of my obsolete notions. You may 
go to him, wife, now, if you please. I will not, nor will I take 
from him a crust of bread. I came hither, determined to tell 
the young, lady all this, if I found her at home. I should be 
a dishonored man if I suffered her to be cheated into misery. 
There, Madame Venosta, there ! Take that journal, show it 
*to Mademoiselle, and report to her all I have said." 

M. Rameau, habitually the mildest of men, had, in talking, 
worked himself up into positive fury. 

His wife, calmer but more deeply affected, made a piteous 
sign to the Venosta not to say more ; and without other sal- 
utation or adieu took her husband's arm, and led him from 
the house. 



CHAPTER VL 

Obtaining from her husband Gustave's address, Madame 
Rameau hastened to her son's apartment alone through the 
darkling streets. The house in which he lodged was in a 
different quarter from that in which Isaura had visited kim. 
Theif the street selected was still in the centre of the beau 
monde . now it was within the precincts of that section of 
the jpany-faced capital in which the beau monde was held in 
d^estation or scorn ; still the house had certain pretensions, 
boasting a court-yard and a porter's lodge. Madame Ra- 
meau, instructed to mount au second, found tl^e door ajar, 
and, entering! perceived on the table of the little acUon the 
remains of a feast which, however untempting it might have 
been in happier times, contrasted strongly the meagre fare 
of which Gustave's parents had deemed themselves fortunate 
to partake at the board of his betrothed . remnants of those 
viands which offered to the inquisitive epicure an experiment 
in food much too costly for the popular stomach . dainty 
morsels of elephant, hippopotamus, and wolf, interspersed 
with half-emptied bottles of varied and highiprioed wine&. 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 297 

Passing these evidences of unseasonable extravagance with a 
mute sentiment of anger and disgust, Madame Raifiieau pen- 
etrated into a small cabinet, the door of which was also ajar, 
and saw her son stretched on his bed half dressed, breathing* 
heavily in the sleep which follows intoxication. She did not 
attempt to disturb him. She placed herself quietly by his 
side, gazing mournfully on the face which she had once so- 
proudly contemplated, now haggard and faded . still strange- 
ly beautiful, though it was the beauty of ruin. 

From time to time he stirred uneasily, and muttered broken 
* words, in which fragments of his own delicately worded verse 
were incoherently mixed up with ribald slang, addressed to 
imaginary companions. In his dreams*he was evidently liv- 
ing over again his late revel, with episodical diversions into 
the poet-world, of which he was rather a vagrant nomad than 
a settled cultivator. Then she would silently bathe his fever- 
ish temples with the perfumed water she found on his dress^ 
ing- table. And so she watched till, in the middle of the 
night, he awoke, and recovered the possession of his reason 
with a quickness that surprised Madame Rameau. He was, 
indeed, one of those men in whom excess of drink, when slept 
oif, is succeeded by extreme mildness, the effect of nervous 
exhaustion, and by a dejected repentance, which to his moth- 
er seemed a propitious lucidity of the moral sense. 

Certainly on seeing her he threw himself on her breast, and 
began to she(l tears. Madame Rameau had not the heart to 
reproach him sternly. But by gentle degrees she made him 
comprehend the pain he had given to his father, and the des- 
titution in which he had deserted bis parents and his affi- 
anced. In his present mood Gustavo was deeply affected by 
these representations. He excused himself feebly by dwell- 
ing on the excitement of the times, the preoccupation of his 
mind, the example of his companions ; but with his excuses 
he mingled passionate expressions of remorse, and before day- 
break mother and son were completely reconciled. Then he 
fell into a tranquil sleep ; and Madame Rameau, quite worn 
out, slept also in the chair beside him, her arm around his 
neck. He awoke. before she did at a late hour in the morn- 
ing ; and, stealing from her arm, went to his escritoire, and 
took forth what money he found there, half of which he pour- 
ed into her lap, kissing her till she awoke. 



 



 



298 THB FABJBlkNS, 

"Mother," he said, " henceforth I will work for thee and my 
father. Take this trifle now ; the rest I reserve for Isaura." 

" Joy ! I have found my boy again. But Isaura, I fear that 
she will not take thy money, and all thought of her must also 
be abandoned." 

Gustave had already turned to his looking-glass, and was 
arranging with care his dark ringlets : his personal vanity . 
his remorse appeased by this pecuniary oblation . had re- 
vived. 

"No," he said, gayly, "I don't think I s^all abandon her; 
and it is not likely, when she sees and hears me, that she can * 
wish to abandon me ! Now let us breakfast, and then I will 
go at once to her." . 

In the mean wKile Isaura, on her return to her apartment 
at the wintry nightfall, found a cart stationed at the door, 
and the Venosta on the threshold,jBuperintending the remov- 
al of various articles of furniture . indeed, all such articles 
as were not absolutely required. 

"Oh,-PkJcoto/" she said, with an attempt at cheerfulness, 
" I did not expect thee back so soon. Hush 1 I have made a 
famous bargain. I have found a broker to buy these things, 
which we don't want just at present, and can replace by new 
and prettier things when the siege is orer and we get our 
money. The broker pays down on the nail, and thou wilt 
not go to bed without supper.. There are no ills which are 
not more supportable after food." ^ 

Isaura smiled faintly, kissed the Venosta's cheek, and as- 
cended with weary steps to the sitting-room. There she 
seated herself quietly, looking with abstracted eyes round 
the bare dismantled space by the light of the single candle. 

When the Venosta re-entered, -she was followed by the 
servants, bringing in a daintier .meal than they had known 
for days . a genuine rabbit, potatoes, marrona glacis, a bot- 
tle of wine, and a pannier of wood. The fire was soon light- 
ed, the Venosta plying the bellows. It was not till this ban- 
quet, of wjiich Isaura, faint as she was, scarcely partook, had 
been remitted to the two Italian women-servants, and anoth- 
er log been thrown on the hearth, that the Venosta opened 
the subject which was pressing on her heart. She did this 
with a joyous smile, taking both Isaura's hands in her own, 
and stroking them fondly. 



 



 



THB PARISIANft. 299 

"My child, I Have such good news for thee! TlTou hast 
escaped . thou art free !" and then she related all that M. Ra- 
meau had said, and finished by producing the copy of Gus- 
tave's unhallowed journal. 

When she had read the latter, which she did with com- 
pressed lips and varying color, the girl fell on her knees . 
not to thank Heaven that she would m>w escape a union 
from which h^r soul so recoiled . not that she was indeed 
free . but to pray, with tears rolling down her cheeks, that 
God would yet save to Himself,- and to good ends, the soul 
that she had failed to bring to Him. All previous irritation 
against Gustave was gone . all had melted into an inelFable 
coiQpassion. 

CHAPTER VII. 

When, a little before noon, Gustave was admitted by the 
servant into Isaura^s scUoUy its desolate condition, stripped of 
all its pretty feminine ejegancies, strtick him with a sense of 
discomfort to himself which superseded any more remorseful 
sentiment. The day was intensely cold ; the single log on 
the hearth did not burn ; there were only two or three chairs 
in the room ; even the carpet, which had been of gayly color- 
ed Aubusson, was gone. His teeth chattered ; and he only re- 
plied by a dreary nod to the servant, who informed him that 
Madame Yenosta was gone out, and mademoiselle* had not 
yet quitted her own room. 

K there be a thing which a true Parisian of Rameau's stamp 
associates with love of woman, it is a certain sort of elegant 
surroundings . a pretty boudoir^ a cheery hearth, an easy 
JmeteuU. In the absence of such attributes, ^^fugit retro Ve- 
wt." K the Englishman invented the word *^ comfort," it is 
the Parisian who most thoroughly comprehends the thing. 
And he resents the loss of it in any house where he has been 
accustomed to look for it as a personal wrong to his feelings. 

Left for some minutes alone, Gustave occupied himself with 
kindling the log, and muttering, "Par tons les diablesy qitel 
chien de rhumeje vats (ZttraperP^ He turned as he heard the 
rustle of a robe and a light, slow step. Isaura stood before him. 
Her aspect startled him. He had come prepare^ to expect 
grave displeasure and a frigid reception. But the expression 



 



 



300 THE PABISIANS. 

of Isaura's face was more kindly, more gentle, more tender, 
than hjB had seen it since the day she had accepted his suit. 

Knowing from his mother what his father had said to his 
prejudice, he thought within himself, " After all, the poor girl 
loves me better than I thought. She is sensible and enlight- 
ened ; she can not pretend to dictate an opinion to a man like 
me." 

He approached with a complacent, self-assured mieu, and 
took her hand, which she yielded to him quietly, leading her 
to one of the few remaining thairs, and seating himself beside 
her. 

" Dear Isaura," he said, talking rapidly all the while he 
performed this ceremony, " I need not assure you of my u^ter 
ignorance of the state to which the imbecility of our govern- 
ment, and the cowardice, or rather the treachery, of our gen- 
erals, has reduced you. J only heard of it late last night from 
my mother. I hasten to claim my right to share with you 
the humble resources which I have saved by the intellectual 
labors that have absorbed all such moments as my military 
drudgeries left to the talents which, even at such a moment, 
paralyzing minds less energetic, have sustained me" . and 
therewith he poured several pieces of gold and silver on the 
table beside her chair. 

" Gustave," then said Isaura, " I am well pleased that you 
thus prove that I was not mistaken when I thought and said 
that, despite all appearances, all errors, your heart was good. 
Oh, do but follow its true impulses, and . " 

" Its impulses lead me ever to thy feet," interrupted Gus- 
tave, with a fervor which sounded somewhat theatiieal and 
hollow. 

The girl smiled, not bitterly, not mockingly ; but Gustave 
did not like thfe smile. 

" Poor Gustave," she said, with a melandioly pathos in her 
soft voice, " do you not understand that the time has come 
when such conjmonplace compliments ill suit our altered po- 
sitions to each other? Nay, liaten to me patiently; and let 
not my words in this last interview pain you to recall. If 
either of us be to blame in the engagement hastily contract- 
ed, it is I. Gustave, when you, exaggerating in your imag- 
ination the nature of your sentiments for me, said with such 
earnestness that on my consent to our union depended your 



 



Google 



i 



THB PABISIANS. 301 

health, youv life, your career; that if I withheld that consent 
you were lost, and in despair would seek distractiop from 
thought in all from which your friends, your mother, the du- 
ties imposed upon Genius for the good 6f Man to the ends of 
God, should withhold and save you . when you said all this, 
and I believed it, I felt as if Heaven commanded me not to 
desert the soul which appealed to me in the crisis of its strug- 
gle and peril. Gustave, I repent ; I was to blame." 

"How to blame?" 

" I overrated my power over your heart ; I overrated still 
more, perhaps, my power over my own." 

'* Ah, your own ! I understand now. You did not love me ?" 

" I never said that I loved you in the sense in which you 
use the word. I told you that the love which you have de- 
scribed in your verse, and which," she added, falterinffly, 
with heightened color, and with hands tightly clasped, " I 
have conceived possible in my dreams, it was not mine to 
give. You declared you were satisfied with such affection 
as I could bestow. Hush ! let me go on. You said that af- 
fection would increase, would become love, in proportion as 
I knew you more. It has not done so. Nay, it passed away, 
even before, in this time* of trial and grief, I became aware 
how different from the love you professed was the neglect 
which needs no excuse, for it did not pain me." 

" You afe cruel, indeed, mademoiselle." 

" No, indeed, I am kind. I wish you to feel no pang at our 
parting. Truly, I had resolved, when the siege terminated, 
and the time to speak frapkly of our engagement came, to tell 
you that I shrank fuom the thought of a unipn between us ; 
and that it was for the happiness of both that our promises 
should be mutually canceled. The moment has <;ome sooner 
than I thought. Even had I loved yau, Gustave, as deeply 
as . as well as the beings of JRomance love, I would not dare 
to wed owe who calls upon mortals to^deny God, demolish 
His altars, treat His worship as a crime. No ; I would soon- 
er die of a broken heart, that I might* the sooner be one of 
those souls privileged to pray the Divine Intercessor for mer- 
ciful light on those beloved and left dark on earth." 

*' Isaura !" exclaimed Gustave, his mobile temperament im- 
pressed, not by th8 words of Isaura, but by the passionate 
earnestness with which they were uttered, and by the exqui- 

II.-14 

 VjOOQIC 



302 THK PABI8IAXS. 

site spiritual beauty which her face took from the combined 
sweetness and fervor of its devout expression . "Isaura, I 
merit your censure, your sentence of condemnation ; but do 
not ask me to give back your plighted troth. I have not the 
strength to do so. More than ever, more than when first 
pledged to me, I need the aid, the companionship, of my guard- 
ian angel. You were that to me once; abandon me not now. 
In these terrible times of revolution, excitable natures catch 
madness from each other. A writer in the heat of his pas- 
sion says much that he does not mean to be literally taken, 
which in cooler moments he repents and retracts. Consider, 
too, the pressure of want, of hunger. It is the opinions that 
you so condemn which alone at this moment supply bread to 
the writer. But say you will yet pardon me . yet give me 
trial if I offend no more . if I withdraw my aid to any attacks 
on your views, your religion. if I say, * Thy God shall be my 
God, and thy people shall be my people.' " 

'' Alas.!" said Isaura, softly, " ask thyself if those be words 
which I can believe again. Hush !" she continued, checking 
his answer, with a more kindling countenance and more im- 
passioned voice. "Are they, after all, the words that man 
should address to \Coman ? Is it on the strength of Woman 
that Man should rely ? Is it to her that he should say, * Dic- 
tate my opinions on all that belongs to the Mind of man; 
change the doctrines that I have thoughtfully f5rmed and 
honestly advocate; teach me how-to acfon earth, clear all 
my doubts as to my hopes of heaven ?' No, Gustave ; in this 
task man never should repose on M^man. Thou art honest 
at this moment^ my poor friend ; but could I believe thee to- 
day, thou wouldst laugh to-morrow at what woman can be 
made to believe." 

Stung to the quick by the truth of Isanra's accusation, Gus- 
tave exclaimed with vehemence, V All that thou sayest is false, 
and thou knowest it^ The influence of woman on man fot 
good or for evil defies reasoning. It does mould his deeds 
on earth ; it does either make or mar all that future which 
lies between his life and his grave-stone, and of whatsoever 
may lie beyond the grave. Give me up now, and thou art 
responsible for me, for all I do . it may be against all that 
thou deemest holy. Keep thy troth yef a while, and test 
me. If I come to thee showing how I could have injured, 



 



 



THE PABtSIANS. 303 

and how for thy dear sake I have spared, nay, aided, all that 
thou dost believe and reverence, then wilt thou dare to say, 
* Go thy ways alone . I forsake thee !' " 

Isaura turned aside her face, but she held out her hand . 
it was as cold as death. He knew that she had so far yield- 
ed, and his vanity exulted : he smiled in secret triumph as 
he pressed his kiss on that icy hand, and was gone. 

"This is duty . it must be duty," said Isaura to herself. 
*^But where is the buoyant delight that belongs to a duty 
achieved? . where? oh, where?" And then she stole, with 
drooping head and heavy step, into her own room, fell on her 
knees, and prayed. 



CHAPTER VIH. 



In vain persons, be they male or female, there is a compla- 
cent self-satisfaction in any momentary personal success, how- 
ever little. that success may conduce to . nay, however much 
it may militate against . the objects to which their vanity 
itself devotes its more permanent desires. A vain woman 

may be very anxious to win A , the magnificent, as a 

partner for life,* and yet feel a certatin triumph when a gl^ce 

of her eye has made an evening's conquest of the pitiful B , 

although by that achievement she incurs the imminent haz- 
ard of losing A altogether. So, when Gustave Rameau 

quitted Isaura, his first feeling was that of triumph. His elo- 
quence had subdued her will : she had not finally discai*ded 
him. But as he wandered abstractedly in the .biting air, his 
self-complacency was succeeded by mortification and discon- 
tent. He felt that he had committed 'himself to promises 
which he was by no means prepared to keep. Triife, the prom- 
ises were vague in words ; but in substance they were per- 
fectly clear . ^" to spare, nay, to aid, all that Isaura esteemed 
and rev^enced." How was this possible to him ? How could 
he suddenly change the whole character of his writings? . 
how become the defender of marriage and property, of Church 
and religion? . how proclaim himself so utter an apostate? 
If he did. How become a leader of the fresh revolution ? . how 
escape being its victim? Cease to write altogether? But 
then how live ? His pen was his sole subsistence, save thirty 



 



 



304 THS FABISIANS. 

BOU8 a daj as a National Guard . ^thirty soas a day to him 
who, in order to be Sybarite in tastes, was Spartan in^ doc- 
trine. Nothing better just at that moment than Spp^rtan 
doctrine . ^* Live on black broth, and fight the enemy." And 
the journalists in vogue so thrived upon that patriotic senti- 
ment that they were the last persons compelled to drink the 
black broth or to fight the enemy. 

" Those women are such idiots when they meddle in poli- 
tics," grumbled between his teeth Xhe enthusiastic advocate 
of Woman's Rights on all matters of love. "And," he con- 
tinued, soliloquizing, *' it is not as if the girl had any large 
or decent dot; it is not as if she said, * In return for the sac- 
rifice of your popularity, your prospects, your opinions, I give 
you not only a devoted heart, but an excellent table and a 
capital fire and plenty of pocket-money.' Sacre bleu ! when 
I thifik of that frozen salon^ and possibly the leg of a mouse 
for dinner, and a virtuous homily by way of grace, the pros- 
pect is not alliiring ; and the girl hei:self is not so pretty as 
she was . grown very thin. Sur man dme, I thinjc she asks 
too much . far more than she is worth. No, no ; I had Bet- 
ter have accepted her dismissal. JUe n' est pas dig^ie de moV^ 

Just as he arrived at that conclusion, Gustavo Rameau felt 
the^touch of a light, a soft, a warm, yet a firm hand on his 
ann. He turned, and beheld the face of the woman whom, 
through so many dreary weeks, he had sought to shun . ^the 
face of Julie Caumartin. Julie was not, as Savarin had seen 
her, looking pinched and wan, with iaded robes, nor, as when " 
met in the cafe by Lemercier, in the faded robes of a theatre. 
Julie never lopked more beautiful, more radiant, than she did 
now; and there was a wonderful heartfelt fondness in her 
voice when she crifid, ^^Mon homme! man hommef send 
homme au fnonde d mon coeur, Gicstave, ch6ri adori! I have 
found thee . at last . at last !" Gustavo gazed upon her, stu- 
pefied. Involuntarily his eye glanced from the freshness of 
bloom in her face, which the intense cold of the atn)osphere 
only seemed to heighten into purer health, to her dress, which 
was new and handsome. black . he did nort know that it was 
mourning . the cloak trimmed with costly sables. Certainly 
it was no mendicant for alms who thus reminded the shiver- 
ing Adonis of the claims of a pristine Venus. He stammered 
out her name . " Julie !" . and then he stopped. 



 



 



THE PABI6IANS, ' 305 

** Oui, ta JuUe ! Petit ingrat I how I have sought for thee ! 
how I have hungered for the sight of thee ! * That monster 
Savarin ! he would not give me any news of thee. That is 
ages ago. But at least Frederic Lemercier, whom I saw 
since, promised to remind thee that I lived still. He did not 
do so, or I should have seen thee. ^'es cepas?^^ 

"Certainly, certainly . only, ch^re amie^ you know that 
. that . as I before announced to thee, I . ^I . was engaged 
in maniage . and . and . " 

" But are you marned ?" 

" No, no. Hark ! Take care . is not that the hiss of an 

" What theii ? Let it come ! Would it might slay us both 
while my hand is in thine 1" 

"Ah!" muttered Gustave, inwardly, **what a difference! 
This is love ! No preaching here ! J^Ue est plus digne de moi 
que Pautre.^^ 

" No," he said, aloud, " I am not married. Mamage is at 
best a pitiful ceremony. But if you wished for news of me, 
surely you must have heard of my effect as an oi^tor not de- 
spised in the Salle Favre. Since, I have withdrawn fr6m that 
arena. But as a journalist I flatter myself t^at I have had 
a beau succ^s.^* 

. '' Doubtless, doubtless, my Gustave, my Poet ! Wherever 
thou art, thou must be first among men. * But, alas ! it is 
my fault . my misfortune. I have not been in the midst of 
a world that perhaps rings of thy name." 
* "Not my name. Prudence compelled me to conceal that. 
Still, Genius pierces under any name. You might have dis- 
covered me under my nom deplume.''^ 

"Pardon me . I was always Mte. But, oh! for so many 
weeks I was so poor . so destitute. I could go nowhei'e, ex- 
cept . don't be ashamed of me . except . ^" 

"Yes? Goon." 

"Except where I could get some money. At firet to 
dance . you remember my bolero. Then I got a better en- 
gagement. Do you not remember that you taught me to re- 
cite verses ? Had it been for myself alone, I might have 
been contented to starve. Without thee, what was life? But 
thou wilt recollect Madeleine, the old bonne who lived .with 
me. Well, she had attended and cherished me since I was 



 



 



306 THE PABI8IAKS. 

80 high . lived with my mother. Mother! no; it seems that 
Madame Sarvillc was not my mother after all. But,of course, 
I could not let my old Madeleine starve ; and therefore, with 
a heait heavy as lead, I danced and Reclaimed. My hear|; 
was not so heavy when I recited thy songs." 

" My songs ! ^Pauvre <mge /'* exclaimed the Poet. 
. "And then, too, I thought, * Ah I thi dreadful siege ! He, 
too, may be poor . he may know want and hunger ;' and so 
^U I could save from Madeleine I put into a box for thee, in 
case thou shouldst come back to me some day. Mon hommey 
how could I go to the Salle Favre ? How could I read jour- 
nals, Gustave ? But thou art not married, Gustavo ? I^arole 
d'honneurf^^ 

^^ Parole cThonneiirl - What does that matter?" 

"Every thing! Ah! I am not so mkchante^ so mauvaise 
t^e, as I was some months ago. If thou wert married, I should 
say, ^Blessed and sacred be thy wife ! Forget me.' But as 
it is, one word more. Dost thou love the young lady, who- 
ever she be ? or does she love thee so well that it would be 
sin in thee' to talk trifles to Jjilie ? Speak as honestly as if 
thou Wfert not a poet." 

" Honestly, she never said she loved me. I never thopght 
she did. But, you see, I was very ill, and my parents and 
friends and my physician said 'that it was right for me to ar- 
range my life, and marry, and so forth. And the girl had 
money, and was a good match. In short, the thing was set- 
tled. - But oh, Julie, she never learned my song*s by heart ! 
She did not love^ as thou didst, and still dost. And . ah . 
well . now that we meet again . now that I look in thy face 
. now that I hear thy voice . No, I^o not love her as I 
loved, and might yet loye thee. But?. but . ^" 

" Well, but ? oh, I guess. Thou seest me well dressed, no 
longer dancing and declaiming at cafes; and thou thinkest 
that Julie has disgraced herself? she is unfaithful ?" 

Gustave had not anticipated that frankness, nor was the 
idea which it expressed uppermost in his mind when he said, 
" but, but . ^" There were many butSy all very confused, strug- 
gling through his mind as he spoke. However, he answered 
as a Parisian skeptic, not ill bred, naturally would answer . 

"My dear friend, my dear child" (the Parisian is very fond 
of the word child or enfant in addressing a woman), " I have 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 307 

neycr seen thee so i)eautiful as thou art now; and when thou 
tellest me that thou art no longer poor, and the proof gf what 
thcMi sayest is visible in the furs, which, alas ! I can not give 
thee, what am I to think ?" 

"Oh, mon homme, man hommel thou art very e^irituel^ 
and that is why I loved thee. I am very Mte^ and that is 
excuse enough for thee if thou couldst not love me. But 
canst thou look me in the face and not know that* my eyes 
could not meet thine as they do if J had been faithless to 
thee even in a thought, when I so boldly touched thine arm? 
Yiens chez moi, come and let me explain all. Only . only let 
me repeat, if another has rights over thee which forbid thee 
to come, say so kindly, and I will never trouble thee again." 

Gustave had been hitherto walking slowly by the side of 
Julie, amid the distant boom of the besiegers' cannon, while 
the short day began to close ; and along the dreary Boule- 
vards sauntered. idlers turning to look at the young, beautiful, 
well-dressed woman who seemed in such contrast to the cap- 
ital whose former luxuries the "Ondine" of imperial Paris 
represented. He now offered his arm to Julie ; and, quick- 
ening his pace, said, " There is no reason why I should refuse 
to iattend thee home, and listen to the explanations thou dost 
generously condescend to volunteer." 



CHAPTER IX. 

"Ah, indeed ! what a difference ! what a difference 1" said 
Gustave to himself when he -entered Julie's apartment. In 
her palmier days, when he had first made her acquaintance, 
the apartment o doubt had been infinitely more splendid, 
more abundant in silks and fringes and flowers and nick- 
nacks ; but never had. it seemed so cheery and comfortable 
and home-like a now. What a contrast to Isaura's disman- 
tled, chilly salon I She drew him toward the hearth, on 
which, blazing though it was, she piled fresh billets, seated 
him in the easiest of easy-chairs, knelt beside him, and chafed 
his numbed hands in hers ; and as her bright eyes fixed ten- 
derly on hii, she looke'd so young and so Innocent ! You 
would not then have called her the *'Ondine of Paris." 

But when, a little while after, revived by the genial warmth 



 



 



308 THE PABISUNS. 

and moved by the charm -of her beauty,*Gustave passed his 
arm round her neck and sought to draw her on his Jap, she 
slid from his embrace, shaking her head gently, and seated 
herself, with a pretty ^ir of ceremonious decorum, at a little 
distancd. 

Gustave looked at her amazed. 

" Cau^pnSy^ said she, gravely : " thou wouldst know why 
I am so well dressed, so comfortably lodged, and I am long- 
ing to explain to thee all. Some days ago I had just finished 

my pe^wi'mance at the Caft ^ and was putting on my 

shawl, when a tall monsieur,/or^ bel homme^ with the air of a 
grand seigneury entered the caf^^ and, approaching me polite- 
ly, said, *.! think I have the honor- to address Mademoiselle 
Julie Cauraartin ?' ' That is my name,' I said, surprised ; 
and, looking at him more intently, I recognized his face. He 
had come into the cafk a few days before with thine old ac- 
quaintance Frederic Lemercier^ and stood by* when I asked 
Frederic to give me news of thee. 'Mademoiselle,' he con- 
tinued, with a serious, melancholy smile, * I shall stai*tle you 
_when I say that I am appointed to act as your guardian by 
the last request of your mother.' *0f JV^adame Surville?* 
* Madame Surville adopted you, but was not yojir mother. 
We can not talk at ease here. Allow me to request that you 

accompany.me to Monsieur N , the avouL It is not very 

far from this ; and by the way I will tell you some news that 
may sadden, and some news that may rejoice.' 

" There was an earnestness in the voice and* look of this 
monsieur that impressed me. He did not offer me his arm ; 
but I walked by his side in the direction he chose. As we 
walked, he told me in very few words that my mother had 
been separated from her husband, and for Qa*tain family rea- 
sons had found it so difficult to rear and provide for me her- 
self, that she had accepted the offer of Madame Surville to 
adopt me as her 'own child. While he spoke, there came 
dimly back to me the remembrance of a lady who had taken 
me from my first home, when I had been, as I understood, at 
nurse, and left me with poor dear Madame Surville, saying, 
*This is henceforth your mamma.' I never again saw that . 
lady. It seems that many years afterward mytrue mother 
desired to regain me. Madame Surville was then dead. She 
failed to trace me out, owing, alas ! to my own faults and 



 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 309 

change of name. She then entered a nunnery, but before 
doing so assigned a sum of 100,000 francs to this gentleman, 
who was distantly connected with her, with full power to 
him to take it to himself, or give it to my use should he dis- 
cover me, at his discretion. * I ask you,' continued the mon- 
sieur, ' to go with me to M. N- . 's, because the suA is still 
in his hands. He will confirm my statement. All that I 
have now to say is this : If you accept my guardianship, if 
you obey implicitly my advice, I shall consider the interest 
of this sum which has accumulated since deposited with M. 

N due to you ; and the capital will be your dot on mar- 

i-iage, if the marriage be with my consent.' " 

Gustave had listened very attentively, and without inter- 
ruption, till now ; when he looked up, and said, with his cus- 
tomary sneer, "Did your monsieur, /br< belhomme you say, 
inform you of the value of the advice, rather of the com- 
mands, you were implicitly to obey ?" 

" Yes," answered Julie, " not then, but later. Let me go 

on. We arrived at M. N 's, an elderly, grave man. He 

said that all he knew was that he held the money in trust for 
the monsieur with me, to be given to him, with the accumula- 
tions of interest, on the death of the lady who had deposited 
*it. If that monsieur had instructions how to dispose of the 
money, they were not known to him. All he had to do was 
to transfer it absolutely to him on the proper certificate of 
the lady's d^ath. So you see, Gustave, that the monsieur 
could have kept all from me if he had liked." 

"Your monsieur is veiy generous. Perhaps you will now 
tell me his name ?" 

" No ; he forbids me to do it yet." 

" And he took this apartment for you, and gave you the 
money to buy that smart dress and these furs. Bah I mon 
enfant^ why try to deceive me? Do I not know my Paris? 
A fort bel homme does not make himself guardian to a fort 
beUefUle so young and fair as Mademoiselle Julie Caumartin 
without certain considerations which shall be nameless^ like 
himself." 

Julie's eyes flashed. " Ah, Gustave I ah, monsieur !" she 
said, half angrily, half plaintively, " I see that my guardian 
knew you better than I did. Never mind; I will not re- 
proach. Thou hast the right to despise me." 

 VjOOQIC 



310 THE PAEISIANS. 

" Pardon ! I did not mean to offend thee," said Gustave, 
somewhat disconcerted. "But own that thy story is strange; 
and this guardian, who knows me better than thou.- does he 
kuow me at all? Didst thou speak to him of me?" * 

"How could I help it? He says that this terrible' war, in 
which he takes an active pa^t, makes his life uncertain from 
day to day. He wished to complete the trust bequeathed to 
him by seeing me safe in the love of some worthy man who" 
. she paused for a moment with an expression of compressed 
anguish, and then hurried on . ^" who wx>uld recognize what 
was good in me . would never reproach me for . ^for . ^the . 
past. I then said that my heart was thine : I could never 
marry any one. but thee." 

" Marry me," faltered Gustave . " marry !" 

" And," continued the girl, not heeding his interruption, 
" he said thou wert not the husband he would choose for me : 
that thou wert not . no, I can not wound thee by repeating 
what he said unkindly,- unjustly. He bade me think of thee 
no more. I said again, ' That is impossible.' " 

" But," resumed Rameau, with an affected laugh, " why 
think of any thing so formidable as marriage? Thou lovest 
me, and . " He approached again, seeking to embrace her. 
She recoiled. " No; Gustave, no. I have sworn . sWom sol-' 
emnly by the memory of my lost mother, that I will never 
sin again. I will never be to thee other than thy friend . 
or thy wife." 

Before Gustave could reply to these words, which took him 
wholly by surprise, there was a ring at the outer door, and 
the old bonne ushered in Victor de Maul^on. He halted at 
the threshold, and his brow contracted. 

"So you have already broken faith with me, mademoi- 
selle?" 

"No, monsieur, I have not broken faitli," cried Julie, pas- 
sionately. "I told you that I would not seek to find out 
Monsieur Rameau. I did not seek, but I met him unexpect- 
edly. I owed to him an explanation. I invited him here to 
give that explanation. Without it, what would he have 
thought of me? Now h may go, and I will never admit 
him ag^n without your sanction." 

The Vicomte turned his stern look upon Gustave, who, 
though, as we know, not wanting in personal courage, fdt 



 VjOOQIC 



THB PAEISIANS. 311 

cowed by his false position ; and his eye fell, quailed before 
De Mauleon's gaze. 

"Leave us for a few minutes alone, mademoiselle," said 
the Vicomte* "Nay, Julie," he added, in softened tones, 
"fear nothing. I, too, owe explanation . friendly explana- 
tion . to M. Rameau." 

With his habitual courtesy toward women, he extended 
his hand to Julie, and led her from the room. Then, closing 
the door, he seated himself, and made a sign to Gustavo to 
do the same. 

"Monsieur," said De Mauleon, " excuse me if I detain you. 
A very few words will suffice for our present interview. I 
take it for grg-nted that mademoiselle has told you that she 
is no child of Madame Surville's : that her own mother be- 
queathed her to my protection and guardianship, with a 
modest fortune which is at my disposal to give or withhold. 
The little I have seen already of mademoiselle impresses me 
with sincere interest in her fate. I look with cDmpassiOn on 
what she may have been in the past ; I antjcipate^with hope 
what she may be in the future. I do not a^ you to see her 
in either with my eyes. I say frankly that it is my intention, 
and I i^ay -add ray resolve^ that the ward thus left to my 
charge shall be henceforth safe from the temptations that 
have seduced her poverty, her inexperience . her vanity, if yon 
will . ^but have not yet corrupted her heart. Bref^ I must re- 
quest you to give me your word of honor that you will hold 
no further communication with her. I can allow ho sinister 
influence to stand between her fate and honor." 

"You speak well and nobly, M. le Vicomte," said Rameau, 
** and I give the promise you exact." He added, feelingly, 
" It is true, her heart has never be^ corrupted. That is 
good, affectionate, unselfish as a child's. J'^ai Vhonneur de 
vous saluer^ M. le Vicomte." 

He bowed with a dignity unusual to him, and tears were 
in his eyes as he passed by De Mauleon and^gained the ante- 
room. There a side-door suddenly opened, and Julie's face, 
anxious, eager, looked forth. 

Gustavo paused : " Adieu, mademoiselle ! Though we may 
never met again . though our fates divide us . believe me 
that I shall ever cherish your memory . and . " 

The girl interrupted him, impulsively seizing his arm, and 
looking him in the face with a wild, fixed stare.^ . ^ ^ 

 VjOOQIC 



312 THB PARISIANS. 

"Hush I dost thou mean to say that we are parted . part- 
ed forever ?" 

" Alas I" said Gustave, " what option is before us ? Your 
guardian rightly forbids my visits ; and even were I free to 
offer you my hand, you yourself say that I am not a suitor 
he would approve." 

JuKe turned her eyes toward De Maul^on, who, following 
Gustave into the anteroom, stood silent and impassive, lean- 
ing against the wall. 

He now understood and replied to the pathetic appeal in 
the girl's eyes. 

" My young ward," he said, " M. Rameau expresses himself 
with propriety and truth. Suffer him to depart. He belongs 
to the former life ; reconcile yourself to the new." 

He advanced to take her hand, making a sign to Gustave 
to depart. But as he approached Julie, she uttered a weak, 
piteous wail, and fell at his feet senseless. De Mauleon raised 
and carried her into her room, where he left her to the care 
of the ol<* bonn^ On re-entering the anteroom, he found 
Gustave still lingeying by the outer door. 

" You will pardon me, monsieur," he said to the y^comte, 
" but in fact I feel so uneasy, so unhappy. Has .she . ? 
You see . you see that there is danger to her health, perhaps 
to her reason, in so abrupt a separation, so cruel a ruptui-e 
between us. Let me call again, nr I may not have strength 
to keep my promise." 

De Mauleon remaiued a few minutes musing. Then he 
said in a whisper, " Come back into the saion. Let us talk 
frankly." 

CHAPTER X, 

" M. IIameau," said De Maul6on, when the two men had re- 
seated themselves in the salo7i^ " I will honestly say that my 
desire is to rid myself as soon as I can of the trust of guard- 
ian to this young lady. Playing as I do with fortune, my 
only stake against her favors is my life. I feel as if it were 
my duty to see that mademoiselle is n6t left alone and friend- 
less in the world at my decease. I have in my mind for her 
a husband that I think in every way suitable : a handsome 
and brave young fellow in my battalion, of respectable birth, 



 



 



THE PARllfelAKS. 313 

without any living relations to consult as to his choice. I 
have reason to believe that if Julie married him, she need 
never fear a reproach as to her antecedents. Her dot would 
suffice to enable him to realize his own wish 'of a country 
town in Normandy. And in that station, Paris and its temp- 
tations would soon pass from the poor child's thoughts, as an 
evil dream. But I can not dispose of her hand without her 
own consent ; and if she is to be reasoned out of her fancy 
for you, I have no time to devote to the task. I come to the 
point. You are not the man I would choose for her husband. 
But, evidently, you are the man she would choose. Are you 
disposed to marry her ? You hesitate, very naturally ; I have 
no right to demand an immediate answer to a question so 
serious. Perhaps you will think over it, and let me know in 
a day or two ? I take it for granted that if you were, as 1 
heard, engaged before the siege to marry the Signora Cicogna, 
that engagement is annulled ?" 

"Why take it for granted?" asked Gustave, perplexed. - 

" Simply because I find you here. Nay, spare explanations, 
and excuses. I quite understand that you were invited to 
come. But a man solemnly betrothed to a demoiselle like 
the Signora Cicogna, in a time of such dire -calamity and 
peril, could scarcely allow himself to be tempted to accept 
the -invitation of one so beautiful, and so warmly attached 
to him, as is Mademoiselle Julie; and on witnessing the 
passionate strength of that attachment, say that he can not 
keep a promise not to repeat his visits. But if I mistake, 
and you are still betrothed to the signorina, of course all dis- 
cussion is at an end." 

Gustave hung his head in some shame, and in much be- 
wildered doubt. 

The practiced observer of men's characters, and of shifting 
phases of mind, glanced at the^poor poet's perturbed counte- 
nance with a half-smile of disdain. 

" It is for you to judge how far the very love to you so in- 
genuously evinced by my ward . ^how far the reasons against 
marriage with one whose antecedents expose her to reproach 
. should influence one of your advanced opinions upon social 
ties. Such reasons do not appear to have with artists the 
same weight they have with the bourgeoisie, I have but to 
add that the husband of Julie will receive with her hand a 

 VjOOQIC 



314 TUB PABI8IANS. 

dot of nearly 120,000 francs ; and I have reason to believe 
that that fortune will be increase<^. how much, I can not 
guess . when the cessation of the siege will allow communi- 
cation with ngland. One worjd more. I should wish to 
rank the husband of my ward in the number of my friends. 
If he did not oppose the political opinions with which I iden- 
tify my own career, I should be pleased to make any rise in 
the world achieved by me assist to the raising of himself. 
But my opinions, as during the time we were brought to- 
gether you were made aware, are those of a practical man of 
the world, and have nothing in common with Communists, 
Socialists, Internationalists, or whatever sect would pUce the 
aged societies of Europe in MedeaV caldron of youth. At a 
moment like the present, fanatics and dreamers so abound, 
that the number of such sinners wiA necessitate a general 
amnesty when order is restored. What a poet so young as 
you may have written or said at such a time will be readily 
forgotten and forgiven a year or two hence, provided he does 
not put his notions into violent action. But if you choose to 
pereevere in the views you now advocate, so be it. They will 
not make poor Julie less a believer in your wisdom and gen- 
ius. Only they will separate you from me, and a day may 
come when I should have the painful duty of ordering you 
to be shot . Dii meliora. Think over all I have thus frankly 
said. Give me your answer in forty-eight hours ; and mean- 
while hold no communication with my ward. I have the 
honor, to wish you good-day." 



CHAPTER XI. . 

The short grim day was closing when Gustave, quitting 
Julie's apartment, again found himself in the streets. His 
thoughts were troubled and confused. He was the more at 
fected by Julie's impassioned love for him, by the contrast 
with Isaura's word^ and manner in their^recent interview. 
His own ancient fancy for the " Ondin^ of Paris" became re- | 

vived by the difficulties between their ancient intercourse 
which her unexpected scruples and De Mauleon's guardian- 
ship interposed. A witty writer thus defines une passion^ 
^^une caprice inftamme par des obstacles J*^ In the ordinary 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 315 

times of peace, Gustave, handsome, aspiring to reputable 
position in the' beau monde^ would not have admitted any 
considerations to compromise his station by marriage with a 
figurante. But now the wild political doctrines he had em- 
braced separated his ambition from that heau mmide^ and 
combined it with ascendency over the revolutionists of the 
populace . a direction which he must abandon if he continued 
his suit to Isaura. Then, too, the immediate possession of 
Julie's dot was not without temptation to a man who was so 
fond of his personal comforts, and who did not see where to 
turn for a dinner, if, obedient to Isaura's "prejudices," he 
abandoned his profits as a writer in the revolutionary press. 
The inducements for withdrawal from the cause he had es- 
pousedj held out to him with so haughty a coldness by De 
Maul^on, were not wholly without force, though they irri- 
tated his self-esteem. He was" dimly aware of the Vicomte's 
masculine talents for public life ; and the high reputation he 
had already acquired among military authorities, and even 
among experienced and thoughtful civilians, had wdght upon 
Gustave's impressionable temperament. But though De Mau- 
16on's implied advice here coincided in much with the tac- 
it compact he had made with Isaura, it alienated him more 
from Isaura herself, for Isaura did not bring to him the for- 
tune which would enable him to suspend his lucubrations, 
watch the turn of events, and live at ease in the mean while ; 
and the dot to be received with De Mauleon's ward had those 
advantages. 

While thus meditating, Gustave turned into one of the 
cantines still open, to brighten his intellect with Si petit verrCy 
and there he found the two colleagues in the extinct Coun- 
cil of Ten, Paul Grimm and Edgar Ferrier. With the last 
of these revolutionists Gustave had bepome intimately lik 
They wrote in the ^ame journal, and he willingly accepted a 
distraction from his self-conflict which Edgar offered him in 
a dinner at the Ca/i RichCy which still offered its hospitalities 
at no exorbitant price^ At this repast, as the drink circu- 
lated, Gustave waxed confidential. He longed, poor youth, 
for an adviser. Could he marry a girl who had been a bal- 
let-dancer, and who had come into an unexpected heritage ? 
"jE& tufou d^en doiUer?'^ cried "Edgar. "What a sublime 
occasion to manifest thy scorn of the miserable bancUit&s of 



 



 



316 THE PARISIANS. 

the bourgeoisie I It will but increase thy moral power over 
the people. And then think of the money. What an aid to 
the cause I What a capital for the launch !. journal all thine 
.own! Besides, when our principles triumph . as triumph 
they must. what would be naarriage but a brief and futile 
ceremony, to be broken the moment thou hast cause to com- 
plain of thy wife or chafe at the bond ? Only get the dot 
into thine own hands. L^amour passe . reste la casseUe.^^ 

Though there was enough of good in the son of Madame 
Rameau to revolt at the precise words in which the counsel 
was given, still, as the fumes of the punch yet more addled 
his brains, the counsel itself was acceptable ; and in that sort 
of maddened fury which intoxication produces in some ex- 
citable temperaments, as Gustavo reeled home that night 
leaning on the arm of stouter Edgar Ferrier, heMnsisted on 
going out of his way to pass the house in which Isaura lived, 
and, pausing under her window, gasped out some verses of a 
wild song, then much in vogue among the votaiies of Felix 
Pyat, in which every thing that existent society deems sacred 
vcas reviled in the grossest ribaldry. Happily Isaura's ear 
heard it not. The girl was kneeling by her bedside absorbed 
in prayer. 

CHAPTER XIL 

Three days after the evening thus spent by Gustavo Ra- 
meau, Isaura was startled by a visit from M. de Mauleon. 
She had not seen him since the commencement of the siege, 
and she did not recognize him at first glance in his military 
uniform. 

" I trust you will pardon my intrusion, mademoiselle,*' he 
said, in the low, sweet voice habitual to him in his gentler 
moods ; " but I thought it became me to announce to you the 
decease of one who, I fear, did not discharge with much kind- 
ness the duties her connection with you imposed. Your fa- 
ther's second wife, afterward Madame Selby, is no more. 
She died some days since in a convent to which she had re- 
tired." 

Isaura had no cause to mourn the dead, but she feit a shock 
in the suddenness of this' information; and in th^t sweet 
spirit of womanly compassion which entered so largely into 

 Google 



THE PAEISIANS. 317 

her ckaracter, and made a part of her genius itself, she mur- 
mured tearfully, " The poor signora ! Why could I not have 
been with her in illness ? She might then have learned to 
love me. And she died in a convent, you say. Ah, her re- 
ligion was then sincere ! Her end was peaceful ?" 

" Let us not doubt that, mademoiselle. Certainly she lived 
to regret any former errors, and her last thought was directed 
toward such atonement as might be in her power. And it is 
that desire* of atonement which now strangely mixes me up, 
mademoiselle^ in your destinies. In that desire for atone- 
ment, she left to my charge, as a kinsman . distant, indeed, 
but "still, perhaps, the nearest with whom she was personally 
acquainted . a young ward. In accepting that trust, I find 
myself strangely compelled to hazard the risk of offending 
you." 

"Offending me ? How ? Pray speak openly." 

"In so doing, I must utter the name of Gustave Rameaii." 

Isaura turned pale and recoiled, but she did not speak. 

" Did he inform me rightly that, in the last interview with 
him three days ago, you expressed a strong desire that the 
engagement between him and yourself should cease; and that 
you only, and with reluctance, suspended your rejection of 
the suit he had pressed on you, in consequence of his entreat- 
ies, and of certain assurances as to the changed direction of 
the talents of which we will assume that he is possessed ?" 

" Well, well, monsieur," exclaimed Isaura, her whole face 
brightening ; " and you come on the partof Gustave Rameau 
to say that oh reflection he does not hold me to our engage- 
ment . that in honor and in conscience I am free ?" 

" I see," said De Mauleon, smiling, " that I am pardoned 
already. It would not pain you if such were my instructions 
in the embassy I undertake ?" 

"Pain me? No. But." 

" But what?"- 

" Must he persist in a course which will break his mother's 
heart, and make his father deplore the hour that he was born ? 
Have you influence over him, M. de Mauleon ? If so, will you 
not exert it for his good ?" 

"You interest yourself still in his fate, mademoiselle?" 

" How can I do otherwise ? Did I not consent to share it 
when my heart shrank from Jhe thought of out union ? And 



 



 



318 yHB PAEISIANS. 

now when, !f I undeinstand you rightly, I am free, I can not 
but think of what was best in him." 

. " Alas I mademoiselle, he is but one of many . a spoiled child 
of that Circe, imperial Paris. Everywhere I look around, I 
see but corruption. It was hidden by the halo which corrup- 
tion itself engenders. The halo is gone, the corruption is 
visible. Where is the old French manhood? Banished 
from the heart, it comes out only at the tongue. Were our 
deeds like our words, Prussia would beg on her knee to be a 
province of France. Gustavo is the fit poet for this genei-a- 
tion. Vanity . desire to be known for somethmg, no matter 
what, no matter by whom . that is the Parisian's leading mo- 
tive powet ; . orator, soldier, poet, all alike. XJtterers of fine 
phrases; despising knowledge and toil and discipline; rail- 
ing against the Germans as barbarians, against their generals 
as traitors, against God for not taking their part. What 
can be done to weld this mass of hollow bubbles into the solid 
form of a nation . the nation it aflects to be ? What genera- 
. tion can be born out of the unmanly race, inebriate with brag 
and absinthe ? Forgive me this tirade ; I have been review- 
ing the battalion I command. As for Gustavo Rameau . ^if 
we survive the siege, and see once more a government that 
can enforce order, and a public that will refuse renown for 
balderdash . I should not* be surprised" if Gustavo Rameau 
were among the prettiest imitators of Lamartine's early ' Med- 
itations.' Had he been born under Louis XIV., how loyal he 
would have been ! What sacred tragedies in the style of 
* Athalie' he would have written, in the hope of ap audience 
at Versailles ! But I detain you from the letter I was charged 
to deliver to you. I have done so purposely, that I might 
convince myself that you welcomie that release which your 
too delicate sense of honor shrank too long from demanding." 
Here he took forth and placed a letter in Isaura's hand ; 
and, as if.to allow her to read it unobserv4Bd, retired to the 
window recess. 

, Isaura glanced over the letter. It ran thus : 
" I feel that it was only to your compassion tiiat I owed 
your consent to my suit. Could I have doubted that before, 
your words when we last met sufficed to convince me. In 
my selfish pain at the moment, I committed a great wrong. 
I would have4ield you bound to a promise frorti which you 



 



 



THE PABISIANa 319 

desired to be free. Grant me pardon for that, and for all the 
faults by which I have offended you. * In canceling our en- 
gagement, let me hope that I may rejoice in your friendship, 
your remembrance of me, some gentle and kindly thought. * 
My life may henceforth pass out of contact with yours ; but 
you will ever dwell in my heart, an image pure and holy as 
the saints in whom you may well believe . they are of your 
own kindred." 

"May I convey to Gustave Rameau any verbal reply to 
his letter ?" asked De Mauleon, turning as she replaced the 
letter on the table. 

" Only my wishes for his welfare. It might wound him if 
I added, my gratitude for the generous manner in which he . 
has interpreted my heart, and acceded to its desire." 

" Mademoiselle, accept my congratulations. My condo- 
lences are for the poor girl left to my guardianship. Unhap- 
pily she loves this man ; and there are reasons why I can not 
withhold my consent to her union with him, should he de- 
mand it, now that, in the letter remitted to you, he has ac- 
cepted your dismissal. If I can keep him out of all the follies 
and all the evils into which he suffers his vanity to mislead 
bis reason, I will do so . would I might say, only in compli- 
ance with your compassionate injunctions. But henceforth 
the infatuation of my wai'd compels me to take some interest 
in bis career. Adieu, mademoiselle ! I have no fear^br your 
happiness now."  

Left alone, Isaura stood as one transfigured.. 'AH the bloom 
of her youth seemed suddenly restored. Round her red lips 
the dimples opened, countless mirrors of one happy smile. 
" I am fre^, I am free," she murmured . "joy, joy !" and she 
passed from the room to seek the Venosta, singing clear, sing- 
ing loud, as a bird that escapes from the cage, and warbles to 
tbelieaven it regains the blissful tale of its release. 



CHAPTER Xm. 



In proportion to the nearer roar of the besiegers' cannon, 
and the sharper gripe of famine within the walls, the Paris- 
ians seemed to increase their scorn for the skill of the enemy, 
and their faith in the sanctity of the capital. All false news 

 VjOOQIC 



820 THB PABISIANS. 

was believed as trnth ; all truthful news abhorred as false- 
hood. Listen to the groups round the caf^: "The Prussian 
funds have fallen three per cent, at Berlin," says a threadbare 
ghost of the Bourse (he had been a clerk of Louvier's). . " Ay," 
cries a National Guard, "read extracts from Za lAhertk 
The barbarians are in despair. ' Nancy is threatened, Belfoi-d 
fr^ed. Bourbaki is invading Baden. Our fleets are pointing 
their cannon upon Hamburg. Their country endangered, 
their retreat cut off, the sole hope of Bismarck and his trem- 
bling legions is to find a refuge in Paris. The increasing fury 
of the bombardment is a proof of their despair." . 

" In that case," whispered Savarin to De Br^z6, " suppose 
we send a flag of truce to Versailles with a message from 
Trochu that, on disgorging thifeir conquests, ceding the left 
bank of the Rhine, and paying the expenses of the war. Pans, 
ever magnanimous to the vanquished, will allow the Prus- 
sians to retire." 

" The Prussians ! Retire 1" cried Edgar Femer, catching 
the last word and glancing fiercely at Savarin. " What Prus- 
sian spy have we among us? Not one of the barbarians 
shall escape. We have but to dismiss the traitors who have 
usurped the government, proclaim the Commune and the 
rights of labor, and Ve^ive birth to a Hercules that even in 
its cradle can strangle the vipers." 

Edgai* Ferrier was the sole member of his political party 
among the group which he ttus addressed; but suc*h was 
the terror which the Co\nmunist8 already began to inspire 
among the bourgeoisie that no one volunteered a reply. Sa- 
varin linked his arm in De Brez6's, and prudently drew 
him off. 

"I suspect," said the former, "that we shall soon have 
worse calamities to endure than the Prussian obus and the 
black loaf. The Communists will have their day." 

" I shall be in my grave before then," said De Br6z6, in hol- 
low accents. " It is twenty-four houf s since I spent my last 
fifty sous on the purchase of a rat, and I burned the legs of my 
..bedstead for the fuel by which that quadruped was roasted." 

'^^Entre nous, my poor friend, I am in much the same con- 
dition," said Savarin, with a ghastly attempt at his old pleas- 
ant laugh. " See how I am shrunken ! My wife would l)e 
unfaithful to the Savarin of her dreams if she accepted a kiss 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PABISIANS. 321 

.from the slender gallant you behold in me. But I thought 
you were in the National Guard, and therefore had not to 
vanish into air." 

" I was a National Guard, but I could not stand the hard- 
ships ; and being above the age, I obtained my exemption. 
As to pay, I was then too proud to claim my wage of 1 franc 
25 centimes. I should not be top proud now. Ah, blessed 
be Heaven ! here comes Lemercier ; he owes me a dinner . 
he shall pay it. Bo7i jouVy my dear Frederic ! How hand- 
some you look in your kepi. Your uniform is brilliantly fresh 
from the soil of powder. What a contrast to the tatterde- 
malions of the Line !" 

" I fear," said Lemercier, ruefufly, " that my costume will 
not look so well a day or two hence. I have just had 
news that will no doubt seem very glorious . in the news- 
papers. But then newspapers are not subjected to cannon- 
balls." 

" What do you mean ?" answered De Br6ze. 

" I met, as I emerged from my apartment a few minutes 
ago, that fire-eater Victor de Maul6on, who always contrives 
to know what passes at head-quarters. He told me that 
preparations are being made for a great sortie. Most prob- 
ably the announcement will appear in a proclamation to-mor- 
row, and our troops march forth to-morrow night. The Na- 
tional Guard (fools and asses who have been yelling out for 
decisive action) are to have their wish, and to be placed in 
the van of battle . among the foremost, the battalion in 
which 4I am enrolled. Should this be our last meeting on 
earth, say that Frederic Lemercier has finished his part in 
life with iclaty 

" Gallant friend," said De Br^z6, feeblj: seizing him by the 
arm, "if it be true that thy^nortal career is menaced, die as 
thou hast lived. An honest man leaves no debt unpaid. 
Thou owest me a dinner." 

" Alas ! ask of meVhat is possible. I will give thee three, 
however, if I survive and regain* my rentes. But to-day I 
have not even a naouse to share with Fox." 

"Fox lives, then ?" cried De Br6z6, with sparkling, hungry 
eyes. 

" Yes. At present he is making the experiment how long 
an animal can live without food." 



 



 



322 THE PABISIANS. 

^^ Have mercy upon him, poor beast ! Terminate his pangs, 
by a noble death. Let him save thy friends and thyself 
from starving. For myself alone I do not plead ; I am bat 
an amateur in polite literatura Bat Savarin, the illustrious 
Savann . ^in criticism the French Longinus . in poetry the 
Parisian Horace . in social life the genius of gayety in panta- 
loons^contemplate his attenuated frame ! Shall he perish 
for want of food while thou hast such superfluity in thy lard- 
er? I appeal to thy heart, thy conscience, thy patriotism. 
What in the eyes of France are a thousand Foxes compared 
to a single Savarin ?'' 

" At this moment," sighed Savarin, " I could swallow any 
thing, however nauseous, even thy flattery, De Br6z6. But, 
my friend Frederic, thou goest into battle . what will be- 
come of Fox if thou fall ? Will he not be devoured by stran- 
gers. Sarely it were a sweeter thought to his faithful heart 
to furnish a repast to thy friends ? . his virtues acknowledged, 
his memory blessed !" 

**Thou dost look very lean, my poor Savarin ! And how 
hospitable thou wert when yet plump !" said Frederic, pathet- 
ically. " And certainly, if I live. Fox will starve ; if I am 
slain. Fox will be eaten. Yet, poor Fox, dear Fox, who lay 
on my breast when I was frost-bitten I No ; I have not the 
heart to order him to the spit for you. Urge it not.** 

" I will save thee that pang,** cried De Brez6. " We are 
close by thy rooms. Excuse me for a moment : I* will run in 
and instruct thy honne.'*^ 

So saying he sprang forward with an elasticity rf step 
which no one could have anticipated from his previous lan- 
guor. Frederic would have followed, but Savann clung to 
him, whimpering. n" Stay; I shall fall like an empty sack, 
without the support of thine arm, young hero. Pooh ! of 
course De Brez6 is only joking . a pleasant joke. Hist . a 
secret : he has moneys, and means to give us once more a 
dinner at his own cost, pretending that we dine on thy dog. 
He was planning this when thou camest up. Let him have 
his joke, and we shall have z,festin de Bakhjozar^^ 

" Hein 1" said Frederic, doubtfully ; " thou art sure he has 
no designs upon Fox ?" 

" Certainly not, except in regaling us. Donkey is not bad, 
but it is 14 francs a pound. A pullet is excellent, but it is 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 323 

30 francs. Trust to De Brez6^ we shall have donkey and 
pullet, and Fox shall feast upon the remains." 

Before Frederic could reply, the two men were jostled and 
swept on by a sudden rush of a noisy crowd in their rear. 
They could but distinguish the words, " Glorious news . vic- 
tory . ^Faidherbe . Chanzy." But these words were sufficient 
to induce them to join willingly in the rush. They forgot 
their hunger; they forgot Fox. As they were hurried on, 
they learned that there was a report of a complete defeat of 
the Prussians by Faidherbe near Amiens . of a still more de- 
cided one on the Loire by Chanzy. These generals, with 
armies flushed with triumph, were pressing on toward Paris 
to accelerate the destruction o the hated Germans. How 
the report arose no one exactly knew. All believed it, and 
were making their way to the Hotel de Ville to hear it form- 
ally confirmed. 

Alas! before they got there they were met by another 
crowd returning, dejected but angry. No such news had 
reached the government. Chanzy and Faidherbe were no 
doubt fighting bravely, with every probability of success, 
but . 

The Parisian imagination required no more. " We should 
always be defeating the enemy," said Savarin, "if there were 
not always a but ;^^ and his audience, who, had he so expressed 
himself ten minutes before, would have torn him to pieces, 
now applauded the epigram ; and with execrations on Tro- 
chu, mingled with many a peal of painful, sarcastic laughter, 
vociferated and dispersed. 

As the two friends sauntered back toward the part of the 
Boulevards on which De Br^ze had parted company with 
them, Savarin quitted Lemercier suddenly, and crossed the 
street to accost a small party of two ladies and two men who 
were on their way to the Madeleine. While he was exchang- 
ing a few words with them, a young couple, arm in arm, pass- 
ed by Lemercier . the man in the uniform of the National 
Guard . uniform as unsullied as Frederic's, but with as little 
of a military air as can well be conceived. His gait was 
slouching; his head bent downjvard. He did not seem to 
listen to his companion, who was talking with quickness and 
vivacity, her fair face radiant with smiles. Lemercier looked 
after them as they passed by. ^^Sur man dme^^ muttered 



 



 



324 THE PARISIANS. 

Frederic to himself, " surely tbat is la beUe Julie, and she has 
got back her truant poet at last !" 

. While Lemercier thus soliloquized, Gustave, still looking 
down, was led across the street by his fair companion, and 
into the mids.t of the little group with whom Savarin had 
paused to sp6ak. Accidentally brushing against Savaria 
himself, he raised his eyes with a start, about to mutter some 
conventional apology, when Julie felt the arm on which she 
leaned tremble nervously. Before him stood* Isaura, the 
Countess de Vandemar by her side ; her two other compan- 
ions, Raoul and the Abbe Vertpr6, a step or two behind. 

Gustave uncovered, bowed low, and stood mute and still 
for a moment, paralyzed by surprise and the chill of a pain- 
ful shame. 

Julie's watchful eyes, following his, fixed themselves on 
the same fdce. On the instant she divined the truth. She 
beheld her to whom she had owed months of jealous agony, 
and over whom, poor child, she thought she had achieved a 
triumph. But the girl's heart was so instinctively good that 
the sense of triumph was mqrged into a sense of compassioa. 
Her rival had lost Gustave. To Julie the loss of Gustave 
was the loss of all that makes life wo/th having. On her 
part, Isaura was moved not only by the beauty of Julie's 
countenance, but still more by the childlike ingenuousness 
of its expression. 

So, for the first time in their lives, met the child and the 
lUep-child of Louise Duval. Each so deserted, each so left 
alone and inexperienced amid the perils of the world, with 
fates so different, typifying orders of Womanhood sq opposed. 
Isaura was naturally the first to break the silence that 
weighed like a sensible load on all present. 

She advanced toward Rameau, with sincere kindness in 
her look and tone. 

" Accept my congratulations," she said, with a grave sq;iile. 
" Your mother informed me last evening of your nuptials. 
Without doubt, I see Madame Gustave Rameau " . and she 
extended her hand toward Julie. The poor " Ondine" shrank 
back for a moment, blushing^up to her temples. It was the 
first hand which a woman of spotless character had extended 
to her since she had lost the protection of Madame Surville. 
She touched it timidly, humbly, then drew her bridegroom 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 325 

on; and with head more downcagt than Gustave, passed 
through the group without a Word. 

She did not speak to Gustave till they were out of sight 
and hearing of those they had left. Then, pressing his arm 
passionately, she said, " And that is the demoiselle thou hast 
resigned for me ! Do not deny it. I am so glad to have 
seen her ; it has done me so much good. How it hs^ deep- 
ened, purified my love for thee ! I have but one return to 
make; but that is my whole life. Thou shalt never have 
cause to blame me . never . never!" 

Savarin looked very grave and thoughtful when he rejoin- 
<Sd Leraercier. 

"Can I believe my eyes?" said Frederic. "Surely that 
was Julie Caumartin leaning on Gustave Rameau's arm! 
And had he the assurance, so accompanied, to salute Madame 
de Vandemar and Mademoiselle Cicogna, to whom I under- 
stood he was once affianced ? Nay, did I not see mademoi- 
selle shake hands with the 'Ondine?' or am I under one of the 
illusions which famine is said to engender in the brain ?" 

"I have not strength now to answer all these interroga- 
tives. I have a story to tell ; but I keep it for dinner. Let 
us hasten to thy apartment. De Br6z6 is doubtless there 
awaiting us." 

CHAPTER XIV. 

Unpbescient of the perils that awaited him, absorbed in 
the sense of existing discomfort, cold, and hunger. Fox lifted 
his mournful visage from his master's dressing-gown, in 
which he had encoiled his shivering frame, on the entrance 
of De Br^z6 and the concierge of the house in which Lemer- 
cier had his apartment. Recognizing the Vicomte as one of 
his master's acquaintances, he checked the first impulse that 
prompted him to essay a feeble bark, and permitted himself, 
with a petulant whine, to be extracted from his covering, and 
held in the arms of the murderous visitor. 

"2>iew des dieuxP^ ejaculated De Brez6, "how light the 
poor beast has become !" Here he pinched the sides and 
thighs of the victim. " Still," he said, " there is some flesh 
yet on these bones. You may grill the ^awfi, fricasser the 
shoulders, and roast the rest. The rognons and the head ac- 

 VjOOQIC 



82(1 THB PABISIANS. 

oept for yourself as a perquisite." Here he transferred Fox to 
the arms of the concierge^ addifig, " VUe au besogney man ami.'" 

"' Yes, monsieur. I must be quick about it, while my wife 
is absent. She hai^a faiblesae for the brute. He must be 
on the spit before she returns." 

'* Be it so ; and on the table in an hour . five o'clock pre- 
cisely-r-I ani famished." 

The concierge disappeared with Fox. De Br6z6 J^hen 
amused himself by searching into Fredenc's cupboards and 
buffets, from which he produced a cloth and utensils necessa- 
ry for the repast. These he arranged with great neatness, 
and awaited in patience the moment of participation in the 
feast. 

The hour of five had struck before Savarin and Frederic 
entered the salon; and at their sight De Br^z6 dashed to the 
staircase and called out to the concierge to serve the dinner. 

Frederic, unconscious of the Thyestean nature of the ban- 
quet, still looked round for the dog ; and, not perceiving 
him, began to call out, "Fox ! Fox 1 where hast thou hidden 
thyself?" 

" Tranquillize youi-self," said De Br6z6. " Do not suppose 
that I have not" . . . 



NOTE BY THE AUTHOR'S SON.* 

The hand that wrote thus far has left unwritten the last 
scene of the tragedy of poor Fox. In the deep where Pros- 
pero has dropped his wand are now irrevocably buried the 
humor and the pathos of this cynophagous banquet One 
detail of it, however, which the author imparted to his son, 
may here be faintly indicated. Let the sympathizing reader 
recognize all that is dramatic in the conflict between hunger 
and affection ; let him recall to mind the lachrymose loving- 
kindness of his own postprandial emotions after blissfully 
breaking some fast, less mercilessly prolonged, we will hope, 
than that of these besieged banqueters ; and then, though 
unaided by the fancy which conceived so quaint a situation, 
he may perhaps imagine what tearftil tenderness would fill 

. See, also, Prefatory Note, vol. i., p. 5, 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PABISXAKS. 827 

the eyes of the kind^iearted Frederic, as they conteniplate 
the well-picked hones of his sacrificed favorite on the platter 
before him ; which he pushes away, sighing, " Ah, poor Fox ! 
how he would have enjoyed those bone^" 

The chapter immediately following this one also remains 
unfinished. It was not intended to close the narrative thus 
left uncompleted ; but of those many and so various works 
which have not unworthily associated with almost every de- 
partment of literature the name of a single English writer, it 
is Chapteb the Last. Had the author lived to finish it, he 
would doubtless have added to his Iliad of the Siege of Paris 
its most epic episode, by here, describing the mighty combat 
between those two princes of the Parisian Bourse, the mag- 
nanimous Duplessis and the redoubtable Louvier. Among 
the few other pages of the book which have been left un- 
written, we must also reckon with regret some page descrip- 
tive of the reconciliation between Graham Yane and Isaura 
Cicogna ; but, fortunately for the satisfaction of every reader 
who may have followed thus far the fortunes of " The Paris- 
ians," all that our curiosity is chiefly interested to learn has 
been recorded in the Envois which was written before the 
completion of the novel. 

* We know not, indeed, what has become of these two Paris- 
ian types of a Beauty not of Holiness, the poor vain Poet of 
the Pav&^ and the good-hearted " Ondine" of the Gutter. It 
is obvious, from the absence of all allusion to them in Lemer- 
cier's letter to Vane, that they had passed out of the narra- 
tive before that letter was written. We must suppose the 
catastrophe of their fates to have been described, in some 
preceding chapter, by the author himself; who would assur- 
edly not have left M. Gustavo Rameau in permanent posses- 
sion of his ill-merited and ill-ministeredtfortune. That French 
representative of the appropriately popular poetry of mod- 
ern ideas, which prefers " the roses and raptures of vice" to 
" the lilies and languors of virtue," can not have been irre- 
deemably reconciled by the sweet savors of the domestic jtjo^ 
avrfeu^ even when spiced with pungent whiffs of repudiated 
disreputability, to any selfish betrayal of the cause of univer- 
sal social emancipation from the personal proprieties. If 
poor Julie Caumartin perished in the siege of Paris, with all 
the grace of her self-wrought redemption still upon her, we 



 



 



32B THE PABISIANS. 

shair doubtless deem her fate a happier one than any she 
could have found in prolonged existence as Madame Rameau; 
and a certain modicum of this world's good things will, in 
that case, have be^n rescued for worthier employment by 
Graham Vane. To that assurance nothing but Lemercier's 
description of the fate of Victor de Maul6on (which will te 
found in the Mivoi) need be added for the satisfaction of our 
sense of poetic justice ; and if on the mimic stage, from which 
they now disappear, all these puppets have rightly played 
their parts in the drama of an empire's fall, each will have 
helped "to point a moral" as well as to "adorn a tale." Va- 
lete et plaudite ! L. 



CHAPTER THE LAST. 



Among the refugees which the convoi from Versailles dis- 
gorged on the Paris station were two men, who, in pushing 
through the crowd, came suddenly face to face with each 
other. 

" Aha ! Bon jour^ M.'Duplessis," said a burly voice. 

^^Bon jour^ M, Louvier," replied Duplessis. ^ 

" How long have you left Bretagne ?" 

" On the day that the news of the armistice reached it, m 
order to be able to enter Paris the first day its gates were 
open. And you . ^where have you been ?" 

"In London." 

"Ah ! in London !" said Duplessis, paling. " I knew I had 
an enemy there." 

" Enemy ! I ? Bah ! my dear monsieur. What makes 
you think me your enemy ?" 

" I remember your'threatSi" 

^^ Apropos of Rochebriant. By-the-way, when would it be 
convenient to you and the dear Marquis to let me into prompt 
possession of that property ? You can no longer pretend to 
buy it as a dot for Mademoiselle Valerie." 

" I know not that yet. It is true that all the financial op- 
erations attempted by my agent in London have failed. But 
I may recover myself yet, now that I re-enter Paris. In the 
mean time, we have still six months before us ; for, as you 
will find . if you know it not already . the interest due to 

 VjOOQIC 



THE PARISIANS. 329 

you has been lodged with Messrs. of , and you 

can not foreclose, even if the law did not take into consider- 
ation the national calamities as between debtor and cred- 
itor." 

" Quite true. But if you can not buy the property, it must 
pass into my hands in a very short time. And you and the 
Marquis had better come to an amicable arrangement with 
me. Apropos^ I read in the Times newspaper that Alain was 
among the wounded in the sortie of December." 

" Yes ; we learned that through a pigeon-post. We were 
afraid" . . . 



L'ENVOI. 

Thb intelligent reader will perceive that the story I relate 
is virtually closed with the preceding chapter ; though I re- 
joice to think that what may be called its plot does not find 
its denouement amid the crimes and the frenzy of the Q^uearre 
des Communeaux, Fit subjects these, indeed, for the social 
annalist in times to come. When crimes that outrage hu- 
manity have their motive or their excuse in principles that 
demand the demolition of all upon which the civilization of 
Europe has its basis . worship, property, and marriage . in 
order to reconstruct a new civilization adapted to a new hu- 
manity, it is scarcely possible fofr the serenest contemporary 
to keep his mind in that state of abstract reasoning with 
which Philosophy deduces from some past evil some existent 
good. For my part, I believe that throughout the whole 
known history of mankind, even in epochs when reason is 
most misled and conscience most perverted, there runs visi- 
ble, though fine and threadlike, the chain of destiny, which has 
its roots in the throne of an All- wise and an All-good ; that 
in the wildest illusions by which multitudes are frenzied 
there may be detected gleams of prophetic truths ; that in 
the fiercest crimes which, like the disease of an epidemic, 
characterize a peculiar epoch under abnormal circumstances, 
there might be found instincts or aspirations toward some 
social virtues to be realized ages afterward by ^appier gen- 
erations, all tending to save man from despair of the future, 
were the whole society to unite for the joyless hour of his 
race in the abjuration of soul and the denial of God, because 



 



 



380 THB PARISIANS. 

all irresistibly establishing that yearning toward an unseen 
future which is the leading attribute of soul, evincing the 
government of a divine Thought which evolves out of the 
discords of one age the harmonies of another, and, in the 
world within us as in the world without, enforces upon every 
unclouded reason the distinction between Providence and 
Chance. 

The account subjoined may suffice to say all that rests to 
be said of those individuals in whose fate, apart from the 
events or personages that belong to graver history, the read- 
er of this work may have conceived an interest. It is trans- 
lated from the letter of Frederic Lemercier to Graham Vane, 
dated June . , a month after the defeat of the Communists : 

" Dear and distinguished Englishman, whose name I honor 
but fail to pronounce, accept my cordial thanks for your in- 
terest in such remains of Frederic Lemercier as yet survive 
the ravages of Famine, Equality, Brotherhood, Petroleum, and 
the Rights of Labor. I did not desert my Paris when M. 
Thiers, ^parmida non bene rdictd^ led his sagacious friends 
and his valiant troops to the groves of Versailles, and con- 
fided to us unarmed citizens the preservation of order and 
property from the insurgents whom he left in possession of 
our forts and cannon. I felt spellbound by the interest of 
the sinistre melodrame^ with its quick succession of scenic ef- 
fects and the metropolis of the world for its stage. Taught 
by experience, I did not aspire to be an actor ; and even as a 
spectator, I took care neither to hiss nor applaud. Lnitating 
your happy England, I observed a strict neutrality ; and, safe 
myself from danger, left my best friends to the care of the 
gods. ' 

" As to political questions, I dare not commit mjrself to a 
conjecture. At this rouge et noir table, all I can say is, that 
whichever card turns up, it is either a red or a black one. 
One gamester gains for the moment by the loss of the other; 
the table eventually ruins both. 

" No one believes that the present form of government can 
last; every one differs as to that which can.' Raoul de Van- 
deraar is iiimovably convinced of the restoration of the 
Bourbons. Savarin is meditating a new journal devoted to 
the cause of the Count of Paris. De Brez6 and the old Count 
de Passy, having in turn espoused and opposed every previ- 

 VjOOQIC 



THB PARISIANS. 331 

ous form of government, naturally go in for a perfectly novel 
experiment, and are for constitational dictatorship under the 
Due d'Aumale, which he is to hold at his own pleasure, and 
ultimately resign to his nephew the Count, under the mild 
title of a constitutional king . that is, if it ever suit the 
pleasure of a dictator to depose himself To me this seems 
the wildest of notions. If the Due's administration were suc- 
cess^l, the French would insist on keeping it ; and if the un- 
cle were unsuccessful, the nephew would not have a chance. 
Duplessis retains his faith in the Imperial dynasty, and that 
Imperialist party is much stronger than it appears on the 
surface. So many of the bourgeoisie recall with a sigh eight- 
een years of prosperous trade ; so many of the military oflS- 
cers, so many of the civil oflScials, identify their career with 
the Napoleonic favor; and so many of th^ Priesthood, abhor- 
ring the Republic, always liable to pass into the hands of 
those who assail religion . unwilling to admit the claim of 
the Orleanists, are at heart for the Empire. 

" But I will tell you one secret. I and all the quiet folks 
like me (we are more numerous than any one violent faction) 
are willing to accept any form of government by which we 
have the best chance of keeping our coats on our backs. Li- 
hertiy JEgalUi^ Fraternity are gone quite out of fashion ; and 

Mademoiselle has abandoned her great chant of the 

MaraeiUaiaey and is drawing teacs from enlightened audiences 
by her pathetic delivery of *0 Richard! O mon roiP 

" Now about the other friends of whom you ask for news. 

" Wonders will never cease. Louvier and Duplessis are no 
longer deadly rivals. They have become sworn friends, and 
are meditating a great speculation in common, to commence 
as soon as the Prussian debt is paid off. Victor de Maul^on 
brought about this reconciliation in a single interview during 
the brief interregnum between the Peace and the Querre des 
Communeaitx. You know how sternly Louvier was bent upon 
seizing Alain de Rochebriant's estates. Can you conceive the 
true cause? Can you imagine it possible that a hardened 
money-maker like Louvier should ^ver allow himself to be act- 
uated, one way or the other, by the romance of a sentiment- 
al wrong ? Yet so it was. It seems that many years ago 
he was desperately in love with a girl who disappeared from 
his life, and whom he believed to have been seduced by the 



 



 



382 THE PARISIANS. 

late Marquis de Rochebriant. It was in revenge for this 
supposed crime that he had made himself the principal mort- 
gagee of the late Marquis ; and, visiting the sins of the father 
on the son, had, under the infernal disguise of friendly interest, 
made himself sole mortgagee to Alain, upon terms apparent- 
ly the most generous. The demon soon showed his griffey 
and was about to foreclose, when Duplessis came to Alain's 
relief; and Rochebriant was to be Valerie's dot on her mar- 
riage with Alain. ' The Prussian war, of course, suspended 
all such plans, pecuniary and matrimonial. Duplessis, whose 
resources were terribly crippled by the war, attempted oper- 
ations in London with a view of raising the sum necessary 
to pay off the mortgage . found himself strangely frustrated 
and baffled. Louvier was in London, and defeated his rival's 
agent in every speculation. It became impossible for Du- 
plessis to redeem the mortgage. The two men came to Par- 
is with the peace. Louvier determined both to seize the 
Breton lands and to complete the ruin of Duplessis ; when 
he learned from De Maul^on that he had spent half his life in 
a baseless illusion . that Alain's father was innocent of the 
crime for which his son was to suffer ; and Victor, with that 
strange power over men's minds which was so peculiar to 
him, talked Louvier into mercy if not into repentance. In 
short, the mortgage is to be paid off by installments at the 
convenience of Duplessis. Alain's marriage with Valerie is 
to take place in a few weeks. The foumisaeurs are already 
gone to fit up the old chateau for the bride, and Louvier is 
invited to the wedding. 

" I have all this story from Alain, and from Duplessis him- 
self. I tell the tale as 'twas told to me, with all the gloss of 
sentiment upon its woof. But between ourselves, I am too 
Parisian not to be skeptical as to the unalloyed amiability of 
sudden conversions. And I suspect that Louvier was no 
longer in a condition to indulge in the unprofitable whim of 
turning rural seigneur. He had sunk large sums and incur- 
red great liabilities in the new street to be called after his 
name ; and that street has been twice ravaged, first by the 
Prussian siege and next by the Guerre des Communeanx^ and 
I can detect many reasons why Louvier should deem it pru- 
dent not only to withdraw from the Rochebriant seizure, and 
make sure of peacefully recovering the capital loaned on it, 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 333 

but establishing joint interest and qv^asi partnership with a 
financier so brilliant and successful as Armand Duplessis has 
hitherto been. 

" Alain himself is not quite recovered from his wound, and 
is now at Roohebriant, nursed by his aunt and Valerie. I 
have promised to visit him next week. Rao^l de Vandemar 
is still at Paris with his mother, saying there is no place 
where one Christian man can be of such ^service. The old 
Count declines to come back, saying there is no place where 
a philosopher can be in such danger. 

"I reserve as my last communication, in reply to your 
questions, that which is the gravest. You say that you saw 
in the public journals brief notice of the assassination of 
Victor de Maul^on ; and you ask for such authentic partic- 
ulars as I can give of that event, and of the motives of the 
assassin. 

"I need not, of course, tell you how bravely the poor Vi- 
comte behaved throughout the siege ; but he had made many 
enemies among the worst members of the National Guard by 
the severity of his discipline ; and had he been caught by the 
mob the same day as Clement Thomas, who committed the 
same offense, would have certainly shared the fate of that 
general. Though elected a diput'e^ he remained at Paris a 
few days after Thiers & Co. left it, in the hope of persuading 
the party of Order, including then no small portion of the 
National Guards, to take prompt and vigorous measures to 
defend the city against the Communists. Indignant at their 
pusillanimity, he then escaped to Versailles. There he more* 
than confirmed the high reputation he had acquired during 
the siege, and impressed the ablest public men with the be- 
lief that he was destined to take a very leading part in the 
strife of party. When the Versailles troops entered Paris, 
he was, of course, among them in command of a battalion. 

" He escaped safe through that horrible war of barricades, 
though no man more courted danger. He inspired his men 
with his own courage. It was not till the revolt was quench- 
ed on the evening of the 28th May that he met his death. 
The Versailles soldiei-s, naturally exasperated, were very 
prompt in seizing and shooting at once every passenger who 
looked like a foe. Some men under De Maul^on had seized 

upon one of these victims, and were hurrying him into the 

15* 

 VjOOQIC 



334 THE PABISIAKS. 

next street for execution, when, catching sight of the Vicomte, 
he screamed out, ' Lebeau, save me !' 

"At that cry De Maul6on rushed forward, arrested his 
soldiers, cried, * This man is innocent . a harmless physician. 
I answer for him,' As he thus spoke, a wounded Communist, 
lying in the gutter amid a heap of the slain, dragged himself 
up, reeled toward De Maul6on, plunged a knife between his 
shoulders, and droj)ped down dead. 

" The Vicomte was carried into a neighboring house, from 
all the windows of which the tricolor was suspended ; and 
the M&decin^ whom he had just saved from summary execu- 
tion examined and dressed his wound. The Vicomte lingered 
for more than an hour, but expired in the effort to utter some 
words, the sense of which those about him endeavored in 
vain to seize. 

" It was from the MMecin that the name of the assassin 
and the motive for the crime were ascertained. The miscre- 
ant was a Red Republican and Socialist named Armand Mon- 
nier. He had been a very skillful workman, and earning, as 
such, high wages. But he thought fit to become an active 
revolutionary politician, first led into schemes for upsetting 
the world by the existing laws of marriage, which had in- 
flicted on him one woman who ran away from him, but, be- 
ing still legally his wife, forbade him to marry another wom- 
an with whom he lived, and to whom he seems to have been 
passionately attached. 

" These schemes, however, he did not put into any positive 
practice till he fell in with a certain Jean Lebeau, who exei> 
cised great influence over him, and by whom he was ad- 
mitted into one of the secret revolutionary societies which 
had for their object the overthrow of the Empire. After that 
time his head became turned. The fall of the Empire put an 
end to the society he had joined : Lebeau dissolved it. Dur- 
ing the siege Monnier was a sort of leader among the ou- 
vriers; but as it advanced and famine commenced, he con- 
tracted the habit of intoxication. His children died of cold 
and hunger. The woman he lived with followed them to the 
grave. Then he seems to have become a furious madman, 
and to have been implicated in the worst crimes of the Com- 
munists. He cherished a wild desire of revenge against this 
Jean Lebeau, to whom he attributed all his calamities, and 



 



 



THE PABISIANS. 335 

Dy whom, he said, his brother had been shot in the sortie of 
December. 

" Here comes the strange part of the story. This Jean Le- 
beau is alleged to have been one and the same person with 
Victor de Mauleon. The Mededn I have named, and who is 
well known in Belleville and Montmartre as the Mkdedn des 
PauvreSy confesses that he belonged to the secret society or- 
ganized by Lebeau ; that the disguise the Yicomte assumed 
was so complete that he should not have recognized his iden- 
tity with the conspirator but for an accident During the 
latter time of the bombardment, he, the M&decin des PauvreSy 
was on the eastern ramparts, and his attention was suddenly 
called to a man mortally wounded by the splinter of a shell. 
While examining the nature of the wound, De Mauleon, who 
was also on the ramparts, came to the spot. The dying man 
said, *M. le Vicomte, you owe me a service. My name is 
Marc le Roux. I was on the police before the war. When 
M. de Maul6on reassumed his station, and was making him- 
self obnoxious to the Emperor, I might have denounced him 
as Jean Lebeau, the conspirator. I did not. The siege has 
reduced me to want. I have a child at home . a pet. Don't 
let her starve.' * I will see to her,' said the Vicomte. Before 
we could get the man into the ambulance cart he expired. 

" The M&decin who told this story I had the curiosity to 
see myself, and cross-question. I own I believe his statement. 
Whether De Maul6on did or did not conspire against a fallen 
dynasty, to which he owed no allegiance, can little if at all 
fnjure the reputation he has left behind of a very remarkable 
man . of great courage and great ability . who might have 
had a splendid career if he had survived. But, as Savarin 
says truly, the first bodies which the car of revolution crushes 
down are those which first harness themselves to it. 

" Among De Maul^on's papers is the programme of a con- 
stitution fitted for France. How it got into Savarin's hands 
I know not. De Mauleon left no will, and no relations came 
forward to claim his papers. I asked Savarin to give me the 
heads of the plan, which he did. They are as follows : 

" * The American republic is the sole one worth studying, 
for it has lasted. The causes of its duration are in the checks 
to democratic fickleness and disorder. 1st. No law afiecting 
the Constitution can be altered without the consent of two 



 



 



336 THE PABISIANB. 

thirds of Congress. 2d. To counteract the impulses natural 
to a popular Assembly chosen by universal suffrage, the 
greater legislative powers, especially in foreign affairs, are 
vested in the Senate, which has even executive as well as ' 

legislative functions. 3d. The chief of the State, having j 

elected his government, can maintain it independent of hos- 
tile majorities in either Assembly. I 

" * These three principles of safety to form the basis of any ^ 

new constitution for France. 

 ( For France it is essential that the chief magistrate, under 
whatever title he assume, should be as irresponsible as an 
English sovereign. Therefore he should not preside at his 
councils; he should not lead his armies. The day for per- 
sonal government is gone, even in Prussia. The safety for 
order in a State is that, when things go wrong, the Ministry 
changes, the State remains the same. In Europe, Republican 
institutions are safer where the chief magistrate is hereditary 
than where elective.' 

^^ Savarin says these axioms are carried out at length, and I 

argued with great ability. 

" I am very grateful for your proffered hospitalities in En- 
gland. Some day I shall accept them . viz., whenever I de- 
cide on domestic life, and the calm of the conjugal foyer. I 
have a penchant for an English MeeSy and am not exacting as 
to the dot. Thirty thousand livres sterling would satisfy me 
. a trifle, I believe, to you rich islanders. 

^' Meanwhile, I am naturally compelled to make up for the 
miseries of that horrible siege. Certain moralizing journals 
tell us that, sobered by misfortunes, the Parisians are going 
to turn over a new leaf, become studious and reflective, de- 
spise pleasure and luxury, and live like German professors. 
Don't believe a word of it. My conviction is that, whatever 
may be said as to our frivolity, extravagance, etc., under the 
Empire, we shall be just the same under any form of govern- 
ment . the bravest, the most timid, the most ferocious, the 
kindest-hearted, the most irrational, the most intelligent, the 
most contradictory, the most consistent people whom Jove, 
taking counsel of Venus and the Graces, Mars and the Furies, 
ever created for the delight and terror of the world . in a 
word, the Parisians. Yotre tcrut d&vou^, 

Frederic Lemsrcier.'' 



 



 



 



 




QBAIIAH YAME AND ISACBA AT 80BBBMT0. 



 



 



THE PARISIANS. 337 

It is a lovely noon on the bay of Sorrento, toward the close 
of the autumn of 1871, upon the part of the craggy shore, to 
the left of the town, on which her first perusal of the loveliest 
poem in which the^ romance of Christian heroism has ever 
combined elevation of thought with silver delicacies of speech 
had charmed her childhood, reclined the young bride of Gra- 
ham Vane, They were in the first month of their marriage. 
Isaura had not yet recovered from the effects of all that had 
preyed upon her life, from the hour in which she had deemed 
that in her pursuit of fame she had lost the love that had col- 
ored her genius and inspired her dreams, to that in which . , . 

The physicians consulted agreed in insisting on her passing 
the winter in a southern climate ; and after their wedding, 
which took place in Florence, they thus came to Sori'ento. 

As Isaura is seated on the small smoothed rocklet, Gra- 
ham reclines at her feet, his face upturned to hers with an 
inexpressible wistful anxiety in his impassioned tenderness. 
"You are sure you feel better and stronger since we have 
been here ?" 



THE END. 
THE PARISIANS. 



-. 



BOOK VII. 



CHAPTER I. 

It is the first week in the month of May 1870. Celebrities 
are of rapid growth in the salons of Paris. Gustave Rameau 
has gained the position for which he sighed. The journal he 
edits has increased its hold on the public, and his share of the 
profits has been liberally augmented by the secret proprietor. 
Rameau is acknowledged as a power in literary circles. And as 
critics belonging to the same clique praise each other in Paris, 
whatever they may do in communities more rigidly virtuous, his 
poetry has been declared by authorities in the press to be 
superior to that of Alfred de Musset in vigour . to that of Victor 
Hugo in refinement; neither of which assertions would much, 
perhaps, shock a cultivated understanding. 

It is true that it (Gustave's poetry) has not gained a wide 
audience among the public But with regard to poetry now- 
adays, there are plenty of persons who say as Dr. Johnson said 
of the verse of Spratt, " I would rather praise it than read." 

At all events, Rameau was courted in gay and brilliant circles, 
and, following the general example of French litterateurs in 
fashion, lived well up to the income he received, had a delightful 



io THE PARISIANS. 



bachelors apartment, furnished with artistic effect, spent largely 
on the adornment of his person, kept a coupe' and entertained 
profusely at the Cafe Anglais and the Maison Dor6e. A reputa- 
tion that inspired a graver and more unquiet interest had been 
created by the Vicomte de Mauldon. Recent articles in the 
Sens Cotnmun, written under the name of Pierre Firmin on the 
discussions on the vexed question of the plebiscite, had given 
umbrage to the Government, and Rameau had received an 
intimation that he, as editor, was responsible for the composi- 
tions of the contributors to the journal he edited ; and that 
though, so long as Pierre Firmin had kept his caustic spirit 
within proper bounds, the Government had winked at the 
evasion of the law which required every political article in a 
journal to be signed by the real name of its author, it could do 
so no longer. Pierre Firmin was apparently a nom de plume; 
if not, his identity must be proved, or Rameau would pay the 
penalty which his contributor seemed bent on incurring. 

Rameau, much alarmed for the journal that might be sus- 
pended, and for himself who might be imprisoned, conveyed 
this information through the publisher to his correspondent 
Pierre Firmin, and received the next day an article signed 
Victor de Maul^on, in which the writer proclaimed himself to 
be one and the same with Pierre Firmin, and, taking a yet 
bolder tone than he had before assumed, dared the Government 
to attempt legal measures against him. The Government was 
prudent enough to disregard that haughty bravado, but Victor 
de Maul^on rose at once into political importance. He had 
already in his real name and his quiet way established a popular 
and respectable place in Parisian society. But if this revela- 
tion created him enemies whom he had not before provoked, he 
was now sufficiently acquitted, by tacit consent, of the sins 
formerly laid to his charge, to disdain the assaults of party 
wrath. His old reputation for personal courage and skill in 
sword and pistol served, indeed, to protect him from such 
charges as a Parisian journalist does not reply to with his pen. 
If he created some enemies, he created many more friends, 
or, at least, partisans and admirers. He only needed fine and 
imprisonment to become a popular hero. 



THE PARISIANS. n 



A few days after he had thus proclaimed himself, Victor de 
Maul6on . who had before kept aloof from Rameau, and from 
salons at which he was likely to meet that distinguished minstrel 
. solicited his personal acquaintance, and asked him to break- 
fast 

Rameau joyfully went. He had a very natural curiosity to 
see the contributor whose articles had so mainly insured the 
sale of the Sens Commun. 

In the dark-haired, keen-eyed, well-dressed, middle-aged 
man, with commanding port and courtly address, he failed to 
recognise any resemblance to the fiaxen-wigged, long-coated, 
be-spectacled, shambling sexagenarian whom he had known 
as Lebeau. Only now and then a tone of voice struck him 
as familiar, but he could not recollect where he had heard the 
voice it resembled. The thought of Lebeau did not occur 
to him; if it had occurred it would only have struck him as 
a chance coincidence. Rameau, like most egotists, was rather 
a dull observer of men. His genius was not objective. 

" I trust Monsieur Rameau," said the Vicomte, as he and his 
guest were seated at the breakfast-table, "that you are not 
dissatisfied with the remuneration your eminent services in the 
journal have received." 

" The proprietor, whoever he be, has behaved most liberally," 
answered Rameau. 

"I take that compliment to myself, clier confrire ; for though 
the expenses of starting the Sens Commun, and the caution 
money lodged were found by a friend of mine, that was as 
a loan, which I have long since repaid, and the property in 
the journal is now exclusively mine. I have to thank you 
not only for your own brilliant contributions, but for those 
of the colleagues you secured. Monsieur Savarin's piquant 
criticisms were most valuable to us at starting. I regret to 
have lost his aid. But as he has set up a new journal of his 
own, even he has not wit enough to spare for another. A propos 
of our contributors, I shall ask you to present me to the fair 
author of The Artists Daughter. I am of too prosaic a 
nature to appreciate justly the merits of a roman ; but I have 
heard warm praise of this story from the young . they are 



12 THE PARISIANS. 



the best judges of that kind of literature ; and I can at least 
understand the worth of a contributor who trebled the sale 
of our journal. It is a misfortune to us, indeed, that her work 
is completed, but I trust that the sum sent to her through our 
publisher suffices to tempt her to favour us with another roman 



in series." 



"Mademoiselle Cicogna," said Rameau, with a somewhat 
sharper intonation of his sharp voice, "has accepted for the 
republication of her roman in a separate form terms which 
attest the worth of her genius, and has had offers from other 
journals for a serial tale of even higher amount than the sum 
so generously sent to her through your publisher." 

" Has she accepted them, Monsieur Rameau ? If so, tant pis 
pour vous. Pardon me, I mean that your salary suffers in 
proportion as the Sens Contmun declines in sale." 

" She has not accepted them. I advised her not to do so until 
she could compare them with those offered by the proprietor of 
the Sens Commun? 

"And your advice guides her? Ah, cher confrire> you are 
a happy man ! . you have influence over this young aspirant to 
the fame of a De Stael or a Georges Sand." 

"I flatter myself that I have some," answered Rameau, 
smiling loftily as he helped himself to another tumbler of 
Volnay wine . excellent, but rather heady. 

"So much the better. I leave you free to arrange terms 
with Mademoiselle Cicogna, higher than she can obtain else- 
where, and kindly contrive my own personal introduction to 
her . you have breakfasted already? . permit me to offer you 
a cigar . excuse me if I do not bear you company ; I seldom 
smoke . never of a morning. Now to business, and the state 
of France. Take that easy-chair, seat yourself comfortably. 
So ! Listen ! If ever Mephistopheles revisit the earth, how 
he will laugh at Universal Suffrage and Vote by Ballot 
in an old country like France, as things to be admired by 
educated men, and adopted by friends of genuine freedom ! " 

" I don't understand you," said Rameau. 

" In this respect at least, let me hope that I can furnish you 
with understanding." 



THE PARISIANS. 13 



" The Emperor has resorted to a plebiscite . viz., a vote by 
ballot and universal suffrage . as to certain popular changes which 
circumstances compel him to substitute for his former personal 
rule. Is there a single intelligent Liberal who is not against 
that plebiscite ? . is there any such who does not know that 
the appeal of the Emperor to universal suffrage and vote by 
ballot must result in a triumph over all the variations of 
free thought, by the unity which belongs to Order, represented 
through an able man at the head of the State ? The multitude 
never comprehend principles ; principles are complex ideas ; 
they comprehend a single idea, and the simplest idea is, a Name 
that rids their action of all responsibility to thought 

"Well, in France there are principles superabundant which 
you can pit against the principle of Imperial rule. But there 
is not one name you can pit against Napoleon the Third ; 
therefore, I steer our little bark in the teeth of the popular 
gale when I denounce the plebiscite, and Le Sens Comntun will 
necessarily fall in sale . it is beginning to fall already. We shall 
have the educated men with us, the rest against. In every 
country . even in China, where all are highly educated . a few 
must be yet more highly educated than the many. Monsieur 
Rameau, I desire to overthrow the Empire: in order to do 
that, it is not enough to have on my side the educated men, 
I must have the canaille . the canaille of Paris and of the 
manufacturing towns. But I use the canaille for my purpose 
. I don't mean to enthrone it. You comprehend ? . the canaille 
quiescent is simply mud at the bottom of a stream ; the canaille 
agitated is mud at the surface. But no man capable of three 
ideas builds the palaces and senates of civilised society out of 
mud, be it at the top or the bottom of an ocean. Can either 
you or I desire that the destinies of France shall be swayed by 
coxcombical artisans who think themselves superior to every 
man who writes grammar, and whose idea of a commonwealth 
is the confiscation of private property ? " 

Rameau, thoroughly puzzled by this discourse, bowed his 
head, and replied whisperingly, " Proceed. You are against the 
Empire, yet against the populace! . What are you for? not, surely, 
the Legitimists ? . are you Republican ? Orleanist ? or what ? " 



* Your q-iffatrrass are rery pertinent,.* answered t&e Moomte, 
cr>urtraisiy r *aaef ray answer snail be very frank. I am 
zgzsa&t abactiitc nig; w5gc&igr irm^er a Bc nnagarte or a Bourbon. 
1 im. for a firec Seats* wftfftfceir cunier a aaratifrafciiogal hereditary 
acwgzsiigtt Irke tine Eng^a or Beldam, or w&etrDcr. republican 
rn same, fit be less democratic than ccnsrjtutfocal monarchy 
itt practice, like the American. Bet as a man interested in 
the fate of Le S*m$ Cjwkmtl, I hal<f in profoand disdain ail 
crotdaets for fevototaont^ng' the dements q Human Nature. 
Enftagh of tfacs abstract talk. To the peart. You are of 
C6in a-sfare of the violent meetings beM by the Socialists, 
fwcmaally against the pl<r:iszU r really against tbe Emperor 

* Yes, I know at least that the working class are extremely 
dhcrmtentcd ; the numerous strikes last month were not on a 
mere question of wages . they were against the existing forms 
of society. And the articles by Pierre Firmin which brought 
me into collision with the Government, seemed to differ from 
what you now say. They approve those strikes ; they appeared 
to sympathise with the revolutionary meetings at Belleville and 
Montmartre" 

* Of course . we use coarse tools for destroying ; we cast them 
aside for finer ones when we want to reconstruct 

u I attended one of those meetings last night See^ I have 
a pass for all such assemblies, signed by some dolt who cannot 
even spell the name he assumes . ' Pom-de-Tair! A commissary 
of police sat yawning at the end of the orchestra, his secretary 
by his side, while the orators stammer out fragments of would- 
be thunderbolts. Commissary of police yawns more wearily 
than before, secretary disdains to use his pen, seizes his pen- 
knife and pares his nails. Up rises a wild-haired, weak-limbed 
silhouette of a man, and affecting a solemnity of mien which 
might have become the virtuous Guizot, moves this resolution 
. 'The French people condemns Charles Louis Napoleon the 
Third to the penalty of perpetual hard labour.' Then up 
rincs the commissary of police and says quietly, r I declare this 
meeting at an end.' 

" Sensation among the audience . they gesticulate . they 



THE PARISIANS. 15 



screech . they bellow . the commissary puts on his great-coat 
. the secretary gives a last touch to his nails and pockets his 
penknife . the audience disperses . the silhouette of a man effaces 
itself . all is over." 

" You describe the scene most wittily/' said Rameau, laughing, 
but the laugh was constrained. A would-be cynic himself, there 
was a something grave and earnest in the real cynic that awed 
him. 

"What conclusion do you draw from such a scene, cher 
poHe?" asked De Mauldon, fixing his keen quiet eyes on 
Rameau. 

" What conclusion ? Well, that . that . 

" Yes, continue." 



 



"That the audience were sadly degenerated from the time 
when Mirabeau said to a Master of the Ceremonies, l We are 
here by the power of the French people, and nothing but the 
point of the bayonet shall expel us.' " 

" Spoken like a poet, a French poet. I suppose you admire 
M. Victor Hugo. Conceding that he would have employed a 
more sounding phraseology, comprising more absolute ignorance 
of men, times, and manners in unintelligible metaphor and melo- 
dramatic braggadocio, your answer might have been his; but 
pardon me if I add, it would not be that of Common Sense." 

" Monsieur le Vicomte might rebuke me more politely," said 
Rameau, colouring high. 

"Accept my apologies; I did not mean to rebuke, but to 
instruct The times are not those of 1789. And Nature, ever 
repeating herself in the production of coxcombs and blockheads, 
never repeats herself in the production of Mirabeaus. The 
Empire is doomed . doomed, because it is hostile to the free 
play of intellect Any Government that gives absolute pre- 
ponderance to the many is hostile to intellect, for intellect is 
necessarily confined to the few. 

"Intellect is the most revengeful of all the elements of 
society. It cares not what the materials through which it 
insinuates or forces its way to its seat. 

" I accept the aid of Pom-de-Tair. I do not demean myself 
to the extent of writing articles that may favour the principles 



16 THE PARISIANS. 



of Pom-de-1 air t signed in the name of Victor de Maul6on or 
of Pierre Firmin. 

" I will beg you, my dear editor, to obtain clever, smart 
writers, who know nothing about Socialists and Internationalists, 
who therefore will not commit Le Sens Cotnmun by advocating 
the doctrines of those idiots, but who will flatter the vanity of 
the canaille . vaguely; write any stuff they please about the 
renown of Paris, ' the eye of the world/ ' the sun of the European 
system,' &c, of the artisans of Paris as supplying soul to that 
eye and fuel to that sun . any blague of that sort . genre Victor 
Hugo ; but nothing definite against life and property, nothing 
that may not be considered hereafter as the harmless extra- 
vagance of a poetic enthusiasm. You might write such 
articles yourself. In fine, I want to excite the multitude, 
and yet not to commit our journal to the contempt of the 
few. 

"Nothing is to be admitted that may bring the law upon 
us except it be signed by my name. There may be a moment 
in which it would be desirable for somebody to be sent to 
prison : in that case, I allow no substitute . I go myself. 

"Now you have my most secret thoughts. I intrust them 
to your judgment with entire confidence. Monsieur Lebeau 
gave you a high character, which you have hitherto deserved. 
By the way, have you seen anything lately of that bourgeois 
conspirator ? " 

" No, his professed business of letter-writer or agent is 
transferred to a clerk, who says M. Lebeau is abroad." 

" Ah ! I don't think that is true. I fancy I saw him the other 
evening gliding along the lanes of Belleville. He is too con- 
firmed a conspirator to be long out of Paris ; no place like 
Paris for seething brains." 

" Have you known M. Lebeau long ? " asked Rameau. 

"Ay, many years. We are both Norman by birth, as you 
may perceive by something broad in our accent." 

" Ha ! I knew your voice was familiar to me ; certainly it 
does remind me of Lebeau's." 

" Normans are like each other in many things besides voice 
and accent . obstinacy, for instance, in clinging to ideas once 



THE PARISIANS. 17 



formed ; this makes them good friends and steadfast enemies. 
I would advise no man to make an enemy of Lebeau. 

u Au revoir, cher confrere. Do not forget to present me to 
Mademoiselle Cicogna." 



CHAPTER II. 

On leaving De Mauteon and regaining his coupt, Rameau felt 
at once bewildered and humbled, for he was not prepared for 
the tone of careless superiority which the Vicomte assumed over 
him. He had expected to be much complimented, and he com- 
prehended vaguely that he had been somewhat snubbed. He 
was not only irritated . he was bewildered, for De Maulon's 
political disquisitions did not leave any clear or definite idea on 
his mind as to the principles which as editor of the Sens Comtnun 
he was to see adequately represented and carried out. In 
truth, Rameau was one of those numerous Parisian politicians 
who have read little and reflected less on the government of 
men and States. Envy is said by a great French writer to be 
the vice of Democracies. Envy certainly had made Rameau a 
democrat. He could talk and write glibly enough upon the 
themes of equality and fraternity, and was so far an ultra- 
democrat that he thought moderation the sign of a mediocre 
understanding. 

De Maul6on's talk, therefore, terribly perplexed him. It was 
unlike anything he had heard before. Its revolutionary pro- 
fessions, accompanied with so much scorn for the multitude, and 
the things the multitude desired, were Greek to him. He was 
not shocked by the cynicism which placed wisdom in using the 
passions of mankind as tools for the interests of an individual ; 
but he did not understand the frankness of its avowal. 

Nevertheless the man had dominated over and subdued him. 
He recognised the power of his contributor without clearly 
analysing its nature . a power made up of large experience of 

VOL. II. B 



1 3 THE PARISIANS. 



life, of cold examination of doctrines that heated others . of 
patrician calm . of intellectual sneer . of collected confidence 
in self. 

Besides, Rameau felt, with a nervous misgiving, that in this 
man, who so boldly proclaimed his contempt for the instruments 
he used, he had found a master. De Mauleon, then, was 
sole proprietor of the journal from which Rameau drew his 
resources ; might at any time dismiss him ; might at any time 
involve the journal in penalties which, even if Rameau could 
escape in his official capacity as editor, still might stop the Sens 
Comtnun, and with it Rameau's luxurious subsistence. 

Altogether the visit to De Mauleon had been anything but a 
pleasant one. He sought, as the carriage rolled on, to turn 
his thoughts to more agreeable subjects, and the image of 
Isaura rose before him. To do him justice he had learned to 
love this girl as well as his nature would permit : he loved her 
with the whole strength of his imagination, and though his heart 
was somewhat cold, his imagination was very ardent. He loved 
her also with the whole strength of his vanity, and vanity was 
even a more preponderant organ of his system than imagination. 
To carry off as his prize one who had already achieved celebrity, 
whose beauty and fascination of manner were yet more acknow- 
ledged than her genius, would certainly be a glorious triumph. 

Every Parisian of Rameau's stamp looks forward in marriage 
to a brilliant salon. What salon more brilliant than that which 
he and Isaura united could command ? He had long conquered 
his early impulse of envy at Isaura's success, . in fact that suc- 
cess had become associated with his own, and had contributed 
greatly to his enrichment So that to other motives of love 
he might add the prudential one of interest. Rameau well 
knew that his own vein of composition, however lauded by 
the cliques, and however unrivalled in his own eyes, was not 
one that brings much profit in the market He compared 
himself to those poets who are too far in advance of their time 
to be quite as sure of bread and cheese as they are of immortal 
fame. 

But he regarded Isaura's genius as of a lower order, and a 
thing in itself very marketable. Marry her, and the bread and 



\ 



THE PARISIANS. 19 



cheese were so certain that he might elaborate as slowly as he 
pleased the verses destined to immortal fame. Then he should 
be independent of inferior creatures like Victor de Mauldon. 
But while Rameau convinced himself that he was passionately 
in love with Isaura, he could not satisfy himself that she was 
in love with him. 

Though during the past year they had seen each other 
constantly, and their literary occupations had produced many 
sympathies between them . though he had intimated that many 
of his most eloquent love-poems were inspired by her . though 
he%had asserted in prose, very pretty prose too, that she was 
all that youthful poets dream of, . yet she had hitherto treated 
such declarations with a playful laugh, accepting them as 
elegant compliments inspired by Parisian gallantry; and he 
felt an angry and sore foreboding that if he were to insist too 
seriously on the earnestness of their import and ask her plainly 
to be his wife, her refusal would be certain, and his visits to her 
house might be interdicted. 

Still Isaura was unmarried, still she had refused offers of 
marriage from men higher placed than himself, . still he divined 
no one whom she could prefer. And as he now leaned back 
in his coupi he muttered to himself, " Oh, if I could but get 
rid of that little demon Julie, I would devote myself so 
completely to winning Isaura' s heart that I must succeed ! 
. but how to get rid of Julie ? She so adores me, and is so 
headstrong! She is capable of going to Isaura . showing my 
letters . making such a scene ! " 

Here he checked the carriage at a cafi on the Boulevard, 
. descended, imbibed two glasses of absinthe, . and then 
feeling much emboldened, remounted his coupi and directed 
the driver to Isaura's apartment. 



B 2 



20 THE PARISIANS. 



CHAPTER III. 

Yes, celebrities are of rapid growth in the salons of Paris. 
Far more solid than that of Rameau, far more brilliant than 
that of De Mauteon, was the celebrity which Isaura had now 
acquired. She had been unable to retain the pretty suburban 

villa at A . The owner wanted to alter and enlarge it 

for his own residence, and she had been persuaded by Signora 
Venosta, who was always sighing for fresh salons to conquer, to 
remove (towards the close of the previous year) to apartments in 
the centre of the Parisian beau monde. Without formally pro- 
fessing to receive, on one evening in the week her salon was 
open to those who had eagerly sought her acquaintance . 
comprising many stars in the world of fashion, as well as those 
in the world of art and letters. And as she had now wholly 
abandoned the idea of the profession for which her voice had 
been cultivated, she no longer shrank from the exercise of her 
surpassing gift of song for the delight of private friends. Her 
physician had withdrawn the interdict on such exercise. 

His skill, aided by the rich vitality of her constitution, had 
triumphed over all tendencies to the malady for which he had 
been consulted. To hear Isaura Cicogna sing in her own house 
was a privilege sought and prized by many who never read a 
word of her literary compositions. A good critic of a book is 
rare ; but good judges of a voice are numberless. Adding this 
attraction of song to her youth, her beauty, her frank powers of 
converse . an innocent sweetness of manner free from all 
conventional affectation . and to the fresh novelty of a genius 
which inspired the young with enthusiasm and beguiled the old 
to indulgence, it was no wonder that Isaura became a celebrity 
at Paris. 

Perhaps it was a wonder that her head was not turned by the 
adulation that surrounded her. But I believe, be it said with 
diffidence, that a woman of mind so superior that the mind 
never pretends to efface the heart, is less intoxicated with 
flattery than a man equally exposed to it 



THE PARISIANS. 21 



It is the strength of her heart that keeps her head sober. 
Isaura had never yet overcome her first romance of love ; as yet, 
amid all her triumphs, there was not a day in which her 
thoughts did not wistfully, mournfully, fly back to those 
blessed moments in which she felt her cheek colour before 
a look, her heart beat at the sound of a footfall. Perhaps if 
there had been the customary finis to this young romance . the 
lover's deliberate renunciation, his formal farewell . the girl's 
pride would ere this, have conquered her affection, . possibly . 
who knows? . replaced it. 

But, reader, be you male or female, have you ever known this 
sore trial of affection and pride, that from some cause or other, 
to you mysterious, the dear intercourse to which you had 
accustomed the secret life of your life, abruptly ceases ; you 
know that a something has come between you and the beloved 
which you cannot distinguish, cannot measure, cannot guess, and 
therefore cannot surmount ; and you say to yourself at the dead 
of solitary night, " Oh for an explanation ! Oh for one meeting 
more ! All might be so easily set right ; or if not, I should 
know the worst, and knowing it, could conquer ! " 

This trial was Isaura's. There had been no explanation, no 
last farewell between her and Graham. She divined . no woman 
lightly makes a mistake there . that he loved her ! She knew 
that this dread something had intervened between her and him 
when he took leave of her before others so many months ago ; 
that this dread something still continued . what was it ? She 
was certain that it would vanish, could they but once meet again 
and not before others. Oh for such a meeting ! 

She could not herself destroy hope. She could not marry 
another. She would have no heart to give to another while 
he was free, while in doubt if his heart was still her own. And 
thus her pride did not help her to conquer her affection. 

Of Graham Vane she heard occasionally. He had ceased to 
correspond with Savarin ; but among those who most frequented 
her salon were the Morleys. Americans so well educated and so 
well placed as the Morleys knew something about every English- 
man of the social station of Graham Vane. Isaura learned from 
them that Graham after a tour on the Continent, had returned 



22 THE PARISIANS. 



to England at the commencement of the year, had been invited 
to stand for Parliament, had refused, that his name was in the 
list published by the Morning Post of the flite whose arrivals 
in London, or whose presence at dinner-tables, is recorded as an 
event. That the Athenceum had mentioned a rumour that 
Graham Vane was the author of a political pamphlet which, 
published anonymously, had made no inconsiderable sensation. 
Isaura sent to England for that pamphlet : the subject was some- 
what dry, and the style, though clear and vigorous, was scarcely 
of the eloquence which wins the admiration of women ; and yet 
she learned every word of it by heart 

We know how little she dreamed that the celebrity which she 
hailed as an approach to him was daily making her more remote. 
The sweet labours she undertook for that celebrity, continued 
to be sweetened yet more by secret association with the absent 
one. How many of the passages most admired could never 
have been written had he been never known ! 

And she blessed those labours the more that they upheld her 
from the absolute feebleness of sickened reverie, beguiled her 
from the gnawing torture of unsatisfied conjecture. She did 
comply with Madame de Grantmesnil's command . did pass 
from the dusty beaten road of life into green fields and along 
flowery river-banks, and did enjoy that ideal by-world. 

But still the one image which reigned over her human heart 
moved beside her in the gardens of fairyland. 



CHAPTER IV. 

ISAURA was seated in her pretty salon, with the Venosta, 
M. Savarin, the Morleys, and the financier Louvier, when 
Rameau was announced. 

"Hal" cried Savarin, "we were just discussing a matter 
which nearly concerns you, cher potie. I have not seen you 
since the announcement that Pierre Firmin, is no other than 



THE PARISIANS. 23 



Victor de Mauleon. Ma foi, that worthy seems likely to be 
as dangerous with his pen as he was once with his sword. 
The article in which he revealed himself makes a sharp lunge 
on the Government 

"Take care of yourself. When hawks and nightingales fly 
together the hawk may escape, and the nightingale complain 
of the barbarity of kings, in a cage : ' flebiliter gemens infelix 
avis.'" 

" He is not fit to conduct a journal," replied Rameau, mag- 
niloquently, "who will not brave a danger for his body in 
defence of the right to infinity for his thought." 

" Bravo ! " said Mrs. Morley, clapping her pretty hands. 
"That speech reminds me of home. The French are very 
much like the Americans in their style of oratory." 

"So," said Louvier, "my old friend the Vicomte has come 
out as a writer, a politician, a philosopher ; I feel hurt that he 
kept this secret from me despite our intimacy. I suppose you 
knew it from the first, M. Rameau ? " 

" No, I was as much taken by surprise as the rest of the 
world. You have long known M. de Mauleon ? " 

" Yes, I may say we began life together . that is, much at the 
same time." 

" What is he like in appearance ? " asked Mrs. Morley. 

" The ladies thought him very handsome when he was 
young," replied Louvier. " He is still a fine-looking man, 
about my height." 

" I should like to know him ! " cried Mrs. Morley, " if only 
to tease that husband of mine. He refuses me the dearest 
of woman's rights. . I can't make him jealous." 

" You may have the opportunity of knowing this ci-devant 
Lovelace very soon," said Rameau, "for he has begged me 
to present him to Mademoiselle Cicogna, and I will ask 
her permission to do so, on Thursday evening when she 
receives." 



Isaura, who had hitherto attended very listlessly to the 
conversation, bowed assent "Any friend of yours will be 
welcome. But I own the articles signed in the name of Pierre 
Firmin do not prepossess me in favour of their author." 



24 THE PARISIANS. 



" Why so ? " asked Louvier ; " surely you are not an 

Imperialist?" 

" Nay, I do not pretend to be a politician at all, but there is 

something in the writing of Pierre Firmin that pains and chills 
me. 

"Yet the secret of its popularity," said Savarin, "is that it 
says what every one says . only better." 

" I see now that it is exactly that which displeases me ; it 
is the Paris talk condensed into epigram : the graver it is the 
less it elevates . the lighter it is, the more it saddens." 

" That is meant to hit me/' said Savarin, with his sunny laugh 
. " me whom you call cynical." 

" No, dear M. Savarin ; for above all your cynicism is genuine 
gaiety, and below it solid kindness. You have that which I do 
not find in M. de Mauteon's writing, nor often in the talk of 
the salon . you have youthfulness." 

" Youthfulness at sixty . flatterer ! " 

* Genius does not count its years by the almanac," said Mrs. 
Morley. " I know what Isaura means . she is quite right ; 
there is a breath of winter in M. de Mauleon's style, and an 
odour of fallen leaves. Not that his diction wants vigour ; on 
the contrary, it is crisp with hoar-frost. But the sentiments 
conveyed by the diction are those of a nature sear and withered. 
And it is in this combination of brisk words and decayed 
feelings that his writing represents the talk and mind of Paris. 
He and Paris are always fault-finding : fault-finding is the 
attribute of old age." 

Colonel Morley looked round with pride, as much as to say 
. " clever talker my wife." 

Savarin understood that look, and replied to it courteously. 
" Madame has a gift of expression which Emile de Girardin 
can scarcely surpass. But when she blames us for fault-finding, 
can she expect the friends of liberty to praise the present style 
of things ? " 

"I should be obliged to the friends of liberty," said the 
Colonel, drily, " to tell me how that state of things is to be 
mended. I find no enthusiasm for the Orleanists, none for 
a Republic ; people sneer at religion ; no belief in a cause, 



THE PARISIANS. 25 



no adherence to an opinion. But the worst of it is that, like 
all people who are blasis y the Parisians are eager for strange 
excitement, and ready to listen to any oracle who promises 
a relief from indifferentism. This it is which makes the Press 
more dangerous in France than it is in any other country. 
Elsewhere the Press sometimes leads, sometimes follows, public 
opinion. Here there is no public opinion to consult, and instead 
of opinion the Press represents passion." 

" My dear Colonel Morley," said Savarin, " I hear you very 
often say that a Frenchman cannot understand America. 
Permit me to observe that an American cannot understand 
France . or at least Paris. A propos of Paris . that is a large 
speculation of yours, Louvier, in the new suburb." 

"And a very sound one; I advise you to invest in it I 
can secure you at present 5 per cent, on the rental ; that is 
nothing . the houses will be worth double when the Rue de 
Louvier is completed." 

"Alas! I have no money; my new journal absorbs all my capital." 

" Shall I transfer the money I hold for you, Signorina, and 
add to them whatever you may have made by your delightful 
roman, as yet lying idle, to this investment? I cannot say 
more in its favour than this . I have embarked a very large 
portion of my capital in the Rue de Louvier, and I flatter 
myself that I am not one of those men who persuade their 
friends to do a foolish thing by setting them the example." 

"Whatever you advise on such a subject," said Isaura, 
graciously, " is sure to be as wise as it is kind ! " 

" You consent, then ? " 

" Certainly." 

Here the Venosta, who had been listening with great atten- 
tion to Louvier's commendation of this investment, drew him 
aside, and whispered in his ear . " I suppose, M. Louvier, that 
one can't put a little money . a very little money. poco-poco- 
pocolino, into your street." 

"Into my street! Ah, I understand . into the speculation 
of the Rue de Louvier! Certainly you can. Arrangements 
are made on purpose to suit the convenience of the smallest 
capitalists . from 500 francs upwards." 



26 THE PARISIANS. 



"And you feel quite sure that we shall double our money 
when the street is completed . I should not like to have my 
brains in my heels." l 

"More than double it, I hope, long before the street is 
completed." 

" I have saved a little money . very little. I have no 
relations, and I mean to leave it all to the Signorina ; and 
if it could be doubled, why, there would be twice as much 
to leave her." 

" So there would," said Louvier. " You can't do better than 
put it all into the Rue de Louvier. I will send you the 
necessary papers to-morrow, when I send hers to the Signorina." 

Louvier here turned to address himself to Colonel Morley, 
but finding that degenerate son of America indisposed to get 
cent per cent, for his money when offered by a Parisian, he 
very soon took his leave. The other visitors followed his 
example, except Rameau, who was left alone with the Venosta 
and Isaura. The former had no liking for Rameau, who showed 
her none of the attentions his innocent vanity demanded, and 
she soon took herself off to her own room to calculate the 
amount of her savings, and dream of the Rue de Louvier and 
" golden joys." 

Rameau approaching his chair to Isaura's then com- 
menced conversation, drily enough, upon pecuniary matters; 
acquitting himself of the mission with which De Maulon had 
charged him, the request for a new work from her pen for the 
Sens Commun, and the terms that ought to be asked for 
compliance. The young lady-author shrank from this talk. 
Her private income though modest, sufficed for her wants, 
and she felt a sensitive shame in the sale of her thoughts 
and fancies. 

Putting hurriedly aside the mercantile aspect of the question, 
she said that she had no other work in her mind at present 
. that, whatever her vein of invention might be it flowed 
at its own will, and could not be commanded. 

"Nay," said Rameau, "this is not true. We fancy, in our 
hours of indolence, that we must wait for inspiration ; but once 

1 " Avert il cervello nella calcagna" . viz., to act without prudent reflection. 



THE PARISIANS. 27 



force ourselves to work, and ideas spring forth at the wave of 
the pen. You may believe me here . I speak from experience : 
I, compelled to work, and in modes not to my taste . I do my 
task I know not how. I rub the lamp, ' the genius comes.' " 

" I have read in some English author that motive power is 
necessary to continued labour : you have motive power, I have 
none." 



" I do not quite understand you. " 

" I mean that a strong ruling motive is required to persist in 
any regular course of action that needs effort : the motive with 
the majority of men is the need of subsistence ; with a large 
number (as in trades or professions), not actually want, but a 
desire of gain, and perhaps of distinction, in their calling : the 
desire of professional distinction expands into the longings for 
more comprehensive fame, more exalted honours, with the few 
who become great writers, soldiers, statesmen, orators." 

u And do you mean to say you have no such motive ? " 

" None in the sting of want, none in the desire of gain." 

" But fame ? " 

" Alas ! I thought so once. I know not now . I begin to 
doubt if fame should be sought by women." This was said 
very dejectedly. 

" Tut, dearest Signorina ! what gadfly has stung you ? Your 
doubt is a weakness unworthy of your intellect ; and even were 
it not, genius is destiny and will be obeyed : you must write, 
despite yourself . and your writing must bring fame, whether 
you wish it or not." 

Isaura was silent, her head drooped on her breast . there 
were tears in her downcast eyes. 

Rameau took her hand, which she yielded to him passively, 
and clasping it in both his own, he rushed on impulsively. 

" Oh, I know what these misgivings are when we feel ourselves 
solitary, unloved : how often have they been mine ! But how 
different would labour be if shared and sympathised with 
by a congenial mind, by a heart that beats in unison with 
one's own ! " 

Isaura's breast heaved beneath her robe, she sighed softly. 

" And then how sweet the fame of which the one we love is 



28 THE PARISIANS. 



proud ! how trifling becomes the pang of some malignant de- 
preciation, which a word from the beloved one can soothe! 

Signorina ! O Isaura ! are we not made for each other ? 
Kindred pursuits, hopes and fears in common ; the same race 
to run, the same goal to win ! I need a motive, stronger than 

1 have yet known for the persevering energy that insures 
success : supply to me that motive. Let me think that what- 
ever I win in the strife of the world is a tribute to Isaura. No, 
do not seek to withdraw this hand, let me claim it as mine for 
life. I love you as man never loved before . do not reject 
my love." 

They say the woman who hesitates is lost Isaura hesitated, 
but was not yet lost The words she listened to moved her 
deeply. Offers of marriage she had already received : one from 
a rich middle-aged noble, a devoted musical virtuoso ; one from 
a young avocat fresh from the provinces, and somewhat calculat- 
ing on her dot ; one from a timid but enthusiastic admirer of 
her genius and her beauty, himself rich, handsome, of good 
birth, but with shy manners and faltering tongue. 

But these had made their proposals with the formal respect 
habitual to French decorum in matrimonial proposals. Words 
so eloquently impassioned as Gustave Rameau's had never 
before thrilled her ears. Yes, she was deeply moved ; and 
yet, by that very emotion she knew that it was not to the 
love of this wooer that her heart responded. 

There is a circumstance in the history of courtship familiar to 
the experience of many women, that while the suitor is pleading 
his cause, his language may touch every fibre in the heart of his 
listener, yet substitute, as it were, another presence for his own. 
She may be saying to herself, " Oh that another had said those 
words ! " and be dreaming of the other, while she hears the one. 

Thus it was with Isaura, and not till Rameau's voice had 
ceased did that dream pass away, and with a slight shiver she 
turned her face towards the wooer sadly and pityingly. 

" It cannot be," she said, in a low whisper ; " I were not 
worthy of your love could I accept it. Forget that you 
have so spoken ; let me still be a friend admiring your genius, 
interested in your career. I cannot be more. Forgive me if 



TFIE PARISIANS. 29 



I unconsciously led you to think I could, I am so grieved to 
pain you." 

" Am I to understand," said Rameau, coldly, for his amour 
propre was resentful, " that the proposals of another have been 
more fortunate than mine ? " And he named the youngest and 
comeliest of those whom she had rejected. 

" Certainly not," said Isaura. 

Rameau rose and went to the window, turning his face from 
her. In reality he was striving to collect his thoughts and 
decide on the course it were most prudent for him now to 
pursue. The fumes of the absinthe which had, despite his 
previous forebodings, emboldened him to hazard his avowal 
had now subsided into the languid reaction which is generally 
consequent on that treacherous stimulus, a reaction not un- 
favourable to passionless reflection. He knew that if he said 
he could not conquer his love, he would still cling to hope, 
and trust to perseverance and time, he should compel Isaura 
to forbid his visits, and break off their familiar intercourse. 
This would be fatal to the chance of yet winning her, and 
would also be of serious disadvantage to his more worldly 
interests. Her literary aid might become essential to the 
journal on which his fortunes depended; and at all events, 
in her conversation, in her encouragement, in her sympathy 
with the pains and joys of his career, he felt a support, a 
comfort, nay, an inspiration. For the spontaneous gush of 
her fresh thoughts and fancies served to recruit his own jaded 
ideas, and enlarge his own stinted range of invention. No, he 
could not commit himself to the risk of banishment from Isaura. 

And mingled with meaner motives for discretion, there was 
one of which he was but vaguely conscious, purer and nobler. 
In the society of this girl, in whom whatever was strong and 
high in mental organisation became so sweetened into feminine 
grace by gentleness of temper and kindliness of disposition, 
Rameau felt himself a better man. The virgin-like dignity 
with which she moved, so untainted by a breath of scandal, 
amid salons in which the envy of virtues doubted sought to 
bring innocence itself into doubt, warmed into a genuine 
reverence the cynicism of his professed creed. 



y> THE PARISIAN'S. 



While with her, while under her chastening influence, he was 
sensible of a poetry infused within him far more true to the 
Camcenae than all he had elaborated into verse. In these 
moments he was ashamed of the vices he had courted as 
distractions. He imagined that with her all his own, it would 
be easy to reform. 

No ; to withdraw wholly from Isaura was to renounce his sole 
chance of redemption. 

While these thoughts, which it takes so long to detail, passed 
rapidly through his brain, he felt a soft touch on his arm, and, 
turning his face slowly, encountered the tender, compassionate 
eyes of Isaura. 

u Be consoled, dear friend," she said, with a smile, half cheering, 
half mournful u Perhaps for all true artists the solitary lot is 
the best." 

" I will try to think so," answered Rameau ; . and meanwhile 
I thank you with a full heart for the sweetness with which you 
have checked my presumption . the presumption shall not be 
repeated. Gratefully I accept the friendship you deign to tender 
me. You bid me forget the words I uttered. Promise in turn 
that you will forget them . or at least consider them withdrawn. 
You will receive me still as friend ? n 

" As friend, surely : yes. Do we not both need friends ? " 
She held out her hand as she spoke ; he bent over it, kissed it 
with respect, and the interview thus closed. 



CHAPTER V. 



It was late in the evening that day when a man who had 
the appearance of a decent bourgeois, in the lower grades 
of that comprehensive class, entered one of the streets in 
the Faubourg Montmartre, tenanted chiefly by artisans. He 
paused at the open doorway of a tall narrow house, and drew 
back as he heard footsteps descending a very gloomy staircase. 



.'  



THE PARISIANS. 31 



The light from a gas lamp on the street fell full on the face of 
the person thus quitting the house . the face of a young and 
handsome man, dressed with the quiet elegance which betokened 
one of higher rank or fashion than that neighbourhood was 
habituated to find among its visitors. The first comer retreated 
promptly into the shade, and, as by sudden impulse, drew his 
hat low down over his eyes. 

The other man did not, however, observe him, went his way 
with a quick step along the street, and entered another house 
some yards distant 

"What can that pious Bourbonite do here?" muttered the 
first comer. " Can he be a conspirator ? Diable ! 'tis as dark 
as Erebus on that staircase." 

Taking cautious hold of the banister, the man now ascended 
the stairs. On the landing of the first floor there was a gas 
lamp which threw upward a faint ray that finally died at 
the third story. But at that third story the man's journey 
ended ; he pulled a bell at the door to the right, and in 
another moment or so the door was opened by a young woman 
of twenty-eight or thirty, dressed very simply, but with a certain 
neatness not often seen in the wives of artisans in the Faubourg 
Montmartre. Her face, which, though pale and delicate, re- 
tained much of the beauty of youth, became clouded as she 
recognised the visitor; evidently the visit was not welcome 
to her. 

" Monsieur Lebeau again ! " she exclaimed, shrinking back. 

"At your service, chkre dame. The goodman is of course 
at home? Ah, I catch sight of him," and sliding by the 
woman, M. Lebeau passed the narrow lobby in which she 
stood, through the open door conducting into the room in 
which Armand Monnier was seated, his chin propped on his 
hand, his elbow resting on a table, looking abstractedly into 
space. In a corner of the room two small children were 
playing languidly with a set of bone tablets, inscribed with 
the letters of the alphabet. But whatever the children were 
doing with the alphabet, they were certainly not learning to 
read from it 

The room was of fair size and height, and by no means 



32 THE PARISIANS. 



barely or shabbily furnished. There was a pretty clock on 
the mantelpiece. On the wall were hung designs for the 
decoration of apartments, and shelves on which were ranged 
a few books. 

The window was open, and on the sill were placed flower- 
pots ; you could scent the odour they wafted into the room. 

Altogether it was an apartment suited to a skilled artisan 
earning high wages. From the room we are now in, branched 
on one side a small but commodious kitchen ; on the other 
side, on which the door was screened by a portiere, with a 
borcjer prettily worked by female hands . some years ago, 
for it was faded now . was a bedroom, communicating with 
one of less size in which the children slept. We do not enter 
those additional rooms, but it may be well here to mention 
them as indications of the comfortable state of an intelligent 
skilled artisan of Paris, who thinks he can better that state 
by some revolution which may ruin his employer. 

Monnier started up at the entrance of Lebeau, and his 
face showed that he did not share the dislike to the visit 
which that of the female partner of his life had evinced. On 
the contrary, his smile was cordial, and there was a hearty ring 
in the voice which cried out . 

" I am glad to see you . something to do ? Eh ? " 

" Always ready to work for liberty, mon brave? 

" I hope so : what's in the wind now ? " 

"O Armand, be prudent . be prudent!" cried the woman, 
piteously. " Do not lead him into further mischief, Monsieur 
Lebeau ; " as she faltered forth the last words, she bowed her 
head over the two little ones, and her voice died in sobs. 

" Monnier," said Lebeau, gravely, " Madame is right. I ought 
not to lead you into further mischief; there are three in the room 
who have better claims on you than . 



* 



" The cause of millions," interrupted Monnier. 

" No." 

He approached the woman and took up one of the children 
very tenderly, stroking back its curls and kissing the face, 
which, if before surprised and saddened by the mother's sob, 
now smiled gaily under the father's kiss. 



THE PARISIANS. 33 



" Canst thou doubt, my H&olse," said the artisan, mildly, 
" that whatever I do thou and these are not uppermost in my 
thoughts ? I act for thine interest and theirs . the world as it 
exists is the foe of you three. The world I would replace it 
by will be more friendly." 

The poor woman made no reply, but as he drew her towards 
him, she leant her head upon his breast and wept quietly- 
Monnier led her thus from the room whispering words of 
soothing. The children followed the parents into the adjoin- 
ing chamber. In a few minutes Monnier returned, shutting 
the door behind him, and drawing the portibre close, 

" You will excuse me, Citizen, and my poor wife . wife she is 
to me and to all who visit here, though the law says she 
is not" 

" I respect Madame the more for her dislike to myself," said 
Lebeau, with a somewhat melancholy smile. 

"Not dislike to you personally, Citizen, but dislike to the 
business which she connects with your visits, and she is more 
than usually agitated on that subject this evening, because, just 
before you came, another visitor had produced a great effect on 
her feelings . poor dear H&olse ! " 

" Indeed ! how ? " 

u Well, I was employed in the winter in redecorating the salon 
and boudoir of Madame de Vandemar ; her son, M. Raoul, took 
great interest in superintending the details. He would some- 
times talk to me very civilly, not only on my work, but on 
other matters. It seems that Madame now wants something 
done to the salle-a-manger y and asked old G^rard^-my late 
master, you know . to send me. Of course he said that was 
impossible . for, though I was satisfied with my own wages, I 
had induced his other men to strike, and was one of the ring- 
leaders in the recent strike of artisans in general . a dangerous 
man, and he would have nothing more to do with me. So M. 
Raoul came to see and talk to me . scarce gone before you 
rang at the bell . you might have almost met him, on the 
stairs." 

" I saw a beau monsieur come out of the house. And so his 
talk has affected Madame." 

VOL. IL C 



34 THE PARISIANS. 



"Very much; it was quite brother-like. He is one of the 
religious set, and they always get at the weak side of the 
soft sex." 

" Ay," said Lebeau, thoughtfully ; " if religion were banished 
from the laws of men, it would still find a refuge in the hearts 
of women. But Raoul de Vandemar did not presume to preach 
to Madame upon the sin of loving you and your children ? " 

" I should like to have heard him preach to her/' cried 
Monnier, fiercely. " No, he only tried to reason with me about 
matters he could not understand." 

" Strikes ? " 

" Well, not exactly strikes . he did not contend that we work- 
men had not full right to combine and to strike for obtaining 
fairer money's worth for our work ; but he tried to persuade me 
that where, as in my case, it was not a matter of wages, but 
of political principle . of war against capitalists . I could but 
injure myself and mislead others. He wanted to reconcile 
me to old Gerard, or to let him find me employment elsewhere ; 
and when I told him that my honour forbade me to make terms 
for myself till those with whom I was joined were satisfied, he 
said, ' But if this lasts much longer, your children will not look 
so rosy ; ' then poor H&olse began to wring her hands and cry, 
and he took me aside and wanted to press money on me as a 
loan. He spoke so kindly that I could not be angry ; but when 
he found I would take nothing, he asked me about some 
families in the street of whom he had a list, and who he was 
informed, were in great distress. That is true; I am feeding 
some of them myself out of my savings. You see, this young 
Monsieur belongs to a society of men, many as young as he is, 
which visits the poor and dispenses charity. I did not feel I 
had a right to refuse aid for others, and I told him where his 
money would be best spent. I suppose he went there when he 
left me." 

" I know the society you mean, that of St. Francois de S&les. 
It comprises some of the most ancient of that old noblesse to 
which the ouvriers in the great Revolution were so remorseless." 

" We ouvriers are wiser now ; we see that in assailing 
tJiem, we gave ourselves worse tyrants in the new aristocracy 



THE PARISIANS. 35 



of the capitalists. Our quarrel now is that of artisans against 
employers." 

" Of course, I am aware of that ; but to leave general politics, 
tell me frankly, How has the strike affected you as yet ? I 
mean in purse? Can you stand its pressure? If not, you 
are above the false pride of not taking help from me, a 
fellow-conspirator, though you were justified in refusing it 
when offered by Raoul de Vandemar, the servant of the 
Church. ,, 

" Pardon, I refuse aid from any one, except for the common 
cause. But do not fear for me, I am not pinched as yet. 
I have had high wages for some years, and since I and H&olse 
came together, I have not wasted a sou out of doors, except 
in the way of public duty, such as making converts at the 
Jean Jacques and elsewhere ; a glass of beer and a pipe don't 
cost much. And H&olse is such a housewife, so thrifty, scolds 
me if I buy her a ribbon, poor love ! No wonder that I would 
pull down a society that dares to scoff at her . dares to say 
she is not my wife, and her children are base born. No, 
I have some savings left yet. War to society, war to the 
knife ! " 

"Monnier," said Lebeau, in a voice that evinced emotion, 
"listen to me: I have received injuries from society which, 
when they were fresh, half-maddened me . that is twenty years 
ago. I would then have thrown myself into any plot against 
society that proffered revenge ; but society, my friend, is a 
wall of very strong masonry, as it now stands ; it may be 
sapped in the course of a thousand years, but stormed in a 
day . no. You dash your head against it . you scatter your 
brains, and you dislodge a stone. Society smiles in scorn, 
effaces the stain, and replaces the stone. I no longer war 
against society. I do war against a system in that society 
which is hostile to me . systems in France are easily over- 
thrown. I say this because I want to use you, and I do not 
want to deceive." 

u Deceive me, bah ! You are an honest man," cried Monnier ; 
and he seized Lebeau's hand, and shook it with warmth and 
vigour. 

C 2 



36 THE PARISIANS. 



"But for you I should have been a mere grumbler. No 
doubt I should have cried out where the shoe pinched, and 
railed against laws that vex me; but from the moment you 
first talked to me I became a new man. You taught me to 
act, as Rousseau and Madame de Grantmesnil had taught me 
to think and to feel. There is my brother, a grumbler too, 
but professes to have a wiser head than mine. He is always 
warning me against you . against joining a strike . against 
doing anything to endanger my skin. I always went by his 
advice till you taught me that it was well enough for women 
to talk and complain ; men should dare and do." 

" Nevertheless," said Lebeau, " your brother is a safer coun- 
sellor to a ptre de famille than I. I repeat what I have so 
often said before : I desire, and I resolve, that the Empire 
of M. Bonaparte shall be overthrown. I see many concurrent 
circumstances to render that desire and resolve of practicable 
fulfilment. You desire and resolve the same thing. Up to 
that point we can work together. I have encouraged your 
action only so far as it served my design ; but I separate 
from you the moment you would ask me to aid your design 
in the hazard of experiments which the world has never 
yet favoured, and trust me, Monnier, the world never will 
favour. n 

"That remains to be seen," said Monnier, with compressed, 
obstinate lips. " Forgive me, but you are not young ; you 
belong to an old school." 

" Poor young man ! " said Lebeau, readjusting his spectacles, 
" I recognise in you the genius of Paris, be the genius good 
or evil. Paris is never warned by experience. Be it so. I 
want you so much, your enthusiasm is so fiery, that I can 
concede no more to the mere sentiment which makes me 
say to myself, 'It is a shame to use this great-hearted, 
wrong-headed creature for my personal ends.' I come at 
once to the point . that is, the matter on which I seek you 
this evening. At my suggestion, you have been a ringleader 
in strikes which have terribly shaken the Imperial system, 
more than its Ministers deem ; now I want a man like you 
to assist in a bold demonstration against the Imperial resort 



THE PARISIANS. 37 



to a rural priest-ridden suffrage, on the part of the enlightened 
working class of Paris." 

" Good ! " said Monnier. 

"In a day or two the result of the plebiscite will be known. 
The result of universal suffrage will be enormously in favour of 
the desire expressed by one man." 

" I don't believe it," said Monnier, stoutly. " France cannot 
be so hoodwinked by the priests." 

"Take what I say for granted," resumed Lebeau, calmly. 
"On the 8th of this month we shall know the amount of the 
majority . some millions of French votes. I want Paris to 
separate itself from France, and declare against those blun- 
dering millions. I want an 4meute % or rather a menacing 
demonstration . not a premature revolution, mind. You must 
avoid bloodshed." 

" It is easy to say that beforehand ; but when a crowd of men 
once meets in the streets of Paris " 

" It can do much by meeting, and cherishing resentment if 
the meeting be dispersed by an armed force, which it would be 
waste of life to resist." 

" We shall see when the time comes," said Monnier, with a 
fierce gleam in his bold eyes. 

" I tell you, all that is required at this moment is an evident 
protest of the artisans of Paris against the votes of the ' rurals ' 
of France. Do you comprehend me ? " 

" I think so ; if not, I obey. What we ouvriers want is what 
we have not got . a head to dictate action to us." 

"See to this, then. Rouse the men you can command. I 
will take care that you have plentiful aid from foreigners. We 
may trust to the confreres of our council to enlist Poles and 
Italians ; Gaspard le Noy will turn out the volunteer rioters 
at his command. Let the tmeute be within, say a week, after 
the vote of the plebiscite is taken. You will need that time to 
prepare." 

" Be contented . it shall be done." 

" Good night, then. " Lebeau leisurely took up his hat and 
drew on his gloves . then, as if struck by a sudden thought, he 
turned briskly on the artisan and said in quick blunt tones . 



38 THE PARISIANS. 



"Armand Monnier, explain to me why it is that you . a 
Parisian artisan, the type of a class the most insubordinate, the 
most self-conceited that exists on the face of earth . take without 
question, with so docile a submission, the orders of a man who 
plainly tells you he does not sympathise in your ultimate objects, 
of whom you really know very little, and whose views you 
candidly own you think are those of an old and obsolete school 
of political reasoners." 

" You puzzle me to explain," said Monnier, with an ingenuous 
laugh, that brightened up features stern and hard, though comely 
when in repose. "Partly, because you are so straightforward, 
and do not talk blague ; partly, because I don't think the class 
I belong to would stir an inch unless we had a leader of another 
class . and you give me at least that leader. Again, you go to 

that first stage which we all agree to take, and well, do you 

want me to explain more ? " 

"Yes." 

" Eh bien ! you have warned me, like an honest man ; like 
an honest man I warn you. That first step we take together ; 
I want to go a step further ; you retreat, you say, ' No : ' I reply 
you are committed : that further step you must take, or I cry 
1 traitre / . a la lanterne ! ' You talk of ' superior experience : ' 
bah ! what does experience really tell you ? Do you suppose 
that Philippe Egalit6, when he began to plot against Louis XVI., 
meant to vote for his kinsman's execution by the guillotine? 
Do you suppose that Robespierre, when he commenced his 
career as the foe of capital punishment, foresaw that he should 
be the Minister of the Reign of Terror ? . Not a bit of it. Each 
was committed by his use of those he designed for his tools : so 
must you be . or you perish." 

Lebeau, leaning against the door, heard the frank avowal he 
had courted without betraying a change [o( countenance. But 
when Armand Monnier had done, a slight movement of his lips 
showed emotion ; was it of fear or disdain ? 

" Monnier," he said gently ; " I am so much obliged to you 
for the manly speech you have made. The scruples which my 
conscience had before entertained are dispelled. I dreaded lest 
I, a declared wolf, might seduce into peril an innocent sheep. 



THE PARISIANS. 39 



I see I have to deal with a wolf of younger vigour and sharper 
fangs than myself, so much the better : obey my orders now ; 
leave it to time to say whether I obey yours later. Au revoir." 



CHAPTER VI. 

ISAURA'S apartment, on the following Thursday evening, was 
more filled than usual. Besides her habitual devotees in the 
artistic or literary world, there were diplomatists and deputies 
commixed with many fair chiefs of la jeunesse dore*e ; amongst 
the latter the brilliant Enguerrand de Vandemar, who, deeming 
the acquaintance of every celebrity essential to his own celebrity 
in either Carthage, the beau monde, or the detni-tnonde> had, two 
Thursdays before, made Louvier attend her soirie and present 
him. Louvier, though gathering to his own salons authors and 
artists, very rarely favoured their rooms with his presence ; he 
did not adorn Isaura's party that evening. But Duplessis was 
there, in compensation. It had chanced that Valerie had met 
Isaura at some house in the past winter, and conceived an 
enthusiastic affection for her : since then, Valerie came very 
often to see her, and made a point of dragging with her to 
Isaura's Thursday reunions her obedient father. Soirees, musical 
or literary, were not much in his line ; but he had no pleasure 
like that of pleasing his spoilt child. Our old friend Frederic 
Lemercier was also one of Isaura's guests that night. He had 
become more and more intimate with Duplessis, and Duplessis 
had introduced him to the fair Valerie as " un jeune liomme plein 
de tnoyens, qui ira loin' 1 

Savarin was there of course, and brought with him an English 
gentleman of the name of Bevil, as well known at Paris as in 
London . invited everywhere . popular everywhere, . one of 
those welcome contributors to the luxuries of civilised society 
who trade in gossip, sparing no pains to get the pick of it, and 
exchanging it liberally sometimes for a haunch of venison, 



4 o THE PARISIANS. 



sometimes for a cup of tea. His gossip not being adulterated 
with malice was in high repute for genuine worth. 

If Bevil said, " This story is a fact," you no more thought of 
doubting him than you would doubt Rothschild if he said, 
" This is Lafitte of '48." 

Mr. Bevil was at present on a very short stay at Paris, and, 
naturally wishing to make the most of his time, he did not 
tarry beside Savarin, but, after being introduced to Isaura, 
flitted here and there through the assembly. 

" Apis Matinae . 
More modoque . 
Grata carpentis thyma " . 

The bee proffers honey, but bears a sting. 

The room was at its fullest when Gustave Rameau entered, 
accompanied by Monsieur de Mauleon. 

Isaura was agreeably surprised by the impression made on 
her by the Vicomte's appearance and manner. His writings, 
and such as she had heard of his earlier repute, had prepared 
her to see a man decidedly old, of withered aspect and sardonic 
smile . aggressive in demeanour . forward or contemptuous in 
his very politeness . a Mephistopheles engrafted on the stem of 
a Don Juan. She was startled by the sight of one who, despite 
his forty-eight years . and at Paris a man is generally older at 
forty-eight than he is elsewhere . seemed in the zenith of 
ripened manhood . startled yet more by the singular modesty 
of a deportment too thoroughly high-bred not to be quietly 
simple . startled most by a melancholy expression in eyes 
that could be at times soft, though always so keen, and in 
the grave pathetic smile which seemed to disarm censure of 
past faults in saying, " I have known sorrows." 

He did not follow up his introduction to his young hostess 
by any of the insipid phrases of compliment to which she 
was accustomed ; but, after expressing in grateful terms his 
thanks for the honour she had permitted Rameau to confer on 
him, he moved aside, as if he had no right to detain her 
from other guests more worthy her notice, towards the door- 
way, taking his place by Enguerrand amidst a group of men 
of whom Duplessis was the central figure. 



THE PARISIANS. 41 



At that time . the first week in May, 1870 . all who were 
then in Paris will remember that there were two subjects 
uppermost in the mouths of men : first, the plebiscite ; secondly, 
the conspiracy to murder the Emperor . which the disaffected 
considered to be a mere fable, a pretence got up in time to 
serve the plebiscite and prop the Empire. 

Upon this latter subject Duplessis had been expressing 
himself with unwonted animation. A loyal and earnest Im- 
perialist, it was only with effort that he could repress his scorn 
of that meanest sort of gossip which is fond of ascribing petty 
motives to eminent men. 

To him nothing could be more clearly evident than the 
reality of this conspiracy, and he had no tolerance for the 
malignant absurdity of maintaining that the Emperor or his 
Ministers could be silly and wicked enough to accuse seventy- 
two persons of a crime which the police had been instructed 
to invent 

As De Mauleon approached, the financier brought his speech 
to an abrupt close. He knew in the Vicomte de Mauleon the 
writer of articles which had endangered the Government, and 
aimed no pointless shafts against its Imperial head. 

"My cousin," said Enguerrand, gaily, as he exchanged a 
cordial shake of the hand with Victor, " I congratulate you 
on the fame of journalist, into which you have vaulted, armed 
cap-d-pie, like a knight of old into his saddle; but I don't 
sympathise with the means you have taken to arrive at that 
renown. I am not myself an Imperialist. a Vandemar can be 
scarcely that. But if I am compelled to be on board a ship, 
I don't wish to take out its planks and let in an ocean, when all 
offered to me instead is a crazy tub and a rotten rope." 

" Tris bien," said Duplessis, in Parliamentary tone and 
phrase. 

"But," said De Mauleon, with his calm smile, "would you like 
the captain of the ship, when the sky darkened and the sea 
rose, to ask the common sailors * whether they approved his 
conduct on altering his course or shortening his sail ' ? Better 
trust to a crazy tub and a rotten rope than to a ship in which the 
captain consults a. plebiscite." 



42 THE PARISIANS. 



"Monsieur," said Duplessis, "your metaphor is ill chosen . 
no metaphor indeed is needed. The head of the State was 
chosen by the voice of the people, and, when required to change 
the form of administration which the people had sanctioned, and 
inclined to do so from motives the most patriotic and liberal, he 
is bound again to consult the people from whom he holds his 
power. It is not, however, of the plebiscite we were conversing, 
so much as of the atrocious conspiracy of assassins . so happily 
discovered in time. I presume that Monsieur de Maul6on must 
share the indignation which true Frenchmen of every party must 
feel against a combination united by the purpose of murder." 

The Vicomte bowed as in assent "But do you believe," 
asked a Liberal Depute, " that such a combination existed, 
except in the visions of the police or the'cabinet of a Minister ?" 

Duplessis looked keenly at De Mauleon while this question 
was put to him. Belief or disbelief in the conspiracy was with 
him, and with many, the test by which a sanguinary revolu- 
tionist was distinguished from an honest politician. 

"Ma foi" answered De Mauleon, shrugging his shoulders, * I 
have only one belief left ; but that is boundless. I believe in 
the folly of mankind in general, and of Frenchmen in particular. 
That seventy-two men should plot the assassination of a sovereign 
on whose life interests so numerous and so watchful depend, and 
imagine they could keep a secret which any drunkard amongst 
them would blab out, any tatterdemalion would sell, is a bitise 
so gross that I think it highly probable. But pardon me if I look 
upon the politics of Paris much as I do upon its mud . one must 
pass through it when one walks in the street One changes one's 
shoes before entering the salon. A word with you, Enguerrand," 
. and taking his kinsman's arm he drew him aside from the 
circle. " What has become of your brother ? I see nothing of 
him now." " Oh, Raoul," answered Enguerrand, throwing him- 
self on a couch in a recess, and making room for De Mauleon 
beside him . " Raoul is devoting himself to the distressed ouvriers 
who have chosen to withdraw from work. When he fails to 
persuade them to return, he forces food and fuel on their wives 
and children. My good mother encourages him in this costly 
undertaking, and no one but you who believe in the infinity of 



THE PARISIANS. 43 



human folly would credit me when I tell you that his eloquence 
has drawn from me all the argent de poche I get from our shop. 
As for himself, he has sold his horses, and even grudges a cab- 
fare, saying ' That is a meal for a family.' Ah ! if he had 
but gone into the Church, what a saint would have deserved 
canonisation ! " 

" Do not lament . he will probably have what is a better claim 
than mere saintship on Heaven . martyrdom," said De Maul6on, 
with a smile in which sarcasm disappeared in melancholy. " Poor 
Raoul ! . and what of my other cousin, the beau Marquis ? 
Several months ago his Legitimist faith seemed vacillating . 
he talked to me very fairly about the duties a Frenchman 
owed to France, and hinted that he should place his sword at 
the command of Napoleon III. I have not yet heard of him 
as a soldat de France . I hear a great deal of him as a viveur de 
Parisr 

u Don't you know why his desire for a military career was 
frost-bitten ? " 

" No ! why ? " 

" Alain came from Bretagne profoundly ignorant of most things 
known to a gamin of Paris. When he conscientiously overcame 
the scruples natural to one of his name and told the Duchesse 
de Tarascon that he was ready to fight under the flag of France 
whatever its colour, he had a vague reminiscence of ancestral 
Rochebriants earning early laurels at the head of their regiments. 
At all events he assumed as a matter of course that he, in the 
first rank as gentilhomme, would enter the army, if as a sous- 
lieutenant, still as gentilhomme. But when told that, as he had 
been at no military college, he could only enter the ranks as a 
private soldier . herd with private soldiers . for at least two 
years before passing through the grade of corporal, his birth, 
education, habits of life could, with great favour, raise him to 
the station of a sous-lieutenant, you may conceive that the 
martial ardour of a Rochebriant was somewhat cooled." 

" If he knew what the dormitory of French privates is, and 
how difficult a man well educated well brought up, finds it, first, 
to endure the coarsest ribaldry and the loudest blasphemy, and 
then, having endured and been compelled to share them, ever 



44 THE PARISIANS. 



enforce obedience and discipline as a superior among those with 
whom just before he was an equal, his ardour would not have 
been merely cooled . it would have been changed into despair 
for the armies of France, if hereafter they are met by those whose 
officers have been trained to be officers from the outset and have 
imbibed froni their cradle an education not taught to the boy- 
pedants from school . the twofold education how with courtesy 
to command, how with dignity to obey. To return to Roche- 
briant, such salons as I frequent are somewhat formal . as befits 
my grave years and my modest income ; I may add, now that 
you know my vocation, . befits me also as a man who seeks 
rather to be instructed than amused. In those salons I did, 
last year sometimes, however, meet Rochebriant . as I some- 
times still meet you; but of late. he has deserted such sober 
reunions, and I hear with pain that he is drifting among those 
rocks against which my own youth was shipwrecked. Is the 
report true ? " 

" I fear," said Enguerrand, reluctantly, " that at least the 
report is not unfounded. And my conscience accuses me of 
having been to blame in the first instance. You see, when 
Alain made terms with Louvier by which he obtained a very 
fair income, if prudently managed, I naturally wished that 
a man of so many claims to social distinction, and who 
represents the oldest branch of my family, should take his 
right place in our world of Paris. I gladly therefore presented 
him to the houses and the men most a la mode . advised 
him as to the sort of establishment, in apartments, horses, 
&c, which it appeared to me that he might reasonably afford 
. I mean such as, with his means, I should have prescribed 
to myself " 

" Ah ! I understand. But you, dear Enguerrand, are a born 
Parisian, every inch of you : and a born Parisian is, what- 
ever be thought to the contrary, the best manager in the 
world. He alone achieves the difficult art of uniting thrift 
with show. It is your Provincial who comes to Paris in the 
freshness of undimmed youth, who sows his whole life on its 
barren streets. I guess the rest : Alain is ruined." 

Enguerrand, who certainly was so far a born Parisian that 



THE PARISIANS. * 45 



with all his shrewdness and savoir faire % he had a wonderfully 
sympathetic heart, very easily moved, one way or the other 
. Enguerrand winced at his elder kinsman's words compli- 
mentarily reproachful, and said in unwonted tones of humility, 
"Cousin, you are cruel, but you are in the right. I did not 
calculate sufficiently on the chances of Alain's head being 
turned. Hear my excuse. He seemed to me so much more 
thoughtful than most at our age are, so much more stately 
and proud ; well, also so much more pure, so impressed with 
the responsibilities of station, so bent on retaining the old 
lands in Bretagne; by habit and rearing so simple and self- 
denying, . that I took it for granted he was proof against 
stronger temptations than those which a light nature like my 
own puts aside with a laugh. And at first I had no reason 
to think myself deceived, when, some months ago, I heard 
that he was getting into debt, losing at play, paying court 
to female vampires, who drain the life-blood of those on 
whom they fasten their fatal lips. Oh, then I spoke to him 
earnestly !  

"And in vain?" 

u In vain. A certain Chevalier de Finisterre, whom you 
may have heard of " 

" Certainly, and met ; a friend of Louvier's " 



"The same man . has obtained over him an influence which 
so far subdues mine, that he almost challenged me when I 
told him his friend was a scamp. In fine, though Alain and 
I have not actually quarrelled, we pass each other with, 'Bon 
four, mon ami! " 

* Hum ! My dear Enguerrand, you have done all you could. 
Flies will be flies, and spiders, spiders, till the earth is destroyed 
by a comet Nay, I met a distinguished naturalist in America 
who maintained that we shall find flies and spiders in the next 
world." 

" You have been in America ? Ah, true . I remember, 
California!" 

" Where have I not been ? Tush ! music . shall I hear our 
fair hostess sing ? " 

"I am afraid not to-night: because Madame S is to 



46 THE PARISIANS. 



favour us, and the Signorina makes it a rule not to sing at 
her own house when professional artists do. You must hear 
the Cicogna quietly some day ; such a voice, nothing like it. M 

Madame S , who, since she had learned that there was 

no cause to apprehend that Isaura might become her profes- 
sional rival, conceived for her a wonderful affection, and 
willingly contributed her magnificent gifts of song to the 
charms of Isaura's salon, now began a fragment from / 
Puritani y which held the audience as silent as the ghosts 
listening to Sappho ; and when it was over, several of the 
guests slipped away, especially those who disliked music, and 

feared Madame S might begin again. Enguerrand was not 

one of such soulless recreants, but he had many other places 
to go to. Besides, Madame S was no novelty to him. 

De Mauteon now approached Isaura, who was seated next 
to Valerie, and after well-merited eulogium on Madame S/s 
performance, slid into some critical comparisons between that 
singer and those of a former generation, which interested Isaura, 
and evinced to her quick perceptions that kind of love for music 
which has been refined by more knowledge of the art than is 
common to mere amateurs. 

"You have studied music, Monsieur de Mauldon," she said. 
" Do you not perform yourself? " 

" I ? No. But music has always had a fatal attraction for me. 
I ascribe half the errors of my life to that temperament which 
makes me too fascinated by harmonies . too revolted by 
discords." 

" I should have thought such a temperament would have led 
from errors . are not errors discords ? " 

" To the inner sense, yes ; but to the outer sense not always. 
Virtues are often harsh to the ear. -errors very sweet-voiced. 
The sirens did not sing out of tune. Better to stop one's ears 
than glide on Scylla or be merged into Charybdis." 

"Monsieur," cried Valerie, with a pretty brusquerie which 
became her well, " you talk like a Vandal." 

" It is, I think, by Mademoiselle Duplessis that I hav6 the 
honour to be rebuked. Is Monsieur your father very susceptible 
to music ? " 



THE PARISIANS. 47 



" Well, I cannot say that he cares much for it But then his 
mind is so practical n 

"And his life so successful. No Scylla, no Charybdis for him. 
However, Mademoiselle, I am not quite the Vandal you suppose, 
I do not say that susceptibility to the influence of music may 
not be safe, nay, healthful, to others . it was not so to me in 
my youth. It can do me no harm now." 

Here Duplessis came up, and whispered his daughter " it was 
time to leave ; they had promised the Duchesse de Tarascon 
to assist at the soirie she gave that night " Valerie took her 
father's arm with a brightening smile and a heightened colour. 
Alain de Rochebriant might probably be at the Duchesse's. 

"Are you not going also to the Hotel de Tarascon, M. de 
Mauldon ? " asked Duplessis. 

u No ; I was never there but once. The Duchesse is an 
Imperialist, at once devoted and acute, and no doubt very soon 
divined my lack of faith in her idols. " 

Duplessis frowned, and hastily led Valerie away. 

In a few minutes the room was comparatively deserted. De 
Mauteon, however, lingered by the side of Isaura till all the 
other guests were gone. Even then he lingered still, and 
renewed the interrupted conversation with her, the Venosta 
joining therein ; and so agreeable did he make himself to her 
Italian tastes by a sort of bitter-sweet wisdom like that of her 
native proverbs . comprising much knowledge of mankind on 
the unflattering side of humanity in that form of pleasantry 
which has a latent sentiment of pathos . that the Venosta ex- 
claimed, " Surely you must have been brought up in Florence !" 

There was that in De Mauteon's talk hostile to all which 
we call romance that excited the imagination of Isaura, and 
compelled her instinctive love for whatever is more sweet, more 
beautiful, more ennobling on the many sides of human life, to 
oppose what she deemed the paradoxes of a man who had 
taught himself to belie even his own nature. She became 
eloquent, and her countenance, which in ordinary moments 
owed much of its beauty to an expression of meditative 
gentleness, was now lighted up by the energy of earnest 
conviction . the enthusiasm of an impassioned zeal. 



4S THE PARISIANS. 



Gradually De Mauteon relaxed his share in the dialogue, and 
listened to her, rapt and dreamily as in his fiery youth he had 
listened to the songs of the sirens. No siren Isaura ! She was 
defending her own cause, though unconsciously . defending the 
vocation of art as the embellisher of external nature, and more 
than embellisher of the nature which dwells crude, but plastic, 
in the soul of man : indeed therein the creator of a new nature, 
strengthened, expanded, and brightened in proportion as it 
accumulates the ideas that tend beyond the boundaries of the 
visible and material nature, which is finite ; for ever seeking in 
the unseen and the spiritual the goals in the infinite which it is 
their instinct to divine. " That which you contemptuously call 
romance," said Isaura, " is not essential only to poets and artists. 
The most real side of every life, from the earliest dawn of mind 
in the infant, is the romantic." 

" When the child is weaving flower-chains, chasing butterflies, 
or sitting apart and dreaming what it will do in the future, 
is not that the child's real life, and yet is it not also the 
romantic ? " 

* But there comes a time when we weave no flower-chains, 
and chase no butterflies." 

" Is it so ? . still on one side of life, flowers and butterflies 
may be found to the last; and at least to the last are there 
no dreams of the future ? Have you no such dreams at this 
moment? and without the romance of such dreams, would 
there be any reality to human life which could distinguish 
it from the life of the weed that rots on Lethe ? " 

" Alas, Mademoiselle," said De Mauteon, rising to take leave, 
"your argument must rest without answer. I would not, if 
I could, confute the beautiful belief that belongs to youth, 
fusing into one rainbow all the tints that can colour the 
world. But the Signora Venosta will acknowledge the truth 
of an old saying expressed in every civilised language, but 
best, perhaps, in that of the Florentine . 'You might as well 
physic the dead as instruct the old/ " 

" But you are not old ! " said the Venosta, with Florentine 
politeness, . " you ! not a grey hair." 

" Tis not by the grey of the hair that one knows the 



THE PARISIANS. 49 



of the heart," answered De Maul6on, in another paraphrase of 
Italian proverb, and he was gone. 

As he walked homeward, through deserted streets, Victor 
de Mauteon thought to himself, " Poor girl, how I pity her ! 
married to a Gustave Rameau . married to any man . nothing 
in the nature of man, be he the best and the cleverest, can 
ever realise the dream of a girl who is pure and has genius. 
Ah, is not the converse true ? What girl, the best and the 
cleverest, comes up to the ideal of even a commonplace man 
. if he ever dreamed of an ideal ! " 

Then he paused, and in a moment or so afterwards his 
thought knew such questionings no more. It turned upon 
personalities, on stratagems and plots, on ambition. The man 
had more than his share of that peculiar susceptibility which 
is one of the characteristics of his countrymen . susceptibility 
to immediate impulse . susceptibility to fleeting impressions. 
It was a key to many mysteries in his character when he 
owned his subjection to the influence of music, and in music 
recognised not the seraph's harp, but the siren's song. If 
you could have permanently fixed Victor de Mauteon in one 
of the good moments of his life . even now . some moment 
of exquisite kindness . of superb generosity . of dauntless 
courage . you would have secured a very rare specimen of 
noble humanity. But so to fix him was impossible. 

That impulse of the moment vanished the moment after; 
swept aside by the force of his very talents . talents con- 
centrated by his intense sense of individuality . sense of wrongs 
or of rights . interests or objects personal to himself. He 
extended the royal saying, ZYto/, c'est tnoi" to words far 
more grandiloquent. "The universe, 'tis I." The Venosta 
would have understood him and smiled approvingly, if he 
had said with good-humoured laugh, " I dead, the world is 
dead ! " That is an Italian proverb, and means much the 
same thing. 



VOL. II. 



BOOK VIII. 



CHAPTER I. 

On the 8th of May the vote of the plebiscite was recorded, 
. between seven and eight millions of Frenchmen in support 
of the Imperial programme. in plain words, of the Emperor 
himself . against a minority of 1,500,000. But among the 
1,500,000 were the old throne-shakers . those who compose 
and those who lead the mob of Paris. On the 14th, as 
Rameau was about to quit the editorial bureau of his printing- 
office, a note was brought, in to him which strongly excited 
his nervous system. It contained a request to see him forthwith, 
signed by those two distinguished foreign members of the 
Secret Council of Ten, Thaddeus Loubinsky and Leonardo 
Raselli. 

The meetings of that Council had been so long suspended 
that Rameau had almost forgotten its existence. He gave 
orders to admit the conspirators. The two men entered, . 
the Pole, tall, stalwart, and with martial stride . the Italian, 
small, emaciated, with skulking, noiseless, cat-like step, . both 
looking wondrous threadbare, and in that state called " shabby 
genteel," which belongs to the man who cannot work for his 
livelihood, and assumes a superiority over the man who can. 
Their outward appearance was in notable discord with that 
of the poet-politician . he all new in the last fashions of 
Parisian elegance, and redolent of Parisian prosperity and 
extrait de Mousseline ! 



THE PARISIANS. 51 



" Confrlre? said the Pole, seating himself on the edge of 
the table, while the Italian leaned against the mantelpiece, 
and glanced round the room with furtive eye, as if to detect 
its innermost secrets, or decide where safest to drop a lucifer- 
match for its conflagration, . " confrire? said the Pole, "your 
country needs you . 



> 



"Rather, the cause of all countries," interposed the Italian 
softly, . " Humanity." 

" Please to explain yourselves ; but stay, wait a moment," 
said Rameau; and rising, he went to the door, opened it, 
looked forth, ascertained that the coast was clear, then reclosed 
the door as cautiously as a prudent man closes his pocket 
whenever shabby-genteel visitors appeal to him in the cause 
of his country, still more if they appeal in that of Humanity. 

" Confrere? said the Pole, "this day a movement is to be 
made . a demonstration on behalf of your country " 

" Of Humanity," again softly interposed the Italian, 

" Attend and share it," said the Pole. 

" Pardon me," said Rameau, " I do not know what you mean. 
I am now the editor of a journal in which the proprietor does 
not countenance violence ; and if you come to me as a member 
of the Council, you must be aware that I should obey no orders 
but that of its president, whom I have not seen for nearly a 
year; indeed, I know not if the Council still exists." 

" The Council exists, and with it the obligation it imposes," 
replied Thaddeus. 

" Pampered with luxury," here the Pole raised his voice, 
" do you dare to reject the voice of Poverty and Freedom ? " 

"Hush, dear but too vehement confrfre? murmured the 
bland Italian ; " permit me to dispel the reasonable doubts 
of our confrfre? and he took out of his breast-pocket a paper 
which he presented to Rameau; on it were written these 
words : . 

"This evening May 14th. Demonstration. . Faubourg du 
Temple. . Watch events, under orders of A. M. Bid the 
youngest member take that first opportunity to test nerves 
and discretion. He is not to act, but to observe." 

No name was appended to this instruction, but a cipher 

D 2 



52 THE PARISIANS. 



intelligible to all members of the Council as significant of 
its president, Jean Lebeau. 

" If I err not," said the Italian, " Citizen Rameau is our 
youngest confrere? 

Rameau paused. The penalties for disobedience to an order 
of the President of the Council were too formidable to be 
disregarded. There could be no doubt that, though his name 
was not mentioned, he, Rameau, was accurately designated as 
the youngest member of the Council. Still, however he might 
have owed his present position to the recommendation of 
Lebeau, there was nothing in the conversation of M. de 
Mauteon which would warrant participation in a popular 
hneute by the editor of a journal belonging to that mocker 
of the mob. Ah ! but . and here again he glanced over the 
paper . he was asked " not to act, but to observe." To observe 
was the duty of a journalist. He might go to the demonstration 
as De Mauteon confessed he had gone to the Communist Club, 
a philosophical spectator. 

" You do not disobey this order ? " said the Pole, crossing his 
arms. 

" I shall certainly go into the Faubourg du Temple this even- 
ing," answered Rameau, drily, " I have business that way." 

" Bon / " said the Pole ; " I did not think you would fail us, 
though you do edit a journal which says not a word on the 
duties that bind the French people to the resuscitation of Poland." 

" And is not pronounced in decided accents upon the cause 
of the human race," put in the Italian, whispering. 

" I do not write the political articles in Le Sens Commun? 
answered Rameau ; " and I suppose that our president is satisfied 
with them since he recommended me to the preference of the 
person who does. Have you more to say? Pardon me, my 
time is precious, for it does not belong to me." 

" Eno* ! " said the Italian, " we will detain you no longer." 
Here, with a bow and a smile, he glided towards the door. 

" Confrkre? muttered the Pole, lingering, "you must have 
become very rich ! . do not forget the wrongs of Poland . I am 
their Representative . I . speaking in that character, not as 
myself individually . I have not breakfasted ! " 



THE PARISIANS. 



Rameau, too thoroughly Parisian not to be as lavish of his 
own money as he was envious of another's, slipped some pieces 
of gold in the Pole's hand. The Pole's bosom heaved with 
manly emotion : " These pieces bear the effigies of the tyrant 
. I accept them as redeemed from disgrace by their uses to 
Freedom." 

" Share them with Signor Raselli in the name of the same 
cause," whispered Rameau, with a smile he might have plagiarised 
from De Mauteon. 

The Italian, whose ear was inured to whispers, heard and 
turned round as he stood at the threshold. 

" No, confrere of France . no, confrere of Poland . I am Italian. 
All ways to take the life of an enemy are honourable . no way 
is honourable which begs money from a friend." 

An hour or so later, Rameau was driven in his comfortable 
coupe' to the Faubourg du Temple. 

Suddenly, at the angle of a street, his coachman was stopped 
. a rough-looking man appeared at the door . " Descends, mon 
petit bourgeois? Behind the rough-looking man were menacing 
faces. 

Rameau was not physically a coward . very few Frenchmen 
are, still fewer Parisians ; and still fewer no matter what their 
birthplace, the men whom we call vain . the men who over- 
much covet distinction, and over-much dread reproach. 

"Why should I descend at your summons?" said Rameau, 
haughtily. " Bah I Coachman, drive on ! " 

The rough-looking man opened the door, and silently ex- 
tended a hand to Rameau, saying gently : " Take my advice, 
man bourgeois. Get out . we want your carriage. It is a day 
of barricades . every little helps, even your coupe' I " 

While this man spoke others gesticulated ; some shrieked out, 
"He is an Employer! he thinks he can drive over the employed!" 

Some leader of the crowd . a Parisian crowd always has a 
classical leader, who has never read the classics . thundered 
forth, M Tarquin's car ! Down with Tarquin ! " Therewith 
came a yell, "A la lanterne . Tarquin /" 

We Anglo-Saxons, of the old country or the new, are not 
familiarised to the dread roar of a populace delighted to have 



54 THE PARISIANS. 



a Roman authority for tearing us to pieces ; still Americans 
know what is Lynch law. Rameau was in danger of Lynch law, 
when suddenly a face not unknown to him interposed between 
himself and the rough-looking man. 

" Ha ! " cried this new comer, " my young confrere, Gustave 
Rameau, welcome ! Citizens, make way. I answer for this 
patriot . I, Armand Monnier. He comes to help us. Is this 
the way you receive him ? " Then in a low voice to Rameau, 
" Come out. Give your coupi to the barricade. What matters 
such rubbish ? Trust to me . I expected you. Hist ! . Lebeau 
bids me see that you are safe." 

Rameau then, seeking to drape himself in majesty, . as the 
aristocrats of journalism in a city wherein no other aristocracy 
is recognised naturally and commendably do, when ignorance 
combined with physical strength asserts itself to be a power, 
beside which the power of knowledge is what a learned poodle 
is to a tiger . Rameau then descended from his coup % and 
said to this Titan of labour, as a French marquis might have 
said to his valet, and as, when the French marquis has become 
a ghost of the past, the man who keeps a coupi says to the man 
who mends its wheels, " Honest fellow, I trust you." 

Monnier led the journalist through the mob to the rear of 
the barricade hastily constructed. Here were assembled very 
motley groups. 

The majority were ragged boys, the gamins of Paris, com- 
mingled with several women of no reputable appearance, 
some dingily, some gaudily apparelled. The crowd did not 
appear as if the business in hand was a very serious one- 
Amidst the din of voices the sound of laughter rose pre- 
dominant, jests and dons mots flew from lip to lip. The 
astonishing good-humour of the Parisians was not yet excited 
into the ferocity that grows out of it by a street contest. It 
was less like a popular ttneute than a gathering of schoolboys, 
bent not less on fun than on mischief. But still, amid this 
gayer crowd were sinister, lowering faces ; the fiercest were not 
those of the very poor, but rather of artisans, who, to judge by 
their dress, seemed well off . of men belonging to yet higher 
grades. Rameau distinguished amongst these the mtdecin des 



THE PARISIANS. 55 



pauvres, the philosophical atheist, sundry young, long-haired 
artists, middle-aged writers for the Republican press, in close 
neighbourhood with ruffians of villainous aspect, who might 
have been newly returned from the galleys. None were 
regularly armed; still revolvers and muskets and long knives 
were by no means unfrequently interspersed among the rioters. 
The whole scene was to Rameau a confused panorama, and 
the dissonant tumult of yells and laughter, of menace and joke, 
began rapidly to act on his impressionable nerves. He felt 
that which is the prevalent character of a Parisian riot . the 
intoxication of an impulsive sympathy ; coming there as a 
reluctant spectator, if action commenced he would have been 
borne readily into the thick of the action . he could not have 
helped it ; already he grew impatient of the suspense of strife. 
Monnier having deposited him safely with his back to a wall, 
at the corner of a street handy for flight, if flight became 
expedient, had left him for several minutes, having business 
elsewhere. Suddenly the whisper of the Italian stole into 
his ear . "These men are fools. This is not the way to 
do business ; this does not hurt the robber of Nice . Garibaldi's 
Nice : they should have left it to me." 

" What would you do ? " 

"I have invented a new machine," whispered the Friend 
of humanity; "it would remove all at one blow . lion and 
lioness, whelp and jackals . and then the Revolution if you 
will ! not this paltry tumult The cause of the human race 
is being frittered away. I am disgusted with Lebeau. Thrones 
are not overturned by gamins." 

Before Rameau could answer, Monnier rejoined him. The 
artisan's face was overcast . his lips compressed, yet quivering 
with indignation. " Brother," he said to Rameau, " to-day 
the cause is betrayed" . (the word trahi was just then coming 
into vogue at Paris) . "the blouses I counted on are recreant. 
I have just learned that all is quiet in the other quartiers where 
the rising was to have been simultaneous with this. We are 
in a guet-dpens . the soldiers will be down on us in a few 
minutes ; hark ! don't you hear the distant tramp ? Nothing 
for us but to die like mea Our blood will be avenged later. 



56 THE PARISIANS. 



Here," and he thrust a revolver into Rameau's hand. Then 
with a lusty voice that rang ' through the crowd, he shouted 
" Vive le peuple ! " The rioters caught and re-echoed the cry, 
mingled with other cries, " Vive la Republique /" " Vive le 
drapeau rouge ! " 

The shouts were yet at their full when a strong hand grasped 
Monnier's arm, and a clear, deep, but low voice thrilled through 
his ear . " Obey ! I warned you. No fight to-day* Time not 
ripe. All that is needed is done . do not undo it Hist ! the 
sergens de ville are force enough to disperse the swarm of those 
gnats. Behind the sergens come soldiers who will not fraternise. 
Lose not one life to-day. The morrow when we shall need every 
man . nay, every gamin . will dawn soon. Answer not. Obey ! " 
The same strong hand quitting its hold on Monnier, then 
seized Rameau by the wrist, and the same deep voice said, 
" Come with me." Rameau, turning in amaze, not unmixed 
with anger, saw beside him a tall man with sombrero hat 
pressed close over his head, and in the blouse of a labourer, 
but through such disguise he recognised the pale grey whiskers 
and green spectacles of Lebeau. He yielded passively to the 
grasp that led him away down the deserted street at the angle. 

At the further end of that street, however, was heard the 
steady thud of hoofs. 

" The soldiers are taking the mob at its rear," said Lebeau, 
calmly ; " we have not a moment to lose . this way," and he 
plunged into a dismal court, then into a labyrinth of lanes, 
followed mechanically by Rameau. They issued at last on the 
Bouvelards, in which the usual loungers were quietly sauntering, 
wholly unconscious of the riot elsewhere. "Now, take that 
fiacre and go home ; write down your impressions of what you 
have seen, and take your MS. to M. de Maul6on." Lebeau 
here quitted him. 

Meanwhile all happened as Lebeau had predicted. The 
sergens de ville showed themselves in front of the barricades, 
a small troop of mounted soldiers appeared in the rear. The 
mob greeted the first with yells and a shower of stones; at 
the sight of the last they fled in all directions ; and the sergetts 
de ville \ calmly scaling the barricades, carried off in triumph, as 



THE PARISIANS. 57 



prisoners of war, 4 gamins, 3 women, and 1 Irishman loudly 
protesting innocence, and shrieking " Murther ! " So ended the 
first inglorious rise against tint plebiscite and the Empire, on the 
14th of May, 1870. 

From Isaura Cicogna to Madame de Grantmesnil. 

Saturday, May 21, 1870. 

" I am still, dearest Eulalie, under the excitement of im- 
pressions wholly new to me. I have this day witnessed one of 
those scenes which take us out of our private life, not into the 
world of fiction, but of history, in which we live as in the life 
of a nation. You know how intimate I have become with 
Valerie Duplessis. She is in herself so charming in her com- 
bination of petulant wilfulness and guileless naivete, that she 
might sit as a model for one of your exquisite heroines. Her 
father, who is in great favour at Court, had tickets for the Salle 
des tats of the Louvre to-day . when, as the journals will tell 
you, the results of the plebiscite were formally announced to the 
Emperor . and I accompanied him and Valerie. I felt, on 
entering the hall, as if I had been living for months in an 
atmosphere of false rumours, for those I chiefly meet in the 
circles of artists and men of letters, and the wits and fl&neurs 
who haunt such circles, are nearly all hostile to the Emperor. 
They agree, at least, in asserting the decline of his popularity . 
the failure of his intellectual powers ; in predicting his downfall 
. deriding the notion of a successor in his son. Well, I know 
not how to reconcile these statements with the spectacle I have 
beheld to-day. 

" In the chorus of acclamation amidst which the Emperor 
entered the hall, it seemed as if one heard the voice of the 
France he had just appealed to. If the Fates are really 
weaving woe and shame in his woof, it is in hues which, to 
mortal eyes, seem brilliant with glory and joy. 

"You will read the address of the President of the Corps 
Legislatif ; I wonder how it will strike you ! I own fairly that 
me it wholly carried away. At each sentiment I murmured 
to myself, ' Is not this true ? and, if true, are France and human 
nature ungrateful ? ' 



58 THE PARISIANS. 



" ' It is now/ said the President, ' eighteen years since France, 
wearied with confusion, and anxious for security, confiding in 
your genius and the Napoleonic dynasty, placed in your hands, 
together with the Imperial Crown, the authority which the 
public necessity demanded/ Then the address proceeded to 
enumerate the blessings that ensued . social order speedily 
restored . the welfare of all classes of society promoted . 
advances in commerce and manufactures to an extent hitherto 
unknown. Is not this true ? and, if so, are you, noble daughter 
of France, ungrateful ? 

"Then came words which touched me deeply . me, who, 
knowing nothing of politics, still feel the link that unites Art 
to Freedom : ' But from the first your Majesty has looked 
forward to the time when this concentration of power would 
no longer correspond to the aspirations of a tranquil and 
reassured country, and, foreseeing the progress of modern 
society, you proclaimed that " Liberty must be the crowning 
of the edifice." ' Passing then over the previous gradual 
advances in popular government, the President came to the 
' present self-abnegation, unprecedented in history/ and to the 
vindication of that plebiscite which I have heard so assailed . 
viz., Fidelity to the great principle upon which the throne was 
founded, required that so important a modification of a power 
bestowed by the people should not be made without the par- 
ticipation of the people themselves. Then, enumerating the 
millions who had welcomed the new form of government . the 
President paused a second or two, as if with suppressed emotion 
. and every one present held his breath, till, in a deeper voice, 
through which there ran a quiver that thrilled through the hall, 
he concluded with . ' France is with you ; France places the 
cause of liberty under the protection of your dynasty and the 
great bodies of the State.' Is France with him ? I know not ; 
but if the malcontents of France had been in the hall at 
that moment, I believe they would have felt the power of that 
wonderful sympathy which compels all the hearts in great 
audiences to beat in accord, and would have answered, 'It is 
true/ 

"All eyes now fixed on the Emperor, and I noticed few 



THE PARISIANS. 59 



eyes which were not moist with tears. You know that calm 
unrevealing face of his . a face which sometimes disappoints 
expectation. But there is that in it which I have seen in no 
other, but which I can imagine to have been common to the 
Romans of old, the dignity that arises from self-control . an 
expression which seems removed from the elation of joy, the 
depression of sorrow . not unbecoming to one who has known 
great vicissitudes of Fortune, and is prepared alike for her 
frowns or her smiles. 

" I had looked at that face while M. Schneider was reading 
the address . it moved not a muscle, it might have been a face 
of marble. Even when at moments the words were drowned 
in applause and the Empress, striving at equal composure, still 
allowed us to see a movement of her eyelids, a tremble on her 
lips. The boy at his right, heir to his dynasty, had his looks 
fixed on the President, as if eagerly swallowing each word in 
the address, save once or twice, when he looked round the hall 
curiously, and with a smile as a mere child might look. He 
struck me as a mere child. Next to the Prince was one of 
those countenances which once seen are never to be forgotten 
. the true Napoleonic type, brooding, thoughtful, ominous, 
beautiful. But not with the serene energy that characterises 
the head of the first Napoldon when Emperor, and wholly with- 
out the restless eagerness for action which is stamped in the 
lean outline of Napoleon when First Consul : no . in Prince 
Napoleon there is a beauty to which, as woman, I could never 
give my heart . were I a man, the intellect that would not com- 
mand my trust. But, nevertheless, in beauty, it is signal, and 
in that beauty the expression of intellect is predominant. 

" Oh, dear Eulalie, how I am digressing ! The Emperor 
spoke . and believe me, Eulalie, whatever the journals or your 
compatriots may insinuate, there is in that man no sign of 
declining intellect or failing health. I care not what may be 
his years, but that man is in mind and in health as young as 
Caesar when he crossed the Rubicon. 

" The old cling to the past . they do not go forward to the 
future. There was no going back in that speech of the Emperor. 
There was something grand and something young in the modesty 



6o THE PARISIANS. 



with which he put aside all references to that which his Empire 
had done in the past, and said with a simple earnestness of 
manner which I cannot adequately describe : . 

"'We must more than ever look fearlessly forward to the future. 
Who can be opposed to the progressive march of a regime 
founded by a great people in the midst of political disturbance, 
and which now is fortified by liberty ? ' 

" As he closed, the walls of that vast hall seemed to rock with 
an applause that must have been heard on the other side of 
the Seine. 

"' Vive VEmpereur /' 

" ' Vive V Imptratrice ! ' 

" * Vive le Prince Imperial ! ' . and the last cry was yet more 
prolonged than the others, as if to affirm the dynasty. 

" Certainly I can imagine no Court in the old days of chivalry 
more splendid than the audience in that grand hall of the Louvre. 
To the right of the throne all the ambassadors of the civilised 
world in the blaze of their rich costumes and manifold orders. 
In the gallery at the left, yet more behind, the dresses and 
jewels of the dames d'honneur and of the great officers of State. 
And when the Empress rose to depart, certainly my fancy 
cannot picture a more queen-like image, or one that seemed 
more in unison with the representation of royal pomp and 
power. The very dress, of a colour which would have been 
fatal to the beauty of most women equally fair . a deep golden 
colour . (Valerie profanely called it buft) . seemed so to suit the 
splendour of the ceremony and the day ; it seemed as if that 
stately form stood in the midst of a sunlight reflected from 
itself. Day seemed darkened when that sunlight passed 
away. 

" I fear you will think I have suddenly grown servile to the 
gauds and shows of mere royalty. I ask myself if that be so . 
I think not. Surely it is a higher sense of greatness which has 
been impressed on me by the pageant of to-day : I feel as if 
there were brought vividly before me the majesty of France, 
through the representation of the ruler she has crowned. 

" I feel also as if there, in that hall, I found a refuge from 
all the warring contests in which no two seem to me in 



THE PARISIANS. 61 



agreement as to the sort of government to be established in 
place of the present The ' Liberty ' clamoured for by one 
would cut the throat of the ' Liberty ' worshipped by another. 

a I see a thousand phantom forms of Liberty . but only one 
living symbol of ORDER . that which spoke from a throne 
to-day." 



Isaura left her letter uncompleted. On the following Monday 
she was present at a crowded soirie given by M. Louvier. Among 
the guests were some of the most eminent leaders of the Opposi- 
tion, including that vivacious master of sharp sayings, M. P , 

whom Savarin entitled "the French Sheridan;" if laws could 
be framed in epigrams he would be also the French Solon. 

There, too, was Victor de Maulon, regarded by the Republican 
party with equal admiration and distrust For the distrust, he 
himself pleasantly accounted in talk with Savarin. 

a How can I expect to be trusted ? I represent ' Common 
Sense ; ' every Parisian likes Common Sense in print, and cries 
' Je suis trahV when Common Sense is to be put into action." 

A group of admiring listeners had collected round one (perhaps 
the most brilliant) of those oratorical lawyers by whom, in 
France, the respect for all laws has been so often talked away : 
he was speaking of the Saturday's ceremonial with eloquent 
indignation. It was a mockery to France to talk of her placing 
Liberty under the protection of the Empire. 

There was a flagrant token of the military force under which 
civil freedom was held in the very dress of the Emperor and his 
insignificant son : the first in the uniform of a General of Division ; 
the second, forsooth, in that of a sous-lieutenant* Then other 
liberal chiefs chimed in : " The army," said one, " was an absurd 
expense ; it must be put down : " " The world was grown too 
civilised for war," said another: "The Empress was priest- 
ridden," said a third : " Churches might be tolerated ; Voltaire 
built a church, but a church simply to the God of Nature, not 
of priestcraft," . and so on. 

Isaura, whom any sneer at religion pained and revolted, here 
turned away from the orators to whom she had before been 



\ 



62 THE PARISIANS. 



listening with earnest attention, and her eyes fell on the 
countenance of De Mauldon, who was seated opposite. The 
countenance startled her, its expression was so angrily scornful ; 
that expression, however, vanished at once as De Mauldon's eyes 
met her own, and drawing his chair near to her, he said, smiling : 
"Your look tells me that I almost frightened you by the ill- 
bred frankness with which my face must have betrayed my 
anger, at hearing such imbecile twaddle from men who aspire 
to govern our turbulent France. You remember that after 
Lisbon was destroyed by an earthquake a quack advertised 
'pills against earthquakes.' These messieurs are not so cunning 
as the quack ; he did not name the ingredients of his pills." 

" But, M. de Mauldon," said Isaura, " if you, being opposed 
to the Empire, think so ill of the wisdom of those who would 
destroy it, are you prepared with remedies for earthquakes 
more efficacious than their pills ? " 

" I reply as a famous English statesman, when in opposition, 
replied to a somewhat similar question, . ' I don't prescribe till 
Tm called in/ " 

"To judge by the seven millions and a half whose votes 
were announced on Saturday, and by the enthusiasm with 
which the Emperor was greeted, there is too little fear of 
an earthquake for a good trade to the pills of these messieurs, 
or for fair play to the remedies you will not disclose till 
called in." 

"Ah, Mademoiselle! playful wit from lips not formed for 
politics makes me forget all about emperors and earthquakes. 
Pardon that commonplace compliment . remember I am a 
Frenchman, and cannot help being frivolous." 

"You rebuke my presumption too gently. True, I ought 
not to intrude political subjects on one like you . I understand 
so little about them . but this is my excuse, I so desire to know 
more." 

M. de Maulon paused, and looked at her earnestly with 
a kindly, half-compassionate look, wholly free from the im- 
pertinence of gallantry. " Young poetess," he said, softly, " you 
care for politics ! Happy, indeed, is he . and whether he succeed 
or fail in his ambition abroad, proud should he be of an ambition 



THE PARISIANS. 63 



med at home . he who has made you desire to know more 
olitics ! " 

he girl felt the blood surge to her temples. How could 
have been so self-confessed ? She made no reply, nor did 
de Mauldon seem to expect one ; with that rare delicacy 
high breeding which appears in France to belong to a 
ler generation, he changed his tone, and went on as if 
e had been no interruption to the question her words 
lied 

You think the Empire secure . that it is menaced by no 
hquake ? You deceive yourself. The Emperor began with 
.tal mistake, but a mistake it needs many years to discover, 
disdained the slow natural process of adjustment between 
land and supply . employer and workmen. He desired . 
ignoble ambition . to make Paris the wonder of the world, 
eternal monument of his reign. In so doing, he sought 
reate artificial modes of content for revolutionary workmen, 
'er has any ruler had such tender heed of manual labour 
:he disparagement of intellectual culture. Paris is embel- 
sd ; Paris is the wonder of the world ; other great towns 
e followed its example ; they, too, have their rows of palaces 

temples. Well, the time comes when the magician can 
longer give work to the spirits he raises ; then they must 

on him and rend : out of the very houses he built for the 
:er habitation of workmen will flock the malcontents who 

'Down with the Empire!' On the 21st of May you 
lessed the pompous ceremony which announces to the 
pire a vast majority of votes, that will be utterly useless 
t except as food for gunpowder in the times that are at 
d. Seven days before, on the 14th of Ma)', there was* 
iot in the Faubourg du Temple . easily put down . you 
cely hear of it. That riot was not the less necessary 
:hose who would warn the Empire that it is mortal True, 

riot disperses . but it is unpunished; riot unpunished is a 
>lution begun. The earthquake is nearer than you think ; 

for that earthquake what are the pills yon quacks adver- 
? They prate of an age too enlightened for war; they 
ild mutilate the army . nay, disband it if they could . 



64 THE PARISIANS. 



with Prussia next door to France. Prussia, desiring, not 
unreasonably, to take that place in the world which France 
now holds, will never challenge France ; if she did, she would 
be too much in the wrong to find a second : Prussia knowing 
that she has to do with the vainest, the most conceited, the 
rashest antagonist that ever flourished a rapier in the face of 
a spadassin . Prussia will make France challenge her. 

" And how do ces messieurs deal with the French army ? 
Do they dare to say to the ministers, ' Reform it ' ? Do they 
dare say, 'Prefer for men whose first duty it is to obey, 
discipline to equality . insist on the distinction between the 
officer and the private, and never confound it ; Prussian 
officers are well-educated gentlemen, see that yours are ' ? 
Oh no ; they are democrats too stanch not to fraternise with 
an armed mob ; they content themselves with grudging an 
extra sou to the Commissariat, and winking at the millions 
fraudulently pocketed by some ' Liberal contractor.' Dieu dcs 
dieux! France to be beaten, not as at Waterloo by hosts 
combined, but in fair duel by a single foe! Oh, the shame! 
the shame ! But as the French army is now organised, beaten 
she must be, if she meets the march of the German." 

" You appal me with your sinister predictions," said Isaura ; 
"but, happily, there is no sign of war. M. Duplessis, who 
is in the confidence of the Emperor, told us only the other 
day that Napoleon, on learning the result of the plebiscite, 
said: 'The foreign journalists who have been insisting that 
the Empire cannot coexist with free institutions, will no longer 
hint that it can be safely assailed from without/ And more 
than ever I may say L % Empire cest la paix /" 

Monsieur de Maul6on shrugged his shoulders. "The old 
story . Troy and the wooden horse." 

" Tell me, M. de Mauteon, why do you, who so despise the 
Opposition, join with it in opposing the Empire ? " 

"Mademoiselle, the Empire opposes me; while it lasts I 
cannot be even a Dtputt; when it is gone, Heaven knows that 
I may be, perhaps Dictator; one thing, you may rely upon, 
that I would, if not Dictator myself, support any man who was 
better fitted for that task." 



THE PARISIANS. $5 



"Better fitted to destroy the liberty which he pretended to 
fight for." 

"Not exactly so," replied M. de Mauleon, imperturbably 
. "better fitted to establish a good government in lieu of 
the bad one he had fought against, and the much worse 
governments that would seek to turn France into a madhouse, 
and make the maddest of the inmates the mad doctor ! " He 
turned away, and here their conversation ended. 

But it so impressed Isaura, that the same night she concluded 
her letter to Madame de Grantmesnil by giving a sketch of its 
substance, prefaced by an ingenuous confession that she felt 
less sanguine confidence in the importance of the applauses 
which had greeted the Emperor at the Saturday's ceremonial, 
and ending thus : " I can but confusedly transcribe the words 
of this singular man, and can give you no notion of the manner 
and the voice which made them eloquent. Tell me, can there 
be any truth in his gloomy predictions ? I try not to think 
so, but they seem to rest over that brilliant hall of the Louvre 
like an ominous thunder-cloud." 



CHAPTER II. 

The Marquis de Rochebriant was seated in his pleasant 
apartment, glancing carelessly at the envelopes of many notes 
and letters lying yet unopened on his breakfast-table. He 
had risen late at noon, for he had not gone to bed till dawn. 
The night had been spent at his club . over the card-table 
. by no means to the pecuniary advantage of the Marquis. 
The reader will have learned, through the conversation recorded 
in a former chapter between De Maul6on and Enguerrand 
de Vandemar, that the austere Seigneur Breton had become 
a fast viveur of Paris. He had long since spent the remnant 
of Louvier's premium of iooo/l and he owed a year's interest 
For this last there was an excuse. M. Collot, the contractor 

VOL. 11. E 



66 THE PARISIANS. 



to whom he had been advised to sell the yearly fall of his 
forest-trees, had removed the trees, but had never paid a 
sou beyond the preliminary deposit ; so that the revenue, out 
of which the mortgagee should be paid his interest, was not 
forthcoming. Alain had instructed M. Hebert to press the 
contractor; the contractor had replied, that if not pressed he 
could soon settle all claims . if pressed, he must declare himself 
bankrupt The Chevalier de Finisterre had laughed at the 
alarm which Alain conceived when he first found himself in the 
condition of debtor for a sum he could not pay. creditor for 
a sum he could not recover. 

" Bagatelle ! " said the Chevalier. " Tschu ! Collot, if you 
give him time, is as safe as the Bank of France, and Louvier 
knows it. Louvier will not trouble you . Louvier, the best 
fellow in the world ! I'll call on him and explain matters." 

It is to be presumed that the Chevalier did so explain ; for 
though both at the first, and quite recently at the second 
default of payment, Alain received letters from M. Louvier's 
professional agent, as reminders of interest due, and as requests j 
for its payment, the Chevalier assured him that these applica- 
tions were formalities of convention . that Louvier, in fact, 
knew nothing about them; and when dining with the great 
financier himself, and cordially welcomed and called " Mon 
cher? Alain had taken him aside and commenced explanation 
and excuse, Louvier had cut him short. " Peste ! don't mention 
such trifles. There is such a thing as business . that concerns 
my agent ; such a thing as friendship . that concerns me. 
Allez! n 

Thus M. de Rochebriant, confiding in debtor and in creditor, 
had suffered twelve months to glide by without much heed of 
either, and more than lived up to an income amply sufficient 
indeed for the wants of an ordinary bachelor, but needing more 
careful thrift than could well be expected from the head of one 
of the most illustrious houses in France, cast so young into the 
vortex of the most expensive capital in the world. 

The poor Marquis glided into the grooves that slant downward, 
much as the French Marquis of tradition was wont to glide; not 
that he appeared to live extravagantly, but he needed all he 



THE PARISIANS. 67 



had for his pocket-money, and had lost that dread of being in 
debt which he had brought up from the purer atmosphere of 
Bretagne. 

But there were some debts which, of course, a Rochebriant 
must pay . debts of honour . and Alain had, on the previous 
night, incurred such a debt and must pay it that day. He 
had been strongly tempted, when the debt rose to the figure 
it had attained, to risk a change of luck ; but whatever his 
imprudence, he was incapable of dishonesty. If the luck did 
not change, and he lost more, he would be without means 
to meet his obligations. As the debt now stood, he calculated 
that he could just discharge it by the sale of his coupt and 
horses. It is no wonder he left his letters unopened, however 
charming they might be ; he was quite sure they would contain 
no cheque which would enable him to pay his debt and retain 
his equipage. 

The door opened, and the valet announced M. le Chevalier de 
Finisterre . a man with smooth countenance and air distingut, 
a pleasant voice and perpetual smile. 

"Well, mon cher? cried the Chevalier, "I hope that you 
recovered the favour of Fortune before you quitted her green 
table last night When I left she seemed very cross with you. " 

u And so continued to the end," answered Alain, with well- 
simulated gaiety . much too bon gentUliomme to betray rage or 
anguish for pecuniary loss. 

"After all," said de Finisterre, lighting his cigarette, "the 
uncertain goddess could not do you much harm ; the stakes 
were small, and your adversary, the Prince, never goes double 
or quits." 

* Nor I either. ' Small/ however, is a word of relative import ; 
the stakes might be small to you, to me large. Entre nous, 
cher ami, I am at the end of my purse, and I have only this 
consolation . I am cured of play : not that I leave the complaint, 
the complaint leaves me ; it can no more feed on me than a 
fever can feed on a skeleton." 

u Are you serious ? " 

* As serious as a mourner who has just buried his alL " 
" His all ? Tut, with such an estate as Rochebriant ! " 

 2 



68 THE PARISIANS. 



For the first time in that talk Alain's countenance became 
overcast. 

" And how long will Rochebriant be mine ? You know that 
I hold it at the mercy of the mortgagee, whose interest has not 
been paid, and who could, if he so pleased, issue notice, take 
proceedings . that " 

" Peste ! " interrupted de Finisterre ; " Louvier take proceed- 
ings ! Louvier, the best fellow in the world ! But don't I see 
his handwriting on that envelope ? No doubt an invitation to 
dinner." 

Alain took up the letter thus singled forth from a miscellany 
of epistles, some in female handwritings, unsealed but ingeniously 
twisted into Gordian knots . some also in female handwritings, 
carefully sealed . others in ill-looking envelopes, addressed in 
bold, legible, clerk-like caligraphy. Taken altogether, these 
epistles had a character in common ; they betokened the 
correspondence of a viveur, regarded from the female side as 
young, handsome, well-born . on the male side, as a viveur who 
had forgotten to pay his hosier and tailor. 

Louvier wrote a small, not very intelligible, but very masculine, 
hand, as most men who think cautiously and act promptly do 
write. The letter ran thus : . 

" C/ter petit Marquis" (at that commencement Alain haughtily 
raised his head and bit his lips). 

"Cher petit Marquis, . It is an age since I have seen you. 
No doubt my humble soirees are too dull for a beau seigneur 
so courted. I forgive you. Would I were a beau seigneur 
at your age ! Alas ! I am only a commonplace man of business, 
growing old, too. Aloft from the world in which I dwell, you 
can scarcely be aware that I have embarked a great part of my 
capital in building speculations. There is a Rue de Louvier 
that runs its drains right through my purse. I am obliged 
to call in the moneys due to me. My agent informs me 
that I am just 7000 louis short of the total I need . all other 
debts being paid in . and that there is a trifle more than 7000 
louis owed to me as interest on my hypothkque on Rochebriant: 
kindi} *}ay into his hands before the end of this week that sum. 



THE PARISIANS. 69 



You have been too lenient to Collot, who must owe you more 
than that Send agent to him. Disott to trouble you, and 
am au disespoir to think that my own pressing necessities 
compel me to urge you to take so much trouble. Mais que 
faire ? The Rue de Louvier stops the way, and I must leave 
it to my agent to clear it 

" Accept all my excuses, with the assurance of my sentiments 
the most cordial. 

" Paul Louvier." 

Alain tossed the letter to De Finisterre. "Read that from 
the best fellow in the world." 

The Chevalier laid down his cigarette and read. " Diable ! " 
he said, when he returned the letter and resumed the cigarette 
. a Diable! Louvier must be much pressed for money, or he 
would not have written in this strain. What does it matter? 
Collot owes you more than 7000 louis. Let your lawyer get 
them, and go to sleep with both ears on your pillow." 
Ah ! you think Collot can pay if he will ? " 
Mafai! did not M. Gandrin tell you that M. Collot was 
safe to buy your wood at more money than any one else would 
give?" 

" Certainly," said Alain, comforted. "Gandrin left that im- 
pression on my mind. I will set him on the man. All will 
come right, I dare say; but if it does not come right, what 
would Louvier do ? " 

"Louvier do!" answered Finisterre, reflectively. "Well do 
you ask my opinion and advice ? " 

" Earnestly, I ask." 

"Honestly, then, I answer. I am a little on the Bourse 
myself . most Parisians are. Louvier has made a gigantic 
speculation in this new street, and with so many other irons 
in the fire he must want all the money he can get at. I dare 
say that if you do not pay him what you owe, he must leave 
it to his agent to take steps for announcing the sale of 
Rochebriant But he detests scandal; he hates the notion 
of being severe ; rather than that, in spite of his difficulties, 
he will buy^ Rochebriant of you at a better price than it can 



 



7o THE PARISIANS. 



command at public sale. Sell it to him. Appeal to him to 
act generously, and you will flatter him. You will get more 
than the old place is worth. Invest the surplus. live as you 
have done, or better . and marry an heiress. M or bleu ! a 
Marquis de Rochebriant, if he were sixty years old, would 
rank high in the matrimonial market The more the democrats 
have sought to impoverish titles and laugh down historical 
names, the more do rich democrat fathers-in-law seek to decorate 
their daughters with titles and give their grandchildren the 
heritage of historical names. You look shocked, pauvre ami. 
Let us hope, then, that Collot will pay. Set your dog . I mean 
your lawyer . at him ; seize him by the throat ! " 

Before Alain had recovered from the stately silence with 
which he had heard this very practical counsel, the valet again 
appeared, and ushered in M. Frederic Lemercier. 

There was no cordial acquaintance between the visitors. 
Lemercier was chafed at finding himself supplanted in Alain's 
intimate companionship by so new a friend, and De Finisterre 
affected to regard Lemercier as a would-be exquisite of low 
birth and bad taste. 

Alain, too, was a little discomposed at the sight of Lemercier, 
remembering the wise cautions which that old college friend 
had wasted on him at the commencement of his Parisian 
career, and smitten with vain remorse that the cautions had 
been so arrogantly slighted. 

It was with some timidity that he extended his hand to 
Frederic, and he was surprised as well as moved by the more 
than usual warmth with which it was grasped by the friend he had 
long neglected. Such affectionate greeting was scarcely in 
keeping with the pride which characterised Frederic Lemercier. 

"Ma foil" said the Chevalier, glancing towards the clock, 
" how time flies ! I had no idea it was so late. I must leave 
you now, my dear Rochebriant. Perhaps we shall meet at the 
club later . I dine there to-day. Auplaisir, M. Lemercier." 



THE PARISIANS. 71 



CHAPTER III. 

When the door had closed on the Chevalier, Frederic's 
countenance became very grave. Drawing his chair near to 
Alain, he said : " We have not seen much of each other lately, 
. nay, no excuses ; I am well aware that it could scarcely be 
otherwise. Paris has grown so large and so subdivided into 
sets, that the best friends belonging to different sets become as 
divided as if the Atlantic flowed between them. I come to-day 
in consequence of something I have just heard from Duplessis. 
Tell me, have you got the money for the wood you sold to 
M. Collot a year ago ? " 

u No," said Alain, falteringly. 

" Good heavens ! none of it ? " 

" Only the deposit of ten per cent, which of course I spent, for 
it formed the greater part of my income. What of Collot ? Is 
he really unsafe ? " 

" He is ruined, and has fled the country. His flight was the 
talk of the Bourse this morning. Duplessis told me of it." 

Alain's face paled. " How is Louvier to be paid ? Read that 
letter ! " 

Lemercier rapidly scanned his eye over the contents of 
Louvier's letter. 

" It is true, then, that you owe this man a year's interest . 
more than 7000 louis ? " 

"Somewhat more . yes. But that is not the first care that 
troubles me . Rochebriant may be lost, but with it not my 
honour. I owe the Russian Prince 300 louis, lost to him last 
night at /cart/. I must find a purchaser for my coup/ and 
horses ; they cost me 600 louis last year, . do you know any 
one who will give me three ? " 

" Pooh ! I will give you six ; your alezan alone is worth half 
the money ! " 

"My dear Frederic, I will not sell them to you on any 
account. But you have so many friends " 



72 THE PARISIANS. 



" Who would give their soul to say, ' I bought these horses of 
Rochebriant* Of course I do. Ha ! young Rameau, you are 
acquainted with him ? " 

" Rameau ! I never heard of him ! " 

" Vanity of vanities, then what is fame ? Rameau is the 
editor of Le Sens Commun. You read that journal ? " 

"Yes, it has clever articles, and I remenjber how I was 
absorbed in the eloquent rotnan which appeared in it." 

" Ah ! by the Signora Cicogna, with "whom I think you were 
somewhat smitten last year." 

" Last year . was I ? How a year can alter a man ! But my 
debt to the Prince, What has Le Sens Commun to do with my 
horses ? " 

" I met Rameau at Savarin's the other evening. He was 
making himself out a hero and a martyr ! his coupi had been 
taken from him to assist in a barricade in that senseless hneuU 
ten days ago ; the coupt got smashed, the horses disappeared. 
He will buy one of your horses and caupi. Leave it to me ! 
I know where to dispose of the other two horses. At what 
hour do you want the money ? " 

" Before I go to dinner at the club." 

"You shall have it within two hours ; but you must not dine 
at the club to-day. I have a note from Duplessis to invite you 
to dine with him to-day ! " 

" Duplessis ! I know so little of him ! " 

" You should know him better. He is the only man who can 
give you sound advice as to this difficulty with Louvier ; and he 
will give it the more carefully and zealously because he has that 
enmity to Louvier which one rival financier has to another. I 
dine with him too. We shall find an occasion to consult him 
quietly ; he speaks of you most kindly. What a lovely girl his 
daughter is!" 

" I dare say. Ah ! I wish I had been less absurdly fastidious. 
I wish I had entered the army as a private soldier six months 
ago ; I should have been a corporal by this time ! Still it is 
not too late. When Rochebriant is gone, I can yet say with the 
Mousquetaire in the mflodrame : ' I am rich . I have my honour 
and my sword ! ' " 



THE PARISIANS. 73 



" Nonsense I Rochebriant shall be saved ; meanwhile I hasten 
to Rameau. Au revoir, at the Hotel Duplessis . seven o'clock.'' 

Lemercier went, and in less than two hours sent the Marquis 
bank-notes for 600 louis, requesting an order for the delivery of 
the horses and carriage. 

That order written and signed, Alain hastened to acquit him- 
self of his debt of honour, and contemplating his probable ruin 
with a lighter heart presented himself at the Hotel Duplessis. 

Duplessis made no pretensions to vie with the magnificent 
existence of Louvier. His house, though agreeably situated and 
flatteringly styled the Hotel Duplessis, was of moderate size, 
very unostentatiously furnished ; nor was it accustomed to receive 
the brilliant motley crowds which assembled in the salons of the 
elder financier. 

Before that year, indeed, Duplessis had confined such enter- 
tainments as he gave to quiet men of business, or a few of the 
more devoted and loyal partisans of the Imperial dynasty ; but 
since Valerie came to live with him he had extended his hospi- 
talities to wider and livelier circles, including some celebrities in 
the world of art and letters as well as of fashion. Of the party 
assembled that evening at dinner were Isaura, with the Signora 
Venosta, one of the Imperial Ministers, the Colonel whom Alain 
had already met at Lemercier's supper, Dtputts (ardent Impe- 
rialists), and the Duchesse de Tarascon ; these, with Alain and 
Frederic, made up the party. The conversation was not parti- 
cularly gay. Duplessis himself, though an exceedingly well-read 
and able man, had not the genial accomplishments of a brilliant 
host. Constitutionally grave and habitually taciturn . though 
there were moments in which he was roused out of his wonted self 
into eloquence or wit . he seemed to-day absorbed in some 
engrossing train of thought. The Minister, the Dtputis and the 
Duchesse de Tarascon talked politics, and ridiculed the trumpery 
inuute of the 14th ; exulted in the success of the plebiscite ; and 
admitting, with indignation, the growing strength of Prussia, . and 
with scarcely less indignation, but more contempt, censuring the 
selfish egotism of England in disregarding the due equilibrium 
of the European balance of power, . hinted at the necessity of 
annexing Belgium as a set-off against the results of Sadowa. 



74 THE PARISIANS. 



Alain found himself seated next to Isaura . to the woman 
who had so captivated his eye and fancy on his first arrival 
in Paris. 

Remembering his last conversation with Graham nearly a 
year ago, he felt some curiosity to ascertain whether the rich 
Englishman had proposed to her, and if so, been refused or 
accepted. 

The first words that passed between them were trite enough, 
but after a little pause in the talk, Alain said . 

"I think Mademoiselle and myself have an acquaintance 
in common . Monsieur Vane, a distinguished Englishman. 
Do you know if he be in Paris at present ? I have not seen 
him for many months." 

" I believe he is in London ; at least, Colonel Morley met 
the other day a friend of his who said so." 

Though Isaura strove to speak in a tone of indifference, 
Alain's ear detected a ring of pain in her voice ; and watch- 
ing her countenance, he was impressed with a saddened 
change in its expression. He was touched, and his curiosity 
was mingled with a gentler interest as he said : " When I last 
saw M. Vane I should have judged him to be too much under 
the spell of an enchantress to remain long without the pale 
of the circle she draws around her." 

Isaura turned her face quickly towards the speaker, and 
her lips moved, but she said nothing audibly. 

" Can there have been quarrel or misunderstanding ? " thought 
Alain ; and after that question his heart asked itself, " Supposing 
Isaura were free, her affections disengaged, could he wish to woo 
and to win her ? " and his heart answered . " Eighteen months 
ago thou wert nearer to her than now. Thou wert removed 
from her for ever when thou didst accept the world as a barrier 
between you ; then, poor as thou wert, thou wouldst have pre- 
ferred her to riches. Thou wert then sensible only of the 
ingenuous impulses of youth, but the moment thou saidst, ' I 
am Rochebriant, and having once owned the claims of birth 
and station, I cannot renounce them for love, Isaura became but 
a dream. Now that ruin stares thee in the face . now that thou 
must grapple with the sternest difficulties of adverse fate-^ 



THE PARISIANS. 75 



thou hast lost the poetry of sentiment which could alone give 
to that dream the colours and the form of human life." He 
could not again think of that fair creature as a prize that he 
might even dare to covet And as he met her inquiring eyes, 
and saw her quivering lip, he felt instinctively that Graham 
was dear to her, and that the tender interest with which she 
inspired himself was untroubled by one pang of jealousy. He 
resumed : 

"Yes, the last time I saw the Englishman he spoke with 
such respectful homage of one lady, whose hand he would 
deem it the highest reward of ambition to secure, that I 
cannot but feel deep compassion for him if that ambition 
has been foiled; and thus only do I account for his absence 
from Paris." 

" You are an intimate friend of Mr. Vane's ? " 

" No, indeed, I have not that honour ; our acquaintance is 
but slight, but it impressed me with the idea of a man of 
vigorous intellect, frank temper, and perfect honour." 

Isaura's face brightened with the joy we feel when we hear 
the praise of those we love. 

At this moment, Duplessis, who had been observing the 
Italian and the young Marquis, for the first time during 
dinner, broke silence. 

" Mademoiselle," he said, addressing Isaura across the table, 
" I hope I have not been correctly informed that your literary 
triumph has induced you to forego the career in which all 
the best judges concur that your successes would be not less 
brilliant ; surely one art does not exclude another." 

Elated by Alain's report of Graham's words, by the con- 
viction that these words applied to herself, and by the thought 
that her renunciation of the stage removed a barrier between 
them, Isaura answered, with a sort of enthusiasm . 

" I know not, M. Duplessis, if one art excludes another ; if 
there be desire to excel in each. But I have long lost all 
desire to excel in the art you refer to, and resigned all idea 
of the career in which it opens." 

" So M. Vane told me," said Alain, in a whisper. 

"When?" 



76 THE PARISIANS. 



" Last year, . on the day that he spoke in terms of admiration 
so merited of the lady whom M. Duplessis has just had the 
honour to address." 

All this while, Valerie, who was seated at the further end 
of the table beside the Minister, who had taken her in to 
dinner, had been watching, with eyes, the anxious tearful 
sorrow of which none but her father had noticed, the low- 
voiced confidence between Alain and the friend, whom till 
that day she had so enthusiastically loved. Hitherto she had 
been answering in monosyllables all attempts of the great 
man to draw her into conversation ; but now, observing how 
Isaura blushed and looked down, that strange faculty in 
women, which we men call dissimulation, and which in them 
is truthfulness to their own nature, enabled her to carry off 
the sharpest anguish she had ever experienced, by a sudden 
burst of levity of spirit She caught up some commonplace 
the Minister had adapted to what he considered the poverty 
of her understanding, with a quickness of satire which startled 
that grave man, and he gazed at her astonished. Up to 
that moment he had secretly admired her as a girl well 
brought up . as girls fresh from a French convent are 
supposed to be ; now, hearing her brilliant rejoinder to his 
stupid observation, he said inly: "Dame! the low birth of 
a financier's daughter shows itself." 

But, being a clever man himself, her retort put him on his 
mettle, and he became, to his own amazement, brilliant himself. 
With that matchless quickness which belongs to Parisians, the 
guests around him seized the new esprit de conversation which 
had been evoked between the statesman and the childlike 
girl beside him ; and as they caught up the ball, lightly flung 
among them, they thought within themselves how much more 
sparkling the financier's pretty, lively daughter was than that 
dark-eyed young muse, of whom all the journalists of Paris 
were writing in a chorus of welcome and applause, and who 
seemed not to have a word to say worth listening to, except 
to the handsome young Marquis, whom, no doubt, she wished 
to fascinate. 

Valerie fairly outshone Isaura in intellect and in wit; and 



THE PARISIANS. 77 



neither Valerie nor Isaura cared, to the value of a bean-straw, 
about that distinction. Each was thinking only of the prize 
which the humblest peasant women have in common with 
the most brilliantly accomplished of their sex . the heart of 
a man beloved. 



CHAPTER IV. 

On the Continent generally, as we all know, men do not 
sit drinking wine together after the ladies retire. So when 
the signal was given all the guests adjourned to the salon ; 
and Alain quitted Isaura to gain the ear of the Duchesse 
de Tarascon. 

" It is long . at least long for Paris life," said the Marquis . 
"since my first visit to you, in company with Enguerrand 
de Vandemar. Much that you then said rested on my mind, 
disturbing the prejudices I took from Bretagne." 

u I am proud to hear it, my kinsman." 

u You know that I would have taken military service under 
the Emperor, but for the regulation which would have compelled 
me to enter the ranks as a private soldier." 

" I sympathise with that scruple ; but you are aware that the 
Emperor himself could not have ventured to make any exception 
even in your favour." 

" Certainly not I repent me of my pride ; perhaps I may 
enlist still in some regiment sent to Algiers." 

"No; there are other ways in which a Rochebriant can serve 
a throne. There will be an office at Court vacant soon, which 
would not misbecome your birth." 

" Pardon me ; a soldier serves his country . a courtier owns 
a master ; and I cannot take the livery of the Emperor, though 
I could wear the uniform of France." 

" Your distinction is childish, my kinsman," said the Duchesse, 
impetuously. '^You talk as if the Emperor had an interest 
apart from the nation. I tell you that he has not a corner 



78 THE PARISIANS. 



of his heart . not even one reserved for his son and his dynasty 
. in which the thought of France does not predominate." 

" I do not presume, Madame la Duchesse, to question the 
truth of what you say; but I have no reason to suppose 
that the same thought does not predominate in the heart 
of the Bourbon. The Bourbon would be the first to say to 
me: 'If France needs your sword against her foes, let it not 
rest in the scabbard/ But would the Bourbon say, ' The place 
of a Rochebriant is among the valetaille of the Corsican's 
successor ' ? " 

" k Alas for poor France!" said the Duchesse; "and alas for 
men like you, my proud cousin, if the Corsican's successors 
or successor be " 

" Henry V. ? " interrupted Alain, with a brightening eye. 

"Dreamer! No; some descendant of the mob- kings who 
gave Bourbons and nobles to the guillotine." 



While the Duchesse and Alain were thus conversing, Isaura 
had seated herself by Valerie, and, unconscious of the offence 
she had given, addressed her in those pretty caressing terms 
with which young-lady friends are wont to compliment each 
other ; but Valerie answered curtly or sarcastically, and turned 
aside to converse with the Minister. A few minutes more, and 
the party began to break up. Lemercier, however, detained 
Alain, whispering, "Duplessis will see us on your business 
so soon as the other guests have gone." 



CHAPTER V. 

"Monsieur le Marquis," said Duplessis, when the salon 
was cleared of all but himself and the two friends, " Lemercier 
has confided to me the state of your affairs in connection with 
M. Louvier, and flatters me by thinking my advice may be 
of some service ; if so, command me." 



THE PARISIANS. 79 



u I shall most gratefully accept your advice," answered Alain, 
* but I fear my condition defies even your ability and skill." 

" Permit me to hope not, and to ask a few necessary questions. 
M. Louvier has constituted himself your sole mortgagee ; to 
what amount, at what interest, and from what annual proceeds 
is the interest paid ? " 

Herewith Alain gave details already furnished to the reader. 
Duplessis listened, and noted down the replies. 

u I see it all," he said, when Alain had finished. " M. Louvier 

had predetermined to possess himself of your estate : he makes 

himself mortgagee at a rate of interest so low, that I tell you 

fairly, at the present value of money, I doubt if you could find 

any capitalist who would accept the transfer of the mortgage 

at the same rate. This is not like Louvier, unless he had 

an object to gain, and that object is your land. The revenue 

from your estate is derived chiefly from wood, out of which 

the interest due to Louvier is to be paid. M. Gandrin, in a 

skilfully-guarded letter, encourages you to sell the wood from 

your forests to a man who offers you several thousand francs 

more than it could command from customary buyers. I say 

nothing against M. Gandrin, but every man who knows Paris 

as I do, knows that M. Louvier can put, and has put, a great 

deal of money into M. Gandrin's pocket The purchaser of 

your wood does not pay more than his deposit, and has just 

left the country insolvent. Your purchaser, M. Collot, was 

an adventurous speculator; he would have bought anything 

at any price, provided he had time to pay; if his speculations 

had been lucky he would have paid. M. Louvier knew, as 

I knew, that M. Collot was a gambler, and the chances were 

that he would not pay. M. Louvier allows a year's interest 

on his hypothique to become due . notice thereof duly given to 

you by his agent. now you come* under the operation of the 

law. Of course, you know what the law is ? " 

"Not exactly," answered Alain, feeling frostbitten by the 
congealing words of his counsellor ; " but I take it for granted 
that if I cannot pay the interest of a sum borrowed on my 
property, that property itself is forfeited." 

u No, not quite that . the law is mild. If the interest which 



8o THE PARISIANS. 



should be paid half-yearly remains unpaid at the end of a year, the 
mortgagee has a right to be impatient, has he not ? " 

" Certainly he has." 

" Well, then, on fait un commandement tendant A saisie im- 
mobilize, viz. : The mortgagee gives a notice that the property 
shall be put up for sale. Then it is put up for sale, and in most 
cases the mortgagee buys it in. Here, certainly, no competitors 
in the mere business way would vie with Louvier; the mortgagee at 
3^ per cent, covers more than the estate is apparently worth. 
Ah ! but stop, M. le Marquis ; the notice is not yet served : 
the whole process would take six months from the day it is 
served to the taking possession after the sale ; in the meanwhile, 
if you pay the interest due, the action drops. Courage, M. le 
Marquis ! Hope yet, if you condescend to call me friend." 

" And me" cried Lemercier ; " I will sell out of my railway 
shares to-morrow . see to it, Duplessis . enough to pay off the 
damnable interest. See to it, mon amir 

"Agree to that, M. le Marquis, and you are safe for another 
year/' said Duplessis, folding up the paper on which he had 
made his notes, but fixing on Alain quiet eyes half concealed 
under drooping lids. 

" Agree to that ! " cried Rochebriant, rising . " agree to allow 
even my worst enemy to pay for me moneys I could never hope 
to repay . agree to allow the oldest and most confiding friends 
to do so . M. Duplessis, never ! If I carried the porter's knot 
of an Auvergnat, I should still remain gentilhomtne and Breton" 

Duplessis, habitually the driest of men, rose with a moistened 
eye and flushing cheek . " Monsieur le Marquis, vouchsafe me 
the honour to shake hands with you. I, too, am by descent 
gentilhomtne, by profession a speculator on the Bourse. In both 
capacities I approve the sentiment you have uttered. Certainly, 
if our friend Frederic lent you 7000 louis or so this year, it 
would be impossible for you even to foresee the year in which 
you could repay it ; but," . here Duplessis paused a minute, 
and then lowering the tone of his voice, which had been some- 
what vehement and enthusiastic, into that of a colloquial good- 
fellowship, equally rare to the measured reserve of the financier, 
he asked, with a lively twinkle of his grey eye, "Did you 



THE PARISIANS. 81 



never hear, Marquis, of a little encounter between irue and 
M. Louvier ? " 

" Encounter at arms. does Louvier fight ? " asked Alain, 
innocently. 

" In his own way he is always fighting ; but I speak meta- 
phorically. You see this small house of mine . so pinched in 
by the houses next to it that I can neither get space for a ball- 
room for ValeVie, nor a dining-room for more than a friendly 
party like that which has honoured me to-day. Eh bien / I 
bought this house a few years ago, meaning to buy the one next 
to it and throw the two into one. I went to the proprietor of 
the next house, who, as I knew, wished to sell. 'Aha/ he 
thought, 'this is the rich Monsieur Duplessis ; ' and he asked me 
2000 louis more than the house was worth. We men of business 
cannot bear to be too much cheated ; a little cheating we 
submit to . much cheating raises our gall. Bref. this was on 
Monday. I offered the man iooo louis above the fair price, and 
gave him till Thursday to decide. Somehow or other Louvier 
hears of this. ' Hillo ! ' says Louvier, . here is a financier who 
desires a hdtel to vie with mine ! ' He goes on Wednesday to 
my next-door neighbour. ' Friend, you want to sell your house. 
I want to buy . the price ? ' The proprietor, who does not know 
him by sight, says : ' It is as good as sold. M. Duplessis and 
I shall agree/ ' Bah ! What sum did you ask M. Duplessis ? ' 
He names the sum ; 2000 louis more than he can get else- 
where. 'But M. Duplessis will give me the sum.' 'You ask 
too little. I will give 3000. A fig for M. Duplessis ! I am 
Monsieur Louvier.' So when I call on Thursday the house is 
sold. I reconcile myself easily enough to the loss of space for 
a larger dining-room ; but though Valerie was then a child at 
a convent, I was sadly disconcerted by the thought that I could 
have no salle de bal ready for her when she came to reside with 
me. Well, I say to myself, patience ; I owe M. Louvier a 
good turn ; my time to pay him off will come. It does come, 
and very soon. M. Louvier buys an estate near Paris . builds 
a superb villa. Close to his property is a rising forest ground 
for sale. He goes to the proprietor: says the proprietor 
to himself, 'The great Louvier wants this/ and adds 5000 

VOL. IL F 



82 THE PARISIANS. 



louis to its market price. Louvier, like myself, can't bear to 
be cheated egregiously. Louvier offers 2000 louis more than 
the man could fairly get, and leaves him till Saturday to 
consider. I hear of this . speculators hear of everything. 
On Friday night I go to the man and I give him 6000 louis, 
where he had asked 5000. Fancy Louvier's face the next day ! 
But there my revenge, only begins," continued Duplessis, 
chuckling inwardly. "My forest looks down on the villa he is 
building. I only wait till his villa is built, in order to send to 
my architect and say, Build me a villa at least twice as grand 
as M. Louvier's, then clear away the forest trees, so that every 
morning he may see my palace dwarfing into insignificance 
his own." 

"Bravo!" cried Lemercier, clapping his hands. Lemercier 
had the spirit of party, and felt for Duplessis against Louvier 
much as in England Whig feels against Tory, or vice versd. 

" Perhaps now," resumed Duplessis, more soberly, . " perhaps 
now, M. le Marquis, you may understand why I humiliate you 
by no sense of obligation if I say that M. Louvier shall not be 
the Seigneur de Rochebriant if I can help it. Give me a line 
of introduction to your Breton lawyer and to Mademoiselle 
your aunt . let me have your letters early to-morrow. I will 
take the afternoon train. I know not how many days I may 
be absent, but I shall not return till I have carefully examined 
the nature and conditions of your property. If I see my way 
to save your estate, and give a mauvais quart cTheure to Louvier, 
so much the better for you, M. le Marquis ; if I cannot, I will 
say frankly, ' Make the best terms you can with your creditor.' " 

"Nothing can be more delicately generous than the way 
you put it," said Alain ; " but pardon me, if I say that the 
pleasantry with which you narrate your grudge against M. 
Louvier does not answer its purpose in diminishing my sense 
of obligation." So, linking his arm in Lemercier's, Alain made 
his bow and withdrew. 

When his guests had gone, Duplessis remained seated in 
meditation . apparently pleasant meditation, for he smiled while 
indulging it ; he then passed through the reception-rooms to 
one at the far end appropriated to Valerie as a boudoir or 



THE PARISIANS. 83 



morning-room, adjoining her bed-chamber; he knocked gently 
at the door, and, all remaining silent within, he opened it 
noiselessly and entered. Valerie was reclining on the sofa 
near the window . her head drooping, her hands clasped on 
her knees. Duplessis neared her with tender stealthy steps, 
passed his arm round her, and drew her head towards his 
bosom. " Child ! " he murmured ; " my child, my only one ! " 

At that soft loving voice, Valerie flung her arms round him, 
and wept aloud like an infant in trouble. He seated himself 
beside her, and wisely suffered her to weep on, till her passion 
had exhausted itself; he then said, half fondly, half chiding ly : 
"Have you forgotten our conversation only three days ago? 
Have you forgotten that I then drew forth the secret of your 
heart ? Have you forgotten what I promised you in return 
for your confidence ? and a promise to you have I ever yet 
broken ? " 

" Father ! father ! I am so wretched and so ashamed of 
myself for being wretched ! Forgive me. No, I do not forget 
your promise; but who can promise to dispose of the heart 
of another ? and that heart will never be mine. But bear with 
me a little, I shall soon recover." 

"Valerie, when I made you the promise you now think I 
cannot keep, I spoke only from that conviction of power to 
promote the happiness of a child which nature implants in 
the heart of parents ; and it may be also from the experience 
of my own strength of will, since that which I have willed I 
have always won. Now I speak on yet surer ground. Before 
the year is out you shall be the beloved wife of Alain de 
Rochebriant Dry your tears and smile on me, Valerie. If 
you will not see in me mother and father both, I have double 
love for you, motherless child of her who shared the poverty 
of my youth, and did not live to enjoy the wealth which I 
hold as a trust for that heir to mine all which she left me." 

As this man thus spoke you would scarcely have recognised 
in him the old saturnine Duplessis, his countenance became so 
beautified by the one soft feeling which care and contest, am- 
bition and money-seeking, had left unaltered in his heart. 
Perhaps there is no country in which the love of parent and 

F 2 



84 THE PARISIANS. 



child, especially of father and daughter, is so strong as it is 
in France ; even in the most arid soil, among the avaricious, 
even among the profligate, it forces itself into flower. Other 
loves fade away : in the heart of the true Frenchman that 
parent love blooms to the last 

Valerie felt the presence of that love as a divine protecting 
guardianship. She sank on her knees and covered his hand 
with grateful kisses. 

" Do not torture yourself, my child, with jealous fears of the 
fair Italian. Her lot and Alain de Rochebriant's can never 
unite ; and whatever you may think of their whispered converse, 
Alain's heart at this moment is too filled with anxious troubles 
to leave one spot in it accessible even to a frivolous gallantry. 
It is for us to remove these troubles ; and then, when he turns 
his eyes towards you, it will be with the gaze of one who beholds 
his happiness. You do not weep now, Valerie ! " 



BOOK IX, 



CHAPTER L 

On waking some morning, have you ever felt, reader, as if a 
change for the brighter in the world, without and within you, 
had suddenly come to pass . some new glory has been given to 
the sunshine^ some fresh balm to the air. you feel younger, and 
happier, and lighter, in the very beat of your heart . you almost 
fancy you hear the chime of some spiritual music far off, as if 
in the deeps of heaven ? You are not at first conscious how, or 
wherefore, this change has been brought 'about Is it the effect 
of a dream in the gone sleep, that has made this morning so 
different from mornings that have dawned before ? And while 
vaguely asking yourself that question, you become aware that 
the cause is no mere illusion, that it has its substance in words 
spoken by living lips, in things that belong to the work-day 
world. 

It was thus that Isaura woke the morning after the con- 
versation with Alain de Rochebriant, and as certain words> 
then spoken, echoed back on her ear, she knew why she was 
so happy, why the world was so changed. 

In those words she heard the voice of Graham Vane . no I 
she had not deceived herself. ^she was loved ! she was loved ! 
What mattered that long cold interval of absence ? She had 
not forgotten . she could not believe that absence had brought 
forgetfulness. There are moments when we insist on judging 



86 THE PARISIANS. 



another's heart by our own. All would be explained some day 
. all would come right. 

How lovely was the face that reflected itself in the glass as 
she stood before it smoothing back her long hair, murmuring 
sweet snatches of Italian love-song, and blushing with sweeter 
love-thoughts as she sang ! All that had passed in that year 
so critical to her outer life . the authorship, the fame, the public 
career, the popular praise . vanished from her mind as a vapour 
that rolls from the face of a lake to which the sunlight restores 
the smile of a brightened heaven. 

She was more the girl now than she had ever been since the 
day on which she sat reading Tasso on the craggy shore of 
Sorrento. 

Singing still as she passed from her chamber, and entering the 
sitting-room, which fronted the east, and seemed bathed in the 
sunbeams of deepening May she took her bird from its cage, 
and stopped her song to cover it with kisses, which perhaps 
yearned for vent somewhere. 

Later in the day she went out to visit Valerie. Recalling the 
altered manner of her young friend, her sweet nature became 
troubled. She divined that Valerie had conceived some jealous 
pain which she longed to heal ; she could not bear the thought 
of leaving any one that day unhappy. Ignorant before of the 
girl's feelings towards Alain, she now partly guessed them . one 
woman who loves in secret is clairvoyante as to such secrets in 
another. 

Valerie received her visitor with a coldness she did not 
attempt to disguise. Not seeming to notice this, Isaura com- 
menced the conversation with frank mention of Rochebriant 
" I have to thank you so much, dear Valerie, for a pleasure you 
could not anticipate . that of talking about an absent friend, 
and hearing the praise he deserved from one so capable of 
appreciating excellence as M. de Rochebriant appears to be." 

"You were talking to M. de Rochebriant of an absent 
friend . ah ! you seemed indeed very much interested in the 
conversation " 

" Do not wonder at that, Valerie ; and do not grudge me the 
happiest moments I have known for months." 



THE PARISIANS. 87 



 



In talking with M. de Rochebriant ! No doubt, Mademoiselle 
Cicogna, you found him very charming." 

To her surprise and indignation, Valerie here felt the arm of 
Isaura tenderly entwining her waist, and her face drawn towards 
Isaura's sisterly kiss. 

"Listen to me, naughty child . listen and believe. M. de 
Rochebriant can never be charming to me . never touch a 
chord in my heart or my fancy except as friend to another, or 
. kiss me in your turn, Valerie . as suitor to yourself." 

Valerie here drew back her pretty childlike head, ga?ed 
keenly a moment into Isaura's eyes, felt convinced by the 
limpid candour of their unmistakable honesty, and flinging 
herself on her friend's bosom, kissed her passionately, and burst 
into tears. 

The complete reconciliation between the two girls was thus 
peacefully effected ; and then Isaura had to listen, at no small 
length, to the confidences poured into her ears by Valerie, who 
was fortunately too engrossed by her own hopes and doubts 
to exact confidences in return. Valerie's was one of those 
impulsive eager natures that longs for a confidante. Not so 
Isaura's. Only when Valerie had unburthened her heart, and 
been soothed and caressed into happy trust in the future, did 
she recall Isaura's explanatory words, and said, archly : " And 
your absent friend ? Tell me about him. Is he as handsome 
as Alain ? " 

" Nay," said Isaura, rising to take up the mantle and hat she 
had laid aside on entering, u they say that the colour of a flower 
is in our vision, not in the leaves." Then with a grave melan- 
choly in the look she fixed upon Valerie, she added : " Rather 
than distrust of me should occasion you pain, I have pained 
myself, in making clear to you the reason why I felt interest 
in M. de Rochebriant's conversation. In turn, I ask of you a 
favour . do not on this point question me farther. There are 
some things in our past which influence the present, but to 
which we dare not assign a future . on which we cannot talk 
to another. What soothsayer can tell us if the dream of a 
yesterday will be renewed on the night of a morrow ? All is 
said . we trust one another, dearest." 



88 THE PARISIANS. 



CHAPTER II. 

That evening the Morleys looked in at Isaura's on their 
way to a crowded assembly at the house of one of those rich 
Americans, who were then outvying the English residents at 
Paris in the good graces of Parisian society. I think the 
Americans get on better with the French than the English do 
. I mean the higher class of Americans. They spend more 
money ; their men speak French better ; the women are better 
dressed, and, as a general rule, have read more largely, and 
converse more frankly. 

Mrs. Morley's affection for Isaura had increased during the 
last few months. As so notable an advocate of the ascendency 
of her sex, she felt a sort of grateful pride in w the accomplish- 
ments and growing renown of so youthful a member of the 
oppressed sisterhood. But, apart from that sentiment, she had 
conceived a tender mother-like interest for the girl who stood 
in the world so utterly devoid of family ties, so destitute of that 
household guardianship and protection which, with all her 
assertion of the strength and dignity of woman, and all her 
opinions as to woman's right of absolute emancipation from the 
conventions fabricated by the selfishness of man, Mrs. Morley 
was too sensible not to value for the individual, though she 
deemed it not needed for the mass. Her great desire was that 
Isaura should marry well, and soon. American women usually 
marry so young that it seemed to Mrs. Morley an anomaly in 
social life, that one so gifted in mind and person as Isaura 
should already have passed the age in which the belles of the 
great Republic are enthroned as wives and consecrated as 
mothers. 

We have seen that in the past year she had selected from 
our unworthy but necessary sex, Graham Vane as a suitable 
spouse to her young friend. She had divined the state of his 
heart . she had more than suspicions of the state of Isaura's. 
She was exceedingly perplexed, and exceedingly chafed at the 



THE PARISIANS. 89 



Englishman's strange disregard to his happiness and her own 
projects. She had counted, all this past winter, on his return 
to Paris ; and she became convinced that some misunderstanding, 
possibly some lover's quarrel was the cause of his protracted 
absence, and a cause that, if ascertained, could be removed. 
A good opportunity now presented itself . Colonel Morley was 
going to London the next day. He had business there which 
would detain him at least a week. He would see Graham ; and 
as she considered her husband the shrewdest and wisest person 
in the world . I mean of the male sex . she had no doubt of his 
being able to turn Graham's mind thoroughly inside out, and 
ascertain his exact feelings and intentions. If the Englishman, 
thus assayed, were found of base metal, then, at least, Mrs. 
Morley would be free to cast him altogether aside, and coin 
for the uses of the matrimonial market some nobler effigy in 
purer gold. 

"My dear child/' said Mrs. Morley, in low voice, nestling 
herself close to Isaura, while the Colonel, duly instructed* drew 
off the Venosta, " have you heard anything lately of our pleasant 
friend Mr. Vane ? " 

You can guess with what artful design Mrs. Morley put that 
question point-blank, fixing keen eyes on Isaura while she put 
it She saw the heightened colour, the quivering lip of the girl 
thus abruptly appealed to, and she said inly : " I wa5 right . 
she loves hiqi ! " 

u I heard of Mr. Vane last night . accidentally." 

" Is he coming to Paris soon ? " 

u Not that I know of. How charmingly that wreath becomes 
you ! it suits the earrings so well, too. " 

" Frank chose it ; he has good taste for a man. I trust him 
with my commissions to Hunt and Rosk ell's but I limit him 
as to price, he is so extravagant . men are, when they make 
presents. They seem to think we value things according to 
their cost They would gorge us with jewels, and let us starve 
for want of a smile. Not that Frank is so bad as the rest of 
them. But d propos of Mr. Vane . Frank will be sure to see 
him, and scold him well for deserting us alL I should not be 
surprised if he brought the deserter back with him, for I send 



90 THE PARISIANS. 



a little note by Frank, inviting him to pay us a visit We 
have spare rooms in our apartments." 

Isaura's heart heaved beneath her robe, but she replied in a 
tone of astonishing indifference : " I believe this is the height 
of the London season, and Mr. Vane would probably be too 
engaged to profit even by an invitation so tempting." 

"Nous verrons. How pleased he will be to hear of your 
triumphs ! He admired you so much before you were famous : 
what will be his admiration now ! men are so vain . they care 
for us so much more when people praise us. But till we have 
put the creatures in their proper place, we must take them for 
what they are." 

Here the Venosta, with whom the poor Colonel had exhausted 
all the arts at his command for chaining her attention, could be 
no longer withheld from approaching Mrs. Morley, and venting 
her admiration of that lady's wreath, earrings, robes, flounces. 
This dazzling apparition had on her the effect which a candle 
has on a moth . she fluttered round it, and longed to absorb 
herself in its blaze. But the wreath especially fascinated her 
. a wreath which no prudent lady with colourings less pure, 
and features less exquisitely delicate than the pretty champion 
of the rights of women, could have fancied on her own brows 
without a shudder. But the Venosta in such matters was not 
prudent. " It can't be dear," she cried piteously, extending her 
arms towards Isaura. " I must have one exactly like. Who 
made it ? Cara signora, give me the address." 

"Ask the Colonel, dear Madame; he chose and bought 
it," and Mrs. Morley glanced significantly at her well-tutored 
Frank. 

" Madame," said the Colonel, speaking in English, which he 
usually did with the Venosta . who valued herself on knowing 
that language and was flattered to be addressed in it . while 
he amused himself by introducing into its forms the dainty 
Americanisms with which he puzzled the Britisher . he might 
well puzzle the Florentine, . "Madame, I am too anxious for 
the appearance of my wife to submit to the test of a rival 
schemer like yourself in the same apparel. With all the 
homage due to a sex of which I am enthused dreadful, I 



THE PARISIANS. 91 



decline to designate the florist from whom I purchased Mrs. 
Morley*s head-fixings." 

" Wicked man ! " cried the Venosta, shaking her finger at him 
coquettishly. "You are jealous! Fie! a man should never 
be jealous of a woman's rivalry with women ;" and then, with 
a cynicism that might have become a grey-beard, she added, 
" but of his own sex every man should be jealous . though of 
his dearest friend Isn't it so, Colonello ? " 

The Colonel looked puzzled, bowed, and made no reply. 

" That only shows," said Mrs. Morley, rising, " what villains 
the Colonel has the misfortune to call friends and fellow-men." 

" I fear it is time to go," said Frank, glancing at the clock. 

In theory the most rebellious, in practice the most obedient, 
of wives, Mrs. Morley here kissed Isaura, resettled her crinoline, 
and shaking hands with the Venosta, retreated to the door. 

" I shall have the wreath yet," cried the Venosta, impishly. 
u La speranza i ferntnina " (Hope is female). 

"Alas!" said Isaura, half mournfully, half smiling, . "alas! 
do you not remember what the poet replied when asked what 
disease was most mortal? . 'the hectic fever caught from the 
chill of hope. 1 



* tt 



CHAPTER III. 

Graham Vane was musing very gloomily in his solitary 
apartment one morning, when his servant announced Colonel 
Morley. 

He received his visitor with more than the cordiality with 
which every English politician receives an American citizen. 
Graham liked the Colonel too well for what he was in him- 
self to need any national title to his esteem. After some 
preliminary questions and answers as to the health of Mrs. 
Morley, the length of the Colonel's stay in London, what day 
he could dine with Graham at Richmond or Gravesend, the 



92 THE PARISIANS. 



Colonel took up the ball. " We have been reckoning to see 
you at Paris, sir, for the last six months." 

a I am very much flattered to hear that you have thought 
of me at all; but I am not aware of having warranted the 
expectation you so kindly express." 

" I guess you must have said something to my wife which 
led her to do more than expect . to reckon on your return. 
And, by the way, sir, I am charged to deliver to you this 
note from her, and to back the request it contains that you 
will avail yourself of the offer. Without summarising the points 
I do so." 

Graham glanced over the note addressed to him : . 

" Dear Mr. Vane, . Do you forget how beautiful the environs 
of Paris are in May and June ? how charming it was last year 
at the lake of Enghien ? how gay were our little dinners out of 
doors in the garden arbours, with the Savarins and the fair 
Italian, and her incomparably amusing chaperon ? Frank has 
my orders to bring you back to renew these happy days, 
while the birds are in their first song, and the leaves are 
in their youngest green. I have prepared your rooms chez 
nous . a chamber that looks out on the Champs Elys^es, and 
a quiet cabinet de travail at the back, in which you can read, 
write, or sulk undisturbed. Come, and we will again visit 
Enghien and Montmorency. Don't talk of engagements. If 
man proposes, woman disposes. Hesitate not . obey. Your 
sincere little friend, 

" Lizzy." 

"My dear Morley," said Graham, v/ith emotion, "I cannot 
find words to thank your wife sufficiently for an invitation so 
graciously conveyed. Alas ! I cannot accept it" 

" Why ? " asked the Colonel, drily. 

" I have too much to do in London." 

" Is that the true reason, or am I to suspicion that there is 
anything, sir, which makes you dislike a visit to Paris ?" 

The Americans enjoy the reputation of being the frankest 
putters of questions whom liberty of speech has yet educated 



THE PARISIANS. 93 



into la recherche de la viritt, and certainly Colonel Morley in this 
instance did not impair the national reputation. 

Graham Vane's brow slightly contracted, and he bit his lip 
as if stung by a sudden pang ; but after a moment's pause, he 
answered with a good-humoured smile . 

" No man who has taste enough to admire the most beautiful 
city, and appreciate the charms of the most brilliant society in 
the world, can dislike Paris." 

"My dear sir, I did not ask if you disliked Paris, but if 
there were anything that made you dislike coming back to 
it on a visit * 

" What a notion ! and what a cross-examiner you would have 
made if you had been called to the bar ! Surely, my dear friend, 
you can understand that when a man has in one place busi- 
ness which he cannot neglect, he may decline going to another 
place, whatever pleasure it would give him to do so. By the 
way, there is a great ball at one of the Ministers' to-night ; 
you should go there, and I will point out to you all those 
English notabilities in whom Americans naturally take in- 
terest. I will call for you at eleven o'clock. Lord , 



who is a connection of mine, would be charmed to know you." 

Morley hesitated ; but when Graham said, " How your wife 
will scold you if you lose such an opportunity of telling her 

whether the Duchess of M is as beautiful as report says, 

and whether Gladstone or Disraeli seem to your phrenological 
science to have the finer head ! " the Colonel gave in, and 
it was settled that Graham should call for him at the Langham 
Hotel. 

That matter arranged, Graham probably hoped that his 
inquisitive visitor would take leave for the present, but the 
Colonel evinced no such intention. On the contrary, settling 
himself more at ease in his arm-chair, he said, " If I remember 
aright, you do not object to the odour of tobacco ? " 

Graham rose and presented to his visitor a cigar-box which 
he took from the mantelpiece. 

The Colonel shook his head, and withdrew from his breast- 
pocket a leather case, from which he extracted a gigantic 
regalia; this he lighted from a gold match-box in the shape 



94 THE PARISIANS. 



of a locket attached to his watch-chain, and took two or three 
preliminary puffs, with his head thrown back and his eyes 
meditatively intent upon the ceiling. 

We know already that strange whim of the Colonel's (than 
whom, if he so pleased, no man could speak purer English as 
spoken by the Britisher) to assert the dignity of the American 
citizen by copious use of expressions and phrases familiar to 
the lips of the governing class of the great Republic . delicacies 
of speech which he would have carefully shunned in the polite 
circles of the Fifth Avenue in New York. Now the Colonel was 
much too experienced a man of the world not to be aware that 
the commission with which his Lizzy had charged him was an 
exceedingly delicate one; and it occurred to his mother wit 
that the best way to acquit himself of it, so as to avoid the 
risk of giving or of receiving serious affront, would be to push 
that whim of his into more than wonted exaggeration. Thus 
he could more decidedly and briefly come to the point; and 
should he, in doing so, appear too meddlesome, rather pro- 
voke a laugh than a frown . retiring from the ground with 
the honours due to a humorist. Accordingly, in his deepest 
nasal intonation, and withdrawing his eyes from the ceiling, 
he began . 

"You have not asked, sir, after the signorina, or, as we 
popularly call her, Mademoiselle Cicogna ? " 

" Have I not ? I hope she is quite well, and her lively 
companion, Signora Venosta." 

" They are not sick, sir ; or at least were not so last night 
when my wife and I had the pleasure to see them. Of course 
you have read Mademoiselle Cicogna's book . a bright perform- 
ance, sir, age considered." 

" Certainly, I have read the book ; it is full of unques- 
tionable genius. Is Mademoiselle writing another? But of 
course she is." 

" I am not aware of the fact, sir. It may be predicated ; 
such a mind cannot remain inactive ; and I know from M. 
Savarin and that rising young man Gustave Rameau, that the 
publishers bid high for her brains considerable. Two trans- 
lations have already appeared in our country. Her fame, sir, 



THE PARISIANS. 95 



will be world-wide. She may be another Georges Sand, or at 
least another Eulalie GrantmesniL" 

Graham's cheek became as white as the paper I write on. 
He inclined his head as in assent, but without a word. The 
Colonel continued . 

"We ought to be very proud of her acquaintance, sir. I 
think you detected her gifts while they were yet unconjectured. 
My wife says so. You must be gratified to remember that, sir 
. clear grit, sir, and no mistake." 

" I certainly more than once have said to Mrs. Morley, that 
I esteemed Mademoiselle's powers so highly that I hoped 
she would never become a stage-singer and actress. But this 
M. Rameau ? You say he is a rising man. It struck me when 
at Paris that he was one of those charlatans with a great deal 
of conceit and very little information, who are always found 
in scores on the ultra-Liberal side of politics ; possibly I was 
mistaken" 

" He is the responsible editor of Le Sens Cotntnun, in which 
talented periodical Mademoiselle Cicogna's book was first raised." 

* Of course, I know that ; a journal which, so far as I have 
looked into its political or social articles, certainly written by 
a cleverer and an older man than M. Rameau, is for unsettling 
all things and settling nothing. We have writers of that kind 
among ourselves . I have no sympathy with them. To me it 
seems that when a man says, . Off with your head/ he ought 
to let us know what other head he would put on our shoulders, 
and by what process the change of heads shall be effected. 
Honestly speaking, if you and your charming wife are intimate 
friends and admirers of Mademoiselle Cicogna, I think you could 
not do her a greater service than that of detaching her from all 
connection with men like M. Rameau, and journals like Le 
Sens Cotntnun" 

The Colonel here withdrew his cigar from his lips, lowered 
his head to a level with Graham's, and relaxing into an arch 
significant smile, said, " Start to Paris, and dissuade her your- 
self. Start . go ahead . don't be shy . don't seesaw on the 
beam of speculation. You will have more influence with that 
young female than we can boast." 



96 THE PARISIANS. 



Never was England in greater danger of quarrel with America 
than at that moment ; but Graham curbed his first wrathful 
impulse, and replied coldly . 

" It seems to me, Colonel, that you, though very unconsciously, 
derogate from the respect due to Mademoiselle Cicogna. That 
the counsel of a married couple like yourself and Mrs. Morley 
should be freely given to and duly heeded by a girl deprived 
of her natural advisers in parents, is a reasonable and honourable 
supposition ; but to imply that the most influential adviser of 
a young lady so situated is a young single man, in no way 
related to her, appears to me a dereliction of that regard to 
the dignity of her sex which is the chivalrous characteristic 
of your countrymen . and to Mademoiselle Cicogna herself 
a surmise which she would be justified in resenting as an 
impertinence." 

" I deny both allegations," replied the Colonel, serenely. " I 
maintain that a single man whips all connubial creation when it 
comes to gallantising a single young woman ; and that no young 
lady would be justified in resenting as impertinence my friendly 
suggestion to the single man so deserving of her consideration 
as I estimate you to be, to solicit the right to advise her for 
life. And that's a caution." 

Here the Colonel resumed his regalia, and again gazed intent 
on the ceiling. 

" Advise her for life ! You mean, I presume, as a candidate 
for her hand." 

a You don't Turkey now. Well, I guess, you are not wide of 
the mark there, sir." 

" You do me infinite honour, but I do not presume so far." 

" So, so . not as yet. Before a man who is not without 
gumption runs himself for Congress, he likes to calculate 
how the votes will run. Well, sir, suppose we are in caucus, 
and let us discuss the chances of the election with closed 
doors." 

Graham could not help smiling at the persistent officiousness 
of his visitor, but his smile was a very sad one. 

"Pray change the subject, my dear Colonel Morley . it is 
not a pleasant one to me ; and as regards Mademoiselle Cicogna, 



THE PARISIANS. 97 



can you think it would not shock her to suppose that her name 
was dragged into the discussions you would provoke, even with 
closed doors ? " 

" Sir," replied the Colonel, imperturbably, " since the doors 
are closed, there is no one, unless it be a spirit-listener under 
the table, who can wire to Mademoiselle Cicogna the substance 
of debate. And, for my part, I do not believe in spiritual 
manifestations. Fact is, that I have the most amicable 
sentiments towards both parties, and if there is a misunder- 
standing which is opposed to the union of the States, I wish to 
remove it while yet in time. Now, let us suppose that you 
decline to be a candidate; there are plenty of others who 
will run ; and as an elector must choose one representative 
or other, so a gal must choose one husband or other. And 
then you only repent when it is too late. It is a great thing 
to be first in the field. Let us approximate to the point ; the 
chances seem good . will you run ? . Yes or no ? " 

"I repeat, Colonel Morley, that I entertain no such pre- 
sumption." 

The Colonel here, rising, extended his hand, which Graham 
shook with constrained cordiality, and then leisurely walked 
to the door; there he paused, as if struck by a new thought, 
and said gravely, in his natural tone of voice, "You have 
nothing to say, sir, against the young lady's character and 
honour ? " 

" I ! . heavens, no ! Colonel Morley, such a question insults 



me." 



The Colonel resumed his deepest nasal bass: "It is only 
then, because you don't fancy her now so much as you did 
last year . fact, you are soured on her and fly off the handle. 
Such things do happen. The same thing has happened to 
myself, sir. In my days of celibacy, there was a gal at 
Saratoga whom I gallantised, and whom, while I was at 
Saratoga, I thought Heaven had made to be Mrs. Morley: 
I was on the very point of telling her so; when I was suddenly 
called off to Philadelphia ; and at Philadelphia, sir, I found that 
Heaven had made another Mrs. Morley. I state this fact, sir, 
though I seldom talk of my own affairs, even when willing to 

vol. 11. G 



98 THE PARISIANS. 



tender my advice in the affairs of another, in order to prove 
that I do not intend to censure you if Heaven has served 
you in the same manner. Sir, a man may go blind for one 
gal when he is not yet dry behind the ears, and then, when 
his eyes are skinned, go in for one better. All things mortal 
meet with a change, as my sister's little boy said when, 
at the age of eight, he quitted the Methodys and turned 
Shaker. Threep and argue as we may, you and I are both 
mortals . more's the pity. Good morning, sir (glancing at the 
clock, which proclaimed the hour of 3 P.M.), . I err . good 
evening." 

By the post that day the Colonel transmitted a condensed 
and laconic report of his conversation with Graham Vane. 
I can state its substance in yet fewer words. He wrote word 
that Graham positively declined the invitation to Paris; that 
he had then, agreeably to Lizzy's instruction, ventilated the 
Englishman, in the most delicate terms, as to his intentions 
with regard to Isaura, and that no intentions at all existed. 
The sooner all thoughts of him were relinquished, as a new 
suitor on the ground, the better it would be for the young 
lady's happiness in the only state in which happiness should 
be, if not found, at least sought, whether by maid or man. 

Mrs. Morley was extremely put out by this untoward result 
of the diplomacy she had intrusted to the Colonel ; and when, 
the next day, came a very courteous letter from Graham, 
thanking her gratefully for the kindness of her invitation, 
and expressing his regret briefly, though cordially, at his 
inability to profit by it, without the most distant allusion to 
the subject which the Colonel had brought on the tapis, or 
even requesting his compliments to the Signoras Venosta and 
Cicogna, she was more than put out, more than resentful,. 
she was deeply grieved. Being, however, one of those gallant 
heroes of womankind who do not give in at the first defeat, 
she began to doubt whether Frank had not rather overstrained 
the delicacy which he said he had put into his "soundings. 1 ' 
He ought to have been more explicit Meanwhile she resolved 
to call on Isaura, and without mentioning Graham's refusal of 
her invitation, endeavour to ascertain whether the attachment 



THE PARISIANS. 99 



which she felt persuaded the girl secretly cherished for this 
recalcitrant Englishman were something more than the first 
romantic fancy . whether it were sufficiently deep to justify 
farther effort on Mrs. Morley's part to bring it to a prosperous 
issue. 

She found Isaura at home and alone ; and, to do her justice, 
she exhibited wonderful tact in the fulfilment of the task she 
had set herself. Forming her judgment by manner and look 
. not words . she returned home, convinced that she ought to 
seize the opportunity afforded to her by Graham's letter. It was 
one to which she might very naturally reply, and in that reply 
she might convey the object at her heart more felicitously than 
the Colonel had done. "The cleverest man is," she said to 
herself, "stupid compared to an ordinary woman in the real 
business of life, which does not consist of fighting and money- 
making." 

Now there was one point she had ascertained by words in her 
visit to Isaura . a point on which all might depend. She had 
asked Isaura when and where she had seen Graham last ; and 
when Isaura had given her that information, and she learned 
it was on the eventful day on which Isaura gave her consent 
to the publication of her MS. if approved by Savarin, in the 
journal to be set up by the handsome-faced young author, she 
leapt to the conclusion that Graham had been seized with no 
unnatural jealousy, and was still under the illusive glamoury 
of that green-eyed fiend She was confirmed in this notion, 
not altogether an unsound one, when asking with apparent care- 
lessness . * And in that last interview, did you see any change 
in Mr. Vane's manner, especially when he took leave ?  

Isaura turned away pale, and involuntarily clasping her hands 
. as women do when they would suppress pain . replied, in a 
low murmur, " His manner was changed." 

Accordingly, Mrs. Morley sat dow and wrote the following 
letter : . 

"DEAR Mr. Vane, . I am very angry indeed with you for 
refusing my invitation, . I had so counted on you, and I don't 
believe a word of your excuse. Engagements ! To balls and 

G 2 



ioo THE PARISIANS. 



dinners, I suppose, as if you were not much too clever to care 
about such silly attempts to enjoy solitude in crowds. And as 
to what you men call business, you have no right to have any 
business at all. You are not in commerce; you are not in Parlia- 
ment; you told me yourself that you had no great landed 
estates to give you trouble ; you are rich, without any necessity 
to take pains to remain rich, or to become richer ; you have no 
business in the world except to please yourself : and when you 
will not come to Paris to see one of your truest friends . which 
I certainly am . it simply means, that no matter how such a 
visit would please me, it does not please yourself. I call that 
abominably rude and ungratefuL 

" But I am not writing merely to scold you. I have some- 
thing else on my mind, and it must come out. Certainly, when 
you were at Pari s last year you did admire, above all other 
young ladies, Lsaura Cicogna. And I honoured you for doing 
so. I know no other young lady to be called her equal Well, 
if you admired her then, what would you do now, if you met 
her ? Then she was but a girl . very brilliant; very charming, 
it is true . but undeveloped, untested. Now she is a woman, 
a princess among women, but retaining all that is most lovable 
in a girl ; so courted, yet so simple . so gifted, yet so innocent 
Her head is not a bit turned by all the flattery that surrounds 
her. Come and judge for yourself. I still hold the door of the 
rooms destined to you open for repentance. 

" My dear Mr. Vane, do not think me a silly match-making 
little woman, when I write to you thus, d coeur ouvert 

"I like you so much that I would fain secure to you the 
rarest prize which life is ever likely to offer to your ambition. 
Where can you hope to find another lsaura ? Among the state- 
liest daughters of your English dukes, where is there one whom a 
proud man would be more proud to show to the world, saying, 
'She is mine! ' where one more distinguished . I will not say 
by mere beauty, there she might be eclipsed . but by sweetness 
and dignity combined . in aspect, manner, every movement, 
every smile ? 

"And you, who are yourself so clever, so well read . you 
who would be so lonely with a wife who was not your com- 



THE PARISIANS. 101 



panion, with whom you could not converse on equal terms 
of intellect, . my dear friend, where could you find a companion 
in whom you would not miss the poet-soul of Isaura? Of 
course I should not dare to obtrude all these questionings 
on your innermost reflection, if I had not some idea, right or 
wrong, that since the days when at Enghien and Montmorency, 
seeing you and Isaura side by side, I whispered to Frank, ' So 
should those two be through life/ some cloud has passed 
between your eyes and the future on which they gazed. Can- 
not that cloud be dispelled ? Were you so unjust to yourself 
as to be jealous of a rival, perhaps of a Gustave Rameau ? I 
write to you frankly . answer me frankly ; and if you answer, 
. 'Mrs. Morley, I don't know what you mean; I admired 
Mademoiselle Cicogna as I might admire any other pretty, 
accomplished girl, but it is really nothing to me whether she 
marries Gustave Rameau or any one else/ . why, then, burn 
this letter . forget that it has been written; and may you 
never know the pang of remorseful sigh, if, in the days to come, 
you see her . whose name in that case I should profane did I 
repeat it . the comrade of another|man's mind, the half of another 
man's heart, the pride and delight of another man's blissful 
home." 



CHAPTER IV. 

THERE is somewhere in Lord Lytton's writings . writings 
so numerous that I may be pardoned if I cannot remember 
where . a critical definition of the difference between dramatic 
and narrative art of story, instanced by that marvellous passage 
in the loftiest of Sir Walter Scott's works, in which all the anguish 
of Ravenswood on the night before he has to meet Lucy's 
brother in mortal combat is conveyed without the spoken words 
required in tragedy. It is only to be conjectured by the tramp 
of his heavy boots to and fro all the night long in his solitary 
chamber, heard below by the faithful Caleb. The drama could 



io2 THE PARISIANS. 



not have allowed that treatment ; the drama must have put into 
words as " soliloquy," agonies which the non-dramatic narrator 
knows that no soliloquy can describe. Humbly do I imitate, 
then, the great master of narrative in declining to put into words 
the conflict between love and reason that tortured the heart of 
Graham Vane when, dropping noiselessly the letter I have just 
transcribed, he covered his face with his hands and remained . 
I know not how long . in the same position, his head bowed, 
not a sound escaping from his lips. 

He did not stir from his rooms that day ; and had there been 
a Caleb's faithful ear to listen, his tread, too, might have been 
heard all that sleepless night passing to and fro, but pausing oft, 
along his solitary floors. 

Possibly love would have borne down all opposing reasonings, 
doubts, and prejudices, but for incidents that occurred the 
following evening. On that evening Graham dined en famille 
with his cousins the Altons. After dinner, the Duke produced 
the design for a cenotaph inscribed to the memory of his aunt, 
Lady Janet King, which he proposed to place in the family 
chapel at Alton, 

"I know," said the Duke, kindly, "you would wish the old 
house from which she sprang to preserve some such record 
of her who loved you as her son.; and even putting you out of 
the question, it gratifies me to attest the claim of our family 
to a daughter who continues to be famous for her goodness* 
and made the goodness so lovable that envy forgave it for 
being famous. It was a pang to me when poor Richard King 
decided on placing her tomb among strangers ; but in conceding 
his rights as to her resting-place, I retain mine to her name, 
Nostris liberis virtutis exemplar? 

Graham wrung his cousin's hand . he could not speak, choked 
by suppressed tears. 

The Duchess, who loved and honoured Lady Janet almost 
as much as did her husband, fairly sobbed aloud. She had, 
indeed, reason for grateful memories of the deceased : there 
had been some obstacles to her marriage with the man who 
had won her heart, arising from political differences and family 
feuds between their parents, which the gentle mediation of Lady 



/ 



THE PARISIANS. 103 



Janet had smoothed away. And never did union founded on 
mutual and ardent love more belie the assertions of the great 
Bichat (esteemed by Dr. Buckle the finest intellect which 
practical philosophy has exhibited since Aristotle), that " Love 
is a sort of fever which does not last beyond two years," than 
that between those eccentric specimens of a class denounced as 
frivolous and heartless by philosophers, English and French, 
who have certainly never heard of Bichat. 

When the emotion the Duke had exhibited was calmed down, 
his wife pushed towards Graham a sheet of paper, inscribed 
with the epitaph composed by his hand. " Is it not beautiful," 
she said, falteringly . " not a word too much or too little ? " 

Graham read the inscription slowly, and with very dimmed 
eyes. It deserved the praise bestowed on it; for the Duke, 
though a shy and awkward speaker, was an incisive and 
graceful writer. 

Yet, in his innermost self, Graham shivered when he read 
that epitaph, it expressed so emphatically the reverential nature 
of the love which Lady Janet had inspired . the genial influences 
which the holiness of a character so active in doing good had 
diffused around it It brought vividly before Graham that image 
of perfect spotless womanhood. And a voice within him asked, 
"Would that cenotaph be placed amid the monuments of an 
illustrious lineage if the secret known to thee could transpire ? 
What though the lost one were really as unsullied by sin as 
the world deems, would the name now treasured as an heirloom 
not be a memory of gall and a sound of shame ? " 

He remained so silent after putting down the inscription, that 
the Duke said modestly, ' My dear Graham, I see that you do 
not like what I have written. Your pen is much more practised 
than mine. If I did not ask you to compose the epitaph, it was 
because I thought it would please you more in coming, as a 
spontaneous tribute due to her, from the representative of her 
family. But will you correct my sketch, or give me another 
according to your own ideas ? " 

u I see not a word to alter," said Graham ; " forgive me if my 
silence wronged my emotion ; the truest eloquence is that which 
holds us too mute for applause." 



1 



io4 THE PARISIANS. 



"I knew you would like it. Leopold is always so disposed 
to underrate himself/' said the Duchess, whose hand was resting 
fondly on her husband's shoulder. " Epitaphs are so difficult 
to write. especially epitaphs on women of whom in life the 
least said the better. Janet was the only woman I ever knew 
whom one could praise in safety." 

" Well expressed," said the Duke, smiling : " and I wish you 
would make that safety clear to some lady friends of yours, to 
whom it might serve as a lesson. Proof against every breath of 
scandal herself, Janet King never uttered and never encouraged 
one ill-natured word against another. But I am afraid, my dear 
fellow, that I must leave you to a tete-d-tite with Eleanor. You 
know that I must be at the House this evening . I only paired 
till half-past nine." 

" I will walk down to the House with you, if you are going on 
foot." 

" No," said the Duchess ; "you must resign yourself to me for 
at least half an hour. I was looking over your aunt's letters 
to-day, and I found one which I wish to show you ; it is all 
about yourself, and written within the last few months of her 
life." Here she put her arm into Graham's, and led him into 
her own private drawing-room, which, though others might call 
it a boudoir, she dignified by the name of her study. The Duke 
remained for some minutes thoughtfully leaning his arm on the 
mantelpiece. It was no unimportant debate in the Lords that 
night, and on a subject in which he took great interest, and the 
details of which he had thoroughly mastered. He had been 
requested to speak, if only a few words, for his high character 
and his reputation for good sense gave weight to the mere 
utterance of his opinion. But though no one had more moral 
courage in action, the Duke had a terror at the very thought of 
addressing an audience, which made him despise himself. 

" Ah ! " he muttered, " if Graham Vane were but in Parliament, 
I could trust him to say exactly what I would rather be swal- 
lowed up by an earthquake than stand up and say for myself. 
But now he has got money he seems to think of nothing but 
saving it. 



THE PARISIANS. io$ 



CHAPTER V. 

The letter from Lady Janet, which the Duchess took from 
the desk and placed in Graham's hand, was in strange coin- 
cidence with the subject that for the last twenty-four hours had 
absorbed his thoughts and tortured his heart. Speaking of him 
in terms of affectionate eulogy, the writer proceeded to confide 
her earnest wish that he should not longer delay that change in 
life which, concentrating so much that is vague in the desires 
and aspirations of man, leaves his heart and his mind, made 
serene by the contentment of home, free for the steadfast 
consolidation of their warmth and their light upon the ennobling 
duties that unite the individual to his race. 

* There is no one," wrote Lady Janet, " whose character and 
career a felicitous choice in marriage can have greater influence 
over than this dear adopted son of mine. I do not fear that 
in any case he will be liable to the errors of his brilliant father. 
His early reverse of fortune here seems to me one of those 
blessings which Heaven conceals in the form of affliction. For 
in youth, the genial freshness of his gay animal spirits, a native 
generosity mingled with desire of display and thirst for applause, 
made me somewhat alarmed for his future. But, though he still 
retains these attributes of character, they are no longer predomi- 
nant ; they are modified and chastened. He has learned pru- 
dence. But what I now fear most for him is that which he 
does not show in the world, which neither Leopold nor you 
seem to detect, . it is an exceeding sensitiveness of pride. I 
know not how else to describe it. It is so interwoven with 
the highest qualities, that I sometimes dread injury to them 
could it be torn away from the faultier ones which it supports. 

u It is interwoven with that lofty independence of spirit which 
has made him refuse openings the most alluring to his ambition ; 
it communicates a touching grandeur to his self-denying thrift ; 
it make him so tenacious of his word once given, so cautious 
before he gives it. Public life to him is essential; without it 



io6 THE PARISIANS. 



he would be incomplete ; and yet I sigh to think that whatever 
success he may achieve in it will be attended with proportionate 
pain. Calumny goes side by side with fame, and courting fame 
as a man, he is as thin-skinned to calumny as a woman. 

"The wife for Graham should have qualities not, taken in- 
dividually, uncommon in English wives, but in combination 
somewhat rare. 

" She must have mind enough to appreciate his . not to clash 
with it She must be fitted with sympathies to be his dearest com- 
panion, his confidante in the hopes and fears which the slightest 
want of sympathy would make him keep ever afterwards pent 
within his breast In herself worthy of distinction, she must merge 
all distinction in his. You have met in the world men who, marry- 
ing professed beauties, or professed literary geniuses, are spoken 
of as the husband of the beautiful Mrs. A- . . , or of the clever 

Mrs. B- : can you fancy Graham Vane in the reflected light of 

one of those husbands ? I trembled last year when I thought he 
was attracted by a face which the artists raved about, and again 
by a tongue which dropped dons mots that went the round of 
the club. I was relieved, when, sounding him, he said, laugh- 
ingly, ' No, dear aunt, I should be one sore from head to foot 
if I married a wife that was talked about for anything but 
goodness.' 

" No, . Graham Vane will have pains sharp enough if he live 
to be talked about himself. But that tenderest half of himself, 
the bearer of the name he would make, and for the dignity of 
which he alone would be responsible, . if that were the town 
talk, he would curse the hour he gave any one the right to 
take on herself his man's burden of calumny and fame. I 
know not which I should pity the most, Graham Vane or 
his wife. 

"Do you understand me, dearest Eleanor? No doubt you 
do so far, that you comprehend that the women whom men 
most admire are not the women we, as women ourselves, 
would wish our sons or brothers to marry. But perhaps you 
do not comprehend my cause of fear, which is this . for in 
such matters men do not see as we women do . Graham abhors, 
in the girls of our time, frivolity and insipidity. Very rightly, 



THE PARISIANS. 107 



you will say. True, but then he is too likely to be allured by 
contrasts. I k have seen him attracted by the very girls we recoil 
from more than we do from those we allow to be frivolous and 
insipid. I accused him of admiration for a certain young lady 
whom you call ' odious/ and whom the slang that has come into 
vogue calls ' fast ; ' and I was not satisfied with his answer . 
' Certainly I admire her ; she is not a doll. she has ideas.' I 
would rather of the two see Graham married to what men call 
a doll, than to a girl with ideas which are distasteful to women." 

Lady Janet then went on to question the Duchess about a 
Miss Asterisk, with whom this tale will have nothing to do, 
but who, from the little which Lady Janet had seen of her, 
might possess all the requisites that fastidious correspondent 
would exact for the wife of her adopted soil 

This Miss Asterisk had been introduced into the London 
world by the Duchess. The Duchess had replied to Lady 
Janet, that if earth could be ransacked a more suitable wife 
for Graham Vane than Miss Asterisk could not be found ; she 
was well born . an heiress; the estates she inherited were in 

the county of (viz*, the county in which the ancestors of 

D'Altons and Vanes had for centuries established their where- 
about). Miss Asterisk was pretty enough to please any man's 
eye, but not with the beauty of which artists rave ; well informed 
enough to be companion to a well informed man, but certainly 
not witty enough to supply bons mots to the clubs. Miss 
Asterisk was one of those women of whom a husband might 
be proud, yet with whom a husband would feel safe from 
being talked about. 

And in submitting the letter we have read to Graham's eye, 
the Duchess had the cause of Miss Asterisk pointedly in view. 
Miss Asterisk had confided to her friend, that, of all men she 
had seen, Mr. Graham Vane was the one she would feel the 
least inclined to refuse. 

So when Graham Vane returned the letter to the Duchess, 
simply saying, " How well my dear aunt divined what is weakest 
in me I " the Duchess replied quickly, " Miss Asterisk dines here 
to-morrow ; pray come ; you would like her if you knew more 
of her." 



io8 THE PARISIANS. 



"To-morrow I am engaged . an American friend of mine 
dines with me ; but 'tis no matter, for I shall never feel more 
for Miss Asterisk than I feel for Mont Blanc." 



CHAPTER VI. 

On leaving his cousin's house Graham walked on, he scarce 
knew or cared whither, the image of the beloved dead so 
forcibly recalled the solemnity of the mission with which he 
had been intrusted, and which hitherto he had failed to fulfil. 
What if the only mode by which he could, without causing 
questions and suspicions that might result in dragging to 
day the terrible nature of the trust he held, enrich the 
daughter of Richard King, repair all wrong hitherto done to 
her, and guard the sanctity of Lady Janet's home, . should be 
in that union which Richard King had commended to him 
while his heart was yet free ? 

In such a case, would not gratitude to the dead, duty to the 
living, make that union imperative at whatever sacrifice of 
happiness to himself? The two years to which Richard King 
had limited the suspense of research were not yet expired 
Then, too, that letter of Lady Janet's, . so tenderly anxious 
for his future, so clear-sighted as to the elements of his own 
character in its strength or its infirmities . combined with 
graver causes to withhold his heart from its yearning impulse, 
and . no, not steel it against Isaura, but forbid it to realise, in 
the fair creature and creator of romance, his ideal of the woman 
to whom an earnest, sagacious, aspiring man commits all the 
destinies involved in the serene dignity of his hearth. He 
could not but own that this gifted author . this eager seeker 
after fame . this brilliant and bold competitor with men on 
their own stormy battle-ground . was the very person from 
whom Lady Janet would have warned away his choice. She 
(Isaura) merge her own distinctions in a husband's ; . she 



THE PARISIANS. Io9 



leave exclusively to him the burden of fame and calumny! . 
she shun "to be talked about!" she who could feel her life 
to be a success or a failure, according to the extent and the 
loudness of the talk which it courted ! 

While these thoughts racked his mind, a kindly hand was 
laid on his arm, and a cheery voice accosted him. " Well met, 
my dear Vane! I see we are bound to the same place; there 
will be a good gathering to-night" 

" What do you mean, Bevil ? I am going nowhere, except to 
my own quiet rooms." 

" Pooh ! Come in here at least for a few minutes," . and 
Bevil drew him up to the door-step of a house close by, where, 
on certain evenings, a well-known club drew together men who 
seldom meet so familiarly elsewhere . men of all callings ; a club 
especially favoured by wits, authors, and the fldneurs of polite 
society. 

Graham shook his head, about to refuse, when Bevil added, 
"I have just come from Paris, and can give you the last 
news, literary, political, and social. By the way, I saw Savarin 
the other night at the Cicogna's . he introduced me there." 
Graham winced ; he was spelled by the music of a name, 
and followed his acquaintance into the crowded room, and 
after returning many greetings and nods, withdrew into a 
remote corner, and motioned Bevil to a seat beside him. 

" So you met Savarin ? Where, did you say ? " 

"At the house of the new lady-author . I hate the word 
authoress . Mademoiselle Cicogna! Of course you have read 
her book?" 

-Yes." 

" Full of fine things, is it not ? . though somewhat highflown 
and sentimental : however, nothing succeeds like success. No 
book has been more talked about at Paris : the only thing more 
talked about is the lady-author herself. " 

" Indeed, and how ? " 

"She doesn't look twenty, a mere girl. of that kind of 
beauty which so arrests the eye that you pass by other 
faces to gaze on it, and the dullest stranger would ask, 
4 Who, and what is she?' A girl, I say, like that . who lives 



no THE PARISIANS. 



as independently as if she were a middle-aged widow, receives 
every week (she has her Thursdays), with no other chaperon 
than an old ci-devant Italian singing woman, dressed like 
a guy . must set Parisian tongues into play even if she had 
not written the crack book of the season." 

" Mademoiselle Cicogna receives on Thursdays, . no harm 
in that ; and if she have no other chaperon than the Italian 
lady you mention, it is because Mademoiselle Cicogna is an 
orphan, and having a fortune, such as it is, of her own, I do 
not see why she should not live as independently as many 
an unmarried woman in London placed under similar circum- 
stances. I suppose she receives chiefly persons in the literary 
or artistic world, and if they are all as respectable as the 
Savarins, I do not think ill-nature itself could find fault with 
her social circle." 

" Ah ! you know the Cicogna, I presume. I am sure I did 
not wish to say anything that could offend her best friends, only 
I do think it is a pity she is not married, poor girl ! " 

" Mademoiselle Cicogna, accomplished, beautiful, of good birth 
(the Cicognas rank among the oldest of Lombard families), is 
not likely to want offers." 

" Offers of marriage, . h'm . well, I dare say, from authors and 
artists. You know Paris better even than I do, but I don't 
suppose authors and artists there make the most desirable 
husbands ; and I scarcely know a marriage in France between 
a man-author and lady-author which does not end in the 
deadliest of all animosities . that of wounded amour propre. 
Perhaps the man admires his own genius too much to do proper 
homage to his wife's." 

"But the choice of Mademoiselle Cicogna need not be 
restricted to the pale of authorship . doubtless she has many 
admirers beyond that quarrelsome borderland." 

" Certainly . countless adorers. Enguerrand de Vandemar . 
you know that diamond of dandies ? " 

" Perfectly . is he an admirer ? " 

" Cela va sans dire . he told me that though she was not 
the handsomest woman in Paris, all other women looked less 
handsome since he had seen her. But, of course, French lady- 



THE PARISIANS. in 



killers like Enguerrand, when it comes to marriage, leave it to 
their parents to choose their wives and arrange the terms of the 
contract Talking of lady-killers, I beheld amid the throng 
at Mademoiselle Cicogna's the ci-devant Lovelace whom I 
remember some twenty-three years ago as the darling of wives 
and the terror of husbands . Victor de Mauteon." 

"Victor de Mauleon at Mademoiselle Cicogna's! . what! is 
that man restored to society ? " 

" Ah ! you are thinking of the ugly old story about the jewels 
. oh yes, he has got over that; all his grand relations, the 
Vandemars, Beauvilliers, Rochebriant, and others, took him 
by the hand when he reappeared at Paris last year; and 
though I believe he is still avoided by many, he is courted 
by still more . and avoided, I fancy, rather from political than 
social causes. The Imperialist set, of course, execrate and 
proscribe him. You know he is the writer of those biting 
articles signed Pierr t e Firrnin in the Sens Cotnmun ; and I am 
told he is the proprietor of that very clever journal, which has 
become a power." 

" So, so. that is the journal in which Mademoiselle Cicogna's 
ronton first appeared. So, so . Victor de Mauleon one of her 
associates, her counsellor and friend . ah ! " 

" No, I didn't say that ; on the contrary, he was presented to 
her for the first time the evening I was at the house. I saw 
that young silk-haired coxcomb, Gustave Rameau, introduce 
him to her. You don't perhaps know Rameau, editor of the 
Sens Cotnmun . writes poems and criticisms. They say he is 
a -Red Republican, but De Mauleon keeps truculent French 
politics subdued if not suppressed in his cynical journal. 
Somebody told me that the Cicogna is very much in love 
with Rameau ; certainly he has a handsome face of his own, 
and that is the reason why she was so rude to the Russian 
Prince X.." 

"How rude 1 Did the Prince propose to her ? " 
"Propose! you forget . he is married. Don't you know the 
Princess? Still there are other kinds of proposals than those 
of marriage which a rich Russian prince may venture to make 
to a pretty novelist brought up for the stage." 



i!2 THE PARISIANS. 



"Bevil!" cried Graham, grasping the man's arm fiercely, 
" how dare you ? " 

" My dear boy," said Bevil, very much astonished, u I really 
did not know that your interest in the young lady was so 
great. If I have wounded you in relating a mere on dit picked 
up at the Jockey Club, I beg you a thousand pardons. I 
dare say there was not a word of truth in it." 

"Not a word of truth, you may be sure, if the on dit was 
injurious to Mademoiselle Cicogna. It is true, I have a strong 
interest in her; any man . any gentleman . would have such 
interest in a girl so brilliant and seemingly so friendless. It 
shames one of human nature to think that the reward which 
the world makes to those who elevate its platitudes, brighten 
its dulness, delight its leisure, is . Slander! I have had the 
honour to make the acquaintance of this lady before she 
became a 'celebrity/ and I have never met in my paths 
through life a purer heart or a nobler nature. What is the 
wretched on dit you condescend to circulate ? Permit me 
to add . 

" ' He who repeats a slander shares the crime. 1 " 

" Upon my honour, my dear Vane," said Bevil seriously (he 
did not want for spirit), " I hardly know you this evening. It 
is not because duelling is out of fashion that a man should allow 
himself to speak in a tone that gives offence to another who 
intended none ; and if duelling is out of fashion in England, it 
is still possible in France. Entre nous, I would rather cross 
the Channel with you than submit to language that conveys 
unmerited insult." 

Graham's cheek, before ashen pale, flushed into dark red. u I 
understand you," he said quietly, "and will be at Boulogne 
to-morrow." 

" Graham Vane," replied Bevil, with much dignity, w you and 
I have known each other a great many years, and neither of 
us has cause to question the courage of the other; but I am 
much older than yourself . permit me to take the melancholy 
advantage of seniority. A duel between us in consequence of 
careless words said about a lady in no way connected with 



THE PARISIANS. 113 



either, would be a cruel injury to her; a duel on grounds so 
slight would little injure me . a man about town, who would 
not sit an hour in the House of Commons if you paid him a 
thousand pounds a minute. But you, Graham Vane . you whose 
destiny it is to canvass electors and make laws . would it not 
be an injury to you to be questioned at the hustings why you 
broke the law, and why you sought another man's life ? Come, 
come ! shake hands and consider all that seconds, if we chose 
them, would exact, is said, every affront on either side retracted 
every apology on either side made." 

" Bevil, you disarm and conquer me. I spoke like a hot- 
headed fool ; forget it . forgive. But . but . I can listen calmly 
now . what is that on dit ? " 

" One that thoroughly bears out your own very manly 
upholding of the poor young orphan, whose name I shall 
never again mention without such respect as would satisfy her 

most sensitive champion. It was said that the Prince X 

boasted that before a week was out Mademoiselle Cicogna 
should appear in his carriage at the Bois de Boulogne, and 
wear at the opera diamonds he had sent to her; that this 
boast was enforced by a wager, and the terms of the wager 
compelled the Prince to confess the means he had taken to 
succeed, and produce the evidence that he had lost or won. 
According to this on dit % the Prince had written to Mademoiselle 
Cicogna, and the letter had been accompanied by a parure that 
cost him half a million of francs ; that the diamonds had been 
sent back with a few words of such scorn as a queen might 
address to an upstart lackey. But, my dear Vane, it is a 
mournful position for a girl to receive such offers ; and you 
must agree with me in wishing she were safely married, even 
to Monsieur Rameau, coxcomb though he be. Let us hope 
that they will be an exception to French authors, male and 
female, in general, and live like turtle-doves." 



vol. IL H 



U4 THE PARISIANS. 



CHAPTER VII. 

A FEW days after the date of the last chapter, Colonel Morley 
returned to Paris. He had dined with Graham at Greenwich, 
had met him afterwards in society, and paid him a farewell visit 
on the day before the Colonel's departure; but the name of 
Isaura Cicogna had not again been uttered by either. Morley 
was surprised that his wife did not question him minutely as 
to the mode in which he had executed her delicate commission, 
and the manner as well as words with which Graham had replied 
to his " ventilations." But his Lizzy cut him short when he 
began his recital . 

"I don't want to hear anything more about the man. He 
has thrown away a prize richer than his ambition will ever gain, 
even if it gained him a throne." 

.' That it can't gain him in the old country. The people are 
loyal to the present dynasty, whatever you may be told to the 
contrary." 

" Don't be so horribly literal, Frank ; that subject is done with. 
How was the Duchess of M dressed ? " 

But when the Colonel had retired to what the French call 
the cabinet de travail . and which he more accurately termed his 
" smoke den " . and there indulged in the cigar, which, despite 
his American citizenship, was forbidden in the drawing-room of 
the tyrant who ruled his life, Mrs. Morley took from her desk 
a letter received three days before, and brooded over it intently, 
studying every word. When she had thus reperused it, her 
tears fell upon her page. " Poor Isaura !" she muttered . "poor 
Isaura ! I know she loves him . and how deeply a nature like 
hers can love! But I must break it to her. If I did not, 
she would remain nursing a vain dream, and refuse every 
chance of real happiness for the sake of nursing it." Then 
she mechanically folded up the letter . I need not say it was 
from Graham Vane . restored it to the desk, and remained 



THE PARISIANS. 115 



rousing till the Colonel looked in at the door and said peremp- 
torily, " Very late . come to bed." 

The next day Madame Savarin called on Isaura. 

" Chkre enfant," said she, " I have bad news for you. Poor 
Gustave is very ill . an attack of the lungs and fever ; you know 
how delicate he is." 

"I am sincerely grieved," said Isaura, in earnest, tender 
tones; "it must be a very sudden attack: he was here last 
Thursday." 

"The malady only declared itselt yesterday morning, but 
surely you must have observed how ill he has been looking 
for several days past ? It pained me to see him." 

" I did not notice any change in him," said Isaura, somewhat 
conscience-stricken. Wrapt in her own happy thoughts, she 
would not have noticed change in faces yet more familiar to 
her than that of her young admirer. 

" Isaura," said Madame Savarin, " I suspect there are moral 
causes for our friend's failing health. Why should I disguise 
my meaning? You know well how madly he is in love with 
you, and have you denied him hope ? " 

"I like M. Rameau as a friend; I admire him . at times I 
pity him." 

" Pity is akin to love." 

" I doubt the truth of that saying, at all events as you apply 
it now. I could not love M. Rameau ; I never gave him cause 
to think I could " 

" I wish for both your sakes that you could make me a 
different answer ; for his sake, because, knowing his faults and 
failings, I am persuaded that they would vanish in a companion- 
ship so pure, so elevating as yours : you could make him not 
only so much happier but so much better a man. Hush ! let 
me go on, let me come to yourself, . I say for your sake I wish 
it. Your pursuits, your ambition, are akin to his ; you should 
not marry one who could not sympathise with you in these. 
If you did, he might either restrict the exercise of your genius 
or be chafed at its display. The only authoress I ever knew 
whose married lot was serenely happy to the last, was the 
greatest of English poetesses married to a great English poet 

H 2 



n6 THE PARISIANS. 



You cannot, you ought not, to devote yourself to the splendid 
career to which your genius irresistibly impels you, without that 
counsel, that support, that protection, which a husband alone 
can give. My dear child, as the wife myself of a man of letters, 
and familiarised to all the gossip, all the scandal, to which they 
who give their names to the public are exposed, I declare that 
if I had a daughter who inherited Savarin's talents, and was 
ambitious of attaining to his renown, I would rather shut her 
up in a convent than let her publish a book that was in every 
one's hands until she had sheltered her name under that of a 
husband ; and if I say this of my child, with a father so wise 
in the worlds ways, and so popularly respected as my bon 
homme, what must I feel to be essential to your safety, poor 
stranger in our land ! poor solitary orphan ! with no other advice 
or guardian than the singing mistress whom you touchingly 
call c Madre!' I see how I distress and pain you . I cannot 
help it. Listen : The other evening Savarin came back from 
his favourite cafe in a state of excitement that made me think 
he came to announce a revolution. It was about you; he 
stormed, he wept . actually wept . my philosophical laughing 
Savarin. He had just heard of that atrocious wager made by 
a Russian barbarian. Every one praised you for the contempt 
with which you had treated the savage's insolence. But that 
you should have been submitted to such an insult without one 
male friend who had the right to resent and chastise it, . you 
cannot think how Savarin was chafed and galled. You know 
how he admires, but you cannot guess how he reveres you; 
and since then he says to me every day : c That girl must not 
remain single. Better marry any man who has a heart to 
defend a wife's honour and the nerve to fire a pistol : every 
Frenchman has those qualifications ! ' " 

Here Isaura could no longer restrain her emotions, she burst 
into sobs so vehement, so convulsive, that Madame Savarin 
became alarmed ; but when she attempted to embrace and 
soothe her, Isaura recoiled with a visible shudder, and gasping 
out, " Cruel, cruel ! " turned to the door, and rushed to her 
own room. 

A few minutes afterwards a maid entered the salon with 



THE PARISIANS. n 7 



a message to Madame Savarin that Mademoiselle was so 
unwell that she must beg Madame to excuse her return to 
the salon. 

Later in the day Mrs, Morley called, but Isaura would not 
see her. 

Meanwhile poor Rameau was stretched on his sick-bed, and 
in sharp struggle between life and death. It is difficult to 
disentangle, one by one, all the threads in a nature so complex 
as Rameau's ; but if we may hazard a conjecture, the grief of 
disappointed love was not the immediate cause of his illness, 
and yet it had much to do with it The goad of Isaura's 
refusal had driven him into seeking distraction in excesses 
which a stronger frame could not have courted with impunity. 
The man was thoroughly Parisian in many things, but especially 
in impatience of any trouble. Did love trouble him . love 
could be drowned in absinthe ; and too much absinthe may 
be a more immediate cause of congested lungs than the love 
which the absinthe had lulled to sleep. 

His bedside was not watched by hirelings. When first taken 
thus ill . too ill to attend to his editorial duties . information 
was conveyed to the publisher of the Sens Commun, and in 
consequence of that information, Victor de Mauteon came to 
see the sick man. By his bed he found Savarin, who had 
called, as it were by chance, and seen the doctor, who had 
said, " It is grave. He must be well nursed." 

Savarin whispered to De Mauteon, " Shall we call in a pro- 
fessional nurse, or a sceur de c/iaritd ? " 

De Maul^on replied also in a whisper, " Somebody told me 
that the man had a mother." 

It was true . Savarin had forgotten it. Rameau never 
mentioned his parents . he was not proud of them. 

They belonged to a lower class of the bourgeoisie, retired 
shopkeepers, and a Red Republican is sworn to hate of the 
bourgeoisie, high or low; while a beautiful young author 
pushing his way into the Chauss^e d'Antin does not proclaim 
to the world that his parents had sold hosiery in the Rue 
St Denis. 

Nevertheless Savarin knew that Rameau had such parents 



n8 THE PARISIANS. 



still living, and took the hint Two hours afterwards Rameau 
was leaning his burning forehead on his mother's breast 

The next morning the doctor said to the mother, " You are 
worth ten of me. If you can stay here we shall pull him 
through." 

" Stay here ! . my own boy ! " cried indignantly the poor 
mother. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

The day which had inflicted on Isaura so keen an anguish 
was marked by a great trial in the life of Alain de Rochebriant 

In the morning he received the notice " of un commandement 
tendant d saisit immobiliere? on the part of his creditor, M. 
Louvier ; in plain English, an announcement that his property 
at Rochebriant would be put up to public sale on a certain 
day, in case all debts due to the mortgagee were not paid 
before. An hour afterwards came a note from Duplessis 
stating that "he had returned from Bretagne on the previous 
evening, and would be very happy to see the Marquis de 
Rochebriant before two o'clock, if not inconvenient to call." 

Alain put the " commandement " into his pocket, and repaired 
to the Hotel Duplessis. 

The financier received him with very cordial civility. Then 
he began, " I am happy to say I left your excellent aunt in 
very good health. She honoured the letter of introduction 
to her which I owe to your politeness with the most amiable 
hospitalities ; she insisted on my removing from the auberge 
at which I first put up and becoming a guest under your 
venerable roof-tree . a most agreeable lady, and a most 
interesting chdteau? 

"I fear your accommodation was in striking contrast to 
your comforts at Paris; my ch&teau is only interesting to an 
antiquarian enamoured of ruins." 



THE PARISIANS. 119 



u Pardon me, ( ruins ' is an exaggerated expression. I do 
not say that the chdteau does not want some repairs, but 
they would not be costly ; the outer walls are strong enough 
to defy time for centuries to come, and a few internal decora- 
tions and some modern additions of furniture would make the 
old manoir a home fit for a prince. I have been over the whole 
estate, too, with the worthy M. Hubert,. a superb property ! " 

" Which M. Louvier appears to appreciate," said Alain, 
with a somewhat melancholy smile, extending to Duplessis 
the menacing notice. 

Duplessis glanced at it, and said drily, " M. Louvier knows 
what he is about But I think we had better put an immediate 
stop to formalities which must be painful to a creditor so 
benevolent. I do not presume to offer to pay the interest 
due on the security you can give for the repayment If you 
refused that offer from so old a friend as Lemercier, of course 
you could not accept it from me. I make another proposal, 
to which you can scarcely object. I do not like to give my 
scheming rival on the Bourse the triumph of so profoundly 
planned a speculation. Aid me to defeat him. Let me take 
the mortgage on myself, and become sole mortgagee . hush ! 
. on this condition, that there should be an entire union of 
interests between us two ; that I should be at liberty to make 
the improvements I desire, and when the improvements be 
made, there should be a fair arrangement as to the proportion 
of profits due to me as mortgagee and improver, to you as 
original owner. Attend, my dear Marquis, . I am speaking 
as a mere man of business. I see my way to adding more 
than a third . I might even say a half . to the present revenues 
of Rochebriant. The woods have been sadly neglected, drainage 
alone would add greatly to their produce. Your orchards 
might be rendered magnificent supplies to Paris with better 
cultivation. Lastly, I would devote to building purposes or 
to market gardens all the lands round the two towns of 



and . I think I can lay my hands on suitable speculators 

for these last experiments. In a word, though the market 
value of Rochebriant, as it now stands, would not be equivalent 
to the debt on it, in five or six years it could be made worth 



120 THE PARISIANS. 



. well, I will not say how much . but we shall be both well 
satisfied with the result. Meanwhile, if you allow me to find 
purchasers for your timber, and if you will not suffer the 
Chevalier de Finisterre to regulate your expenses, you need 
have no fear that the interest due to me will not be regularly 
paid, even though I shall be compelled, for the first year or 
two at least, to ask a higher rate of interest than Louvier 
exacted . say a quarter per cent more ; and in suggesting 
that, you will comprehend that this is now a matter of business 
between us, and not of friendship." 

Alain turned his head aside to conceal his emotion, and then 
with the quick affectionate impulse of the genuine French 
nature, threw himself on the financier's breast and kissed him 
on both cheeks. 

"You save me! you save the home and the tombs of my 
ancestors ! Thank you I cannot ; but I believe in God . I pray 
. I will pray for you as for a father ; and if ever," he hurried 
on in broken words, " I am mean enough to squander on idle 
luxuries one franc that I should save for the debt due to you, 
chide me as a father would chide a graceless son." 

Moved as Alain was, Duplessis was moved yet more deeply. 

What father would not be proud of such a son ? Ah, if I had 
such a one!" he said softly. Then, quickly recovering his 
wonted composure, he added, with the sardonic smile which 
often chilled his friends and alarmed his foes, " Monsieur 
Louvier is about to pass that which I ventured to promise him, 
a ' mauvais quart (fheure! Lend me that commandement tendant 
a saisie. I must be off to my avout with instructions. If you 
have no better engagement, pray dine with me to-day and 
accompany Valerie and myself to the opera." 

I need not say that Alain accepted the invitation. How 
happy Valerie was that evening ! 



.it 



\ 



THE PARISIANS. 121 



CHAPTER IX. 

The next day Duplessis was surprised by a visit from M. 
Louvier . that magnate of millionaires had never before set foot 
in the house of his younger and less famous rival. 

The burly man entered the room with a face much flushed, 
and with more than his usual mixture of jovial brusquerie and 
opulent swagger. 

" Startled to see me, I dare say," began Louvier, as soon as 
the door was closed. "I have this morning received a com- 
munication from your agent containing a cheque for the interest 
due to me from M. Rochebriant, and a formal notice of your 
intention to pay off the principal on behalf of that popinjay 
prodigal. Though we two have not hitherto been the best 
friends in the world, I thought it fair to a man in your station 
to come to you direct and say, ' Cher confrhe, what swindler 
has bubbled you ? you don't know the real condition of this 
Breton property, or you would never so throw away your 
millions. The property is not worth the mortgage I have on 
it by 30,000 louis.' " 

"Then, M. Louvier, you will be 30,000 louis the richer if I 
take the mortgage off your hands. " 

" I can afford the loss . no offence . better than you can ; ajid 
I may have fancies which I don't mind paying for, but which 
cannot influence another. See, I have brought with me the 
exact schedule of all details respecting this property. You 
need not question their accuracy ; they have been arranged by 
the Marquis's own agents, M. Gandrin and M. Hubert. They 
contain, you will perceive, every possible item of revenue, down 
to an apple-tree. Now, look at that, and tell me if you are 
justified in lending such a sum on such a property/' 

M Thank you very much for an interest in my affairs that I 
scarcely ventured to expect M. Louvier to entertain ; but I see 
that I have a duplicate of this paper, furnished to me very 
honestly by M. Hubert himself. Besides, I, too, have fancies 



122 THE PARISIANS. 



which I don't mind paying for, and among them may be a fancy 
for the lands of Rochebriant" 

" Look you, Duplessis, when a man like me asks a favour, 
you may be sure that he has the power to repay it Let 
me have my whim here, and ask anything you like from 
me in return ! " 

u DhoU not to oblige you, but this has become not only 
a whim of mine, but a matter of honour; and honour, you 
know, my dear M. Louvier, is the first principle of sound 
finance. I have myself, after careful inspection of the Roche- 
briant property, volunteered to its owner to advance the money 
to pay off your hypothtque; and what would be said on the 
Bourse if Lucien Duplessis failed in an obligation ?" 

" I think I can guess what will one day be said of Lucien 
Duplessis if he make an irrevocable enemy of Paul Louvier. 
Corbleu / mon cher, a man of thrice your capital, who watched 
every speculation of yours with a hostile eye, might some beau 
iour make even you a bankrupt ! " 

"Forewarned, forearmed!" replied Duplessis, imperturbably, 

"Fas est ab hoste doceri, . I mean, 'It is right to be taught 

by an enemy ; ' and I never remember the day when you were 

otherwise, and yet I am not a bankrupt, though I receive 

you in a house which, thanks to you, is so modest in point of 
size ! " 

" Bah ! that was a mistake of mine, . and, ha ! ha ! you had 
your revenge there . that forest ! " 

" Well, as a peace offering, I will give you up the forest, and 
content my ambition as a landed proprietor with this bad 
speculation of Rochebriant ! " 

u Confound the forest, I don't care for it now ! I can sell 
my place for more than it has cost me to one of your imperial 
favourites. Build a palace in your forest. Let me have 
Rochebriant, and name your terms." 

" A thousand pardons ! but I have already had the honour to 
inform you, that I have contracted an obligation which does not 
allow me to listen to terms." 

As a serpent, that, after all crawlings and windings, rears itself 
on end, Louvier rose, crest erect . 



THE PARISIANS. 123 



" So then it is finished. I came here disposed to offer peace . 
you refuse, and declare war." 

" Not at all, I do not declare war ; I accept it if forced on me." 

* Is that your last word, M. Duplessis ? " 

" Monsieur Louvier, it is." 

" Bon jour /" 

And Louvier strode to the door ; here he paused . " Take 
a day to consider." 

" Not a moment." 

"Your servant, Monsieur, . your very humble servant." 
Louvier vanished. 

Duplessis leaned his large thoughtful forehead on his thin 
nervous hand. "This loan will pinch me," he muttered. "I 
must be very wary now with such a foe. Well, why should I 
care to be rich ? Valerie's dot, Valerie's happiness, are secured." 



CHAPTER X. 

Madame Savarin wrote a very kind and very apologetic 
letter to Isaura, but no answer was returned to it Madame 
Savarin did not venture to communicate to her husband the 
substance of a conversation which had ended so painfully. He 
had, in theory, a delicacy of tact, which, if he did not always 
exhibit it in practice, made him a very severe critic of its 
deficiency in others. Therefore, unconscious of the offence 
given, he made a point of calling at Isaura's apartments, and 
leaving word with her servant that " he was sure she would be 
pleased to hear M. Rameau was somewhat better, though still 
in danger." 

It was not till the third day after her interview with Madame 
Savarin that Isaura left her own room, . she did so to receive 
Mrs. Moriey. 

The fair American was shocked to see the change in Isaura's 



124 THE PARISIANS. 



countenance. She was very pale, and with that indescribable 
appearance of exhaustion which betrays continued want of sleep ; 
her soft eyes were dim, the play of her lips was gone, her light 
step weary and languid. 

" My poor darling ! " cried Mrs. Morley, embracing her, " you 
have indeed been ill ! What is the matter ? . who attends 
you ? " 

" I need no physician, it was but a passing cold . the air of 
Paris is very trying. Never mind me, dear . what is the last 
hews ? " 

Therewith Mrs. Morley ran glibly through the principal topics 
of the hour . the breach threatened between M. Ollivier and 
his former liberal partisans; the tone unexpectedly taken by 
M. de Girardin ; the speculations as to the result of the trial 
of the alleged conspirators against the Emperor's life, which 
was fixed to take place towards the end of that month of 
June, . all matters of no slight importance to the interests of 
an empire. Sunk deep into the recesses of her fauteuil, Isaura 
seemed to listen quietly, till when a pause came, she said in 
cold clear tones . 

" And Mr. Graham Vane . he has refused your invitation ? " 

" I am sorry to say he has . he is so engaged in London." 

" I knew he had refused," said Isaura, with a low bitter laugh. 

" How ? who told you ? " 

" My own good sense told me. One may have good sense, 
though one is a poor scribbler." 

"Don't talk in that way; it is beneath you to angle for 
compliments." 

" Compliments, ah ! And so Mr. Vane has refused to come 
to Paris ; never mind he will come next year. I shall not be 
in Paris then. Did Colonel Morley see Mr. Vane ? " 

" Oh yes ; two or three times." 

" He is well ? " 

" Quite well, I believe . at least Frank did not say to the 
contrary ; but, from what I hear, he is not the person I took 
him for. Many people told Frank that he is much changed 
since he came into his fortune . is grown very stingy, quite 
miserly indeed ; declines even a seat in Parliament because of 



THE PARISIANS. 125 



the expense. It is astonishing how money does spoil a 
man/' 

" He had come into his fortune when he was here. Money 
had not spoiled him then." 

Isaura paused, pressing her hands tightly together; then she 
suddenly rose to her feet, the colour on her cheek mantling and 
receding rapidly, and fixing on her startled visitor eyes no 
longer dim, but with something half fierce, half imploring in the 
passion of their gaze, said . "Your husband spoke of me to 
Mr. Vane : I know he did. What did Mr. Vane answer ? Do not 
evade my question. The truth ! the truth ! I only ask the truth ! " 

" Give me your hand ; sit here beside me, dearest child." 

* Child ! . no, I am a woman ! . weak as a woman, but strong 
as a woman too ! . The truth ! " 

Mrs. Morley had come prepared to carry out the resolution 
she had formed and " break " to Isaura " the truth," that which 
the girl now demanded. But then she had meant to break the 
truth in her own gentle, gradual way. Thus suddenly called 
upon, her courage failed her. She burst into tears. Isaura 
gazed at her dry-eyed. 

"Your tears answer me. Mr. Vane has heard that I have 
been insulted. A man like him does not stoop to love for a 
woman who has known an insult I do not blame him ; I 
honour him the more . he is right." 

u No . no . no ! . you insulted ! Who dared to insult you ? 
(Mrs. Morley had never heard the story about the Russian 
Prince.) Mr. Vane spoke to Frank, and writes of you to me 
as of one whom it is impossible not to admire, to respect ; but 
. I cannot say it . you will have the truth, . there, read and 
judge for yourself." And Mrs. Morley drew forth and thrust 
into Isaura's hands the letter she had concealed from her 
husband. The letter was not very long; it began with ex- 
pressions of warm gratitude to Mrs. Morley, not for her in- 
vitation only, but for the interest she had conceived in his 
happiness. It went on thus : . 

*' I join with my whole heart in all that you say, with such 
eloquent justice, of the mental and personal gifts so bounteously 
lavished by nature on the young lady whom you name. 



126 THE PARISIANS. 



" No one can feel more sensible than I of the charm of so 
exquisite a loveliness; no one can more sincerely join in the belief 
that the praise which greets the commencement of her career 
is but the whisper of the praise that will cheer its progress with 
louder and louder plaudits. 

" He only would be worthy of her hand, who, if not equal to 
herself in genius, would feel raised into partnership with it by 
sympathy with its objects and joy in its triumphs. For myself, 
the same pain with which I should have learned she had adopted 
the profession which she originally contemplated, saddened and 
stung me when, choosing a career that confers a renown yet 
more lasting than the stage, she no less left behind her the 
peaceful immunities of private life. Were I even free to consult 
only my own heart in the choice of the one sole partner of my 
destinies (which I cannot at present honestly say that I am, 
though I had expected to be so ere this, when I last saw you 
at Paris) ; could I even hope . which I have no right to do. that I 
could chain to myself any private portion of thoughts which 
now flow into the large channels by which poets enrich the 
blood of the world,. -still (I say it in self-reproach, it maybe 
the fault of my English rearing, it may rather be the fault of 
an egotism peculiar to myself) . still I doubt if I could render 
happy any woman whose world could not be narrowed to the 
Home that she adorned and blessed. 

"And yet not even the jealous tyranny of man's love could 
dare to say to natures like hers of whom we speak, ' Limit to 
the household glory of one the light which genius has placed in 
its firmament for the use and enjoyment of all/ " 

" I thank you so much," said Isaura, calmly ; " suspense makes 
a woman so weak . certainty so strong." Mechanically she 
smoothed and refolded the letter . mechanically, with slow, 
lingering hands . then she extended it to her friend, smiling. 

"Nay, will you not keep it yourself?" said Mrs. Morley. 
"The more you examine the narrow-minded prejudices, the 
English arrogant man's jealous dread of superiority . nay, of 
equality . in the woman he can only value as he does his 
house or his horse, because she is his exclusive property, the 
more you, will be rejoiced to find yourself free for a more worthy 



THE PARISIANS. 127 



choice. Keep the letter; read it till you feel for the writer 
forgiveness and disdain." 

Isaura took back the letter, and leaned her cheek on her 
hand, looking dreamily into space. It was some moments 
before she replied, and her words then had no reference to 
Mrs. Morley's consolatory exhortation. 

" He was so pleased when he learned that I renounced the 
career on which I had set my ambition. I thought he would 
have been so pleased when I sought in another career to raise 
myself nearer to his level . I see now how sadly I was mistaken. 
All that perplexed me before in him is explained. I did not 
guess how foolishly I had deceived myself till three days ago, 
. then I did guess it ; and it was that guess which tortured me 
so terribly that I could not keep my heart to myself when I 
saw you to-day ; in spite of all womanly pride it would force 
its way . to the truth. Hush ! I must tell you what was said to 
me by another friend of mine . a good friend, a wise and kind 
one. Yet I was so angry when she said it that I thought I 
could never see her more." 

" My sweet darling 1 who was this friend, and what did she say 
to you ? " 

" The friend was Madame Savarin." 

" No woman loves you more except myself . and she said ? " 

" That she would have suffered no daughter of hers to commit 
her name to the talk of the world as I have done . be exposed 
to the risk of insult as I have been . until she had the shelter 
and protection denied to me. And I have thus overleaped the 
bound that a prudent mother would prescribe to her child, 
have become one whose hand men do not seek, unless they 
themselves take the same roads to notoriety. Do you not 
think she was right ? " 

"Not as you so morbidly put it, silly girl, . certainly not 
right But I do wish that you had the shelter and protection 
which Madame Savarin meant to express; I do wish that 
you were happily married to one very different from Mr. 
Vane . one who would be more proud of your genius than 
of your beauty . one who would say, 'My name, safer far in 
its enduring nobility than those that depend on titles and 



128 THE PARISIANS. 



lands . which are held on the tenure of the popular breath 
. must be honoured by prosperity, for She has deigned to 
make it hers. No democratic revolution can disennoble tne." 

"Ay, ay, you believe that men will be found to think with 
complacency that they owe to a wife a name that they could 
not achieve for themselves. Possibly there are such men. 
Where? . among those that are already united by sympathies 
in the same callings, the same labours, the same hopes and fears 
with the women who have left behind them the privacies of 
home. Madame de Grantmesnil was wrong. Artists should 
wed with artists. True . true ! " 

Here she passed her hand over her forehead . it was a pretty 
way of hers when seeking to concentrate thought . and was 
silent a moment or so. 

" Did you ever feel," she then asked dreamily, " that there 
are moments in life when a dark curtain seems to fall over one's 
past that a day before was so clear, so blended with the present ? 
One cannot any longer look behind ; the gaze is attracted 
onward, and a track of fire flashes upon the future, . the 
future which yesterday was invisible. There is a line by some 
English poet . Mr. Vane once quoted it, not to me, but to M. 
Savarin, and in illustration of his argument, that the most 
complicated recesses of thought are best reached by the 
simplest forms of expression. I said to myself, ' I will study 
that truth if ever I take to literature as I have taken to song ; ' 
and . yes . it was that evening that the ambition fatal to woman 
fixed on me its relentless fangs . at Enghien . we were on the 
lake . the sun was setting." 

u But you do not tell me the line that so impressed you," said 
Mrs. Morley, with a woman's kindly tact 

" The line . which line ? Oh, I remember ; the line was 
this. 

" ' I see as from a tower the end of alL* 



And now . kiss me, dearest . never a word again to me about 
this conversation : never a word about Mr. Vane . the dark 
curtain has fallen on the past." 



THE PARISIANS. 129 



CHAPTER XL 

Men and women are much more like each other in certain 
large elements of character than is generally supposed, but 
it is that very resemblance which makes their differences the 
more incomprehensible to each other; just as in politics, 
theology, or that most disputatious of all things disputable, 
metaphysics, the nearer the reasoners approach each other 
in points that to an uncritical bystander seem the most 
important, the more sure they are to start off in opposite 
directions upon reaching the speck of a pin-prick. 

Now there are certain grand meeting-places between man 
and woman . the grandest of all is on the ground of love, 
and yet here also is the great field of quarrel. And here 
the teller of a tale such as mine ought, if he is sufficiently 
wise to be humble, to know that it is almost profanation if, 
as man, he presumes to enter the penetralia of a woman's 
innermost heart, and repeat, as a man would repeat, all the 
vibrations of sound which the heart of a woman sends forth 
undistinguishable even to her own ear. 

I know Isaura as intimately as if I had rocked her in her 
cradle, played with her in her childhood, educated and trained 
her in her youth ; and yet I can no more tell you faithfully 
what passed in her mind during the forty-eight hours that 
intervened between her conversation with that American lady 
and her reappearance in some commonplace drawing-room, 
than I can tell you what the Man in the Moon might feel 
if the sun that his world reflected were blotted out of creation. 

I can only say that when she reappeared in that common- 
place drawing-room world, there was a change in her face 
not very perceptible to the ordinary observer. If anything, 
to his eye she was handsomer . the eye was brighter . the 
complexion (always lustrous, though somewhat pale, the limpid 
paleness that suits so well with dark hair) was yet more 
lustrous, . it was flushed into delicate rose hues . hues that 
VOL. II. I 



i 3 o THE PARISIANS. 



still better suit with dark hair. What, then, was the change, 
and change not 4 for the better ? The lips, once so pensively 
sweet, had grown hard ; on the brow that had seemed to 
laugh when the lips did, there was no longer sympathy 
between brow and lip; there was scarcely seen a fine thread- 
like line that in a few years would be a furrow on the space 
between 'the eyes; the voice was not so tenderly soft; the 
step was haughtier. What all such change denoted it is for 
a woman to decide . I can only guess. In the meanwhile, 
Mademoiselle Cicogna had sent her servant daily to inquire 
after M. Rameau. That, I think, she would have done under 
any circumstances. Meanwhile, too, she had called on Madame 
Savarin . made it up with her . sealed the reconciliation by 
a cold kiss. That, too, under any circumstances, I think she 
would have done . under some circumstances the kiss might 
have been less cold. 

There was one thing unwonted in her habits. I mention it, 
though it is only a woman who can say if it means anything 
worth noticing. 

For six days she had left a letter from Madame de 
Grantmesnil unanswered. With Madame de Grantmesnil was 
connected the whole of her innermost life . from the day 
when the lonely desolate child had seen, beyond the dusty 
thoroughfares of life, gleams of the faery land in poetry and 
art . onward through her restless, dreamy, aspiring youth . 
onward . onward . till now, through all that constitutes the 
glorious reality that we call romance. 

Never before had she left for two days unanswered letters 
which were to her as Sibylline leaves to some unquiet neophyte 
yearning for solutions to enigmas suggested whether by the 
world without or by the soul within. For six days Madame 
de Grantmesnil's letter remained unanswered, unread, neglected, 
thrust out of sight ; just as when some imperious necessity 
compels us to grapple with a world that is, we cast aside the 
romance which, in our holiday hours, had beguiled us to a 
world with which we have interests and sympathies no more. 



THE PARISIANS. 131 



CHAPTER XII. 

GUSTAVE recovered, but slowly. The physician pronounced 
him out of all immediate danger, but said frankly to him, and 
somewhat more guardedly to his parents, " There is ample cause 
to beware." " Look you, my young friend," he added to Rameau, 
"mere brain-work seldom kills a man once accustomed to it 
like you ; but heart-work, and stomach-work, and nerve-work, 
added to brain-work, may soon consign to the coffin a frame 
ten times more robust than yours. Write as much as you will 
. that is your vocation ; but it is not your vocation to drink 
absinthe . to preside at orgies in the Maison DorSe. Regulate 
yourself, and not after the fashion of the fabulous Don Juan. 
Marry . live soberly and quietly . and you may survive the 
grandchildren of viveurs. Go on as you have done, and before 
the year is out you are in Pire la Chaise." 

Rameau listened languidly, but with a profound conviction 
that the physician thoroughly understood his case. 

Lying helpless on his bed he had no desire for orgies at 
the Maison Dorte ; with parched lips thirsty for innocent tisane 
of lime-blossoms, the thought of absinthe was as odious to him 
as the liquid fire of Phlegethon. If ever sinner became suddenly 
convinced that there was a good deal to be said in favour of 
a moral life, that sinner at the moment I speak of was Gustave 
Rameau. Certainly a moral life . ' Domus et placens uxor I were 
essential to the poet who, aspiring to immortal glory, was 
condemned to the ailments of a very perishable frame. 

"Ah," he murmured plaintively to himself, "that girl Isaura 
can have no true sympathy with genius ! It is no ordinary man 
that she will kill in me ! " 

And so murmuring he fell asleep. When he woke and found 
his head pillowed on his mother's breast, it was much as a 
sensitive, delicate man may wake after having drunk too much 
the night before. Repentant, mournful, maudlin, he began to 

I 2 



132 THE PARISIANS. 



weep, and in the course of his weeping he confided to his mother 
the secret of his heart 

Isaura had refused him . that refusal had made him desperate. 

"Ah! with Isaura how changed would be his habits! how 
pure ! how healthful I " His mother listened fondly, and did 
her best to comfort him and cheer his drooping spirits. 

She told him of Isaura's messages of inquiry duly twice 
a-day. Rameau, who knew more about women in general, and 
Isaura in particular, than his mother conjectured, shook his 
head mournfully* "She could not do less," he said. "Has 
no one offered to do more ? " . he thought of Julie when he 
asked that . Madame Rameau hesitated. 

These poor Parisians ! it is the mode to preach against them ; 
and before my book closes, I shall have to preach . no, not to 
preach, but to imply . plenty of faults to consider and amend. 
Meanwhile I try my best to take them, as the philosophy of 
life tells us to take other people, for what they are. 

I do not think the domestic relations of the Parisian bourgeoisie 
are as bad as they are said to be in French novels. Madame 
Rameau is not an uncommon type of her class. She had been 
when she first married singularly handsome. It was from her 
that Gustave inherited his beauty ; and her husband was a very 
ordinary type of the French shopkeeper . very plain, by no 
means intellectual, but gay, good-humoured, devotedly attached 
to his wife, and with implicit trust in her conjugal virtue. Never 
was trust better placed. There was not a happier nor a more 
faithful couple in the quartkr in which they resided. Madame 
Rameau hesitated when her boy, thinking of Julie, asked if no 
one had done more than send to inquire after him as Isaura 
had done. 

After that [hesitating pause she said, " Yes . a young lady 
calling herself Mademoiselle Julie Caumartin wished to instal 
herself here as your nurse. When I said, ' But I am his mother 
. he needs no other nurses/ she would have retreated, and 
looked ashamed . poor thing ! I don't blame her if she loved 
my son. But, my son, I say this, . if you love her, don't talk 
to me about that Mademoiselle Cicogna ; and if you love 
Mademoiselle Cicogna, why, then your father will take care 



THE PARISIANS. 133 



that the poor girl who loved you not knowing that you loved 
another is not left to the temptation of penury." 

Rameau's pale lips withered into a phantom-like sneer! 
Julie ! the 'resplendent Julie ! . true, only a ballet-dancer, but 
whose equipage in the Bois had once been the envy of 
duchesses . Julie! who had sacrificed fortune for his sake . 
who, freed from him, could have millionnaires again at her feet ! 
. Julie ! to be saved from penury, as a shopkeeper would save 
an erring nursemaid . Julie! the irrepressible Julie! who had 
written to him, the day before his illness, in a pen dipped, not 
in ink, but in blood from a vein she had opened in her arm : 
"Traitor! . I have not seen thee for three days. Dost thou 
dare to love another ? Jf so, I care not how thou attempt to 
conceal it . woe to her! Ingtat ! woe to thee! Love is not 
love, unless, when betrayed by Love, it appeals to death. 
Answer me quick . quick. Julie." 

Poor Gustave thought of that letter and groaned. Certainly 
his mother , was right . he ought to get rid of Julie ; but he did 
not clearly see how Julie was to be got rid of. He replied to 
Madame Rameau peevishly, " Don't trouble your head about 
Mademoiselle Caumartin ; she is in no want of money. Of 
course, if I could hope for Isaura . but, alas ! I dare not hope. 
Give me my tisane? 

When the doctor called next day, he looked grave, and, draw- 
ing Madame Rameau into the next room he said, " We are not 
getting on so well as I had hoped ; the fever is gone, but there 
is much to apprehend from the debility left behind. His spirits 
are sadly depressed." Then added the doctor, pleasantly, and 
with that wonderful insight into our complex humanity in which 
physicians excel poets, and in which Parisian physicians are not 
excelled by any physicians in the world, . * Can't you think of 
any bit of good news . that ' M. Thiers raves about your son's 
last poem' . that 'it is a question among the Academicians 
between him and Jules Janin ' . or that ' the beautiful Duchesse 

de has been placed in a lunatic asylum because she has 

gone mad for love of a certain young Red Republican whose 
name begins with R,' . can't you think of any bit of similar good 



13* THE PARISIANS. 



news ? If you can, it will be a tonic to the relaxed state of 
your dear boy's amour propre> compared to which all the drugs 
in the Pharmacopoeia are moonshine and water; and mean- 
while be sure to remove him to your own house, and out of the 
reach of his giddy young friends, as soon as you possibly can." 

When that great authority thus left his patient's case in the 
hands of the mother, she said . " The boy shall be saved." 



CHAPTER XIII. 

ISAURA was seated beside the Venosta, . to whom, of late, 
she seemed to cling with greater fondness than ever, . working 
at some piece of embroidery . a labour from which she had 
been estranged for years; but now she had taken writing, 
reading, music, into passionate disgust Isaura was thus seated, 
silently intent upon her work, and the Venosta in full talk, 
when the servant announced Madame Rameau. 

The name startled both ; the Venosta had never heard that 
the poet had a mother living, and immediately jumped to the 
conclusion that Madame Rameau must be a wife he had hitherto 
kept unrevealed. And when a woman, still very handsome, 
with a countenance grave and sad, entered the salon, the 
Venosta murmured, "The husband's perfidy reveals itself on 
a wife's face," and took out her handkerchief in preparation for 
sympathising tears. 

" Mademoiselle," said the visitor, halting, with eyes fixed on 
Isaura. " Pardon my intrusion . my son has the honour to be 
known to you. Every one who knows him must share in my 
sorrow . so young . so promising, and in such danger . my poor 
boy ! " Madame Rameau stopped abruptly. Her tears forced 
their way . she turned aside to conceal them. 

In her twofold condition of being . womanhood and genius . 
Isaura was too largely endowed with that quickness of sympathy 



THE PARISIANS. 135 



which distinguishes woman from man, and genius from talent, 
not to be wondrously susceptible to pity. 

Already she has wound her arm round the grieving mother . 
already drawn her to the seat from which she herself had risen 
. and bending over her had said some words . true, conven- 
tional enough in themselves, . but cooed forth in a voice the 
softest I ever expect to hear, save in dreams, on this side of the 
grave. 

Madame Rameau swept her hand over her eyes, glanced 
round the room, and noticing the Venosta in dressing-robe 
and slippers, staring with those Italian eyes, in seeming so 
quietly innocent, in reality so searchingly shrewd, she whispered 
pleadingly, " May I speak to you a few minutes alone ? " This 
was not a request that Isaura could refuse, though she was 
embarrassed and troubled by the surmise of Madame Rameau's 
object in asking it; accordingly she led her visitor into the 
adjoining room, and making an apologetic sign to the Venosta, 
closed the door. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

When they were alone, Madame Rameau took Isaura's 
hand in both her own, and, gazing wistfully into her face 
said, " No wonder you are so loved . yours is the beauty that 
sinks into the hearts and rests there. I prize my boy more, 
now that I have seen you. But, oh Mademoiselle ! pardon 
me . do not withdraw your hand . pardon the mother who 
comes from the sick-bed of her only son and asks if you will 
assist to save him ! A word from you is life or death to him ! " 

u Nay, nay, do not speak thus, Madame ; your son knows 
how much I value, how sincerely I return, his friendship ; 
but . but," she paused a moment, and continued sadly and 
with tearful eyes . "I have no heart to give to him . to any 
one." 



i 3 6 THE PARISIANS. 



" I do not . I would not if I dared . ask what it would be 
violence to yourself to promise. I do not ask you to bid me 
return to my son and say, ' Hope and recover/ but let me take 
some healing message from your lips. If I understand your 
words rightly, I at least may say that you do not give to 
another the hopes you deny to him ? " 

"So far you understand me rightly, Madame. It has been 
said, that romance-writers give away so much of their hearts 
to heroes or heroines of their own creation, that they leave 
nothing worth the giving to human beings like themselves. 
Perhaps it is so ; yet, Madame," added Isaura, with a smile of 
exquisite sweetness in its melancholy, u I have heart enough left 
to feel for you." 

Madame Rameau was touched. " Ah, Mademoiselle, I do not 
believe in the saying you have quoted. But I must not abuse 
your goodness by pressing further upon you subjects from which 
you shrink. Only one word more : you know that my husband 
and I are but quiet tradesfolk, not in the society, nor aspiring 
to it, to which my son's talents have raised himself; yet dare 
I ask that you will not close here the acquaintance that I have 
obtruded on you? . dare I ask, that I may, now and then, 
call on you . that now and then I may see you at my own 
home ? Believe that I would not here ask anything which 
your own mother would disapprove if she overlooked disparities 
of station. Humble as our home is, slander never passed its 
threshold." 

"Ah, Madame, I and the Signora Venosta, whom in our 
Italian tongue I call mother, can but feel honoured and grateful 
whenever it pleases you to receive visits from us." 

" It would be a base return for such gracious compliance with 
my request if I concealed from you the reason why I pray 
Heaven to bless you for that answer. The physician says that 
it may be long before my son is sufficiently convalescent to 
dispense with a mother's care, and resume his former life and 
occupation in the great world. It is everything for us if we can 
coax him into coming under our own rooftree. This is difficult 
to do. It is natural for a young man launched into the world 
to like his own chez luu Then what will happen to Gustave ? 



THE PARISIANS. 137 



He, lonely and heart-stricken, will ask friends, young as himself, 
but far stronger, to come and cheer him ; or he will seek to 
distract his thoughts by the overwork of his brain ; in either 
case he is doomed. But I have stronger motives yet to fix him 
a while at our hearth. This is just the moment, once lost never 
to be regained, when soothing companionship, gentle reproach- 
less advice, can fix him lastingly in the habits and modes of life 
which will banish all fears of his future from the hearts of his 
parents. You at least honour him with friendship, with kindly 
interest . you at least would desire to wean him from all that a 
friend may disapprove or lament . a creature whom Providence 
meant to be good, and perhaps great. If I say to him, 'It 
will be long before you can go out and see your friends, but 
at my house your friends shall come and see you . among 
them Signora Venosta and Mademoiselle Cicogna will now 
and then drop in' . my victory is gained, and my son is 
saved" 

" Madame,"said Isaura, half sobbing,  what a blessing to have 
a mother like you ! Love so noble ennobles those who hear its 
voice. Tell your son how ardently I wish him to be well, and 
to fulfil more than the promise of his genius ; tell him also this 
. how I envy him his mother. " 



CHAPTER XV. 

It needs no length of words, to inform thee, my intelligent 
reader, be thou man or woman . but more especially woman . of 
the consequences following each other, as wave follows wave 
in a tide, that resulted from the interview with which my last 
chapter closed. Gustave is removed to his parents' house ; he 
remains for weeks confined within doors, or, on sunny days, 
takes an hour or so in his own carriage, drawn by the horse 
bought from Rochebriant, into by-roads remote from the 



138 THE PARISIANS. 



fashionable world ; Isaura visits his mother, liking, respecting, 
influenced by her more and more ; in those visits she sits 
beside the sofa on which Rameau reclines. Gradually, gently 
. more and more by his mother's lips . is impressed on her 
the belief that it is in her power to save a human life, and 
to animate its career towards those goals which are never 
based wholly upon earth in the earnest eyes of genius, or 
perhaps in the yet more upward vision of pure-souled believing 
woman. 

And Gustave himself, as he passes through the slow stages 
of convalescence, seems so gratefully to ascribe to her every 
step in his progress . seems so gently softened in character 
. seems so refined from the old affectations, so ennobled 
above the old cynicism . and, above all, so needing her 
presence, so sunless without it, that . well, need I finish 
the sentence ?. the reader will complete what I leave unsaid. 

Enough, that one day Isaura returned home from a visit 
at Madame Rameau's with the knowledge that her hand was 
pledged . her future life disposed of; and that, escaping from 
the Venosta, whom she so fondly, and in her hunger for a 
mother's love, called Madre, the girl shut herself up in her 
own room with locked doors. 

Ah, poor child ! ah, sweet-voiced Isaura I whose delicate 
image I feel myself too rude and too hard to transfer to this 
page in the purity of its outlines, and the blended softnesses 
of its hues . thou who, when saying things serious in the words 
men use, saidst them with a seriousness so charming, and with 
looks so feminine . thou, of whom no man I ever knew was 
quite worthy . ah, poor, simple, miserable girl, as I see thee 
now in the solitude of that white-curtained virginal room ; 
hast thou, then, merged at last thy peculiar star into the 
cluster of all these commonplace girls whose lips have said 
"Ay," when their hearts said "No"?. thou, O brilliant 
Isaura ! thou, O poor motherless child ! 

She had sunk into her chair . her own favourite chair, . the 
covering of it had been embroidered by Madame de Grantmesnil, 
and bestowed on her as a birthday present last year . the year 
in which she had first learned what it is to love . the year in 



THE PARISIANS. 139 



which she had first learned what it is to strive for fame. And 
somehow uniting, as many young people do, love and fame in 
dreams of the future, that silken seat had been to her as the 
Tripod of Delphi was to the Pythian : she had taken to it, as 
it were intuitively, in all those hours, whether of joy or sorrow, 
when youth seeks to prophesy, and does but dream. 

There she sat now, in a sort of stupor . a sort of dreary 
bewilderment . the illusion of the Pythian gone . desire of 
dream and of prophecy alike extinct . pressing her hands 
together, and muttering to herself, " What has happened ? . 
what have I done ? " 

Three hours later you would not have recognised the same 
face that you see now. For then the bravery, the honour, the 
loyalty of the girl's nature had asserted their command. Her 
promise had been given to one man . it could not be recalled. 
Thought itself of any other man must be banished. On her 
hearth lay ashes and tinder . the last remains of every treasured 
note from Graham Vane; of the hoarded newspaper extracts 
that contained his name ; of the dry treatise he had published, 
and which had made the lovely romance-writer first desire " to 
know something about politics." Ay, if the treatise had been 
upon fox-hunting, she would have desired " to know something 
about " that ! Above all, yet distinguishable from the rest . as 
the sparks still upon stem and leaf here and there faintly glowed 
and twinkled . the withered flowers which recorded that happy 
hour in the arbour, and the walks of the forsaken garden . the 
hour in which she had so blissfully pledged herself to renounce 
that career in art wherein fame would have been secured, but 
which would not have united Fame with Love . in dreams 
evermore over now. 



BOOK X. 



CHAPTER I. 

Graham Vane had heard nothing for months from M. 
Renard, when one morning he received the letter I translate : . 

" Monsieur, . I am happy to inform you that I have at last 
obtained one piece of information which may lead to a more 
important discovery. When we parted after our fruitless 
research in Vienna, we had both concurred in the persuasion, 
that for some reason known only to the two ladies them- 
selves, Madame Marigny and Madame Duval had exchanged 
names . that it was Madame Marigny who had deceased in 
the name of Madame Duval, and Madame Duval who had 
survived in that of Marigny. 

u It was clear to me that the Beau Monsieur who had visited 
the false Duval must have been cognisant of this exchange of 
name, and that if his name and whereabouts could be ascer- 
tained, he, in all probability, would know what had become of 
the lady who is the object of our research ; and after the lapse 
of so many years he would probably have very slight motive 
to preserve the concealment of facts which might, no doubt, 
have been convenient at the time. The lover of the soi-disant 
Mademoiselle Duval was by such accounts as we could gain 
a man of some rank . very possibly a married man ; and the 
liaison, in short, was one of those which, while they last 
necessitate precautions and secrecy. 



THE PARISIANS. 141 



"Therefore, dismissing all attempts at further trace of the 
missing lady, I resolved to return to Vienna as soon as the 
business that recalled me to Paris was concluded, and devote 
myself exclusively to the search after the amorous and 
mysterious Monsieur. 

" I did not state this determination to you, because, possibly, 
I might be in error . or, if not in error, at least too sanguine 
in my expectations . and it is best to avoid disappointing an 
honourable client 

"One thing was clear, that, at the time of the soi-disant 
Duval's decease, the beau Monsieur was at Vienna. 

" It appeared also tolerably clear that when the lady friend 
of the deceased quitted Munich so privately, it was to Vienna 
she repaired, and from Vienna comes the letter demanding the 
certificates of Madame Duval's death. Pardon me, if I remind 
you of all these circumstances no doubt fresh in your recollection. 
I repeat them in order to justify the conclusions to which they 
led me. 

" I could not, however, get permission to absent myself from 
Paris for the time I might require till the end of last April. I 
had meanwhile sought all private means of ascertaining what 
Frenchmen of rank and station were in that capital in the 
autumn of 1849. Among the list of the very few such 
Messieurs I fixed upon one as the most likely to be the 
mysterious Achille . Achille was, indeed, his nom de baptime. 

" A man of intrigue . d bonties fortunes . of lavish expenditure 
withal ; very tenacious of his dignity, and avoiding any petty 
scandals by which it might be lowered ; just the man who, in 
some passing affair of gallantry with a lady of doubtful repute, 
would never have signed his titular designation to a letter, and 
would have kept himself as much incognito as he could. But 
this man was dead . had been dead some years. He had not 
died at Vienna . never visited that capital for some years before 
his death. He was then, and had long been, the ami de la 
maisoti of one of those grandes dames of whose intimacy grands 
seigneurs are not ashamed. They parade there the bonnes 
fortunes they conceal elsewhere. Monsieur and the grande dame 
were at Baden when the former died. Now, Monsieur, a Don 



i 4 2 THE PARISIANS. 



Juan of that stamp is pretty sure always to have a confidential 
Leporello. If I could find Leporello alive I might learn the 
secrets not to be extracted from a Don Juan defunct. I ascer- 
tained, in truth, both at Vienna, to which I first repaired in 
order to verify the renseignetnents I had obtained at Paris, 
and at Baden, to which I then bent my way, that this 
brilliant noble had a favourite valet who had lived with him 
from his youth . an Italian, who had contrived in the course 
of his service to lay by savings enough to set up a hotel 
somewhere in Italy, supposed to be Pisa. To Pisa I repaired, 
but the man had left some years ; his hotel had not prospered 
. he had left in debt No one could say what had become 
of him. At last, after a long and tedious research, I found 
him installed as manager of a small hotel at Genoa . a pleasant 
fellow enough ; and after friendly intercourse with him (of course 
I lodged at his hotel), I easily led him to talk of his earlier life 
and adventures, and especially of his former master, of whose 
splendid career in the army of 'La Belle DSesse 9 he was not 
a little. proud. It was not very easy to get him to the particular 
subject in question. In fact, the affair with the poor false 
Duval had been so brief and undistinguished an episode in 
his master's life, that it was not without a strain of memory 
that he reached it. 

u By little and little, however, in the course of two or three 
evenings, and by the aid of many flasks of Orviette or bottles 
of Lacrima (wines, Monsieur, that I do not commend to any 
one who desires to keep his stomach sound and his secrets safe), 
I gathered'these particulars. 

" Our Don Juan, since the loss of a wife in the first year of 
marriage, had rarely visited Paris where he had a domicile . his 
ancestral hotel there he had sold. 

" But happening to visit that capital of Europe a few months 
before we come to our dates at Aix-la-Chapelle, he made 
acquaintance with Madame Marigny, a natural daughter of 
high-placed parents, by whom, of course, she had never been 
acknowledged, but who had contrived that she should receive 
a good education at a convent ; and on leaving it also contrived 
that an old soldier of fortune . which means an officer without 



THE PARISIANS. 143 



fortune . who had served in Algiers with some distinction, should 
offer her his hand, and add the modest dot they assigned her to 
his yet more modest income. They contrived also that she 
should understand the offer must be accepted. Thus Made- 
moiselle ' Quelque Chose 9 became Madame Marigny, and she, 
on her part, contrived that a year or so later she should be 
left a widow. After a marriage, of course the parents washed 
their hands of her . they had done their duty. At the time 
Don Juan made this lady's acquaintance nothing could be said 
against her character; but the milliners and butchers had 
begun to imply that they would rather have her money than 
trust to her character. Don Juan fell in love with her, satisfied 
the immediate claims of milliner and butcher, and when they 
quitted Paris it was agreed that they should meet later at Aix- 
la-Chapelle. But when he resorted to that sultry, and, to my 
mind, unalluring spa, he was surprised by a line from her saying 
that she had changed her name of Marigny for that of Duval. 

u * I recollect/ said Leporello, ' that two days afterwards my 
master said to me, " Caution and secrecy. Don't mention my 
name at the house to which I may send you with any note for 
Madame Duval. I don't announce my name when I call. La 
petite Marigny has exchanged her name for that of Louise 
Duval ; and I find that there is a Louise Duval here, her 
friend, who is niece to a relation of my own, and a terrible 
relation to quarrel with . a dead shot and unrivalled swords- 
man . Victor de Mauteon." My master was brave enough, 
but he enjoyed life, and he did not think la petite Marigny 
worth being killed for. ' 

u Leporello remembered very little of what followed. All he 
did remember is that Don Juan, when at Vienna, said to him 
one morning, looking less gay than usual, ' It is finished with 
la petite Marigny . she is no more.' Then he ordered his bath, 
wrote a note, and said with tears in his eyes, 'Take this to 
Mademoiselle Celeste ; not to be compared to la petite Marigny ; 
but la petite Celeste is still alive.' Ah, Monsieur! if only 
any man in France could be as proud of his ruler as that 
Italian was of my countrymen! Alas! we Frenchmen are 
all made to command . or at least we think ourselves so . and 



i 4 4 THE PARISIANS. 



we are insulted by one who says to us, ' Serve and obey.' Now- 
adays, in France, we find all Don Juans and no Leporellos. 

"After strenuous exertions upon my part to recall to 
Leporello's mind the important question whether he had ever 
seen the true Duval, passing under the name of Marigny . - 
whether she had not presented herself to his master at Vienna 
or elsewhere . he rubbed his forehead, and drew from it these 
reminiscences. 

* ' On the day that his Excellency/ . Leporello generally so 
styled his master . ' Excellency/ as you are aware, is the title 
an Italian would give to Satan if taking his wages, . ' told me 
that la petite Marigny was no more, he had received previously 
a lady veiled and mantled, whom I did not recognise as any 
one I had seen before, but I noticed her way of carrying 
herself . haughtily . her head thrown back ; and I thought to 
myself, that lady is one of his grandes dames. She did 
call again two or three times, never announcing her name ; 
then she did not reappear. She might be Madame Duval 
. I can't say.' 

" ' But did you never hear his Excellency speak of the real 
Duval after that time ? ' 

" ' No. 0/i mi ricorda . I don't remember/ 

" ' Nor of some living Madame Marigny, though the real one 
was dead ? " 

*" Stop, I do recollect ; not that he ever named such a persoa 
to me, but that I have posted letters for him to a Madame 
Marigny . oh, yes ! even years after the said petite Marigny 
was dead ; and once I did venture to say, " Pardon me, Eccel- 
lenza, but may I ask if that poor lady is really dead, since I 
have to prepay this letter to her ? " ' 

" c " Oh," said he, u Madame Marigny ! Of course the one you 
know is dead, but there are others of the same name ; this lady 
is of my family. Indeed, her house, though noble in itself, 
recognises the representative of mine as its head, and I am too 
bon prince not to acknowledge and serve any one who branches 
out of my own tree." ' 

" A day after this last conversation on the subject, Leporello 
said to me: 'My friend, you certainly have some interest in 



THE PARISIANS. 145 



ascertaining what became of the lady who took the name 
of Marigny/ (I state this frankly, Monsieur, to show how 
difficult even for one so prudent as I am to beat about a 
bush long but what you let people know the sort of bird 
you are in search of.) 

"'Well/ said I, 'she does interest me. I knew something 
of that Victor de Mauteon, whom his Excellency did not wish 
to quarrel with ; and it would be a kindly act to her relation 
if one could learn what became of Louise Duval. " 

" ' I can put you on the way of learning all that his Excellency 
was likely to have known of her through correspondence. I 
have often heard him quote, with praise, a saying so clever that 
it might have been Italian . " Never write, never burn ; " that is, 
never commit yourself by a letter . keep all letters that could 
put others in your power. All the letters he received were 
carefully kept and labelled. I sent them to his son in four 
large trunks. His son, no doubt, has them still.' 

u Now, however, I have exhausted my budget. I arrived at 
Paris last night I strongly advise you to come hither at once, 
if you still desire to prosecute your search. 

" You, Monsieur, can do what I could not venture to do ; 
you can ask the son of Don Juan if, amid the correspondence 
of his father, which he i may have preserved, there be any 
signed Marigny or Duval . any, in short, which can throw 
light on this very obscure complication of circumstances. A 
^grand seigneur would naturally be more complaisant to a 
man of your station than he would be to an agent of police. 
Don Juan's son, inheriting his father's title, is Monsieur le 
Marquis de Rochebriant; and permit me to add, that at 
this moment, as the journals doubtless inform you, all Paris 
resounds with the rumour of the coming war ; and Monsieur 
de Rochebriant . who is, as I have ascertained, now in 
Paris . it may be difficult to find anywhere on earth a 
month or two hence. . I have the honour, with profound 
consideration, &c. &c, I. Renard." 

The day after the receipt of this letter Graham Vane was 
in Paris. 
VOL. il K 



I 4 6 THE PARISIANS. 



CHAPTER II. 

AMONG things indescribable is that which is called "Agitation " 
in Paris . " Agitation without riot or violence . showing itself by 
no disorderly act, no turbulent outburst Pejhaps the cafes are 
more crowded } passengers in the streets stop each other more 
often, and converse in small knots and groups; yet, on the 
whole, there is little externally to show how loudly the heart 
of Paris is beating. A traveller may be passing through quiet 
landscapes, unconscious that a great battle is going on some 
miles off, but if he will stop and put his ear to the ground he 
will recognise, by a certain indescribable vibration^ the voice of 
the cannon. 

But at Paris an acute observer need not stop and put his ear 
to the ground ; he feels within himself a vibration . a mysterious 
inward sympathy which communicates to the individual a con- 
scious thrill . when the passions of the multitude are stirred, no 
matter how silently. 

Tortoni's cafe was thronged when Duplessis and Frederic 
Lemercier entered it: it was in vain to order breakfast; no 
table was vacant either within the rooms or under the awnings 
without. 

But they could not retreat so quickly as they had entered. 
On catching sight of the financier several men rose and gathered 
round him, eagerly questioning : . 

" What do you think, Duplessis ? Will any insult to France 
put a drop of warm blood into the frigid veins of that miserable 
Ollivier?" 

" It is not yet clear that France has been insulted, Messieurs," 
replied Duplessis, phlegmatically. 

" Bah I Not insulted ! The very nomination of a Hohenzollern 
to the crown of Spain was an insult . what would you have 
more?" 

" I tell you what it is, Duplessis," said the Vicomte de Br6z, 
whose habitual light good temper seemed exchanged for insolent 



THE PARISIANS. 147 



swagger . " I tell you what it is, your friend the Emperor has no 
more courage than a chicken. He is grown old, and infirm, and 
lazy ; he knows that he can't even mount on horseback. But if, 
before this day week, he has not declared war on the Prussians, 
he will be lucky if he can get off as quietly as poor Louis 
Philippe did under shelter of his umbrella, and ticketed 
' Schmidt* Or could you not, M. Duplessis, send him back to 
London in a bill of exchange ? " 

"For a man of your literary repute, M. le Vicomte," said 
Duplessis, "you indulge in a strange confusion of metaphors. 
But, pardon me, I came here to breakfast, and I cannot remain 
to quarrel. Come, Lemercier, let us take our chance of a cutlet 
at the Trots Frtres" 

" Fox, Fox," cried Lemercier, whistling to a poodle that had 
followed him into the caff, and, frightened by the sudden move- 
ment and loud voices of the habitues, had taken refuge under 
the table. 

"Your dog is poltron," said De Br6z6; "call him Nap." 

At this stroke of humour there was a general laugh, in the 
midst of which Duplessis escaped, and Frederic, having discovered 
and caught his dog, followed with that animal tenderly clasped 
in his arms. "I would not lose Fox for a great deal," said 
Lemercier with effusion; "a pledge of love and fidelity from 
an English lady the most distinguished : the lady left me . the 
dog remains." 

Duplessis smiled grimly: "What a thoroughbred Parisian 
you are, my dear Frederic! I believe if the trump of the last 
angel were sounding, the Parisians would be divided into two 
sets : one would be singing the Marseillaise, and parading the 
red flag; the other would be shrugging their shoulders and 
saying, ' Bah ! as if le Bon Dieu would have the bad taste to 
injure Paris . the Seat of the Graces, the School of the Arts, 
the Fountain of Reason, the Eye of the World ; ' and so be 
found by the destroying angel caressing poodles and making 
bons mots about lesfenwtes" 

" And quite right, too," said Lemercier, complacently ; " what 
other people in the world could retain lightness of heart under 
circumstances so unpleasant ? But why do you take things so 

K 2 



i 4 8 THE PARISIANS. 



solemnly? Of course there will be war . idle. now to talk of 
explanations and excuses. When a Frenchman says, ' I am 
insulted/ he is not going to be told that he is not insulted 
He means fighting, and not apologising. But what if there 
be war? Our brave soldiers beat the Prussians . take the 
Rhine . return to Paris covered with laurels ; a new Boulevard 
de Berlin eclipses the Boulevard Sebastopol. By the way, 
Duplessis, a Boulevard de Berlin will be a good speculation . 
better than the Rue de Louvier. Ah ! is not that my English 
friend, Grarm Varn?" here, quitting the arm of Duplessis, 
Lemercier stopped a gentleman who was about to pass him 
unnoticing. u Bon jour \ mon ami! how long have you been 
at Paris ? * 

"I only arrived last evening," answered Graham, "and my 
stay will be so short that it is a piece of good luck, my dear 
Lemercier, to meet with you, and exchange a cordial shake of 
the hand." 

" We are just going to breakfast at the Trois Frires . Duplessis 
and I . pray join us." 

"With great pleasure . ah, M. Duplessis, I shall be glad to 
hear from you that the Emperor will be firm enough to check 
the advances of that martial fever which, to judge by the 
persons I meet, seems to threaten delirium." 

Duplessis looked very keenly at Graham's face, as he replied 
slowly : " The English, at least, ought to know that when the 
Emperor by his last reforms resigned his personal authority for 
constitutional monarchy, it ceased to be a question whether he 
could or could not be firm in matters that belonged to the 
Cabinet and the Chambers. I presume that if Monsieur 
Gladstone advised Queen Victoria to declare war upon the 
Emperor of Russia, backed by a vast majority in Parliament, 
you would think me very ignorant of constitutional monarchy 
and Parliamentary government if I said, "I hope Queen 
Victoria will resist that martial fever.'" 

" You rebuke me very fairly, M. Duplessis, if you can show 
me that the two cases are analogous ; but we do not understand 
in England that, despite his last reforms, the Emperor has so 
abnegated his individual ascendency, that his will, clearly and 



THE PARISIANS. 149 



resolutely expressed, would not prevail in his Council and 
silence opposition in the Chambers. Is it so? I ask for 
information." 

The three men were walking on towards the Palais Royal 
side by side while this conversation proceeded. 

"That all depends," replied Duplessis, "upon what may be 
the increase of popular excitement at Paris. If it slackens, the 
Emperor, no doubt, could turn to wise account that favourable 
pause in the fever. But if it continues to swell, and Paris cries, 
1 War/ in a voice as loud as it cried to Louis Philippe 'Revolution,' 
do you think that the Emperor could impose on his ministers the 
wisdom of peace ? His ministers would be too terrified by the 
clamour to undertake the responsibility of opposing it . they 
would resign. Where is the Emperor to find another Cabinet ? 
a peace Cabinet? What and who are the orators for peace? 
. what a handful! . who? Gambetta, Jules Favre, avowed 
Republicans, . would they even accept the post of ministers 
to Louis Napoleon? If they did, would not their first step 
be the abolition of the Empire ? Napoleon is therefore so far 
a constitutional monarch in the same sense as Queen Victoria, 
that the popular will in the country (and in France in such 
matters Paris is the country) controls the Chambers, controls 
the Cabinet; and against the Cabinet the Emperor could not 
contend. I say nothing of the army . a power in France 
unknown to you in England, which would certainly fraternise 
with no peace party. If war is proclaimed, . let England 
blame it if she will . she can't lament it more than I should : 
but let England blame the nation ; let her blame, if she please, 
the form of the government, which rests upon popular suffrage ; 
but do not let her blame our sovereign more than the French 
would blame her own, if compelled by the conditions on which 
she holds her crown to sign a declaration of war, which vast 
majorities in a Parliament just elected, and a Council of 
Ministers whom she could not practically replace, enforced 
upon her will" 

"Your observations, M. Duplessis, impress me strongly, and 
add to the deep anxieties with which, in common with all my 
countrymen, I regard the menacing aspect of the present hour. 



1 



150 THE PARISIANS. 



Let us hope the best. Our Government, I know, is exerting 
itself to the utmost verge of its power, to remove every just 
ground of offence that the unfortunate nomination of a German 
Prince to the Spanish throne could not fail to have given to 
French statesmen." 

" I am glad you concede that such a nomination was a just 
ground of offence," said Lemercier, rather bitterly ; " for I have 
met Englishmen who asserted that France had no right to 
resent any choice of a sovereign that Spain might make." 

" Englishmen in general are not very reflective politicians in 
foreign affairs," said Graham; "but those who are must see 
that France could not, without alarm the most justifiable, con- 
template a cordon of hostile states being drawn around her on 
all sides, . Germany, in itself so formidable since the field of 
Sadowa, on the east ; a German prince in the south-west ; the 
not improbable alliance between Prussia and the Italian kingdom, 
already so alienated from the France to which it owed so much. 
If England 'would be uneasy were a great maritime power 
possessed of Antwerp, how much more uneasy might France justly 
be if Prussia could add the armies of Spain to those of Germany, 
and launch them both upon France. But that cause of alarm is 
over . the Hohenzollern is withdrawn. Let us hope for the 
best." 

The three men had now seated themselves at a table in the 
Trots Frires, and Lemercier volunteered the task of inspecting 
the menu and ordering the repast, still keeping guard on 
Fox. 

" Observe that man," said Duplessis, pointing towards a gentle- 
man who had just entered ; " the other day he was the popular 
hero . now, in the excitement of threatened war, he is permitted 
to order his bifteck uncongratulated, uncaressed ; such is fame 
at Paris ! here to-day and gone to-morrow." 

" How did the man become famous ? " 

" He is a painter, and refused a decoration . the only French 
painter who ever did." 

" And why refuse ? " 

" Because he is more stared at as the man who refused than 
he would have been as the man who accepted. If ever the Red 



V 
N 



THE PARISIANS. 151 



Republicans have their day, those among them most certain of 
human condemnation will be the coxcombs who have gone mad 
for the desire of human applause." 

" You are a profound philosopher, M. Duplessis." 

* I hope not . I have an especial contempt for philosophers. 
Pardon me a moment . I see a man to whom I would say a word 
or two." 

Duplessis crossed over to another table to speak to a middle- 
aged man of somewhat remarkable countenance, with the red 
ribbon in his buttonhole, in whom Graham recognised an ex- 
minister of the Emperor, differing from most of those at that 
day in his Cabinet, in the reputation of being loyal to his master 
and courageous against a mob. 

Left thus alone with Lemercier, Graham said . 

" Pray tell me where I can find your friend the Marquis de 
Rochebriant I called at his apartment this morning, and I 
was told that he had gone on some visit into the country, 
taking his valet, and the concierge could not give me his 
address. I thought myself so lucky on meeting with you, 
who are sure to know." 

" No, I do not ; it is some days since I saw Alain. But 
Duplessis will be sure to know." Here the financier rejoined 
them. 

" Mon cker, Grarm Vara wants to know for what Sabine shades 
Rochebriant has deserted the 'futnutn opes strepitutnque ' of the 
capital." 

" Ah 1 the Marquis is a friend of yours, Monsieur? " 

" I can scarcely boast that honour, but he is an acquaintance 
whom I should be very glad to see again." 

" At this moment he is at the Duchesse de Tarascon's country- 
house near Fontainebleau ; I had a hurried line from him two days 
ago stating that he was going there on her uigent invitation. 
But he may return to-morrow; at all events he dines with 
me on the 8th, and I shall be charmed if you will do me the 
honour to meet him at my house." 

" It is an invitation too agreeable to refuse, and I thank you 
very much for it " 

Nothing worth recording passed further in conversation 



152 THE PARISIANS. 



between Graham and the two Frenchmen. He left them 
smoking their cigars in the garden, and walked homeward by 
the Rue de Rivoli. As he was passing beside the Magasin du 
Louvre he stopped, and made for a lady crossing quickly out 
of the shop towards her carriage at the door. Glancing at him 
with a slight inclination of her head in acknowledgement of his 
courtesy, the lady recognised his features, . 

" Ah, Mr. Vane ! " she cried, almost joyfully . u you are then 
at Paris, though you have not come to see me." 

" I only arrived last night, dear Mrs. Morley," said Graham, 
rather embarrassed, "and only on some matters of business 
which unexpectedly summoned me. My stay will probably 
be very short." 

" In that case let me rob you of a few minutes . no, not rob 
you even of them ; I can take you wherever you want to go, and 
as my carriage moves more quickly than you do on foot, I shall 
save you the minutes instead of robbing you of them." 

" You are most kind, but I was only going to my hotel, which 
is close by." 

" Then you have no excuse for not taking a short drive with 
me in the Champs Elysdes . come." 

Thus bidden, Graham could not civilly disobey. He handed 
the fair American into her carriage, and seated himself by her 
side. 



CHAPTER IIL 

" Mr. Vane, I feel as if I had many apologies to make for 
the interest in your life which my letter to you so indiscreetly 
betrayed." 

" Oh, Mrs. Morley ! you cannot guess how deeply that interest 
touched me." 

" I should not have presumed so far," continued Mrs. Morley, 
unheeding the interruption, "if I had not been altogether in 



THE PARISIANS. 153 



error as to the nature of your sentiments in a certain quarter. 
In this you must blame my American rearing. With us there 
are many flirtations between boys and girls which come to 
nothing ; but when in my country a man like you meets with 
a woman like Mademoiselle Cicogna there cannot be flirtation. 
His attentions, his looks, his manner, reveal to the eyes of those 
who care enough for him to watch, one of two things . either he 
coldly admires and esteems, or he loves with his whole heart 
and soul a woman worthy to inspire such a love. Well, I did 
watch, and I was absurdly mistaken. I imagined that I saw 
love, and rejoiced for the sake of both of you to think so. I 
know that in all countries, our own as well as yours, love is 
so morbidly sensitive and jealous that it is always apt to invent 
imaginary foes to itself. Esteem and admiration never do that. 
I thought that some misunderstanding, easily removed by the 
intervention of a third person, might have impeded the impulse 
of two hearts towards each other, . and so I wrote. I had 
assumed that you loved . I am humbled to the last degree . you 
only admired and esteemed." 

" Your irony is very keen, Mrs. Morley, and to you it may 
seem very just." 

" Don't call me Mrs. Morley in that haughty tone of voice, . 
can't you talk to me as you would talk to a friend ? You only 
esteemed and admired . there is an end of it." 

" No, there is not an end of it," cried Graham, giving way to 
an impetuosity of passion, which rarely, indeed, before another, 
escaped his self-control ; " the end of it to me is a life out of 
which is ever stricken such love as I could feel for woman. To 
me true love can only come once. It came with my first look 
on that fatal face . it has never left me in thought by day, in 
dreams by night. The end of it to me is farewell to all such 
happiness as the one love of a life can promise . but . 



a 



"But what?" asked Mrs. Morley, softly, and very much 
moved by the passionate earnestness of Graham's voice and 
words. 

"But," he continued with a forced smile, "we Englishmen 
are trained to the resistance of absolute authority; we cannot 
submit all the elements that make up our being to the sway 



154 THE PARISIANS. 



of a single despot. Love is the painter of existence, it should 
not be its sculptor." 

" I do not understand the metaphor." 

u Love colours our life, it should not chisel its form." 

" My dear Mr. Vane, that is very cleverly said, but the human 
heart is too large and too restless to be quietly packed up in an 
aphorism. Do you mean to tell me that if you found you had 
destroyed Isaura Cicogna's happiness as well as resigned your 
own, that thought would not somewhat deform the very shape 
you would give to your life ? Is it colour alone that your life 
would lose ? " 

" Ah, Mrs. Morley, do not lower your friend into an ordinary 
girl in whom idleness exaggerates the strength of any fancy 
over which it dreamily broods. Isaura Cicogna has her 
occupations . her genius . her fame . her career. Honestly 
speaking, I think that in these she will find a happiness 
that no quiet hearth could bestow. I will say no more. I 
feel persuaded that were we two united I could not make 
her happy. With the irresistible impulse that urges the 
genius of the writer towards its vent in public sympathy 
and applause, she would chafe if I said, 'Be contented to 
be wholly mine.' And if I said it not, and felt I had no 
right to say it, and allowed the full scope to her natural 
ambition, what then ? She would chafe yet more to find that 
I had no fellowship in her aims and ends . that where I 
should feel pride, I felt humiliation. It would be so ; I cannot 
help it, 'tis my nature." 

u So be it then. When, next year perhaps, you visit Paris, 
you 'will be safe from my officious interference . Isaura will 
be the wife of another." 

Graham pressed his hand to his heart with the sudden move- 
ment of one who feels there [an agonising spasm . his cheek, 
his very lips were bloodless. 

" I told you," he said bitterly, " that your fears of my influence 
over the happiness of one so gifted, and so strong in such 
gifts, were groundless; you allow that I should be very soon 
forgotten?" 

" I allow no such thing . I wish I could But do you know so 



THE PARISIANS. 155 



little of a woman's heart (and in matters of heart, I never yet 
heard that genius had a talisman against emotion), . do you 
know so little of a woman's heart as not to know that the very 
moment in which she may accept a marriage the least fitted 
to render her happy, is that in which she has lost all hope 
of happiness in another ? " 

"Is it indeed so?" murmured Graham . "ay, I can conceive 
it" 

"And have you so little comprehension of the necessities 
which that fame, that career to which you allow she is impelled 
by the instincts of genius, impose on this girl, young, beautiful, 
fatherless, motherless? No matter how pure her life, can she 
guard it from the slander of envious tongues ? Will not all her 
truest friends . would not you, if you were her brother . press 
upon her by all the arguments that have most weight with 
the woman who asserts independence in her modes of life, 
and yet is wise enough to know that the world can only 
judge of virtue by its shadow . reputation, not to dispense 
with the protection which a husband can alone secure? And 
that is why I warn you, if it be yet time, that in resigning 
your own happiness you may destroy Isaura's. She will wed 
another, but she will not be happy. What a chimera or 
dread your egotism as man conjures up ! Oh 1 forsooth, the 
qualities that charm and delight a world are to unfit a woman 
to be helpmate to a man. Fie on you ! . fie I " 

Whatever answer Graham might have made to these im- 
passioned reproaches was here checked. 

Two men on horseback stopped the carriage. One was 
Enguerrand de Vandemar, the other was the Algerine Colonel 
whom we met at the supper given at the Maison Dorte by 
Frederic Lemercier. 

" Pardon, Madame Morley," said Enguerrand ; " but there are 
symptoms of a mob-epidemic a little further up : the fever began 
at Belleville, and is threatening the health of the Champs Elys6es. 
Don't be alarmed . it may be nothing, though it may be much. 
In Paris, one can never calculate an hour beforehand the exact 
progress of a politico-epidemic fever. At present I say, ' Bah ! 
a pack of ragged boys, gamins de Paris; 9 but my friend the 



156 THE PARISIANS. 



Colonel, twisting his moustache en souriant amkrhnenty says, ' It 
is the indignation of Paris at the apathy of the Government 
under insult to the honour of France;' and Heaven only 
knows how rapidly French gamins grow into giants when 
Colonels talk about the indignation of Paris and the honour 
of France!" 

" But what has happened ?" asked Mrs. Morley, turning to the 
Colonel. 

" Madame," replied the warrior, " it is rumoured that the King 
of Prussia has turned his back upon the ambassador of France ; 
and that the pikin who is for peace at any price . M. Ollivier . 
will say to-morrow in the Chamber, that France submits to a 
slap in the face." 

" Please, Monsieur de Vandemar, to tell my coachman to 
drive home," said Mrs. Morley. 

The carriage turned and went homeward. The Colonel lifted 
his hat, and rode back to see what the gamins were about 
Enguerrand, who had no interest in the gamins and who 
looked on the Colonel as a bore, rode by the side of the 
carriage. 

" Is there anything serious in this ? " asked Mrs. Morley. 

"At this moment, nothing. What it may be this hour to- 
morrow I cannot say. Ah ! Monsieur Vane, bonjour . I did not 
recognise you at first. Once, in a visit at the ch&teau of one of 
your distinguished countrymen, I saw two game-cocks turned 
out facing each other : they needed no pretext for quarrelling . 
neither do France and Prussia . no matter which game-cock 
gave the first offence, the two game-cocks must have it out. 
All that Ollivier can do, if he be wise, is to see that the 
French cock has his steel spurs as long as the Prussians. But 
this I do say, that if Ollivier attempts to put the French 
cock back into its bag, the Empire is gone in forty-eight 
hours. That to me is a trifle . I care nothing for the 
Empire; but that which is not a trifle is anarchy and chaos. 
Better war and the Empire than peace and Jules Favre. 
But let us seize the present hour, Mr. Vane; whatever 
happens to-morrow, shall we dine together to-day ? Name 
your restaurant? 



THE PARISIANS. 157 



" I am so grieved," answered Graham, rousing himself . " I am 
here only on business, and engaged all the evening." 

" What a wonderful thing is this life of ours ! " said Enguer- 
rand. "The destiny of France at this moment hangs on a 
thread . I, a Frenchman, say to an English friend, 'Let us 
dine . a cutlet to-day and a fig for to-morrow;' and my 
English friend, distinguished native of a country with which 
we have the closest alliance, tells me that in this crisis of 
France he has business to attend to ! My father is quite 
right ; he accepts the Voltairean philosophy, and cries, Vivent 
les indifferents I " 

u My dear M. de Vandemar," said Graham, " in every country 
you will find the same thing. All individuals massed together 
constitute public life. Each individual has a life of his own, 
the claims and the habits and the needs of which do not 
Suppress his sympathies with public life, but imperiously over- 
rule them. Mrs. Morley, permit me to pull the check-string 
. I get out here." 

"I like that man," said Enguerrand, as he continued to 
ride by the fair American, "in language and esprit he is so 
French." 

"I used to like him better than you can," answered Mrs. 
Morley, "but in prejudice and stupidity he is so English. 
As it seems you are disengaged come and partake, pot au 
feu, with Frank and me." 

"Charmed to do so," answered the cleverest and best bred 
of all Parisian beaux gargons, "but forgive me if I quit you soon. 
This poor France ! Entre nous, I am very uneasy about the 
Parisian fever. I must run away after dinner to clubs and 
cafe's to learn the last bulletins." 

u We have nothing like that French Legitimist in the States," 
said the fair American to herself, " unless we should ever be 
so silly as to make Legitimists of the ruined gentlemen of the 
South." 

Meanwhile Graham Vane went slowly back to his apartment 
No false excuse had he made to Enguerrand ; this evening was 
devoted to M. Renard, who told him little he had not known 
before ; but his private life overruled his public, and all that 



158 THE PARISIANS. 



night, he, professed politician, thought sleeplessly, not over 
the crisis to France, which might alter the conditions of 
Europe, but the talk on his private life of that intermeddling 
American woman. 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE next day, Wednesday, July 6th, 'commenced one of 
those eras in the world's history in which private life would 
vainly boast that it overrules Life Public How many private 
lives does such a terrible time influence, absorb, darken with 
sorrow, crush into graves ? 

It was the day when the Due de Gramont uttered the fatal 
speech which determined the die between peace and war. No 
one not at Paris on that day can conceive the popular enthu- 
siasm with which that speech was hailed . the greater because 
the warlike tone of it was not anticipated ; because there had 
been a rumour amidst circles the best informed that a speech 
of pacific moderation was to be the result of the Imperial 
Council. Rapturous indeed were the applauses with which 
the sentences that breathed haughty defiance were hailed by 
the Assembly. The ladies in the tribune rose with one accord, 
waving their handkerchiefs. Tall, stalwart, dark, with Roman 
features and lofty presence, the Minister of France seemed to 
say with Catiline in the fine tragedy: "Lo! where I stand, 
I am war ! " 

Paris had been hungering for some hero of the hour . the 
Due de Gramont became at once raised to that eminence. 

All the journals, save the very few which were friendly to 
peace, because hostile to the Emperor, resounded with praise, 
not only of the speech, but of the speaker. It is with a 
melancholy sense of amusement that one recalls now to mind 
those organs of public opinion . with what romantic fondness 
they dwelt on the personal graces of the man who had at 
last given voice to the chivalry of France . "The charming 



THE PARISIANS. 159 



M 
M 



gravity of his countenance . the mysterious expression of his 
eye!" 

As the crowd poured from the Chambers, Victor de Mauleon 
and Savarin, who had been among the listeners, encountered. 

" No chance for my friends the Orleanists now," said Savarin. 
u You who mock at all parties are, I suppose, at heart for the 
Republican . small chance, too, for that." 

"I do not agree with you. Violent impulses have quick 
reactions." 

"But what reaction could shake the Emperor after he 
returns a conqueror, bringing in his pocket the left bank of 
the Rhine ? " 

"None . when he does that Will he do it? Does he 
himself think he will do it ? I doubt " 

" Doubt the French army against the Prussian ? " 
Against the German people united . yes, very much." 
But war will disunite the German people. Bavaria will 
surely assist us . Hanover will rise against the spoliator . 
Austria at our first successes must shake off her present 
enforced neutrality ? " 

"You have not been in Germany, and I have. What 
yesterday was a Prussian army, to-morrow will be a German 
population ; far exceeding our own in numbers, in hardihood 
of body, in cultivated intellect, in military discipline. But 
talk of something else. How is my ex-editor . poor Gustave 
Rameau ? " 

"Still very weak, but on the mend. You may have him 
back in his office soon." 

"Impossible! even in his sick-bed his vanity was more 
vigorous than ever. He issued a war-song, which has gone 
the round of the war journals signed by his own name. He 
must have known very well that the name of such a Tyrteus 
cannot reappear as the editor of Le Sens Commun; that in 
launching his little firebrand he burned all vessels that could 
waft him back to the port he had quitted. But I dare say 
he has done well for his own interests; I doubt if Le Sens 
Commun can much longer hold its ground in the midst of 
the prevalent lunacy. " 



i6o THE PARISIANS. 



" What ! it has lost subscribers ? . gone off in sale already, 
since it declared for peace ? " 

" Of course it has ; and after the article which, if I live over 
to-night, will appear to-morrow, I should wonder if it sell enough 
to cover the cost of the print and paper. " 

" Martyr to principle ! I revere, but I do not envy thee." 

"Martyrdom is not my ambition. If Louis Napoleon be 
defeated, what then ? Perhaps he may be the martyr ; and 
the Favres and Gambettas may roast their own eggs on the 
gridiron they heat for his majesty." 

Here an English gentleman, who was the very able cor- 
respondent to a very eminent journal, and in that capacity 
had made acquaintance with De Mauleon, joined the two 
Frenchmen ; Savarin, however, after an exchange of salutations, 
went his way. 

" May I ask a frank answer to a somewhat rude question, 
M. le Vicomte?" said the Englishman. "Suppose that the 
Imperial Government had to-day given in their adhesion to 
the peace party, how long would it have been before their 
orators in the Chamber and their organs in the press would 
have said that France was governed by poltrons ? " 

" Probably for most of the twenty-four hours. But there 
are a few who are honest in their convictions ; of that few 
I am one." 

"And would have supported the Emperor and his Govern- 
ment ? " 

" No, Monsieur . I do not say that" 

" Then the Emperor would have turned many friends into 
enemies, and no enemies into friends." 

" Monsieur . you in England know that a party in opposition 
is not propitiated when the party in power steals its measures. 
Ha I . pardon me, who is that gentleman, evidently your country- 
man, whom I see yonder talking to the Secretary of your 
Embassy ? " 

" He, . Mr. Vane . Graham Vane. Do you not know him ? 
He has been much in Paris, attached to our Embassy formerly ; 
a clever man. much is expected from him." 

"Ah! I think I have seen him before, but am not quite 



THE PARISIANS. 161 



sure. Did you say Vane ? I once knew a Monsieur Vane, a 
distinguished parliamentary orator." 

u That gentleman is his son . would you like to be introduced 
to him ? * 

"Not to-day . I am in some hurry." Here Victor lifted 
his hat in parting salutation, and as he walked away cast 
at Graham another glance keen and scrutinising. " I have 
seen that man before," he muttered, " where ? . when ?. can 
it be only a family likeness to the father? No, the features 
are different ; the profile is . ha 1 . Mr. Lamb, Mr. Lamb . but 
why call himself by that name ? . why disguised ? . what can 
he have to do with poor Louise ? Bah . these are not questions 
I can think of now. This war . this war . can it. yet be pre- 
vented ? How it will prostrate all the plans my ambition so 
carefully schemed ! Oh ! . at least if I were but in the Chatnbre. 
Perhaps I yet may be before the war is ended . the Clavignys 
have great interest in their department " 



CHAPTER V. 

Graham had left a note with Rochebriant's concierge requesting 
an interview on the Marquis's return to Paris, and on the evening 
after the day just commemorated he received a line, saying that 
Alain had come back, and would be at home at nine o'clock. 
Graham found himself in the Breton's apartment punctually at 
the hour indicated 

Alain was in high spirits : he burst at once into enthusiastic 
exclamations on the virtual announcement of war. 

" Congratulate me, tnon cher ! " he cried . " the news was a 
joyous surprise to me. Only so recently as yesterday morning 
I was under the gloomy apprehension that the Imperial Cabinet 
would continue to back OUivier's craven declaration ' that France 
had not been affronted ! ' The Duchesse de Tarascon, at whose 

VOL. IL ^ 



162 THE PARISIANS. 

campagne I was a guest, is (as you doubtless know) very much 
in the confidence of the Tuileries. On the first signs of war, 
I wrote to her saying, that whatever the objections of my pride 
to enter the army as a private in time of peace, such objections 
ceased on the moment when all distinctions of France must 
vanish in the eyes of sons eager to defend her banners. The 
Duchesse in reply begged me to come to her campagne and talk 
over the matter. I went ; she then said that if war should 
break out it was the intention to organise the Mobiles and 
officer them with men of birth and education, irrespective of 
previous military service, and in that case I might count on 
my epaulets. But only two nights ago she received a letter 
. I know not of course from whom . evidently from some high 
authority . that induced her to think the moderation of the 
Council would avert the war, and leave the swords of the 
Mobiles in their sheaths. I suspect the decision of yesterday 
must have been a very sudden one. Ce cher Gramont! 
See what it is to have a well-born man in a sovereign's 
councils." 

"If war must come, I at least wish all renown to yourself. 
But " 

" Oh ! spare me your ' buts * ; the English are always too full 
of them where her own interests do not appeal to her. She 
had no ' buts ' for war in India or a march into Abyssinia." 

Alain spoke petulantly; at that moment the French were 
very much irritated by the monitory tone of the English journals. 
Graham prudently avoided the chance of rousing the wrath of 
a young hero yearning for his epaulets. 

" I am English enough," said he, with good-humoured courtesy, 
"to care for English interests; and England has no interest 
abroad dearer to her than the welfare and dignity of France. 
And now let me tell you why I presumed on an acquaintance 
less intimate than I could desire, to solicit this interview on 
a matter which concerns myself, and in which you could perhaps 
render me a considerable service." 

" If I can, count it rendei-ed ; move to this sofa . join me in 
a cigar, and let us talk at ease comme de vieux amis, whose 
fathers or brothers might have fought side by side in the 



THE PARISIANS. 163 



Crimea." Graham removed to the sofa beside Rochebriant, 
and after one or two whiffs laid aside the cigar and began : 

" Among the correspondence which Monsieur your father has 
left, are there any letters of no distant date signed Marigny 
. Madame Marigny? Pardon me, I should state my motive 
in putting this question. I am intrusted with a charge, the 
fulfilment of which may prove to the benefit of this lady or 
her child ; such fulfilment is a task imposed upon my honour. 
But all the researches to discover this lady which I have 
instituted stop at a certain date, with this information, . viz,, 
that she corresponded occasionally with the late Marquis de 
Rochebriant; that he habitually preserved the letters of his 
correspondents ; and that these letters were severally transmitted 
to you at his decease." 

Alain's face had taken a very grave expression while Graham 
spoke, and he now replied with a mixture of haughtiness and 
embarrassment : 

"The boxes containing the letters my father received and 
preserved were sent to me as you say . the larger portion of 
them were from ladies . sorted and labelled, so that in glancing 
at any letter in each packet I could judge of the general tenor 
of these in the same packet without the necessity of reading 
them. All packets of that kind, Monsieur Vane, I burned. I 
do not remember any letters signed ' Marigny.' " 

u I perfectly understand, my dear Marquis, that you would 
destroy all letters which your father himself would have 
destroyed if his last illness had been sufficiently prolonged. 
But I do not think the letters I mean would have come under 
that classification ; probably they were short, and on matters 
of business relating to some third person . some person, for 
instance, of the name of Louise, or of Duval ! " 

* Stop ! let me think. I have a vague remembrance of one 
or two letters which rather perplexed me, they were labelled, 

' Louise D . Mem. : to make further inquiries as to the fate 

of her uncle/ " 

" Marquis, these are the letters I seek. Thank heaven, you 
have not destroyed them ? " 

*No; there was no reason why I should destroy, though I 

L 2 



164 THE PARISIANS. 



really cannot state precisely any reason why I kept them. I 
have a very vague recollection of their existence." 

" I entreat you to allow me at least a glance at the hand- 
writing, and compare it with that of a letter I have about 
me; and if the several handwritings correspond, I would 
ask you to let me have the address, which, according to your 
father's memorandum, will be found in the letters you have 
preserved." 

" To compliance with such a request I not only cannot demur, 
but perhaps it may free me from some responsibility which I 
might have thought the letters devolved upon my executorship. 
I am sure they did not concern the honour of any woman of 
any family, for in that case I must have burned them." 

" Ah, Marquis, shake hands there ! In such concord between 
man and man, there is more entente cordiale between England 
and France than there was at Sebastopol. Now let me compare 
the handwritings." 

"The box that contained the letters is not here . I left it 
at Rochebriant ; I will telegraph to my aunt to send it ; the 
day after to-morrow it will no doubt arrive. Breakfast with 
me that day . say at one o'clock, and after breakfast the 
Box ! " 

" How can I thank you ? " 

" Thank me ! but you said your honour was concerned in your 
request . requests affecting honour between men cotnme il faut is 
a ceremony of course, like a bow between them. One bows, 
the other returns the bow . no thanks on either side. Now 
that we have done with that matter, let me say that I thought 
your wish for our interview originated in a very different cause." 

u What could that be ? " 

" Nay, do you not recollect that last talk between us, when 
with such loyalty you spoke to me about Mademoiselle Cicogna, 
and supposing that there might be rivalship between us, retracted 
all that you might have before said to warn me against fostering 
the sentiment with which she had inspired me ; even at the 
first slight glance of a face which cannot be lightly forgotten 
by those who have once seen it." 

"I recollect perfectly every word of that talk, Marquis," 



THE PARISIANS. 165 



answered Graham, calmly, but with his hand concealed within 
his vest and pressed tightly to his heart. The warning of Mrs. 
Morley flashed upon him. " Was this the man to seize the prize 
he had put aside . this man, younger than himself. handsomer 
than himself . higher in rank ? " 

" I recollect that talk, Marquis ! Well, what then ? " 
. In my self-conceit I supposed that you might have heard 
how much I admired Mademoiselle Cicogna. how, having not 
long since met her at the house of Duplessis (who by the way 
writes me word that I shall meet you chez lui to-morrow), I 
have since sought her society wherever there was a chance to 
find it You may have heard, at our club, or elsewhere, how 
I adore her genius . how, I say, that nothing so Breton . that 
is, so pure and so lofty . has appeared and won readers since 
the days of Chateaubriand . and you, knowing that les absens ont 
toujours tort, come to me and ask Monsieur de Rochebriant, 
Are we rivals ? I expected a challenge . you relieve my mind 
. you abandon the field to me ? " 

At the first I warned the reader how improved from his 
old mauvaise honte a year or so of Paris life would make 
our beau Marquis. How a year or two of London life with 
its horsey slang and its fast girls of the period would have 
vulgarised an English Rochebriant ! Graham gnawed his lips 
and replied quietly, " I do not challenge ! Am I to con- 
gratulate you?" 

u No, that brilliant victory is not for me. I thought that was 
made clear in the conversation I have referred to. But if you 
have done me the honour to be jealous I am exceedingly 
flattered. Speaking seriously, if I admired Mademoiselle 
Cicogna when you and I last met, the admiration is in* 
creased by the respect with which I regard a character so 
simply noble. How many women older than she would 
have been spoiled by the adulation that has followed her 
literary success ! . how few women so young, placed in a position 
so critical, having the courage to lead a life so independent, 
would have maintained the dignity of their Character free 
from a single indiscretion ! I speak not from my own know- 
ledge, but from the report of all, who would be pleased enough 



166 THE PARISIANS. 



to censure if they could find a cause. Good society is the 
paradise of mauvaises langues." 

Graham caught Alain's hand and 'pressed it, but made no 
answer. 

The young Marquis continued : 

"You will pardon me for speaking thus freely in the way 
that I would wish any friend to speak of the demoiselle who might 
become my wife. I owe you much, not only for the loyalty 
with which you addressed me in reference to this young lady, 
but for words affecting my own position in France, which sank 
deep into my mind . saved me from deeming myself ^.proscrit 
in my own land . filled me with a manly ambition, not stifled 
amidst the thick of many effeminate follies . and, in fact, led 
me to the career which is about to open before me, and in which 
my ancestors have left me no undistinguished examples. Let us 
speak, then, d cceur ouvert, as one friend to another. Has there been 
any misunderstanding between you and Mademoiselle Cicogna 
which has delayed your return to Paris ? If so, is it over now ?* 

u There has been no such misunderstanding." 

u Do you doubt whether the sentiments you expressed in 
regard to her when we met last year, are returned ? " 

" I have no right to conjecture her sentiments. You mistake 
altogether." 

" I do not believe that I am dunce enough to mistake your 
feelings towards Mademoiselle . they may be read in your 
face at this moment. Of course I do not presume to hazard 
a conjecture as to those of Mademoiselle towards yourself. But 
when I met her not long since at the house of Duplessis, with 
whose daughter she is intimate, I chanced to speak to her of 
you ; and if I may judge, by looks and manner, I chose no 
displeasing theme. You turn away . I offend you ? " 

u Offend ! . no, indeed ; but on this subject I am not prepared 
to converse. I came to Paris on matters of business much 
complicated and which ought to absorb my attention. I cannot 
longer trespass on your evening. The day after to-morrow, 
then, I will be with you at one o'clock." 

" Yes, I hope then to have the letters you wish to consult ; 
and, meanwhile, we meet to-morrow at the Hotel Duplessis." 



THE PARISIANS. 167 



CHAPTER VI. 

Graham had scarcely quitted Alain, and the young Marquis 
was about to saunter forth to his club, when Duplessis was 
announced. 

These two men had naturally seen much of each other since 
Duplessis had returned from Bretagne and delivered Alain from 
the gripe of Louvier. Scarcely a day had passed but what 
Alain had been summoned to enter into the financier's plans 
for the aggrandisement of the Rochebriant estates, and delicately 
made to feel that he had become a partner in speculations, 
which, thanks to the capital and the abilities Duplessis brought 
to bear, seemed likely to result in the ultimate freedom of 
his property from all burdens, and the restoration of his 
inheritance to a splendour correspondent with the dignity of 
his rank. 

On the plea that his mornings were chiefly devoted to pro- 
fessional business, Duplessis arranged that these consultations 
should take place in the evenings. From those consultations 
Valerie was not banished ; Duplessis took her into the council 
as a matter of course. " Valerie," said the financier to Alain, 
u though so young, has a very clear head for business, and she 
is so interested in all that interests myself, that even where 
I do not take her opinion, I at least feel my own made livelier 
and brighter by her sympathy." 

So the girl was in the habit of taking her work or her book 
into the cabinet de travail, and never obtruding a suggestion 
unasked, still, when appealed to, speaking with a modest good 
sense which justified her father's confidence and praise ; and 
apropos of her book, she had taken Chateaubriand into peculiar 
favour. Alain had respectfully presented to her beautifully 
bound copies of A tola and Le Gtnie du Christianisme ; it is 
astonishing, indeed, how he had already contrived to regulate 
her tastes in literature. The charms of those quiet family 
evenings had stolen into the young Breton's heart 



168 THE PARISIANS. 



He yearned for none of the gayer reunions in which he had 
before sought for a pleasure that his nature had not found; 
for, amidst the amusements of Paris Alain remained intensely 
Breton . viz., formed eminently for the simple joys of domestic 
life, associating the sacred hearthstone with the antique religion 
of his fathers ; gathering round it all the images of pure and 
noble affections which the romance of a poetic temperament had 
evoked from the solitude which had surrounded a melancholy 
boyhood . an uncontaminated youth. 

Duplessis entered abruptly, and with a countenance much 
disturbed from its wonted saturnine composure. 

" Marquis, what is this I have just heard from the Duchesse 
de Tarascon ? Can it be ? You ask military service in this 
ill-omened war ? . you ? " 

"My dear and best friend," said Alain, very much startled, 
"I should have thought that you, of all men in the world, 
would have most approved of my request . you, so devoted an 
Imperialist . you, indignant that the representative of one of 
these families, which the First Napoleon so eagerly and so vainly 
courted, should ask for the grade of sous-lieutenant in the 
armies of Napoleon the Third . you, who of all men know how 
ruined are the fortunes of a Rochebriant . you, feel surprised 
that he clings to the noblest heritage his ancestors have left to 
him . their sword ! I do not understand you." 

"Marquis," said Duplessis, seating himself, and regarding 
Alain with a look in which were blended the sort of admiration 
and the sort of contempt with which a practical man of the 
world, who, having himself gone through certain credulous 
follies, has learned to despise the follies, but retains a remin- 
iscence of sympathy with the fools they bewitch, . "Marquis, 
pardon me ; you talk finely, but you do not talk common sense. 
I should be extremely pleased if your Legitimist scruples had 
allowed you to solicit, or rather to accept, a civil appointment 
not unsuited to your rank, under the ablest sovereign, as a 
civilian, to whom France can look for rational liberty combined 
with established order. Such openings to a suitable career you 
have rejected ; but who on earth could expect you, never trained 
to military service, to draw a sword hitherto sacred to the 



THE PARISIANS. 169 



Bourbons, on behalf of a cause which the madness, I do not 
say of France but of Paris, has enforced on a sovereign against 
whom you would fight to-morrow if you had a chance of placing 
the descendant of Henry IV. on his throne." 

" I am not about to fight for any sovereign but for my 
country against the foreigner." 

"An excellent answer if the foreigner had invaded your 
country ; but it seems that your country is going to invade 
the foreigner . a very different thing. Chut ! all this discussion 
is most painful to me. I feel for the Emperor a personal 
loyalty, and for the hazards he is about to encounter a pro- 
phetic dread, as an ancestor of yours might have felt for 
Francis I. could he have foreseen Pavia. Let us talk of 
ourselves and the effect the war should have upon our 
individual action. You are aware of course, that, though 
M. Louvier has had notice of our intention to pay off his 
mortgage, that intention cannot be carried into effect for six 
months; if the money be not then forthcoming his hold on 
Rochebriant remains unshaken . the sum is large." 

u Alas ! yes." 

"The war must greatly disturb the money-market, affect 
many speculative adventures and operations when at the very 
moment credit may be most needed. It is absolutely necessary 
that I should be daily at my post on the Bourse, and hourly 
watch the ebb and flow of events. Under these circumstances 
I had counted, permit me to count still, on your presence in 
Bretagne. We have already begun negotiations on a somewhat 
extensive scale, whether as regards the improvement of forests 
and orchards, or the plans for building allotments, as soon as 
the lands are free for disposal . for all these the eye of a master 
is required. I entreat you, then, to take up your residence at 
Rochebriant" 

" My dear friend, this is but a kindly and delicate mode of 
relieving me from the dangers of war. I have, as you must be 
conscious, no practical knowledge of business. Hubert can be 
implicitly trusted, and will carry out your views with a zeal 
equal to mine, and with infinitely more ability." 

"Marquis, pray neither to Hercules nor to Hubert; if you 



i7o THE PARISIANS. 



wish to get your own cart out of the ruts, put your owu 
shoulder to the wheel." 

Alain coloured high, unaccustomed to be so bluntly addressed, 
but he replied with a kind of dignified meekness : 

" I shall ever remain grateful for what you have done, and 
wish to do for me. But, assuming that you suppose rightly, 
the estates of Rochebriant would, in your hands, become a 
profitable investment, and more than redeem the mortgage, 
and the sum you have paid Louvier on my account, let it 
pass to you irrespectively of me. I shall console myself in 
the knowledge that the old place will be restored, and those 
who honoured its old owners prosper in hands so strong, guided 
by a heart so generous." 

Duplessis was deeply affected by these simple words ; they 
seized him on the tenderest side of his character . for his 
heart was generous, and no one, except his lost wife and his 
loving child, had ever before discovered it to be so. Has it ever 
happened to you, reader, to be appreciated on the one point 
of the good or the great that is in you. on which secretly 
you value yourself most . but for which nobody, not admitted 
into your heart of hearts, has given you credit ? If that has 
happened to you, judge what Duplessis felt when the fittest 
representative of that divine chivalry which, if sometimes 
deficient in head, owes all that exalts it to riches of heart, 
spoke thus to the professional money-maker, whose qualities 
of head were so acknowledged that a compliment to them 
would be a hollow impertinence, and whose qualities of heart 
had never yet received a compliment ! 

Duplessis started from his seat and embraced Alain, mur- 
muring, " Listen to me, I love you . I never had a son . be 
mine . Rochebriant shall be my daughter's dot" 

Alain returned the embrace, and then recoiling, said : . 

" Father, your first desire must be honour for your son. You 
have guessed my secret . I have learned to love Valerie. Seeing 
her out in the world, she seemed like other girls, fair and com- 
monplace . seeing her . at your house, I have said to myself, 
'There is the one girl fairer than all others in my eyes, and 
the one individual to whom all other girls are commonplace.' " 



THE PARISIANS. 171 



" Is that true ?. is it ? " 

" True ! does a gentUhomme ever lie ? And out of that love 
for her has grown this immovable desire to be something 
worthy of her . something that may lift me from the vulgar 
platform of men who owe all to ancestors, nothing to them- 
selves. Do you suppose for one moment that I, saved from 
ruin and penury by Valerie's father, could be base enough to 
say to her, ' In return be Madame la Marquise de Rochebriant ? ' 
Do you suppose that I, whom you would love and respect as 
son, could come to you and say : ' I am oppressed by your 
favours . I am crippled with debts . give me your millions 
and we are quits.' No, Duplessis! You, so well descended 
yourself. so superior as man amongst men that you would 
have won name and position had you been born the son of 
el shoeblack, . you would eternally despise the noble who, in 
days when all that we Bretons deem holy in noblesse are 
subjected to ridicule and contempt, should so vilely forget 
the only motto which the scutcheons of all gentilhomtnes have 
in common, ' Noblesse oblige! War, with all its perils and all 
its grandeur, . war lifts on high the banners of France, . war, 
in which every ancestor of mine whom I care to recall ag- 
grandised the name that descends to me. Let me then do 
as those before me have done ; let me prove that I am worth 
something in myself, and then you and I are equals ; and I 
can say with no humbled crest, ' Your benefits are accepted : ' 
the man who has fought not ignobly for France may aspire 
to the hand of her daughter. Give me Valdrie; as to her 
dot, . be it so, Rochebriant, . it will pass to her children." 

u Alain ! Alain ! my friend ! my son ! . but if you fall." 

* Valerie will give you a nobler son." 

Duplessis moved away, sighing heavily ; but he said no more 
in deprecation of Alain's martial resolves. 

A Frenchman, however practical, however worldly, however 
philosophical he may be, who does not sympathise with the 
follies of honour . who does not concede indulgence to the 
hot blood of youth when he says, " My country is insulted 
and her banner is unfurled," may certainly be a man of ex- 
cellent common-sense ; but if such men had been in the 



\ 



172 THE PARISIANS. 



majority, Gaul would never have been France . Gaul would 
have been a province of Germany. 

And as Duplessis walked homeward . he the calmest and 
most farseeing of all authorities on the Bourse . the man who, 
excepting only De Mauteon most decidedly deemed the cause 
of the war a blunder, and most forebodingly anticipated its 
issues, caught the prevalent enthusiasm. Everywhere he was 
stopped by cordial hands, everywhere met by congratulating 
smiles. "How right you have been, Duplessis, when you 
have laughed at those who have said, 'The Emperor is ill, 
decrepit, done up/ " 

" Vive tEmpereurl at last we shall be face to face with those 
insolent Prussians!" 

Before he arrived at his home, passing along the Boulevards; 
greeted by all the groups enjoying the cool night air before the 
caf/s, Duplessis had caught the war epidemic 

Entering his hotel, he went at once to Valerie's chamber. 
" Sleep well to-night, child ; Alain has told me that he adores 
thee, and if he will go to the war, it is that he may lay his 
laurels at thy feet Bless thee, my child, thou couldst not have 
made a nobler choice/ 9 

Whether, after these words, Valdrie slept well or not 'tis not 
for me to say ; but if she did sleep, I venture to guess that her 
dreams were rose-coloured. 



CHAPTER VII. 

All the earlier part of that next day, Graham Vane remained 
in-doors. a lovely day at Paris that 8th of July, and with that 
summer day all hearts at Paris were in unison. Discontent was 
charmed into enthusiasm . Belleville and Montmartre forgot the 
visions of Communism and Socialism and other " isms " not to 
be realised except in some undiscovered Atlantis 1 



THE PARISIANS. 173 



The Emperor was the idol of the day . the names of Jules 
Favre and Gambetta were bywords of scorn. Even Armand 
Monnier, still out of work, beginning to feel the pinch of want, 
and fierce for any revolution that might turn topsy-turvy the 
conditions of labour, . even Armand Monnier was found among 
groups that were laying immortelles at the foot of the column 
in the Place Venddme, and heard to say to a fellow malcontent, 
with eyes uplifted to the statue of the First Napoleon, " Do you 
not feel at this moment that no Frenchman can be long angry 
with the Little Corporal ? He denied La Liberty but he gave 
La GloireV 

Heeding not the stir of the world without, Graham was 
compelling into one resolve the doubts and scruples which 
had so long warred against the heart which they ravaged, 
but could not wholly subdue. 

The conversations with Mrs. Morley and Rochebriant had 
placed in a light in which he had not before regarded it, the 
image of Isaura. 

He had reasoned from the starting-point of his love for her, 
and had sought to convince himself that against that love it 
was his duty to strive. 

But now a new question was addressed to his conscience as 
well as to his heart What though he had never formally 
declared to her his affection . never, in open words, wooed her 
as his own . never even hinted to her the hopes of a union 
which at one time he had fondly entertained, . still was it true 
that his love had been too transparent not to be detected by 
her, and not to have led her on to return it ? 

Certainly he had, as we know, divined that he was not 
indifferent to her : at Enghien, a year ago, that he had gained 
her esteem, and perhaps interested her fancy. 

We know also how he had tried to persuade himself that the 
artistic temperament, especially when developed in women, is 
too elastic to suffer the things of real life to have lasting in- 
fluence over happiness or sorrow, . that in the pursuits in which 
her thought and imagination found employ, in the excitement they 
sustained, and the fame to which they conduced, Isaura would 
be readily consoled for a momentary pang of disappointed 



174 THE PARISIANS. 



affection. And that a man so alien as himself, both by nature 
and by habit, from the artistic world, was the very last person 
who could maintain deep and permanent impression on her 
actual life or her ideal dreams. But what if, as he gathered 
from the words of the fair American . what if, in all these 
assumptions, he was wholly mistaken ? What if, in pre- 
viously revealing his own heart, he had decoyed hers . what 
if, by a desertion she had no right to anticipate, he had 
blighted her future ? What if this brilliant child of genius 
could love as warmly, as deeply, as enduringly as any simple 
village girl to whom there is no poetry except love ? If this 
were so . what became the first claim on his honour, his con- 
science, his duty ? 

The force which but a few days ago his reasonings had given 
to the arguments that forbade him to think of Isaura, became 
weaker and weaker, as now in an altered mood of reflection he 
re-summoned and re-weighed them. 

All those prejudices . which had seemed to him such rational 
common-sense truths, when translated from his own mind into 
the words of Lady Janet's letter, . was not Mrs. Morley right in 
denouncing t/iem as the crotchets of an insolent egotism ? Was 
it not rather to the favour than to the disparagement of Isaura, 
regarded even in the man's narrow-minded view of woman's 
dignity, that this orphan girl could, with character so un- 
scathed, pass through the trying ordeal of the public babble, 
the public gaze . command alike the esteem of a woman so 
pure as Mrs. Morley, the reverence of a man so chivalrously 
sensitive to honour as Alain de Rochebriant ? 

Musing thus, Graham's countenance at last brightened . a 
glorious joy entered into and possessed him. He felt as a man 
who had burst asunder the swathes and trammels which had 
kept him galled and miserable with the sense of captivity, 
and from which some wizard spell that took strength from his 
own superstition had forbidden to struggle. 

He was free ! . and that freedom was rapture ! . yes, his resolve 
was taken. 

The day was now far advanced. He should have just time 
before the dinner with Duplessis to drive to A , where he 



THE PARISIANS. 175 



still supposed Isaura resided. How, as his fiacre rolled along 
the well-remembered road . how completely he lived in that 
world of romance of which he denied himself to be a denizen. 

Arrived at the little villa, he found it occupied only by work- 
men . it was under repair. No one could tell him to what 
residence the ladies who occupied it the last year had removed. 

" I shall learn from Mrs. Morley," thought Graham, and at 
her house he called in going back, but Mrs. Morley was not at 
home ; he had only just time, after regaining his apartment, to 
change his dress for the dinner to which he was invited. As it 
was, he arrived late, and while apologising to his host for his 
want of punctuality, his tongue faltered. At the farther end of 
the room he saw a face, paler and thinner than when he had 
seen it last . a face across which a something of grief had gone. 

The servant announced that dinner was served 

u Mr. Vane," said Duplessis, " will you take into dinner 
Mademoiselle Cicogna ? " 



BOOK XI. 



CHAPTER I. 

AMONG the frets and checks to the course that "never did 
run smooth," there is one which is sufficiently frequent, for 
many a reader will remember the irritation it caused him. You 
have counted on a meeting with the beloved one unwitnessed 
by others, an interchange of confessions and vows which others 
may not hear. You have arranged almost the words in which 
your innermost heart is to be expressed ; pictured to yourself 
the very looks by which those words will have their sweetest 
reply. The scene you have thus imagined appears to you vivid 
and distinct, as if foreshown in a magic glass. And suddenly, 
after long absence, the meeting takes place in the midst of 
a common companionship : nothing that you wished to say can 
be said. The scene you pictured is painted out by the irony 
of Chance ; and groups and backgrounds of which you had never 
dreamed start forth from the disappointing canvas. Happy if 
that be all ! But sometimes, by a strange, subtle intuition, you 
feel that the person herself is changed ; and sympathetic with 
that change, a terrible chill comes over your own heart. 

Before Graham had taken his seat at the table beside Isaura, 
he felt that she was changed to him. He felt it by her very 
touch as their hands met at the first greeting, . by the tone of 
her voice in the few words that passed between them, . by the 
absence of all glow in the smile which had once lit up her face, 
as a burst of sunshine lights up a day in spring, and gives a 



THE PARISIANS. 177 



richer gladness of colour to all its blooms. Once seated side 
by side they remained for some moments silent Indeed it 
would have been rather difficult for anything less than the 
wonderful intelligence of lovers between whom no wall can 
prevent the stolen interchange of tokens, to have ventured 
private talk of their own amid the excited converse which 
seemed all eyes, all tongues, all ears, admitting no one present 
to abstract himself from the common emotion. Englishmen 
do not recognise the old classic law which limited the number 
of guests where banquets are meant to be pleasant, to that 
of the Nine Muses. They invite guests so numerous, and so 
shy of launching talk across the table, that you may talk tc 
the person next to you not less secure from listeners than 
you would be in talking with the stranger whom you met at 
a well in the Sahara. It is not so, except on state occasions, 
at Paris. Difficult there to retire into solitude with your next 
neighbour. The guests collected by Duplessis completed with 
himself the number of the Sacred Nine . the host, Valdrie, 
Rochebriant, Graham, Isaura, Signora Venosta, La Duchesse 

de Tarascon, the wealthy and high-born Imperialist, Prince , 

and last and least, one who shall be nameless. 

I have read somewhere, perhaps in one of the books which 
American superstition dedicates to the mysteries of Spiritualism, 
how a gifted seer, technically styled medium, sees at the opera 
a box which to other eyes appears untenanted and empty, but 
to him is full of ghosts, well dressed in costume de rtgle gazing 
on the boards and listening to the music. Like such ghosts are 
certain beings whom I call Lookers-on. Though still living, 
they have no share in the life they survey, they come as from 
another world to hear and to see what is passing in ours. In 
ours they lived once, but that troubled sort of life they have 
survived. Still we amuse them as stage-players and puppets 
amuse ourselves. One of these Lookers-on completed the party 
at the house of Duplessis. 

How lively, how animated the talk was at the financier's 
pleasant table that day, the 8th of July ! The excitement of 
the coming war made itself loud in every Gallic voice, and 
kindled in every Gallic eye. Appeals at every second minute 

VOL. II. M 



178 THE PARISIANS. 



were made, sometimes courteous, sometimes sarcastic, to the 
Englishman . promising son of an eminent statesman, and 
native of a country in which France is always coveting an 
ally, and always suspecting an enemy. Certainly Graham could 
not have found a less propitious moment for asking Isaura if 
she really were changed. And certainly the honour of Great 
Britain was never less ably represented (that is saying a great 
deal) than it was on this occasion by the young man reared 
to diplomacy and aspiring to Parliamentary distinction. He 
answered all questions with a constrained voice and an insipid 
smile, . all questions pointedly addressed to him as to what 
demonstrations of admiring sympathy with the gallantry of 
France might be expected from the English Government and 
people ; what his acquaintance with the German races led him 
to suppose would be the effect on the Southern States of the 
first defeat of the Prussians ; whether the man called Moltke 
was not a mere strategist on paper, a crotchety pedant ; whether, 
if Belgium became so enamoured of the glories of France as 
to solicit fusion with her people, England would have a right 
to offer any objection, . &c. &c. I do not think that during 
that festival Graham once thought one-millionth so much about 
the fates of Prussia and France as he did think "Why is 
that girl so changed to me ? merciful heaven I is she lost to 
my life ? " 

By training, by habit, even by passion, the man was a genuine 
politician, cosmopolitan as well as patriotic, accustomed to 
consider what effect every vibration in that balance of European 
power, which no deep thinker can despise, must have on the 
destinies of civilised humanity, and on those of the nation to 
which he belongs. But are there not moments in life when 
the human heart suddenly narrows the circumference to which 
its emotions are extended ? As the ebb of a tide, it retreats 
from the shores it had covered on its flow, drawing on with 
contracted waves the treasure-trove it has selected to hoard 
amid its deeps. 



\ 



THE PARISIANS. 179 



CHAPTER II. 

On quitting the dining-room, the Duchesse de Tarascon said 
to her host, on whose arm she was leaning, " Of course you and 
I must go with the stream. But is not all the fine talk that has 
passed to-day at your table, and in which we too have joined, 
a sort of hypocrisy ? I may say this to you ; I would say it to 
no other." 

"And I say to you, Madame la Duchesse, that which I 
would say to no other. Thinking over it as I sit alone, I 
find myself making a ' terrible hazard ; ' but when I go abroad 
and become infected by the general enthusiasm, I pluck up 
gaiety of spirit, and whisper to myself, 'True, but it may 
be an enormous gain.' To get the left bank of the Rhine 
is a trifle ; but to check in our next neighbour a growth which 
a few years hence would overtop us, . that is no trifle. And, 
be the gain worth the hazard or not, could the Emperor, could 
any Government likely to hold its own for a week, have declined 
to take the chance of the die ? " 

The Duchesse mused a moment, and meanwhile the two 
seated themselves on a divan in the corner of the salon. Then 
she said very slowly . 

"No Government that held its tenure on popular suffrage 
could have done so. But if the Emperor had retained the 
personal authority which once allowed the intellect of one 
man to control and direct the passions of many, I think the 
war would have been averted. I have reason to know that the 
Emperor gave his emphatic support to the least bellicose members 
of the Council, and that Grammont's speech did not contain the 
passage that precipitates hostilities when the Council in which 
it was framed broke up. These fatal words were forced upon 
him by the temper in which the Ministers found the Chamber, 
and the reports of the popular excitement which could not be 
resisted without imminent danger of revolution. It is Paris that 
has forced the war on the Emperor. But enough of this subject 

M 2 



180 THE PARISIANS. 



What must be, must, and, as you say, the gain may be greater 
than the hazard. I come to something else you whispered to 
me before we went in to dinner, . a sort of complaint which 
wounds me sensibly. You say I had assisted to a choice of 
danger and possibly of death a very distant connection of mine, 
who might have been a very near connection of yours. You 
mean Alain de Rochebriant ? " 

" Yes ; I accept him as a suitor for the hand of my only 
daughter." 

" I am so glad, not for your sake so much as for his. No 
one can know him well without appreciating in him the finest 
qualities of the finest order of the French noble; but having 
known your pretty Valerie so long, my congratulations are 
for the man who can win her. Meanwhile, hear my explana- 
tion : when I promised Alain any interest I can command 
for the grade of officer in a regiment of Mobiles, I knew 
not that he had formed, or was likely to form, ties or duties 
to keep him at home. I withdraw my promise." 

"No, Duchesse, fulfil it. I should be disloyal indeed if I 
robbed a sovereign under whose tranquil and prosperous reign 
I have acquired, with no dishonour, the fortune which Order 
proffers to Commerce, of one gallant defender in the hour of 
need. And, speaking frankly, if Alain were really my son, I 
think I am Frenchman enough to remember that France is 
my mother." 

" Say no more, my friend . say no more," cried the Duchesse, 
with the warm blood of the heart rushing through all the 
delicate coatings of pearl-powder. " If every Frenchman felt as 
you do ; if in this Paris of ours all hostilities of class may 
merge in the one thought of the common country ; if in French 
hearts there yet thrills the same sentiment as that which, in the 
terrible days when all other ties were rent asunder, revered 
France as mother, and rallied her sons to her aid against the 
confederacy of Europe, . why, then, we need not grow pale 
with dismay at the sight of a Prussian needle-gun. Hist ! 
look yonder: is not that a tableau of Youth in Arcady? 
Worlds rage around, and Love, unconcerned, whispers to 
Love!" The Duchesse here pointed to a corner of the 



\ 
\ 



THE PARISIANS. 181 



adjoining room in which Alain and Valerie sat apart, he 
whispering into her ear: her cheek downcast, and, even seen 
at that distance, brightened by the delicate tenderness of its 
blushes. 



CHAPTER III. 

But in that small assembly there were two who did not 
attract the notice of Duplessis or of the lady of the Imperial 

Court. While the Prince and the placid Looker-on were 

engaged at a contest of icarti % with the lively Venosta, for 
the gallery, interposing criticisms and admonitions, Isaura was 
listlessly turning over a collection of photographs, strewed on 
a table that stood near to an open window in the remoter 
angle of the room, communicating with a long and wide 
balcony filled partially with flowers and overlooking the 
Champs Elysdes, softly lit up by the innumerable summer 
stars. Suddenly a whisper, the command of which she could 
not resist, thrilled through her ear, and sent the blood rushing 
back to her heart. 

"Do you remember that evening at Enghien? how I said 
that our imagination could not carry us beyond the question 
whether we two should be gazing together that night twelve 
months on that star which each of us had singled out from 
the hosts of heaven ? That was the 8th of July. It is the 
8th of July once more. Come and seek for our chosen star 
. come. I have something to say, which say I must. 
Come." 

Mechanically, as it were, . mechanically, as they tell us the 
Somnambulist obeys the Mesmeriser, . Isaura obeyed that sum- 
mons. In a kind of dreamy submission she followed his steps, 
and found herself on the balcony, flowers around her and staxs 
above, by the side of the man who had been to her that being 
ever surrounded by flowers and lighted by stars, . the ideal of 
Romance to the heart of virgin Woman. 

" Isaura," said the Englishman, softly. At the sound of her 



-J 

I 



\%2 THE PARISIANS. 



own name for the first time heard from those lips, every nerve 
in her frame quivered " Isaura, I have tried to live without you. 
I cannot You are all in all to me : without you it seems to 
me as if earth had no flowers, and even heaven had withdrawn 
its stars. Are there differences between us, differences of taste 
of sentiments, of habits, of thought ? Only let me hope that 
you can love me a tenth part so much as I love you, and such 
differences cease to be discord. Love harmonises all sounds, 
blends all colours into its own divine oneness of heart and soul. 
Look up ! is not the star which this time last year invited our 
gaze above, is it not still there? Does it not still invite our 
gaze ? Isaura, speak ! " 

" Hush, hush, hush," . the girl could say no more, but she 
recoiled from his side. 

The recoil did not wound him : there was no hate in it. He 
advanced, he caught her hand, and continued, in one of those 
voices which become so musical in summer nights under starry 
skies . 

" Isaura, there is one name which I can never utter without a 
reverence due to the religion which binds earth to heaven . 
a name which to man should be the symbol of life cheered 
and beautified, exalted, hallowed. That name is 'wife.' Will 
you take that name from me ? " 

And still Isuara made no reply. She stood mute, and cold, and 
rigid as a statue of marble. At length, as if consciousness had been 
arrested and was struggling back, she sighed heavily, and passed 
her hands slowly over her forehead. 

" Mockery, mockery," she said then, with a smile half bitter, 
half plaintive, on her colourless lips. " Did you wait to ask me 
that question till you knew what my answer must be ? I have 
pledged the name of wife to another." 

" No, no ; you say that to rebuke, to punish me ! Unsay it ! 
unsay it ! " 

Isaura beheld the anguish of his face with bewildered eyes. 
* How can my words pain you ? " she said, drearily. * Did you 
not write that I had unfitted myself to be wife to you ? " 
"I?" 
"That I had left behind me the peaceful immunities of 



THE PARISIANS. 183 



private life ? I felt you were so right ! Ye* ! I am affianced 

to one who thinks that in spite of that misfortune " 

M Stop, I command you . stop ! You saw my letter to Mrs. 
Morley. I have not had one moment free from torture and 
remorse since I wrote it. But whatever in that letter you 
might justly resent . 



11 



" I did not resent " 

Graham heard not the interruption, but hurried on. "You 
would forgive could you read my heart No matter. Every 
sentiment in that letter, except those which conveyed admira- 
tion, I retract Be mine, and instead of presuming to check in 
you the irresistible impulse of genius to the first place in the head 
or the heart of the world, I will teach myself to encourage, to 
share, to exult in it Do you know what a difference there is 
between the absent one and the present one . between the dis- 
tant image against whom our doubts, our fears, our suspicions, 
raise up hosts of imaginary giants, barriers of visionary walls, 
and the beloved face before the sight of which the hosts are fled, 
the walls are vanished? Isaura, we meet again. You know 
now from my own lips that I love you. I think your lips will 
not deny that you love me. You say that you are affianced to 
another. Tell the man frankly, honestly, that you mistook 
your heart It is not yours to give. Save yourself, save him, 
from a union in which there can be no happiness." 

" It is too late," said Isaura, with hollow tones, but with no 
trace of vacillating weakness on her brow and lips. * Did I say 
now to that other one, c I break the faith that I pledged to you/ 
I should kill him, body and soul. Slight thing though I be, to 
him I am all in all ; to you, Mr. Vane, to you a memory . the 
memory of one whom a year, perhaps a month, hence, you will 
rejoice to think you have escaped." 

She passed from him . passed away from the flowers and the 
starlight ; and when Graham, . recovering from the stun of her 
crushing words, and with the haughty mien and step of the man 
who goes forth from the ruin of his hopes, leaning for support 
upon his pride, . when Graham re-entered the room, all the 
guests had departed save only Alain, who was still exchanging 
whispered words with Valerie. 



184 THE PARISIANS. 



CHAPTER IV. 

The next day, at the hour appointed, Graham entered 
Alain's apartment " I am glad to tell you," said the Marquis, 
gaily, " that the box has arrived, and we will very soon examine 
its contents. Breakfast claims precedence." During the meal 
Alain was in gay spirits, and did not at first notice the gloomy 
countenance and abstracted mood of his guest At length, 
surprised at the dull response to his lively sallies on the part 
of a man generally so pleasant in the frankness of his speech, 
and the cordial ring of his sympathetic laugh, it occurred to 
him that the change in Graham must be ascribed to something 
that had gone wrong in the meeting with Isaura the evening 
before ; and remembering the curtness with which Graham had 
implied disinclination to converse about the fair Italian, he felt 
perplexed how to reconcile the impulse of his good nature with 
the discretion imposed on his good-breeding. At all events, 
a compliment to the lady whom Graham had so admired could 
do no harm. 

" How well Mademoiselle Cicogna looked last night ! " 

"Did she? It seemed to me that, in health at least, she 
did not look very well. Have you heard what day M. Thiers 
will speak on the war ? " 

"Thiers? No. Who cares about Thiers? Thank heaven 
his day is past ! I don't know any unmarried woman in Paris, 
not even Valdrie . I mean Mademoiselle Duplessis . who has so 
exquisite a taste in dress as Mademoiselle Cicogna. Generally 
speaking, the taste of a female author is atrocious. " 

" Really . I did not observe her dress. I am no critic on 
subjects so dainty as the dress of ladies, or the tastes of female 
authors." 

" Pardon me," said the beau Marquis, gravely. " As to dress, 
I think that is so essential a thing in the mind of woman, that 
no man who cares about women ought to disdain critical study 
of it In woman, refinement of character is never found in 



THE PARISIANS. 185 



vulgarity of dress. I have only observed that truth since 
I came up from Bretagne." 

"I presume, my dear Marquis, that you may have read in 
Bretagne books which very few not being professed scholars 
have ever read at Paris ; and possibly you may remember that 
Horace ascribes the most exquisite refinement in dress, denoted 
by the untranslatable words, ' simplex tnunditiis,' to a lady who 
was not less distinguished by the ease and rapidity with which 
she could change her affection. Of course that allusion does 
not apply to Mademoiselle Cicogna, but there are many other 
exquisitely dressed ladies at Paris of whom an ill-fated admirer 

"'fidem 
Mutatosque deos flebit.' 

Now, with your permission, we will adjourn to the box ot 
letters. " 

The box being produced and unlocked, Alain looked with 
conscientious care at its contents before he passed over to 
Graham's inspection a few epistles, in which the Englishman 
immediately detected the same handwriting as that of the 
letter from Louise which Richard King had bequeathed 
to him. 

They were arranged and numbered chronologically. 



Letter I. 

" Dear M. le Marquis, . How can I thank you sufficiently 
for obtaining and remitting to me those certificates ? You are 
too aware of the unhappy episode in my life not to know how 
inestimable is the service you render me. I am saved all 
further molestation from the man who had indeed no right 
over my freedom, but whose persecution might compel me 
to the scandal and disgrace of an appeal to the law for pro- 
tection, and the avowal of the illegal marriage into which I 
was duped. I would rather be torn limb from limb by wild 
horses, like the Queen in the history books, than dishonour 
myself and the ancestry which I may at least claim on the 



186 THE PARISIANS. 



mother's side, by proclaiming that I had lived with that low 
Englishman as his wife, when I was only . O heavens, I cannot 
conclude the sentence ! 

"No, Mons. le Marquis, I am in no want of the pecuniary 
aid you so generously wish to press on me. Though I know 
not where to address my poor dear uncle, . though I doubt, 
even if I did, whether I oould venture to confide to him the 
secret known only to yourself as to the name I now bear . and 
if he hear of me at all he must believe me dead, . yet I have 
enough left of the money he last remitted to me for present 
support ; and when that fails, I think, what with my knowledge 
of English and such other slender accomplishments as I possess, 
I could maintain myself as a teacher or governess in some 
German family. At all events, I will write to you again soon, 
and I entreat you to let me know all you can learn about 
my uncle. I feel so grateful to you for your just disbelief 
of the horrible calumny which must be so intolerably galling 
to a man so proud, and, whatever his errors, so incapable 
of a baseness. 

Direct to me Poste restante 9 Augsburg. 

" Yours with all consideration, 



u 



ti  



Letter II. 

{Seven months after the date of Letter L) 

"Augsburg. 

" Dear M. le Marquis, . I thank you for your kind little 
note informing me of the pains you have taken, as yet with no 
result, to ascertain what has become of my unfortunate uncle. 
My life since I last wrote, has been a very quiet one. I have 
been teaching among a few families here ; and among my pupils 
are two little girls of very high birth. They have taken so great 
a fancy to me that their mother has just asked me to come and 
reside at their house as governess. What wonderfully kind 
hearts those Germans have, . so simple, so truthful I They raise 
no troublesome questions, . accept my own story implicitly." 



THE fetfUSIANS. 187 



Here follow a few commonplace sentences about the German 
character, and a postscript " I go into my new home next 
week. When you hear more of my uncle, direct to me at the 

Countess von Rudesheim, Schloss N M , near Berlin." 

u Rudesheim ! " Could this be the relation, possibly the wife, 
of the Count von Rudesheim with whom Graham had formed 
acquaintance last year ? 

Letter II L 

(Between three and four years after the date of the last) 

"YOU startle me indeed, dear M. le Marquis. My uncle 
said to have been recognised in Algeria under another name, 
a soldier in the Algerine army? My dear, proud, luxurious 
uncle! Ah, I cannot believe it, any more than you do: but 
I long eagerly for such further news as you can learn of him. 
For myself, I shall perhaps surprise you when I say I am 
about to be married. Nothing can exceed the amiable kind- 
ness I have received from the Rudesheims since I have been in 
their house. For the last year especially I have been treated 
on equal terms as one of the family. Among the habitual 
visitors at the house is a gentleman of noble birth, but not 
of rank too high, nor of fortune too great, to make a marriage 
with the French widowed governess a misalliance. I am sure 
that he loves me sincerely; and he is the only man I ever 
met whose love I have cared to win. We are to be married 
in the course of the year. Of course he is ignorant of my 
painful history, and will never learn it And after all, Louise 

D is dead. In the home to which I am about to remove, 

there is no probability that the wretched Englishman can ever 
cross my path. My secret is as safe with you as in the 

grave that holds her whom in the name of Louise D 

you once loved. Henceforth I shall trouble you no more with 
my letters; but if you hear anything decisively authentic of my 
uncle's fate, write me a line at any time, directed as before to 
Madame M , enclosed to the Countess von Rudesheim. 

* And accept, for all the kindness you have ever shown me, 



188 THE PARISIANS. 



as to one whom you did not disdain to call a kinswoman, the 
assurance of my undying gratitude. In the alliance she now 
makes, your kinswoman does not discredit the name through 
which she is connected with the yet loftier line of Rochebriant." 

To this letter the late Marquis had appended in pencil u Of 
course a Rochebriant never denies the claim of a kinswoman, even 
though a drawing-master's daughter. Beautiful creature, Louise, 
but a termagant I I could not love Venus if she were a termagant. 
L.'s head turned by the unlucky discovery that her mother was 
noble. In one form or other, every woman has the same disease 
. vanity. Name of her intended not mentioned . easily found 
out." 

The next letter was dated May 7, 1859, on black-edged 
paper, and contained but these lines : " I was much comforted 
by your kind visit yesterday, dear Marquis. My affliction has 
been heavy: but for the last two years my poor husband's 
conduct has rendered my life unhappy, and I am recovering 
the shock of his sudden death. It is true that I and the 
children are left very ill provided for ; but I cannot accept 
your generous offer of aid. Have no fear as to my future 
fate. Adieu, my dear Marquis! This will reach you just 
before you start for Naples. Bon voyage" There was no 
address on this note . no postmark on the envelope . evidently 
sent by hand. 

The last note, dated 1861, March 20, was briefer than its 
predecessor. " I have taken your advice dear Marquis ; and, 
overcoming all scruples, I have accepted his kind offer, on 
the condition that I am never to be taken to England. I 
had no option in this marriage. I can now own to you 
that my poverty had become urgent. . Yours, with inalienable 
gratitude, ." 

This last note, too, was without postmark, and as evidently 
sent by hand. 

"There are no other letters, then, from this writer?" asked 
Graham ; " and no further clue as to her existence ? " 
< "None that I have discovered; and I see now why I preserved 



THE PARISIANS. 189 



these letters. There is nothing in their contents not creditable 
to my poor father. They show how capable he was of good- 
natured disinterested kindness towards even a distant relation 
of whom he could certainly not have been proud, judging not 
only by his own pencilled note, or by the writer's condition 
as a governess, but by her loose sentiments as to the marriage 
tie. I have not the slightest idea who she could be. I never 
at least heard of one connected, however distantly, with my 
family, whom I could identify with the writer of these letters." 

" I may hold them a short time in my possession ? " 

"Pardon me a preliminary question. If I may venture to 
form a conjecture, the object of your search must be connected 
with your countryman, whom the lady politely calls the ' wretched 
Englishman ; ' but I own I should not like to lend, through 
these letters, a pretence to any steps that may lead to a scandal 
in which my father's name or that of any member of 'my family 
could be mixed up." 

" Marquis, it is to prevent the possibility of all scandal that 
I ask you to trust these letters to my discretion." 

" Foi de gentilhomme ? " 

" Foi de gentilhomme I " 

" Take them. When and where shall we meet again ? " 

" Soon, I trust ; but I must leave Paris this evening. I am 
bound to Berlin in quest of this Countess von Rudesheim : and 
I fear that in a very few days intercourse between France and 
the German frontier will be closed upon travellers." 

After a few more words not worth recording, the two young 
men shook hands and parted. 



190 THE PARISIANS. 



CHAPTER V. 

It was with an interest languid and listless indeed, compared 
with that which he would have felt a day before, that Graham 
mused over the remarkable advances toward the discovery of 
Louise Duval which were made in the letters he had perused. 
She had married, then, first a foreigner, whom she spoke of as 
noble, and whose name and residence could be easily found 
through the Countess von Rudesheim. The marriage did not 
seem to have been a happy one. Left a widow in reduced 
circumstances, she had married again, evidently without affec- 
tion. She was living so late as 1861, and she had children living 
in 1859 : was ^ e child referred to by Richard King one 
of them ? 

The tone and style of the letters served to throw some light 
on the character of the writer : they evinced pride, stubborn 
self-will, and unamiable hardness of nature ; but her rejection 
of all pecuniary aid from a man like the late Marquis de 
Rochebriant betokened a certain dignity of sentiment She 
was evidently, whatever her strange ideas about her first 
marriage with Richard King, no vulgar woman of gallantry; 
and there must have been some sort of charm about her to 
have excited a friendly interest in a kinsman so remote, and 
a man of pleasure so selfish, as her high-born correspondent 

But what now, so far as concerned his own happiness, was the 
hope, the probable certainty, of a speedy fulfilment of the trust 
bequeathed to him ? Whether the result, in the death of the 
mother, and more especially of the child, left him rich, or, it 
the last survived, reduced his fortune to a modest independence, 
Isaura was equally lost to him, and fortune became valueless. 
But his first emotions on recovering from the shock of hearing 
from Isaura's lips that she was irrevocably affianced to another, 
were not those of self-reproach. They were those of intense 
bitterness against her who, if really so much attached to him 
as he had been led to hope, could within so brief a time reconcile 



THE PARISIANS. 191 



her heart to marriage with another. This bitterness was no 
doubt unjust ; but I believe it to be natural to men of a nature 
so proud and of affections so intense as Graham's, under similar 
defeats of hope. Resentment is the first impulse in a man loving 
with the whole ardour of his soul, rejected, no matter why 
or wherefore, by the woman by whom he had cause to believe 
he himself was beloved; and though Graham's standard of 
honour was certainly the reverse of low, yet man does not 
view honour in the same light as woman does, when involved 
in analogous difficulties of position. Graham conscientiously 
thought that if Isaura so loved him as to render distasteful an 
engagement to another which could only very recently have 
been contracted, it would be more honourable frankly so to 
tell the accepted suitor than to leave him in ignorance that 
her [ heart was estranged. But these engagements are very 
solemn things with girls like Isaura, and hers was no ordinary 
obligation of woman-honour. Had the accepted one been 
superior in rank . fortune . all that flatters the ambition of 
woman in the choice of marriage ; had he been resolute, and 
strong, and self-dependent amid the trials and perils of life, 
. then possibly the woman's honour might find excuse in 
escaping the penalties of its pledge. But the poor, ailing, 
infirm, morbid boy-poet, who looked to her as his saving 
angel in body in mind, and soul . to say to him, " Give me 
back my freedom," would be to abandon him to death and 
to sin. But Graham could not of course divine why what 
he as a man thought right was to Isaura as woman impossible : 
and he returned to his old prejudiced notion that there is no 
real depth and ardour of affection for human lovers in the 
poetess whose mind and heart are devoted to the creation of 
imaginary heroes. Absorbed in reverie, he took his way 
slowly and with downcast looks towards the British embassy, 
at which it was well to ascertain whether the impending war 
yet necessitated special passports for Germany. 

"Bon jour, cher ami? said a pleasant voice ; "and how long 
have you been at Paris ? " 

"Oh, my dear M. Savarinl charmed to see you looking so 
well! Madame well too, I trust? My kindest regards to 



192 THE PARISIANS. 



her. I have been in Paris but a day or two, and I leave this 
evening." 

" So soon ? The war frightens you away, I suppose. Which 
way are you going now ? " 

"To the British embassy." 

* Well, I will go with you so far . it is in my own direction. 
I have to call at the charming Italian's with congratulations . 
on news I only heard this morning." 

"You mean Mademoiselle Cicogna . and the news that 
demands congratulations . her approaching marriage ! " 

"Mon Dieu ! when could you have heard of that ? " 

" Last night at the house of M. Duplessis." 

" Parbleu I I shall scold her well for confiding to her new 
friend Valerie the secret she kept from her old friends, my wife 
and myself." 

" By the way," said Graham, with a tone of admirably-feigned 
indifference, " who is the happy man ? That part of the secret 
I did not hear." 

" Can't you guess ? " 

"No." 

" Gustave Rameau." 

" Ah ! " Graham almost shrieked, so sharp and shrill was his 
cry. " Ah ! I ought indeed to have guessed that ! " 

" Madame Savarin, I fancy, helped to make up the marriage. 
I hope it may turn out well ; certainly it will be his salvation. 
May it be for her happiness ! " 

" No doubt of that ! Two poets . born for each other, I 
daresay. Adieu, my dear Savarin ! Here we are at the 
embassy." 



\ 



THE PARISIANS. 193 



CHAPTER VI. 

That evening Graham found himself in the coupt of the 
express train to Strasbourg. He had sent to engage the 
whole coupt to himself, but that was impossible. One 

place was bespoken as far as C , after which Graham 

might prosecute his journey alone on paying for the three 
places. 

When he took his seat another man was in the further 
corner whom he scarcely noticed. The train shot rapidly 
on for some leagues. Profound silence in the coupt, save 
at moments those heavy impatient sighs that came from 
the very depths of the heart, and of which he who sighs is 
unconscious, burst from the Englishman's lips, and drew on 
him the observant side-glance of his fellow-traveller. 

At length the fellow-traveller said in very good English, 
though with French accent, "Would you object, sir, to my 
lighting my little carriage-lantern? I am in the habit of 
reading in the night train, and the wretched lamp they give 
us does not permit that. But if you wish to sleep, and 
my lantern would prevent you doing so, consider my request 
unasked. " 

" You are most courteous, sir. Pray light your lantern . that 
will not interfere with my sleep." 

As Graham thus answered, far away from the place and the 
moment as his thoughts were, it yet faintly struck him that he 
had heard that voice before. 

The man produced a small lantern, which he attached to the 
window-sill, and drew forth from a small leathern bag sundry 
newspapers and pamphlets. Graham flung himself back, and 
in a minute or so again came his sigh. "Allow me to offer 
you those evening journals . you may not have had time to 
read them before starting," said the fellow-traveller, leaning 
forward, and extending the newspapers with one hand, while 

VOL. II N 



194 THE PARISIANS. 



with the other he lifted his lantern. Graham turned, and 
the faces of the two men were close to each other . Graham 
with his travelling-cap drawn over his brows, the other with 
head uncovered. 

" Monsieur Lebeau ! " 

"Bon soir f Mr. Lamb ! " 

Again silence for a moment or so. Monsieur Lebeau then 
broke it . 

"I think, Mr. Lamb, that in better society than that of 
the Faubourg Montmartre you are known under another 
name." 



Graham had no heart then for the stage-play of a part, and 
answered, with quiet haughtiness, " Possibly. and what name ? " 

" Graham Vane. And, sir," continued Lebeau, with a 
haughtiness equally quiet, but somewhat more menacing, 
"since we two gentlemen find ourselves thus close, do I 
ask too much if I inquire why you condescend to seek 
my acquaintance in disguise ? " 

" Monsieur le Vicomte de Mauleon, when you talk of 
disguise, is it too much to inquire why my acquaintance was 
accepted by Monsieur Lebeau ? " 

" Ha ! Then you confess that it was Victor de Mauleon 
whom you sought when you first visited the Cafi Jean 
Jacques ? " 

" Frankly I confess it" 

Monsieur Lebeau drew himself back, and seemed to reflect 

" I see ! Solely for the purpose of learning whether Victor de 
Mauleon could give you any information about Louise DuvaL 
Is it so ? " 

" Monsieur le Vicomte, you say truly." 

Again M. Lebeau paused as if in reflection ; and Graham, 
in that state of mind when a man who may most despise 
and detest the practice of duelling, may yet feel a thrill of 
delight if some homicide would be good enough to put him 
out of his misery, flung aside his cap, lifted his broad frank 
forehead, and stamped his boot impatiently as if to provoke 
a quarrel. 



THE PARISIANS. 195 



M. Lebeau lowered his spectacles, and with those calm, keen, 
searching eyes of his, gazed at the Englishman. 

" It strikes me," he said, with a smile, the fascination of which 
not even those faded whiskers could disguise . "it strikes me 
that there are two ways in which gentlemen such as you and I 
are can converse: firstly, with reservation and guard against 
each other ; secondly, with perfect openness. Perhaps of the 
two I have more need of reservation and wary guard against 
any stranger than you have. Allow me to propose the 
alternative . perfect openness. What say you ? " and he 
extended his hand. 

" Perfect openness/' answered Graham, softened into sudden 
liking for this once terrible swordsman, and shaking, as an 
Englishman shakes, the hand held out to him in peace by 
the man from whom he had anticipated quarrel. 

" Permit me now, before you address any questions to me, to 
put one to you. How did you learn that Victor de Mauteon 
was identical with Jean Lebeau ? " 

" I heard that from an agent of the police." 

" Ah ! " 

* Whom I consulted as to the means of ascertaining whether 
Louise Duval was alive, . if so, where she could be found." 

" I thank you very much for your information. I had no 
notion that the police of Paris had divined the original alias 
of poor Monsieur Lebeau, though something occurred at Lyons 
which made me suspect it. Strange that the Government, 
knowing through the police that Victor de Mauteon, a writer 
they had no reason to favour, had been in so humble a position, 
should never, even in their official journals, have thought it 
prudent to say so ! But, now I think of it, what if they had ? 
They could prove nothing against Jean Lebeau. They could 
but say, ' Jean Lebeau is suspected to be too warm a lover of 
liberty, too earnest a friend of the people, and Jean Lebeau is 
the editor of Le Sens Contmun. 1 Why, that assertion would have 
made Victor de Mauteon the hero of the Reds, the last thing a 
prudent Government could desire. I thank you cordially for 
your frank reply. Now, what question would you put to me ? " 

N 2 



196 THE PARISIANS. 



" In one word, all you can tell me about Louise Duval." 
" You shall have it. I had heard vaguely in my young days 
that a half-sister of mine by my father's first marriage with 
Mademoiselle de Beauvilliers had . when in advanced middle 
life he married a second time . conceived a dislike for her 
mother-in-law, and, being of age, with an independent fortune 
of her own, had quitted the house, taken up her residence 
with an elderly female relative, and there had contracted a 
marriage with a man who gave her lessons in drawing. After 
that marriage, which my father in vain tried to prevent, 
my [sister was renounced by her family. That was all I 
knew till, after I came into my inheritance by the death of 
both my parents, I learned from my father's confidential 
lawyer, that the drawing-master, M. Duval, had soon dissi- 
pated his wife's fortune, become a widower with one child . 
a girl . and fallen into great distress. He came to my father, 
begging for pecuniary aid. My father, though by no means 
rich, consented to allow him a yearly pension, on condition that 
he never revealed to his child her connection with our family. 
The man agreed to the condition, and called at my fathers 
lawyer quarterly for his annuity. But the lawyer informed 
me that this deduction from my income had ceased, that M. 
Duval had not for a year called or sent for the sum due to 
him, and that he must therefore be dead. One day my valet 
informed me that a young lady wished to see me . in those 
days young ladies very often called on me. I desired her 
to be shown in. There entered a young creature, almost of 
my own age, who, to my amazement, saluted me as uncle. 
This was the child of my half-sister. Her father had been 
dead several months, fulfilling very faithfully the condition on 
which he had held his pension, and the girl never dreaming 
of the claims that, if wise, poor child, she ought not to have 
cared for, viz., . to that obsolete useless pauper birthright, a 
branch on the family tree of a French noble. But in pinch 
of circumstance, and from female curiosity, hunting among 
the papers her father had left for some clue to the reasons 
for the pension he had received, she found letters from her 



THE PARISIANS. 197 



mother, letters from my father, which indisputably proved 
that she was grandchild to the feu Vicomte de Maul&m, and 
niece to myself. Her story as told to me was very pitiable. 
Conceiving herself to be nothing higher in birth than daughter 
to this drawing-master, at his death, poor, penniless orphan 
that she was, she had accepted the hand of an English 
student of medicine whom she did not care for. Miserable 
with this man, on finding by the documents I refer to that 
she was my niece, she came to me for comfort and counsel. 
What counsel could I or any man give to her but to 
make the best of what had happened, and live with her 
husband? But then she started another question. It seems 
that she had been talking with some one, I think her landlady, 
or some other woman with whom she had made acquaintance 
. was she legally married to this man ? Had he not entrapped 
her ignorance into a false marriage ? This became a grave 
question, and I sent at once to my lawyer. On hearing the 
circumstances, he at once declared that the marriage was not 
legal according to the laws of France. But, doubtless, her 
English soi-disant husband was not cognisant of the French 
law, and a legal marriage could, with his assent, be at once 
solemnised. Monsieur Vane, I cannot find words to convey 
to you the joy that poor girl showed in her face and in her 
words when she learned that she was not bound to pass her 
life with that man as his wife. It was in vain to talk and 
reason with her. Then arose the other question, scarcely less 
important True, the marriage was not legal, but would it 
not be better on all accounts to take steps to have it formally 
annulled, thus freeing her from the harassment of any claim 
the Englishman might advance, and enabling her to establish 
the facts in a right position, not injurious to her honour in 
the eyes of any future suitor to her hand ? She would not 
hear of such a proposal. She declared that she could not bring 
to the family she pined to re-enter the scandal of disgrace. 
To allow that she had made such a misalliance would be bad 
enough in itself; but to proclaim to the world that, though 
nominally the wife, she had in fact been only the mistress, of 



193 THE PARISIANS. 



this medical student . she would rather throw herself into the 
Seine. All she desired was to find some refuge, some hiding- 
place for a time, whence she could write to the man informing 
him that he had no lawful hold on her. Doubtless he would not 
seek then to molest her. He would return to his own country, 
and be effaced from her life. And then, her story unknown, 
she might form a more suitable alliance. Fiery young creature 
though she was . true De Mauteon in being so fiery . she in- 
terested me strongly. I should say that she was wonderfully 
handsome ; and though imperfectly educated, and brought up 
in circumstances so lowly, there was nothing common about 
her . a certain je ne sais quoi of stateliness and race. At 
all events she did with me what she wished. I agreed to 
aid her desire of a refuge and hiding-place. Of course I 
could not lodge her in my own apartment, but I induced 
a female relation of her mother's, an old lady living at 
Versailles, to receive her, stating her birth, but of course 
concealing her illegal marriage. 

" From time to time I went to see her. But one day I found 
this restless bright-plumaged bird flown. Among the ladies who 
visited at her relative's house was a certain Madame Marigny, 
a very pretty young widow. Madame Marigny and Louise 
formed a sudden and intimate friendship. The widow was 
moving from Versailles into an apartment at Paris, and invited 
Louise to share it. She had consented. I was not pleased 
at this ; for the widow was too young, and too much of a 
coquette, to be a safe companion to Louise. But though 
professing much gratitude and great regard for me, I had 
no power of controlling the poor girl's actions. Her nominal 
husband, meanwhile, had left France, and nothing more was 
heard or known of him. I saw that the best thing that 
could possibly befall Louise was marriage with some one 
rich enough to gratify her taste for luxury and pomp; and 
that if such a marriage offered itself, she might be induced 
to free it from all possible embarrassment by procuring the 
annulment of the former, from which she had hitherto shrunk 
in such revolt. This opportunity presented itselt. A man 



THE PARISIANS. 199 



already rich, and in a career that promised to make him 
infinitely richer, an associate of mine in those days when I 
was rapidly squandering the remnant of my inheritance . 
this man saw her at the opera in company with Madame 
Marigny, fell violently in love with her, and ascertaining her 
relationship to me, besought an introduction. I was delighted 
to give it ; and, to say the truth, I was then so reduced to the 
bottom of my casket, I felt that it was becoming impossible 
for me to continue the aid I had hitherto given to Louise, 
and what then would become of her? I thought it fair to 
tell Louvier " 

" I-rOuvier . the financier ? " 

" Ah, that was a slip of the tongue, but no matter ; there 
is no reason for concealing his name. I thought it right, I 
say, to tell Louvier confidentially the history of the unfortunate 
illegal marriage. It did not damp his ardour. He wooed her 
to the best of his power, but she evidently took him into great 
dislike. One day she sent for me in much excitement, showed 
me some advertisements in the French journals which, though 
not naming her, evidently pointed at her, and must have been 
dictated by her soi-disant husband. The advertisements might 
certainly lead to her discovery if she remained in Paris. She 
entreated my consent to remove elsewhere. Madame Marigny 
had her own reason for leaving Paris, and would accompany 
her. I supplied her with the necessary means, and a day or 
two afterwards she and her friend departed, as I understood, 
for Brussels. I received no letter from her ; and my own affairs 
so seriously pre-occupied me, that poor Louise might have 
passed altogether out of my thoughts, had it not been for the 
suitor she had left in despair behind. Louvier besought me to 
ascertain her address ; but I could give him no other clue to it 
than that she said she was going to Brussels, but should soon 
remove to some quiet village. It was not for a long time . I 
can't remember how long . it might be several weeks, perhaps 
two or three months, . that I received a short note from her 
stating that she waited for a small remittance, the last she 
would accept from me; as she was resolved, so soon as her 



200 THE PARISIANS. 



health would permit, to find means to maintain herself . and 
telling me to direct to her, Poste restante, Aix-la-Chapelle. I 
sent her the sum she asked, perhaps a little more, but with 
a confession reluctantly wrung from me that I was a ruined 
man ; and I urged her to think very seriously before she 
refused the competence and position which a union with 
M. Louvier would insure. 

" This last consideration so pressed on me that, when Louvier 
called on me, I think that day or the next, I gave him Louise's 
note, and told him that, if he were still as much in love with 
her as ever, les absens ont toujours tort, and he had better go 
to Aix-la-Chapelle and find her out; that he had my hearty 
approval of his wooing, and consent to his marriage, though 
I still urged the wisdom and fairness, if she would take the 
preliminary step . which, after all, the French law frees as 
much as possible from pain and scandal . of annulling the 
irregular marriage into which her childlike youth had been 
decoyed, 

"Louvier left me for Aix-la-Chapelle. The very next day 
came that cruel affliction which made me a prey to the most 
intolerable calumny, which robbed me of every friend, which 
sent me forth from my native country penniless, and resolved 
to be nameless . until . until . well, until my hour could come 
again, . every dog, if not hanged, has its day; . when that 
affliction befell me, I quitted France, heard no more of Louvier 
nor of Louise; indeed, no letter addressed to me at Paris 
would have reached " 

The man paused here, evidently with painful emotion. 
He resumed in the quiet matter-of-fact way in which he had 
commenced his narrative. 

" Louise had altogether faded out of my remembrance until 
your question revived it. As it happened, the question came 
at the moment when I meditated resuming my real name and 
social position. In so doing, I should of course come in contact 
with my old acquaintance Louvier; and the name of Louise 
was necessarily associated with his. I called on him, and made 
myself known. The slight information I gave you as to my 



THE PARISIANS. 201 



niece was gleaned from him. I may now say more. It appears 
that when he arrived at Aix-la-Chapelle he found that Louise 
Duval had left it a day or two previously, and according to 
scandal had been for some time courted by a wealthy and noble 
lover, whom she had gone to Munich to meet. Louvier believed 
this tale ; quitted Aix indignantly, and never heard more of her. 
The probability is, M. Vane, that she must have been long dead. 
But if living still, I feel quite sure that she will communicate 
with me some day or other. Now that I have reappeared in 
Paris in my own name . entered into a career that, for good or 
for evil, must ere long bring my name very noisily before the 
public . Louise cannot fail to hear of my existence and my 
whereabouts ; and unless I am utterly mistaken as to her 
character, she will assuredly inform me of her own. Oblige 
me with your address, and in that case I will let you know. 
Of course I take for granted the assurance you gave me last 
year, that you only desire to discover her in order to render her 
some benefit, not to injure or molest her ?<" 

"Certainly. To that assurance I pledge my honour. Any 
letter with which you may favour me had better be directed to 
my London address ; here is my card. But, M. le Vicomte, 
there is one point on which pray pardon me if I question you 
still. Had you no suspicion that there was one reason why 
this lady might have quitted Paris so hastily, and have so 
shrunk from the thought of a marriage so advantageous, in a 
worldly point of view, as that with M Louvier, . namely, that 
she anticipated the probability of becoming the mother of 
a child by the man whom she refused to acknowledge as a 
husband ? " 

" That idea did not strike me until you asked me if she had 
a child. Should your conjecture be correct, it would obviously 
increase her repugnance to apply for the annulment of her 
illegal marriage. But if Louise is still living and comes across 
me, I do not doubt that, the motives for concealment no longer 
operating, she will confide to me the truth. Since we have been 
talking together thus frankly, I suppose I may fairly ask 
whether I do not guess correctly in supposing that this soi-disant 



202 THE PARISIANS. 



husband, whose name I forget, . Mac something, perhaps, 

Scotch . I think she said he was Ecossais, . is dead and has left 
by will some legacy to Louise and any child she may have 
borne to him ? " 

" Not exactly so. The man, as you say, is dead ; but he 
bequeathed no legacy to the lady who did not hold herself 
married to him. But there are those connected with him 
who, knowing the history, think that some compensation is 
due for the wrong so unconsciously done to her, and yet more 
to any issue of a marriage not meant to be irregular or illegal. 
Permit me now to explain why I sought you in another guise 
and name than my own. I could scarcely place in M. Lebeau 
the confidence which I now unreservedly place in the Vicomte 
de Maul&m." 

" Cela va sans dire. You believed, then, that calumny about 
the jewels ; you do not believe it now ? " 

" Now ! my amazement is, that any one who had known you 
could believe it" 

"Oh, how often, and with tears of rage in my exile . my 
wanderings . have I asked that question of myself! That 
rage has ceased ; and I have but one feeling left for that 
credulous, fickle Paris, of which one day I was the idol, the 
next the byword. Well, a man sometimes plays chess more 
skilfully for having been long a mere bystander. He under- 
stands better how to move, and when to sacrifice the pieces. 
Politics, M. Vane, is the only exciting game left to me at my 
years. At yours, there is still that of love. How time flies ! 
we are nearing the station at which I descend. I have kinsfolk 
of my mother's in these districts. They are not Imperialists ; 
they are said to be powerful in the department. But before 
I apply to them in my own name, I think it prudent that 
M. Lebeau should quietly ascertain what is their real strength, 
and what would be the prospects of success if Victor de 
Mauteon offered himself as de'pute' at the next election. Wish 
him joy, M. Vane ! If he succeed, you will hear of him 
some day crowned in the Capitol, or hurled from the Tarpeian 
rock." 



THE PARISIANS. 203 



Here the train stopped The false Lebeau gathered up his 
papers, re-adjusted his spectacles and his bag, descended lightly, 
and, pressing Graham's hand as he paused at the door, said, " Be 
sure I will not forget your address if I have anything to say. 
Bon voyage ! " 



CHAPTER VII. 

GRAHAM continued his journey to Strasbourg. On arriving 
there he felt very unwell. Strong though his frame was, the 
anguish and self-struggle through which he had passed since the 
day he had received in London Mrs. Morley's letter, till that 
on which he had finally resolved on his course of conduct at 
Paris, and the shock which had annihilated his hopes in Isaura's 
rejection, had combined to exhaust its endurance, and fever had 
already commenced when he took his place in the coupe*. If 
there be a thing which a man should not do when his system is 
undermined, and his pulse between 90 and 100, it is to travel all 
night by a railway express. Nevertheless, as the Englishman's 
will was yet stronger than his frame, he would not give himself 
more than an hour's rest, and again started for Berlin. Long 
before he got to Berlin, the will failed him as well as the frame. 
He was lifted out of the carriage, taken to a hotel in a small 
German town, and six hours afterwards he was delirious. It 
was fortunate for him that under such circumstances plenty of 
money and Scott's circular-notes for some hundreds were found 
in his pocket-book, so that he did not fail to receive attentive 
nursing and skilful medical treatment There, for the present, 
I must leave him . leave him for how long ? But any village 
apothecary could say that fever such as his must run its 
course. He was still in bed, and very dimly . and that but 
at times. conscious, when the German armies were gathering 
round the penfold of Sedan. 



2<H THE PARISIANS. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

When the news of the disastrous day at Sedan reached Paris 
the first effect was that of timid consternation. There were 
a few cries of Dichtance ! fewer still of Vive la Re'publique ! 
among the motley crowds; but they were faint, and chiefly 
by ragged gamins. A small body repaired to Trochu and 
offered him the sceptre, which he politely declined. A more 
important and respectable body . for it comprised the majority 
of the Corps Legislatif . urged Palikao to accept the temporary 
dictatorship, which the War Minister declined with equal 
politeness. In both these overtures it was clear that the 
impulse of the proposers was toward any form of government 
rather than republican. The sergens de ville were sufficient 
that day to put down riot. They did make a charge on a mob, 
which immediately ran away. 

The morning of that day the Council of Ten were summoned 
by Lebeau . minus only Rameau, who was still too unwell to 
attend, and the Belgian, not then at Paris ; but their place was 
supplied by the two travelling members, who had been absent 
from the meeting before recorded. These were conspirators 
better known in history than those I have before described ; 
professional conspirators . personages who from their youth 
upwards had done little else but conspire. Following the 
discreet plan pursued elsewhere throughout this humble work, 
I give their names other than they bore, One, a very swarthy 
and ill-favoured man, between forty and fifty, I call Paul Grimm 
. by origin a German, but by rearing and character French; 
from the hair on his head, staring up rough and ragged as 
a bramble-bush, to the soles of small narrow feet, shod with 
dainty care, he was a personal coxcomb, and spent all he could 
spare on his dress. A clever man, not ill-educated . a vehement 
and effective speaker at a club. Vanity and an amor 
temperament had made him a conspirator, since he f 



THE PARISIANS. 205 



he interested the ladies more in that capacity than any other. 
His companion, Edgar Ferrier, would have been a journalist, 
only hitherto his opinions had found no readers; the opinions 
were those of Marat He rejoiced in thinking that his hour 
for glory, so long deferred, had now arrived. He was thoroughly 
sincere: his father and grandfather had died in a madhouse. 
Both these men, insignificant in ordinary times, were likely to 
become of terrible importance in the crisis of a revolution. 
They both had great power with the elements that form 
a Parisian mob. The instructions given to these members 
of the Council by Lebeau were brief: they were summed 
up in the one word, D&kJance. The formidable nature of 
a council apparently so meanly constituted, became strikingly 
evident at that moment, because it was so small in number, 
while each one of these could put yi movement a large section 
of the populace ; secondly, because, unlike a revolutionary club 
or a numerous association, no time was wasted in idle speeches, 
and all were under the orders of one man of clear head and 
resolute purpose ; and thirdly, and above all, because one man 
supplied the treasury, and money for an object desired was 
liberally given and promptly at hand. The meeting did not 
last ten minutes, and about two hours afterwards its effects 
were visible. From Montmartre and Belleville and Montretout 
poured streams of ouvriers y with whom Armand Monnier was 
a chief, and the Mtdecin des Pauvres an oracle. Grimm and 
Ferrier headed other detachments that startled the well-dressed 
idlers on the Boulevards. The stalwart figure of the Pole was 
seen on the Place de la Concorde, towering amidst other 
refugees, amid which glided the Italian champion of humanity. 
The cry of Dfrktance became louder. But as yet there were 
only few cries of Vive la Rtpublique / . such a cry was not on 
the orders issued by Lebeau. At midnight the crowd round 
the hall of the Corps Ltgislatif is large : cries of La Dtchtance 
loud . a few cries, very feeble, of Vive la Rtpublique ! 

What followed on the 4th . the marvellous audacity with 
which half-a-dozen lawyers belonging to a pitiful minority in 
a Chamber elected by universal suffrage walked into the Hotel 
de Ville and said, " The Republic is established, and we are its 



2o6 THE PARISIANS. 



Government," history has told too recently for me to narrate. 
On the evening of the 5th the Council of Ten met again : the 
Pole ; the Italian radiant ; Grimm and Ferrier much excited 
and rather drunk ; the Mtdecin des Pauvres thoughtful ; and 
Armand Monnier gloomy. A rumour has spread that General 
Trochu, in accepting the charge imposed on him, has exacted 
from the Government the solemn assurance of respect for God, 
and for the rights of Family and Property. The Atheist is 
very indignant at the assent of the Government to the first 
proposition ; Monnier equally indignant at the assent to the 
second and third. What has that honest ouvrier conspired for ? 
. what has he suffered for? . of late nearly starved for? . but 
to marry another man's wife, getting rid of his own, and to 
legalise a participation in the property of his employer, . and 
now he is no better off than before. u There must be another 
revolution," he whispers to the Atheist 

" Certainly," whispers back the Atheist ; " he who desires to 
better this world must destroy all belief in another." 

The conclave was assembled when Lebeau entered by the 
private door. He took his place at -the head of the table; 
and, fixing on the group eyes that emitted a cold gleam through 
the spectacles, thus spoke . 

" Messieurs, or Citoyens, which ye will . I no longer call ye 
confreres . you have disobeyed or blundered my instructions. 
On such an occasion disobedience and blunder are crimes 
equally heinous." 

Angry murmurs. 

" Silence ! Do not add mutiny to your other offences. My 
instructions were simple and short. Aid in the abolition of the 
Empire. Do not aid in any senseless cry for a Republic or 
any other form of government. Leave that to the Legislature. 
What have you done? You swelled the crowd that invaded 
the Corps Ltgislatif. You, Dombinsky, not even a Frenchman, 
dare to mount the President's rostrum, and brawl forth your 
senseless jargon. You, Edgar Ferrier, from whom I expected 
better, ascend the tribune, and invite the ruffians in the crowd 
to march to the prisons and release the convicts; and all of 
you swell the mob at the Hotel de Ville, and inaugurate the 



THE PARISIANS. 207 



reign of folly by creating an oligarchy of lawyers to resist 
the march of triumphal armies. Messieurs, I have done with 
you. You are summoned for the last time: the Council is 
dissolved." 

With these words Lebeau put on his hat, and turned to 
depart. But the Pole, who was seated near him, sprang to his 
feet, exclaiming, . " Traitor, thou shalt not escape ! Comrades, 
he wants to sell us ! " 

" I have a right to sell you, at least, for I bought you, and 
a very bad bargain I made," said Lebeau, in a tone of withering 
sarcasm. 

" Liar ! " cried the Pole, and seized Lebeau by the left hand, 
while with the right he drew forth a revolver. Ferrier and 
Grimm, shouting, "A bas le renigat!" would have rushed 
forward in support of the Pole, but Monnier thrust himself 
between them and their intended victim, crying with a voice 
that dominated their yell, " Back ! . we are not assassins." Before 
he had finished the sentence the Pole was on his knees. With 
a vigour which no one could have expected from the seeming 
sexagenarian, Lebeau had caught the right arm of his assailant, 
twisted it back so mercilessly as almost to dislocate elbow and 
shoulder joint One barrel of the revolver discharged itself 
harmlessly against the opposite wall, and the pistol itself then 
fell from the unnerved hand of the would-be assassin ; and what 
with the pain and the sudden shock, the stalwart Dombinsky 
fell in the attitude of a suppliant at the feet of his unlooked- 
for vanquisher. 

Lebeau released his hold, possessed himself of the pistol, 
pointing the barrels towards Edgar Ferrier, who stood with 
mouth agape and lifted arm arrested, and said quietly: "Monsieur, 
have the goodness to open that window." Ferrier mechanically 
obeyed. "Now, hireling," continued Lebeau, addressing the 
vanquished Pole, "choose between the door and the window." 
" Go, my friend," whispered the Italian. The Pole did not 
utter a word ; but rising nimbly, and rubbing his arm, stalked 
to the door. There he paused a moment and said, " I retire 
overpowered by numbers," and vanished. 

"Messieurs," resumed Lebeau, calmly, "I repeat that the 



2o8 THE PARISIANS. 



Council is dissolved. In fact its object is fulfilled more abruptly 
than any of us foresaw, and by means which I at least had been 
too long out of Paris to divine as possible. I now see that 
every aberration of reason is possible to the Parisians. The 
object that united us was the fall of the Empire. As 
I have always frankly told you, with that object achieved, 
separation commences. Each of us has his own crotchet, which 
differs from the other man's. Pursue yours as you will . I 
pursue mine . you will find Jean Lebeau no more in Paris: 
il  efface. A u plaisir, mats pas au revoir" 

He retreated to the masked door and disappeared. 

Marc le Roux, the porter or custos of that ruinous council- 
hall, alarmed at the explosion of the pistol, had hurried into 
the room, and now stood unheeded by the door with mouth 
agape, while Lebeau thus curtly dissolved the assembly. But 
when the president vanished through the secret doorway, 
Le Roux also retreated. Hastily descending the stairs, he 
made as quickly as his legs could carry him for the mouth 
of the alley in the rear of the house, through which he knew 
that Lebeau must pass. He arrived, panting and breathless, 
in time to catch hold of the ex-president's arm. "Pardon, 
citizen," stammered he, "but do I understand that you have 
sent the Council of Ten to the devil ? " 

" I ? Certainly not, my good Paul ; I dismiss them to go 
where they like. If they prefer the direction you name it is 
their own choice. I declined to accompany them, and I advise 
you not to do so." 

"But, citizen, have you considered what is to become of 
Madame? Is she to be turned out of the lodge? Are my 
wages to stop, and Madame to be left without a crust to put 
into her soup ? " 

" Not so bad as that ; I have just paid the rent of the 
baraque for three months in advance, and there is your 
quarter's pay, in advance also. My kind regards to Madame, 
and tell her to keep your skin safe from the schemes of these 
lunatics." Thrusting some pieces of gold into the hands of the 
porter, Lebeau nodded his adieu, and hastened along his way. 

Absorbed in his own reflections, he did not turn to look 



\ 



THE PARISIANS. 209 



behind. But if he had, he could not have detected the dark 
form of the porter, creeping in the deep shadow of the streets 
with distant but watchful footsteps. 



CHAPTER IX. 

The conspirators, when left by their president, dispersed 
in deep, not noisy resentment. They were indeed too stunned 
for loud demonstration ; and belonging to different grades of 
life, and entertaining different opinions, their confidence in 
each other seemed lost now that the chief who had brought 
and kept them together was withdrawn from their union. 
The Italian and the Atheist slank away, whispering to each 
other. Grimm reproached Ferrier for deserting Dombinsky 
and obeying Lebeau. Ferrier accused Grimm of his German 
origin, and hinted at denouncing him as a Prussian spy. 
Gaspard le Noy linked his arm in Monnier's, and when they 
had gained the dark street without, leading into a labyrinth 
of desolate lanes, the Mtdicin des Pauvres said to the mechanic : 
" You are a brave fellow, Monnier. Lebeau owes you a good 
turn. But for your cry, ' We are not assassins/ the Pole might 
not have been left without support No atmosphere is so 
infectious as that in which we breathe the same air of revenge : 
when the violence of one man puts into action the anger or 
suspicion of others, they become like a pack of hounds, which 
follow the spring of the first hound, whether on the wild boar 
or their own master. Even I, who am by no means hot-headed, 
had my hand on my case-knife when the word ' assassin ' 
rebuked and disarmed me." 

"Nevertheless," said Monnier, gloomily, "I half repent the 
impulse which made me interfere to save that man. Better 
he should die than live to betray the cause we allowed him 
to lead." 

VOL. II. o 



2io THE PARISIANS. 



" Nay, mon ami, speaking candidly, we must confess that he 
never from the first pretended to advocate the cause for which 
you conspired. On the contrary, he always said that with the 
fall of the Empire our union would cease, and each become free 
to choose his own way towards his own after-objects." 

"Yes," answered Armand, reluctantly; "he said that to me 
privately, with still greater plainness than he said it to the 
Council. But I answered as plainly." 

" How ? " 

"I told him that the man who takes the first step in a 
revolution, and persuades others to go along with him, cannot 
in safety stand still or retreat when the next step is to be taken. 
It is ' en avant ' or ' d la lanterned So it shall be with him. Shall 
a fellow-being avail himself of the power over my mind which 
he derives from superior education or experience, . break into 
wild fragments my life, heretofore tranquil, orderly, happy, . 
make use of my opinions, which were then but harmless desires, 
to serve his own purpose, which was hostile to the opinions he 
roused into action, . say to me, 'Give yourself up to destroy 
the first obstacle in the way of securing a form of society 
which your inclinations prefer/ and then, that first obstacle 
destroyed, cry 'Halt! I go with you no further; I will not 
help you to piece together the life I have induced you to 
shatter; I will not aid you to substitute for the society that 
pained you the society that would please; I leave you, 
struggling, bewildered, maddened, in the midst of chaos within 
and without you ' ? Shall a fellow-being do this, and vanish 
with a mocking cry: 'Tool! I have had enough of thee; I 
cast thee aside as worthless lumber'? Ah! let him beware! 
The tool is of iron, and can be shaped to edge and point" 

The passion with which this rough eloquence was uttered, 
and the fierce sinister expression that had come over a counte- 
nance habitually open and manly, even when grave and stern, 
alarmed and startled Le Noy. "Pooh, my friend!" he said, 
rather falteringly, "you are too excited now to think justly. 
Go home and kiss your children. Never do anything that 
may make them shrink from their father. And as to Lebeau, 
try and forget him. He says he shall disappear from Paris. 



\ 



THE PARISIANS. 211 



I believe him. It is clear to me that the man is not what 
he seemed to us. No man of sixty could by so easy a sleight 
of hand have brought that giant Pole to his knee. If Lebeau 
re-appear it will be in some other form. Did you notice that in 
the momentary struggle his flaxen wig got disturbed, and beneath 
it I saw a dark curl. I suspect that the man is not only younger 
than he seemed, but of higher rank, . a conspirator, against one 
throne, perhaps, in order to be minister under another. There 
are such men." 

Before Monnier, who seemed struck by these conjectures, 
collected his thoughts to afiswer, a tall man in the dress of 
a sous lieutenant stopped under a dim gas lamp, and catching 
sight of the artisan's face, seized him by the hand, exclaiming, 
" Armand, man frhre I well met ; strange times, eh ? Come 
and discuss them at the Caft de Lyon yonder over a bowl 
of punch. I'll stand treat/' 

" Agreed, dear Charles." 

"And if this monsieur is a friend of yours, perhaps he will 
join us." 

"You are too obliging, Monsieur," answered Le Noy, not 
ill-pleased to get rid of his excited companion; "but it has 
been a busy day with me, and I am only fit for bed. Be 
abstinent of the punch, Armand- You are feverish already. 
Good night, Messieurs." 

The Caft de Lyon, in vogue among the National Guard of 
the quartier, was but a few yards off, and the brothers turned 
towards it arm in arm. " Who is the friend ? " asked Charles ; 
" I don't remember to have seen him with thee before," 

" He belongs to the medical craft . a good patriot and a kind 
man . attends the poor gratuitously. Yes, Charles, these are 
strange times ; what dost thou think will come of them ? " 

They had now entered the caft; and Charles had ordered the 
punch, and seated himself at a vacant table before he replied. 
" What will come of these times ? I will tell thee. National 
deliverance and regeneration through the ascendancy of the 
National Guard." 

"Eh? I don't take," said Armand, bewildered. 

"Probably not," answered Charles, with an air of com- 

O 2 



2!2 THE PARISIANS. 



passionate conceit ; " thou art a dreamer, but I am a politician." 
He tapped his forehead significantly. "At this custom-house 
ideas are examined before they are passed." 

Armand gazed at his brother wistfully, and with a deference 
he rarely manifested towards any one who disputed his own 
claims to superior intelligence. Charles was a few years older 
than Monnier ; he was of larger build ; he had shaggy lowering 
eyebrows, a long obstinate upper lip, the face of a man who was 
accustomed to lay down the law. Inordinate self-esteem often 
gives that character to a physiognomy otherwise common-place. 
Charles passed for a deep thinker in his own set, which was 
a very different set from Armand's . not among workmen but 
small shopkeepers. He had risen in life to a grade beyond 
Armand's ; he had always looked to the main chance, married 
the widow of a hosier and glover much older than himself, 
and in her right was a very respectable tradesman, comfortably 
well off; a Liberal, of course, but a Liberal bourgeois, equally 
against those above him and those below. Needless to add 
that he had no sympathy with his brother's socialistic opinions. 
Still he loved that brother as well as he could love any one 
except himself. And Armand, who was very affectionate, 
and with whom family ties were very strong, returned that 
love with ample interest ; and though so fiercely at war with 
the class to which Charles belonged, was secretly proud of 
having a brother who was of that class. So in England I 
have known the most violent antagonist of the landed aristocracy 
. himself a cobbler . who interrupts a discourse on the crimes 
of the aristocracy by saying, " Though I myself descend from 
a county family." 

In an evil day Charles Monnier, enrolled in the National 
Guard, had received promotion in that patriotic corps. From 
that date he began to neglect his shop, to criticise military 
matters, and to think that if merit had fair play he should be 
a Cincinnatus or a Washington, he had not decided which. 

"Yes," resumed Charles, ladling out the punch, "thou hast 
wit enough to perceive that our generals are imbeciles or traitors ; 
that gredin Bonaparte has sold the army for ten millions of 
francs to Bismarck, and I have no doubt that Wimpffen has his 



THE PARISIANS. 213 



share of the bargain. M'Mahon was wounded conveniently, and 
has his own terms for it The regular army is nowhere. Thou 
wilt see . thou wilt see . they will not stop the march of the 
Prussians. Trochu will be obliged to come to the National 
Guard. Then we shall say, . General, give us our terms, and 
go to sleep.' I shall be summoned to the council of war. I 
have my plan. I explain it . 'tis accepted . it succeeds. I am 
placed in supreme command . the Prussians are chased back to 
their sour-krout. And I . well . I don't like to boast, but thou'lt 
see . thou'lt see . what will happen." 

" And thy plan, Charles . thou hast formed it already ? " 

"Ay, ay, . the really military genius is prompt, mon petit 
Armand . a flash of the brain. Hark ye ! Let the Vandals 
come to Paris and invest it. Whatever their numbers on paper, 
I don't care a button ; they can only have a few thousands 
at any given point in the vast circumference of the capital. 
Any fool must grant that . thou must grant it, eh ? " 

" It seems just." 

" Of course. Well, then, we proceed by sorties of 200,000 men 
repeated every other day, and in twelve days the Prussians are 
in full flight. 1 The country rises on their flight . they are cut 
to pieces. I depose Trochu . the National Guard elects the 
Saviour of France. I have a place in my eye for thee. Thou 
art superb as a decorator . thou shalt be Minister des Beaux 
Arts. But keep clear of the canaille. No more strikes then 
. thou wilt be an employer . respect thy future order." 

Armand smiled mournfully. Though of intellect which, had 
it been disciplined, was far superior to his brother's, it was so 
estranged from practical opinions, so warped, so heated, so 
flawed and cracked in parts, that he did not see the ridicule 
of Charles's braggadocio. Charles had succeeded in life, Armand 
had failed ; and Armand believed in the worldly wisdom of the 



1 Charles Monnier seems to have indiscreetly blabbed out his "idea," for it was 
plagiarised afterwards at a meeting of the National Guards in the Salle de la Bourse 
by Citizen Rochebrune (slain 19th January, 1871, in the affair of Montretout). The 
plan, which he developed nearly in the same words as Charles Monnier, was received 
with lively applause ; and at the close of his speech it was proposed to name at once 
Citizen Rochebrune General of the National Guard, an honour which, unhappily for 
his country, the citizen had the modesty to decline. 



2! 4 THE PARISIANS. 



elder born. But he was far too sincere for any bribe to tempt 
him to forsake his creed and betray his opinions. And he 
knew that it must be a very different revolution from that 
which his brother contemplated, that could allow him to marry 
another man's wife, and his " order " to confiscate other people's 
property. 

"Don't talk of strikes, Charles. What is done is done. I 
was led into heading a strike, not on my own account, for I was 
well paid and well off, but for the sake of my fellow- workmen. 
I may regret now what I did, for the sake of Marie and the 
little ones. But it is ao affair of honour, and I cannot with- 
draw from the cause till my order, as thou namest my class, 
has its rights." 

" Bah ! thou wilt think better of it when thou art an employer. 
Thou hast suffered enough already. Remember that I warned 
thee against that old fellow in spectacles whom I met once 
at thy house. I told thee he would lead thee ; into mischief, 
and then leave thee to get out of it. I saw through him. I 
have a head! Vat* 9 

"Thou wert a true prophet . he has duped me. But in 
moving me he has set others in movement ; and I suspect he 
will find he has duped himself. Time will show." 

Here the brothers were joined by some loungers belonging 
to the National Guard. The talk became general, the potations 
large. Towards daybreak Armand reeled home, drunk for 
the first time in his life. He was one of those whom drink 
makes violent Marie had been sitting up for him, alarmed 
at his lengthened absence. But when she would have thrown 
herself on his breast, her pale face and her passionate sobs enraged 
him. He flung her aside roughly. From that night the man's 
nature was changed. If, as a physiognomist has said, each man 
has in him a portion of the wild beast, which is suppressed by 
mild civilising circumstances, and comes uppermost when self- 
control is lost, the nature of many an honest workman, 
humane and tender-hearted as the best of us, commenced a 
change into the wild beast, that raged through the civil war 
of the Communists, on the day when half-a-dozen Incapables, 
with no more claim to represent the people of Paris than half- 



THE PARISIANS. 215 



a-dozen monkeys would have, were allowed to elect them- 
selves to supreme power, and in the very fact of that election 
released all the elements of passion, and destroyed all the 
bulwarks of order. 



CHAPTER X. 

No man perhaps had more earnestly sought and more pas- 
sionately striven for the fall of the Empire than Victor de Maul&m ; 
and perhaps no man was more dissatisfied and disappointed by 
the immediate consequences of that fall. In first conspiring 
against the Empire, he had naturally enough, in common with 
all the more intelligent enemies of the dynasty, presumed that 
its fate would be worked out by the normal effect of civil 
causes . the alienation of the educated classes, the discontent 
of the artisans, the eloquence of the press arid of popular 
meetings, strengthened in proportion as the Emperor had 
been compelled to relax the former checks upon the licence of 
either. And De Maul&m had no less naturally concluded that 
there would be time given for the preparation of a legitimate 
and rational form of government to succeed that which was 
destroyed. For, as has been hinted or implied, this remark- 
able man was not merely an instigator of revolution through 
the Secret Council, and the turbulent agencies set in move- 
ment through the lower strata of society; . he was also in 
confidential communication with men eminent for wealth, 
station, and political repute, from whom he obtained the 
funds necessary for the darker purposes of conspiracy, into 
the elaboration of which they did not inquire ; and these men, 
though belonging like himself to the Liberal party, were no hot- 
blooded democrats. Most of them were in favour of constitu- 
tional monarchy; all of them for forms of government very 
different from any republic in which socialists or communists 
could find themselves uppermost. Among these politicians 



216 THE PARISIANS. 



were persons ambitious and able, who, in scheming for the fall 
of the Empire, had been prepared to undertake the task of 
conducting to ends compatible with modern civilisation, the 
revolution they were willing to allow a mob at Paris to com- 
mence. The opening of the war necessarily suspended their 
designs. How completely the events of the 4th September 
mocked the calculations of their ablest minds, and paralysed 
the action of their most energetic spirits, will appear in the 
conversation I am about to record. It takes place between 
Victor de Mauteon and the personage to whom he had ad- 
dressed the letter written on the night before the interview 
with Louvier, in which Victor had announced his intention of 
re-appearing in Paris in his proper name and rank. I shall 
designate this correspondent as vaguely as possible ; let me 
call him the Incognito. He may yet play so considerable a 
part in the history of France as a potent representative of the 
political philosophy of De Tocqueville . that is of Liberal 
principles incompatible with the absolute power either of a 
sovereign or a populace, and resolutely opposed to experi- 
ments on the foundations of civilised society . that it would 
be unfair to himself and his partisans if, in a work like this, 
a word were said that could lead malignant conjecture to his 
identity with any special chief of the opinions of which I here 
present him only as a type. 

The Incognito, entering Victor's apartment : . 
" My dear friend, even if I had not received your telegram, 
I should have hastened hither on the news of this astounding 
revolution. It is only in Paris that such a tragedy could be 
followed by such a farce. You were on the spot . a spectator. 
Explain it if you can. " 

De M aulon. . " I was more than a spectator ; I was an actor. 
Hiss me . I deserve it. When the terrible news from Sedan 
reached Paris, in the midst of the general stun and bewilderment 
I noticed a hesitating timidity among all those who had wares 
in their shops and a good coat on their backs. They feared 
that to proclaim the Empire defunct would be to install the 
Red Republic with all its paroxysm of impulsive rage and 
all its theories of wholesale confiscation. But since it was 



THE PARISIANS. 217 



impossible for the object we had in view to let slip the occa- 
sion of deposing the dynasty which stood in its way, it was 
necessary to lose no time in using the revolutionary part of 
the populace for that purpose. I assisted in doing so ; my 
excuse is this. that in a time of crisis a man of action must 
go straight to his immediate object, and in so doing employ 
the instruments at his command. I made, however, one error 
in judgment which admits of no excuse, I relied on all I had 
heard, and all I had observed, of the character of Trochu, and 
I was deceived, in common, I believe, with all his admirers, 
and three parts of the educated classes of Paris." 

INCOGNITO. . "I should have been equally deceived ! Trochu's 
conduct is a riddle that I doubt if he himself can ever solve. 
He was master of the position ; he had the military force in 
his hands if he combined with Palikao, which, whatever the 
jealousies between the two, it was his absolute duty to do. 
He had a great prestige . 



n 



De MaulSon. . " And for the moment a still greater popu- 
larity. His ipse dixit could have determined the wavering and 
confused spirits of the population. I was prepared for his 
abandonment of the Emperor . even of the Empress and the 
Regency. But how could I imagine that he, the man of 
moderate politics, of Orleanistic leanings, the clever writer, the 
fine talker, the chivalrous soldier, the religious Breton, could 
abandon everything that was legal, everything that could save 
France against the enemy, and Paris against civil discord ; 
that he would connive at the annihilation of the Senate, of 
the popular Assembly, of every form of Government that 
could be recognised as legitimate at home or abroad, accept 
service under men whose doctrines were opposed to all his 
antecedents, all his professed opinions, and inaugurate a chaos 
under the name of a Republic ! " 

Incognito. . " How, indeed ? How suppose that the Na- 
tional Assembly, just elected by a majority of seven millions 
and a half, could be hurried into a conjuring-box, and reappear 
as the travesty of a Venetian oligarchy, composed of half- 
a-dozen of its most unpopular members ! The sole excuse for 
Trochu is, that he deemed all other considerations insignificant 



218 THE PARISIANS. 



compared with the defence of Paris, and the united action of 
the nation against the invaders. But if that were his honest 
desire in siding with this monstrous usurpation of power, he 
did everything by which the desire could be frustrated. Had 
there been any provisional body composed of men known and 
esteemed, elected by the Chambers, supported by Trochu and 
the troops at his back, there would have been a rallying-point 
for the patriotism of the provinces ; and in the wise suspense 
of any constitution to succeed that Government until the 
enemy were chased from the field, all partisans . Imperialists, 
Legitimists, Orleanists, Republicans . would have equally ad- 
journed their differences. But a democratic Republic, pro- 
claimed by a Parisian mob for a nation ip which sincere 
democratic Republicans are a handful, in contempt of an 
Assembly chosen by the country at large; headed by men 
in whom the provinces have no trust, and for whom their 
own representatives are Violently cashiered ; . can you conceive 
such a combination of Wet blankets supplied by the irony of 
Fate for the extinction of every spark of ardour in the population 
from which armies are to be gathered in haste, at the beck of 
usurpers they distrust and despise ? Paris has excelled itself 
in folly. Hungering for peace, it proclaims a Government 
which has no legal power to treat for it Shrieking out for 
allies among the monarchies, it annihilates the hope of obtaining 
them ; its sole chance of escape from siege, famine, and bom- 
bardment, is in the immediate and impassioned sympathy of 
the provinces ; and it revives all the grudges which the pro- 
vinces have long sullenly felt against the domineering pretensions 
of the capital, and invokes the rural populations, which comprise 
the pith and sinew of armies, in the name of men whom I verily 
believe they detest still more than they do the Prussians. Victor, 
it is enough to make one despair of his country ! All beyond 
the hour seems anarchy and ruin." 

" Not so ! " exclaimed De Mauteon. " Everything comes to 
him who knows how to wait. The Empire is destroyed ; the 
usurpation that follows it has no roots. It will but serve to 
expedite the establishment of such a condition as we have 
meditated and planned . a constitution adapted to our age 



\ 



THE PARISIANS. 219 



and our people, not based wholly on untried experiments, 
taking the best from nations that do not allow Freedom and 
Order to be the sport of any popular breeze. From the 
American Republic we must borrow the only safeguards against 
the fickleness of the universal suffrage which, though it was 
madness to concede in any ancient community, once conceded 
cannot be safely abolished, . viz., the salutary law that no 
article of the Constitution once settled, can be altered without 
the consent of two-thirds of the legislative body. By this law 
we insure permanence, and that concomitant love for institutions 
which is engendered by time and custom. Secondly, the forma- 
tion of a senate on such principles as may secure to it in all 
times of danger a confidence and respect which counteract in 
public opinion the rashness and heat of the popular assembly. 
On what principles that senate should be formed, with what 
functions invested, what share of the executive. especially 
in foreign affairs, declarations of war, or treaties of peace . 
should be accorded to it, will no doubt need the most deliberate 
care of the ablest minds. But a senate I thus sketch has alone 
rescued America from the rashness of counsel incident to a 
democratic Chamber; and it is still more essential to France, 
with still more favourable elements for its creation. From 
England we must borrow the great principle that has alone 
saved her from revolution . that the head of the State can do 
no wrong. He leads no armies, he presides over no Cabinet. 
All responsibility rests with his advisers ; and where we upset 
a dynasty, England changes an administration. Whether the 
head of the State should have the title of sovereign or president, 
whether he be hereditary or elected, is a question of minor 
importance impossible now to determine, but on which I 
heartily concur with you that hereditary monarchy is infinitely 
better adapted to the habits of Frenchmen, to their love of 
show and of honours . and infinitely more preservative from 
all the dangers which result from constant elections to such 
a dignity, with parties so heated, and pretenders to the rank 
so numerous . than any principle by which a popular demagogue 
or a successful general is enabled to destroy the institutions he 
is elected to guard. On these fundamental doctrines for the 



vt 



220 THE PARISIANS. 



regeneration of France I think we are agreed. And I believe 
when the moment arrives to promulgate them, through an 
expounder of weight like yourself, they will rapidly commend 
themselves to the intellect of France. For they belong to 
common-sense; and in the ultimate prevalence of common-sense 
I have a faith which I refuse to medievalists who would restore 
the right divine ; and still more to fanatical quacks, who imagine 
that the worship of the Deity, the ties of family, and the rights 
of property are errors at variance with the progress of society. 
Qui vivra, verra" 

Incognito. . "In the outlines of the policy you so ably 
enunciate I heartily concur. But if France is, I will not say 
to be regenerated, but to have fair play among the nations 
of Europe, I add one or two items to the programme. France 
must be saved from Paris, not by subterranean barracks and 
trains, the impotence of which we see to-day with a general 
in command of the military force, but by conceding to France 
its proportionate share of the power now monopolised by Paris. 
All this system of centralisation, equally tyrannical and corrupt, 
must be eradicated. Talk of examples from America, of which 
I know little . from England, of which I know much, . what 
can we more advantageously borrow from England than that 
diffusion of all her moral and social power which forbids the 
congestion of blood in one vital part ? Decentralise ! decentralise ! 
decentralise ! will be my incessant cry, if ever the time comes 
when my cry will be heard. France can never be a genuine 
France until Paris has no more influence over the destinies 
of France than London has over those of England. But on 
this theme I could go on till midnight. Now to the immediate 
point : what do you advise me to do in this crisis, and what do 
you propose to do yourself ? " 

De Maulon put his hand to his brow, and remained a few 
moments silent and thoughtful. At last he looked up with 
that decided expression of face which was not the least among 
his many attributes for influence over those with whom he came 
into contact. 

" For you, on whom so much of the future depends, my advice 
is brief . have nothing to do with the present. All who join 



THE PARISIANS. 221 



this present mockery of a Government will share the fall that 
attends it . a fall from which one or two of their body may 
possibly recover by casting blame on their confreres, . you never 
could. But it is not for you to oppose that Government with 
an enemy on its march to Paris. You are not a soldier; military 
command is not in your rdle. The issue of events is uncertain | 
but whatever it be, the men in power cannot conduct a pros- 
perous war nor obtain an honourable peace. Hereafter you may 
be the Dens ex machinA. No personage of that rank and with 
that mission appears till the end of the play : we are only in the 
first act Leave Paris at once, and abstain from all action." 

Incognito (dejectedly). . "I cannot deny the soundness of 
your advice, though in accepting it I feel unutterably saddened. 
Still you, the calmest and shrewdest observer among my friends, 
think there is cause for hope, not despair. Victor, I have more 
than most men to make life pleasant, but I would lay down life 
at this moment with you. You know me well enough to be 
sure that I utter no melodramatic fiction when I say that I 
love my country as a young man loves the ideal of his dreams 
. with my whole mind and heart and soul ! and the thought 
that I cannot now aid her in the hour of her mortal trial is 
. is 

The man's voice broke down, and he turned aside, veiling his 
face with a hand that trembled. 

De Mauleon. . " Courage ! . patience ! All Frenchmen have 
the first ; set them an example they much need in the second. 
I, too, love my country, though I owe to it little enough, heaven 
knows. I suppose love of country is inherent in all who 
are not Internationalists. They profess only to love humanity, 
by which, if they mean anything practical, they mean a rise 
in wages." 

INCOGNITO (rousing himself, and with a half smile). . "Always 
cynical, Victor . always belying yourself. But now that you 
have advised my course, what will be your own ? Accompany 
me, and wait for better times." 

" No, noble friend ; our positions are different. Yours is made 
. mine yet to make. But for this war I think I could have 
secured a seat in the Chamber. As I wrote you, I found that 



222 THE PARISIANS. 



my kinsfolk were of much influence in their department, and 
that my restitution to my social grade, and the repute I had 
made as an Orleanist, inclined them to forget my youthful errors 
and to assist my career. But the Chamber ceases to exist 
My journal I shall drop. I cannot support the Government ; it 
is not a moment to oppose it. My prudent course is silence." 

Incognito. . "But is not your journal essential to your 
support ? " 

De Mauleon! . " Fortunately not Its profits enabled me 
to lay by for the rainy day that has come ; and having re- 
imbursed you and all friends the sums necessary to start it, 
I stand clear of all debt, and for my slender wants, a rich 
man. If I continued the journal I should be beggared; for 
there would be no readers to Common Sense in this interval 
of lunacy. Nevertheless, during this interval, I trust to other 
ways for winning a name that will open my rightful path of 
ambition whenever we again have a legislature in which Common 
Sense can be heard." 

Incognito. . u But how win that name, silenced as a writer ? n 

De Maulon.. " You forget that I have fought in Algeria. 
In a few days Paris will be in a state of siege ; and then . and 
then," he added, and very quietly dilated on the renown of a 
patriot or the grave of a soldier. 

" I envy you the chance of either," said the Incognito ; and 
after a few more brief words he departed, his hat drawn over 
his brows, and entering a hired carriage which he had left at 
the corner of the quiet street, was consigned to the station 
du , just in time for the next train. 



THE PARISIANS. 223 



CHAPTER XL 

Victor dressed and went out The streets were crowded. 
Workmen were everywhere employed in the childish operation 
of removing all insignia, and obliterating all names that showed 
where an Empire had existed. One greasy citizen, mounted 
on a ladder, was effacing the words " Boulevard Haussman," and 
substituting for Haussman, " Victor Hugo." 

Suddenly De Maul6on came on a group of blouses, inter- 
spersed with women holding babies and ragged boys holding 
stones, collected round a well-dressed slender man, at whom 
they were hooting and gesticulating, with menaces of doing 
something much worse. By an easy effort of his strong frame 
the Vicomte pushed his way through the tormentors, and gave 
his arm to their intended victim. 

" Monsieur, allow me to walk home with you." 
Therewith the shrieks and shouts and gesticulations increased. 
u Another impertinent ! Another traitor ! Drown him ! Drown 
them both ! To the Seine ! To the Seine ! " A burly fellow 
rushed forward, and the rest made a plunging push. The out- 
stretched arm of De Mauteon kept the ringleader at bay. " Mes 
enfans? cried Victor with a calm clear voice, * I am not an 
Imperialist Many of you have read the articles signed Pierre 
Firmin, written against the tyrant Bonaparte when he was at 
the height of his power. I am Pierre Firmin . make way for 
me." Probably not one in the crowd had ever read a word 
written by Pierre Firmin, nor even heard of the name. But 
they did not like to own ignorance ; and that burly fellow did 
not like to encounter that arm of iron which touched his throat. 
So he cried out, " Oh ! if you are the great Pierre Firmin, that 
alters the case. Make way for the patriot Pierre ! " " But," 
shrieked a virago, thrusting her baby into De Mauteon's face, 
"the other is the Imperialist, the capitalist, the vile Duplessis. 
At least we will have him." De Mauteon suddenly snatched the 
baby from her, and said, with imperturbable good temper, 



224 THE PARISIANS. 



" Exchange of prisoners. I resign the man, and I keep the 
baby." 

No one who does not know the humours of a Parisian mob 
can comprehend the suddenness of popular change, or the 
magical mastery over crowds which is effected by quiet courage 
and a ready joke. The group was appeased at once. Even 
the virago laughed ; and when De Mauteon restored the infant 
to her arms, with a gold piece thrust into its tiny clasp, she 
eyed the gold, and cried, "God bless you, citizen!" The two 
gentlemen made their way safely now. 

"M. de Mauteon," said Duplessis, " I know not how to thank 
you. Without your seasonable aid I should have been in great 
danger of life ; and . would you believe it ? . the woman who 
denounced and set the mob on me was one of the objects 
of a charity which I weekly dispense to the poor." 

" Of course I believe that At the Red clubs no crime is 
more denounced than that of charity. It is the ' fraud against 
Egalitf . a vile trick of the capitalist to save to himself the 
millions he ought to share with all by giving a sou to one. 
Meanwhile, take my advice, M. Duplessis, and quit Paris with 
your young daughter. This is no place for rich Imperialists 
at present." 

"I perceived that before to-day's adventure. I distrust the 
looks of my very servants, and shall depart with Vaterie this 
evening for Bretagne." 

" Ah ! I heard from Louvier that you propose to pay off his 
mortgage on Rochebriant, and make yourself sole proprietor of 
my young kinsman's property." 

"I trust you only believe half what you hear. I mean to 
save Rochebriant from Louvier, and consign it, free of charge, 
to your kinsman, as the dot of his bride, my daughter." 

" I rejoice to learn such good news for the head of my house. 
But Alain himself . is he not with the prisoners of war ? " 

" No, thank heaven. He went forth an officer of a regiment 
of Parisian Mobiles . went full of sanguine confidence ; he came 
back with his regiment in mournful despondency. The un- 
discipline of his regiment, of the Parisian Mobiles generally, 
appears incredible. Their insolent disobedience to their officers, 



THE PARISIANS. 225 



their ribald scoffs at their general . oh, it is sickening to speak 
of it ! Alain distinguished himself by repressing a mutiny and 
is honoured by a signal compliment from the commander in 
a letter of recommendation to Palikao. But Palikao is nobody 
now. Alain has already been sent into Bretagne, commissioned 
to assist in organising a corps of Mobiles in his neighbourhood. 
Trochu, as you know, is a Breton. Alain is confident of the 
good conduct of the Bretons. What will Louvier do? He 
is an arch Republican ; is he pleased now he has got what 
he wanted ? " 

" I suppose he is pleased, for he is terribly frightened. Fright 
is one of the great enjoyments of a Parisian. Good day. 
Your path to your hotel is clear now. Remember me kindly 
to Alain." 

De Mauleon continued his way through streets sometimes 
deserted, sometimes thronged. At the commencement of the Rue 
de Florentin he encountered the brothers Vandemar walking 
arm in arm. 

" Ha, De Mauleon ! " cried Enguerrand ; " what is the last 
minute's news?" 

" I can't guess. Nobody knows at Paris how soon one folly 
swallows up another. Saturn here is always devouring one or 
other of his children." 

"They say that Vinoy, after a most masterly retreat, is 
almost at our gates with 80,000 men." 

"And this day twelvemonth we may know what he does 
with them." 

Here Raoul, who seemed absorbed in gloomy reflections, 
halted before the hotel in which the Contessa di Rimini lodged, 
and with a nod to his brother, and a polite, if not cordial saluta- 
tion to Victor, entered the porte cochtre. 

"Your brother seems out of spirits, . a pleasing contrast to 
the uproarious mirth with which Parisians welcome the advance 
of calamity " 

"Raoul, as you know, is deeply religious. He regards the 
defeat we have sustained, and the peril that threatens us, as 
the beginning of a divine chastisement, justly incurred by our 
sins . I mean, the sins of Paris. In vain my father reminds 

VOL. IL P 



226 THE PARISIANS. 

him of Voltaire's story, in which the ship goes down with a 
fripon on board. In order to punish the fripon, the honest 
folks are drowned." 

" Is your father going to remain on board the ship, and share 
the fate of the other honest folks ? " 

" Pas si bite. He is off to Dieppe for sea-bathing. He says 
that Paris has grown so dirty since the 4th September, that 
it is only fit for the feet of the Unwashed. He wished my 
mother to accompany him ; but she replies, ' No ; there are 
already too many wounded not to need plenty of nurses/ 
She is assisting to inaugurate a society of ladies in aid of 
the S&urs de Charitt. Like Raoul, she is devout, but she 
has not his superstitions. Still his superstitions are the 
natural reaction of a singularly earnest and pure nature from 
the frivolity and corruption which, when kneaded well up 
together with a slice of sarcasm, Paris calls philosophy." 

"And what, my dear Enguerrand, do you propose to do? " 

"That depends on whether we are really besieged. If so, 
of course I become a soldier." 

" I hope not a National Guard ? " 

" I care not in what name I fight so that I fight for 
France." 

As Enguerrand said these simple words, his whole counte- 
nance seemed changed. The crest rose; the eyes sparkled; 
the fair and delicate beauty which had made him the darling 
of women . the joyous sweetness of expression and dainty grace 
of high breeding which made him the most popular companion 
to men, . were exalted in a masculine nobleness of aspect, from 
which a painter might have taken hints for a study of the young 
Achilles separated for ever from effeminate companionship at 
the sight of the weapons of war. De Mauteon gazed on him 
admiringly. We have seen that he shared the sentiments 
uttered . had resolved on the same course of action. But it 
was with the tempered warmth of a man who seeks to divest 
his thoughts and his purpose of the ardour of romance, and 
who, in serving his country, calculates on the gains to his own 
ambition. Nevertheless he admired in Enguerrand the image 
of his own impulsive and fiery youth. 



THE PARISIANS. 227 



u And you, I presume," resumed Enguerrand, " will fight too, 
but rather with pen than with sword. " 

" Pens will now only be dipped in red ink, and common-sense 
never writes in that colour; as for the sword, I have passed 
the age of forty-five, at which military service halts. But if 
some experience in active service, some knowledge of the art 
by which soldiers are disciplined and led, will be deemed 
sufficient title to a post of command, however modest the 
grade be, I shall not be wanting among the defenders of 
Paris. ,, 

" My brave dear Vicomte, if you are past the age to serve, 
you are in the ripest age to command ; and with the testi- 
monials and the cross you won in Algeria, your application 
for employment will be received with gratitude by any general 
so able as Trochu. " 

* I don't know whether I shaH apply to Trochu. I would 
rather be elected to command even by the Mobiles or the 
National Guard, of whom I have just spoken disparagingly ; 
and no doubt both corps will soon claim and win the right 
to choose their officers. But if elected, no matter by whom, 
I shall make a preliminary condition ; the men under me shall 
train, and drill, and obey, . soldiers of a very different kind 
from the youthful Pekins nourished on absinthe and self-conceit, 
and applauding that Bombastes Furioso, M. Hugo, when he 
assures the enemy that Paris will draw an idea from its 
scabbard. But here comes Savarin. Bon jour, my dear poet." 

" Don't say good day. An evil day for journalists and 
writers who do not out-Herod Blanqui and Pyat. I know 
not how I shall get bread and cheese. My poor suburban 
villa is to be pulled down by way of securing Paris ; my 
journal will be suppressed by way of establishing the liberty 
of the press. It ventured to suggest that the people of France 
should have some choice in the form of their government" 

u That was very indiscreet, my poor Savarin," said Victor ; 
" I wonder your printing-office has not been pulled down. We 
are now at the moment when wise men hold their tongues." 

" Perhaps so, M. de Mauteon. It might have been wiser 
for all of us, you as well as myself, if we had not allowed 

P 2 



228 THE PARISIANS. 



our tongues to be so free before this moment arrived. We 
live to learn ; and if we ever have what may be called a passable 
government again, in which we may say pretty much what 
we like, there is one thing I will not do, I will not undermine 
that government without seeing a very clear way to the govern- 
ment that is to follow it. What say you, Pierre Firmin ?" 

* Frankly, I say that I deserve your rebuke," answered De 
Mauteon, thoughtfully. " But, of course, you are going to take 
or send Madame Savarin out of Paris.' , 

"Certainly. We have made a very pleasant party for our 
hegira this evening . among others the Morleys. Morley is 
terribly disgusted. A Red Republican slapped him on the 
shoulder and said, 'American, we have a republic as well as 
you.' ' Pretty much you know about republics/ growled Morley ; 
'a French republic is as much like ours as a baboon is like 
a man.' On which the Red roused the mob, who dragged the 
American off to the nearest station of the National Guard, 
where he was accused of being a Prussian spy. With some 
difficulty, and lots of brag about the sanctity of the stars and 
stripes, he escaped with a reprimand, and caution how to 
behave himself in future. So he quits a city in which there 
no longer exists freedom of speech. My wife hoped to induce 
Mademoiselle Cicogna to accompany us; I grieve to say she 
refuses. You know she is engaged in marriage to Gustave 
Rameau ; and his mother dreads the effect that these Red Clubs 
and his own vanity may have upon his excitable temperament 
if the influence of Mademoiselle Cicogna be withdrawn/' 

" How could a creature so exquisite as Isaura Cicogna ever 
find fascination in Gustave Rameau ! " exclaimed Enguerrand. 

" A woman like her," answered De Mauteon, " always finds a 
fascination in self-sacrifice." 

" I think you divine the truth," said Savarin, rather mournfully. 
" But I must bid you good-bye. May we live to shake hands 
r/ttnis sous des meilleurs auspices? 

Here Savarin hurried off, and the other two men strolled into 
the Champs Elys^es, which were crowded with loungers, gay and 
careless, as if there had been no disaster at Sedan, no overthrow 
of an Empire, no enemy on its road to Paris. 



THE PARISIANS. 229 



In fact the Parisians at once the most incredulous and the 
most credulous of all populations, believed that the Prussians 
would never be so impertinent as to come in sight of the 
gates. Something would occur to stop them ! The king had 
declared he did not war on Frenchmen, but on the Emperor : 
the Emperor gone, the war was over. A democratic republic 
was instituted. A horrible thing in its way it is true ; but how 
could the Pandour tyrant brave the infection of democratic 
doctrines among his own barbarian armies ? Were not placards, 
addressed to our " German brethren," posted upon the walls 
of Paris, exhorting the Pandours to fraternise with their fellow- 
creatures? Was not Victor Hugo going to publish "a letter 
to the German people ? " Had not Jules Favre graciously 
offered peace, with the assurance that " France would not cede 
a stone of her fortresses . an inch of her territory ? She would 
pardon the invaders and not march upon Berlin ! " To all these, 
and many more such incontestable proofs, that the idea of a 
siege was moonshine, did Enguerrand and Victor listen as they 
joined group after group of their fellow-countrymen : nor did 
Paris cease to harbour such pleasing illusions, amusing itself with 
piously laying crowns at the foot of the statue of Strasbourg, 
swearing " they would be worthy of their Alsatian brethren," 
till on the 19th of September the last telegram was received, 
and Paris was cut off from the rest of the world by the iron 
line of the Prussian invaders. " Tranquil and terrible," says 
Victor Hugo, "she awaits the invasion! A volcano needs no 
assistance." 



CHAPTER XII. 

We left Graham Vane slowly recovering from the attack of 
fever which had arrested his journey to Berlin in quest of the 
Count von Rudesheira He was, however, saved the prosecu- 
tion of that journey, and his direction turned back to France by 



2$o THE PARISIANS. 



a German newspaper which informed him that the King of 
Prussia was at Rheims, and that the Count von Rudesheim 
was among the eminent personages gathered there around their 
sovereign. In conversing the same day with the kindly doctor 
who attended him, Grahatii ascertained that this German noble 
held a high command in the German armies, and bore a no less 
distinguished reputation as a wise political counsellor than he 
had earned as a military chief As soon as he was able to 
travel, and indeed before the good doctor sanctioned his de- 
parture, Graham took his way to Rheims, uncertain, however, 
whether the Count would still be found there. I spare the 
details of his journey, interesting as they were. On reaching 
the famous, and in the eyes of Legitimists the sacred city, the 
Englishman had no difficulty in ascertaining the house, not far 
from the cathedral, in which the Count von Rudesheim had 
taken his temporary abode. Walking toward it from the 
small hotel in which he had been lucky enough to find a room 
disengaged . slowly, for he was still feeble . he was struck by 
the quiet conduct of the German soldiery, and, save in their 
appearance, the peaceful aspect of the streets. Indeed there 
was ah air of festive gaiety about the place, as in an English 
town in which some popular regiment is quartered. The 
German soldiers thronged the shops, buying largely ; lounged 
into the cafts; here and there attempted flirtations with the 
grisettes who laughed at their French and blushed at their 
compliments ; and in their good-humoured, somewhat bashful 
cheeriness, there was no trace of the insolence of conquest 

But as Graham neared the precincts of the cathedral his ear 
caught a grave and solemn music, which he at first supposed to 
come from within the building. But as he paused and looked 
round, he saw a group of the German military, on whose 
stalwart forms and fair manly earnest faces the setting sun 
cast its calm lingering rays. They were chanting, in voices not 
loud but deep, Luther's majestic hymn " Nun danket alle Gott" 
The chant awed even the ragged beggar boys who had followed 
the Englishman, as they followed any stranger, would have 
followed King William himself, whining for alms. " What a 
type of the difference between the two nations!" thought 



THE PARISIANS. 231 



Graham ; " the Marseillaise, and Luther's Hymn ! " While 
thus meditating and listening, a man in a general's uniform 
came slowly out of the cathedral, with his hands clasped 
behind his back, and his head bent slightly downwards. He, 
too, paused on hearing the hymn ; then unclasped his hand 
and beckoned to one of the officers, to whom approaching he 
whispered a word or two, and passed on towards the Episcopal 
palace. The hymn hushed, and the singers quietly dispersed. 
Graham divined rightly that the general had thought a hymn 
thanking the God of battles might wound the feelings of the 
inhabitants of the vanquished city . not, however, that any of 
them were likely to understand the language in which the 
thanks were uttered. Graham followed the measured steps 
of the general, whose hands were again clasped behind his 
back . the musing habit of Von Moltke, as it had been of 
Napoleon the First 

Continuing his way, the Englishman soon reached the house 
in which the Count von Rudesheim was lodged, and sending 
in his card, was admitted at once through an ante-room in which 
sate two young men, subaltern officers apparently employed in 
draughting maps, into the presence of the Count. 

" Pardon me," said Graham, after the first conventional saluta- 
tion, " if I interrupt you for a moment or so in the midit of events 
so grave, on a matter that must seem to you very trivial." 

" Nay," answered the Count, " there is nothing so trivial in 
this world but what there will be some one to whom it is 
important. Say how I can serve you." 

" I think, M. le Comte, that you once received in your house- 
hold, as teacher or governess, a French lady, Madame Marigny." 

" Yes, I remember her well . a very handsome woman. My 
wife and daughter took great interest in her. She was married 
out of my house." 

" Exactly . and to whom ? " 

"An Italian of good birth, who was then employed by the 
Austrian Government in some minor post, and subsequently 
promoted to a better one in the Italian dominion, which then 
belonged to the house of Hapsburg, after which we lost sight of 
him and his wife." 



232 THE PARISIANS. 



"An Italian . what was hrs name ?" 
" Ludovico Cicogna." 

" Cicogna ! " exclaimed Graham, turning very pale. " Are 
you sure that was the name ? " 

"Certainly. He was a cadet of a very noble house, and 
disowned by relations too patriotic to forgive him for accepting 
employment under the Austrian Government." 

" Can you not give me the address of the place in Italy to 
which he was transferred on leaving Austria ? " 

" No ; but if the information be necessary to you, it can be 
obtained easily at Milan, where the head of the family resides, 
or indeed in Vienna, through any ministerial bureau." 

"Pardon me one or two questions more. Had Madame 
Marigny any children by a former husband ?" 

" Not that I know of: I never heard so. Signor Cicogna was 
a widower, and had, if I remember right, children by his first 
wife, who was also a Frenchwoman. Before he obtained office 
in Austria, he resided, I believe, in France. I do not remember 
how many children he had by his first wife. I never saw them. 
Our acquaintance began at the baths of Toplitz, where he saw 
and fell violently in love with Madame Marigny. After their 
marriage, they went to his post, which was somewhere, I think, 
in the Tyrol. We saw no more of them ; but my wife and 
daughter kept up a correspondence with the Signora Cicogna for 
a short time. It ceased altogether when she removed into Italy." 
"You do not even know if the Signora is still living?" 
" No." 

" Her husband, I am told, is dead." 

" Indeed ! I am concerned to hear it A good-looking, lively, 
clever man. I fear he must have lost all income when the 
Austrian dominions passed to the house of Savoy." 

"Many thanks for your information. I can detain you no 
longer," said Graham, rising. 

" Nay, I am not very busy at this moment ; but I fear we 
Germans have plenty of work on our bands." 

" I had hoped that, now the French Emperor, against whom 
your king made war, was set aside, his Prussian majesty would 
make peace with the French people." 



THE PARISIANS. 233 



" Most willingly would he do so if the French people would 
let him. But it must be through a French Government legally- 
chosen by the people. And they have chosen none ! A mob 
at Paris sets up a provisional administration, that commences 
by declaring that it will not give up ' an inch of its territory nor 
a stone of its fortresses/ No terms of peace can be made with 
such men holding such talk." After a few words more over 
the state of public affairs, . in which Graham expressed the 
English side of affairs, which was all for generosity to the 
vanquished ; and the Count argued much more ably on the 
German, which was all for security against the aggressions 
of a people that would not admit itself to be vanquished, . the 
short interview closed. 

As Graham at night pursued his journey to Vienna, there 
came into his mind Isaura's song of the Neapolitan fisherman. 
Had he, too, been blind to the image on the rock? Was it 
possible that all the while he had been resisting the impulse 
of his heart, until the discharge of the mission intrusted to him 
freed his choice and decided his fortunes, the very person 
of whom he was in search had been before him, then to be for 
ever won, lost to him now for ever ? Could Isaura Cicogna be the 
child of Louise Duval by Richard King ? She could not have 
been her child by Cicogna : the dates forbade that hypothesis. 
Isaura must have been five years old when Louise married the 
Italian. 

Arrived at Milan, Graham quickly ascertained that the post 
to which Ludovico Cicogna had been removed was in Verona, 
and that he had there died eight years ago. Nothing was to 
be learned as to his family or his circumstances at the time of 
his death. The people of whose history we know the least are 
the relations we refuse to acknowledge. Graham continued 
his journey to Verona. There he found on inquiry that the 
Cicognas had occupied an apartment in a house which stood 
at # the outskirts of the town, and had been since pulled down 
to make way for some public improvements. But his closest 
inquiries could gain him no satisfactory answers to the all- 
important questions as to Ludovico Cicogna's family. His 
political alienation from the Italian cause, which was nowhere 



234 THE PARISIANS. 



more ardently espoused than at Verona, had rendered him very 
unpopular. He visited at no Italian houses. Such society as he 
had was confined to the Austrian military within the Quadri- 
lateral or at Venice, to which city he made frequent excursions : 
was said to lead there a free and gay life, very displeasing to the 
Signora, whom he left in Verona. She was but little seen, and 
faintly remembered as very handsome and proud-looking. Yes, 
there were children . a girl, and a boy several years younger 
than the girl ; but whether she was the child of the Signora by 
a former marriage, or whether the Signora was only the child's 
stepmother, no one could say. The usual clue, in such doubtful 
matters, obtainable through servants, was here missing. The 
Cicognas had only kept two servants, and both were Austrian 
subjects, who had long left the country, . their very names 
forgotten. 

Graham now called to mind the Englishman Selby, for whom 
Isaura had such grateful affection, as supplying to her the place 
of her father. This must have been the Englishman whom 
Louise Duval had married after Cicogna's death. It would 
be no difficult task, surely, to ascertain where he had resided. 
Easy enough to ascertain all that Graham wanted to know 
from Isaura herself, if a letter could reach her. But, as he 
knew by the journals, Paris was now invested . cut off from 
all communication with the world beyond. Too irritable, anxious, 
and impatient to wait for the close of the siege, though he 
never suspected it could last so long as it did, he hastened to 
Venice, and there learned through the British consul that the 
late Mr. Selby was a learned antiquarian, an accomplished 
general scholar, a fanatico in music, a man of gentle temper 
though reserved manners ; had at one time lived much at 
Venice : after his marriage with the Signora Cicogna he had 
taken up his abode near Florence. To Florence Graham now 
went. He found the villa on the skirts of Fiesole at which 
Mr. Selby had resided. The peasant who had officiated as 
gardener and shareholder in the profits of vines and figs, was 
still, with his wife, living on the place. Both man and wife 
remembered the Inglese well ; spoke of him with great affection, 
of his wife with great dislike. They said her manners were 



\ 
\ 



THE PARISIANS. 235 



very haughty, her temper very violent ; that she led the Inglese 
a very unhappy life ; that there were a girl and a boy, both 
hers by a former marriage ; but when closely questioned 
whether they were sure that the girl was the Signora's child 
by the former husband, or whether she was not the child of 
that husband by a former wife, they could not tell ; they could 
only say that both were called by the same name . Cicogna ; 
that the boy was the Signora's favourite . that indeed she 
seemed wrapt up in him ; that he died of a rapid decline a 
few months after Mr. Selby had hired the place, and that 
shortly after his death the Signora left the place and never 
returned to it ; that it was little more than a year that she 
had lived with her husband before this final separation took 
place. The girl remained with Mr. Selby, who cherished and 
loved her as his own child. Her Christian- name was Isaura, 
the boy's Luigi. A few years later, Mr. Selby left the villa 
and went to Naples, where they heard he had died. They 
could give no information as to what had become of his wife. 
Since the death of her boy that lady had become very much 
changed . her spirits quite broken, no longer violent. She 
would sit alone and weep bitterly. The only person out of 
her family she would receive was the priest ; till the boy's 
death she had never seen the priest, nor been known to attend 
divine service. 

u Was the priest living ? " 

" Oh no ; he had been dead two years. A most excellent 
man . a saint," said the peasant's wife. 

"Good priests are like good women," said the peasant, drily ; 
" there are plenty of them, but they are all underground." 

On which remark the wife tried to box his ears. The 
contadino had become a freethinker since the accession of 
the house of Savoy. His wife remained a good Catholic 

Said the peasant as, escaping from his wife, he walked into 
the high road with Graham, " My belief, Eccelenza, is, that the 
priest did all the mischief." 

"What mischief?" 

" Persuaded the Signora to leave her husband. The Inglese 
was not a Catholic I heard the priest call him a heretic. 



236 THE PARISIANS. 



And the Padre> who, though not so bad as some of his cloth, 
was a meddling bigot, thought it perhaps best for her soul 
that it should part company with a heretic's person. I can't 
say for sure, but I think that was it. The Padre seemed to 
triumph when the Signora was gone." 

Graham mused. The peasant's supposition was not impro- 
bable. A woman such as Louise Duval appeared to be . of 
vehement passions and ill-regulated mind . was just one of 
those who, in a moment of great sorrow, and estranged from 
the ordinary household affections, feel, though but imperfectly, 
the necessity of a religion, and, ever in extremes, pass at once 
from indifferentism into superstition. 

Arrived at Naples, Graham heard little of Selby except as 
a literary recluse, whose only distraction from books was the 
operatic stage. But he heard much of Isaura ; of the kindness 
which Madame de Grantmesnil had shown to her, when left 
by Selby's death alone in the world ; of the interest which the 
friendship and the warm eulogies of one so eminent as the great 
French writer had created for Isaura in the artistic circles ; of 
the intense sensation her appearance, her voice, her universal 
genius, had made in that society, and the brilliant hopes of her 
subsequent career on the stage the cognoscenti had formed. No 
one knew anything of her mother ; no one entertained a doubt 
that Isaura was by birth a Cicogna. Graham could not learn 
the present whereabouts of Madame de Grantmesnil. She had 
long left Naples, and had been last heard of at Genoa; was 
supposed to have returned to France a little before the war. 
In France she had no fixed residence. 

The simplest mode of obtaining authentic information whether 
Isaura was the daughter of Ludovico Cicogna by his first wife 
. namely, by registration of her birth . failed him ; because, as 
von Rudesheim had said, his first wife was a Frenchwoman. 
The children had been born somewhere in France, no one could 
even guess where. No one had ever seen the first wife, who 
had never appeared in Italy, nor had even heard what was her 
maiden name. 

Graham, meanwhile, was not aware that Isaura was still in 
the besieged city, whether or not already married to Gustave 



THE PARISIANS. 237 



Rameau ; so large a number of the women had quitted Paris 
before the siege began, that he had reason to hope she was 
among them. He heard through an American that the Morleys 
had gone to England before the Prussian investment ; perhaps 
Isaura had gone with them. He wrote to Mrs. Morley, inclosing 
his letter to the Minister of the United States at the Court of 
St. James's, and while still at Naples received her answer. It 
was short, and malignantly bitter. " Both myself and Madame 
Savarin, backed by Signora Venosta, earnestly entreated Ma- 
demoiselle Cicogna to quit Paris, to accompany us to England. 
Her devotion to her affianced husband would not permit her 
to listen to us. It is only an Englishman who could suppose 
Isaura Cicogna to be one of those women who do not insist 
on sharing the perils of those they love. You ask whether she 
was the daughter of Ludovico Cicogna by his former marriage, 
or of his second wife by him. I cannot answer. I don't even 
know whether Signor Cicogna ever had a former wife. Isaura 
Cicogna never spoke to me of her parents. Permit me to ask 
what business is it of yours now ? Is it the English pride that 
makes you wish to learn whether on both sides she is of noble 
family ? How can that discovery alter your relations towards 
the affianced bride of another ? " 

On receipt of this letter, Graham quitted Naples, and shortly 
afterwards found himself at Versailles. He obtained permission 
to establish himself there though the English were by no means 
popular. Thus near to Isaura, thus sternly separated from her, 
Graham awaited the close of the siege. Few among those at 
Versailles believed that the Parisians would endure it much 
longer. Surely they would capitulate before the bombardment, 
which the Germans themselves disliked to contemplate as a last 
resource, could commence. 

In his own mind Graham was convinced that Isaura was 
the child of Richard King. It seemed to him probable that 
Louise Duval, unable to assign any real name to the daughter 
of the marriage she disowned, . neither the name borne by the 
repudiated husband, nor her own maiden name, . would, on 
taking her daughter to her new home, have induced Cicogna 
to give the child his name, or that after Cicogna's death she 



2 38 THE PARISIANS. 



herself had so designated the girl. A dispassionate confidant, 
could Graham have admitted any confidant whatever, might 
have suggested the more than equal probability that Isaura 
was Cicogna's daughter by his former espousal. But then what 
could have become of Richard King's child ? To part with the 
fortune in his hands, to relinquish all the ambitious dreams 
which belonged to it, cost Graham Vane no pang : but he 
writhed with indignant grief when he thought that the wealth 
of Richard King's heiress was to pass to the hands of Gustave 
Rameau, . that this was to be the end of his researches . this 
the result of the sacrifice his sense of honour imposed on him. 
And now that there was the probability that he must convey to 
Isaura this large inheritance, the practical difficulty of inventing 
some reason for such a donation, which he had, while at a 
distance, made light of, became seriously apparent How 
could he say to Isaura that he had 200,000/. in trust for her, 
without naming any one so devising it ? Still more, how con- 
stitute himself her guardian, so as to secure it to herself, 
independently of her husband ? Perhaps Isaura was too 
infatuated with Rameau, or too romantically unselfish, to 
permit the fortune so mysteriously conveyed being exclusively 
appropriated to herself. And if she were already married to 
Rameau, and if he were armed with the right to inquire into 
the source of this fortune, how exposed to the risks of disclosure 
would become the secret Graham sought to conceal. Such a 
secret affecting the memory of the sacred dead, affixing a shame 
on the scutcheon of the living, in the irreverent hands of a 
Gustave Rameau, . it was too dreadful to contemplate such a 
hazard. And yet, if Isaura were the missing heiress, could 
Graham Vane admit any excuse for basely withholding from 
her, for coolly retaining to himself the wealth for which he 
was responsible? Yet, torturing as were these communings 
with himself, they were mild in their torture compared to 
the ever-growing anguish of the thought that in any case the 
only woman he had ever loved . ever could love, . who might 
but for his own scruples and prejudices have been the partner 
of his life was perhaps now actually the wife of another and, as 
such, in what terrible danger ! Famine within the walls of the 






\ 



\ 



THE PARISIANS. 239 



doomed city : without, the engines of death waiting for a signal. 
So near to her, and yet so far ! So willing to die for her, if for 
her he could not live : and with all his devotion, all his intellect, 
all his wealth, so powerless ! 



CHAPTER XIII. 

IT is now the middle of November . a Sunday. The day 
has been mild, and is drawing towards its close. The Parisians 
have been enjoying the sunshine. Under the leafless trees in 
the public gardens and the Champs Elysdes children have been 
at play. On the Boulevards the old elegance of gaiety is suc- 
ceeded by a livelier animation. Itinerant musicians gather 
round them ragged groups. Fortune-tellers are in great 
request, especially among the once brilliant Laises and 
Thaises, now looking more shabby, to whom they predict 
the speedy restoration of Nabobs and Russians, and golden 
joys. Yonder Punch is achieving a victory over the Evil One, 
who wears the Prussian spiked helmet, and whose face has 
been recently beautified into a resemblance to Bismarck. Punch 
draws to his show a laughing audience of Moblots and recruits 
to the new companies of the National Guard. Members of the 
once formidable police, now threadbare and hunger-pinched, 
stand side by side with unfortunate beggars and sinister-looking 
patriots who have served their time in the jails or galleys. 

Uniforms of all variety are conspicuous . the only evidence 
visible of an enemy at the walls. But the aspects of the wearers 
of warlike accoutrements are cUbonnaire and smiling, as of revellers 
on a holiday of peace. Among these defenders of their country, 
at the door of a crowded caff, stands Frederic Lemercier, superb 
in the costume, bran-new, of a National Guard, . his dog Fox 
tranquilly reposing on its haunches, with eyes fixed upon its 
fellow-dog philosophically musing on the edge of Punch's show, 



2 4 o THE PARISIANS. 



whose master is engaged in the conquest of the Bismarck 
fiend. 

" Lemercier," cried the Vicomte de Br6z6, approaching the cafi, 
" 1 scarcely recognise you in that martial guise. You look 
magnifique . the galons become you. Peste ! an officer 
already ? " 

" The National Guards and Mobiles are permitted to choose 
their own officers, as you are aware. I have been elected, but 
to subaltern grade, by the warlike patriots of my department. 
Enguerrand de Vandemar is elected a captain of the Mobiles 
in his, and Victor de Maul6on is appointed to the command of a 
battalion of the National Guards. But I soar above jealousy at 
such a moment, . 



" ' Rome a choisi mon bras ; jc n'examine rien.' " 

"You have no right to be jealous. De Mauleon has had 
experience and won distinction in actual service, and from 
all I hear is doing wonders with his men . has got them 
not only to keep but to love drill. I heard no less an 

authority than General V say that if all the officers of 

the National Guard were like De Mauleon, that body would 
give an example of discipline to the line." 

"I say nothing as to the promotion of a real soldier like 
the Vicomte . but a Parisian dandy like Enguerrand de 
Vandemar ! " 

" You forget that Enguerrand received a military education . 
an advantage denied to you." 

"What does that matter? Who cares for education now- 
adays ? Besides, have I not been training ever since the 4th of 
September, to say nothing of the hard work on the ramparts ? " 

" Parlez moi de cela: it is indeed hard work on the ramparts. 
Infandum dolorem quorum pars magna fui. Take the day duty. 
What with rising at seven o'clock, and being drilled between 
a middle-aged and corpulent grocer on one side and a meagre 
beardless barber's apprentice on the other ; what with going to 
the bastions at eleven, and seeing half one's companions drunk 
before twelve ; what with trying to keep their fists off one's face 
when one politely asks them not to call one's general a traitor or 



THE PARISIANS. 241 

a poltroon, . the work of the ramparts would be . supportable, if 
I did not take a pack of cards with me, and enjoy a quiet rubber 
with three other heroes in some sequestered corner. As for 
night work, nothing short of the indomitable fortitude of a 
Parisian could sustain it ; the tents made expressly not to 
be waterproof, like the groves of the Muses, . 

"'per 
Quos et aquae subeant et aurae.' 

A fellow-companion of mine tucks himself up on my rug, and 
pillows his head on my knapsack. I remonstrate . he swears 
. the other heroes wake up and threaten to thrash us both ; 
and just when peace is made, and one hopes for a wink of 
sleep, a detachment of spectators, chiefly gamins, coming to 
see that all is safe in the camp, strike up the Marseillaise. 
Ah, the world will ring to the end of time with the sublime 
attitude of Paris in the face of the Vandal invaders, especially 
when it learns that the very shoes we stand in are made of 
cardboard. In vain we complain. The contractor for shoes 
is a staunch Republican, and jobs by right divine. May I ask 
if you have dined yet ? " 

" Heavens I no, it is too early. But I am excessively hungry. 
I had only a quarter of jugged cat for breakfast, and the brute 
was tough. In reply to your question, may I put another . 
Did you lay in plenty of stores ? " 

" Stores ? no ; I am a bachelor, and rely on the stores of my 
married friends." 

u Poor De Brz6 1 I sympathise with you, for I am in the 
same boat, and dinner invitations have become monstrous rare." 

" Oh, but you are so confoundedly rich ! What to you are 
forty francs for a rabbit, or eighty francs for a turkey ? " 

"Well, I suppose I am rich, but I have no money, and the 
ungrateful restaurants will not give me credit. They don't 
believe in better days." 

u How can you want money ? " 

" Very naturally. I had invested my capital famously . the 
best speculations . partly in house rents, partly in company 
shares ; and houses pay no rents, and nobody will buy company 
shares. I had 1,000 napoleons on hand, it is true, when 

VOL. II. Q 



242 THE PARISIANS. 



Duplessis left Paris . much more, I thought, than I could 
possibly need, for I never believed in the siege. But during 
the first few weeks I played at whist with bad luck, and since 
then so many old friends have borrowed of me that I doubt 
if I have 200 francs left I have despatched four letters to 
Duplessis by pigeon and balloon, entreating him to send me 
25,000 francs by some trusty fellow who will pierce the Prussian 
lines. I have had two answers . 1st, that he will find a man ; 
2nd, that the man is found and on his way. Trust to that man 
my dear friend, and meanwhile lend me 200 francs." 

" Mon cher, ddsoU to refuse ; but I was about to ask you to 
share your 200 francs with me who live chiefly by my pen ; 
and that resource is cut off. Still, il faut vivre . one must dine." 

"That is a fact, and we will dine together to-day at my 
expense, limited liability, though. eight francs a head." 

" Generous Monsieur, I accept Meanwhile let us take a 
turn towards the Madeleine." 

The two Parisians quit the cafe, and proceed up the 
Boulevard. On their way they encounter Savarin. "Why," 
said De Brez, " I thought you had left Paris with Madame." 

" So I did, and deposited her safely with the Morleys at 
Boulogne. These kind Americans were going to England, 
and they took her with them. But / quit Paris ! I ! No : 
I am old ; I am growing obese. I have always been short- 
sighted. I can neither wield a sword nor handle a musket 
But Paris needs defenders ; and every moment I was away 
from her I sighed to myself, ' 77 faut etre laV I returned 
before the Vandals had possessed themselves of our railways, 
the convoi overcrowded with men like myself, who had removed 
wives and families ; and when we asked each other why we 
went back, every answer was the same, l II faut itre Id. 9 No, 
poor child, no . I have nothing to give you." 

These last words were addressed to a woman young and 
handsome, with a dress that a few weeks ago might have 
been admired for taste and elegance by the lady leaders of 
the ton, but was now darned, and dirty, and draggled. 

"Monsieur, I did not stop you to ask for alms. You do not 
seem to remember me, M. Savarin." 



\ 



THE PARISIANS. 243 



" But I do," said Lemercier, " surely I address Mademoiselle 
Julie Caumartin." 

"Ah, excuse me, le petit Frederic," said Julie with a sickly 
attempt at coquettish sprightliness ; " I had no eyes except 
for M. Savarin." 

"And why only for me, my poor child?" asked the kind- 
hearted author. 

"Hush!" She drew him aside. "Because you can give 
me news of that monster Gustave. It is not true, it cannot 
be true, that he is going to be married ? " 

" Nay, surely, Mademoiselle, all connection between you and 
young Rameau has ceased for months . ceased from the date 
of that illness in July which nearly carried him off." 

" I resigned him to the care of his mother," said the girl ; 
"but when he no longer needs a mother, he belongs to me. 
Oh, consider, M. Savarin, for his sake I refused the most 
splendid offers! When he sought me, I had my coup/, my 
opera-box, my cachemires, my jewels. The Russians . the 
English . vied for my smiles. But I loved the man. I never 
loved before : I shall never love again ; and after the sacrifices 
I have made for him, nothing shall induce me to give him up. 
Tell me, I entreat, my dear M. Savarin, where he is hiding. 
He has left the parental roof, and they refused there to give 
me his address." 

"My poor girl, don't be mtchante. It is quite true that 
Gustave Rameau is engaged to be married ; and any attempt 
of yours to create scandal " 

"Monsieur," interrupted Julie, vehemently, "don't talk to 
me about scandal ! The man is mine, and no one else shall 
have him. His address ? " 

"Mademoiselle," cried Savarin, angrily, "find it out for 
yourself." Then . repentant of rudeness to one so young and 
so desolate . he added, in mild expostulatory accents : " Come, 
come, ma belle enfant, be reasonable : Gustave is no loss. He 
is reduced to poverty." 

" So much the better. When he was well off I never cost 
him more than a supper at the Maison Dor6e ; and if he is 
poor he shall marry me, and I will support him ! " 

Q 2 



244 THE PARISIANS. 



" You !. and how ? " 

" By my profession when peace comes ; and meanwhile I 
have offers from a caft to recite warlike songs. Ah ! you 
shake your head incredulously. The ballet-dancer recite 
verses ? Yes ! he taught me to recite his own Soyez bon pour 
mot. M. Savarin ! do say where I can find mon hotntne." 

" No." 

" That is your last word ? " 

" It is." 

The girl drew her thin shawl round her and hurried off. 
Savarin rejoined his friends. "Is that the way you console 
yourself for the absence of Madame ? " asked De Br6z6, drily. 

"Fie!" cried Savarin, indignantly; "such bad jokes are ill- 
timed. What strange mixtures of good and bad, of noble and 
base, every stratum of Paris life contains ! There is that poor 
girl, in one way contemptible,' no doubt, and yet in another way 
she has an element of grandeur. On the whole, at Paris, the 
women, with all their faults, are of finer mould than the men. " 

"French gallantry has always admitted that truth," said 
Lemercier. " Fox, Fox, Fox." Uttering this cry, he darted 
forward after the dog, who had strayed a few yards to salute 
another dog led by a string, and caught the animal in his arms. 
" Pardon me," he exclaimed, returning to his friends, " but there 
are so many snares for dogs at present They are just coming 
into fashion for roasts, and Fox is so plump." 

" I thought," said Savarin, " that it was resolved at all the 
sporting clubs that, be the pinch of famine ever so keen, the 
friend of man should not be eaten." 

" That was while the beef lasted ; but since we have come to 
cats, who shall predict immunity to dogs? Quid intactum 
ne-faste liquimus ? Nothing is sacred from the hand of rapine." 

The church of the Madeleine now stood before them. Moblots 
were playing pitch-and-toss on its steps. 

" I don't wish you to accompany me, Messieurs," said Lemercier, 
apologetically, " but I am going to enter the church." 

" To pray ? " asked De Brz6, in profound astonishment 
" Not exactly ; but I want to speak to my friend Rochebriant, 
and I know I shall find him there." 



THE PARISIANS. 245 



" Praying ? " again asked De Br6z6. 

- Yes." 

" That is curious . a young Parisian exquisite at prayer . that 
is worth seeing. Let us enter, too, Savarin." 

They enter the church. It is filled, and even the sceptical De 
Br6z6 is impressed and awed by the sight An intense fervour 
pervades the congregation. The majority, it is true, are women, 
many of them in deep mourning, and many of their faces mourn- 
ing deeper than the dress. Everywhere may be seen gushing 
tears, and everywhere faintly heard the sound of stifled sighs. 
Besides the women were men of all ages . young, middle- 
aged, old, with heads bowed and hands clasped, pale, grave, 
and earnest. Most of them were evidently of the superior 
grade in life . nobles, and the higher bourgeoisie: few of the 
ouvrier class, very few, and these were of an earlier generation. 
I except soldiers, of whom there were many, from the provincial 
Mobiles, chiefly Bretons ; you know the Breton soldiers by the 
little cross worn on their kfyis. 

Among them Lemercier at once distinguished the noble coun- 
tenance of Alain de Rochebriant. De Br6z and Savarin looked 
at each other with solemn eyes. I know not when either had 
last been within a church ; perhaps both were startled to find 
that religion still existed in Paris . and largely exist it does, 
though little seen on the surface of society, little to be estimated 
by the articles of journals and the reports of foreigners. Un- 
happily, those among whom it exists are not the ruling class . 
are of the classes that are dominated over and obscured in every 
country the moment the populace becomes master. And at 
that moment the journals chiefly read were warring more against 
the Deity than the Prussians . were denouncing soldiers who 
attended mass. "The Gospel certainly makes a bad soldier," 
writes the patriot Pyat 

Lemercier knelt down quietly. The other two men crept 
noiselessly out, and stood waiting for him on the steps, 
watching the Moblots (Parisian Moblots) at play. 

" I should not wait for the roturier if he had not promised 
me a rdti," said the Vicomte de Br6z6, with a pitiful attempt at 
the patrician wit of the ancien rtgime. 



246 THE PARISIANS. 



Savarin shrugged his shoulders. " I am not included in the 
invitation," said he, " and therefore free to depart. 1 must go 
and look up a former confrere who was an enthusiastic Red 
Republican, and I fear does not get so much to eat since he has 
no longer an Emperor to abuse." 

So Savarin went away. A few minutes afterwards Lemercier 
emerged from the church with Alain. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

" I KNEW I should find you in the Madeleine," said Lemercier, 
" and I wished much to know when you had news from Duplessis. 
He and your fair fiancee are with your aunt still staying at 
Rochebriant?" 

" Certainly. A pigeon arrived this morning with a few lines. 
All well there." 

" And Duplessis thinks, despite the war, that he shall be able, 
when the time comes, to pay Louvier the mortgage-sum ? " 

" He never doubts that His credit in London is so good. 
But of course all works of improvement are stopped." 

"Pray did he mention me? . anything about the messenger 
who was to pierce the Prussian lines ? " 

"What! has the man not arrived? It is two weeks since 
he left." 

"The Uhlans have no doubt shot him . the assassins, . and 
drunk up my 25,000 francs . the thieves." 

" I hope not But in case of delay, Duplessis tells me I am 
to remit to you 2000 francs for your present wants. I will send 
them to you this evening." 

" How the deuce do you possess such a sum ? " 

" I came from Brittany with a purse well filled. Of course I 
could have no scruples in accepting money from my destined 
father-in-law." 



THE PARISIANS. 247 



" And you can spare this sum ? " 

u Certainly . the State now provides for me ; I am in command 
of a Breton company." 

" True. Come and dine with me and De Brz." 

" Alas ! I cannot. I have to see both the Vandemars before 
I return to the camp for the night And now . hush . come this 
way (drawing Frederic further from De Brz), I have famous 
news for you. A sortie on a grand scale is imminent ; in a few 
days we may hope for it." 

" I have heard that so often that I am incredulous." 

" Take it as a fact now." 

* What ! Trochu has at last matured his plan ? " 

" He has changed its original design, which was to cut through 
the Prussian lines to Rouen, occupying there the richest country 
for supplies, guarding the left bank of the Seine and a water- 
course to convoy them to Paris. The incidents of war prevented 
that : he has a better plan now. The victory of the army of the 
Loire at Orleans opens a new enterprise. We shall cut our way 
through the Prussians, join that army, and with united forces 
fall on the enemy at the rear. Keep this a secret as yet, but 
rejoice with me that we shall prove to the invaders what men 
who fight for their native soil can do under the protection of 
Heaven." 

" Fox, Fox, mon chri? said Lemercier, as he walked towards 
the Cafe Riche with De Brz ; " thou shalt have a festin de 
Balthazar under the protection of Heaven." 



CHAPTER XV. 

On leaving Lemercier and De Br^z6, Savarin regained the 
Boulevard, and pausing every now and then to exchange a few 
words with acquaintances . the acquaintances of the genial 
author were numerous . turned into the quartier Chauss^e 



248 THE PARISIANS. 



d'Antin, and gaining a small neat house, with a richly-orna- 
mented facade, mounted very clean, well-kept stairs to a third 
story. On one of the doors on the landing-place was nailed 
a card, inscribed, " Gustave Rameau, hotnme de lettres? Cer- 
tainly it is not usual in Paris thus to afficher one's self as 
a "man of letters " ? But Genius scorns what is usual. Had 
not Victor Hugo left in the hotel-books on the Rhine his 
designation "homme de lettres" ? Did not the heir to one of 
the loftiest houses in the peerage of England, and who was also 
a first-rate amateur in painting, inscribe on his studio when 

in Italy, , "artiste"? Such examples, no doubt, were 

familiar to Gustave Rameau, and " hotnme de /ettres" was on 
the scrap of pasteboard nailed to his door. 

Savarin rang ; the door opened, and Gustave appeared. The 
poet was, of course, picturesquely attired. In his day of fashion 
he had worn within doors a very pretty fanciful costume, de- 
signed after portraits of the young Raffaele; that costume he 
had preserved . he wore it now. It looked very threadbare, 
and the pourpoint very soiled. But the beauty of the poet's 
face had survived the lustre of the garments. True, thanks to 
absinthe, the cheeks had become somewhat puffy and bloated. 
Grey was distinctly visible in the long ebon tresses. But still 
the beautyfof the face was of that rare type which a Thorwaldsen 
or a Gibson seeking a model for a Narcissus would have longed 
to fix into marble. 

Gustave received his former chief with a certain air of reserved 
dignity ; led him into his chamber, only divided by a curtain 
from his accommodation for washing and slumber, and placed 
him in an arm-chair beside a drowsy fire . fuel had already 
become very dear. 

" Gustave," said Savarin, " are you in a mood favourable to 
a little serious talk ? " 

" Serious talk from M. Savarin is a novelty too great not to 
command my profoundest interest." 

" Thank you, . and to begin : I who know the world and 
mankind advise you, who do not, never to meet a man who 
wishes to do you a kindness with an ungracious sarcasm. Ironv 
is a weapon I ought to be skilled in, but weapons are v A 



THE PARISIANS. 249 



against enemies, and it is only a tyro who flourishes his rapier 
in the face of his friends." 

" I was not aware that M. Savarin still permitted me to regard 
him as a friend." 

u Because I discharged the duties of friend . remonstrated, 
advised, and warned. However, let bygones be bygones. I 
entreated you not to quit the safe shelter of the paternal roof. 
You insisted on doing so. I entreated you not to send to one 
of the most ferocious of the Red, or rather, the Communistic, 
journals, articles, very eloquent, no doubt, but which would 
most seriously injure you in the eyes of quiet, orderly people, 
and compromise your future literary career for the sake of 
a temporary flash in the pan during a very evanescent period 
of revolutionary excitement You scorned my adjurations, 
but at all events you had the grace not to append your true 
name to those truculent effusions. In literature, if literature 
revive in France, we two are henceforth separated. But I do 
not forego the friendly interest I took in you in the days 
when you were so continually in my house. My wife, who 
liked you so cordially, implored me to look after you during 
her absence from Paris, and, enfin, mon pauvre garqon, it would 
grieve me very much if, when she comes back, I had to say 
to her 'Gustave Rameau has thrown away the chance of 
redemption and of happiness which you deemed was secure 
to him.' A r<xil tnalade, la lumikre nuit." 

So saying, he held out his hand kindly. 

Gustave, who was far from deficient in affectionate or tender 
impulses, took the hand respectfully, and pressed it warmly. 

"Forgive me if I have been ungracious, M. Savarin, and 
vouchsafe to hear my explanation." 

" W illingly, mon garqon? 

u When I became convalescent, v/ell enough to leave my 
father's house, there were circumstances which compelled me 
to do so. A young man accustomed to the life of a garqon 
can't be always tied to his mother's apron-strings." 

"Especially if the apron-pocket does not contain a bottle 
of absinthe," said Savarin, drily. " You may well colour and 
try to look angry ; but I know that the doctor strictly forbade 



250 THE PARISIANS. 



the use of that deadly liqueur, and enjoined your mother to 
keep strict watch on your liability to its temptations. And 
hence one cause of your ennui under the paternal roof. But 
if there you could not imbibe absinthe, you were privileged 
to enjoy a much diviner intoxication. There you could have 
the foretaste of domestic bliss, . the society of the girl you 
loved, and who was pledged to become your wife. Speak 
frankly. Did not that society itself begin to be wearisome ? " 

" No," cried Gustave, eagerly, " it was not wearisome " 

" Yes, but " 



" But it could not be all-sufficing to a soul of fire like mine." 

" Hem," murmured Savarin . " a soul of fire ! This is very 
interesting ; pray go on." 

"The calm, cold, sister-like affection of a childish unde- 
veloped nature, which knew no passion except for art, and 
was really so little emancipated from the nursery as to take 
for serious truth all the old myths of religion . such companion- 
ship may be very soothing and pleasant when one is lying on 
one's sofa, and must live by rule, but when one regains the 
vigour of youth and health " 

"Do not pause," said Savarin gazing with more compassion 
than envy on that melancholy impersonation of youth and 
health. " When one regains that vigour of which I myself 
have no recollection, what happens ? " 

"The thirst for excitement, the goads of ambition, the 
irresistible claims which the world urges upon genius, return." 

"And that genius, finding itself at the North Pole amid 
Cimmerian darkness in the atmosphere of a childish intellect 
. in other words, the society of a pure-minded virgin, who, 
though a good romance-writer, writes nothing but what a 
virgin may read, and, though a bel esprit^ says her prayers 
and goes to church . then genius. well, pardon my ignorance, 
what does genius do ? " 

" Oh, M. Savarin, M. Savarin ! don't let us talk any more. 
There is no sympathy between us. I cannot bear that bloodless, 
mocking, cynical mode of dealing with grand emotions, which 
belongs to the generation of the Doctrinaires. I am not a 
Thiers or a Guizot." 



THE PARISIANS. 251 



" Good heavens ; who ever accused you of being either ? 
I did not mean to be cynical. Mademoiselle Cicogna has 
often said I am, but I did not think you would. Pardon 
me. I quite agree with the philosopher who asserted that 
the wisdom of the past was an imposture, that the meanest 
intellect now living is wiser than the greatest intellect which 
is buried in P&re la Chaise; because the dwarf who follows 
the giant, when perched on the shoulders of the giant, sees 
farther than the giant ever could. Allez. I go in for your 
generation. I abandon Guizot and Thiers. Do condescend 
and explain to my dull understanding, as the inferior mortal 
of a former age, what are the grand emotions which impel 
a soul of fire in your wiser generation. The thirst of excite- 
ment . what excitement ? The goads of ambition . what 
ambition ? " 

"A new social system is struggling from the dissolving 
elements of the old one, as, in the fables of priestcraft, the 
soul frees itself from the body which has become ripe for 
the grave. Of that new system I aspire to be a champion . 
a leader. Behold the excitement that allures me, the ambition 
that goads." 

"Thank you," said Savarin, meekly; "I am answered. I 
recognise the dwarf perched on the back of the giant Quitting 
these lofty themes, I venture to address to you now one simple 
matter-of-fact question . How about Mademoiselle Cicogna ? 
Do you think you can induce her to transplant herself to the 
new social system, which 1 presume will abolish, among other 
obsolete myths, the institution of marriage ? " 

" M. Savarin, your question offends me. Theoretically I am 
opposed to the existing superstitions that encumber the very 
simple principle by which may be united two persons so long 
as they desire the union, and separated so soon as the union 
becomes distasteful to either. But I am perfectly aware that 
such theories would revolt a young lady like Mademoiselle 
Cicogna. I have never even named them to her, and our 
engagement holds good." 

"Engagement of marriage? No period for the ceremony 
fixed ? " 



252 THE PARISIANS. 



u That is not my fault. I urged it on Isaura with all earnest- 
ness before I left my father's house." 

"That was long after the siege had begun. Listen to me, 
Gustave. No persuasion of mine or my wife's, or Mrs. Morley's, 
could induce Isaura to quit Paris while it was yet time. She 
said very simply that, having pledged her truth and hand to 
you, it would be treason to honour and duty if she should 
allow any considerations for herself to be even discussed so 
long as you needed her presence. You were then still suffering, 
and though convalescent, not without danger of a relapse. And 
your mother said to her . I heard the words . ' 'Tis not for his 
bodily health I could dare to ask you to stay, when every man 
who can afford it is sending away his wife, sisters, daughters. 
As for that, I should suffice to tend him ; but if you go, I resign 
all hope for the health of his mind and his soul.' I think at 
Paris there may be female poets and artists whom that sort of 
argument would not have much influenced. But it so happens 
that Isaura is not a Parisienne, She believes in those old myths 
which you think fatal to sympathies with yourself; and those 
old myths also lead her to believe that where a woman has 
promised she will devote her life to a man, she cannot forsake 
him when told by his mother that she is necessary to the health 
of his mind and his soul. Stay. Before you interrupt me, 
let me finish what I have to say. It appears that, so soon 
as your bodily health was improved, you felt that your mind 
and your soul could take care of themselves; and certainly 
it seems to me that Isaura Cicogna is no longer of the smallest 
use to either." 

Rameau was evidently much disconcerted by this speech. 
He saw what Savarin was driving at . the renunciation of 
all bond between Isaura and himself. He was not prepared 
for such renunciation. He still felt for the Italian as much 
of love as he could feel for any woman who did not kneel 
at his feet, as at those of Apollo condescending to the homage 
of Arcadian maids. But, on the one hand, he felt that many 
circumstances had occurred since the disaster at Sedan to render 
Isaura a very much less desirable partie than she had been when 
he had first wrung from her the pledge of betrothal. In the 



THE PARISIANS. 253 



palmy times of a Government in which literature and art 
commanded station and insured fortune, Isaura, whether as 
authoress or singer, was a brilliant marriage for Gustave 
Rameau. She had also then an assured and competent, if 
modest, income. But when times change, people change with 
them. As the income for the moment (and Heaven only can 
say how long that moment might last), Isaura's income had 
disappeared. It will be recollected that Louvier had invested 
her whole fortune in the houses to be built in the street called 
after his name. No houses, even when built, paid any rent now. 
Louvier had quitted Paris ; and Isaura could only be subsisting 
upon such small sum as she might have had in hand before the 
siege commenced. All career in such literature and art as 
Isaura adorned was at a dead stop. Now, to do Rameau 
justice, he was by no means an avaricious or mercenary man. 
But he yearned for modes of life to which money was essential. 
He liked his " comforts ; " and his comforts included the luxuries 
of elegance and show . comforts not to be attained by marriage 
with Isaura under existing circumstances. 

Nevertheless it is quite true that he had urged her to marry 
him at once, before he had quitted his father's house; and 
her modest shrinking from such proposal, however excellent 
the reasons for delay in the national calamities of the time, 
as well as the poverty which the calamity threatened, had 
greatly wounded his amour propre. He had always felt that 
her affection for him was not love; and though he could 
reconcile himself to that conviction when many solid advantages 
were attached to the prize of her love, and when he was ill, and 
penitent, and maudlin, and the calm affection of a saint seemed 
to him infinitely preferable to the vehement passion of a sinner, 
. yet when Isaura was only Isaura by herself . Isaura minus 
all the et cetera which had previously been taken into account . 
the want of adoration for himself very much lessened her value. 

Still, though he acquiesced in the delayed fulfilment of the 
engagement with Isaura, he had no thought of withdrawing 
from the engagement itself, and after a slight pause he replied : 
"You do me great injustice if you suppose that the occupations 
to which I devote myself render me less sensible to the merits 



254 TH E PARISIANS. 



of Mademoiselle Cicogna, or less eager for our union. On the 
contrary, I will confide to you . as a man of the world . one 
main reason why I quitted my father's house, and why I desire 
to keep my present address a secret Mademoiselle Caumartin 
conceived for me a passion . a caprice . which was very flatter- 
ing for a time, but which latterly became very troublesome. 
Figure to yourself . she daily came to ourTiouse while I was lying 
ill, and with the greatest difficulty my mother got her out of it 
That was not all. She pestered me with letters containing all 
sorts of threats . nay, actually kept watch at the house ; and 
one day when I entered the carriage with my mother and 
Signora Venosta for a drive in the Bois (meaning to call for 
Isaura by the way), she darted to the carriage-door, caught my 
hand, and would have made a scene if the coachman had given 
her leave to do so. Luckily he had the tact to whip on his 
horses, and we escaped. I had some little difficulty in con- 
vincing the Signora Venosta that the girl was crazed. But I 
felt the danger I incurred of her coming upon me some moment 
when in company with Isaura, and so I left my father's house ; 
and naturally wishing to steer clear of this vehement little 
demon till I am safely married, I keep my address a secret 
from all who are likely to tell her of it" 

" You do wisely if you are really afraid of her, and cannot 
trust your nerves to say to her plainly, . I am engaged to be 
married; all is at an end between us. Do not force me to 
employ the police to protect myself from unwelcome im- 
portunities/ " 

" Honestly speaking, I doubt if I have the nerve to do that, 
and I doubt still more if it would be of any avail It is very 
ennuyaut to be so passionately loved ; but, que voulez vous ? It 
is my fate." 

" Poor martyr ! I condole with you : and to say truth, it was 
chiefly to warn you of Mademoiselle Caumartin's pertinacity 
that I call this evening." 

Here Savarin related the particulars of his rencontre with Julie, 
and concluded by saying : " I suppose I may take your word of 
honour that you will firmly resist all temptation to renew a 
connection which would be so incompatible with the respect 



THE PARISIANS. 255 



due to your fiancte ? Fatherless and protectorless as Isaura is, 
I feel bound to act as a virtual guardian to one in whom my wife 
takes so deep an interest, and to whom, as she thinks, she had 
some hand in bringing about your engagement: she is com- 
mitted to no small responsibilities. Do not allow poor Julie, 
whom I sincerely pity, to force on me the unpleasant duty of 
warning your fiancee of the dangers to which she might be 
subjected by marriage with an Adonis whose fate it is to 
be so profoundly beloved by the sex in general, and ballet 
nymphs in particular." 

"There is no chance of so disagreeable a duty being in- 
cumbent on you, M. Savarin. Of course, what I myself have 
told you in confidence is sacred." 

u Certainly. There are things in the life of a garqon before 
marriage which would be an affront to the modesty of \C\sfianch 
to communicate and discuss. But then those things must belong 
exclusively to the past and cast no shadow over the future. I 
will not interrupt you further. No doubt you have work for the 
night before you. Do the Red journalists for whom you write 
pay enough to support you in these terribly dear times ? " 

"Scarcely. But I look forward to wealth and fame in the 
future. And you ? " 

" I just escape starvation. If the siege last much longer, it is 
not ot the gout I shall die. Good-night to you." 



CHAPTER XVI. 

ISAURA had, as we have seen, been hitherto saved by the siege 
and its consequences from the fulfilment of her engagement to 
Gustave Rameau ; and since he had quitted his father's house 
she had not only seen less of him, but a certain chili crept into 
his converse in the visits he paid to her. The compassionate 
feeling his illness had excited, confirmed by the unwonted 



256 THE PARISIANS. 



gentleness of his mood, and the short-lived remorse with which 
he spoke of his past faults and follies, necessarily faded away 
in proportion as he regained that kind of febrile strength which 
was his normal state of health, and with it the arrogant self- 
assertion which was ingrained in his character. But it was 
now more than ever that she became aware of the antagonism 
between all that constituted his inner life and her own. It was 
not that he volunteered in her presence the express utterance 
of those opinions, social or religious, which he addressed to the 
public in the truculent journal to which, under a nom de plume, 
he was the most inflammatory contributor. Whether it was that 
he shrank from insulting the ears of the pure virgin whom he 
had wooed as wife with avowals of his disdain of marriage bonds, 
or perhaps from shocking yet more her womanly humanity and 
her religious faith by cries for the blood of anti-republican traitors 
and the downfall of Christian altars ; or whether he yet clung, 
though with relapsing affection, to the hold which her promise 
had imposed on him, and felt that that hold would be for ever 
gone, and that she would recoil from his side in terror and 
dismay, if she once learned that the man who had implored her 
to be his saving angel from the comparatively mild errors of 
youth, had so belied his assurance, so mocked her credulity, as 
deliberately to enter into active warfare against all that he knew 
her sentiments regarded as noble and her conscience received 
as divine: despite the suppression of avowed doctrine on his 
part, the total want of sympathy between these antagonistic 
natures made itself felt by both . more promptly felt by Isaura. 
If Gustave did not frankly announce to her in that terrible 
time (when all that a little later broke out on the side of the 
Communists was more or less forcing ominous way to the lips 
of those who talked with confidence to each other, whether 
to approve or to condemn) the associates with whom he was 
leagued, the path to which he had committed his career, . still 
for her instincts for genuine Art . which for its development 
needs the serenity of peace, which for its ideal needs dreams 
that soar into the Infinite . Gustave had only the scornful sneer 
of the man who identifies with his ambition the violent upset 
of all * u - f civilisation has established in this world, and the 



THE PARISIANS. 257 



blank negation of all that patient hope and heroic aspiration 
which humanity carries on into the next 

On his side, Gustave Rameau, who was not without certain 
fine and delicate attributes in a complicated nature over which 
the personal vanity and the mobile temperament of the Parisian 
reigned supreme, chafed at the restraints imposed on him. No 
matter what a man's doctrines may be . however abominable 
you and I may deem them . man desires to find in the dearest 
fellowship he can establish, that sympathy in the woman his 
choice singles out from her sex . deference to his opinions, 
sympathy with his objects, as man. So, too, Gustave's sense 
of honour . and according to his own Parisian code that sense 
was keen . became exquisitely stung by the thought that he 
was compelled to play the part of a mean dissimulator to the 
girl for whose opinions he had the profoundest contempt. How 
could these two, betrothed to each other, not feel, though without 
coming to open dissension, that between them had flowed the 
inlet of water by which they had been riven asunder ? What 
man, if he can imagine himself a Gustave Rameau, can blame 
the revolutionist absorbed in ambitious projects for turning the 
pyramid of society topsy-turvy, if he shrank more and more 
from the companionship of a betrothed v/ith whom he could not 
venture to exchange three words without caution and reserve ? 
And what woman can blame an Isaura if she felt a sensation 
of relief at the very neglect of the affianced whom she had 
compassionated and could never love ? 

Possibly the reader may best judge of the state of Isaura's 
mind at this time by a few brief extracts from an imperfect 
fragmentary journal, in which, amid saddened and lonely hours, 
she held converse with herself. 

"One day at Enghien I listened silently to a conversation 
between M. Savarin and the Englishman, who sought to explain 
the conception of duty in which the German poet has given such 
noble utterance to the thoughts of the German philosopher . 
viz., that moral aspiration has the same goal as the artistic, . 
the attainment to the calm delight wherein the pain of effort 
disappears in the content of achievement. Thus in life, as in 

VOL. II. R 



258 THE PARISIANS. 



art, it is through discipline that we arrive at freedom, and duty 
only completes itself when all motives, all actions, are attuned 
into one harmonious whole, and it is not striven for as duty, but 
enjoyed as happiness. M. Savarin treated this theory with the 
mockery with which the French wit is ever apt to treat what 
it terms German mysticism. According to him, duty must 
always be a hard and difficult struggle ; and he said laughingly. 
' Whenever a man says, " I have done my duty," it is with a 
long face and a mournful sigh.' 

"Ah, how devoutly I listened to the Englishman ! how harshly 
the Frenchman's irony jarred upon my ears ! And yet now, in 
the duty that life imposes on me, to fulfil which I strain every 
power vouchsafed to my nature, and seek to crush down every 
impulse that rebels, where is the promised calm, where any 
approach to the content of achievement ? Contemplating the 
way before me, the Beautiful even of Art has vanished. I see 
but cloud and desert. Can this which I assume to be duty really 
be so ? Ah, is it not sin even to ask my heart that question ? 

* * * * 

" Madame Rameau is very angry with her son for his neglect 
both of his parents and of me. I have had to take his part 
against her. I would not have him lose their love. Poor 
Gustave ! But when Madame Rameau suddenly said to-day : 
'I erred in seeking the union between thee and Gustave. 
Retract thy promise ; in doing so thou wilt be justified/ . oh, 
the strange joy that flashed upon me as she spoke. Am I 
justified ? Am I ? Oh, if that Englishman had never crossed 
my path ! Oh, if I had never loved ! or if in the last time 
we met he had not asked for my love, and confessed his 
own ! Then, I think, I could honestly reconcile my conscience 
with my longings, and say to Gustave, 'We do not suit each 
other ; be we both released ! ' But now . is it that Gustave 
is really changed from what he was, when in despondence 
at my own lot, and in pitying belief that I might brighten 
and exalt his, I plighted my troth to him ? or is it not rather 
that the choice I thus voluntarily made became so intolerable 
a thought the moment I knew I was beloved and sought by 
another; and from that moment I lost the strength I had 



THE PARISIANS. 259 



before, . strength to silence the voice at my own heart ? 
What ! is it the image of that other one which is persuading 
me to be false ? . to exaggerate the failings, to be blind to the 
merits of him who has a right to say, ' I am what I was when 
thou didst pledge thyself to take me for better or for worse ' ? 

* * * . 

" Gustave has been here after an absence of several days. He 
was not alone. The good Abb6 Vertpr6 and Madame de 
Vandemar, with her son, M. Raoul, were present They had 
come on matters connected with our ambulance. They do 
not know of my engagement to Gustave ; and seeing him 
in the uniform of a National Guard, the Abb6 courteously 
addressed to him some questions as . to the possibility of 
checking the terrible increase of the vice of intoxication, so 
alien till of late to the habits of the Parisians, and becoming 
fatal to discipline and bodily endurance, . could the number 
of the cantines on the ramparts be more limited ? Gustave 
answered with rudeness and bitter sarcasm, 'Before priests 
could be critics in military matters they must undertake military 
service themselves/ 

"The AbW replied with unalterable good-humour, 'But, in 
order to criticise the effects of drunkenness, must one get drunk 
one's self?' Gustave was put out, and retired into a corner of 
the room, keeping sullen silence till my other visitors left. 

" Then before I could myself express the pain his words and 
manner had given me, he said abruptly, ' I wonder how you can 
tolerate the tartuferie which may amuse on the comic stage, but 
in the tragedy of these times is revolting.' This speech roused 
my anger, and the conversation that ensued was the gravest that 
had ever passed between us. 

u If Gustave were of stronger nature and more concentrated 
will, I believe that the only feelings I should have for him would 
be antipathy and dread. But it is his very weaknesses and 
inconsistencies that secure to him a certain tenderness of interest. 
I think he could never be judged without great indulgence by 
women ; there is in him so much of the child, . wayward, irritat- 
ing at one moment, and the next penitent, affectionate. One 
feels as if persistence in evil were impossible to one so delicate 

R 2 



26o THE PARISIANS. 



both in mind and form. That peculiar order of genius to which 
he belongs seems as if it ought to be so estranged from all 
directions, violent or coarse. When in poetry he seeks to 
utter some audacious and defying sentiment, the substance 
melts away in daintiness of expression, in soft, lute-like strains 
of slender music. And when he has stung, angered, revolted 
my heart the most, suddenly he subsides into such pathetic 
gentleness, such tearful remorse, that I feel as if resentment 
to one so helpless, desertion of one who must fall without the 
support of a friendly hand, were a selfish cruelty. It seems to 
me as if I were dragged towards a precipice by a sickly child 
clinging to my robe. 

" But in this last conversation with him, his language in regard 
to subjects I hold most sacred drew forth from me words which 
startled him, and which may avail to save him from that worst 
insanity of human minds, . the mimicry of the Titans who would 
have dethroned a God to restore a Chaos. I told him frankly 
that I had only promised to share his fate on my faith in his 
assurance of my power to guide it heavenward ; and that if the 
opinions he announced were seriously entertained, and put forth 
in defiance of heaven itself, we were separated for ever. I told 
him how earnestly, in the calamities of the time, my own soul 
had sought to take refuge in thoughts and hopes beyond the 
earth ; and how deeply many a sentiment that in former days 
passed by me with a smile in the light talk of the salons, now 
shocked me as an outrage on the reverence which the mortal 
child owes to the Divine Father. I owned to him how much of 
comfort, of sustainment, of thought and aspiration, elevated 
beyond the sphere of Art in which I had hitherto sought the 
purest air, the loftiest goal, I owed to intercourse with minds 
like those of the Abb6 de Vertpr6 ; and how painfully I felt as 
if I were guilty of ingratitude when he compelled me to listen 
to insults on those whom I recognised as benefactors. 

" I wished to speak sternly ; but it is my great misfortune, 
my prevalent weakness, that I cannot be stern when I ought 
to be. It is with me in life as in art I never could on the 
stage have taken the part of a Norma or a Medea. If I attempt 
in fiction a character which deserves condemnation, I am untrue 



THE PARISIANS. 261 



to poetic justice. I cannot condemn and execute ; I can but 
compassionate and pardon the creature I myself have created. 
I was never in the real world stern but to one ; and then, alas ! 
it was because I loved where I could no longer love with honour; 
and I, knowing my weakness, had terror lest I should yield. 

" So Gustave did not comprehend from my voice, my manner, 
how gravely I was in earnest. But, himself softened, affected 
to tears, he confessed his own faults . ceased to argue in order 
to praise ; and . and . uttering protestations seemingly the most 
sincere, he left me bound to him still . bound to him still . woe 
is me ! " 

It is true that Isaura had come more directly under the 
influence of religion than she had been in the earlier dates 
of this narrative. There is a time in the lives of most of us, 
and especially in the lives of women, when, despondent of all 
joy in an earthly future, and tortured by conflicts between 
inclination and duty, we transfer all the passion and fervour of 
our troubled souls to enthusiastic yearnings for the Divine Love ; 
seeking to rebaptise ourselves in the fountain of its mercy, taking 
thence the only hopes that can cheer, the only strength that can 
sustain us. Such a time had come to Isaura. Formerly she had 
escaped from the griefs of the work-day world into the garden- 
land of Art Now, Art had grown unwelcome to her, almost 
hateful. Gone was the spell from the garden-land ; its flowers 
were faded, its paths were stony, its sunshine had vanished in 
mist and rain. There are two voices of Nature in the soul of 
the genuine artist, . that is, of him who, because he can create, 
comprehends the necessity of the great Creator. Those voices 
are never both silent When one is hushed, the other becomes 
distinctly audible. The one speaks to him of Art, the other of 
Religion. 

At that period several societies for the relief and tendance 
of the wounded had been formed by the women of Paris, . 
the earliest, if I mistake not, by ladies of the highest rank 
. amongst wliom were the Comtesse de Vandemar and the 
Contessa di Rimini . though it necessarily included others of 
stations less -elevated. To this society, at the request of 



262 THE PARISIANS. 



Alain de Rochebriant and of Enguerrand, Isaura had eagerly 
attached herself. It occupied much of her time; and in 
connection with it she was brought much into sympathetic 
acquaintance with Raoul de Vandemar . the most zealous 
and active member of that Society of St. Francis de Sales, 
to which belonged other young nobles of the Legitimist creed. 
The passion of Raoul's life was the relief of human suffering. 
In him was personified the ideal of Christian charity. I think 
all, or most of us, have known what it is to pass under the 
influence of a nature that is so far akin to ours thajt it desires 
to become something better and higher than it is . that desire 
being paramount in ourselves . but seeks to be that something 
in ways not akin to, but remote from, the ways in which we 
seek it When this contact happens, either one nature, by 
the mere force of will, subjugates and absorbs the other, or 
both, while preserving their own individuality, apart and 
independent, enrich themselves by mutual interchange, and 
the asperities which differences of taste and sentiment in 
detail might otherwise provoke, melt in the sympathy which 
unites spirits striving with equal earnestness to rise nearer 
to the unseen and unattainable Source, which they equally 
recognise as Divine. 

Perhaps, had these two persons met a year ago in the 
ordinary intercourse of the world, neither would have detected 
the sympathy of which I speak. Raoul was not without the 
prejudice against artists and writers of romance, that is shared 
by many who cherish the persuasion that all is vanity which 
does not concentrate imagination and intellect in the destinies 
of the soul hereafter; and Isaura might have excited his 
compassion, certainly not his reverence. While to her, his 
views on all that seeks to render the actual life attractive 
and embellished, through the accomplishments of Muse and 
Grace, would have seemed the narrow-minded asceticism of 
a bigot But now, amid the direful calamities of the time, 
the beauty of both natures became visible to each. To the 
eyes of Isaura tenderness became predominant in the monastic 
self-denial of RaouL To the eyes of Raoul, devotion became 
predominant in the gentle thoughtfulness of Isaura. Their 



THE PARISIANS. 263 



intercourse was in ambulance and hospital . in care for the 
wounded, in prayer for the dying* Ah ! it is easy to declaim 
against the frivolities and vices of Parisian society as they appear 
on the surface ; and, in revolutionary times, it is the very worst 
of Paris that ascends in scum to the top. But descend below 
the surface, even in that demoralising suspense of order, and 
nowhere on earth might the angel have beheld the image of 
humanity more amply vindicating its claim to the heritage 
of heaven. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

The warning announcement of some great effort on the part 
of the besieged, which Alain had given to Lemercier, was soon 
to be fulfilled. 

For some days the principal thoroughfares were ominously 
lined with military convois. The loungers on the Boulevards 
stopped to gaze on the long defiles of troops and cannon 
commissariat conveyances, and, saddening accompaniments ! 
the vehicles of various ambulances for the removal of the 
wounded. With what glee the loungers said to each other, 
"Enfin!" Among all the troops that Paris sent forth, none 
were so popular as those which Paris had not nurtured . the 
sailors. From the moment they arrived, the sailors had been 
the pets of the capital. They soon proved themselves the most 
notable contrast to that force which Paris herself had produced 
. the National Guard. Their frames were hardy, their habits 
active, their discipline perfect, their manners mild and polite. 
"Oh, if all our troops were like these!" was the common 
exclamation of the Parisians. 

At last burst forth upon Paris the proclamations of General 
Trochu and General Ducrot ; the first brief, calm, and Breton- 
like, ending with " Putting our trust in God. March on for 
our country : " the second more detailed, more candidly stating 
obstacles and difficulties, but fiery with eloquent enthusiasm, 






264 THE PARISIANS: 



not unsupported by military statistics, in the 400 cannon, two- 
thirds of which were of the largest calibre, that no material 
object could resist; more than 150,00x5 soldiers, all well armed, 
well equipped, abundantly provided with munitions, and all 
(/'en ai Vespoir) animated by an irresistible ardour. "For 
me," concludes the General, " I am resolved. I swear before 
you, before the whole nation, that I will not re-enter Paris 
except as dead or victorious.*' 

At these proclamations, who then at Paris does not recall the 
burst of enthusiasm that stirred the surface ? Trochu became 
once more popular ; even the Communistic or atheistic journals 
refrained from complaining that he attended mass, and invited 
his countrymen to trust in a God. Ducrot was more than 
popular . he was adored. 

The several companies in which De Mauteon and Enguerrand 
served departed towards their post early on the same morning, 
that oC the 28th. All the previous night, while Enguerrand was 
buried in profound slumber, Raoul remained in his brother's room ; 
sometimes on his knees before the ivory crucifix which had been 
their mother's last birthday gift to her youngest son. -sometimes 
seated beside the bed in profound and devout meditation. At 
daybreak, Madame de Vandemar stole into the chamber. Un- 
conscious of his brother's watch, he had asked her to wake him 
in good time, for the young man was a sound sleeper. Shading 
the candle she bore with one hand, with the other she drew 
aside the curtain, and looked at Enguerrand's calm fair face, 
its lips parted in the happy smile which seemed to carry joy 
with it wherever its sunshine played. Her tears fell noiselessly 
on her darling's cheek; she then knelt down and prayed for 
strength. As she rose she felt Raoul's arm around her ; they 
looked at each other in silence ; then she bowed her head and 
wakened Enguerrand with her lips. "Pas de querelle, mes amis" 
he murmured, opening his sweet blue eyes drowsily. " Ah, it 
was a dream ! I thought Jules and Emile [two young friends 
of his] were worrying each other ; and you know, dear Raoul, 
that I am the most officious of peacemakers. Time to rise, is 
it ? No peacemaking to-day. Kiss me again, mother, and say 
* Bless thee.' " 



THE PARISIANS. 265 



r 

" Bless thee, bless thee, my child," cried the mother, wrapping 
her arms passionately round him, and in tones choked with 
sobs. 

" Now leave me, maman" said Enguerrand, resorting to the 
infantine ordinary name, which he had not used for years. 
"Raoul, stay and help me to dress. I must be tris beau 
to-day. I shall join thee at breakfast, maman. Early for 
such repast, but, Vappitit vient en mangeanU Mind the coffee 
is hot." 

Enguerrand, always careful of each detail of dress, was 
especially so that morning, and especially gay, humming the 
old air, " Partant pour la Syne." But his gaiety was checked 
when Raoul, taking from his breast a holy talisman, which he 
habitually wore there, suspended it with loving hands round 
his brother's neck. It was a small crystal set in Byzantine 
filigree ; imbedded in it was a small splinter of wood, said by 
pious tradition to be a relic of the Divine Cross. It had been 
for centuries in the family of the Contessa di Rimini, and was 
given by her to Raoul, the only gift she had ever made him, as 
an emblem of the sinless purity of the affection that united those 
two souls in the bonds of the beautiful belief. 

" She bade me transfer it to thee to-day, my brother," said 
Raoul, simply ; " and now without a pang I can gird on thee thy 
soldier's sword." 

Enguerrand clasped his brother in his arms, and kissed him 
with passionate fervour. "Oh, Raoul I how I love thee! how 
good thou hast ever been to me I how many sins thou hast saved 
me from! how indulgent thou hast been to those from which 
thou couldst not save! Think on that, my brother, in case 
we do not meet again on earth." 

"Hush, hush, Enguerrand I No gloomy forebodings nowt 
Come, come hither, my half of life, my sunny half of life ! " 
and uttering these words, he led Enguerrand towards the 
crucifix, and there, in deeper and more solemn voice, said, 
" Let us pray." So the brothers knelt side by side, and Raoul 
prayed aloud as only such souls can pray. 

When they descended into the salon where breakfast was set 
out, they found assembled several of their relations, and some 



1 



266 THE PARISIANS. 



of Enguerrand's young friends not engaged in the sortie. One 
or two of the latter, indeed, were disabled from fighting by 
wounds in former fields ; they left their sick-beds to bid him 
good-bye. Unspeakable was the affection this genial nature 
inspired in all who came into the circle of its winning magic ; 
and when, tearing himself from them, he descended the stair, 
and passed with light step through the porte cochire, there was 
a crowd around the house . so widely had his popularity spread 
among even the lower classes, from which the Mobiles in his 
regiment were chiefly composed. He departed to the place 
of rendezvous amid a chorus of exhilarating cheers. 

Not thus lovingly tended on, not thus cordially greeted, was 
that equal idol of a former generation, Victor de Maul6on. No 
pious friend prayed beside his couch, no loving kiss waked him 
from his slumbers. At the grey of the November dawn he rose 
from a sleep which had no smiling dreams, with that mysterious 
instinct of punctual will which cannot even go to sleep without 
fixing beforehand the exact moment in which sleep shall end. 
He, too, like Enguerrand, dressed himself with care . unlike 
Enguerrand, with care strictly soldier-like. Then, seeing he 
had some little time yet before him, he rapidly revisited pigeon- 
holes and drawers, in which might be found by prying eyes 
anything he would deny to their curiosity. All that he found 
of this sort were some letters in female handwriting, tied 
together with faded ribbon, relics of earlier days, and treasured 
throughout later vicissitudes; letters from the English girl to 
whom he had briefly referred in his confession to Louvier, . 
the only girl he had ever wooed as his wife. She was the 
only daughter of high-born Roman Catholics, residing at the 
time of his youth in Paris. Reluctantly they had assented 
to his proposals; joyfully they had retracted their assent 
when his affairs had become so involved ; yet possibly the 
motive that led him to his most ruinous excesses . the gam- 
bling of the turf . had been caused by the wild hope of a nature, 
then fatally sanguine, to retrieve the fortune that might suffice 
to satisfy the parents. But during his permitted courtship the 
lovers had corresponded. Her letters were full of warm, if 
innocent, tenderness . till came the last cold farewell. The 



THE PARISIANS. 267 



family had long ago returned to England; he concluded, of 
course, that she had married another. 

Near to these letters lay the papers which had served to 
vindicate his honour in that old affair, in which the unsought 
love of another had brought on him shame and affliction. As 
his eye fell on the last, he muttered to himself, " I kept these, to 
clear my repute. Can I keep those, when, if found, they might 
compromise the repute of her who might have been my wife 
had I been worthy of her ? She is doubtless now another's ; 
or, if dead, . honour never dies." He pressed his lips to the 
letters with a passionate, lingering, mournful kiss ; then, raking 
up the ashes of yesterday's fire, and rekindling them, he placed 
thereon those leaves of a melancholy romance in his past, and 
watched them slowly, reluctantly smoulder away into tinder. 
Then he opened a drawer in which lay the only paper of 
a political character which he had preserved. All that related 
to plots or conspiracies in which his agency had committed 
others, it was his habit to destroy as soon as received. For 
the sole document thus treasured he alone was responsible; 
it was an outline of his ideal for the future constitution of 
France, accompanied with elaborate arguments, the heads of 
which his conversation with the Incognito made known to 
the reader. Of the soundness of this political programme, 
whatever its merits or faults (a question on which I presume 
no judgment), he had an intense conviction. He glanced 
rapidly over its contents, did not alter a word, sealed it up 
in an envelope, inscribed, "My Legacy to my Countrymen." 
The papers refuting a calumny relating solely to himself he 
carried into the battle-field, placed next to his heart, . significant 
of a Frenchman's love of honour in this world . as the relic 
placed round the neck of Enguerrand by his pious brother was 
emblematic of the Christian hope of mercy in the next 



268 THE PARISIANS. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

The streets swarmed with the populace gazing on the 
troops as they passed to their destination. Among those 
of the Mobiles who especially caught the eye were two com- 
panies in which Enguerrand de Vandemar and Victor de 
Maul6on commanded In the first were many young men 
of good family, or in the higher ranks of the bourgeoisie, known 
to numerous lookers-on; there was something inspiriting in 
their gay aspects, and in the easy carelessness of their march. 
Mixed with this company, however, and forming of course 
the bulk of it, were those who belonged to the lower classes 
of the population ; and though they too might seem gay to 
an ordinary observer, the gaiety was forced. Many of them 
were evidently not quite sober; and there was a disorderly 
want of soldiership in their mien and armament which inspired 
distrust among such vietix moustaches as, too old for other 
service than that of the ramparts, mixed here and there among 
the crowd. 

But when De Maul6on's company passed, the vieux mous- 
taches impulsively touched each other. They recognised the 
march of well-drilled men ; the countenances grave and severe, 
the eyes not looking on this side and that for admiration, the 
step regularly timed ; and conspicuous among these men the 
tall stature and calm front of the leader. 

"These fellows will fight well," growled a vieux moustache: 
* where did they fish out their leader ? " 

" Don't you know ? " said a bourgeois. " Victor de Mauteon. 
He won the cross in Algeria for bravery. I recollect him 
when I was very young; the very devil for women and 
fighting." 

" I wish there were more such devils for fighting and fewer 
for women," growled again le vieux moustache. 

One incessant roar of cannon all the night of the 29th. 
The populace had learned the, names of the French cannons, 



THE PARISIANS. 269 



and fancied they could distinguish the several sounds of their 
thunder. "There spits 'Josephine' 1" shouts an invalid sailor. 
* There howls our own ' Populace 'I" 1 cries a Red Republican 
from Belleville. " There sings ' Le Ch&timent ' I " laughed 
Gustave Rameau, who was now become an enthusiastic admirer 
of the Victor Hugo he had before affected to despise. And 
all the while, mingled with the roar of the cannon, came, far 
and near, from the streets, from the ramparts, the gusts of 
song . song sometimes heroic, sometimes obscene, more often 
carelessly joyous. The news of General Vinoy's success during 
the early part of the day had been damped by the evening 
report of Ducrot's delay in crossing the swollen Marne. But 
the spirits of the Parisians rallied from a momentary depression 
on the excitement at night of that concert of martial music 

During that night, close under the guns of the double re- 
doubt of Gravelle and La Faisanderie, eight pontoon-bridges 
were thrown over the Marne ; and at daybreak the first column 
of the third army under Blanchard and Renoult crossed with 
all their artillery, and, covered by the fire of the double re- 
doubts, of the forts of Vincennes, Nogent, Rossney, and the 
batteries of Mont Avron, had an hour before noon carried 
the village of Champigny, and the first Echelon of the important 
plateau of Villiers, and were already commencing the work 
of intrenchment, when, rallying from the amaze of a defeat, 
the German forces burst upon them, sustained by fresh 
batteries. The Prussian pieces of artillery established at 
Chennev&res and at Neuilly opened fire with deadly execu- 
tion ; while a numerous infantry, descending from the intrench- 
ments of Villiers, charged upon the troops under Renoult 
Among the French in that strife were Enguerrand and the 
Mobiles of which he was in command. Dismayed by the 
unexpected fire, these Mobiles gave way, as indeed did many 
of the line. Enguerrand rushed forward to the front . "On, 
mes enfans, on ! What will our mothers and wives say of us 
if we fly ? Vive la France ! . On ! " Among those of the 
better class in that company there rose a shout of applause, 

* The "Populace" had been contributed to the artillery, sou ci sou, by the 
working class. 



270 THE PARISIANS. 



but it found no sympathy among the rest They wavered, 
they turned. "Will you suffer me to go on alone, country- 
men ? " cried Enguerrand ; and alone he rushed on toward 
the Prussian line, . rushed, and fell, mortally wounded by 
a musket-balL "Revenge, revenge!" shouted some of the 
foremost ; " Revenge ! " shouted those in the rear ; and so 
shouting, turned on their heels and fled. But ere they could 
disperse they encountered the march, steadfast though rapid, 
of the troop led by Victor de Maul6on. "Poltroons!" he 
thundered, with the sonorous depth of his strong voice, " halt 
and turn, or my men shall fire on you as deserters." " Va, 
citoyen," said one fugitive, an officer . popularly elected, because 
he was the loudest brawler in the club of the Salle Favre, . 
we have seen him before . Charles, the brother of Armand 
Monnier ; . " men can't fight when they despise their generals. 
It is our generals who are poltroons and fools both." 

" Carry my answer to the ghosts of cowards," cried De 
Mauldon, and shot the man dead. 

His followers, startled and cowed by the deed, and the 
voice and the look of the death-giver, halted. The officers, 
who had at first yielded to the panic of their men, took fresh 
courage, and finally fc led the bulk of the troop back to their 
post "enlevis d la baionette," to use the phrase of a candid 
historian of that day. 

Day, on the whole, not inglorious to France. It was the 
first, if it was the last, really important success of the besieged. 
They remained masters of the ground, the Prussians leaving to 
them the wounded and the dead. 

That night what crowds thronged from Paris to the top of 
the Montmartre heights, from the observatory on which the 
celebrated inventor Bazin had lighted up, with some magical 
electric machine, all the plain of Gennevilliers from Mont 
Vaterien to the Fort de la Briche ! The splendour of the 
blaze wrapped the great city ; . distinctly above the roofs of 
the houses soared the Ddme des Invalides, the spires of N6tre 
Dame, the giant turrets of the Tuileries ; . and died away on 
resting on the infantes scapulos Acroceraunia, the "thunder 
crags " of the heights occupied by the invading army. 



THE PARISIANS. 271 



Lemercier, De Br6z6, and the elder Rameau . who, despite 
his peaceful habits and grey hairs, insisted on joining in the 
aid of la patrie . were among the National Guards attached 
to the Fort de la Briche and the neighbouring eminence, and 
they met in conversation. 

" What a victory we have had ! " said the old Rameau. 

Rather mortifying to your son, M. Rameau," said Lemercier. 

* Mortifying to my son, sir ! . the victory of his countrymen. 
What do you mean ? " 

" I had the honour to hear M. Gustave the other night at the 
club de la Vengeance? 

"Bon Dieu ! do you frequent those tragic reunions ? " asked 
De Br6z& 

" They are not at all tragic : they are the only comedies left 
us, as one must amuse one's self somewhere, and the club de la 
Vengeance is the prettiest thing of the sort going. I quite 
understand why it should fascinate a poet like your son, M. 
Rameau. It is held in a salle de caff chantant . style Louis 
Quinze . decorated with a pastoral scene from Watteau. I and 
my dog Fox drop in. We hear your son haranguing. In what 
poetical sentences he despaired of the Republic ! The Govern- 
ment (he called them 'les charlatans de VH6tel de Ville) were 
imbeciles. They pretended to inaugurate a revolution, and 
did not employ the most obvious of revolutionary means. 
There Fox and I pricked up our ears: what were those 
means ? Your son proceeded to explain : ' All mankind were 
to be appealed to against individual interests. The commerce 
of luxury was to be abolished : clearly luxury was not at the 
command of all mankind. Caffs and theatres were to be closed 
for ever . all mankind could not go to caffs and theatres. It 
was idle to expect the masses to combine for anything in which 
the masses had not an interest in common. The masses had 
no interest in any property that did not belong to the masses. 
Programmes of the society to be founded, called the Ligue 
Cosmopolite Dfrnocratique, should be sent at once into all the 
States of the civilised world . how? by balloons. Money 
corrupts the world as now composed: but the money at the 
command of the masses could buy all the monarchs and 



272 THE PARISIANS. 



courtiers and priests of the universe.' At that sentiment, 
vehemently delivered, the applauses were frantic and Fox in 
his excitement began to bark. At the sound of his bark one 
man cried out, 'That's a Prussian!' another, 'Down with 
the spy ! ' another, ' There's an aristo present . he keeps alive 
a dog which would be a week's meal for a family ! ' I snatch 
up Fox at the last cry, and clasp him to a bosom protected 
by the uniform of the National Guard. 

"When the hubbub had subsided, your son, M. Rameau, 
proceeded, quitting mankind in general, and arriving at the 
question in particular most interesting to his audience . the 
mobilisation of the National Guard ; that is, the call upon 
men who like talking and hate fighting to talk less and fight 
more. ' It was the sheerest tyranny to select a certain number 
of free citizens to be butchered. If the fight was for the mass, 
there ought to be la levte en masse. If one did not compel 
everybody to fight, why should anybody fight?' Here the 
applause again became vehement, and Fox again became 
indiscreet I subdued Fox's bark into a squeak by pulling 
his ears.  What ! ' cries your poet-son, ' la levie en masse 
gives us fifteen millions of soldiers, with which we could crush, 
not Prussia alone, but the whole of Europe. (Immense sen- 
sation.) Let us, then, resolve that the charlatans of the 
Hdtel de Ville are incapable of delivering us from the 
Prussians ; that they are deposed ; that the Ligue of the 
Dhnocratie Cosmopolite is installed ; that meanwhile the Com- 
mune shall be voted the Provisional Government, and shall 
order the Prussians to retire within three days from the soil 
of Paris.' 

" Pardon me this long description, my dear M. Rameau ; 
but I trust I have satisfactorily explained why victory 
obtained in the teeth of his eloquent opinions, if gratifying 
to him as a Frenchman, must be mortifying to him as 
a politician." 

The old Rameau sighed, hung his head, and crept away. 

While, amid this holiday illumination, the Parisians enjoyed 
the panorama before them, the Frhes Chretiens and the at- 
tendants of the various ambulances were moving along the 



THE PARISIANS. 273 



battle-plains; the first in their large-brimmed hats and sable 
garbs, the last in strange motley costume, many of them in 
glittering uniform . all alike in their serene indifference to 
danger; often pausing to pick up among the dead their own 
brethren who had been slaughtered in the midst of their task. 
Now and then they came on sinister forms apparently engaged 
in the same duty of tending the wounded and dead, but 
in truth murderous plunderers, to whom the dead and the 
dying were equal harvests. Did the wounded man attempt 
to resist the foul hands searching for their spoil, they added 
another wound more immediately mortal, grinning as they 
completed on the dead the robbery they had commenced on 
the dying. 

Raoul de Vandemar had been all the earlier part of the day 
with the assistants of the ambulance over which he presided, 
attached to the battalions of the National Guard in a quarter 
remote from that in which his brother had fought and fallen. 
When those troops, later in the day, were driven from the 
Montmedy plateau, which they had at first carried, Raoul 
repassed towards the plateau at Villiers, on which the dead 
lay thickest On the way he heard a vague report of the 
panic which had dispersed the Mobiles of whom Enguerrand 
was in command, and of Enguerrand's vain attempt to inspirit 
them. But his fate was not known. There, at midnight, 
Raoul is still searching among the ghastly heaps and pools 
of blood, lighted from afar by the blaze from the observatory 
of Montmartre, and more near at hand by the bivouac fires 
extended along the banks to the left of the Marne, while 
everywhere about the field flitted the lanterns of the Frhres 
Chretiens. Suddenly, in the dimness of a spot cast into 
shadow by an incompleted earthwork, he observed a small 
sinister figure perched on the breast of some wounded soldier, 
evidently not to succour. He sprang forward and seized a 
hideous-looking urchin, scarcely twelve years old, who held 
in one hand a small crystal locket, set in filigree gold, torn 
from the soldier's breast, and lifted high in the other a long 
case-knife. At a glance Raoul recognised the holy relic he 
had given to Enguerrand, and, flinging the precocious murderer 

VOL. 11. S 



274 THE PARISIANS. 



to be seized by his assistants, he cast himself beside his brother. 
Enguerrand still breathed, and his languid eyes brightened as 
he knew the dear familiar face. He tried to speak but his 
voice failed, and he shook his head sadly, but still with a 
faint smile on his lips. They lifted him tenderly, and placed 
him on a litter. The movement, gentle as it was, brought back 
pain, and with the pain strength to mutter, "My mother . I 
would see her once more." 

As at daybreak the loungers on Montmartre and the ramparts 
descended into the streets . most windows in which were open, 
as they had been all night, with anxious female faces peering 
palely down . they saw the conveyances of the ambulances 
coming dismally along, and many an eye turned wistfully 
towards the litter on which lay the idol of the pleasure-loving 
Paris, with the dark, bareheaded figure walking beside it, . 
onwards, onwards, till it reached the Hdtel de Vandemar, 
and a woman's cry was heard at the entrance . the mother's 
cry, " My son ! my son ! " 



BOOK XII. 



CHAPTER I. 

The last book closed with the success of the Parisian sortie 
on the 30th of November, to be followed by the terrible 
engagements no less honourable to French valour, on the 2nd 
of December. There was the sanguine belief that deliverance 
was at hand ; that Trochu would break through the circle of 
iron, and effect that junction with the army of Aurelles de 
Paladine which would compel the Germans to raise the 
investment ; . belief rudely shaken by Ducrot's proclamation 
of the 4th, to explain the recrossing of the Marne, and the 
abandonment of the positions conquered, but not altogether 
dispelled till von Moltke's letter to Trochu on the 5th 
announcing the defeat of the army of the Loire and the 
recapture of Orleans. Even then the Parisians did not lose 
hope of succour; and even after the desperate and fruitless 
sortie against Le Bourget on the 21st, it was not without 
witticisms on defeat and predictions of triumph, that Winter 
and Famine settled sullenly on the city. 

Our narrative reopens with the last period of the siege. 

It was during these dreadful days, that if the vilest and 
the most hideous aspects of the Parisian population showed 
themselves at the worst, so all its loveliest, its noblest, its 
holiest characteristics . unnoticed by ordinary observers in 
the prosperous days of the capital . became conspicuously 
prominent. The higher classes, including the remnant of 

S 2 



276 THE PARISIANS. 



the old noblesse, had, during the whole siege, exhibited quali- 
ties in notable contrast to those assigned them by the enemies 
of aristocracy. Their sons had been foremost among those 
soldiers who never calumniated a leader, never fled before a 
foe ; their women had been among the most zealous and the 
most tender nurses of the ambulances they had founded and 
served ; their houses had been freely opened, whether to the 
families exiled from the suburbs, or in supplement to the 
hospitals. The amount of relief they afforded unostentatiously, 
out of means that shared the general failure of accustomed re- 
source, when the famine commenced, would be scarcely credible 
if stated. Admirable, too, were the fortitude and resigna- 
tion of the genuine Parisian bourgeoisie, . the thrifty tradesfolk 
and small rentiers, . that class in which, to judge of its timidity 
when opposed to a mob, courage is not the most conspicuous 
virtue. Courage became so now . courage to bear hourly 
increasing privation, and to suppress every murmur of suffer- 
ing that would discredit their patriotism, and invoke "peace 
at any price." It was on this class that the calamities of the 
siege now pressed the most heavily. The stagnation of trade, 
and the stoppage of the rents, in which they had invested their 
savings, reduced many of them to actual want Those only of 
their number who obtained the pay of one-and-a-half franc a-day 
as National Guards, could be sure to escape from starvation. But 
this pay had already begun to demoralise the receivers. Scanty 
for supply of food, it was ample for supply of drink. And 
drunkenness, hitherto rare in that rank of the Parisians, became 
a prevalent vice, aggravated in the case of a National Guard, 
when it wholly unfitted him for the duties he undertook, 
especially such National Guards as were raised from the most 
turbulent democracy of the working class. 

But of all that population, there were two sections in which 
the most beautiful elements of our human nature were most 
touchingly manifest. the women and the priesthood, including 
in the latter denomination all the various brotherhoods and 
societies which religion formed and inspired. 

It was on the 27th of December that Frederic Lemercier 
stood gazing wistfully on a military report affixed to a blank 



THE PARISIANS. 277 



wall, which stated that "the enemy, worn out by a resistance 
of over one hundred days," had commenced the bombardment. 
Poor Frederic was sadly altered ; he had escaped the Prussian's 
guns, but not the Parisian winter . the severest known for twenty 
years. He was one of the many frozen at their posts . brought 
back to the ambulance with Fox in his bosom trying to keep 
him warm. He had only lately been sent forth as convalescent, 
. ambulances were too crowded to retain a patient longer than 
absolutely needful, . and had been hunger-pinched and frost- 
pinched ever since. The luxurious Frederic had still, some- 
where or other, a capital yielding above three thousand a-year, 
and of which he could not now realise a franc, the title-deeds 
to various investments being in the hands of Duplessis, . the 
most trustworthy of friends, the most upright of men, . but 
who was in Bretagne, and could not be got at. And the 
time had come at Paris when you could not get trust for a 
pound of horse-flesh, or a daily supply of fuel. And Frederic 
Lemercier, who had long since spent the 2000 francs borrowed 
from Alain (not ignobly, but somewhat ostentatiously, in feast- 
ing any acquaintance who wanted a feast), and who had sold 
to any one who could afford to speculate on such dainty 
luxuries, . clocks, bronzes, amber-mouthed pipes, . all that 
had made the envied garniture of his bachelor's apartment 
. Frederic Lemercier was, so far as the task of keeping 
body and soul together, worse off than any English pauper 
who can apply to the Union. Of course he might have 
claimed his half-pay of thirty sous as a National Guard. But 
he little knows the true Parisian who imagines a seigneur of 
the Chausse d'Antin, the oracle of those with whom he lived, 
and one who knew life so well that he had preached prudence 
to a seigneur of the Faubourg like Alain de Rochebriant, 
stooping to apply for the wages of thirty sous. Rations 
were only obtained by the wonderful patience of women, who 
had children to whom they were both saints and martyrs. 
The hours, the weary hours, one had to wait before one could 
get one's place on the line for the distribution of that atro- 
cious black bread, defeated men, . defeated most wives if 
only for husbands, . were defied only by mothers and daughters. 



278 THE PARISIANS. 



Literally speaking, Lemercier was starving. Alain had been 
badly wounded in the sortie of the 2 1st, and was laid up 
in an ambulance. Even if he could have been got at, he 
had probably nothing left to bestow upon Lemercier. 

Lemercier gazed on the announcement of the bombardment, 
and the Parisian gaiety, which some French historian of the 
siege calls douce philosophie, lingering on him still, he said, 
audibly, turning round to any stranger who heard : " Happiest 
of mortals that we are! Under the present Government we 
are never warned of anything disagreeable that can happen ; 
we are only told of it when it has happened, and then as 
rather pleasant than otherwise. I get up. I meet a civil 
gendarme. c What is that firing ? which of our provincial armies 
is taking Prussia in the rear ? ' ' Monsieur/ says the gendarme, 
'it is the Prussian Krupp guns/ I look at the proclamation! 
and my fears vanish, . my heart is relieved. I read that the 
bombardment is a sure sign that the enemy is worn out" 

Some of the men grouped round Frederic ducked their 
heads in terror; others, who knew that the thunderbolt 
launched from the plateau of Avron would not fall on the 
pavements of Paris, laughed and joked. But in front, with 
no sign of terror, no sound ot laughter, stretched, moving 
inch by inch, the female procession towards the bakery in 
which the morsel of bread for their infants was doled out 

" Hist, mon ami" said a deep voice beside Lemercier. " Look 
at those women, and do not wound their ears by a jest." 

Lemercier, offended by that rebuke, though too susceptible 
to good emotions not to recognise its justice, tried with feeble 
fingers to turn up his moustache, and to turn a defiant crest 
upon the rebuker. He was rather startled to see the tall 
martial form at his side, and to recognise Victor de Maul^on. 
" Don't you think, M. Lemercier," resumed the Vicomte, half 
sadly, "that these women are worthy of better husbands and 
sons than are commonly found among the soldiers whose 
uniform we wear ? " 

" The National Guard ! You ought not to sneer at them, 
Vicomte, . you whose troop covered itself with glory on the 
great days of Villiers and Champigny, . you in whose praise 



THE PARISIANS. 279 



even the grumblers of Paris became eloquent, and in whom a 
future Marshal of France is foretold." 

"But, alas! more than half of my poor troop was left on 
the battle-field, or is now wrestling for mangled remains of life 
in the ambulances. And the new recruits with which I took the 
field on the 21st are not likely to cover themselves with glory, or 
to insure their commander the bdton of a marshal." 

* Ay, I heard when I was in the hospital that you had 
publicly shamed some of these recruits, and declared that 
you would rather resign than lead them again to battle." 

" True ; and at this moment, for so doing, I am the man most 
hated by the rabble who supplied those recruits." 

The men, while thus conversing, had moved slowly on, and 
were now in front of a large cafe, from the interior of which 
came the sound of loud bravos and clappings of hands. 
Lemercier's curiosity was excited. "For what can be that 
applause ? " he said ; " let us look in and see." 

The room was thronged. In the distance, on a small raised 
platform, stood a girl dressed in faded theatrical finery, making 
her obeisance to the crowd. 

" Heavens ! " exclaimed Frederic . M can I trust my eyes ? 
Surely that is the once superb Julie : has she been dancing here ? " 

One of the loungers, evidently belonging to the same world 
as Lemercier, overheard the question and answered politely : 
" No, Monsieur : she has been reciting verses, and really 
declaims very well, considering it is not her vocation. She 
has given us extracts from Victor Hugo and De Musset : and 
crowned all with a patriotic hymn by Gustave Rameau, . her 
old lover, if gossip be true." 

Meanwhile De Mauldon, who at first had glanced over the 
scene with his usual air of calm and cold indifference, became 
suddenly struck by the girl's beautiful face, and gazed on it 
with a look of startled surprise. 

"Who and what did you say that poor fair creature is, 
M. Lemercier ? " 

" She is a Mademoiselle Julie Caumartin, and was a very 
popular coryph/e. She has hereditary right to be a good 
dancer, as the daughter of a once more famous ornament of 



28o THE PARISIANS. 



the ballet, la belle L6onie . whom you must have seen in your 
young days." 

"Of course. L6onie . she married a M. Surville, a silly 
bourgeois gentUhomme 9 who earned the hatred of Paris by 
taking her off the stage. So that is her daughter! I see 
no likeness to her mother . much handsomer. Why docs 
she call herself Caumartin ? " 

" Oh," said Frederic, " a melancholy but trite story. Leonie 
was left a widow, and died in want What could the poor 
young daughter do ? She found a rich protector, who had 
influence to get her an appointment in the ballet: and there 
she did as most girls so circumstanced do . appeared under 
an assumed name, which she has since kept." 

" I understand," said Victor, compassionately. " Poor thing ! 
she has quitted the platform, and is coming this way, evidently 
to speak to you. I saw her eyes brighten as she caught sight 
of your face." 

Lemercier attempted a languid air of modest self-com- 
placency as the girl . now approached him. u Bon jour, M. 
Frederic 1 A A, mon Dieut how thin you have grown! You 
have been ill ? " 

"The hardships of a military life, Mademoiselle. Ah, for 
the beaux jours and the peace we insisted on destroying under 
the Empire which we destroyed for listening to us 1 But you 
thrive well, I trust I have seen you better dressed, but never in 
greater beauty." 

The girl blushed as she replied, " Do you really think as you 
speak ? " 

" I could not speak more sincerely if I lived in the legendary 
House of Glass." 

The girl clutched his arm, and said in suppressed tones, 
" Where is Gustave ? " 

" Gustave Rameau ? I have no idea. Do you never see him 
now ? " 

" Never, . perhaps I never shall see him again ; but when you 
do meet him, say that Julie owes to him her livelihood. An 
honest livelihood, Monsieur. He taught her to love verses . 
told her how to recite them. I am engaged at this cafi. you 



THE PARISIANS. 281 



will find me here the same hour every day, in case . in case- 



You are good and kind, and will come and tell me that Gustave 
is well and happy even if he forgets me. Au revoir t Stop, 

you do look, my poor Frederic, as if . as if pardon me, 

Monsieur Lemercier, is there anything I can do ? Will you 
condescend to borrow from me ? I am in funds." 

Lemercier at that offer was nearly moved to tears. Famished 
though he was, he could not, however, have touched that girl's 
earnings. 

* You are an angel of goodness, Mademoiselle ! Ah, how I 
envy Gustave Rameau ! No, I don't want aid. I am always 
a . rentier.* 9 

u Bien ! and if you see Gustave, you will not forget." 

u Rely on me. Come away," he said to De Mauleon ; " I 
don't want to hear that girl repeat the sort of bombast the poets 
indite nowadays. It is fustian ; and that girl may have a brain 
of feather, but she has a heart of gold. " 

u True," said Victor, as they regained the street. " I over- 
heard what she said to you. What an incomprehensible thing 
is a woman ! how more incomprehensible still is a woman's love ! 
Ah, pardon me ; I must leave you. I see in the procession a 
poor woman known to me in better days." 

De Maulton walked towards the woman he spoke of . one 
of the long procession to the bakery . a child clinging to her 
robe. A pale grief-worn woman, still young, but with the 
weariness of age on her face, and the shadow of death on 
her child's. 

" I think I see Madame Monnier," said De Mauleon, softly. 

She turned and looked at him drearily. A year ago, she 
would have blushed if addressed by a stranger in a name not 
lawfully hers. 

" Well," she said, in hollow accents broken by cough ; " I 
don't know you, Monsieur." 

u Poor woman ! " he resumed, walking beside her as she 
moved slowly on, while the eyes of other women in the 
procession stared at him hungrily. "And your child looks 
ill too. It is your youngest ? " 

" My only one 1 The others are in Pire la Chaise. There 



2*2 THE PARISIAN?. 



are but few children alive in my str eet now. God has been 
very merciful, and taken them to Himsell " 

De Mauleon recalled the scene of a neat comfortable apart- 
ment, and the healthful happy children at play on the floor. 
The mortality among the little ones, especially in the quartier 
occupied by the working classes, had of late been terrible. The 
want of food, of fuel, the intense severity of the weather, had 
swept them off as by a pestilence. 

" And Monnier . what of him ? No doubt he is a National 
Guard, and has his pay ? " 

The woman made no answer, but hung down her head. She 
was stifling a sob. Till then her eyes seemed to have exhausted 
the last source of tears. 

*He lives still?" continued Victor, pityingly: "he is not 
wounded ? ** 

" No : he is well . in health ; thank you kindly, Monsieur.* 9 

" But his pay is not enough to help you, and of course he can 
get no work. Excuse me if I stopped you. It is because I 
owed Armand Monnier a little debt for work, and I am 
ashamed to say that it quite escaped my memory in these 
terrible events. Allow me, Madame, to pay it to you," and 
he thrust his purse into her hand. "I think this contains 
about the sum I owed ; if more or less, we will settle the 
difference later. Take care of yourself." 

He was turning away when the woman caught hold of him. 

" Stay, Monsieur. May Heaven bless you I . but . but . tell 
me what name I am to give to Armand. I can't think of any 
one who owed him money. It must have been before that dread- 
ful strike, the beginning of all our woes. Ah, if it were allowed 
to curse any one, I fear my last breath would not be a prayer.'* 

"You would curse the strike, or the master who did not 
forgive Armand's share in it ? " 

" No, no, . the cruel man who talked him into it . into all that 
has changed the best workman, the kindest heart . the . the . 
again her voice died in sobs. 



n 



" And who was that man ? " asked De Mauleon, falteringly. 
" His name was Lebeau. If you were a poor man, I should 
say 'Shun hinv 



I u 



THE PARISIANS. 283 



" I have heard of the name you mention ; but if we mean the 
same person, Monnier cannot have met him lately. He has not 
been in Paris since the siege." 

" I suppose not, the coward ! He ruined us . us who were so 
happy before; and then, as Armand says, cast us away as 
instruments he had done with. But . but if you do know him, 
and do see him again, tell him . tell him not to complete his 
wrong . not to bring murder on Armand's soul. For Armand 
isn't what he was . and has become, oh, so violent ! I dare not 
take this money without saying who gave it. He would not 
take money as alms from an aristocrat. Hush ! he beat me for 
taking money from the good Monsieur Raoul de Vandemar . 
my poor Armand beat me ! " 

De Mauteon shuddered. "Say that it is from a customer 
whose rooms he decorated in his spare hours on his own account 

before the strike, . Monsieur ; " here he uttered indistinctly 

some unpronounceable name and hurried off, soon lost as the 
streets grew darker. Amid groups of a higher order of men 
. military men, nobles, ci-devant deputies . among such ones 
his name stood very high. Not only his bravery in the recent 
sorties had been signal, but a strong belief in his military talents 
had become prevalent; and conjoined with the name he had 
before established as a political writer, and the remembrance 
of the vigour and sagacity with which he had opposed the 
war he seemed certain, when peace and order became re- 
established, of a brilliant position and career in a future 
administration : not less because he had steadfastly kept aloof 
from the existing Government, which it was rumoured, rightly or 
erroneously, that he had been solicited to join ; and from every 
combination of the various democratic or discontented factions. 

Quitting these more distinguished associates, he took his 
way alone towards the ramparts. The day was closing; the 
thunders of the cannon were dying down. 

He passed by a wine-shop round which were gathered many 
of the worst specimens of the Moblots and National Guards, 
mostly drunk, and loudly talking in vehement abuse of generals 
and officers and commissariat By one of the men, as he came 
under the glare of a petroleum lamp (there was gas no longer 



284 THE PARISIANS. 



in the dismal city), he was recognised as the commander who 
had dared to insist on discipline, and disgrace honest patriots 
who claimed to themselves the sole option between fight and 
flight. The man was one of those patriots . one of the new 
recruits whom Victor had shamed and dismissed for mutiny 
and cowardice. He made a drunken plunge at his former 
chief, shouting, " A has Varisto I Comrades, this is the coquin 
De Maul6on who is paid by the Prussians for getting us killed : 
d la lanternel" U A la lanterne!" stammered and hiccupped 
others of the group ; but they did not stir to execute their 
threat Dimly seen as the stern face and sinewy form of the 
threatened man was by their drowsied eyes, the name of De 
Maul6on, the man without fear of a foe, and without ruth for 
a mutineer, sufficed to protect him from outrage ; and with a 
slight movement of his arm that sent his denouncer reeling 
against the lamp-post, De Maul6on passed on : . when another 
man, in the uniform of a National Guard, bounded from the 
door of the tavern, crying with a loud voice, "Who said De 
Mauteon ? . let me look on him : " and Victor, who had strode 
on with slow lion-like steps, cleaving the crowd, turned, and 
saw before him in the gleaming light a face, in which the bold 
frank, intelligent aspect of former days was lost in a wild, 
reckless, savage expression . the face of Armand Monnier. 

" Ha ! are you really Victor de Mauteon ? " asked Monnier, 
not fiercely, but under his breath, . in that sort of stage whisper 
which is the natural utterance of excited men under the mingled 
influence of potent drink and hoarded rage. 

 Certainly ; I am Victor de Maul6on." 

" And you were in command of the company of the 

National Guard on the 30th of November at Champigny and 
Villiers?" 

"I was." 

"And you shot with your own hand an officer belonging to 
another company who refused to join yours ? " 

" I shot a cowardly soldier who ran away from the enemy, 
and seemed a ringleader of other runaways ; and in so doing, 
I saved from dishonour the best part of his comrades." 

" The man was no coward. He was an enlightened Frenchman, 



THE PARISIANS. 285 



and worth fifty of such aristos as you ; and he knew better than 
his officers that he was to be led to an idle slaughter. Idle . 
I say idle. What was France the better, how was Paris the 
safer, for the senseless butchery of that day? You mutinied 
against a wiser general than Saint Trochu when you murdered 
that mutineer." 

"Armand Monnier, you are not quite sober to-night, or 
I would argue with you that question. But you no doubt 
are brave : how and why do you take the part of a runaway ? " 

"How and why? He was my brother, and you own you 
murdered him : my brother . the sagest head in Paris. If I 
had listened to him, I should not be, . bah ! . no matter now 
what I am." 

" I could not know he was your brother ; but if he had been 
mine I would have done the same." 

Here Victor's lip quivered, for Monnier griped him by the 
arm, and looked him in the face with wild stony eyes. 

" I recollect that voice I Yet . yet . you say you are a noble, 
a Vicomte. Victor de Mauteon and you shot my brother ! " 

Here he passed his left hand rapidly over his forehead. The 
fumes of wine still clouded his mind, but rays of intelligence 
broke through the cloud. Suddenly he said in a loud, and 
calm, and natural voice, 

" Mons. le Vicomte, you accost me as Armand Monnier . pray 
how do you know my name ? " 

" How should I not know it ? I have looked into the meet- 
ings of the 'Clubs rouges.' I have heard you speak, and 
naturally asked your name. Bon soir, M. Monnier 1 When you 
reflect in cooler moments, you will see that if patriots excuse 
Brutus for first dishonouring and then executing his own son, 
an officer charged to defend his country may be surely pardoned 
for slaying a runaway to whom he was no relation, when in slay- 
ing he saved the man's name and kindred from dishonour . 
unless, indeed, you insist on telling the world why he was slain." 

" I know your voice . I know it Every sound becomes clearer 
to my ear. And if " 

But while Monnier thus spoke, De Mauteon had hastened on. 
Monnier looked round, saw him gone, but did not pursue. He 



286 THE PARISIANS. 



was just intoxicated enough to know that his footsteps were 
not steady, and he turned back to the wine-shop and asked 
surlily for more wine. Could you have seen him then as he 
leant swinging himself to and fro against the wall, . had you 
known the man two years ago, you would have been a brute if 
you felt disgust. You could only have felt that profound com- 
passion with which we gaze on a great royalty fallen. For the 
grandest of all royalties is that which takes its crown from 
Nature, needing no accident of birth. And Nature made the 
mind of Armand Monnier king-like ; endowed it with lofty 
scorn of meanness and falsehood and dishonour, with warmth 
and tenderness of heart which had glow enough to spare from 
ties of kindred and hearth and home, to extend to those distant 
circles of humanity over which royal natures would fain extend 
the shadow of their sceptre. 

How had the royalty of the man's nature fallen thus ? Royalty 
rarely falls from its own constitutional faults. It falls when, 
ceasing to be royal, it becomes subservient to bad advisers. And 
what bad advisers, always appealing to his better qualities and 
so enlisting his worser, had discrowned this mechanic ? 

" A little knowledge is a dangerous thing/' 

says the old-fashioned poet. " Not so," says the modern 
philosopher ; " a little knowledge is safer than no knowledge." 
Possibly, as all individuals and all communities must go through 
the stage of a little knowledge before they can arrive at that of 
much knowledge, the philosopher's assertion may be right in 
the long-run, and applied to human-kind in general. But there 
is a period, as there is a class, in which a little knowledge tends 
to terrible demoralisation. And Armand Monnier lived in that 
period and was one of that class. The little knowledge that his 
mind, impulsive and ardent, had picked up out of books that 
warred with the great foundations of existing society, had 
originated in ill advices. A man stored with much knowledge 
would never have let Madame de Grantmesnil's denunciations 
of marriage rites, or Louis Blanc's vindication of Robespierre 
as the representative of the working against the middle class, 
influence his practical life. He would have assessed such 



THE PARISIANS. 287 



opinions at their real worth; and whatever that worth might 
seem to him, would not to such opinions have committed the 
conduct of his life. Opinion is not fateful : conduct is. A little 
knowledge crazes an earnest, warm-blooded, powerful creature 
like Armand Monnier into a fanatic He takes an opinion 
which pleases him as a revelation from the gods ; that opinion 
shapes his conduct ; that conduct is his fate. Woe to the philo- 
sopher who serenely flings before the little knowledge of the 
artisan, dogmas as harmless as the Atlantis of Plato if only to 
be discussed by philosophers, and deadly as the torches of At 6 
if seized as articles of a creed by fanatics ! But thrice woe to 
the artisan who makes himself the zealot of the Dogma ! 

Poor Armand acts on the opinions he adopts ; proves his con- 
tempt for the marriage state by living with the wife of another ; 
resents, as natures so inherently manly must do, the Society 
that visits on her his defiance of its laws ; throws himself, head 
foremost, against that society altogether; necessarily joins all who 
have other reasons for hostility to Society ; he himself having 
every inducement not to join indiscriminate strikes . high wages, 
a liberal employer, ample savings, the certainty of soon becoming 
employer himself. No ; that is not enough to the fanatic : he 
persists on being dupe and victim. He, this great king of 
labour, crowned by Nature, and cursed with that degree of 
little knowledge which does not comprehend how much more 
is required before a schoolboy would admit it to be knowledge 
at all, . he rushes into the maddest of all speculations . that 
of the artisan with little knowledge and enormous faith . that 
which intrusts the safety and repose and dignity of life to 
some ambitious adventurer, who uses his warm heart for the 
adventurer's frigid purpose, much as the lawyer-government of 
September used the Communists, . much as, in every revolution 
of France, a Bertrand has used a Raton . much as, till the 
sound of the last trumpet, men very much worse than Victor de 
Maulon will use men very much better than Armand Monnier, 
if the Armand Monniers disdain the modesty of an Isaac Newton 
on hearing that a theorem to which he had given all the strength 
of his patient intellect was disputed : " It may be so ; " mean- 
ing, I suppose, that it requires a large amount of experience 



288 THE PARISIANS. 



ascertained before a man of much knowledge becomes that 
which a man of little knowledge is at a jump . the fanatic 
of an experiment untried. 



CHAPTER II. 

Scarcely had De Maulon quitted Lemercier before the 
latter was joined by two loungers scarcely less famished than 
himself. Savarin and De Br6z6. Like himself too, both had been 
sufferers from illness, though not of a nature to be consigned 
to an hospital All manner of diseases then had combined 
to form the pestilence which filled the streets with unregarded 
hearses . bronchitis, pneumonia, small-pox, a strange sort of 
spurious dysentery much more speedily fatal than the genuine. 
The three men, a year before so sleek, looked like ghosts 
under the withering sky ; yet all three retained embers of the 
native Parisian humour, which their very breath on meeting 
sufficed to kindle up into jubilant sparks or rapid flashes. 

"There are two consolations," said Savarin, as the friends 
strolled or rather crawled towards the Boulevards . "two con- 
solations for the gourmet and for the proprietor in these days 
of trial for the gourmand, because the price of truffles is 
come down." 

" Truffles ! " gasped De Br6z6, with watering mouth ; " impos- 
sible ! They are gone with the age of gold." 

" Not so. I speak on the best authority . my laundress ; for 
she attends the succursale in the Rue de Chateaudun ; and if the 
poor woman, being, luckily for me, a childless widow, gets a 
morsel she can spare, she sells it to me." 

" Sells it ! M feebly exclaimed Lemercier. " Croesus ! you have 
money then, and can buy ? " 

" Sells it . on credit ! I am to pension her for life if I live 
to have money again. Don't interrupt me. This honest woman 
goes this morning to the succursale. I promise myself a delicious 



THE PARISIANS. 289 



bifteck of horse. She gains the succursale, and the etnployt informs 
her that there is nothing left in his store except . truffles. A 
glut of those in the market allows him to offer her a bargain . 
seven francs la bolte. Send me seven francs, De Brz6, and you 
shall share the banquet." 

De Br6zd shook his head expressively. 

" But," resumed Savarin, " though credit exists no more except 
with my laundress, upon terms of which the usury is necessarily 
proportioned to the risk, yet, as I had the honour before to 
observe, there is comfort for the proprietor. The instinct of 
property is imperishable. 1 ' 

" Not in the house where I lodge," said Lemercier. M Two 
soldiers were billeted there ; and during my stay in the am- 
bulance they enter my rooms, and cart away all of the little 
furniture left there, except a bed and a table. Brought before 
a court-martial, they defend themselves by saying, ' The rooms 
were abandoned.' The excuse was held valid. They were let 
off with a reprimand and a promise to restore what was not 
already disposed of. They have restored me another table and 
four chairs." 

" Nevertheless, they had the instinct of property, though 
erroneously developed, otherwise they would not have deemed 
any excuse for their act necessary. Now for my instance of the 
inherent tenacity of that instinct. A worthy citizen in want 
of fuel sees a door in a garden wall, and naturally carries 
off the door. He is apprehended by a gendarme who sees 
the act * Voleur? he cries to the gendarme , ' do you want 
to rob me of my property?' 'That door your property? 
I saw you take it away.' 'You confess,' cries the citizen, 
triumphantly . 'you confess that it is my property; for you 
saw me appropriate it/ Thus you see how imperishable is the 
instinct of property. No sooner does it disappear as yours than 
it reappears as mine." 

" I would laugh if I could," said Lemercier, " but such a 
convulsion would be fatal. Dieu des dieux, how empty I am ! " 
He reeled as he spoke, and clung to De Brez6 for support. De 
Br6z6 had the reputation of being the most selfish of men. But 
at that moment, when a generous man might be excused for 

vol. 11. T 



290 THE PARISIANS. 



being selfish enough to desire to keep the little that he had 
for his own reprieve from starvation, this egotist became superb. 
" Friends," he cried, with enthusiasm, " I have something yet 
in my pocket ; we will dine, all three of us." 

" Dine ! " faltered Lemercier. " Dine ! I have not dined 
since I left the hospital. I breakfasted yesterday . on two 
mice upon toast. Dainty, but not nutritious. And I shared 
them with Fox." 

" Fox ! Fox lives still, then ? " cried De Br6z6, startled. 

" In a sort of way he does. But one mouse since yesterday 
morning is not much ; and he can't expect that every day." 

" Why don't you take him out ? " asked Savarin. " Give him 
a chance of picking up a bone somewhere." 

" I dare not ; he would be picked up himself. Dogs are 
getting very valuable : they sell for 50 francs a piece. Come, 
De Br6z6, where are we to dine ? " 

" I and Savarin can dine at the London Tavern upon rat pdt/ 
or jugged cat. But it would be impertinence to invite a satrap . 
like yourself, who has a whole dog in his larder . a dish of 
50 francs . a dish for a king. Adieu, my dear Frederic Allans, 
Savarin." 

" I feasted you on better meats than dog when I could afford 
it," said Frederic, plaintively ; " and the first time you invite me 
you retract the invitation. Be it so. Bon appetit? 

" Bah ! " said De Br6z6, catching Frederic's arm as he turned 
to depart. " Of course I was but jesting. Only another day, 
when my pockets will be empty, do think what an excellent 
thing a roasted dog is, and make up your mind while Fox has 
still some little flesh on his bones." 

" Flesh ! " said Savarin, detaining them. " Look ! See how 
right Voltaire was in saying, ' Amusement is the first necessity 
of civilised man.' Paris can do without bread: Paris still 
retains Polichinello." 

He pointed to the puppet-show, round which a crowd, not of 
children alone, but of men . middle-aged and old . were 
collected ; while sous were dropped into the tin handed round 
by a squalid boy. 

"And, mon ami" whispered De Br6z6 to Lemercier, with 



THE PARISIANS. 291 



the voice of a tempting fiend, " observe how Punch is without 
his dog." 

It was true. The dog was gone, . its place supplied by a 
melancholy emaciated cat 

Frederic crawled towards the squalid boy. "What has 
become of Punch's dog ? " 

" We ate him last Sunday. Next Sunday we shall have the 
cat in a pie/' said the urchin, with a sensual smack of the lips. 

" O Fox i Fox ! " murmured Frederic, as the three men went 
slowly down through the darkening streets . the roar of the 
Prussian guns heard afar, while distinct and near rang the 
laugh of the idlers round the Punch without a dog. 



CHAPTER III. 

While De Br6z6 and his friends were feasting at the Caff 
Anglais, and faring better than the host had promised . for the 
bill of fare comprised such luxuries as ass, mule, peas, fried 
potatoes, and champagne (champagne in some mysterious way 
was inexhaustible during the time of famine) . a very different 
group had assembled in the rooms of Isaura Cieogna. She and 
the Venosta had hitherto escaped the extreme destitution to 
which many richer persons had been reduced. It is true that 
Isaura's fortune placed in the hands of the absent Louvier, and 
invested in the new street that was to have been, brought no 
return. It was true that in that street the Venosta, dreaming 
of cent, per cent, had invested all her savings. But the Venosta, 
at the first announcement of war, had insisted on retaining in 
hand a small sum from the amount Isaura had received from 
her " roman" that might suffice for current expenses, and with 
yet more acute foresight had laid in stores of provisions and fuel 
immediately after the probability of a siege became apparent. 
But even the provident mind of the Venosta had never foreseen 

T 2 



292 THE PARISIANS. 



that the siege would endure so long, or that the prices of all 
articles of necessity would rise so high. And meanwhile all 
resources . money, fuel, provisions . had been largely drawn 
upon by the charity and benevolence of Isaura, without much 
remonstrance on the part of the Venosta, whose nature was very 
accessible to pity. Unfortunately too, of late money and 
provisions had failed to Monsieur and Madame Rameau, their 
income consisting partly of rents, no longer paid, and the profits 
of a sleeping partnership in the old shop, from which custom 
had departed ; so that they came to share the fireside and meals 
at the rooms of their son's fiancte with little scruple, because 
utterly unaware that the money retained and the provisions 
stored by the Venosta were now nearly exhausted. 

The patriotic ardour which had first induced the elder Rameau 
to volunteer his services as a National Guard, had been ere this 
cooled if not suppressed, first by the hardships of the duty, and 
then by the disorderly conduct of his associates, and their ribald 
talk and obscene songs. He was much beyond the age at 
which he could be registered. His son was, however, com- 
pelled to become his substitute, though from his sickly health 
and delicate frame attached to that portion of the National 
Guard which took no part in actual engagements, and was 
supposed to do work on the ramparts and maintain order in 
the city. 

In that duty, so opposed to his tastes and habits, Gustave 
signalised himself as one of the loudest declaimers against the 
imbecility of the Government, and in the demand for immediate 
and energetic action, no matter at what loss of life, on the part 
of all . except the heroic force to which he himself was attached. 
Still, despite his military labours, Gustave found leisure to con- 
tribute to Red journals, and his contributions paid him tolerably 
well. To do him justice, his parents concealed from him the 
extent of their destitution ; they, on their part, not aware that 
he was so able to assist them, rather fearing that he himself 
had nothing else for support but his scanty pay as a National 
Guard. In fact, of late the parents and son had seen little of 
each other. M. Rameau, though a Liberal politician, was 
Liberal as a tradesman, not as a Red Republican or a Socialist. 



THE PARISIANS. 293 



And, though little heeding his son's theories while the Empire 
secured him from the practical effect of them, he was now as 
sincerely frightened at the chance of the Communists becoming 
rampant as most of the Parisian tradesmen were. Madame 
Rameau, on her side, though she had the dislike to aristocrats 
which was prevalent with her class, was a stanch Roman 
Catholic; and seeing in the disasters that had befallen her 
country the punishment justly incurred by its sins, could not 
but be shocked by the opinions of Gustave, though she little 
knew that he was the author of certain articles in certain 
journals, in which these opinions were proclaimed with a 
vehemence far exceeding that which they assumed in his 
conversation. She had spoken to him with warm anger, 
mixed with passionate tears, on his irreligious principles ; and 
from that moment Gustave shunned to give her another 
opportunity of insulting his pride and depreciating his wisdom. 
Partly to avoid meeting his parents, partly because he recoiled 
almost as much from the ennui of meeting the other visitors at 
her apartments . the Paris ladies associated with her in the 
ambulance, Raoul de Vandemar, whom he especially hated, 
and the Abb6 Vertpr6, who had recently come into intimate 
friendship with both the Italian ladies . his visits to Isaura had 
become exceedingly rare. He made his incessant military 
duties the pretext for absenting himself; and now, on this 
evening, there were gathered round Isaura's hearth . on which 
burned almost the last of the hoarded fuel . the Venosta, the 
two Rameaus, the AbW Vertpr6, who was attached as con- 
fessor to the society of which Isaura was so zealous a member. 
The old priest and the young poetess had become dear friends. 
There is in the nature of a woman (and especially of a woman 
at once so gifted and so childlike as Isaura, combining an innate 
tendency towards faith with a restless inquisitiveness of intellect, 
which is always suggesting query or doubt) a craving for some- 
thing afar from the sphere of her sorrow, which can only be 
obtained through that " bridal of the earth and sky " which we 
call religion. And hence to natures like Isaura's, that link 
between the woman and the priest, which the philosophy of 
France has never been able to dissever. 



294 THE PARISIANS. 



" It is growing, late," said Madame Rameau ; " I am begin- 
ning to feel uneasy. Our dear Isaura is not yet returned." 

" You need be under no apprehension," said the Abbd " The 
ladies attached to the ambulance of which she is so tender and 
zealous a sister incur no risk. There are always brave men 
related to the sick and wounded who see to the safe return of 
the women. My poor Raoul visits that ambulance daily. His 
kinsman, M. de Rochebriant, is there among the wounded." 

"Not seriously hurt, I hope," said the Venosta ; "not disfigured? 
He was so handsome ; it is only the ugly warrior whom a scar 
on the face improves." 

"Don't be alarmed, Signora; the Prussian guns spared his 
face. His wounds in themselves were not dangerous, but he 
lost a good deal of blood. Raoul and the Christian brothers 
found him insensible among a heap of the slain." 

" M. de Vandemar seems to have very soon recovered the 
shock of his poor brother's death," said Madame Rameau. 
"There is very little heart in an aristocrat" 

The Abbe's mild brow contracted. " Have more charity, my 
daughter. It is because Raoul's sorrow for his lost brother is 
so deep and so holy that he devotes himself more than ever 
to the service of the Father which is in heaven. He said, a 
day or two after the burial, when plans for a monument to 
Enguerrand were submitted to him . 'May my prayer be 
vouchsafed, and my life be a memorial of him more accept- 
able to his gentle spirit than monuments of bronze or marble. 
May I be divinely guided and sustained in my desire to do 
such good acts as he would have done had he been spared 
longer to earth. And whenever tempted to weary, may my 
conscience whisper, Betray not the trust left to thee by thy 
brother, lest thou be not reunited to him at last. ' " 

"Pardon me, pardon ! " murmured Madame Rameau humbly, 
while the Venosta burst into tears. 

The Abb6, though a most sincere and earnest ecclesiastic, 
was a cheery and genial man of the world ; and, in order to 
relieve Madame Rameau from the painful self-reproach he had 
before excited, he turned the conversation. " I must beware, 
however," he said, with his pleasant laugh, " as to the company 



THE PARISIANS. 295 



in which I interfere in family questions ; and especially in which 
I defend my poor Raoul from any charge brought against him. 
For some good friend this day sent me a terrible organ of 
communistic philosophy, in which we humble priests are very 
roughly handled, and I myself am especially singled out by 
name as a pestilent intermeddler in the affairs of private 
households. I am said to set the women against the brave 
men who are friends of the people, and am cautioned by very 
truculent threats to cease from such villanous practices." And 
here, with a dry humour that turned into ridicule what would 
otherwise have excited disgust and indignation among his 
listeners, he read aloud passages replete with the sort of 
false eloquence which was then the vogue among the Red 
journals. In these passages, not only the Abb6 was pointed 
out for popular execration, but Raoul de Vandemar, though 
not expressly named, was clearly indicated as a pupil of the 
AbWs, the type of a lay Jesuit. 

The Venosta alone did not share in the contemptuous 
laughter with which the inflated style of these diatribes 
inspired the Rameaus. Her simple Italian mind was horror- 
stricken by language which the Abb treated with ridicule. 

" Ah ! " said M. Rameau, " I guess the author . that firebrand 
Felix Pyat" 

" No," answered the Abb6 ; " the writer signs himself by the 
name of a more learned atheist . Diderot lejeune. " 

Here the door opened, and Raoul entered, accompanying 
Isaura. A change had come over the face of the young 
Vandemar since his brother's death. The lines about the 
mouth had deepened, the cheeks had lost their rounded 
contour and grown somewhat hollow. But the expression 
was as serene as ever, perhaps even less pensively melancholy. 
His whole aspect was that of a man who has sorrowed, but 
been supported in sorrow; perhaps it was more sweet . cer- 
tainly it was more lofty. 

And, as if there were in the atmosphere of his presence 
something that communicated the likeness of his own soul 
to others, since Isaura had been brought into his companion- 
ship, her own lovely face had caught the expression that 



296 THE PARISIANS. 



prevailed in his . that, too, had become more sweet . that, 
too, had become more lofty. 

The friendship that had grown up between these two young 
mourners was of a very rare nature. It had in it no sentiment 
that could ever warm into the passion of human love. Indeed, 
had Isaura's heart been free to give away, love for Raoul de 
Vandemar would have seemed to her a profanation. He was 
never more priestly than when he was most tender. And the 
tenderness of Raoul, towards her was that of some saint-like 
nature towards the acolyte whom it attracted upwards. He 
had once, just before Enguerrand's death, spoken to Isaura 
with a touching candour as to his own predilection for a 
monastic life. "The worldly avocations that open useful and 
honourable careers for others have no charm for me. I care 
not for riches nor power, nor honours nor fame. The austerities 
of the conventual life have no terror for me ; on the contrary, 
they have a charm, for with them are abstraction from earth 
and meditation on heaven. In earlier years I might, like other 
men, have cherished dreams of human love, and felicity in 
married life, but for the sort of veneration with which I regarded 
one to whom I owe . humanly speaking . whatever of good 
there may be in me. Just when first taking my place among 
the society of young men who banish from their life all thought 
of another, I came under the influence of a woman who taught 
me to see that holiness was beauty. She gradually associated 
me with her acts of benevolence, and from her I learned to 
love God too well not to be indulgent to his creatures. I 
know not whether the attachment I felt to her could have 
been inspired in one who had not from childhood conceived 
a romance, not perhaps justified by history, for the ideal 
images of chivalry. My feeling for her at first was that of 
the pure and poetic homage which a young knight was per- 
mitted, sans reprodie, to render to some fair queen or chdtelaim, 
whose colours he wore in the lists, whose spotless repute he 
would have perilled his life to defend. But soon even that 
sentiment, pure as it was, became chastened from all breath 
of earthly love, in proportion as the admiration refined itself 
into reverence. She has often urged me to marry, but I have 



\ 



THE PARISIANS. 297 



no bride on this earth. I do but want to see Enguerrand 
happily married, and then I quit the world for the cloister. " 

But after Enguerrand's death, Raoul resigned all idea of the 
convent That evening, as he attended to their homes Isaura 
and the other ladies attached to the ambulance, he said, in 
answer to inquiries about his mother, " She is resigned and calm. 
I have promised her I will not, while she lives, bury her other 
son : I renounce my dreams of the monastery." 

Raoul did not remain many minutes at Isaura's. The Abb6 
accompanied him on his way home. " I have a request to make 
to you," said the former ; " you know, of course, your distant 
cousin the Vicomte de Maulon ? " 

u Yes. Not so well as I ought, for Enguerrand liked him." 

"Well enough, at all events, to call on him with a request 
which I am commissioned to make, but it might come better 
from you as a kinsman. I am a stranger to him, and I know 
not whether a man of that sort would not regard as an officious 
intermeddling any communication made to him by a priest 
The matter, however, is a very simple one. At the convent of 
there is a poor nun who is, I fear, dying. She has an 



intense desire to see M. de Maul6on, whom she declares to be 
her uncle, and her only surviving relative. The laws of the 
convent are not too austere to prevent the interview she 
seeks in such a case. I should add that I am not acquainted 
with her previous history. I am not the confessor of the 
sisterhood ; he, poor man, was badly wounded by a chance 
ball a few days ago when attached to an ambulance on the 
ramparts. As soon as the surgeon would allow him to see 
any one, he sent for me, and bade me go to the nun I speak 
of . Sister Ursula. It seems that he had informed her that 
M. de Mauteon was at Paris, and had promised to ascertain 
his address. His wound had prevented his doing so, but he 
trusted to me to procure the information. I am well acquainted 
with the Sup&ieure of the convent, and I flatter myself that she 
holds me in esteem. I had therefore no difficulty to obtain her 
permission to see this poor nun, which I did this evening. She 
implored me for the peace of her soul to lose no time in finding 
out M. de Maul6on's address, and entreating him to visit her. 



298 THE PARISIANS. 



Lest he should demur, I was to give him the name by which 
he had known her in the world . Louise Duval. Of course 
I obeyed. The address of a man who has so distinguished 
himself in this unhappy siege I very easily obtained, and repaired 
at once to M. de Maul6on's apartment I there learned that 
he was from home, and it was uncertain whether he would not 
spend the night on the ramparts." 

"I will not fail to see him early in the morning," said Raoul, 
"and execute your commission." 



CHAPTER IV. 

De Mauleon was somewhat surprised by Raoul's visit 
the next morning. He had no great liking for a kinsman 
whose politely distant reserve towards him, in contrast to poor 
Enguerrand's genial heartiness, had much wounded his sensitive 
self-respect ; nor could he comprehend the religious scruples 
which forbade Raoul to take a soldier's share in the battle-field, 
though in seeking there to save the lives of others so fearlessly 
hazarding his own life. 

"Pardon," said Raoul, with his sweet mournful smile, "the 
unseasonable hour at which I disturb you. But your duties on 
the ramparts and mine in the hospital begin early, and I have 
promised the Abb6 Vertpr6 to communicate a message of a 
nature which perhaps you may deem pressing." He proceeded 
at once to repeat what the Abb6 had communicated to him 
the night before relative to the illness and the request of 
the nun. 

" Louise Duval ! " exclaimed the Vicomte, " discovered at 
last, and a religieuse! Ah! I now understand why she never 
sought me out when I reappeared at Paris. Tidings of that 
sort do not penetrate the walls of a convent I am greatly 
obliged to you, M. de Vandemar, for the trouble you have 



THE PARISIANS. 299 



so kindly taken. This poor nun is related to me, and I will 

at once obey the summons. But this convent des I am 

ashamed to say I know not where it is. A long way off, 
I suppose ? * 

"Allow me to be your guide," said Raoul ; " I should take it 
as a favour to be allowed to see a little more of a man whom 
my lost brother held in such esteem." 

Victor was touched by this conciliatory speech, and in a few 
minutes more the two men were on their way to the convent 
on the other side of the Seine. 

Victor commenced the conversation by a warm and heartfelt 
tribute to Enguerrand's character and memory. " I never," he 
said, " knew a nature more rich in the most endearing qualities 
of youth; so gentle, so high-spirited, rendering every virtue more 
attractive, and redeeming such few faults or foibles as youth so 
situated and so tempted cannot wholly escape, with an urbanity 
not conventional, not artificial, but reflected from the frankness 
of a genial temper and the tenderness of a generous heart. Be 
comforted for his loss, my kinsman. A brave death was the 
proper crown of that beautiful life." 

Raoul made no answer, but pressed gratefully the arm now 
linked within his own. The companions walked on in silence ; 
Victor's mind settling on the visit he was about to make to the 
niece so long mysteriously lost, and now so unexpectedly found. 
Louise had inspired him with a certain interest from her beauty 
and force of character, but never with any warm affection. He 
felt relieved to find that her life had found its close in the 
sanctuary of the convent. He had never divested himself of 
a certain fear, inspired by Louvier's statement that she might 
live to bring scandal and disgrace on the name he had with 
so much difficulty, and after so lengthened an anguish, partially 
cleared in his on person. 

Raoul left De Maul6on at the gate of the convent, and took 
his way towards the hospitals where he visited, and the poor 
whom he relieved. 

Victor was conducted silently into the convent parloir ; and, 
after waiting there several minutes, the door opened, and the 
Sup^rieure entered. As she advanced towards him, with stately 



30O THE PARISIANS. 



step and solemn visage, De Mauteon recoiled, and uttered a 
half-suppressed exclamation that partook both of amaze and 
awe. Could it be possible ? Was this majestic woman, with 
the grave impassible aspect, once the ardent girl whose tender 
letters he had cherished through stormy years, and only burned 
on the night before the most perilous of his battle-fields ? 
This the one, the sole one, whom in his younger dreams he 
had seen as his destined wife? It was so . it was. Doubt 
vanished when he heard her voice ; and yet how different every 
tone, every accent, from those of the low, soft, thrilling music 
that had breathed in the voice of old ! 

" M. de Maul6on," said the Sup^rieure, calmly, " I grieve to 
sadden you by very mournful intelligence. Yesterday evening, 
when the Abbe undertook to convey to you the request of our 
Sister Ursula, although she was beyond mortal hope of recovery 
. as otherwise you will conceive that I could not have relaxed 
the rules of this house so as to sanction your visit . there was 
no apprehension of immediate danger. It was believed that 
her sufferings would be prolonged for some days. I saw her 
late last night before retiring to my cell, and she seemed 
even stronger than she had been for the last week. A sister 
remained at watch in her cell. Towards morning she fell into 
apparently quiet sleep, and in that sleep she passed away." 
The Sup6rieure here crossed herself, and murmured pious words 
in Latin. 

" Dead ! my poor niece ! " said Victor, feelingly, roused from 
his stun at the first sight of the Supdrieure by her measured 
tones, and the melancholy information she so composedly 
conveyed to him. "I cannot, then, even learn why she so 
wished to see me once more, . or what she might have requested 
at my hands ! " 

" Pardon, M. le Vicomte. Such sorrowful consolation I have 
resolved to afford you, not without scruples of conscience, but 
not without sanction of the excellent Abb6 Vertpr6, whom 
I summoned early this morning to decide my duties in the 
sacred office I hold. As soon as Sister Ursula heard of your 
return to Paris, she obtained my permission to address to you 
a letter, subjected, when finished, to my perusal and sanction. 



THE PARISIANS. 301 



She felt that she had much on her mind which her feeble state 
might forbid her to make known to you in conversation with 
sufficient fulness; and as she could only have seen you in 
presence of one of the sisters, she imagined that there would 
also be less restraint in a written communication. In fine, 
her request was that, when you called, I might first place 
this letter in your hands, and allow you time to read it, 
before being admitted to her presence ; when a few words, 
conveying your promise to attend to the wishes with which 
you would then be acquainted, would suffice for an interview in 
her exhausted condition. Do I make myself understood ? " 
" Certainly, Madame, . and the letter ? " 
" She had concluded last evening ; and when I took leave of 
her later in the night, she placed it in my hands for approval. 
M. le Vicomte, it pains me to say that there is much in the 
tone of that letter which I grieve for and condemn. And it 
was my intention to point this out to our sister at morning, and 
tell her that passages must be altered before I could give to you 
the letter. Her sudden decease deprived me of this opportunity. 
I could not, of course, alter or erase a line . a word. My only 
option was to suppress the letter altogether, or give it you 
intact. The Abbe thijiks that, on the whole, my duty does 
not forbid the dictate of my own impulse . my own feelings ; 
and I now place this letter in your hands." 

De Mauteon took a packet, unsealed, from the thin white 
fingers of the Sup^rieure ; and as he bent to receive it, lifted 
toward her eyes eloquent with a sorrowful, humble pathos, 
in which it was impossible for the heart of a woman who had 
loved not to see a reference to the past which the lips did not 
dare to utter. 

A faint, scarce-perceptible blush stole over the marble 
cheek of the nun. But, with an exquisite delicacy, in which 
survived the woman while reigned the nun, she replied to the 
appeal. 

" M. Victor de Mauteon, before, having thus met, we part for 
ever, permit a poor religieuse to say with what joy . a joy 
rendered happier because it was tearful . I have learned 
through the Abb6 Vertpr that the honour which, as between 



302 THE PARISIANS. 



man and man, no one who had once known you could ever 
doubt, you have lived to vindicate from calumny." 

" Ah ; you have heard that . at last, at last ! " 

"I repeat . of the honour thus deferred, I never doubted." 
The Sup^rieure hurried on. " Greater joy it has been to me 
to hear from the same venerable source that, while found 
bravest among the defenders of your country, you are clear 
from all alliance with the assailants of your God. Continue 
so, continue so, Victor de Maul6on. 

She retreated to the door, and then turned towards him with 
a look in which all the marble had melted away ; adding, with 
words more formally nunlike, yet unmistakably womanlike, than 
those which had gone before, . " That to the last you may be 
true to God, is a prayer never by me omitted." 

She spoke, and vanished. 

In a kind of dim and dreamlike bewilderment, Victor de 
Mauleon found himself without the walls of the convent 
Mechanically, as a man does when the routine of his life is 
presented to him, from the first Minister of State to the poor 
clown at a suburban theatre, doomed to appear at their posts, 
to prose on a Beer Bill, or grin through a horse-collar, though 
their hearts are bleeding at every pore with some household or 
secret affliction, . mechanically De Mauleon went his way 
towards the ramparts, at a section of which he daily drilled 
his raw recruits. Proverbial for his severity towards those who 
offended, for the cordiality of his praise of those who pleased 
his soldierly judgment, no change of his demeanour was visible 
that morning, save that he might be somewhat milder to the 
one, somewhat less hearty to the other. This routine duty 
done, he passed slowly towards a more deserted because a 
more exposed part of the defences, and seated himself on the 
frozen sward alone. The cannon thundered around him. He 
heard unconsciously: from time to time an obus hissed and 
splintered close at his feet ; . he saw with abstracted eye. His 
soul was with the past ; and, brooding over all that in the past 
lay buried there, came over him a conviction of the vanity of 
the human earth-bounded objects for which we burn or freeze, 
far more absolute than had grown out of the worldly cynicism 



THE PARISIANS. 303 



connected with his worldly ambition. The sight of that face, 
associated with the one pure romance of his reckless youth, the 
face of one so estranged, so serenely aloft from all memories of 
youth, of romance, of passion, smote him in the midst of the 
new hopes of the new career, as the look on the skull of the 
woman he had so loved and so mourned, when disburied from 
her grave, smote the brilliant noble who became the stern 
reformer of La Trappe. And while thus gloomily meditating, 
the letter of the poor Louise Duval was forgotten. She whose 
existence had so troubled, and crossed, and partly marred the 
lives of others, . she, scarcely dead, and already forgotten by 
her nearest of kin. Well . had she not forgotten, put wholly out 
of her mind, all that was due to those much nearer to her than is 
an uncle to a niece ? 

The short, bitter, sunless day was advancing towards its 
decline before Victor roused himself with a quick impatient 
start from his reverie, and took forth the letter from the 
dead nun. 

It began with expressions of gratitude, of joy at the thought 
that she should see him again before she died, thank him for his 
past kindness, and receive, she trusted, his assurance that he 
would attend to her last remorseful injunctions. I pass over 
much that followed in the explanation of events in her life 
sufficiently known to the reader. She stated, as the strongest 
reason why she had refused the hand of Louvier, her knowledge 
that she should in due time become a mother . a fact concealed 
from Victor, secure that he would then urge her not to annul 
her informal marriage, but rather insist on the ceremonies that 
would render it valid. She touched briefly on her confidential 
intimacy with Madame Marigny, the exchange of name and 
papers, her confinement in the neighbourhood of Aix, the child 
left to the care of the nurse, the journey to Munich to find the 
false Louise Duval was no more. The documents obtained 
through the agent of her easy-tempered kinsman, the late 
Marquis de Rochebriant, and her subsequent domestication in 
the house of the von Rudesheims, . all this it is needless to do 
more here than briefly recapitulate. The letter then went on : 
" While thus kindly treated by the family with whom nominally 



304 THE PARISIANS. 



a governess, I was on the terms of a friend with Signor Ludovico 
Cicogna, an Italian of noble birth. He was the only man I ever 
cared for. I loved him with frail human passion. I could not 
tell him my true history. I could not tell him that I had a 
child ; such intelligence would have made him renounce me at 
once. He had a daughter, still but an infant, by a former 
marriage, then brought up in France. He wished to take her 
to his house, and his second wife to supply the place of her 
mother. What was I to do with the child I had left near Aix ? 
While doubtful and distracted, I read an advertisement in the 
journals to the effect that a French lady, then staying in 
Coblentz, wished to adopt a female child not exceeding the 
age of six: the child to be wholly resigned to her by the 
parents, she undertaking to rear and provide for it as her own. 
I resolved to go to Coblentz at once. I did so. I saw this lady. 
She seemed in affluent circumstances, yet young but a confirmed 
invalid, confined the greater part of the day to her sofa by some 
malady of the spine. She told me very frankly her story. She 
had been a professional dancer on the stage, had married re- 
spectably, quitted the stage, become a widow, and shortly after- 
wards been seized with the complaint that would probably for 
life keep her a secluded prisoner in her room. Thus afflicted, 
and without tie, interest, or object in the world, she conceived 
the idea of adopting a child that she might bring up to tend and 
cherish her as a daughter. In this, the imperative condition 
was that the child should never be resought by the parents. She 
was pleased by my manner and appearance : she did not wish 
her adopted daughter to be the child of peasants. She asked 
me for no references, . made no inquiries. She said cordially 
that she wished for no knowledge that, through any indiscretion 
of her own, communicated to the child might lead her to seek 
the discovery of her real parents. In fine, I left Coblentz on 
the understanding that I was to bring the infant, and if it pleased 
Madame Surville, the agreement was concluded. 

" I then repaired to Aix. I saw the child. Alas ! unnatural 
mother that I was, the sight only more vividly brought before 
me the sense of my own perilous position. Yet the child was 
lovely ! a likeness of myself, but lovelier far, for it was a pure, 



THE PARISIANS. 305 



innocent, gentle loveliness. And they told her to call me 
' Maman! Oh, did I not relent when I heard that name ? 
No ; it jarred on my ear as a word of reproach and shame. 
In walking with the infant towards the railway station, imagine 
my dismay when suddenly I met the man who had been taught 
to believe me dead. I soon discovered that his dismay was 
equal to my own, . that I had nothing to fear from his desire 
to claim me. It did occur to me for a moment to resign his 
child to him. But when he shrank reluctantly from a half 
suggestion to that effect, my pride was wounded, my con- 
science absolved. And, after all, it might be unsafe to my 
future to leave with him any motive for retracing me. I left 
him hastily. I have never seen nor heard of him more. I 
took the child to Coblentz. Madame Surville was charmed 
with its prettiness and prattle, . charmed still more when I 
rebuked the poor infant for calling me ' Maman* and said, 
' Thy real mother is here/ Freed from my trouble, I returned 
to the kind German roof I had quitted, and shortly after became 
the wife of Ludovico Cicogna. 

"My punishment soon began. His was a light, fickle, 
pleasure-hunting nature. He soon grew weary of me. My 
very love made me unamiable to him. I became irritable, 
jealous, exacting. His daughter, who now came to live with 
us, was another subject of discord I knew that he loved her 
better than me. I became a harsh step-mother ; and Ludovico's 
reproaches, vehemently made, nursed all my angriest passions. 
But a son of this new marriage was born to myself. My pretty 
Luigi ! how my heart became wrapt up in him 1 Nursing him, 
I forgot resentment against his father. Well, poor Cicogna 
fell ill and died. I mourned him sincerely ; but my boy was 
left Poverty then fell on me, . poverty extreme. Cicogna's 
sole income was derived from a post in the Austrian dominion 
in Italy, and ceased with it. He received a small pension 
in compensation ; that died with him. 

"At this time, an Englishman, with whom Ludovico had 
made acquaintance in Venice, and who visited often at our 
house in Verona, offered me his hand. He had taken an 
extraordinary liking to Isaura, Cicogna's daughter by his first 

VOL. II. U 



* 3 o6 THE PARISIANS. 



marriage. But I think his proposal was dictated partly by 
compassion for me, and more by affection for her. For the sake 
of my boy Luigi I married him. He was a good man, of 
retired learned habits with which I had no sympathy. His 
companionship overwhelmed me with ennui. But I bore it 
patiently for Luigi's sake. God saw that my heart was as 
much as ever estranged from Him, and He took away my all 
on earth . my boy. Then in my desolation I turned to our 
Holy Church for comfort. I found a friend in the priest, my 
confessor. I was startled to learn from him how guilty I had 
been . was still. Pushing to an extreme the doctrines of the 
Church, he would not allow that my first marriage, though 
null by law, was void in the eyes of Heaven. Was not the 
death of the child I so cherished a penalty due to my sin 
towards the child I had abandoned ? 

"These thoughts pressed on me night and day. With the 
consent and approval of the good priest, I determined to quit 
the roof of M. Selby, and to devote myself to the discovery 
of my forsaken Julie. 

"I had a painful interview with M. Selby. I announced 
my intention to separate from him. I alleged as a reason my 
conscientious repugnance to live with a professed heretic . an 
enemy to our Holy Church. When M. Selby found that he 
could not shake my resolution, he lent himself to it with the 
forbearance and generosity which he had always exhibited. 
On our marriage he had settled on me five thousand pounds, 
to be absolutely mine in the event of his death. He now 
proposed to concede to me the interest on that capital during 
his life, and he undertook the charge of my step-daughter 
Isaura, and secured to her all the rest he had to leave ; such 
landed property as he possessed in England passing to a 
distant relative. 

" So we parted, not with hostility . tears were shed on both 
sides. I set out for Coblentz. Madame Surville had long since 
quitted that town, devoting some years to the round of various 
mineral spas in vain hope of cure. Not without some difficulty 
I traced her to her last residence in the neighbourhood of Paris, 
but she was then no more . her death accelerated by the shock 



THE PARISIANS. 307 



occasioned by the loss of her whole fortune, which she had been 
induced to place in one of the numerous fraudulent companies 
by which so many have been ruined. Julie, who was with her 
at the time of her death, had disappeared shortly after it . 
none could tell me whither ; but from such hints as I could 
gather, the poor child, thus left destitute, had been betrayed into 
sinful courses. 

" Probably I might yet by searching inquiry have found her 
out; you will say it was my duty at least to institute such 
inquiry. No doubt; I now remorsefully feel that it was. I 
did not think so at the time. The Italian priest had given me 
a few letters of introduction to French ladies with whom, when 
they had sojourned at Florence, he had made acquaintance. 
These ladies were very strict devotees, formal observers of those 
decorums by which devotion proclaims itself to the world. They 
had received me not only with kindness but with marked respect. 
They chose to exalt into the noblest self-sacrifice the act of 
my leaving M. Selby's house. Exaggerating the simple cause 
assigned to it in the priest's letter, they represented me as 
quitting a luxurious home and an idolising husband rather than 
.continue intimate intercourse with the enemy of my religion. 
This new sort of flattery intoxicated me with its fumes. I 
recoiled from the thought of shattering the pedestal to which 
I had found myself elevated. What if I should discover my 
daughter in one from the touch of whose robe these holy 
women would recoil as from the rags of a leper ! No ; it would 
be impossible for me to own her . impossible for me to give 
her the shelter of my roof. Nay, if discovered to hold any 
commune with such an outcast, no explanation, no excuse short 
of the actual truth, would avail with these austere judges of 
human error. And the actual truth would be yet deeper 
disgrace. I reasoned away my conscience. If I looked for 
example in the circles in which I had obtained reverential 
place, I could find no instance in which a girl who had fallen 
from virtue was not repudiated by her nearest relatives. Nay, 
when I thought of my own mother, had not her father refused 
to see her, to acknowledge her child, from no other offence 
than that of a mesalliance which wounded the family pride? 

u 2 



3 o8 THE PARISIANS. 



That pride, alas! was in my blood . my sole inheritance from 
the family I sprang from. 

"Thus it went on, till I had grave symptoms of a disease 
which rendered the duration of my life uncertain. My conscience 
awoke and tortured me. I resolved to take the veil. Vanity 
and pride again ! My resolution was applauded by those whose 
opinion had so swayed my mind and my conduct. Before I 
retired into the convent from which I write, I made legal 
provision as to the bulk of the fortune which, by the death 
of M. Selby, has become absolutely at my disposal One 
thousand pounds amply sufficed for dotation to the convent : 
the other four thousand pounds are given in trust to the 

eminent notary, M. Nadaud, Rue . On applying to him, 

you will find that the sum, with the accumulated interest, is 
bequeathed to you, . a tribute of gratitude for the assistance 
you afforded me in the time of your own need, and the 
kindness with which you acknowledged our relationship and 
commiserated my misfortunes. 

" But oh, my uncle, find out . a man can do so with a facility 
not accorded to a woman . what has become of this poor Julie, 
and devote what you may deem right and just of the sum thus 
bequeathed to place her above want and temptation. In doing 
so, I know you will respect my name : I would not have it 
dishonour you, indeed. 

" I have been employed in writing this long letter since the 
day I heard you were in Paris. It has exhausted the feeble 
remnants of my strength. It will be given to you before the 
interview I at once dread and long for, and in that interview 
you will not rebuke me. Will you, my kind uncle ? No, you 
will only soothe and pity ! 

" Would that I were worthy to pray for others, that I might 
add, ' May the Saints have you in their keeping and lead you 
to faith in the Holy Church, which has power to absolve from 
sins those who repent as I do. ' " 

The letter dropped from Victor's hand. He took it up, 
smoothed it mechanically, and with a dim, abstracted, be- 
wildered, pitiful wonder. Well might the Supdrieure have 
hesitated to allow confessions, betraying a mind so little 



THE PARISIANS. 309 



regulated by genuine religious faith, to pass into other hands. 
Evidently it was the paramount duty of rescuing from want or 
from sin the writer's forsaken child, that had overborne all other 
considerations in the mind of the Woman and the Priest she 
consulted. 

Throughout that letter, what a strange perversion of under- 
standing 1 what a half-unconscious confusion of wrong and right ! 
. the duty marked out so obvious and so neglected ; even the 
religious sentiment awakened by the conscience so dividing 
itself from the moral instinct ! the dread of being thought less 
religious by obscure comparative strangers stronger than the 
moral obligation to discover and reclaim the child for whose 
errors, if she had erred, the mother who so selfishly forsook her 
was alone responsible ! even at the last, at the approach of 
death, the love for a name she had never made a self-sacrifice 
to preserve unstained ; and that concluding exhortation, . that 
reliance on a repentance in which there was so qualified a 
reparation ! 

More would Victor de Mauleon have wondered had he known 
those points of similarity in character, and in the nature of their 
final bequests, between Louise Duval and the husband she had 
deserted. By one of those singular coincidences which, if this 
work be judged by the ordinary rules presented to the ordinary 
novel-reader, a critic would not unjustly impute to defective 
invention in the author, the provision for this child, deprived 
of its natural parents during their lives, is left to the discretion 
and honour of trustees, accompanied on the part of the con- 
secrated Louise and "the blameless King," with the injunction 
of respect to their worldly reputations . two parents so opposite 
in condition, in creed, in disposition, yet assimilating in that 
point of individual character in which it touches the wide vague 
circle of human opinion. For this, indeed, the excuses of 
Richard King are strong, inasmuch as the secrecy he sought 
was for the sake, not of his own memory, but that of her whom 
the world knew only as his honoured wife. The conduct of 
Louise admits no such excuse ; she dies as she had lived, an 
Egotist. But, whatever the motives of the parents, what is the 
fate of the deserted child ? What revenge does the worldly 



3io THE PARISIANS. 



opinion, which the parents would escape for themselves, inflict 
on the innocent infant to whom the bulk of their worldly posses- 
sions is to be clandestinely conveyed ? Would all the gold of 
Ophir be compensation enough for her ? 

Slowly De Mauldon roused himself, and turned from the 
solitary place where he had been seated to a more crowded 
part of the ramparts. He passed a group of young Moblots, 
with flowers wreathed round their gun-barrels. " If," said one 
of them gaily, " Paris wants bread, it never wants flowers." His 
companions laughed merrily, and burst out into a scurrile song 
in ridicule of St. Trochu. Just then an obus fell a few yards 
before the group. The sound only for a moment drowned the 
song, but the splinters struck a man in a coarse, ragged dress, who 
had stopped to listen to the singers. At his sharp cry, two men 
hastened to his side : one was Victor de Mauldon ; the other was 
a surgeon, who quitted another group of idlers . National Guards 
. attracted by the shriek that summoned his professional aid. 
The poor man was terribly wounded. The surgeon, glancing 
at De Maul^on, shrugged his shoulders, and muttered, " Past 
help ! " The sufferer turned his haggard eyes on the Vicomte, 
and gasped out, " M. de Maul6on ? " 

"That is my name," answered Victor, surprised, and not 
immediately recognising the sufferer. 

" Hist, Jean Lebeau ! . look at me : you recollect me now . Marc 
le Roux, concierge to the Secret Council. Ay, I found out who 
you were long ago . followed you home from the last meeting you 
broke up. But I did not betray you, or you would have been 
murdered long since. Beware of the old set . beware of . 

of " Here his voice broke off into shrill exclamations of 

pain. Curbing his last agonies with a powerful effort, he faltered 
forth . " You owe me a service . see to the little one at home . 
she is starving." The death-r^ came on ; in a few moments he 
was no more. 

Victor gave orders for the removal of the corpse, and hurried 
away. The surgeon, who had changed countenance when he 
overheard the name in which the dying man had addressed 
De Mauteon, gazed silently after De Mauteon's retreating foraii 
and then, also quitting the dead, rejoined the group he had 



THE PARISIANS. 311 



quitted. Some of those who composed it acquired evil renown 
later in the war of the Communists, and came to disastrous 
ends : among that number the Pole Loubinsky and other 
members of the Secret Council The Italian Raselli was there 
too, but, subtler than his French confreres, he divined the fate 
of the Communists, and glided from it . safe now in his native 
land, destined there, no doubt, to the funereal honours and lasting 
renown which Italy bestows on the dust of her sons who have 
advocated assassination out of love for the human race. 

Amid this group, too, was a National Guard, strayed from his 
proper post, and stretched on the frozen ground ; and, early 
though the hour, in the profound sleep of intoxication. 

" So," said Loubinsky, " you have found your errand in vain, 
Citizen le Noy; another victim to the imbecility of our 
generals." 

"And partly one of us," replied the MMecin des Pauvres. 
* You remember poor le Roux, who kept the old baroque where 
the Council of Ten used to meet ? Yonder he lies." 

" Don't talk of the Council of Ten. What fools and dupes we 
were made by that vieux gredin, Jean Lebeau ! How I wish I 
could meet him again ! " 

Gaspard le Noy smiled sarcastically. " So much the worse for 
you if you did. A muscular and a ruthless fellow is that Jean 
Lebeau ! " Therewith he turned to the drunken sleeper and 
woke him up with a shake and a kick. 

"Armand . Armand Monnier, I say, rise, rub your eyes! 
What if you are called to your post ? What if you are shamed 
as a deserter and a coward ? " 

Armand turned, rose with an effort from the recumbent to the 
sitting posture, and stared dizzily in the face of the MMecin des 
Pauvres. 

" I was dreaming that I had caught by the throat," said 
Armand, wildly, " the aristo who shot my brother ; and lo, 
there were two men, Victor de Maul&m and Jean Lebeau." 

"Ah! there is something in dreams," said the surgeon. 
u Once in a thousand times a dream comes true." 



312 THE PARISIANS. 



CHAPTER V. 

The time now came when all provision of food or of fuel 
failed the modest household of Isaura ; and there was not only 
herself and the Venosta to feed and warm . there were the 
servants whom they had brought from Italy, and had not the 
heart now to dismiss to the certainty of famine. True, one of 
the three, the man, had returned to his native land before the 
commencement of the siege ; but the two women had remained 
They supported themselves now as they could on the meagre 
rations accorded by the Government Still Isaura attended 
the ambulance to which she was attached. From the ladies 
associated with her she could readily have obtained ample 
supplies : but they had no conception of her real state of 
destitution; and there was a false pride generally prevalent 
among the respectable classes, which Isaura shared, that 
concealed distress lest alms should be proffered. 

The destitution of the household had been carefully concealed 
from the parents of Gustave Rameau until, one day, Madame 
Rameau, entering at the hour at which she generally, and her 
husband sometimes, came for a place by the fireside and a 
seat at the board, found on the one only ashes, on the other 
a ration of the black nauseous compound which had become 
the substitute for bread. 

Isaura was absent on her duties at the ambulance hospital, . 
purposely absent, for she shrank from the bitter task of making 
clear to the friends of her betrothed the impossibility of con- 
tinuing the aid to their support which their son had neglected 
to contribute; and still more from the comment which she knew 
they would make on his conduct, in absenting himself so wholly 
of late, and in the time of such trial and pressure, both from 
them and from herself. Truly, she rejoiced at that absence so 
far as it affected herself. Every hour of the day she silently 
asked her conscience whether she were not now absolved from 
a promise won from her only by an assurance that she had 



THE PARISIANS. 313 



power to influence for good the life that now voluntarily 
separated itself from her own. As she had never loved 
Gustave, so she felt no resentment at the indifference his 
conduct manifested. On the contrary, she hailed it as a sign 
that the annulment of their betrothal would be as welcome 
to him as to herself. And if so, she could restore to him 
the sort of compassionate friendship she had learned to cherish 
in the hour of his illness and repentance. She had resolved 
to seize the first opportunity he afforded to her of speaking to 
him with frank and truthful plainness. But, meanwhile, her 
gentle nature recoiled from the confession of her resolve to 
appeal to Gustave himself for the rupture of their engagement. 

Thus the Venosta alone received Madame Rameau ; and while 
that lady was still gazing round her with an emotion too deep 
for immediate utterance, her husband entered with an expression 
of face new to him . the look of a man who has been stung to 
anger, and who has braced his mind to some stern determination. 
This altered countenance of the good-tempered bourgeois was 
not, however, noticed by the two women. The Venosta did 
not even raise her eyes to it, as with humbled accents she 
said, "Pardon, dear Monsieur, pardon, Madame, our want of 
hospitality; it is not our hearts that fail. We kept our state 
from you as long as we could. Now it speaks for itself: '/a 
fame i una bratta festin. 9 " 

" Oh, Madame ! and oh, my poor Isaura ! " cried Madame 
Rameau, bursting into tears. " So we have been all this time 
a burden on you, . aided to bring such want on you ! How 
can we ever be forgiven ? And my son . to leave us thus, . 
not even to tell us where to find him ! " 

"Do not degrade us, my wife," said M. Rameau, with un- 
expected dignity, "by a word to imply that we would stoop 
to sue for support to our ungrateful child. No, we will not 
starve ! I am strong enough stnl to find food for you. I 
will apply for restoration to the National Guard. They have 
augmented the pay to married men ; it is now nearly two 
francs and a half a-day to a ptre de famille, and on that 
pay we all can at least live. Courage, my wife ! I will go 
at once for employment Many men older than I am are at 



314 THE PARISIANS. 



watch on the ramparts, and will march to the battle on the 
next sortie." 

" It shall not be so," exclaimed Madame Rameau, vehemently, 
and winding her arm round her husband's neck. " I loved my 
son better than thee once . more the shame to me. Now, 
I would rather lose twenty such sons than peril thy life, my 
Jacques ! Madame," she continued, turning to the Venosta, 
"thou wert wiser than I. Thou wert ever opposed to the 
union between thy young friend and my son. I felt sore with thee 
for it . a mother is so selfish when she puts herself in the place 
of her child. I thought that only through marriage with one 
so pure, so noble, so holy, Gustave could be saved from sin 
and evil, I am deceived. A man so heartless to his parents, 
so neglectful of his affianced, is not to be redeemed. I brought 
about this betrothal: tell Isaura that I release her from it. 
I have watched her closely since she was entrapped into it. 
I know how miserable the thought of it has made her, though, 
in her sublime devotion to her plighted word, she sought to 
conceal from me the real state of her heart. If the betrothal 
bring such sorrow, what would the union do ! Tell her this 
from me. Come, Jacques, come away ! " 

" Stay, Madame ! " exclaimed the Venosta, her excitable 
nature much affected by this honest outburst of feeling. " It 
is true that I did oppose so far as I could, my poor Piccolds 
engagement with M. Gustave. But I dare not do your bidding. 
Isaura would not listen to me. And let us be just ! M. Gustave 
may be able satisfactorily to explain his seeming indifference 
and neglect. His health is always very delicate ; perhaps he 
may be again dangerously ill. He serves in the National Guard ; 
perhaps," . she paused, but the mother conjectured the word 
left unsaid, and, clasping her hands, cried out in anguish, 
" Perhaps dead ! . and we have wronged him ! Oh, Jacques, 
Jacques ! how shall we find out . how discover our boy ? Who 
can tell us where to search ? at the hospital . or in the ceme- 
teries ? " At the last word she dropped into a seat, and her 
whole frame shook with her sobs. 

Jacques approached her tenderly, and kneeling by her side, 
said . 



THE PARISIANS. 315 



" No, triamie, comfort thyself, if it be indeed comfort to 
learn that thy son is alive and well. For my part, I know not 
if I would not rather he had died in his innocent childhood. I 
have seen him . spoken to him. I know where he is to be found." 

" You do, and concealed it from me ? Oh, Jacques ! " 

" Listen to me, wife, and you too, Madame ; for what I have 
to say should be made known to Mademoiselle Cicogna. Some 
time since, on the night of the famous sortie, when at my post 
on the ramparts, I was told that Gustave had joined himself 
to the most violent of the Red Republicans, and had uttered 
at the Club de la Vengeance sentiments, of which I will only 
say that I, his father and a Frenchman, hung my head with 
shame when they were repeated to me. I resolved to go to 
the club myself. I did. I heard him speak . heard him 
denounce Christianity as the instrument of tyrants." 

" Ah ! " cried the two women, with a simultaneous shudder. 

"When the assembly broke up, I waylaid him at the door. 
I spoke to him seriously. I told him what anguish such 
announcement of blasphemous opinions would inflict on his 
pious mother. I told him I should deem it my duty to inform 
Mademoiselle Cicogna, and warn her against the union on 
which he had told us his heart was bent. He appeared 
sincerely moved by what I said ; implored me to keep 
silence towards his mother and his betrothed ; and promised, 
on that condition, to relinquish at once what he called 'his 
career as an orator/ and appear no more at such execrable 
clubs. On this understanding I held my tongue. Why, with 
such other causes of grief and suffering, should I tell thee, 
poor wife, of a sin that I hoped thy son had repented and 
would not repeat? And Gustave kept his word. He has 
never, so far as I know, attended, at least spoken, at the Red 
clubs since that evening." 

" Thank heaven so far," murmured Madame Rameau. 

" So far, yes ; but hear more. A little time after I thus 
met him he changed his lodging, and did not confide to us 
his new address, giving as a reason to us that he wished to 
avoid all clue to his discovery by that pertinacious Mademoiselle 
Julie." 



316 THE PARISIANS. 



Rameau had here sunk his voice into a whisper, intended 
only for his wife, but the ear of the Venosta was fine enough 
to catch the sound, and she repeated, " Mademoiselle Julie ! 
Santa Maria ! who is she ? " 

" Oh ! " said M. Rameau, with a shrug of his shoulders, and 
with true Parisian sang froid as to such matters of morality, 
"a trifle not worth considering. Of course a good-looking 
gargon like Gustave must have his little affairs of the heart 
before he settles for life. Unluckily, amongst those of Gustave 
was one with a violent-tempered girl who persecuted him when 
he left her, and he naturally wished to avoid all chance of 
a silly scandal, if only out of respect to the dignity of his 
fiancee. But I found that was not the true motive, or at least 
the only one, for concealment. Prepare yourself, my poor 
wife. Thou hast heard of these terrible journals which the 
ctichfance has let loose upon us. Our unhappy boy is the 
principal writer of one of the worst of them, under the name 
of ' Diderot le Jeune/ " 

" What ! " cried the Venosta. " That monster ! The good 
Abb Vertpr was telling us of the writings with that name 
attached to them. The Abb himself is denounced by name 
as one of those meddling priests who are to be constrained 
to serve as soldiers or pointed out to the vengeance of the 
canaille. Isaura's fiancee a blasphemer ! " 

"Hush, hush!" said Madame Rameau rising, very pale but 
self-collected. " How do you know this, Jacques ? " 

"From the lips of Gustave himself. I heard first of it 
yesterday from one of the young reprobates with whom he 
used to be familiar, and who even complimented me on the 
rising fame of my son, and praised the eloquence of his article 
that day. But I would not believe him. I bought the journal 
. here it is; saw the name and address of the printer . went 
this morning to the office . was there told that r Diderot le 
Jeune' was within revising the press . stationed myself by 
the street door, and when Gustave came out I seized his 
arm, and asked him to say Yes or No if he was the author 
of this infamous article, . this, which I now hold in my hand. 
He owned the authorship with pride ; talked wildly of the great 



THE PARISIANS. 317 



man he was . of the great things he was to do; said that, in 
hitherto concealing his true name, he had done all he could 
to defer to the bigoted prejudices of his parents and hisfianc/e; 
and that if genius, like fire, would find its way out, he could 
not help it ; that a time was rapidly coming when his opinions 
would be uppermost ; that since October the Communists were 
gaining ascendancy, and only waited the end of the siege to put 
down the present Government, and with it all hypocrisies and 
shams, religious or social. My wife, he was rude to me, 
insulting ! but he had been drinking . that made him in- 
cautious : and he continued to walk by my side towards his 
own lodging, on reaching which he ironically invited me to 
enter, saying, ' I should meet there men who would soon argue 
me out of my obsolete notions/ You may go to him, wife, 
now, if you please. I will not, nor will I take from him 
a crust of bread. I came hither, determined to tell the young 
lady all this, if I found her at home. I should be a dishonoured 
man if I suffered her to be cheated into misery. There, Madame 
Venosta, there! Take that journal, show it to Mademoiselle; 
and report to her all I have said." 

M. Rameau, habitually the mildest of men, had, in talking, 
worked himself up into positive fury. 

His wife, calmer but more deeply affected, made a piteous 
sign to the Venosta not to say more ; and without other 
salutation or adieu took her husband's arm, and led him from 
the house. 



CHAPTER VI. 

Obtaining from her husband Gustave's address, Madame 
Rameau hastened to her son's apartment alone through the 
darkling streets. The house in which he lodged was in a 
different quarter from that in which Isaura had visited him. 
Then, the street selected was still in the centre of th% beau 



318 THE PARISIANS. 



monde . now, it was within the precincts of that section of the 
many-faced capital in which the beau monde was held in detesta- 
tion or scorn ; still the house had certain pretensions, boasting 
a courtyard and a porter's lodge. Madame Rameau, instructed 
to mount au second, found the door ajar, and, entering, perceived 
on the table of the little salon the remains of a feast which, how- 
ever untempting it might have been in happier times, contrasted 
strongly with the meagre fare of which Gustave's parents had 
deemed themselves fortunate to partake at the board of his 
betrothed ; remnants of those viands which offered to the inquisi- 
tive epicure an experiment in food much too costly for the popular 
stomach . dainty morsels of elephant, hippopotamus and wolf, 
interspersed with half-emptied bottles of varied and high-priced 
wines. Passing these evidences of unseasonable extravagance with 
a mute sentiment of anger and disgust, Madame Rameau pene- 
trated into a small cabinet, the door of which was also ajar, and 
saw her son stretched on his bed half dressed, breathing heavily 
in the sleep which follows intoxication. She did not attempt 
to disturb him. She placed herself quietly by his side, gazing 
mournfully on the face which she had once so proudly con- 
templated, now haggard and faded, . still strangely beautiful, 
though it was the beauty of ruin. 

From time to time he stirred uneasily, and muttered broken 
words, in which fragments of his own delicately-worded verse 
were incoherently mixed up with ribald slang, addressed to 
imaginary companions. In his dreams he was evidently living 
over again his late revel, with episodical diversions into the poet- 
world, of which he was rather a vagrant nomad than a settled 
cultivator. Then she would silently bathe his feverish temples 
with the perfumed water she found on his dressing-table. And 
so she watched till, in the middle of the night, he woke up, and 
recovered the possession of his reason with a quickness that 
surprised Madame Rameau. He was, indeed, one of those men 
in whom excess of drink, when slept off, is succeeded by extreme 
mildness, the effect of nervous exhaustion, and by a dejected 
repentance, which, to his mother, seemed a propitious lucidity 
of the moral sense. 

Certainly on seeing her he threw himself on her breast, and 



THE PARISIANS. 319 



began to shed tears. Madame Rameau had not the heart to 
reproach him sternly. But by gentle degrees she made him 
comprehend the pain he had given to his father, and the destitu- 
tion in which he had deserted his parents and his affianced. In 
his present mood Gustave was deeply affected by these repre- 
sentations. He excused himself feebly by dwelling on the 
excitement of the times, the preoccupation of his mind, the 
example of his companions ; but with his excuses he mingled 
passionate expressions of remorse, and before daybreak mother 
and son were completely reconciled. Then he fell into a tranquil 
sleep ; and Madame Rameau, quite worn out, slept also in the 
chair beside him, her arm around his neck. He awoke before 
she did at a late hour in the morning; and stealing from her 
arm, went to his escritoire, and took forth what money he found 
there, half of which he poured into her lap, kissing her till she 
awoke. 

" Mother," he said, " henceforth I will work for thee and my 
father. Take this trifle now ; the rest I reserve for Isaura." 

"Joy ! I have found my boy again. But Isaura, I fear that she 
will not take thy money, and all thought of her must also be 
abandoned." 

Gustave had already turned to his looking-glass, and was 
arranging with care his dark ringlets : his personal vanity . 
his remorse appeased by this pecuniary oblation . had revived. 

" No," he said gaily, " I don't think I shall abandon her ; and 
it is not likely, when she sees and hears me, that she can wish 
to abandon me ! Now let us breakfast and then I will go at once 
to her." 

In the meanwhile, Isaura, on her return to her apartment at 
the wintry nightfall, found a cart stationed at the door, and 
the Venosta on the threshold, superintending the removal of 
various articles of furniture . indeed, all such articles as were not 
absolutely required. 

" Oh, Piccola ! " she said, with an attempt at cheerfulness, " I 
did not expect thee back so soon. Hush ! I have made a famous 
bargain. I have found a broker to buy these things which we 
don't want just at present, and can replace by new and prettier 
things when the siege is over and we get our money. The 



32o THE PARISIANS. 

broker pays down on the nail and thou wilt not go to bed 
without supper. There are no ills which are not more sup- 
portable after food." 

Isaura smiled faintly, kissed the Venosta's cheek, and ascended 
with weary steps to the sitting-room. There she seated herself 
quietly, looking with abstracted eyes round the bare dismantled 
space by the light of the single candle. 

When the Venosta re-entered, she was followed by the 
servants, bringing in a daintier meal than they had known 
for days . a genuine rabbit, potatoes, marrons glacis, a bottle 
of wine, and a pannier of wood. The fire was soon lighted, the 
Venosta plying the bellows. It was not till this banquet, of 
which Isaura, faint as she was, scarcely partook, had been 
remitted to the two Italian women-servants, and another log 
been thrown on the hearth, that the Venosta opened the subject 
which was pressing on her heart. She did this with a joyous 
smile, taking both Isaura's hands in her own, and stroking 
them fondly. 

"My child, I have such good news for thee! Thou hast 
escaped . thou art free ! " and then she related all that M. 
Rameau had said, and finished by producing the copy of 
Gustave's unhallowed journal. 

When she had read the latter, which she did with compressed 
lips and varying colour, the girl fell on her knees . not to thank 
heaven that she would now escape a union from which her soul 
so recoiled . not that she was indeed free, but to pray, with tears 
rolling down her cheeks, that God would yet save to himself, 
and to good ends, the soul that she had failed to bring to Him. 
All previous irritation against Gustave was gone : all had melted 
into an ineffable compassion. 



THE PARISIANS. *2i 



CHAPTER VII. 

When a little before noon, Gustave was admitted by the 
servant into Isaura's salon, its desolate condition, stripped of 
all its pretty feminine elegancies, struck him with a sense of 
discomfort to himself which superseded any more remorseful 
sentiment. The day was intensely cold : the single log on 
the hearth did not burn ; there were only two or three chairs 
in the room ; even the carpet, which had been of gaily coloured 
Aubusson, was gone. His teeth chattered ; and he only replied 
by a dreary nod to the servant who informed him that Madame 
Venosta was gone out, and Mademoiselle had not yet quitted 
her own room. 

If there be a thing which a true Parisian of Rameau's stamp 
associates with love of woman, it is a certain sort of elegant 
surroundings, a pretty boudoir, a cheery hearth, an easy fauteuiL 
In the absence of such attributes, "fugit retro Venus!* If the 
Englishman invented the word comfort, it is the Parisian who 
most thoroughly comprehends the thing. And he resents the 
loss of it in any house where he has been accustomed to look 
for it, as a personal wrong to his feelings. 

Left for some minutes alone, Gustave occupied himself with 
kindling the log, and muttering, " Par tous les diables, quel chien 
de rkutneje vais attraper /" He turned as he heard the rustle 
of a robe and a light slow step. Isaura stood before him. 
Her aspect startled him. He had come prepared to expect 
grave displeasure and a frigid reception. But the expression 
of Isaura's face was more kindly, more gentle, more tender; 
than he had seen it since the day she had accepted his suit 

Knowing from his mother what his father had said to his 
prejudice, he thought within himself, "After all, the poor girl 
loves me better than I thought. She is sensible and enlight- 
ened ; she cannot pretend to dictate an opinion to a man 
like me." 

He approached with a complacent self-assured mien, and 

VOL. IL x 



322 THE PARISIANS. 



took her hand, which she yielded to him quietly, leading 
her to one of the few remaining chairs, and seating himself 
beside her. 

"Dear Isaura," he said, talking rapidly all the while he 
performed this ceremony, " I need not assure you of my utter 
ignorance of the state to which the imbecility of our Govern- 
ment, and the cowardice, or rather the treachery, of our generals, 
has reduced you. I only heard of it late last night from my 
mother. I hasten to claim my right to share with you the humble 
resources which I have saved by the intellectual labours that 
have absorbed all such moments as my military drudgeries left 
to the talents which, even at such a moment, paralysing minds 
less energetic, have sustained me : " . and therewith he poured 
several pieces of gold and silver on the table beside her 
chair. 

" Gustave," then said Isaura, " I am well pleased that you thus 
prove that I was not mistaken when I thought and said that, 
despite all appearances, all errors, your heart was good. Oh, do 
but follow its true impulses, and . 



 



" Its impulses lead me ever to thy feet," interrupted Gustave, 
with a fervour which sounded somewhat theatrical and hollow. 

The girl smiled, not bitterly, not mockingly ; but Gustave did 
not like the smile. 

" Poor Gustave," she said, with a melancholy pathos in her soft 
voice, " do you not understand that the time has come when such 
commonplace compliments ill suit our altered positions to each 
other? Nay, listen to me patiently; and let not my words 
in this last interview pain you to recall. If either of us be 
to blame in the engagement hastily contracted, it is I. Gustave, 
when you, exaggerating in your imagination the nature of your 
sentiments for me, said with such earnestness that on my 
consent to our union depended your health, your life, your 
career; that if I withheld that consent you were lost, and 
in despair would seek distraction from thought in all from 
which your friends, your mother, the duties imposed upon 
Genius for the good of Man to the ends of God, should 
withhold and save you . when you said all this, and I believed 
it, I felt as if Heaven commanded me not to desert the soul 



THE PARISIANS. 323 



which appealed to me in the crisis of its struggle and peril. 
Gustave, I repent ; I was to blame. " 
" How to blame ? " 

" I overrated my power over your heart : I overrated still 
more, perhaps, my power over my own." 

"Ah, your own! I understand now. You did not love 
me?" 

" I never said that I loved you in the sense in which you use 
the word. I told you that the love which you have described 
in your verse, and which," she added, falteringly, with heightened 
colour and with hands tightly clasped, "I have conceived 
possible in my dreams, it was not mine to give. You declared 
you were satisfied with such affection as I could bestow. Hush ! 
let me go on. You said that affection would increase, would 
become love, in proportion as I knew you more. It has not 
done so. Nay, it passed away ; even before this time of trial 
and of grief, I became aware how different from the love 
you professed was the neglect which needs no excuse, for it 
did not pain me." 

"You are cruel indeed, Mademoiselle," 

"No, indeed, I am kind. I wish you to feel no pang at 
our parting. Truly I had resolved, when the siege terminated, 
and the time to speak frankly of our engagement came, to 
tell you that I shrank from the thought of a union between 
us ; and that it was for the happiness of both that our promises 
should be mutually cancelled. The moment has come sooner 
than I thought. Even had I loved you, Gustave, as deeply 
as . as well as the beings of Romance love, I would not dare 
to wed one who calls upon mortals to deny God, demolish His 
altars, treat His worship as a crime. No ; I would sooner 
die of a broken heart, that I might the sooner be one of those 
souls privileged to pray the Divine Intercessor for merciful light 
on those beloved and left dark on earth." 

"Isaura I" exclaimed Gustave, his mobile temperament im- 
pressed, not by the words of Isaura, but by the passionate 
earnestness with which they were uttered, and by the exquisite 
spiritual beauty which her face took from the combined sweet- 
ness and fervour of its devout expression, . "Isaura, I merit 

x 2 



324 THE PARISIANS. 



your censure, your sentence of condemnation ; but do not ask 
me to give back your plighted troth. I have not the strength 
to do so. More than ever, more than when first pledged 
to me, I need the aid, the companionship, of my guardian 
angel. You were that to me once; abandon me not now. 
In these terrible times of revolution, excitable natures catch 
madness from each other. A writer in the heat of his passion 
says much that he does not mean to be literally taken, which 
in cooler moments he repents and retracts. Consider, too, the 
pressure of want, of hunger. It is the opinions that you so 
condemn which alone at this moment supply bread to the 
writer. But say you will yet pardon me, . yet give me trial 
if I offend no more . if I withdraw my aid to any attacks 
on your views, your religion . if I say, ' Thy God shall be my 
God, and thy people shall be my people.' " 

" Alas ! " said Isaura, softly, " ask thyself if those be words 
which I can believe again. Hush!" she continued, checking 
his answer with a more kindling countenance and more im- 
passioned voice. "Are they, after all, the words that man 
should address to woman ? Is it on the strength of Woman 
that Man should rely ? Is it to her that he should say, 
' Dictate my opinions on all that belongs to the Mind of man ; 
change the doctrines that I have thoughtfully formed and 
honestly advocate ; teach me how to act on earth, clear all my 
doubts as to my hopes of heaven ' ? No, Gustave ; in this task 
man never should repose on woman. Thou art honest at this 
moment, my poor friend ; but could I believe thee to-day, 
thou wouldst laugh to-morrow at what woman can be made 
to believe." 

Stung to the quick by the truth of Isaura's accusation, Gustave 
exclaimed with vehemence . " All that thou sayest is false, and 
thou knowest it The influence of woman on man for good or 
for evil defies reasoning. It does mould his deeds on earth ; it 
does either make or mar all that future which lies between his 
life and his gravestone, and of whatsoever may lie beyond the 
grave. Give me up now, and thou art responsible for me, for 
all I do, it may be against all that thou deemest holy. Keep 
thy troth yet awhile, and test me. If I come to thee showing 



THE PARISIANS. 325 



how I could have injured, and how for thy dear sake I have 
spared, nay, aided, all that thou dost believe and reverence, 
then wilt thou dare to say, 'Go thy ways alone . I forsake 
thee ! ' " 

Isaura turned aside her face, but she held out her hand . it was 
as cold as death He knew that she had so far yielded, and his 
vanity exulted : he smiled in secret triumph as he pressed his kiss 
on that icy hand and was gone. 

" This is duty . it must be duty," said Isaura to herself. " But 
where is the buoyant delight that belongs to a duty achieved ? . 
where? oh where ? " And then she stole with drooping head and 
heavy step into her own room, fell on her knees and prayed. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

In vain persons, be they male or female, there is a complacent 
self-satisfaction in any momentary personal success, however 
little that success may conduce to . nay, however much it may 
militate against . the objects to which their vanity itself devotes 
its more permanent desires. A vain woman may be very 

anxious to win A , the magnificent, as a partner for life, and 

yet feel a certain triumph when a glance of her eye has made 

an evening's conquest of the pitiful B -, although by that 

achievement she incurs the imminent hazard of losing A 

altogether. So, when Gustave Rameau quitted Isaura, his first 
feeling was that of triumph. His eloquence had subdued her 
will ; she had not finally discarded him. But as he wandered 
abstractedly in the biting air, his self-complacency was succeeded 
by mortification and discontent He felt that he had committed 
himself to promises which he was by no means prepared to 
keep. True, the promises were vague in words; but in sub- 
stance they were perfectly clear . "to spare, nay, to aid all 
that Isaura esteemed and reverenced." How was this possible 
to him ? How could he suddenly change the whole character 



326 THE PARISIANS. 



of his writings ? . how become the defender of marriage and 
property, of church and religion ? . how proclaim himself so 
utter an apostate ? If he did, how become a leader of the 
fresh revolution ? how escape being its victim ? Cease to 
write altogether? But then how live? His pen was his sole 
subsistence, save 30 sous a-day as a National Guard . 30 sous 
a-day to him who, in order to be Sybarite in tastes, was Spartan 
in doctrine. Nothing better just at that moment than Spartan 
doctrine . " Live on black broth and fight the enemy." And 
the journalists in vogue so thrived upon that patriotic sentiment, 
that they were the last persons compelled to drink the black 
broth or to fight the enemy. 

" Those women are such idiots when they meddle in politics," 
grumbled between his teeth the enthusiastic advocate of Woman's 
Rights on all matters of love. " And," he continued, soliloquising, 
" it is not as if the girl had any large or decent dot ; it is not as 
if she said, ' In return for the sacrifice of your popularity, your 
prospects, your opinions, I give you not only a devoted heart, 
but an excellent table and a capital fire and plenty of pocket- 
money.' Sacrebleu! when I think of that frozen salon, and 
possibly the leg of a mouse for dinner, and a virtuous homily by 
way of grace, the prospect is not alluring ; and the girl herself 
is not so pretty as she was . grown very thin. Sur mon dme, 
I think she asks too much . far more than she is worth. No, 
no ; I had better have accepted her dismissal. Elle riest pas 
digne de mot" 

Just as he arrived at that conclusion, Gustave Rameau felt 
the touch of a light, a soft, a warm, yet a firm hand, on his arm. 
He turned, and beheld the face of the woman whom, through 
so many dreary weeks, he had sought to shun . the face of Julie 
Caumartin. Julie was not, as Savarin had seen her, looking 
pinched and wan, with faded robes, nor, as when met in the cafe 
by Lemercier, in the faded robes of a theatre. Julie never 
looked more beautiful, more radiant, than she did now ; and 
there was a wonderful heartfelt fondness in her voice when she 
cried, " Mon homme ! mon homme ! seul homtne au monde d mon 
cceur, Gustave, c/ufri adore*! I have found thee . at last . at 
last ! " Gustave gazed upon her, stupefied. Involuntarily his 



THE PARISIANS. 327 



eye glanced from the freshness of bloom in her face which the 
intense cold of the atmosphere only seemed to heighten into 
purer health, to her dress, which was new and handsome . black 
. he did not know that it was mourning . the cloak trimmed with 
costly sables. Certainly it was no mendicant for alms who 
thus reminded the shivering Adonis of the claims of a pristine 
Venus. He stammered out her name . " Julie I " . and then he 
stopped. 

" Oui, ta Julie / Petit ingrat I how I have sought for thee ! how 
I have hungered for the sight of thee ! That monster Savarin - 
he would not give me any news of thee. That is ages ago. But 
at least Frederic Lemercier whom I saw since, promised to 
remind thee that I lived still. He did not do so, or I should 
have seen thee . riest ce pas ? " 

" Certainly, certainly. only . chfre amie . you know that . that 
. as I before announced to thee, I . I . was engaged in marriage 
. and . and " 

" But are you married ? " 

" No, no. Hark I Take care . is not that the hiss of an 
obus?" 

" What then ? Let it come \ Would it might slay us both 
while my hand is in thine ! " 

" Ah ! " muttered Gustave, inwardly, u what a difference ! 
This is love ! No preaching here ! Elle est plus digne de moi 
que I* autre." 

" No," he said, aloud, " I am not married. Marriage is at 
best a pitiful ceremony. But if you wished for news of me, 
surely you must have heard of my effect as an orator not 
despised in the Salle Favre. Since, I have withdrawn from 
that arena. But as a journalist I flatter myself that I have 
had a beau succh. " 

"Doubtless, doubtless, my Gustave, my Poet! Wherever 
thou art, thou must be first among men. But, alas ! it is my 
fault . my misfortune. I have not been in the midst of a 
world that perhaps rings of thy name." 

" Not my name. Prudence compelled me to conceal that 
Still, Genius pierces under any name. You might have dis- 
covered me under my notn de plumed 



328 THE PARISIANS. 



"Pardon me . I was always bite. But, oh! for so many 
weeks I was so poor . so destitute. I could go nowhere, 
except . don't be ashamed of me . except . 

" Yes ? Go on." 



 



" Except where I could get some money. At first to dance 
. you remember my bolero. Then I got a better engagement. 
Do you not remember that you taught me to recite verses? 
Had it been for myself alone, I might have been contented 
to starve. Without thee, what was life ? But thou wilt re- 
collect Madeleine, the old bonne who lived with me. Well, 
she had attended and cherished me since I was so high . 
lived with my mother. Mother! no; it seems that Madame 
Surville was not my mother after all. But, of course, I could 
not let my old Madeleine starve; and therefore, with a heart 
as heavy as lead, I danced and declaimed. My heart was 
not so heavy when I recited thy songs." 

" My songs ! Pauvre ange ! " exclaimed the Poet. 

"And then, too, I thought, 'Ah this dreadful siege! He, 
too, may be poor . he may know want and hunger;' and so 
all I could save from Madeleine I put into a box for thee, in 
case thou shouldst come back to me some day. Mon homme 
how could I go to the Salle Favre ? How could I read journals, 
Gustave ? But thou art not married, Gustave ? Parole 
(Tfwnneur ? " 

" Parole d'honneur ! What does that matter ? " 

" Everything ! Ah ! I am not so mtchante, so tnauvaise tite 
as I was some months ago. If thou wert married, I should 
say, ' Blessed and sacred be thy wife ! Forget me.' But as it 
is, one word more. Dost thou love the young lady, whoever 
she be ? or does she love thee so well that it would be sin in 
thee to talk trifles to Julie ? Speak as honestly as if thou 
wert not a poet " 

" Honestly, she never said she loved me. I never thought 
she did. But, you see, I was very ill, and my parents and 
friends and my physician said that it was right for me to 
arrange my life, and marry, and so forth. And the girl had 
money, and was a good match. In short, the thing was 
settled. But oh, Julie, she never learned my songs by heart ! 



THE PARISIANS. 329 



She did not love as thou didst, and still dost And . ah ! 
well. now that we meet again . now that I look in thy face 

. now that I hear thy voice No, I do not love her as 

I loved, and might yet love, thee. But . but . 



ii 



" Well, but ? oh, I guess. Thou seest me well dressed, no 
longer dancing and declaiming at cafis: and thou thinkest 
that Julie has disgraced herself? she is unfaithful ?" 

Gustave had not anticipated that frankness, nor was the idea 
which it expressed uppermost in his mind when he said, " but, 

but " There were many buts all very confused, struggling 

through his mind as he spoke. However, he answered as a 
Parisian sceptic, not ill-bred, naturally would answer . 

" My dear friend, my dear child " (the Parisian is very fond 
of the word child or enfant in addressing a woman), " I have 
never seen thee so beautiful as thou art now ; and when thou 
tellest me that thou art no longer poor, and the proof of what 
thou sayest is visible in the furs, which, alas I I cannot give 
thee, what am I to think ? " 

" Oh, tnon komtne, mon hotntne ! thou art very spirituel, and 
that is why I loved thee. I am very bite and that is excuse 
enough for thee if thou couldst not love me. But canst thou 
look me in the face and not know that my eyes could not 
meet thine as they do, if I had been faithless to thee even in 
a thought, when I so boldly touched thine arm ? Viens chez 
moi, come and let me explain all. Only . only let me repeat, 
if another has rights over thee which forbid thee to come, 
say so kindly, and I will never trouble thee again." 

Gustave had been hitherto walking slowly by the side of 
Julie, amidst the distant boom of the besiegers' cannon, while 
the short day began to close ; and along the dreary boulevards 
sauntered idlers turning to look at the young, beautiful, well- 
dressed woman who seemed in such contrast to the capital 
whose former luxuries the "Ondine" of imperial Paris repre- 
sented. He now offered his arm to Julie ; and, quickening 
his pace, said, "There is no reason why I should refuse to 
attend thee home, and listen to the explanations thou dost 
generously condescend to volunteer." 



330 THE PARISIANS. 



CHAPTER IX. 

" Ah, indeed ! what a difference ! what a difference ! " said 
Gustave to himself when he entered Julie's apartment. In her 
palmier days, when he had first made her acquaintance, the 
apartment no doubt had been infinitely more splendid, more 
abundant in silks and fringes and flowers and nicknacks ; but 
never had it seemed so cheery and comfortable and home-like 
as now. What a contrast to Isaura's dismantled chilly salon / 
She drew him towards the hearth, on which, blazing though it 
was, she piled fresh billets, seated him in the easiest of easy- 
chairs, knelt beside him, and chafed his numbed hands in hers ; 
and as her bright eyes fixed tenderly on his, she looked so 
young and so innocent ! You would not then have called her 
the "Ondine of Paris. " 

But when, a little while after, revived by the genial warmth 
and moved by the charm of her beauty, Gustave passed his 
arm round her neck and sought to draw her on his lap, she 
slid from his embrace, shaking her head gently, and seated 
herself, with a pretty air of ceremonious decorum, at a little 
distance. 

Gustave looked at her amazed. 

" Causons" said she, gravely : " thou wouldst know why I am 
so well dressed, so comfortably lodged, and I am longing to 
explain to thee all. Some days ago I had just finished my 

performance at the Cafe , and was putting on my shawl, 

when a tall Monsieur, fort bel hotnme, with the air of a grand 
seigneur, entered the cafe* and approaching me politely, said, 
' I think I have the honour to address Mademoiselle Julie 
Caumartin ? ' ' That is my name,' I said, surprised ; and, 
looking at him more intently, I recognised his face. He had 
come into the cafe* a few days before with thine old acquaintance 
Frederic Lemercier, and stood by when I asked Frederic to 
give me news of thee. ' Mademoiselle/ he continued, with a 



THE PARISIANS. 331 



serious melancholy smile, * I shall startle you when I say that 
I am appointed to act as your guardian by the last request 
of your mother.' ' Of Madame Surville ? ' ' Madame Surville 
adopted you, but was not your mother. We cannot talk at 
ease here. Allow me to request that you will accompany me 

to Monsieur N , the avont. It is not very far from this : 

and by the way I will tell you some news that may sadden, 
and some news that may rejoice.' 

"There was an earnestness in the voice and look of this 
Monsieur that impressed me. He did not offer me his arm; 
but I walked by his side in the direction he chose. As we 
walked he told me in very few words that my mother had 
been separated from her husband, and for certain family reasons 
had found it so difficult to rear and provide for me herself, 
that she had accepted the offer of Madame Surville to adopt 
me as her own child. While he spoke, there came dimly back 
to me the remembrance of a lady who had taken me from 
my first home, when I had been, as I understood, at nurse, 
and left me with poor dear Madame Surville, saying, ' This is 
henceforth your mamma.' I never again saw that lady. It 
seems that many years afterwards my true mother desired to 
regain me. Madame Surville was then dead. She failed to 
trace me out, owing, alas ! to my own faults and change of 
name. She then entered a nunnery, but before doing so, 
assigned a sum of 100,000 francs to this gentleman, who was 
distantly connected with her, with full power to him to take 
it to himself, or give it to my use should he discover me, at 
his discretion, ' I ask you,' continued the Monsieur, 'to go with 

me to Mons. N 's, because the sum is still in his hands. 

He will confirm my statement. All that I have now to say 
is this : If you accept my guardianship, if you obey implicitly 
my advice, I shall consider the interest of this sum which has 

accumulated since deposited with M. N due to you; and 

the capital will be your dot on marriage, if the marriage be 
with my consent' " 

Gustave had listened very attentively, and without inter- 
ruption, until now; when he looked up, and said with his 
customary sneer, " Did your Monsieur, fort bel hotntne, you say, 



332 THE PARISIANS. 



inform you of the value of the advice, rather of the commands, 
you were implicitly to obey ?" 

" Yes," answered Julie, " not then, but later. Let me go on. 

We arrived at M. N 's, an elderly grave man. He said that 

all he knew was that he held the money in trust for the Monsieur 
with me, to be given to him, with the accumulations of interest, 
on the death of the lady who had deposited it. If that Monsieur 
had instructions how to dispose of the money, they were not 
known to him. All he had to do was to transfer it absolutely 
to him on the proper certificate of the lady's death. So you see, 
Gustave, that the Monsieur could have kept all from me if he 
had liked. " 

" Your Monsieur is very generous. Perhaps you will now tell 
me his name." 

" No ; he forbids me to do it yet." 

"And he took this apartment for you, and gave you the 
money to buy that smart dress and these furs. Bah ! mon 
enfant, why try to deceive me? Do I not know my Paris? 
A fort bel homme does not make himself guardian to a fort belle 
fille so young and fair as Mademoiselle Julie Caumartin without 
certain considerations which shall be nameless, like himself. " 

Julie's eyes flashed. " Ah, Gustave ! ah, Monsieur ! " she said, 
half angrily, half plaintively, "I see that my guardian knew you 
better than I did. Never mind ; I will not reproach. Thou 
hast the right to despise me." 

" Pardon ! I did not mean to offend thee," said Gustave, 
somewhat disconcerted "But own that thy story is strange; 
and this guardian, who knows me better than thou . does he 
know me at all ? Didst thou speak to him of me ? " 

" How could I help it ? He says that this terrible war, in 
which he takes an active part, makes his life uncertain from 
day to day. He wished to complete the trust bequeathed to 
him by seeing me safe in the love of some worthy man who" 
. she paused for a moment with an expression of compressed 
anguish, and then hurried on . " who would recognise what was 
good in me, . would never reproach me for . for . the past. I 
then said that my heart was thine : I could never marry any 
one but thee. " 



THE PARISIANS. 333 



" Marry me," faltered Gustave . " marry ! " 

" And," continued the girl, not heeding his interruption, " he 
said thou wert not the husband he would choose for me : that 
thou wert not . no, I cannot wound thee by repeating what he 
said unkindly, unjustly. He bade me think of thee no more. 
I said again, that is impossible." 

" But," resumed Rameau, with an affected laugh, " why think 
of anything so formidable as marriage ? Thou lovest me, and 

" He approached again, seeking to embrace her. She 

recoiled. " No, Gustave, no, I have sworn . sworn solemnly 
by the memory of my lost mother . that I will never sin 
again. I will never be to thee other than thy friend . or thy 
wife." 

Before Gustave could reply to these words, which took him 
wholly by surprise, there was a ring at the outer door, and the 
old bonne ushered in Victor de Mauldon. He halted at the 
threshold, and his brow contracted. 

" So you have already broken faith with me, Mademoiselle ? " 

" No, Monsieur, I have not broken faith," cried Julie, passion- 
ately. " I told you that I would not seek to find out Monsieur 
Rameau. I did not seek, but I met him unexpectedly. I 
owed to him an explanation. I invited him here to give that 
explanation. Without it, what would he have thought of me ? 
Now he may go, and I will never admit him again without your 
sanction." 

The Vicomte turned his stern look upon Gustave, who though, 
as we know, not wanting in personal courage, felt cowed by 
his false position ; and his eye fell, quailed before De Mauteon's 
gaze. 

" Leave us for a few minutes alone, Mademoiselle," said the 
Vicomte. "Nay, Julie," he added, in softened tones, "fear 
nothing. I, too, owe explanation . friendly explanation . to 
M. Rameau." 

With his habitual courtesy towards women, he extended his 
hand to Julie, and led her from the room. Then, closing the 
door, he seated himself, and made a sign to Gustave to do 
the same. 

"Monsieur," said De Mauteon, "excuse me if I detain you. 



334 THE PARISIANS. 



A very few words will suffice for our present interview. I take 
it for granted that Mademoiselle has told you that she is 
no child of Madame Surville's : that her own mother bequeathed 
her to my protection and guardianship with a modest fortune 
which is at my disposal to give or withhold. The little I have 
seen already of Mademoiselle impresses me with sincere interest 
in her fate. I look with compassion on what she may have been 
in the past ; I anticipate with hope what she may be in the 
future. I do not ask you to see her in either with my eyes. 
I say frankly that it is my intention, and I may add, my resolve, 
that the ward thus left to my charge shall be henceforth safe 
from the temptations that have seduced her poverty, her 
inexperience, her vanity, if you will, but have not yet corrupted 
her heart. Bref, I must request you to give me your word of 
honour that you will hold no further communication with her. 
I can allow no sinister influence to stand between her fate 
and honour." 

"You speak well and nobly, M. le Vicomte," said Rameau, 
"and I give the promise you exact." He added, feelingly, 
" It is true her heart has never been corrupted : that is good, 
affectionate, unselfish as a child's. J*ai Vhonneur de vous saluer, 
M. le Vicomte." 

He bowed with a dignity unusual to him, and tears were in 
his eyes as he passed by De Maul6on and gained the anteroom. 
There a side-door suddenly opened, and Julie's face, anxious, 
eager, looked forth. 

Gustave paused : " Adieu, Mademoiselle ! Though we may 
never meet again, . though our fates divide us, . believe me that 
I shall ever cherish your memory . and " 

The girl interrupted him, impulsively seizing his arm, and 
looking him in the face with a wild fixed stare. 

" Hush ! dost thou mean to say that we are parted, . parted 
for ever ? " 

" Alas ! " said Gustave, " what option is before us ? Your 
guardian rightly forbids my visits ; and even were I free to offer 
you my hand, you yourself say that I am not a suitor he 
would approve." 

Julie turned her eyes towards De Maul6on, who, following 



THE PARISIANS. 335 



Gustave into the anteroom, stood silent and impassive, leaning 
against the wall. 

He now understood and replied to the pathetic appeal in the 
girl's eyes. 

" My young ward," he said, " M. Rameau expresses himself 
with propriety and truth. Suffer him to depart. He belongs 
to the former life ; reconcile yourself to the new." 

He advanced to take her hand, making a sign to Gustave to 
depart. But as he approached Julie, she uttered a weak piteous 
wail, and fell at his feet senseless. De Maul6on raised and 
carried her into her room where he left her to the care of the old 
bonne. On re-entering the anteroom, he found Gustave still 
lingering by the outer door. 

" You will pardon me, Monsieur," he said to the Vicomte, " but 

in fact I feel so uneasy, so unhappy. Has she ? You see, 

you see that there is danger to her health, perhaps to her 
reason, in so abrupt a separation, so cruel a rupture between 
us. Let me call again, or I may not have strength to keep 
my promise." 

De Maulon remained a few minutes musing. Then he said 
in a whisper, " Come back into the salon. Let us talk frankly. 



 



CHAPTER X. 

* M. Rameau," said De Maul&m, when the two men had re- 
seated themselves in the sa/on, " I will honestly say that my desire 
is to rid myself as soon as I can of the trust of guardian to this 
young lady. Playing as I do with fortune, my only stake 
against her favours is my life. I feel as if it were my duty to see 
that Mademoiselle is not left alone and friendless in the world 
at my decease. I have in my mind for her a husband that I 
think in every way suitable : a handsome and brave young fellow 
in my battalion, of respectable birth, without any living relations 



336 THE PARISIANS. 



to consult as to his choice. I have reason to believe that if Julie 
married him, she need never fear a reproach as to her ante- 
cedents. Her dot would suffice to enable him to realise his own 
wish of a country town in Normandy. And in that station, Paris 
and its temptations would soon pass from the poor child's 
thoughts, as an evil dream. But I cannot dispose of her hand 
without her own consent ; and if she is to be reasoned out of her 
fancy for you, I have no time to devote to the task. I come to 
the point. You are not the man I would choose for her husband 
But, evidently, you are the man she would choose. Are you 
disposed to marry her ? You hesitate, very naturally ; I have 
no right to demand an immediate answer to a question so 
serious. Perhaps you will think over it, and let me know in 
a day or two ? I take it for granted that if you were, as I heard, 
engaged before the siege to marry the Sinogra Cicogna, that 
engagement is annulled ? " 

" Why take it for granted ? " asked Gustave, perplexed. 

" Simply because I find you here. Nay, spare explanations 
and excuses. I quite understand that you were invited to come. 
But a man solemnly betrothed to a demoiselle like the Signora, 
Cicogna, in a time of such dire calamity and peril, could scarcely 
allow himself to be tempted to accept the invitation of one so 
beautiful, and so warmly attached to him, as is Mademoiselle 
Julie ; and on witnessing the passionate strength of that attach- 
ment, say that he cannot keep a promise not to repeat his visits. 
But if I mistake, and you are still betrothed to the Signorina, of 
course all discussion is at an end." 

Gustave hung his head in some shame, and in much bewildered 
doubt. 

The practised observer of men's characters, and of shifting 
phases of mind, glanced at the poor poet's perturbed counte- 
nance with a half-smile of disdain. 

" It is for you to judge how far the very love to you so 
ingenuously evinced by my ward . how far the reasons against 
marriage with one whose antecedents expose her to reproach . 
should influence one of your advanced opinions upon social ties. 
Such reasons do not appear to have with artists the same weight 
they have with the bourgeoisie. I have but to add that the 



THE PARISIANS. 337 



husband of Julie will receive with her hand a dot of nearly 
120,000 francs; and I have reason to believe that that fortune 
will be increased . how much, I cannot guess . when the 
cessation of the siege will allow communication with England. 
One word more. I should wish to rank the husband of my 
ward in the number of my friends. If he did not oppose the 
political opinions with which I identify my own career, I should 
be pleased to make any rise in the world achieved by me assist 
to the raising of himself. But my opinions, as during the time 
we were brought together you were made aware, are those of a 
practical man of the world, and have nothing in common with 
Communists, Socialists, Internationalists, or whatever sect would 
place the aged societies of Europe in Medea's caldron of youth. 
At a moment like the present, fanatics and dreamers so abound, 
that the number of such sinners will necessitate a general amnesty 
when order is restored. What a poet so young as you may 
have written or said at such a time will be readily forgotten 
and forgiven a year or two hence, provided he does not put his 
notions into violent action. But if you choose to persevere in 
the views you now advocate, so be it They will not make poor 
Julie less a believer in your wisdom and genius. Only they will 
separate you from me, and a day may come when I should have 
the painful duty of ordering you to be shot . Dii meliora. Think 
over all I have thus frankly said. Give me your answer within 
forty-eight hours ; and meanwhile hold no communication with 
my ward. I have the honour to wish you good-day. " 



CHAPTER XI. 

The short grim day was closing when Gustave, quitting 
Julie's apartment, again found himself in the streets. His 
thoughts were troubled and confused. He was the more 
affected by Julie's impassioned love for him, by the contrast 

VOL. 11. Y 



338 THE PARISIANS. 

with Isaura's words and manner in their recent interview. 
His own ancient fancy for the "Ondine of Paris" became 
revived by the difficulties between their ancient intercourse 
which her unexpected scruples and De Mauteon's guardianship 
interposed. A witty writer thus defines une passion, "urn 
caprice utflammi par des obstacles'' In the ordinary times 
of peace, Gustave, handsome, aspiring to reputable position 
in the beau monde, would not have admitted any considerations 
to compromise his station by marriage with a figurante. But 
now the wild political doctrines he had embraced separated his 
ambition from that beau monde, and combined it with ascen- 
dency over the revolutionists of the populace . a direction 
which he must abandon if he continued his suit to Isaura. 
Then, too, the immediate possession of Julie's dot was not 
without temptation to a man who was so fond of his persona! 
comforts, and who did not see where to turn for a dinner, if 
obedient to Isaura's "prejudices," he abandoned his profits as 
a writer in the revolutionary press. The inducements for 
withdrawal from the cause he had espoused, held out to him 
with so haughty a coldness by De Mauteon, were not wholly 
without force, though they irritated his self-esteem. He was 
dimly aware of the Vicomte's masculine talents for public 
life ; and the high reputation he had already acquired among 
military authorities, and even among experienced and thoughtful 
civilians, had weight upon Gustave's impressionable tempera- 
ment. But though De Maulcon's implied advice here coincided 
in much with the tacit compact he had made with Isaura, it 
alienated him more from Isaura herself, for Isaura did not 
bring to him the fortune which would enable him to suspend 
his lucubrations, watch the turn of events, and live at ease 
in the meanwhile ; and the dot to be received with De Mauleon's 
ward had those advantages. 

While thus meditating Gustave turned into one of the cantines 
still open, to brighten his intellect with & petit verre, and there he 
found the two colleagues in the extinct Council of Ten, Paul 
Grimm and Edgar Ferrier. With the last of these revolutionists 
Gustave had become intimately He". They wrote in the same 
journal, and he willingly accepted a distraction from his self- 



THE PARISIANS. 339 



conflict which Edgar offered him in a dinner at the Cafe 
Riche, which still offered its hospitalities at no exorbitant 
price. At this repast, as the drink circulated, Gustave waxed 
confidential. He longed, poor youth, for an adviser. Could 
he marry a girl who had been a ballet-dancer, and who had 
come into an unexpected heritage ? " Est tufou (Ten douter ? " 
cried Edgar. " What a sublime occasion to manifest thy scorn 
of the miserable banalitts of the bourgeoisie ! It will but 
increase thy moral power over the people. And then think 
of the money. What an aid to the cause ! What a capital 
for the launch ! . journal all thine own ! Besides, when our 
principles triumph . as triumph they must . what would be 
marriage but a brief and futile ceremony, to be broken the 
moment thou hast cause to complain of thy wife or chafe at 
the bond ? Only get the dot into thine own hands. Uamour 
passe . reste la cassette. " 

Though there was enough of good in the son of Madame 
Rameau to revolt at the precise words in which the counsel 
was given, still, as the fumes of the punch yet more addled 
his brains, the counsel itself was acceptable ; and in that sort 
of maddened fury which intoxication produces in some excitable 
temperaments, as Gustave reeled home that night leaning on 
the arm of stouter Edgar Ferrier, he insisted on going out 
of his way to pass the house in which Isaura lived, and, 
pausing under her window, gasped out some -verses of a wild 
song, then much in vogue among the votaries of Felix Pyat, 
in which everything that existent society deems sacred was 
reviled in the grossest ribaldry. Happily Isaura's ear heard 
it not The girl was kneeling by her bedside absorbed in 
prayer. 



Y 2 



340 THE PARISIANS. 



CHAPTER XII. 

Three days after the evening thus spent by Gustave Rameau, 
Isaura was startled by a visit from^M. de Mauleon. She had not 
seen him since the commencement of the siege, and she did not 
recognise him at first glance in his military uniform. 

" I trust you will pardon my intrusion, Mademoiselle," he said, 
in the low sweet voice habitual to him in his gentler moods, 
" but I thought it became me to announce to you the decease of 
one who, I fear, did not discharge with much kindness the duties 
her connection with you imposed. Your father's second wife, after- 
wards Madame Selby, is no more. She died some days since in 
a convent to which she had retired." 

Isaura had no cause to mourn the dead, but she felt a shock 
in the suddenness of this information ; and in that sweet spirit 
of womanly compassion which entered so largely into her 
character, and made a part of her genius itself, she murmured 
tearfully, " The poor Signora ! Why could I not have been 
with her in illness ? She might then have learned to love 
me. And she died in a convent, you say ? Ah, her religion 
was then sincere ! Her end was peaceful ? " 

"Let us not doubt that, Mademoiselle. Certainly she lived 
to regret any former errors, and her last thought was directed 
towards such atonement as might be in her power. And it 
is that desire of atonement which now strangely mixes me 
up, Mademoiselle in your destinies. In that desire for atone- 
ment, she left to my charge, as a kinsman distant indeed, 
but still, perhaps, the nearest with whom she was personally 
acquainted . a young ward. In accepting that trust, I find 
myself strangely compelled to hazard the risk of offending 
you." 

" Offending me ? How ? Pray speak openly." 

" In so doing, I must utter the name of Gustave Rameau." 

Isaura turned pale and recoiled, but she did not speak. 

" Did he inform me rightly that, in the last interview with 



THE PARISIANS. 341 



him three days ago, you expressed a strong desire that the 
engagement between him and yourself should cease ; and that 
you only, and with reluctance, suspended your rejection of 
the suit he had pressed on you, in consequence of his entreaties, 
and of certain assurances as to the changed direction of the 
talents of which we will assume that he is possessed ? " 

"Well, well, Monsieur," exclaimed Isaura, her whole face 
brightening; "and you come on the part of Gustave Rameau 
to say that on reflection he does not hold me to our engagement 
. that in honour and in conscience I am free ? " 

" I see," answered De Mauteon, smiling, " that I am pardoned 
already. It would not pain you if such were my instructions 
in the embassy I undertake ?" 

" Pain me ? No. But " 

" But what ? " 

" Must he persist in a course which will break his mother's 
heart, and make his father deplore the hour that he was born ? 
Have you influence over him, M. de Mauteon ? If so, will you 
not exert it for his good ? " 

" You interest yourself still in his fate, Mademoiselle ? " 

" How can I do otherwise ? Did I not consent to share it 
when my heart shrank from the thought of our union ? And 
now when, if I understand you rightly, I am free, I cannot but 
think of what was best in him." 

" Alas ! Mademoiselle, he is but one of many . a spoilt child 
of that Circe, imperial Paris. Everywhere I look around, I see 
but corruption. It was hidden by the halo which corruption 
itself engenders. The halo is gone, the corruption is visible. 
Where is the old French manhood ? Banished from the heart, 
it comes out only at the tongue. Were our deeds like our 
words, Prussia would beg on her knee to be a province of 
France. Gustave is the fit poet for this generation. Vanity 
. desire to be known for something, no matter what, no matter 
by whom . that is the Parisian's leading motive power ; . orator, 
soldier, poet, all alike. Utterers of fine phrases ; despising 
knowledge, and toil, and discipline ; railing against the Germans 
as barbarians, against their generals as traitors ; against God for 
not taking their part. What can be done to weld this mass of 



342 THE PARISIANS. 



hollow bubbles into the solid form of a nation . the nation it 
affects to be ? What generation can be born out of the un- 
manly race, inebriate with brag and absinthe? Forgive me 
this tirade; I have been reviewing the battalion I command. 
As for Gustave Rameau, . if we survive the siege, and see once 
more a Government that can enforce order, and a public that 
will refuse renown for balderdash, . I should not be surprised 
if Gustave Rameau were among the prettiest imitators ot 
Lamartine's early Meditations. Had he been born under 
Louis XIV. how loyal he would have been! What sacred 
tragedies in the style of Athalie he would have written, in the 
hope of an audience at Versailles ! But I detain you from the 
letter I was charged to deliver you. I have done so purposely, 
that I might convince myself that you welcome that release 
which your too delicate sense of honour shrank too long from 
demanding." 

Here he took forth and placed a letter in Isaura's hand ; and, 
as if to allow her to read it unobserved, retired to the window 
recess. 

Isaura glanced over the letter. It ran thus : . 

" I feel that it was only to your compassion that I owed your 
consent to my suit. Could I have doubted that before, your 
words when we last met sufficed to convince me. In my selfish 
pain at the moment, I committed a great wrong. I would have 
held you bound to a promise from which you desired to be free. 
Grant me pardon for that ; and for all the faults by which I have 
offended you. In cancelling our engagement, let me hope that 
I may rejoice in your friendship, your remembrance of me, some 
gentle and kindly thought My life may henceforth pass out 
of contact with yours ; but you will ever dwell in my heart, an 
image pure and holy as the saints in whom you may well believe 
. they are of your own kindred." 

" May I convey to Gustave Rameau any verbal reply to his 
letter ? " asked De Mauteon turning as she replaced the letter 
on the table. 

" Only my wishes for his welfare. It might wound him if I 



THE PARISIANS. 343 



added, my gratitude for the generous manner in which he has 
interpreted my heart, and acceded to its desires." 

" Mademoiselle, accept my congratulations. My condolences 
are for the poor girl left to my guardianship. Unhappily she 
loves this man ; and there are reasons why I cannot withhold my 
consent to her union with him, should he demand it, now that, 
in the letter remitted to you, he has accepted your dismissal. 
If I can keep him out of all the follies and all the evils into 
which he suffers his vanity to mislead his reason, I will do so ; . 
would I might say, only in compliance with your compassionate 
injunctions. But henceforth the infatuation of my ward compels 
me to take some interest in his career. Adieu, Mademoiselle ! 
I have no fear for your happiness now." 

Left alone, Isaura stood as one transfigured. All the bloom 
of her youth seemed suddenly restored. Round her red lips the 
dimples opened, countless mirrors of one happy smile. " I am 
free, I am free," she murmured . "joy, joy!" and she passed 
from the room to seek the Venosta, singing clear, singing loud, 
as a bird that escapes from the cage and warbles to the heaven 
it regains the blissful tale of its release. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

In proportion to the nearer roar of the besiegers' cannon, and 
the sharper gripe of famine within the walls, the Parisians seemed 
to increase their scorn for the skill of the enemy, and their faith 
in the sanctity of the capital. All false news was believed as 
truth ; all truthful news abhorred as falsehood. Listen to the 
groups round the caf/s. " The Prussian funds have fallen three 
per cent, at Berlin," says a threadbare ghost of the Bourse (he 
had been a clerk of Louvier's). "Ay," cries a National Guard 
"read extracts from La Liberty The barbarians are in despair. 
Nancy is threatened, Belfort is freed. Bourbaki is invading 



344 THE PARISIANS. 



Baden. Our fleets are pointing their cannon upon Hamburg. 
Their country endangered, their retreat cut off, the sole hope of 
Bismarck and his trembling legions is to find a refuge in Paris. 
The increasing fury of the bombardment is a proof of their 
despair." 

" In that case," whispered Savarin to De Breze, " suppose we 
send a flag of truce to Versailles with a message from Trochu 
that, on disgorging their conquests, ceding the left bank of 
the Rhine, and paying the expenses of the war, Paris, ever 
magnanimous to the vanquished, will allow the Prussians 
to retire." 

u The Prussians ! Retire ! " cried Edgar Ferrier, catching the 
last word and glancing fiercely at Savarin. " What Prussian 
spy have we among us ? Not one of the barbarians shall escape. 
We have but to dismiss the traitors who have unsurped the 
government, proclaim the Commune, and the rights of labour, 
and we give birth to a Hercules that even in its cradle can- 
strangle the vipers." 

Edgar Ferrier was the sole member of his political party 
among the group which he thus addressed; but such was the 
terror which the Communists already began to inspire among 
the bourgeoisie that no one volunteered a reply. Savarin linked 
his arm in De Br6z6's, and prudently drew him off. 

" I suspect," said the former, " that we shall soon have worse 
calamities to endure than the Prussian obus and the black loaf. 
The Communists will have their day." 

" I shall be in my grave before then," said De Br6z6, in hollow 
accents. " It is twenty-four hours since I spent my last fifty 
sous on the purchase of a rat, and I burnt the legs of my 
bedstead for the fuel by which that quadruped was roasted" 

" Entre nous, my poor friend, I am much in the same 
condition," said Savarin, with a ghastly attempt at his old 
pleasant laugh. " See how I am shrunken ! My wife would 
be unfaithful to the Savarin of her dreams if she accepted a 
kiss from the slender gallant you behold in me. But I thought 
you were in the National Guard, and therefore had not to vanish 
into air." 

" I was a National Guard, but I could not stand the hardships, 



THE PARISIANS. 345 



and being above the age, I obtained my exemption. As to 
pay, I was then too proud to claim my wage of 1 franc 25 
centimes. I should not be too proud now. Ah, blessed be 
Heaven ! here comes Lemercier ; he owes me a dinner . he shall 
pay it. Bon jour, my dear Frederic ! How handsome you 
look in your kpi! Your uniform is brilliantly fresh from the 
soil of powder. What a contrast to the tatterdemalions of the 
Line ! " 

" I fear," said Lemercier, ruefully, " that my costume will not 
look so well a day or two hence. I have just had news that 
will no doubt seem very glorious . in the newspapers. But then 
newspapers are not subjected to cannon-balls." 

" What do you mean ? " answered De Br6z6. 

" I met, as I emerged from my apartment a few minutes ago, 
that fire-eater, Victor de Maulfeon, who always contrives to know 
what passes at head-quarters. He told me that preparations are 
being made for a great sortie. Most probably the announcement 
will appear in a proclamation to-morrow, and our troops march 
forth to-morrow night The National Guard (fools and asses 
who have been yelling out for decisive action) are to have 
their wish, and to be placed in the van of battle, . amongst 
the foremost, the battalion in which I am enrolled. Should 
this be our last meeting on earth, say that Frederic Lemercier 
has finished his part in life with &lat" 

" Gallant friend/' said De Br6z6, feebly seizing him by the 
arm, "if it be true that thy mortal career is menaced, die as 
thou hast lived. An honest man leaves no debt unpaid. Thou 
owest me a dinner." 

" Alas ! ask of me what is possible. I will give thee three, 
however, if I survive and regain my rentes. But to-day I have 
not even a mouse to share with Fox." 

" Fox lives then ? " cried De Br^ze, with sparkling hungry 
eves. 

" Yes. At present he is making the experiment how long an 
animal can live without food." 

" Have mercy upon him, poor beast ! Terminate his pangs 
by a noble death. Let him save thy friends and thyself from 
starving. For myself alone I do not plead ; I am but an 



i 



346 THE PARISIANS. 



amateur in polite literature. But Savarin, the illustrious 
Savarin, . in criticism the French Longinus . in poetry the 
Parisian Horace . in social life the genius of gaiety in 
pantaloons, . contemplate his attenuated frame! Shall he 
perish for want of food while thou hast such superfluity in 
thy larder? I appeal to thy heart, thy conscience, thy 
patriotism. What, in the eyes of France, are a thousand 
Foxes compared to a single Savarin ? " 

" At this moment," sighed Savarin, " I could swallow anything, 
however nauseous, even thy flattery, De Br6z6. But, my friend 
Frederic, thou goest into battle . what will become of Fox if 
thou fall? Will he not be devoured by strangers? Surely 
it were a sweeter thought to his faithful heart to furnish a 
repast to thy friends ? . his virtues acknowledged, his memory 
blest ! " 

"Thou dost look very lean, my poor Savarin! And how 
hospitable thou wert when yet plump ! " said Frederic, pathetic- 
ally. " And certainly, if I live, Fox will starve ; if I am slain, 
Fox will be eaten. Yet, poor Fox, dear Fox, who lay on my 
breast when I was frostbitten. No ; I have not the heart to 
order him to the spit for you. Urge it not." 

" I will save thee that pang," cried De Br6z6. " We are close 
by thy rooms. Excuse me for a moment: I will run in and 
instruct thy bonne." 

So saying, he sprang forward with an elasticity of step 
which no one could have anticipated from his previous 
languor. Frederic would have followed, but Savarin clung 
to him, whimpering . " Stay ; I shall fall like an empty sack, 
without the support of thine arm, young hero. Pooh ! of course 
De Br6z6 is only joking . a pleasant joke. Hist! . a secret: 
he has moneys, and means to give us once more a dinner at 
his own cost, pretending that we dine on thy dog. He was 
planning this when thou earnest up. Let him have his joke, 
and we shall have ^festin de Balt/iazar" 

" Hein ! " said Frederic, doubtfully ; " thou art sure he has no 
designs upon Fox ? " 

" Certainly not, except in regaling us. Donkey is not bad, 
but it is 14 francs a lb. A pullet is excellent, but it is 30 francs. 



THE PARISIANS. 347 



Trust to De Br6z6 ; we shall have donkey and pullet, and Fox 
shall feast upon the remains/' 

Before Frederic could reply, the two men were jostled and 
swept on by a sudden rush of a noisy crowd in their rear. 
They could but distinguish the words . Glorious news . victory 
. Faidherbe . Chanzy. But these words were sufficient to 
induce them to join willingly in the rush. They forgot their 
hunger; they forgot Fox. As they were hurried on, they 
learned that there was a report of a complete defeat of the 
Prussians by Faidherbe near Amiens, . of a still more decided 
one on the Loire by Chanzy. These generals, with armies flushed 
with triumph, were pressing on towards Paris to accelerate the 
destruction of the hated Germans. How the report arose no 
one exactly knew. All believed it, and were making their 
way to the Hotel de Ville to hear it formally confirmed. 

Alas ! before they got there they were met by another crowd 
returning, dejected but angry. No such news had reached the 
Government. Chanzy and Faidherbe were no doubt fighting 
bravely, with every probability of success ; but 

The Parisian imagination required no more. "We should 
always be defeating the enemy," said Savarin, "if there were 
not always a but ;" and his audience, who, had he so expressed 
himself ten minutes before, would have torn him to pieces, 
now applauded the epigram ; and with execrations on Trochu, 
mingled with many a peal of painful sarcastic laughter, vociferated 
and dispersed. 

As the two friends sauntered back towards the part of the 
Boulevards on which De Br6z6 had parted company with them, 
Savarin quitted Lemercier suddenly, and crossed the street to 
accost a small party of two ladies and two men who were on 
their way to the Madeleine. While he was exchanging a few 
words with them, a young couple, arm in arm, passed by 
Lemercier, . the man in the uniform of the National Guard . 
uniform as unsullied as Frederic's, but with as little of a military 
air as can well be conceived. His gait was slouching ; his head 
bent downwards. He did not seem to listen to his companion, 
who was talking with quickness and vivacity, her fair face 
radiant with smiles. Lemercier looked at them as they passed 



343 THE PARISIANS. 



by. " Sur mon dtne" muttered Frederic to himself, "surely 
that is la belle Julie; and she has got back her truant poet 
at last." 

While Lemercier thus soliloquised, Gustave, still looking 
down, was led across the street by his fair companion, and into 
the midst of the little group with whom Savarin had paused to 
speak. Accidentally brushing against Savarin himself, he raised 
his eyes with a start, about to mutter some conventional apology, 
when Julie felt the arm on which she leant tremble nervously. 
Before him stood Isaura, the Countess de Vandemar by her 
side ; her two other companions, Raoul and the Abb Vertpre, 
a step or two behind. 

Gustave uncovered, bowed low, and stood mute and still for 
a moment, paralysed by surprise and the chill of a painful 
shame. 

Julie's watchful eyes, following his, fixed themselves on the 
same face. On the instant she divined the truth. She beheld 
her to whom she had owed months of jealous agony, and over 
whom, poor child, she thought she had achieved a triumph. 
But the girl's heart was so instinctively good that the sense 
of triumph was merged in a sense of compassion. Her rival 
had lost Gustave. To Julie the loss of Gustave was the loss 
of all that makes life worth having. On her part, Isaura was 
moved not only by the beauty of Julie's countenance, but still 
more by the childlike ingenuousness of its expression. 

So, for the first time in their lives, met the child and the 
stepchild of Louise Duval. Each so deserted, each so left 
alone and inexperienced amid the perils of the world, with 
fates so different, typifying orders of Womanhood so opposed. 
Isaura was naturally the first to break the silence that weighed 
like a sensible load on all present. 

She advanced towards Rameau, with sincere kindness in her 
look and tone. 

"Accept my congratulations," she said, with a grave smile. 
"Your mother informed me last evening of your nuptials. 
Without doubt I see Madame Gustave Rameau ; " . and she 
extended her hand towards Julie. The poor Ondine shrank 
back for a moment, blushing up to her temples. It was thq 



THE PARISIANS. 349 



first hand which a woman of spotless character had extended 
to her since she had lost the protection of Madame Surville. 
She touched it timidly, humbly, then drew her bridegroom on ; 
and with head more downcast than Gustave, passed through 
the group without a word. 

She did not speak to Gustave till they were out of sight 
and hearing of those they had left. Then, pressing his arm 
passionately, she said, "And that is the demoiselle thou hast 
resigned for me ! Do not deny it. I am so glad to have seen 
her; it has done me so much good. How it has deepened, 
purified, my love for thee! I have but one return to make; 
but that is my whole life. Thou shalt never have cause to 
blame me . never . never ! " 

Savarin looked very grave and thoughtful when he rejoined 
Lemercier. 

"Can I believe my eyes?" said Frederic "Surely that 
was Julie Caumartin leaning on Gustave Rameau's arm ! And 
had he the assurance, so accompanied, to salute Madame de 
Vandemar, and Mademoiselle Cicogna, to whom I understood 
he was affianced? Nay, did I not see Mademoiselle shake 
hands with the Ondine? or am I under one of the illusions 
which famine is said to engender in the brain ? " 

" I have not strength now to answer all these interrogatives. 
I have a story to tell ; but I keep it for dinner. Let us hasten 
to thy apartment. De Br6ze is doubtless there waiting us." 



CHAPTER XIV. 

IJNPRESCIENT of the perils that awaited him, absorbed in 
the sense of existing discomfort, cold, and hunger, Fox lifted 
his mournful visage from his master's dressing-gown, in which 
he had encoiled his shivering frame, on the entrance of De 
Br6z6 and the concierge of the house in which Lemercier had 



.350 THE PARISIANS. 



his apartment. Recognising the Vicomte as one of his master's 
acquaintances, he checked the first impulse that prompted him 
to essay a feeble bark, and permitted himself, with a petulant 
whine, to be extracted from his covering, and held in the arms 
of the murderous visitor. 

" Dieu des dieiix ! " ejaculated De Br6z, " how light the poor 
beast has become ! " Here he pinched the sides and thighs of 
the victim. " Still," he said, " there is some flesh yet on these ^ 
bones. You may grill the paws, fricasser the shoulders, and 
roast the rest. The rognons and the head accept for yourself 
as a perquisite." Here he transferred Fox to the arms of the 
concierge, adding, " Vite au besogne, mon ami!' 

"Yes, Monsieur. I must be quick about it while my wife 
is absent. She has a faiblesse for the brute. He must be on 
the spit before she returns." 

" Be it so ; and on the table in an hour . five o'clock precisely 
.I am famished." 

The concierge disappeared with Fox. De Brezd then amused 
himself by searching into Frederic's cupboards and buffets, from 
which he produced a cloth and utensils necessary for the repast 
These he arranged with great neatness, and awaited in patience 
the moment of participation in the feast. 

The hour of five had struck before Savarin and Frederic 
entered the salon ; and at their sight De Br6z6 dashed to the 
staircase and called out to the concierge to serve the dinner. 

Frederic, though unconscious of the Thyestean nature of the 
banquet, still looked round for the dog ; and, not perceiving 
him, began to call out, " Fox ! Fox ! where hast thou hidden 
thyself ? " 

" Tranquillise yourself," said De Brezd. "Do not suppose 
that I have not . . . ." 

Note by the Author's Son. 1 . The hand that wrote thus far has left unwritten 
the last scene of the tragedy of poor Fox. In the deep where Prosper has dropped 
his wand are now irrevocably buried the humour and the pathos of this cynophagous 
banquet One detail of it, however, which the author imparted to his son, mayhere 
be faintly indicated. Let the sympathising reader recognise all that is dramatic in 
the conflict between hunger and affection ; let him recall to mind the lachrymose 
loving-kindness of his own post-prandial emotions after blissfully breaking some fast, 

1 See also Prefatory Note. 



THE PARISIANS. 351 



less mercilessly prolonged, we will hope, than that of these besieged banqueters ; 
and then, though unaided by the fancy which conceived so quaint a situation, he may 
perhaps imagine what tearful tenderness would fill the eves of the kind-hearted 
Frederic, as they contemplate the well-picked bones of his sacrificed favourite on 
the platter before him ; which he pushes away, sighing, " Ah, poor Fox ! how he 
would have enjoyed those bones ! " 

The chapter immediately following this one also remains unfinished. It was not 
intended to close the narrative thus left uncompleted ; but of those many and so 
various works which have not unworthily associated with almost every department of 
literature the name of a single English writer, it is Chapter the Last. Had the 
author lived to finish it, he would doubtless have added to his Iliad of the Siege of 
Paris its most epic episode, by here describing the mighty combat between those two 
princes of the Parisian Bourse, the magnanimous Duplessis and the redoubtable 
Louvier. Amongst the few other pages of the book which have been left unwritten, 
we must also reckon with regret some pages descriptive of the reconciliation between 
Graham Vane and Isaura Cicogna ; but, fortunately for the satisfaction of every 
reader who may have followed thus far the fortunes of The Parisians, all that our 
curiosity is chiefly interested to learn has been recorded in the Envoi, which was 
written before the completion of the novel. 

We know not, indeed, what has become of these two Parisian types of a Beauty 

not of Holiness, the poor vain Poet of the Pave", and the good-hearted Ondine of 

the Gutter. It is obvious, from the absence of all allusion to them in Lemercier's 

letter to Vane, that they had passed out of the narrative before that letter was 

written. We must suppose the catastrophe of their fates to have been described, 

in some preceding chapter, by the author himself; who would assuredly not have 

left M. Gustave Rameau in permanent possession of his ill-merited and ill-ministered 

fortune. That French representative of the appropriately popular poetry of modern 

ideas, which prefers "the roses and raptures of vice" to "the lilies and languors of 

virtue," cannot have been irredeemably reconciled by the sweet savours of the 

domestic pot-au-feu, even when spiced with pungent whiffs of repudiated dis- 

reputability, to any selfish betrayal of the cause of universal social emancipation 

from the personal proprieties. If poor Julie Caumartin has perished in the siege of 

Paris, with all the grace of a self-wrought redemption still upon her, we shall 

doubtless deem her fate a happier one than any she could have found in prolonged 

existence as Madame Rameau ; and a certain modicum of this world's good things 

will, in that case, have been rescued for worthier employment by Graham Vane, To 

that assurance nothing but Lemercier's description of the fate of Victor de Mauleon 

(which will be found in the Envoi) need be added for the satisfaction of our sense of 

poetic justice : and, if on the mimic stage, from which they now disappear, all these 

puppets have rightly played their parts in the drama of an empire's fall, each will 

have helped to " point a moral " as well as to "adorn a tale." Valde d plauditc! 

L. 



352 THE PARISIANS. 



CHAPTER THE LAST. 

AMONG the refugees which the convoi from Versailles dis- 
gorged on the Paris station were two men, who, in pushing 4 
through the crowd, came suddenly face to face with each | 
other. 

" Aha ! Bon jour, M. Duplessis," said a burly voice. 

" Bon jour, M. Louvier," replied Duplessis. 

" How long have you left Bretagne ? " 

" On the day that the news of the armistice reached it, in 1 
order to be able to enter Paris the first day its gates were open. 
And you . where have you been ? " 

" In London." 

" Ah ! in London ! " said Duplessis, paling. " I knew I had 
an enemy there." 1 

" Enemy ! I ? Bah ! my dear Monsieur. What makes you 
think me your enemy ? " 

" I remember your threats." 

"A propos of Rochebriant. By the way, when would it be 
convenient to you and the dear Marquis to let me into prompt  
possession of that property ? You can no longer pretend to 
buy it as a dot for Mademoiselle Valerie." 

"I know not that yet. It is true that all the financial 
operations attempted by my agent in London have failed. 
But I may recover myself yet, now that I re-enter Paris. 
In the mean time, we have still six months before us; for, 
as you will find . if you know it not already . the interest 

due to you has been lodged with Messrs. of , 

and you cannot foreclose, even if the law did not take into 
consideration the national calamities as between debtor and 
creditor." 

"Quite true. But if you cannot buy the property it must 
pass into my hands in a very short time. And you and 
the Marquis had better come to an amicable arrangement 



THE PARISIANS. 



with me. A propos, I read in the Times newspaper that 
Alain was among the wounded in the sortie of December." 

"Yes; we learnt that through a pigeon-post We were 
afraid , . . ." 



I/ENVOI. 



The intelligent reader will perceive that the story I relate is 
virtually dosed with the preceding chapter ; though I rejoice 
to think that what may be called its plot does not find its 
dhw&ment amidst the crimes and the frenzy of the Guerre 
des Communeaux. Fit subjects these, indeed, for the social 
annalist in times to come. When crimes that outrage hu- 
manity have their motive or their excuse in principles that 
demand the demolition of all upon which the civilisation of 
Europe has its basis . worship, property, and marriage . in 
order to reconstruct a new civilisation adapted to a new 
humanity, it is scarcely possible for the serenest contemporary 
to keep his mind in that state of abstract reasoning with 
which Philosophy deduces from some past evil some existent 
good. For my part, I believe that throughout the whole 
known history of mankind, even in epochs when reason is 
most misled and conscience most perverted, there runs visible, 
though fine and threadlike, the chain of destiny, which has 
its roots in the throne of an All-wise and an All-good; that 
in the wildest illusions by which multitudes are frenzied, there 
may be detected gleams of prophetic truths; that in the 
fiercest crimes which, like the disease of an epidemic, cha- 
racterise a peculiar epoch under abnormal circumstances, 
there might be found instincts or aspirations towards some 
social virtues to be realised ages afterwards by happier 
generations, all tending to save man from despair of the 
future, were the whole society to unite for the joyless hout- 

VOL. II. z 



354 THE PARISIANS. 



of his race in the abjuration of soul and the denial of God, 
because all irresistibly establishing that yearning towards an 
unseen future which is the leading attribute of soul, evincing 
the government of a divine Thought which evolves out of 
the discords of one age the harmonies of another, and, in 
the world within us as in the world without, enforces upon 
every unclouded reason the distinction between Providence 
and chance. 

The account subjoined may suffice to say all that rests 
to be said of those individuals in whose fate, apart from the 
events or personages that belong to graver history, the 
reader of this work may have conceived an interest It is 
translated from the letter of Frederic Lemercier to Graham 

Vane, dated June , a month after the defeat of the 

Communists. 

" Dear and distinguished Englishman, whose name I honour 
but fail to pronounce, accept my cordial thanks for your interests 
in such remains of Frederic Lemercier as yet survive the ravages 
of Famine, Equality, Brotherhood, Petroleum, and the Rights of 
Labour. I did not desert my Paris when M. Thiers, ' parniula 
non bene relictd? led his sagacious friends and his valiant troops 
to the groves of Versailles, and confided to us unarmed citizens 
the preservation of order and property from the insurgents 
whom he left in possession of our forts and cannon. I felt spell- 
bound by the interest of the sinistre tndodratne, with its quick 
succession of scenic effects and the metropolis of the world for 
its stage. Taught by experience, I did not aspire to be an 
actor ; and even as a spectator, I took care neither to hiss nor 
applaud. Imitating your happy England, I observed a strict 
neutrality ; and, safe myself from danger, left my best friends 
to the care of the gods. 

"As to political questions, I dare not commit myself to a 
conjecture. At this rouge et noir table, all I can say is, that 
whichever card turns up, it is either a red or a black one. One 
gamester gains for the moment by the loss of the other ; the 
table eventually ruins both. 



THE PARISIANS. 355 



" No one believes that the present form of government can 
last ; every one differs as to that which can. Raoul de Vandemar 
is immovably convinced of the restoration of the Bourbons. 
Savarin is meditating a new journal devoted to the cause of 
the Count of Paris. De Br6z6 and the old Count de Passy, 
having in turn espoused and opposed every previous form of 
government, naturally go in for a perfectly novel experiment, 
and are for constitutional dictatorship under the Due d'Aumale, 
which he is to hold at his own pleasure, and ultimately resign 
to his nephew the Count, under the mild title of a constitutional 
king; . that is, if it ever suits, the pleasure of a dictator to depose 
himself. To me this seems the wildest of notions. If the Due's 
administration were successful, the French would insist on keep- 
ing it ; and if the uncle were unsuccessful, the nephew would 
not have a chance. Duplessis retains his faith in the Imperial 
dynasty ; and that Imperialist party is much stronger than it 
appears on the surface. So many of the bourgeoisie recall 
with a sigh eighteen years of prosperous trade; so many of 
the military officers, so many of the cival officials, identify 
their career with the Napoleonic favour; and so many of the 
Priesthood, abhorring the Republic, always liable to pass into 
the hands of those who assail religion, . unwilling to admit 
the claim of the Orleanists, are at heart for the Empire. 

"But I will tell you one secret I and all the quiet folks 
like me (we are more numerous than any one violent faction) 
are willing to accept any form of government by which we have 
the best chance of keeping our coats on our backs. Liberty 
Egalitiy Fraterniti are gone quite out of fashion ; and Made- 
moiselle has abandoned her great chant of the Marseillaise, 

and is drawing tears from enlightened audiences by her pathetic 
delivery of l O Richard I O mon roil ' 

" Now about the other friends of whom you ask for news. 

"Wonders will never cease. Louvier and Duplessis are no 
longer deadly rivals. They have become sworn friends, and are 
meditating a great speculation in common, to commence as soon 
as the Prussian debt is paid off Victor de Maul6on brought 
about this reconciliation in a single interview during the brief 

z 2 



356 THE PARISIANS. 



interregnum between the Peace and the Guerre des Communtaux. 
You know how sternly Louvier was bent upon seizing Alain 
de Rochebriant's estates. Can you conceive the true cause? 
Can you imagine it possible that a hardened money-maker 
like Louvier should ever allow himself to be actuated, one 
way or the other, by the romance of a sentimental wrong? 
Yet so it was. It seems that many years ago he was 
desperately in love with a girl who disappeared from his 
life, and whom he believed to have been seduced by the late 
Marquis de Rochebriant It was in revenge for this supposed 
crime that he had made himself the principal mortgagee of 
the late Marquis ; and, visiting the sins of the father on the 
son, had, under the infernal disguise of friendly interest, made 
himself sole mortgagee to Alain, upon terms apparently the 
most generous. The demon soon showed his griffe, and was 
about to foreclose, when Duplessis came to Alain's relief ; and 
Rochebriant was to be Valerie's dot on her marriage with Alain. 
The Prussian war, of course, suspended all such plans, pecuniary 
and matrimonial. Duplessis, whose resources were terribly 
crippled by the war, attempted operations in London with a 
view of raising the sum necessary to pay off the mortgage ; . 
found himself strangely frustrated and baffled. Louvier was 
in London, and defeated his rival's agent in every speculation. 
It became impossible for Duplessis to redeem the mortgage. 
The two men came to Paris with the peace. Louvier deter- 
mined both to seize the Breton lands and to complete the ruin 
of Duplessis, when he learned from De Maul6on that he had 
spent half his life in a baseless illusion ; that Alain's father was 
innocent of the crime for which his son was to suffer; . and 
Victor, with that strange power over men's minds which was 
so peculiar to him, talked Louvier into mercy if not into re- 
pentance. In short, the mortgage is to be paid off by in- 
stalments at the convenience of Duplessis. Alain's marriage 
with Valerie is to take place in a few weeks. The foumisseurs 
are already gone to fit up the old chateau for the bride, and 
Louvier is invited to the wedding. 
" I have all this story from Alain, and from Duplessis himself. 



THE PARISIANS. 357 



I tell the tale as 'twas told to me, with all the gloss of sentiment 
upon its woof. But between ourselves, I am too Parisian not to 
be sceptical as to the unalloyed amiability of sudden conversions. 
And I suspect that Louvier was no longer in a condition to 
indulge in the unprofitable whim of turning rural seigneur. He 
had sunk large sums and incurred great liabilities in the new 
street to be called after his name ; and that street has been 
twice ravaged, first by the Prussian siege, and next by the 
Guerre des Cotnntuneaux ; and I can detect many reasons why 
Louvier should deem it prudent not only to withdraw from 
the Rochebriant seizure, and make sure of peacefully recovering 
the capital lent on it, but establishing joint interest and quasi 
partnership with a financier so brilliant and successful as 
Armand Duplessis has hitherto been. 

" Alain himself is not quite recovered from his wound, and is 
now at Rochebriant, nursed by his aunt and Valerie. I have 
promised to visit him next week. Raoul de Vandemar is still 
at Paris with his mother, saying, there is no place where one 
Christian man can be of such service. The old Count declines 
to come back, saying there is no place where a philosopher can 
be in such danger. 

" I reserve as my last communication, in reply to your 
questions, that which is the gravest You say that you 
saw in the public journals brief notice of the assassination 
of Victor de Mauteon; and you ask for such authentic 
particulars as I can give of that event, and of the motives 
of the assassin. 

" I need not, of course, tell you how bravely the poor Vicomte 
behaved throughout the siege; but he made many enemies 
among the worst members of the National Guard by the 
severity of his discipline ; and had he been caught by the 
mob the same day as Clement Thomas, who committed the 
same offence, would have certainly shared the fate of that 
general. Though elected a diputi, he remained at Paris a 
few days after Thiers & Co. left it, in the hope of persuading 
the party of Order, including then no small portion of the 
National Guards, to take prompt and vigorous measures 



358 THE PARISIANS. 



to defend the city against the Communists. Indignant at 
their pusillanimity, he then escaped to Versailles. There he 
more than confirmed the high reputation he had acquired 
during the siege, and impressed the ablest public men with 
the belief that he was destined to take a very leading part 
in the strife of party. When the Versailles troops entered 
Paris, he was, of course, among them in command of a 
battalion. 

"He escaped safe through that horrible war of barricades, 
though no man more courted danger. He inspired his men 
with his own courage. It was not till the revolt was quenched 
on the evening of the 28th May that he met his death. The 
Versailles soldiers, naturally exasperated, were very prompt in 
seizing and shooting at once every passenger who looked like 
a foe. Some men under De Mauleon had seized upon one 
of these victims, and were hurrying him into the next street 
for execution, when, catching sight of the Vicomte, he screamed 
out, . Lebeau, save me ! ' 

"At that cry De Mauleon rushed forward, arrested his 
soldiers, cried, 'This man is innocent . a harmless physician. 
I answer for him.' As he thus spoke, a wounded Communist, 
lying in the gutter amidst a heap of the slain, dragged himself 
up, reeled toward De Mauldon, plunged a knife between his 
shoulders, and dropped down dead. 

"The Vicomte was carried into a neighbouring house, from 
all the windows of which the tricolour was suspended ; and the 
Mtdecin whom he had just saved from summary execution 
examined and dressed his wound. The Vicomte lingered for 
more than an hour, but expired in the effort to utter some 
words, the sense of which those about him endeavoured in 
vain to seize. 

" It was from the Mtdecin that the name of the assassin and 
the motive for the crime were ascertained. The miscreant was 
a Red Republican and Socialist named Armand Monnier. He 
had been a very skilful workman, and earning, as such, high 
wages. But he thought fit to become an active revolutionary 
politician, first led into schemes for upsetting the world by 



THE PARISIANS, 359 



the existing laws of marriage, which had inflicted on him 
one woman who ran away from him, but being still legally 
his wife, forbade him to marry another woman with whom 
he lived, and to whom he seems to have been passionately 
attached. 

" These schemes, however, he did not put into any positive 
practice till he fell in with a certain Jean Lebeau, who exercised 
great influence over him, and by whom he was admitted into 
one of the secret revolutionary societies which had for their 
object the overthrow of the Empire. After that time his head 
became turned. The fall of the Empire put an end to the 
society he had joined : Lebeau dissolved it During the siege 
Monnier was a sort of leader among the ouvriers ; but as it 
advanced and famine commenced, he contracted the habit of 
intoxication. His children died of cold and hunger. The 
woman he lived with followed them to the grave. Then he 
seems to have become a ferocious madman, and to have been 
implicated in the worst crimes of the Communists. He 
cherished a wild desire of revenge against this Jean Lebeau, 
to whom he attributed all his calamities, and by whom, he 
said, his brother had been shot in the sortie of December. 

" Here comes the strange part of the story. This Jean 
Lebeau is alleged to have been one and the same person with 
Victor de Mauleon. The Mtdecin I have named, and who is 
well known in Belleville and Montmartre as the Mtdecin des 
Pauvres, confesses that he belonged to the secret society 
organised by Lebeau ; that the disguise the Vicomte assumed 
was so complete, that he should not have recognised his identity 
with the conspirator but for an accident During the latter 
time of the bombardment, he, the M/decin des Pauvres, was 
on the eastern ramparts, and his attention was suddenly called 
to a man mortally wounded by the splinter of a shell. While 
examining the nature of the wound, De Mauleon, who was also 
on the ramparts, came to the spot. The dying man said, * M. le 
Vicomte, you owe me a service. My name is Marc le Roux. 
I was on the police before the war. When M. de Mauleon 
reassumed his station, and was making himself obnoxious to 



360 THE PARISIANS. 



the Emperor, I might have denounced him as Jean Ijrbm the 
conspirator. I did not The siege has reduced me to vast 
I have a child at home . a pet Don't let her starve:* . I w31 
see to her/ said the Vicomte. Before we could get the man 

into the ambulance cart he expired. 

" The Mtdecin who told this story I had the curiosity to see 
myself, and cross-question. I own I believe his statement. 
Whether De Mauleon did or did not conspire against a fallen 
dynasty, to which he owed no allegiance, can little, if at all, 
injure the reputation he has left behind of a very remarkable 
man . of great courage and great ability . who might have had 
a splendid career if he had survived. But, as Savarin says truly, 
the first bodies which the car of revolution crushes down are 
those which first harness themselves to it 

11 Among De MauleWs papers is the programme of a con- 
stitution fitted for France. How it got into Savarin's hands I 
know not. De Maulon left no will, and no relations came 
forward to claim his papers. I asked Savarin to give me the 
heads of the plan, which he did. They are as follows : . 

11 ' The American republic is the sole one worth studying, for 
it has lusted. The causes of its duration are in the checks to 
democratic fickleness and disorder, ist No law affecting the 
Constitution can be altered without the consent of two-thirds 
of Congress. 2nd. To counteract the impulses natural to a 
popular Assembly chosen by universal suffrage, the greater 
legislative powers, especially in foreign affairs, are vested in 
the Senate, which has even executive as well as legislative 
functions. 3rd. The Chief of the State, having elected his 
government, can maintain it independent of hostile majorities 
in either Assembly. 

" . These three principles of safety to form the basis of any 
new constitution for France. 

" * For France it is essential that the chief magistrate, under 
whatever title he assume, should be as irresponsible as an 
English sovereign. Therefore he should not preside at his 
councils ; he should not lead his armies. The day for personal 
government is gone, even in Prussia. The safety for order in 



THE PARISIANS. 361 



a State is, that when things go wrong, the Ministry changes, 
the State remains the same. In Europe, Republican institutions 
are safer where the chief magistrate is hereditary than where 
elective/ 

"Savarin says these axioms are carried out at length, and 
argued with great ability. 

"I am very grateful for your proffered hospitalities in 
England. Some day I shall accept them . viz., whenever I 
decide on domestic life, and the calm of the conjugal foyer. 
I have a penchant for an English Mees, and am not exacting 
as to the dot. Thirty thousand livres sterling would satisfy 
me . a trifle, I believe, to you rich islanders. 

"Meanwhile I am naturally compelled to make up for the 
miseries of that horrible siege. Certain moralising journals 
tell us that, sobered by misfortunes, the Parisians are going to 
turn over a new leaf, become studious and reflective, despise 
pleasure and luxury, and live like German professors. Don't 
believe a word of it. My conviction is that, whatever may be 
said as to our frivolity, extravagance, &c, under the Empire, 
we shall be just the same under any form of government . 
the bravest, the most timid, the most ferocious, the kindest- 
hearted, the most irrational, the most intelligent, the most 
contradictory, the most consistent people whom Jove, taking 
counsel of Venus and the Graces, Mars and the Furies, ever 
created for the delight and terror of the world; . in a word, 
the Parisians. . Votre tout dvou& 

"Frederic Lemercier." 



It is a lovely noon on the bay of Sorrento, towards the close 
of the autumn of 1871, upon the part of the craggy shore, to 
the left of the town, on which her first perusal of the loveliest 
poem in which the romance of Christian heroism has ever 
combined elevation of thought with silvery delicacies of speech, 
had charmed her childhood, reclined the young bride of Graham 
Vane. They were in the first month of their marriage. Isaura 



362 THE PARISIANS. 



had not yet recovered from the effects of all that had preyed 
upon her life, from the hour in which she had deemed that 
in her pursuit of fame she had lost the love that had coloured 
her genius and inspired her dreams, to that in which . . . 

The physicians consulted agreed in insisting on her passing 
the winter in a southern climate ; and after their wedding, 
which took place in Florence, they thus came to Sorrento. 

As Isaura is seated on the small smoothed rocklet, Graham 
reclines at her feet, his face upturned to hers with an in 
expressible wistful anxiety in his impassioned tenderness. 
"You are sure you feel better and stronger since we have 
been here?" 



THE END.
