MADELEINE GRAHAM 



CHAPTEE I. 

A FINISHING EDUCATIONAL ESTABLISHMENT FOR 
YOUNG LADIES. 

At the Misses Sparx*s Finisliing Educational 
Establishment for Young Ladies, in the Eojal 
Parish of Kensington, all the accomplishments 
were taught, and the moral and physical well- 
being of the pupils was most carefully attended 
to, by thoroughly competent persons, en- 
lightened in every respect to the immense 
responsibility of the task confided to them by 
parents and guardians . at the moderate rate 
of one hundred guineas per annum. Washing, 
calisthenics, separate apartments, a pew at 
church, astronomy, deportment, geology, and 
Hebrew, were charged as extras. 
VOL. I. 1 



3 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

The three principals were themselves most 
accomplished ladies, as hecame them . sisters. 

The eldest Miss Sparx, who had received 
the name of Susannah from her godfathers and 
godmothers, was verging on her forty-seventh 
year, unmarried; and her temper was not 
supposed to be improved by the circumstance. 
She was skilled in every species of fine work, 
and understood the Use of the Globes, as was 
proved by her wearing spectacles while the 
pupils turned those spherical bodies, celestial 
and terrestrial, round and round, with indiffer- 
ence or eagerness, according to idiosyncrasy, 
working out the recondite problems contained 
in certain small 12mo books, handsomely 
bound in red imitation calf, with a frontispiece 
by which you could always tell, given your own 
time, what o'clock it was at Pekin : the same 
being entitled, in letters of gold, " Goldsmith's 
Geography." 

Besides these branches of useful information. 
Miss Sparx was understood to conduct a class 
of Biblical Literature . on the most orthodox 
principles, be sure . twice a week ; to give 
lessons in Botany and Mineralogy on the 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 3 

Mondays and Fridays, and entertaining 
lectures on Physiology, Political Economy, 
and General Metaphysics, on the Thursdays 
and Saturdays . unless the morning happened 
to be very fine on the day last mentioned, when 
the young ladies were sometimes allowed to 
spend the hour properly devoted to the above 
intellectual enjoyment in an extra perambu- 
lation in Kensington Gardens. Particularly 
when Miss Sparx . or Mrs. Sparx, as she was 
now not nnfreqnently styled by ignorant 
strangers, who, however, meant well . had a 
bilious headache, which, poor woman, was not 
so seldom the case as must have been desirable 
for a person who was obliged to dedicate that 
organ to uses so multifarious, and so consider- 
ably out of the average capacity of the female 
human cerebrum to store in different compart- 
ments, and keep from an unseemly chaoticising 
in the reproduction. Though, indeed, I do 
not go so far as to say that this was always 
the case, or to pretend that occasionally 
sciences so likely to run into one another . 
from their extremely close juxtaposition, if 
from nothing else . did not sometimes accom- 

1.2 



4 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

plish that feat ; or, at least, produce upon the 
minds of the young lady pupils, under Miss 
Sparx's most lucid scientific exposition, all the 
same effect. 

To sum up the eldest Miss Sparx^s attri- 
butes, she read prayers morning and evening 
. eaid grace before and after every meal 
but supper, which, for some reason or other, 
was not held to require it . perhaps because 
the young ladies were not present to report . 
and kept the accounts. Item, she was known 
indifferently among the pupils, in private con- 
versation, as the Dowager Miss Sparx, or as 
Mother Minerva . ^though I think the experi- 
ment was seldom made to ascertain wliether 
she answered to either appellation. 

The second (in point of antiquity) Miss 
Sparx, Hortensia by name, instructed the 
pupils who enjoyed the advantages of this 
modern encyclopediacal (not maniacal) academy, 
in English Grammar (without knowing it 
herself) ; Elocution, particularly as applied to 
Poetry ; Dramatic Eecitation, and '' the Ordi- 
nary Tone of vivd voce reading in the di'awing- 
room," . so the prospectuses said. General 



MADELEINE GRAHAM:. 5 

Literature was another of her departments, 
giving her reasons for excluding all sorts of 
pernicious works from the category . the titles 
of which the girls remembered. She could 
teach any pupil who was desirous of extend- 
ing her philological intimacies so far the 
Elements of Greek and Latin, which she had 
herself acquired from a mature clergyman in 
one of the neighbouring churches used by the 
school, whom it was thought . at least, re- 
ported . she was tr}dng her might and main 
to hook into matrimony. Common Arithmetic, 
Cosmogony, and the Art of Making Wax 
Flowers, completed what were technically 
styled, " Miss Hortensia's duties ;" and in this 
last accomplishment she succeeded so well, 
that her elder sister (which, that she was, Miss 
Hortensia hardly ever mentioned her without 
stating), as professoress of botany, took many 
occasions to assure the female public she was 
herself puzzled to distinguish between her 
sister's performances and those of nature, and 
that it was quite as easy to illustrate the 
" Linna3an configurations " of camellias, for 
example, from her imitations, as from the best 



6 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

preserved skeletons in an Herbarium or Hortus 
Siccus, . learned-sounding expressions, to which 
the eldest Miss Sparx herself attached no 
particular meaning, but, like wise people in 
general, was always worrying others to make 
them understand. 

Miss Hortensia had passed her twenty- 
seventh year by her own account, and her five- 
and- thirtieth by the parish register. She was 
tall, and very genteel, though perhaps a trifle 
too thin, if a person can be so who is under- 
stood to have realized six or seven thousand 
pounds. If she had not been so genteel, 
the Eeverend Jabez Bulteel somewhat dis- 
concertedly assured certain of his rollicking 
university friends, whom he had introduced 
to his intended, he really could not have gone 
in for the chance himself at any price. 

But it must be declared, after all, that the 
real strength and popularity of the Sparx 
Gymg}Tioecium (a designation which the 
Eeverend Jabez had either invented or 
selected when engaged in the preparation 
of his great work on the languages of Babel) 
lay chiefly in the youngest partner and pre- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 7 

ceptress, Miss Eosabella Sparx. She, with the 
assistance of masters, who did not come nearly 
so often as they were charged for, instilled a 
knowledge of the Fine Arts really worth know- 
ing ; namely, dancing, embroidery and tapestry 
work, the pianoforte, singing in the Italian 
manner, how to dress your hair most be- 
comingly, how to glide swimmingly into a 
drawing-room, all the varieties of the curtsey, 
charade-playing, and general morals.- It need 
not be added, that Miss Eosabella Sparx was 
by far the most esteemed and cherished of all 
the mistresses of the establishment by its' 
youthful inmates. And she deserved it in 
other respects ; for she was a very lively, 
vivacious, cheerful little woman, was really ten 
or fifteen years younger than either of her 
sisters, and had been seen to smile . nay, had 
once or twice laughed heartily . at the carica- 
tures which certain of the girls, gifted with 
talent in that way, were always making of her 
two elders. In reward for which condescension 
and amiability, the young ladies circulated con- 
stant reports among themselves that ]\Iiss 
Eosabella had several admirers, from whom 



8 MADELEINE GRAHAM, 

she was at liberty to choose a husband ; had 
declined a grocer, and jilted a surgeon ; and, 
finally, that she was engaged to be married to 
a captain in the army, who had seen her 
accidentally in the Park, walking oat with 
them . than which, no possible estate of woman- 
kind was imagined by most of the fair young 
commentators to be more enjoyable and worthy 
of approving estimation. 

Besides these heads of the establishment, 
there were two female teachers attached to it 
en permanence. Madame Beata Fiirschener, a 
Swiss lady, who asserted that her language 
was German, taught it there, and superintended 
the young ladies' linen. Also a young Paris- 
ienne, a certain Mademoiselle Olympe Loriot, 
who taught . ay, what did Mademoiselle 
Olympe Loriot teach in this admirably well- 
ordered radiating point of modern intelli- 
gence ? 

Her own language, for one thing, it was 
certain . conversationally and practically, as 
well as grammatically, of course, you know. 
Anything else ? Perhaps. In fact, it is hardly 
possible to teach French without teaching a 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. ^ 

good deal besides, especially in tlie present 
state of the literature of Imperial France, so 
well calculated to diffuse everywhere the most 
admirable social opinions and maxims, and to 
bring up other capitals towards the supreme 
level of civilization attained by . 

" Cette ville corrompue qui corrompt Tunivers." 

This first-rate finishing establishment for 
young ladies was located in a handsome large 
red-bricked building, of the William and Mary 
period, when it had been the mansion of some 
great nobleman, with an immensely fine peruke 
. a memorial of which, and of himself, had 
been left in a panel painting in the dining- 
room, for which the auctioneer who dispersed 
the last heir's inheritance had not been able to 
find a purchaser. I believe in consequence it 
went as a fixture, or, perhaps, was not reckoned 
at all ; a point, however, which although con- 
cerning a very great nobleman in his own day, 
may not be worth elucidating in ours. The 
mansion, become a seminary of polite acquire- 
ment, stood in its own " park-like grounds," . 
that is to-day it was surrounded by a space of 



10 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

about half an acre, which was prettily got up 
to look like a perfect elysium of girlish out-of- 
door exercise and recreation. There, at suitable 
hours, if admitted . for the walls were, of course, 
too high to be looked over . you might see the 
most delightful sylphide romps going on. In 
one direction half a dozen rosy, laughing, 
screaming, quarrelling, hugging girls tossed 
one another amazing and delirious heights on 
a swing. In another, some graceful creature 
balanced the Indian sceptre in a thousand 
attitudes for the sculptor, if sculptors troubled 
themselves in modern times to make marble 
easy and graceful. Here two pretty little 
creatures exchanged the flying-hoop, or caught 
the rapidly falling ball, on principles of gravita- 
tion which the eldest Miss Sparx, who loved 
always to mix instruction with spoi-t, often 
explained to the best of her o^tl knowledge 
and unbelief. There was green grass below 
their feet, tall waving trees above those still 
happy though puzzled and befussed young heads 
. trees that had an indistinct recollection of 
having contemplated the diamond stomacher 
and belaced satin petticoat of Queen Anne. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. II 

And there were little patches of mignonette 
and flowers, and two urns at the principal 
entrance, overflowing in long dishevelled 
verdure with creeping-jennies, like a drowned 
woman's tresses drawn from some oozy depth. 
So that on the whole the place looked very 
pleasant and secluded indeed, and much com- 
forted the mothers who came to leave their 
daughters there ; nay, awakened in some of 
them regrets that they could not stay behind 
out of the noisy, rattling, headlong world, 
instead of . or, at least, in company with . 
those beloved and cherished deposits. Tor a 
daughter must be valuable for whose education 
you are willing to give one hundred guineas 
per annum and extras . with as little trouble 
as possible, of course, to yourself. 

But, indeed, we should be very long if we 
enlarged on all the advantages of the Sparx 
Grymgynoecium, at which every modern im- 
provement had been so carefully introduced, and 
whence antiquated notions of all sorts had been 
so judiciously eliminated, that Mademoiselle 
Olympe Loriot more than once remarked to 
confidential pupils, with her Parisian shrug, 



12 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

that the proprietresses themselves seemed to 
be the only things a little behind the age. 
Still we may add, in general, that not a single 
moment which could possibly be devoted to 
enlightenment was neglected to be filled up. 
For example, when the young ladies sat at 
work in the evenings round the lamps in the 
great parlour, one of their number, agreeably 
to the custom of other monastic institutions, 
read aloud to the rest from some improving 
book. The subject did not matter much pro- 
vided it was treated in an agreeable and popular 
manner. Upon that point Miss Eosabella 
(whose duty it was to superintend these inter- 
vals of relaxation) was rather fixed. The 
Eeverend Jabez had simplified several sciences 
himself in this way, and had made them as 
light and easy for comprehension as a series of 
dissolving views. Wonderfully advanced our 
happier age is, in truth, in these latter 
respects, and greatly do our own surpass those 
stupid old pros}^, matter-of-fact, scientific 
works of former times ; when, certainly, only 
persons of scientific pursuits and objects perused 
such treatises at all, about whom it was no 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 13 

matter how mucli duller and stupider tliey 
made themselves thereby. 

Some such perusal was taking place on one 
occasion, when it may be as well to introduce 
the reader to the heroine of as strange and 
terrible a story . frivolous as the commence- 
ment of my narrative may seem to some 
readers . as ever essentialized, within the nar- 
row circle of an individual career, the moral 
and condemnation of an age. 

It was to the following effect, read in the 
bright, clear, rippling tones of a youthful 
female voice, tinged ever so slightly with a 
silver Doric ; or, in unpoetical, straightforward 
EngHsh, with a north-country Irish accent. 
For the fame of the Sparx Gymgynoecium was 
widely diffused, especially among the wealthy 
commercial classes of the three divisions of the 
United Kingdom, in consequence of a grand 
match made by one of the pupils almost directly 
after she left it. She married an earl nearly 
three times her age, and had a hundred 
thousand pounds left her by an uncle on that 
condition: . 

" Arsenic, as we commonly call it . ^the 



14 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

white arsenic of the shops, and the arsenious 
acid of the chemist . is well known as a 
yiolent poison. Swallowed in large doses, 
it is what medical writers call an irritant 
poison. In very minute doses it is known 
to professional men as a tonic and altera- 
tive, and is sometimes administered with 
a view to these effects. It is remarkable 
also for exercising a peculiar influence 
upon the skin, and is therefore occasionally 
employed in cutaneous diseases. The use 
of arsenic, however, is unfrequent among 
regularly-educated practitioners, and it is never, 
I believe, used as a household medicine by the 
people. 

" In some parts of Lower Austria, however, 
in Styria, and especially in the hilly country 
towards Hungary, there prevails among the com- 
mon people an extraordinary custom of eating 
arsenic. During the smelting of lead, copper, 
and other ores, white arsenic flies off in fumes, 
and condenses in the solid form in the long 
chimneys which are usually attached to the 
smelting furnaces. From these chimneys, in 
the mining regions, the arsenic is obtained, and 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 15 

is sold to the people by the itinerant pedlars 
and herbalists. It is known by the name of 
Hidri (a corruption of Hutter-rauchy smelting- 
house smoke), and the practice of using it is 
of considerable antiquity. By many it is 
swallowed daily throughout a long life, and 
the custom is even handed down hereditarily 
from father to son. 

" Arsenic is thus consumed chiefly for two 
purposes. ;y?r5^, to give plumpness to the 
figure, cleanness and softness to the skin, and 
beauty and freshness to the complexion ; 
second, to improve the breathing and give 
longness of wind, so that steep and continuous 
heights may be climbed without difficulty and 
exhaustion of breath. Both these results are 
described as following almost invariably from 
the prolonged use of arsenic either by man or 
by animals. 

" For the former purposes, young peasants, 
both male and female, have recourse to it, with 
the view of adding to their charms in the eyes 
of each other ; and it is remarkable to see how 
wonderfully well they attain their object, for 
those young persons who adopt the practice 



16 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

are generally remarkable for clear and blooming 
complexions, for full, rounded figures, and for 
a healthy appearance. Dr. Yon Tschudi gives 
the following case as having occurred in his own 
medical practice : . ' A healthy, but pale and 

thin milkmaid, residing in the parish of H , 

had a lover whom she wished to attach to her 
by a more agreeable exterior ; she therefore 
had recourse to the well-known beautifier, and 
took arsenic several times a week. The desired 
effect was not long in showing itself ; for in a 
few months she became stout, rosy-cheeked, 
and all that her lover could desire. In order, 
however, to increase the effect, she incautiously 
increased the doses of arsenic, and fell a victim 
to her vanity. She died poisoned, a very pain- 
ful death.' The number of such fatal cases, 
especially among young persons, is described 

as by no means inconsiderable. 

^ ^ « « « « 

" The perusal of the above facts regarding 
arsenic . taken in connexion with what has 
been previously stated as to the effects of the 
resin of hemp . recalls to our mind the dreamy 
recollections of what we have been accustomed 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 17 

to consider as tlie fabulous fancies of easy and 
credulous times. Love-pliiltres, charms, and 
potions start up again as real things beneath 
the light of advancing science. From the 
influence of hemp and arsenic no heart seems 
secure . by their assistance no affection un- 
attainable. The wise woman, whom the 
charmless female of the East consults, ad- 
ministers to the desired one a philtre of 
haschisch, which deceives his imagination . 
cheats him into the belief that charms exist, 
and attractive beauty, where there are none, 
and defrauds him, as it were, of a love which, 
with the truth before him, he would never 
have yielded. She acts directly upon his brain 
with her hempen potion, leaving the unlovely 
object he is to admire really as unlovely as 
before. 

" But the Styrian peasant girl, stirred by an 
unconsciously growing attachment . confiding 
scarcely to herself her secret feelings, and 
taking counsel of her inherited wisdom only . 
really adds, by the use of hidri, to the natural 
graces of her filling and rounding form, paints 
with brighter hues her blushing cliceks and 

VOL. I. 2 



18 MADELEINE GEAHAM. 

tempting lips, and imparts a new and winning 
lustre to her sparkling eye. Every one sees 
and admires tlie reality of her growing beauty ; 
the yoimg men sound her praises, and become 
suppliants for her favour. She triumphs over 
the affections of all, and compels the chosen 
one to her feet. 

*' Thus even cruel arsenic, so often the 
minister of crime and the parent of sorrow, 
bears a blessed jewel in its forehead, and, 
as a love-awakener, becomes at times the 
harbinger of happiness, the soother of ardent 
longing, the bestower of contentment and 
peace ! 

"It is probable that the use of these and 
many other love-potions has been known to the 
initiated from very early times . now given to 
the female to enhance her real charms . now 
administered to the lords of the creation, to 
add imaginary beauties to the unattractive. 
And out of this use must often have sprung 
fatal results, . to the female, as is now some- 
times the case in Styria, from the incautious 
use of the poisonous arsenic ; to the male, as 
happens daily in the East, from the maddening 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 19 

effects of the fiery liemp. They must also 
have given birth to many hidden crimes, which 
only romance now collects and preserves . the 
isrnorance of the learned havine: lono; ao"o 
pronounced them unworthy of belief" 



2-z 



20 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



CHAPTER II. 

APPLES ON THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE. 

"That will do, my clear . very nicely read; 
but you should have laid a more particular 
emphasis on the words liemj^ and arsenic, in the 
fifth section of the extract, as these words 
evidently give what we may call the dominating 
impulse to the ideas inculcated in all the 
succeeding portion," said Miss Hortensia, 
who, as instructor in elocution, very properly 
attended only to the sound of what she heard. 

"Oh, aint it funny that hemp and arscjiic 
should go together ? for isn't that what they 
hang people with. Miss Eosabella?" inquired 
a lively young chit, of some fifteen or sixteen 
years of age, of the one of the Misses Sparx 
who, she thought, would aj^preciate a joke. 

" With arsenic, my love ? '* gravely rebuked 
Miss Hortensia, who always required a logical 



MADELEINE GRAHAM:. 21 

precision of expression in everybody but her- 
self. 

" Witb hemp, my sweet cbilcl ? Hemp is a 
plant; tliey do not hang people with plants. 
Go and bring the ' Dictionary of Technological 
Terms' out of my bedroom ; you will find it in 
the window, near my smelling-bottle, which 
you will easily see by the reticule with the 
steel clasps, beside it ; and read us the article,'*' 
said " Mother Minerva," with all the solemnity 
of her favourite bird. 

"Oh, I don't want to know, please. Miss 
Sparx, . I mean, I don't Hke going upstairs in 
the dark," humbly deprecated the offending 
Miss Emily Maughan. 

Miss Eosabella had glanced at her favourite 
pupil with a significant sparkle in the eye. 
" Oh, never mind Emily's mistake, sister ; you 
know it all comes to the same thing. Hemp 
makes rope, and they hang naughty people 
with rope, and that is what Emily meant to 
say," she kindly interposed, biting asunder a 
piece of the thread with which she was 
engaged in working one of the innumerable 
holes forming the pattern of a gorgeous 



22 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

trousseau under-garment . with her front teeth, 
in spite of repeated warnings from her elder 
sister of the danger of the practice. She had 
lost her own by it, Miss Susannah was wont 
to say, when she was quite a child, just as her 
hair had become grey at a supematurally early 
period, by the incautious use of a certain pomade 
divine unskilfully prepared. 

" But didn't you leave something out, 
Madeleine ?" said another of the young ladies 
. a creature as fresh and rosy as a wild apple 
. ^to the one that had obliged the company by 
the perusal commented on. The latter had, 
meanwhile, been earnestly and thoughtfully 
reading over again to herself the " article.". 
So earnestly, indeed, that she took no notice of 
the question. 

" Did you. Miss Graham . did you omit 
some portion of this valuable elucidation?" 
said Miss Hortensia, severely, discerning all 
the presumption of such an act of discretion. 

"Sister means, did you skip anything, 
Madeleine ?" interpreted Miss Eosabella. 

" No . yes, ma'am . yes, I did, because I saw 
it was nothing particular to read . only about 
the effect of arsenic in making people breathe 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 23 

better in going up hills. I did not think that 
was worth reading," the young lady replied, 
blushing very deeply, and she had already a 
colour as richly glowing and beautiful as the 
scarlet of sunrise on her fair, but rather sun- 
freckled, northern complexion. 

" Why, that is most likely by far the best of 
it. I wonder you take upon you to select 
what we are to hear. Surely we are the best 
judges, Miss Madeleine Grraham !" -exclaimed 
Miss Sparx, who had been for some time 
threatened with asthmatical symptoms . or 
fancied that she was ; and, of the two, people 
are always the more thoroughly convinced of 
the existence of an imaginary than of a real 
disorder. 

"Oh, I don't think it is of much conse- 
quence, Susannah, to hear what effect arsenic 
has upon the breathing,'* said Miss Eosabella, 
who was perfectly well, and sound as a bell, 
in her own chest. 

"Put a lesson-keeper in the place. Miss 
Graham, and I will read it myself over again, 
by-and-bye," said Miss Sparx, with evidently 
offended dignity. 

" Yes, ma'am." 



24 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

"What do you call the book, ma chere? 
Who is its writer?" now enquired Mademoiselle 
Olympe Loriot, with as much apparent interest, 
though possibly very differently awakened, as 
her principal exhibited. 

" Professor Johnston's ' Chemistry of Com- 
mon Life,' Mademoiselle." 

" What is it he says . if you please to read 
again? . that this dangerous poison, it com- 
municates a certain plumpness to the figure . 
a freshness and vivacity to the complexion 
otherwise impossible ?" Mademoiselle pursued ; 
who, it may be remarked, was herself in person 
of that kind and degree of Parisian tournure 
known as "scraggy" in England, and was, 
besides, of an unwholesome green-sallow com- 
plexion, touched with indigo under the eyes 
and in the corners of the mouth. 

" Yes, he says that ; but do you really think 
it would, Miss Sparx?" said Miss Graham, 
turning with something like interest . which 
was not often the case . ^to the principal of the 
seminary. 

Miss Sparx opened her mouth to give utter- 
ance to an oracle, when Miss Eosabella glided 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 25 

in an interruption in her quiet way. " Wliy 
do you want to know, Madeleine ?" 

" Because . ^because, perliaps, in tliat case . 
it might remove su7i freckles ^^ that young 
person replied, half laughingly, and smoothing 
back in both hands the splendid masses of her 
glossy black hair, which was what is called 
"waved," with the crisp of a natural curl 
rippling its whole length, without ever break- 
ing into an overflow until it was secured in a 
massive plait behind the head; . "you see I 
have some." 

" I don't advise you to try it, Madeleine, or 
it might remove the owner of the sun freckles 
with them," said Miss Eosabella, who had 
more practical good sense than all the rest of 
the teachers put together. 

"I don't suppose I could get any," said 
Madeleine, regretfully. 

" Will they not . do they not sell it at the 
pharraacien's ?" inquired Mademoiselle Olympc, 
as carelessly as she could. 

" Yes ; if you go with a witness. Made- 
moiselle," said Miss Eosabella, drily ; " and 
then, of course, people would wonder what 



26 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

you wanted with it: and it would be very 
nasty to take, I should think, mixed with soot, 
as the apothecaries are obliged, I believe/' 

"Ah, without doubt !" 

"It is not so bad as haschisch, however," 
said honest Emily Maughan. 

" AVhy not, dear ?" inquired Miss Eosabella. 

"Oh, because didn't the book say that 
haschisch regularly cheats people into the 
belief that one's a great deal handsomer than 
one is? . I don't call that fair, Matty; do 
you?" Emily replied, appealing in embar- 
rassment to a still younger member of the 
society. 

Mademoiselle Loriot shrugged her lean 
shoulders, and looked at the English girl with 
contempt. 

" Ah ! why, that is what is done always and 
everywhere. What folly ! How should we 
please without decoration, we poor women? 
What are we but an illusion, . a vision of the 
imagination, . as but too plainly appears by 
the disenchantment when once we are at- 
tained?" 

"Don't talk that way before the children, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 27 

Mademoiselle ! And I must say I don't think 
it very good taste at any time to let such 
things be known," said Miss Eosabella, sharply, 
and glancing from the French instructress 
with indignation to her own intended wed- 
ding robe. 

Another Parisian shrug, and a pause. 

" What sort of stuff, I wonder, is hascJdsch, 
then ? It isn't a mineral, is it, Miss Sparx ?" 
resumed Madeleine, hoping by the reverential 
reference to obtain the principal's connivance 
to a renewal of the interesting subject. 

" You are doin^ haschisch there, Madeleine!" 
said Miss Eosabella, significantly. 

The young girl blushed; the warm blood 
in those rapid- coursing veins often sent a glow 
of the inward fire to the surface. 

" Oh, is haschisch what Elders, the cook, 
calls 'gammon?'' I heard her say so to a 
policeman, the other night, that called to know 
if anybody had got over the garden wall," 
said Matty, or Miss Matilda DoUards, as was 
her proper name. 

" Very like it, at all events, I should say. 
But it's all stuff o' nonsense ; there's no such 



28 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

thing in reality at all; tliey only put it in 
"books to amuse people." 

Miss Eosabella thus endeavoured to pooh- 
pooh away the impression which she saw made 
on the minds of her young charges. 

"Monsieur Alexandre Dumas, pere, seems 
to maintain the reality of those marvellous 
effects, which he describes in the ' Count of 
Monte Christo,' " resumed, however, Ma- 
demoiselle Olympe, with a vivacity almost 
amounting to rudeness . to revolt, one may 
say, under the circumstances, because in a 
school, quite as much as in a court, one 
is expected to swear in the words of the 
master. 

" Does he ? Well, I suppose that's part of 

his '' liumhiig. Miss Eosabella meant to say, 

until she remembered on a sudden who and 
where she was, and softened the expression 
into " stock-in-trade." 

The conversation rather languished for a 
while; it was chiefly made up during the 
interval by Miss Eosabella's remark on the 
number of times she had broken the eyes of 
her needles that evening \ Miss Hortensia's 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 29 

wonder liow ever people could have invented 
such a foolish expression as the eye of a needle; 
and the eldest Miss Sparx's hopeless flounder- 
ing in an attempt to explain the properties of 
steel, and the j)robable causes of so frequent a 
solution of continuity; when Miss Emily 
Maughan revived the general interest by ejacu- 
lating . no doubt following up a series of 
girlish ideas on the subject of haschisch, . " I 
say, Miss Eosabella, do you believe in the 
Arabian Nights ?" 

" You should never begin addressing a person 
with ' I say,' Emily ; it's vulgar," replied the 
lady addressed, without taking any notice of 
the main question, as a great many other 
people do, in much more exalted positions as 
oracles. 

" How can Miss Eosabella believe in such a 
farrago of nonsensical fancies about magic and 
all that kind of thing, you foolish child, you ? 
Do you imagine the laws of the material world 
are really to be overthrown by a formula of 
words, and that it is possible to raise genii, 
and all that kind of thing [a favourite form of 
getting rid of the necessity of definite ideas 



30 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

on what she was talking, witli Miss Hortensia], 
by rubbing an old lamp ?'* 

" I wish it was ; wouldn't I set to work on 
some of ours ! " exclaimed Miss Dowsabel Bur- 
roughs, a young lady whose " pa" was noto- 
riously rich, but whose mother was strongly 
suspected of having been a servant-of-all-work 
in her youth. Of course, there was a good 
deal of malicious smihng among these women 
of a lesser growth thereupon. 

" Well, what would you ask of an obedient 
genius, supposing you could raise one. Douce?'* 
said Miss Eosabella, who conceived that her 
young people's ideas were now upon safer 
tracks. 

Douce reflected for a moment. 

"I should like . I should like to have a 
tame lizard, . one that w^ouldn't jump about 
so as they do in the garden, and look as pretty 
and speckled, and shine as green in the sun, 
if I put it in a basket in my room." 

" Just the only thing her father told her he 
wouldn't buy her for a birthday present, it 
would be such a nuisance ! What queer crea- 
tures girls are ! " thought Miss Eosabella ; 



MADELEINE CxRAHAM. 31 

and she might have extended the reflection 
to a more adult age ; for the captain of march- 
ing foot upon whom she had set her mind 
was very strongly objected to by both her 
sisters, and for reasons which at a subsequent 
period she perhaps considered would have been 
worth listening to. 

" And what would you ask, Matilda, of the 
Slave of the Lamp, supposing your abrasion 
could produce such a functionary of magic to 
do your will?" said Miss Hortensia, with her 
usual elegance of language and utterance. 

"Let me see," mused Matilda, who was 
famous in the school as a little gourmande, 
whose ideas mostly ran upon good eating and 
drinking, owing, it was supposed, to her father 
being an alderman. " Well,'' she declared, 
finally, after hesitating doubtless among many 
dishes, " I should tell him to bring me a nice 
little roast pig, with plenty of apple sauce 1 " 

There was a general laugh at this. It was 
considered a most agreeable sally. Matilda 
Bollards was surprised, but felt she had achieved 
a social success. Nevertheless, several of the 
young ladies, who knew that there was bread 



32 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

mocked with a faint intimation of butter, and 
a cup of water confused with milk, coming in 
for supper, sighed over the relishing impossi- 
bility. 

" And now, what would you have, Emily ? " 
pursued Miss Eosabella, as soon as the excite- 
ment had subsided- 

"Oh!" said honest Emily, "I should like 
to have a good husband . such a one as papa 
is to mamma." 

" I don't suppose there are many such, my 
dear," sighed the professoress of mineralogy 
and botany, who, after all, was a human 
woman. "At least, I hardly ever met with 
such another pair. What one wishes, the 
other wants. I don't suppose many of us 
have much chance now of such a husband as 
that." 

" As for me, I should not ask of Fortune a 
husband, however good," exclaimed Made- 
moiselle Loriot, with true Parisian enthusiasm, 
and speaking out of her turn, if she ought to 
have had one in so childish a recreation. " I 
should demand only a lover . always true, al- 
ways faithful, always tender, always, above 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. SS 

all, devoted to me. And who can expect t/tat 
of a husband ? " 

" / should," said Miss Eosabella, more drily 
than ever towards the Parisienne, and thinking 
likewise what a pity it was that other na- 
tionalities did not deal in pure French. 

" Ah, you English ! . ^yes, you easily secure 
affections so lethargic as those of your coun- 
trymen, inhabitants of this foggy island I " 
pursued Mademoiselle, who could not always 
prevent herself from speaking what she thought. 
How could she ? How can the best bred and 
most polished of us all ? 

"Well now, Madeleine, what would you 
like to have, if you had the power ? . not 
arsenic, I hope?" said the directress of the 
entertainment, glancing up from her work 
with a degree of interest in the answer to 
the query she had perhaps hardly suspected 
in herself. 

" Oh, no, no. Miss Eosabella, . I should 
like to have . everything ! " was the capa- 
cious rejoinder. 

** A lover always faithful, always true, al- 
ways, above all, devoted to ?" 

VOL. I. 3 



34 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" A husband like my papa ? " 

" A roast pig and apple sauce ? " 

" A lizard in a basket ? " 

All these various intei*pe]lations were 
screamed together by the fair creatures, in- 
somuch that it was hardly possible to know 
what one or the other was saying. 

*' Come, I think it is almost time to go to 
bed, for all of us. We are making such a 
horrid noise that I am sure the policeman 
would be quite right, at all events, in getting 
over the wall to-night, to inquire the meaning 
of it all," said Miss Eosabella, good-hu- 
mouredly, but perhaps not overpleased ; sub- 
joining, to show that she was not in reality 
much put out, though Madeleine Graham's 
last wish strangely annoyed and perplexed 
her, " The only person who has not said a 
word about herself or her wishes is Madame 
Fiirschener ; what would you demand of the 
genius, Madame ? " 

" Who ? . I, mees ? " said the good German 
Switzwoman, starting from a reverie. " Oh, 
I should ask to be transported at once to the 
village of Zugdorf, on the mountain where I 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 35 

was born, just at the time wlien tliey are 
making tlie new cheeses for the fair at Neuf- 
chatel." 

" Dear me ! "We must take care and not 
play the Ranz des Vaches before you, Ma- 
dame Fiirschener. But now, young ladies, 
it is close upon nine o'clock, and I think we 
had better all put by our work, and go to bed 
to dream that we have our wishes." 

Thus did Miss Eosabella wind up- the dis- 
cussion, without calling upon either of her 
sisters to express thdr desires ; being perfectly 
aware that the eldest would have pretended to 
want one of the finest mineralogical and con- 
chological cabinets in the world, and the other 
the power to read Homer and Virgil in the 
blessed originals. 



3. a 



36 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



CHAPTEE in. 



CONFIDENCES. 



Tap! tap! 

" Good heavens ! Oli, is it only you, Made- 
moiselle ?" 

" Yes, yes ; it is only your poor Olympe, my 
dear child. And it is not in the least necessary 
to extinguish before me the amicable light of 
your furtive taper." 

The scene is now Miss Madeleine Graham's 
little exclusive bed-chamber . or that ought to 
have been so, according to the extra charged in 
her school account. But Mademoiselle Loriot, 
who had taken the young girl into particular 
friendship and confidence, and delighted in 
making her the depositary of the craving and 
morbid fancies and projects which haunted her 
own imagination, not unfrequently took upon 
her to break through the rules of the seminary 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 37 

by spending many an hour and half-hour, much 
better devoted to refreshing slumbers, in her 
favourite's apartment of a night. The clan- 
destine character of these visits, and implied 
violation of the decrees of authority, were pos- 
sibly their greatest charm and attraction for 
both Madeleine and the Parisienne. 

It was a very pretty little virginal chamber, 
this, and one would as little have expected to find 
Evil squatting beside that light, snowy-cur- 
tained couch, relieved by rose-like festoons of 
pink calico, amid the quiet environments of a 
young girFs toilette and bedroom furniture, as 
under the green glistening of the trees of 
Paradise, amid its flower}^ turf. Yet there she 
seated herself now, in the outward present- 
ment of Mademoiselle Olympe Loriot, while 
the young proprietress of the chamber, who 
was in bed, reading a book in a yellow cover, 
by the forbidden light of a small wax taper set 
in a washing-basin (for safety's sake !) on 
the counterpane, extended her hand to the 
sympathetic pressure of her Parisian friend. 

" AVhat is the matter to-night, dear Olympe ? 
And are you sure that Miss Eosabella (I know 



38 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

the otlier two are safe enough) will take no 
notice of your not being in your own room ?" 

*^ I have taken precautions against that peril. 
I have locked the door, and brought away the 
key in my pocket. If Miss Eosabella takes it 
into her head to be curious, she may perhaps 
try the lock, when she will be satisfied that I 
am within ; and even for me not to reply will 
be to her the assurance that I am in my bed 
and asleep. We have only to preserve a 
cautious undertone. But I confess that I 
found it impossible, dear Madeleine, to endure 
the solitude of my own thoughts after the recol- 
lections aroused by the recent discussion over 
our work, when, by a rare weakness. Miss 
Bosabella permitted us for once to speak on 
subjects interesting in any degree to humanity 
. ^to the humanity of women, at all events." 

*' She seemed dreadfully put out, didn't she, 
when you began talking how much you pre- 
ferred a lover to a husband ?" said Madeleine. 
"But are you sure you shut the door behind 
you ? If she should be listening 1" 

" Oh yes, oh yes. Do you think I have for- 
gotten the proverb that even walls have ears. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 39 

dear cliild ? But of what do you talk when 
you expose yourself to so much more risk, and 
your poor attached friend also, by presuming 
to read this interesting book, which I have lent 
you, at an hour when it is by no means impos- 
sible the restless genius of Miss Eosabella may 
be in activity still in the corridors of the house ? 
And, you know, none of the pupils is permitted 
to have her door locked against her importu- 
nate scrutiny," said Mademoiselle, glaring 
suspiciously around, and in the operation look- 
ing not altogether a bad resemblance to the 
most impressive hero, at all events, of Milton's 
epic, when he went prospecting round the ada- 
mantine hedgesofEdenon emerging fromChaos. 

" Oh, but I have taken care of all that ; I 
have calculated to a nicety where to put this 
basin, with a light in it, on the bed, so that 
the shadow extends below the door ; and if I 
heard the slightest sound . and you know 
what a sharp, rattling footstep Miss Eosabella 
has . I should out with it in a puff," the apt 
pupil replied. 

" How far have you got in your book, my 
dear little cabbage ? . mon cher jpetit chou ?'* 



40 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" To sucli an interesting point ; where Mar- 
guerite Gautier makes up her mind to go back 
to her old way of living in Paris, you know, 

and accept the offer of that booby Count N , 

whom she disliked so much in reality, rather 
than bring her lover into any farther trouble 
with his family," replied the young girl. 

The work to which she was devoting her 
midnight taper would thus appear to have 
been the extremely improving " Dame aux 
CameHas " of the younger Dumas ; a story 
which, however, it must be admitted, under the 
still more fearless designation of ''La Tra- 
viata," has stirred the sympathies of all the 
civilized operatic nations, in behalf of a species 
of heroine, bare allusion to whose social exist- 
ence and position would have emptied a draw- 
ing-room full of our grandmothers. 

" Ah, indeed, so far ? But we devour words 
when they agree with us . I mean when it is 
pleasant reading. Ah, and is it not an enno- 
bhng and beautiful spectacle, dear Madeleine, to 
behold motives so generous and disinterested 
dominating in the heart of a woman of a caste 
which society entertains in its breast only to 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 41 

conceal and reprobate, as one might a cancer 
gnawing into the flesh, and yet who exhibits 
herself capable of such sublime disinterested- 
ness and devotion as to relinquish the man 
she loves rather than conduct him to ruin? 
Ah ! what good woman . what perfectly good 
woman . as they are called," Mademoiselle 
Olympe concluded, with a passionate sneer, 
" would be capable of conduct at once so 
exalted and incomprehensible by mean and 
routine souls ?" 

Mademoiselle, it was evident, asked the 
question as if instituting a psychological in- 
quiry into the motives and conduct of an actual 
personage, and by no means a creation of the 
diseased imagination and sympathies of lajemie 
France under '^\q second empire. 

"Do you think it is really the case then, 
Olympe, that good women hardly ever do any- 
thing good . of that kind, I mean ? But then 
they haven't much opportunity; they are 
mostly so quietly at home, with husbands and 
children of their own. Still, I can't help 
thinking," Madeleine continued, rather hesi- 
tatingly, " that young Mr. Dumas has made a 



42 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

mistake in the account he gives of his heroine, 
and that, in reality, she . she left Armand 
because she was tired of having nothing to live 
upon, and pawning her clothes, and having to 
part with her . her brougham, I suppose . coujpe 
the Frenchman calls it. Don't you think, now, 
if it is a true story . and even Monsieur Jules 
Janin, in his preface, seems to say it is, . that 
I am a good deal more likely to be right than 
. yes, than the author man himself that tells 
what happened?" 

"In effect," replied Mademoiselle, after a 
brief pause, and seeming to recognise a still 
more advanced esprit to her own in her pupil, 
''it does seem improbable to incredulity that 
the most extinct of all the noble illusions of our 
ancestors . a love altogether superior to, and 
that triumphs over, the miserable motives of 
self-interest and gratification . could have fled 
from every other human heart to take refuge 

in that of a vile but I must not use 

the expression ; and what need of severe ex- 
pressions when we are understood ?" 

" And somebody might hear. Mademoiselle, 
if you raise your voice so much above your 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 43 

breath. But do you redly think people are all 
^0 very bad and greedy now-a-days . women 
and all ?'* said Madeleine, raising herself, with 
evidently awakened interest, on her rounded 
elbow on the pillow. 

" Women above all ! Yes, certainly ; and 
what do you expect ? That we alone are to pre- 
serve the absurd traditions of the senseless in- 
fancy of the world in the midst of the univer- 
sal raging of cupidity and self-interest, which 
presents to us everywhere the most degrading, 
and yet fascinating, spectacles of success and 
enjoyment ? When examples of the preference 
men give to material interests over every other 
force upon us almost the conviction that the 
constitution of the human mind and heart are 
changed, and that the foundations of all our 
modern forms of society are yielding to the 
incessant action of a principle sprung from the 
abyss, but which is fast becoming the sole mo- 
tive power of our age !" 

"You mean people being all so fond of 
money. Mademoiselle?" 

" Yes, certainly ; what else should I 



44 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

"Well, but," remoifttrated the yonng girl, 
who showed herself to be more than ever of 
her epoch, '' what can one possibly do without 
money, Olympe ? Don't money buy everything 
one sees or knows of worth having? All the 
fine clothes, horses, carriages, plate, jewels, fnr- 
nitnre . even the homage and respect which 
. ^yon put in our exercises . ought only to 
be paid to virtue and noble qualities of the 
mind ? But don't we see quite different with 
our own eyes, and even in this narrow enclo- 
sure of a school r I am sure there could not 
be a better woman in the world than Madame 
Fiirschener, for example ; and I think you are 
yourself one of the most talented persons in 
your intellects that can be imagiaed ; but I 
should very much Hke to know when and 
where either of you will attract so much notice 
and respect as that dashing woman of the 
demumonde you poiuted out to me the other day 
in the Park Eoad, and who, you say, is quite 
famous in the newspapers, under the name . ^if 
one may call it so . and description some 
very clever person has given of her . of In- 
cognita/' 



MADELEINE GRAHAM, 45 

" Very true . ^very true. Ah ! even your pru- 
dish England . everything is changing among 
you also. To behold the immense crowd which, 
only the day after that astonishing advertise- 
ment to the public, assembled on the Kensing- 
ton route, to behold pass a woman celebrated for 
her extravagance and cynicism only, driving a 
pair of spirited, fiery ponies, frothing and 
foaming like waves of the sea . as if they, too, 
ate arsenic, Madeleine ! . in silver harness, and 
attended by two grooms in a livery like a 
prince's, on horseback ! It was a spectacle to 
amaze and disgust this sober London, one would 
have thought! But, instead of that, everybody 
thronged to it, . the daughters, the Britannic 
mothers, with whose ancient prudery the world 
has been amused so long, so shortly ago, and 
yet which inspired everywhere a certain re- 
spect ! Yes, you are right, my dear Madeleine ; 
and this is not the age in which to exhibit, on 
a stage which laughs at you, the example of 
virtues as obsolete as the sacques and furbelows 
of a bygone epoch !" 

" And yet I think I should not Hke to 
marry altogether for money ^ Olympe. I think 



46 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

I should like to like the person . a little . 
that I married," said Madeleine, a soft rosiness 
. a faint reminiscence of antique British 
maidenly sentiment and delicacy, possibly . 
rising over the snowy, Hebe-like swell of the 
shoulder and youthful bosom, displayed in the 
careless grace of the young girl's attitude, as 
she sat with her elbow propped on the pillow, 
and her cambric night-clothes dispersed like a 
semi-transparent mist over all that loveliness 
which, it seemed, was to be marketed like any 
other goods. 

" That you married . the ^person that you 
married ? You forget, my poor child," said 
Mademoiselle Lori6t, surveying the fair young 
creature attentively, " that you are not to 
marry so much a person as certain social 
advantages, which are comprised under the ex- 
pression . ^Wealth, position, . perhaps rank and 
power; for you are very beautiful, dearest 
Madeleine ! And if you mount to the height 
of the elevation of your age, above the 
insidious suggestions of passion and feeling, to 
which, nevertheless, your organization exposes 
you, I am persuaded you will make one of the 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 47 

best of Eritish matches, and will be enabled to 
exhibit to those who have loved you so sincerely, 
like your poor Olympe, marks of a generosity 
which I have always contended is natural to 
the goodness of your heart/' 

" I shall certainly try and marry a rich man, 
Olympe. I don't think I care much for rank 
or power," said Madeleine Graham. 

" Not for power even ?" returned the 
Parisienne, with a momentary but quickly 
suppressed quiver of contempt over her facial 
lines. "Ah, well, it is an indifference easily 
accounted for; you spring from a rich com- 
mercial family, to which, above all things, the 
possession of wealth must seem the most 
honourable and desirable." 

" Papa is very well off : but then there are 
a good number of us, boys and all, to be pro- 
vided for. I don't suppose I shall have much 
of a fortune, unless I look after myself," 
replied this prescient and considerative young 
girl of the nineteenth century. 

"And you may be assured, dearest Made- 
leine, of a triumphant issue to your efforts to 
place yourself, with those charms, that beauty, 



48 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

that indescribable fascination, which accom- 
pany all you say and do, and which attract, 
as it were, by an irresistible loadstone, all who 
enter into your sphere ! Even the eldest Miss 
Sparx . she whom nothing else pleases . I 
notice that she occasionally regards you with 
an expression of complacency." 

"No, come Olympe, I can't quite believe 
thatr laughed the young girl; "but of course 
I must depend chiefly on looking well and 
attracting people, to get well married, and that 
is why I take such pains with my accomplish- 
ments, and all that. I don't care much about 
what Mother Minerva calls furnishing one's 
head inside . I say, Olympe, wouldn't it save 
a world of trouble if one could only dose the 
men with lots of that same haschisch we 
were talking about in the parlour before 
supper? " 

"Without concerning ourselves that it is 
said to make madmen and delirious idiots of 
them afterwards, eh, ma chere .^" 

Mademoiselle Loriot spoke these words in 
a tone that startled Madeleine herself; espe- 
cially as she followed up the observation with 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 49 

a strangely discordant, and indeed horrid and 
menacing kind of a choked giggle. 

" How you do talk against the men some- 
times, Olympe ! One would think that the}'- 
had bitterly wronged you . some of them ! 
and yet you are quite young still . you are 
not an old maid at all, I am sure," she 
said, soothingly. 

" I am, nevertheless, one of the victims of 
my age !" replied Mademoiselle, with unflag- 
ging exasperation ; you see me here, earning 
a miserable pittance on which to support 
existence, . an existence which annoys, frets, 
wearies me, but which I have not the courage 
to terminate as yet. I am not destitute of 
talents ; I can sing, I dance to admiration. I 
have read all Eacine, and a part of Corneille, 
and I profess my language with a skill that 
excites admiration. I am not, perhaps, regu- 
larly beautiful, but my complexion has a 
certain pallor and sensibility not without its 
charm ; I have a heart of a grandeur and 
infinity of sentiment altogether inexhaustible, 
were I required to love all the men of my 
epoch ! Figure to yourself, then, my deai* 
VOL. I. 4 



50 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Madeleine, tliat I have heaped all these trea- 
sures of my affections and talents on a single 
individual ; that this individual is a miserable 
commiS'Voyageur of a Lyons silkhouse, en- 
dowed only with a fine figure, and a face 
which attracts the eye by the porcelain beauty 
and clearness of the complexion. That this 
commis-voya(jeur is a creature almost destitute 
of soul and sensibility, wdth only intellect 
sufficient to make a happy selection in the 
colours of a necktie and waistcoat. Put, I 
say, all these ideas and convictions together, 
and know, in conclusion, that I have thro^vn 
myself at the feet of this man, to implore a 
return of devotion, and that he has rejected 
me ! . rejected me, merely because I had not 
twenty thousand francs : at which price only 
he has caused himself to be inscribed, to my 
certain knowledge, in the registry of all the 
matrimonial agencies both at Paris and 
Lyons !" 

Miss Graham, it must be confessed, nearly 
burst out laughing at this exposition of her 
friend's unhappy position ; but she controlled 
her very natural tendency to merriment, and 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 51 

merely remarked, . "Well, you know, I am 
to go home to my native city at the end of 
this quarter. There are plenty of rich men 
there," Olympe, and I will at least try to secure 
myself one of the number ; and then I will 
invite you to stay with me a good long while, 
and I will introduce you to somebody very 
well off, whom you will easily be able to take 
in with your talents and accomplishments, and 
you shall be married near me, and we shall be 
both so happy, you know ; and if you kill 
yourself at all, it shall only be by living too 
well." 

" Embrace me, my dear child ! You give 
me new hope . new life !" 

While this ceremony was being performed. 
Mademoiselle Olympe's vision was crossed by 
a dim notion that she might some day be 
enabled to figure in her young friend's house- 
hold in that favourite character of modern 
French romance, in which the beloved female 
inmate and confidante supplants her benefac- 
tress and entertainer in the affections of her 
husband and all about her, and winds up the 
whole creditable affair by causing the wife to 

LIBRAKY 

UNIVERSITY OF ILUNOIS 



52 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

be expelled in sliame and disgrace from his 
roof and heartli ; mostly, however, with con- 
siderable justification on the part of the 
unhappy lady herself, it must be confessed, . 
an exact reverse of the scriptural position of 
the patriarch Abraham and his Sarah and 
Hagar. 

Fortunately, the antidotes of most poisons 
grew beside them. Miss Graham had also 
perused many of these edifying works, lent to 
her for private relaxation by her kind friend 
and tutoress ; and even as she uttered the 
invitation, she secretly came to the conclusion 
that Mademoiselle Olympe Loriot was just the 
kind of personage to play a benefactress and 
entertainer a trick of the kind, and was there- 
fore, possibly, not so desirable an inmate as to 
render it wholly out of the question to devise 
an excuse for not receiving her as such, when 
the proper time should arrive. 

After a properly enthusiastic outward de- 
monstration of these inward sentiments and 
reflections between the Parisienne and her 
youthful pupil (Madeleine was not quite 
eighteen), the latter withdrew herself with a 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 53 

kind smile, but a little wearied and embarrassed 
with tbe excess of the demonstration on her 
friend's part, from her fond arms. 

" There, that is enough, dear Olympe. You 
know that I do not in the least doubt your 
affection for me ; and some of the best proofs 
of it, I think, you have given me in these 
amusing books you lend me. But to resume 
the real subject . about that Incognita, you 
know . must not some one be at a tremendous 
expense with her?" 

"No doubt, no doubt; a hundred times as 
much as he would pay for a wife/' 

" Oh, how wicked ! Do you know who 
it is?" 

" I have a guess that would prove formid- 
able in a court of justice; but should we tell 
it to a young girl ?" said Mademoiselle Loriot, 
after . let us do her the justice to say so . a 
considerable pause. 

Apparently she decided in the affirmative. 

" Yes ; but he is not at all . what you call 
it, among you, you natives of the glorious; 
Albion? . not at all a . a mnrrfjinf/ man!' 

" Why not ?" said Madeleine. 



54 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" Why not ? Is it proper, again I say to 
myself, to explain himself to her? Why not? 
Let us no longer delude ourselves with phrases 
concerning the innocent candour, not to be 
profaned, of the youth of our days. Parlons 
toute ncite! For the very reason, my child, that 
he is the most proper for matrimony, being so 
immensely rich ; but he therefore supposes 
himself incapable of inspiring an attachment 
worthy of so great a sacrifice. Do you not 
comprehend ? It is a man of an original 
character, and he cannot support the notion 
to be loved for his money alone. Ea ! ha ! 
what a ridiculous vanity in a man, who is far 
from being young, and who ought to be aware 
that at his age one is chiefly loved for the 
benefits he confers !" 

" But is he so very rich ?" 

" Horribly, my dear." 

"Do you know who he is? . what he is 
called?" 

" He is an enormous merchant of London . a 
man who deals with the two worlds ; one may 
say that he is even of a certain rank, since his 
father purchased a patent of German nobility. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 55 

He is past the prime of existence ; lie is 
in some measure bald; lie lias little cliarm 
of manner or conversation ; lie is stern, 
unbending." 

"What is his name, Olympe . dear Olympe?" 
" Behringbright. He is called Mr. Baron 
Behringbright." 

" Wouldn't he be a good match, Olympe ?" 
" Grood to an impossibihty of being better, 
my dear one." 

" But it would be, of course, impossible. I 
don't suppose there would be any way of 
getting at him ?" 

" Not likely. Miss Eosabella almost always 
promenades with us in the parks ; and, besides, 
how could we convince him of the falsehood, 
the treason, of the creature he enables to live 
with so much splendour?" 

" But is she false ? is she treasonable ?" 
" What matters either ? But she is both. 
I could say what I know . only I will not." 

*' Olympe, we will talk more about this 
another time. But are we quite safe now, do 
you think? Did you not hear something 
very like a footstep outside the door ?'* 



56 MADELEINE GRAHA^I. 

" But, no, it is impossible." 

" We are very fanciful in my country ; at 
least we used once to be, in the time of 
Shakspere and Lady Macbeth. And now I 
thought I heard a deep sigh, as if some person 
was very unhappy !" said Madeleine, who was 
contriving a means to get rid of her ^dsitor, 
and now affected to look startled. " Do you 
believe in guardian angels, Olympe ? Well, I 
really thought I heard my guardian angel give 
. a deep sigh." 

" Oh, what folly !" said Mademoiselle Olympe, 
but with visible alarm ; being, like most persons 
who have entirely emancipated their minds 
from superstition, very superstitious. 

" I dare say it is so. Still, Olympe, 1 wish 
you would go to your own bed to-night ! I 
should like to reflect on all you have said." 

" Good night, then, dear Madeleine." 

" Good night, my kind instructress ! Good 
night !" 

"What a splendid thing it would be," thought 
Madeleine Graham, left at last alone, " if one 
could only get to love a man who had plenty 
of money ! How nice it would be to conciliate 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 57 

tlie two views ! I should positively adore a 
man wliom I loved wlio had money 1 But 
this one is oldish and rather bald, they say ; a 
man of a cold, repulsive, almost of an insulting, 
character, whom one could not persuade that 
one loved for himself, from being aware that 
there was nothing lovable in him, and who 
would always be imagining his purse as- 
sailed. . Still, it is the difficulty of the task, 
after all, that makes the fun of it ! There 
would be no great wonder or merit in coaxing 
a young, vehement, Nouvelle Helo'ise sort of a 
lover into the belief that one loved him. But 
a man like this Behringbright . Baron Beh- 
ringbright, too ! After all, it is something 
even to be a German Baroness ! and even Pope, 
whom Miss Hortensia sets us to read for his 
fine morality, says, ' 'Tis good repenting in a 
coach-and-four.' I'll get Olympe to make in- 
quiries . and she already knows a great deal 
more than she has told me, I am sure. What 
a guy to believe in ghosts, too, and guardian 
angels, when she don't believe at all, I am 
sure, in the next world ; and although she is 
so fond, too, of playing at table-rapping when 



58 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

the Misses Sparx' backs are turned ! How 
queer, too, that this Behringbright man does 
not in the least believe in the woman upon 
whom he heaps all the treasures of his un- 
bounded wealth, according to Olympe ! Oh, 
what strange creatures men and women are ! . 
" Well, come, Miss Eosabella told us to go 
and sleep, and dream that we had our wishes. 
I will go to sleep and dream that . that . that 
this cold, repulsive, unbelieving moneyed man 
. that this young, ardent, enthusiastic lover 
. . . Good heavens ! I must be already 
dreaming . falling asleep awake ! It is impos- 
sible to conciliate the two. No ; I must be a 
rich man's wife, with no enjoyment of my life 
but what money can procure, or . or . I should 
like to see this Behringbright . this terribly 
rich man ! I wonder whether I could like his 
money well enough to . to . to sacrifice a 
fervent young lover to his riches . if I had 
one? 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 59 



CHAPTEE IV. 



CAUSES AND EFFECTS. 



'' I SAY, Fauntleroy . Vivian, my boy . who's 
Incognita ?" 

" jF/ios who r 

" Oh, you know who I mean." 

" You should ask Behringbright ; I dare say 
it cost him something handsome per annum to 
be in the secret. Let me see. A villa in 
Eegent's Park ; an open and a close carriage ; 
lots of servants ; a box at the opera ; all the 
spectacles, flower-shows, exhibitions ; Brighton 
and Paris at the proper seasons ; dress, jewel- 
lery, and other knickknacks : I should think 
she stands him in some seven or eight thousand 
pounds a year, this particular Anno Domini of 
ours," summed up Mr. Vivian Fauntleroy, at 
intervals of the puffs of a cigar which he was 
smoking, extended almost at full length on one 



60 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

of the divans of the smoking-room of the ~ 

Club, . or stay, as it is rather old-fashioned to 
leave blanks, let us call it the Dolce -Far-Niente 
Club. 

" Bless me ! And that's the tremendously- 
rich fellow . the millionnaire fellow, don't they 
call them? . that's so set his mind against 
being married for his money ; isn't it, Vivian ?" 
drawled another of the loungers, keeping his 
eyes closed, in the full beatitude of his narcotic 
enjoyment, like a Chinese in a stage of han(j. 

"Against being married for his money 1" 
returned Mr. Vivian Fauntleroy, wdtli a long 
emphasis on the w^ord. " One don't mind the 
other sort of affair, you know, for one's money ; 
it's fair bargain and sale. But Behringbright 
can't take kindly to the notion of being rated 
as a mere money-bag in so important and last- 
ing a business as matrimony ; and that's how 
he gives all the dowagers and Lady Claras the 
slip, and rushes free in the prairies 3'et, in spite 
of all the silken lassos tlirown at his neck." 

" He isn't at all a handsome fellow, and that 
is how he finds the women out, and what 
they're after," returned the drawler . the 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 61 

Honourable Francis Dundreary, M.P. for 
Slopsley, in Worcestershire, who to as a hand- 
some fellow . a most decidedly handsome fellow, 
if faultless features, a faultless moustache, and 
faultless tailors and bootmakers, can make a 
man so. 

"Oh, nobody cares for beaiif?/ now. The 
women are like everybody else . all for them- 
selves, and looking after the main chance ; and 
quite right too," observed a third speaker and 
smoker, the second son of a good family, who 
managed to cut a pretty decent appearance, as 
u single man, on five hundred a year ; but, of 
course, never dreamed of such an imprudence 
as matrimony upon an income of that kind. 

" I wonder the dowagers and Lady Claras, 
as you call them, can take any notice of a man 
like that. of no birth whatever,'' said Lord 
Eonald Macdonald, a Caledonian duke's ninth 
son, and with a portion accordingly; not to 
mention that he was endowed with all the 
extravagance and love of expense which might 
have become the head of the family, in case 
that dignitary had felt inclined to ruin him- 
self. 



62 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

*' No birth ! Why, how do you think he's 
alive then ?'* 

" Oh, nonsense ! you know what I mean." 

" Of course ; any fellow can tell what he 
means," softly ejaculated the Honourable 
Francis. 

" Well, whether he was ever born or no . I 
mean, whether he*s got birth or not . he*s a 
most tremendously rich individual, and he's 
quite in the right to think the fine ladies are 
after him chiefly for that . and to cut them, 
and take up with Incognita," said Mr. Vivian 
Fauntleroy, with unusual earnestness for him 
. an earnestness founded on unhappy ex- 
periences, for he had been jilted not so long 
before . poor fellow ! . for the sake of a man 
who had a good deal more money. In fact, 
Mr. Vivian Fauntleroy had liardl}^ an}', and 
had only been introduced into good society at 
all . and all manner of expenses he could not 
afford . by the brilliant success of a satirical 
novel he had written, and which ridiculed his 
best friends in such a delightful manner, that 
everybody read it and abused it. This 
advanced him, so that he was enabled to join a 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 63 

first-rate club, keep a horse and a natty little 
groom, and smoke Latakia, for one year on his 
own means ; all the rest of his time he lived on 
loans and the means of other people, on condi- 
tion that he rendered himself generally agree- 
able ; and the proper way to do that was to be 
generally malicious, and say all kinds of 
cutting, ill-natured, and unfounded things, as 
foreign to the poor man's own nature as to the 

reality of the questions he treated. 

* 

" Is Incognita . a . a nithe girl ?" said Mr. 
Dundreary. 

" She's a spanker. Didn't you see how she 
drove those horses ? I expected nothing but 
that she would have killed half a dozen people 
between Hyde Park Corner and her own de- 
lightful residence," said Mr. Yivian Fauntleroy. 

"I tried to keep up with her, to see wliere she 
was going, but she went ahead at such a horri- 
ble rate I could not keep pace with her at 
all !" spasmodically inteijected the Honourable 
Francis. 

"Would she have made you welcome, do you 
think, Mr. Dundreary . as, of course, it's only 
money she's at present attached to . in case 



64 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

you had been able to go the pace?'' said Mr. 
Vivian, with a bitter smile. 

" Aw . aw, I dare say ; Bebringbright's 
nothing particular, everybody knows, to doat 
upon." 

"Isn't he monstrously rich?" puffed in a 
man who, up to this time, had remained in an 
apparent state of insensibility, crouched in an 
armchair, with his feet mounted on the back of 
one before him. 

" As rich as a Jew. Some people say he is 
one," replied Mr. Vivian Fauntleroy, who, in 
point of fact, had some considerable occasion 
to know that Mr. Behringbright was as rich as 
a Jew. 

" But as generous as a Christian," inter- 
jected another somnolocutist, half opening his 
eyes, with a significant look in them, at that 
gentleman. 

" I don't know what you mean by a Chris- 
tian, now-a-days," said Mr. Vivian, very drily, 
after a pause. 

" I mean a man that lends you money when 
nobody else will," continued the remorseless 
sleeper-awakened. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 65 

Mr. Fauntleroy did not deign any comment 
on sncli a nonsensical observation. 

"I say, Yivian, what sort of a rich man 

is Behring what is the other part ? I 

never remember a man's name that don't sound 
as if one knew it . Behring^rzyy^ ? " 

" Behring^ny/^^f, Lord Eonald." 

" "Well ; what is he . Barringlight . ^what 
d'ye call him ? . A drysalter? " 

" A drysalter ! Perhaps . among the rest. 
Deals in everything, from a pin to an anchor. 
He is one of the greatest merchants this 
country ever produced . he and his brothers 
are. You don't mean to say, Lord Eonald, 
you don't know who George Cocker Behring- 
bright is ? " 

" Everybody knowths," lisped Mr. Dun- 
dreary. " How thilly of Macdonald to pretend 
not to. That would have done long ago, but 
it isn't the sort of thing now-a-days. Besides, 
isn't he a baron or something of that sort, 
Vivian ? " 

" Yes, but he wont be called so. It isn't 
his fault; it was his father's, who couldn't 
help being a baron, in consequence of a few acres 

VOL. I. 5 



66 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

he bouglit of the Holy Eoman Empire, I don't 
know how long ago. But he hates to be 
called 'Baron; 'yon can't offend him worse. 
He is Mr. Behringbright, 'pur et simjple, to all 
intents and purposes." 

" What a stz^pid fellow I " said Lord Eonald 
Macdonald, with an exceedingly liquid u^ to 
distinguish himself from the people who say 
" stoopid." ** If I were he, I should like, above 
all things, to be a baron, and to sink the 



*' Oh no ; he treads on Plato's pride with 
greater pride ! He's the kind of man that, if 
h^ can't be all, don't care to be an^i:hing. I 
suppose he wouldn't mind being a British 
peer ; but he don't care to be a Eoman baron," 
said Mr. Fauntleroy, rather enjoying the sur- 
prise of the Scotch Duke's ninth son. 

"Why don't he buy himself a peerage, then?" 
s^id a person who had not hitherto spoken, but 
was tranquilly inhaling his cigar in a remote 
corner of the chamber, and who had natural 
tendencies to sarcasm against the aristocracy, 
he being the representative of an exceedingly 
democratic Jjondon constituency, that derived 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 67 

its cliief employment and sustenance from 
manufactures that supplied aristocratic wants. 

" Buy a peerage, sir ! " exclaimed Lord 
Ronald Macdonald. 

" He wouldn't take tlie trouble. Elections 
are sucli a bore, and I don't suppose lie could 
manage a peerage under three or four regular 
votes," said Mr. Yivian. 

People laughed, and seemed gratified . 
particularly the member for the democratic 
constituency, who had set his heart on at least 
a baronetcy. 

There was now a pause, during which the 
curling vapours of the fumigation increased in 
volume, and floated in soft visionary mists 
high in the upper air of the divan. 

*' Behringbrighth's in the right to enjoy 
himself, since he can afford it so well," said 
the Honourable Francis, at last, with a feeble 
ya^vn. " But . I say . Yivian . Mr. Faunt- 
leroy . don't you think he's an ass to let that 
woman make such a tremendous noise and . 
all that. at his expense ? " 

*' He likes it, I suppose," said Mr. Vivian F. 

*' But isn't it scandalous ? Isn't it a 
5.* 



68 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

disgrace . ^in a well-regulated society like ours ? 
All very well for tlie Bois de Boulogne or the 
Champs Elysees . one don't expect anything 
better of the French. But among us I " 
remarked a man of British build, . short, 
thick, round in the stomach and head, but who 
was a terrible hand, in general, at asking 
questions, and was noted for the standing 
nuisance he was to Ministers, no matter of what 
politics or party, in Parliament . being what is 
called an Independent Member . of everybody 
and everything . reason and manners, not 
unfrequently, among the rest. 

" I think he must do it on purpose to affront 
people of condition who invite him to their 
houses," remarked Lord Eonald Macdonald, 
who had a tall, lean, highly intellectual and 
charitable sister to marry . the Lady Flora 
Diana; and knew that his mother, the 
dowager duchess, gave a good number of in- 
convenient parties on that account, to which, 
it is by no means improbable, Mr. Behring- 
bright was often invited. 

"Very likely," said Mr. Fauntleroy; per- 
haps a little ungratefully subjoining, "he is 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 69 

an extremely misantliropic, carping, dispa- 
raging sort of a man, and likes notliing better 
than annoying people that lie thinks want to 
take him in ; and his experience is snch that 
he believes that's the game with all the women." 

" Well, as he's such an ngly fellow," said 
the Honourable Francis 

"As he's such a humbug of an aristo- 
crat," said the popular-constituency repre- 
sentative 

"As he's such a d-^ d democrat," mut- 
tered Lord Ronald 

" As he's such an immoral character/'' said 
the extremely right-minded British Inde- 
pendent Member, who, a few months after, 
fell, by some mischance or other . by the 
wrong delivery of a letter, or something of 
that kind . into the jurisdiction of the two 
C's ; as they used to call the court where the 
Eight Honourable Sir Cresswell Cresswell once 
sat Ehadamanthus 

" I wonder you all care to bother about a 
chap like that. I never heard of his idnning 
the Derby; . hasn't a horse, I suppose, in the 
world worth describing as an animal of the 



70 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

kind ! What's the use, then, of croaking on 
about a humbug fellow because he's rich, and 
amuses himself by setting an impudent woman 
to drive what he daren't himself, I'll be sworn 
. ta pair of spirited horses round the Eing, or 
-^where is it ?" 

" I'll have a look at her to-moiTow, if she's 
out," said an interlocutor, who had not hitherto 
taken any part in the conversation. 

" Well, let's have done with him. It isn't 
very amusing, ragging a fellow when he's 
abthent. I like best teasing a fellow to his 
face ; then one can see how he likes it/' said 
the Honourable Francis. 

This seemed generally acquiesced in. The 
divan was rather tired of hunting on the trail 
of a fox that had only left his scent on the 
dewy grass, and didn't show out of cover. 

I do not, indeed, suppose that even another 
thought on the curling of the fume of a cigar, 
(of course, nobody dreamed of anything half so 
nice, in good society, as a short pipe) would 
have crossed people's minds concerning Mr. 
Behringbright . or Baron Behringbright, as he 
might have constituted himself, in right of 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 71 

three acres purchased of the Holy Eoman 
Empire, when there was a Holy Eoman Em- 
pire . if Baron, or Mr. Behringbright, had not 
at this precise moment entered the smoking- 
room of the Dolce-Ear-Niente Club. 



72 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



CHAPTEE V. 

GEORGE COCKER BEIIRINGBRIGHT, WHO MIGHT 
HAVE BEEN BARON BEHRINGBRIGHT IF ' HE 
HAD CHOSEN. 

I FLATTER Diyself, as tlie saying is . though 
probably, like most other people who say so, I 
flatter myself that I do not flatter myself . that 
I know as well as any of my brother, or even 
sister novehsts, what manner of man the hero 
of a romance ought to be ; and perhaps it would 
be enough for me to deny . as with great truth 
I can. that this romance is a romance, to be 
excused the necessity of pla^dng the Franken- 
stein to a suitable figurant of the kind on these 
boards. Even a great and ceremonious prince, 
of the ancicn regime, returning to Court so 
oppressed with laurels and the gout that he 
could hardly mount the great staircase of the 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 73 

Tuileries . wMch so many persons liave found 
it quite easy to slip down . albeit the Grand 
Monarque himself, all wig and waistcoat, and 
gracious smiles, stood ready to receive him . 
held the mayor of a certain town he passed 
through, excused for not firing a salute of 
twenty-one guns in his honour, on the score 
that there was none in the place. And inas- 
much as, moreover, my hero is not a hero, I 
may claim increased rights of exemption. But I 
should wish it to be clearly demonstrated that 
it is not for want of knowing better that I 
persist in describing persons and events as they 
actually were and came to pass. 

It may suffice for this purpose if I give a 
faint sketch of the properties which I know go 
to make up a personage of the nature omitted 
in this story. I know, for example, that the 
hero of a romance ought to be of a " noble 
stature ;" that is to say, something between a 
giant and a man ; or, to bring the notion to the 
level of the most ordinary capacity, of the aver- 
age height of a Eoyal Life Guardsman . blue 
or red, don't matter for the colour . dismounted 
from his charger, and employed in condescend- 



74 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

ing parley witli a nursery-maid and a per- 
ambulator. I know that he ought to be of 
" a pale, intellectual complexion ;" and that his 
hair should cluster in glossy masses of " raven 
blue-black " around his manly forehead; should 
define his scarlet upper lip, and, according to 
the present fashion, hang from his chin in a 
magnificent, Arab sheik-like beard to his waist. 
His eyes should be of a " rich hazel brown, fuU 
of fire and tenderness," excepting when he 
was sunk in deep melancholy over the reflection 
that he should not see the heroine of the story 
again for a good number of intervening chapters. 
He ought to be dressed in the best black broad- 
cloth from head to foot, save where a fine white 
linen shirt-front should be displayed, project- 
ing in graceful puffs over that tortured seat 
of sensibility, his breast . like the ornamental 
cut paper on a rusty fire-grate in summer. 
The wrists of this shirt ought to be uncom- 
monly long, though not so long as to conceal 
the superior length of the taper fingers. These 
taper fingers are, according to the modern 
novelist, the most indubitable proof of the 
hero's aristocratic descent ; for, 'tis said, it takes 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 75 

tkree generations of doing nothing to make an 
aristocratic liand ; and it is no longer per- 
mitted to establish the position without 
farther trouble by letting the nails grow too 
long to render any species of work possible . 
which was the right thing in the time of the 
great king alluded to ere while. Finally, I 
know that a genuine hero's boots should he of 
lustrous leather, and of the best Parisian make, in 
order that he may be a hero even to his valet 
tie chamhre . a race of people said to be more 
insensible than gravediggers themselves to the 
claims of exalted humanity over its fellows. 

Thus much to show that it is not through 
ignorance on the present writer's part, but 
through the necessity of painting an actual man 
as he actually is, that I introduce George Cocker 
Behringbright to the reader's notice, under 
outward presentments extremely unlike the 
heau ideal here liberally thrown in gratis. 

He was a man, I regret to 'say, very like 
other men who are not peers of this realm; 
which makes a great difference, of course, in 
everything. He was neither tall nor short, 
nor fat nor lean, but he had good shoulders, 



76 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

and stood stoutly on liis lower limbs, as if it 
would not be easy to knock him off them ; he 
had a head and face like a vast number of other 
heads and faces of British manufacture, which 
you may see every day, in any number, passing 
from east to west, or from west to east, as the 
case may happen, under Temple Bar ; thinking 
hard, but not otherwise meaning any particular 
harm to any person or thing. A head that 
was of a good size ; not too big, but with ample 
space in the upper region for the brains . a 
space perhaps becoming a little too conspicuous 
through the slightly grizzled and originally 
sandy brown, short-cut hair. For Mr. Behring- 
briglit had not fallen into the taste of the times 
for hirsute embellishment, and even his chin 
was as smoothly shaven as a grenadier's of His 
Majesty King Greorge III. Not that he was 
so old as to be necessarily bigoted as to his 
hair ; indeed, in spite of the opinions of friends, 
I doubt if he was quite forty yet. But it may 
be, through one of those mistakes into which 
we are all liable to fall, Mr. Behringbright 
thought he should look younger without so 
venerable an appendage as a long beard; forget- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 77 

ful that Fashion is always young, even when she 
powders her locks in complaisance to an old 
king, grown grey in the service. Or perhaps . 
and this is a good deal likelier than our other 
conjectures . he would not take the trouble to 
be of the mode, which, it is well known, in its 
earlier stages, requires a considerable recess 
from society before one can emerge with the 
rudiments of all one's future honours, in some 
luxuriance of growth, to receive the surprised 
and occasionally ironical congratulations of 
one's friends and intimates. 

To continue this authentic description : no 
sculptor would have selected Mr. Behring- 
bright's visage as a model of manly beauty. 
But many persons might have recognised in 
that face the unmistakable indications of 
manly good sense, calmness of nerve, and 
steadiness of judgment. George Behringbright 
looked the kind of man people would like to be 
near, if they were in a steamboat on fire in the 
middle of the Atlantic, or in the thick of a 
railway collision in a tunnel. There was some- 
thing at once so deliberate, firm, and tranquilly 
sagacious in the cut of the middle-sized, sober, 



78 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

projecting nose, the steadily-set lips, the high, 
linwrinkled, but easily compressing forehead, 
which looked as if it mastered great ideas at a 
crunch. Not that you would, if a skilful 
physiognomist, have accepted this man as a 
person possessed of decidedly comfortable hard- 
ness of mind or heart ; on the contrary, there 
was something in the turned- down corners ol 
the mouth, . in the sensitive and rather shrink- 
ing glance of those clear grey eyes . that spoke 
of one who had been capable of great sufferings, 
and might be capable of more, but would rather 
not put himself in the way of having to endure 
them. A man hlase by being ill-used rather 
than ill-using, but who had had enough of the 
sort of thing, and intended, if possible, to pass 
the remainder of his days peacefully. A man, 
nevertheless, whose remains of youth and 
original warmth and earnestness of the passions, 
. it was likely enough, . inclined him to wish 
to enjoy himself, having ample means, if money 
be the means, to that end. Heaven knows 
why this man had ever allowed his name to 
be sullied by its union w4th that of the daring 
and disgraceful creature whom the profligates 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 79 

and fools of that day had agreed to call 
Incognita. 

It would be a wonderfully long story to try 
and explain an anomaly so startling in the 
character of a sober London merchant of the 
nineteenth century, altogether to the satisfac- 
tion of the extremely rational, and of course 
unfailingly consistent, reader ; but Mr Behring- 
bright's personal history might, perhaps, throw 
some gleams of illumination on the subject, 
and therefore we may as well introduce a slight 
sketch of it in this place. 

George Cocker Behringbright was the eldest 
of the three sons of an immensely rich capitalist, 
who had risen, by all accounts, from notldng . 
mushroom like . under the sulphureous mists 
of the last great European war ; but who much 
more probably was descended, as he himself 
always would have it, from a diamond-merchant 
of Amsterdam of the same name, who, at the 
period of the real French Eevolution, thought 
proper to pass over into England with his 
treasures, and there turned them to an 
amazingly better account, in the way of bank- 
ing and loan-mongering. 



80 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

The son of this Amsterdam diamond-mer- 
chant . become English, like most of us, by the 
circumstance of being born in England . also 
married an English wife, who allied the some- 
what dull and lethargic blood of his ancestry 
with the Saxon-mettled and thoroughly native 
fluid in the veins of a Miss Smith, of Oaklands, 
in Surrey, whose father had also risen to a 
high rank in the moneyed aristocracy of the 
country by his own exertions. George Cocker, 
as I have before mentioned, was the eldest 
result of this alliance; and he was carefully 
trained, from his childhood upwards, in aU the 
family faiths and traditions, with the ^dew of 
his becoming in his turn, in the fulness of time, 
the head of the great hereditary mercantile 
firm which, under his sires, had held a foremost 
place among the richest and most powerful of 
the trading sea-kings of England. 

At the same time his father . or possibly 
rather his mother, since it is a kind of ambition 
that runs very strongly in the Smith family . 
was desirous that the son should be qualified 
for a higher position in "society" than the 
parents had ever been able to achieve, in so 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 81 

aristocratic a commercial country, by mere force 
of money alone. Mrs. Beliringbriglit wished 
that the representative of the house should take 
rank also as a gentleman, and become, perhaps, 
a Member of Parliament, and a person of 
consequence in the Legislature ; always, it may 
be, with an eye to business : for if money is 
power, so is power money, . in certain cases 
not unknown to political and financial inter- 
weavings even in these virtuous times of our 
own. 

Accordingly, George Cocker Beliringbriglit 
received what is called a first-class universit}^ 
education, but he did not exhibit the least 
liking or attraction towards the more exalted 
destinies in contemplation for him : on the 
contraiy, he continued of shy and reserved 
manners; spoke his mind honestly when he 
did speak, but abhorred speechifying and all 
other occasions of public and personal display ; 
neither did he ever exhibit any keen relish or 
profound perception in political matters, but 
rather disliked and shunned them, particularly 
when women talked about them, . and State 
policy Avas his mother's favourite hobby. She 

VOL. I. G 



82 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

was democratically inclined, as was natural in 
a Smith who intended her eldest son for a lord, 
and kept up a continual croak out of some of 
the newspapers on the faults of the administra- 
tion. On the other hand, Mr. Behringbright 
never pretended to any special airs of his own, 
but gave in to commerce, and very evidently 
took as hearty and sincere an interest in follow- 
ing in the steps of his ancestors, as if those 
footsteps had led to the clouds. 

I do not say what might have happened, 
considering the natural contrariety of humanity, 
if Mr. Behringbright had been commanded by 
his parents, and entreated by his family in 
general, to become what he made himself. He 
might very possibly then have turned his atten- 
tion another way; but as it was, even his 
mother was at last obliged to give him up as a 
hopeless case for political eminence, and to re- 
linquish her intention of sending him into Par- 
liament on the opposition benches, and thence, 
by an easy leap, into the Upper House. She 
gave him up as a person who was only born 
to sustain the commercial status of the family, 
and most determinedly exhibited his ancestral 



madp:leine graham. 83 

phlegm and perseverance in going the wa3's 
his ancestors had always gone. 

Upon this the Baroness . for such George 
Cocker Behringbright's mother had now con- 
stituted herself, in despair at her eldest son's 
stupidity . ^baroness, one may almost say, in 
her own right, for the intervention of her 
husband v/as not to be counted for much, and 
she wore the title on lier cards in no less de- 
fiance of him than of the Heralds' College of 
London . the Baroness Behringbright, who 
was a notable woman in all respects, and per- 
ceived that no better could be done, set to 
work in another direction, to regulate her 
eldest son's career to his advantage. 

Not a marrying man indeed, Mademoiselle 
Olympe ! How could you expect it ? Why, 
the poor man had alTeady been married once ! 

''Marie et hien marre, ma foiT as a great 
wit could not help observing of another party 
two hundred years ago, just as great wits of 
the present day cannot avoid running occa- 
sionally into the same " confluent small-pox '' 
of v/ords. 

" Marie et hien marred 



84 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

The Baroness's only brother had left an only 
(laughter, heiress to all his wealth, which was 
not very greatly inferior in amount to the 
accumulations of the Behringbright family 
itself. Nothing had all along annoyed the 
Baroness more than the notion of those riches 
passing out of her own family, to which she 
always believed it legitimately belonged. And 
now nothing could appear plainer sailing, or 
more directly pointed out by the finger of 
destiny, than that the eldest son of the rich 
Behringbrights should marry his cousin, the 
wealthy heiress of the Smiths. 

This was not so difficult an enterprise as to 
make a successful politician of a quiet, honest, 
kind-hearted young man, brave as a lion in 
one sense, timorous as a hare in another, and 
who could not, or would* not, make a speech 
in public for his life. George Cocker was still 
very young when his mother took him in hand 
this way : he was willing to oblige her in any 
way he could ; he was of a nature peculiarly 
open to feminine influences in all its details ; 
and in spite of his outward Dutch phleo-m, 
and the difficulty of stirring his passions alight, 
his soul was honeycombed with fire, and easily 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 85 

yielded sparks to the stroke, or even the touch, 
in those days, if subtly applied. Heaven 
knows what might have come of it, if the air 
had been admitted into that whole glowing 
subterrene, and fanned that hidden mass of 
igneous matter to a furnace glow ! 

Miss Abella Smith, the heiress, and Behring- 
bright's cousin, was not, however, exactly the 
kind of asrent to effect this result: and it is 
very possible Gr. C. Behringbright might have 
gone to his grave, like a great many other 
people, entirely ignorant of the mightier sup- 
pressed energies in his own nature, but for a 
series of events and consequences wdiicli make 
what is called among men, the Chances of Life, 
and among the supernals. Destiny. 

In point of fact. Miss Aoella Smith was a 
very common-place personage, and in no wise 
likely to light up a flame, disastrous or other- 
wise, in the human heart. If the whole truth 
must be told, she was particularly what the 
ladies o^dSS. plain . and, oh me ! how much they 
mean by the word ! . to look at ; weak and 
hot-headed internally, almost in equal pro- 
portion ; and, indeed, to say all, in point of 
temper, education, constitution even, a spoiled 



86 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

child, who only wanted the least possible mis- 
direction to become a wicked one. 

At the period, however, when he was first 
requested to court his cousin, George Behring- 
bright was of an age when it is said that no 
woman is absolutely displeasing. He had just 
left school, as it were, for he had made rather 
a serious business of acquiring information in 
his university career ; willing, as far as he pos- 
sibly could, to comply with the expectations 
of his family. He had mingled very little in 
society, and his mother took good care, while 
her projects were brewing, that no fascinating 
interloperesses should distract the attention of 
her son. Miss Abella was at least young, and 
had sufficient of womanly coquetry and pride to 
desire to overcome an indifference in a member 
of the opposite sex which it is possible she 
discerned. She played, therefore, a pretty 
strong card in the game. Habits of obedience 
to family authority were also adhesions of 
their continental extraction, which clung to 
the Behringbrights in their transplantation to 
the free and generous English soil, which it is 
well known suffers no slavery upon it ; not 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 87 

even tlie slavery of filial duty, and patient 
obedience to tlie commands which were deemed 
sacred in those foolish old patriarchal days 
when Jacob waited seven years for his bride. 
And to all this it must be added, that George 
Cocker in his ^^ounger days was as tlioroughly 
impregnated with the family notions on 
financial subjects as any other member of it, 
and fully perceived the propriety of keeping 
Miss Abella Smith's two hundred thousand 
pounds in it. He was a great deal more 
mercenary then, poor fellow, than he became 
at a subsequent period, when he knew the 
value of money better. 

Accordingly, the Baroness Behringbright 
was not doomed to failure in everything that 
regarded her eldest hope ; and in due course 
she had the extreme satisfaction of knowing 
that she had beaten a whole swarm of intriguing 
mammas and fortune-hunters, and of presiding 
over one of the most splendid marriage break- 
fasts ever given in May Fair, . the fashionable 
locality or ere Belgravia was, . in celebration 
of the union of that distinguislied heir of " one 
of our most wealthy commercial families, who 



88 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

have done so mucli to establish the mercantile 
greatness of this country on the highest and 
securest pedestals, with the beautiful and accom- 
plished heiress of the late excellent and esteemed 
Moydore Smith, Esq., and Co., of Toadmorton 
Street, and Groldchamber Hall, Wessex, many 
years M.P. for the East Eiding of the county 
of Eichmond." 

I do not suppose . at least, I never read of 
it . -that there was ever a liner bridal feast, 
even when an old Plantasfenet kins: wedded 
him to some damsel who brought him a pro- 
vince and a war for a dowry. The whole 
neighbourhood was made wretched for weeks 
afterwards by the splendour of the fete ; for in 
spite of all one's natural benevolence, it is not 
pleasant to see other people apparently super- 
latively happy. But when the bridecakes, 
silvered and towered up with all manner of 
chaste designs by Mr. Gunter, were distributed 
among the guests ; when the cold fowls and 
the ham, the only real eatable dishes, and all 
the other splendid indigestibles, were either 
devoured or removed otherwise ; wlien the 
tablecloths of white satin, flowered with silver, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 89 

were raised, covered with tlie stains of " wine 
and wittles," in tlie solemn words of the 
waiters who performed the ceremony, and 
wondered at the wastefulness of " nobs," who 
were not content with what would wash ; when 
the last bottle of fifty dozens of Clicquot's first 
brand had been drunk in the kitchen to the 
'ealth of the young pair just departed, by the 
hiccuping butler and a confused crowd of 
glaring-eyed other domestics, male and female, 
rejoicing over the termination of the fatiguing 
glories of that ever-memorable day, . ;there was 
still something to follow ; and Mr. and Mrs. 
George Cocker Behringbright had to live 
" happy and happy" together ever afterwards . 
if they could. 

But they couldn't. We have seen and said 
that Miss Abella Smith was a spoiled child 
and heiress. What that means in practical 
exposition, Heaven befriend those whose 
miserable doom it is to learn. There was no 
kind of selfishness, absurdity, headlong caprice, 
insatiable craving and croaking, of which that 
overwhelming heiress was not capable. Slic 
did not love her husband, but she persecuted 



90 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

him as if slie did. She seemed to consider that 
he also liad been created by Providence solely 
to wait upon her caprices, in common with all 
the rest of the animate and inanimate world. 
She had a notion, I believe, that the sun only 
rose and set because she required its light. 
She considered that her money entitled her to 
everything, and that no other being in existence 
had any rights or privileges but such as she 
could manage to dispense with. Blessed 
saints ! what a martyrdom she led Greorge 
Cocker Behringbright during a period of seven 
long, long, long years ; dating from the second 
day of their honeymoon, when she ordered him 
to buy her a nosegay of some pet hothouse 
flower of her fancy, and went into hysterics, in 
their travelling carriage and four, because he 
thought they had better not turn aside from 
their road to L^^ons and Ital}^ and drive 
seventy miles or so to the nearest great town, 
where they could hope to meet with rare 
exotics of the kind ! 

Mr. Behringbright was, as has been recited, 
even as a very young man, of much patience and 
self-control ; but his wife's inordinate exactions 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 91 

grew at last to disturb even liis resigned and 
pliilosopliical mood. It came to pass, tlien, one 
nnlucky day, that . although he had the finest 
of town and country houses, the most gorgeous 
of furniture, the most splendid of decorations 
of every kind and sort to his existence . he 
perceived he was not haj)py. He was very far 
from happy . he w^as miserable. There was no 
congeniality between his wife's tastes, manners, 
or occupations, and his own. They had not 
an idea in common. She was frivolous, heart- 
less . insipid in private intercourse beyond 
expression . far beyond the average run of 
things in domestic bliss. At the same time 
she was overbearing, insolent, abusive even, in 
her whole language and demeanour. Enormous 
as the portion of her wealth placed at her 
own disposal was, she managed to be extrava- 
gant beyond its limits; and yet there was 
nothing but discomfort and confusion in the 
gorgeous household. No one was happy in 
it ; no one thing in its proper place. Above 
all, this poor woman was bitten witli a very 
bad form of the Smith rabies, and was bent 
and determined, whatever it cost to her or 



93 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

hers, to become a leading member of fashion- 
able society. 

What torments, what mortifications, what 
days and nights of fatigue and joyless dissi- 
pation . what enormous exjDcnses, in fine, did 
George Cocker Behringbright undergo, toiling 
in the galleys of his senseless Cleopatra's de- 
termination to this efiect ! How did the un- 
grateful, fugitive waves indeed burn with their 
gold, as they strained up their Cydnus against 
all manner of baffling winds and gales, with 
sails spread vainly purple to the uncongenial 
and unfavouring skies, that rained pitilessly on 
them in return, and kept the crew perpetually 
in wet and steaming garments, suffering all 
manner of catarrhs and respiratory miseries ! 
It is quite impossible that anybody, who is 
allowed to eat a crust of bread in peace in a 
corner, can have any notion what a wretched 
life of it George Cocker Behringbright led, as 
an unwilling, unfit, every way indisposed, quiet, 
domestic, home-loving leader of ton, by his 
wife's decree ! 

He grew to hate it at last, and all about it, 
and to grow sulky, and to refuse to lift the 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 93 

oar, at whatever risk of the galley-master's 
lashing tongue ; and the beginning of a great 
contention was firmly established between the 
spouses, one of whom was the most obstinate 
and self-willed of all possible ignorant and 
egotistic individuals; the other, that formid- 
able sort of animal . a patient man driven 
beyond his patience. 

The performance advanced, of course, in 
complexity and stormy interest. Reality is as 
great a dramatist as Shakspere, and does not 
let her scenes flag. These cunningly-devised, 
artificial torrents of destiny come to no stand- 
still either, until the catastrophe is poured in 
a very natural-looking gush and overflow down 
the artfully-grouped rocks and chasms, into 
such fathomless deeps of foam and froth as 
Niagara itself exults in ! 

It is not to be denied that, besides the 
abounding elements of contention and rupture 
that had always existed in the diverse and 
opposed natures of the ill-matched pair, Mr. 
Behringbright had discovered in the interval 
that his wife was decidedly no beauty, and 
that, in by far the greater part of her proceed- 



94 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

ings, she exliibited the most disgusting want 
of good taste, good manners, and even of a 
decently good heart, which inexpressibly 
pained and repulsed his own. Alienation of 
course followed on these disillusions ; disputes, 
jealousies, separate apartments, rancorous 
feuds, friends interfering on all sides. But 
undoubtedly the main faults still continued on 
the wife's side . her own friends {mehercle I), 
even her lawyers, admitted it . up to 'the time 
when the sad discovery was made of that truly 
wonderful lapse from all virtue and honour 
and decency, on the part of Mrs. George 
Cocker Behringbright, which resulted in the 
shocking divorce case of which all of us who 
are permitted to read the papers are aware ; 
wherein the plaintiff was one of the wealthiest 
of London merchants, and the defendant a 
miserable Irish groom ! 

It is not a thing to be dwelt upon; but 
need we wonder so much now that Mr. Gr. C. 
Behringbright had continued for some good 
ten or fifteen years neither a bachelor nor a 
widower, but a person who was free to marry, 
and did not show the least sort of inclination 
that way, in spite of the blandishments of 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 95 

every kind showered profusely on the path of 
the niiUionnaire merchant ? 

Such Mr. Behringbright had become more 
than ever since his father's demise, although 
he had relinquished his wife's fortune to the 
uttermost farthing, to herself and her paramour, 
in breaking for ever the links of their alliance. 
He had apparently found a great solace and 
refreshment in accumulating riches upon the 
riches whose vanity he had learned' and known 
so long. Such had long appeared to be the 
principal object of his existence, and to that 
object he devoted all the powers and energies 
of his mind. To know that other people knew 
he was growing wealthier and wealthier every 
day, and admired and applauded him for it, 
had become his chief means of concealing from 
himself the hollowness of his existence . of all 
that he was doing and living for. The noise 
of a drum perhaps thus silences the convictions 
of the unfortunate who is condemned to beat 
it, and who is consoled by observing what a 
number of still more uncomfortable-lookinsr, 
yearning vagrants attend upon the dissonant 
uproar. 

We need no longer be surprised to know 



96 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

that tliis man of unbounded wealth fed and 
lodged and clothed himself as quietly as if he 
had been only that hapless pauper . of five 
hundred a year . one of his commentators at 
the Dolce-Far-Kiente Club. 

He had chambers in the Albany, over a 
square two yards of mignonette and nasturtiums, 
with a housekeeper who might have sat for 
Hecate. only that Hecate is nowhere stated 
to have snuffed ; and he generally wore a suit 
of coarse brown tweed, with a shabby hat . 
especially in summer, when almost every one 
wore a good one ; highlow boots with drab 
tops, and big mother-of-pearl buttons : and he 
carried an umbrella whenever the sky looked 
threatening ; that is, as often as not. 

Meanwhile, it is true that Mr. Behringbright 
kept up three fine mansions in the country : 
one for people to stare through ; another for 
his mother, the Dowager Baroness, to scold 
fifteen maids of all kinds of work in ; and a 
third for an occasional shooting-box, or any- 
thing else he thought proper. 

On the whole, I think, therefore, that tec 
need not wonder so much as Lord Eouald 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 9? 

Macdonald did, at a man of that kind of ex- 
perience showing no excess of delighted eager- 
ness to avail himself of the lavish overtures 
extended to him by "Society" to enter its 
enchanted precincts, and pluck again the 
gorgeous fruit he had already tasted and 
found of a species which intelligent travellers 
have informed people of less migratory habits 
grows on the borders of the Dead Sea. And 
I put the crown, I think, on my deductions, 
when I say that, considering all things, I do 
not see that ive need be exorbitantly astonished, 
however much we may be scandalized, at 
Mr. Behringbright's implication in the vagaries 
of outrageous Incognita herself. 



VOL. I. 



98 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



CHAPTEE VI. 

CORi^UMPERE ET CORRUMPI S^CULUM VOCATUR. 

Tacitus, ''De Mor.Gerr 

AND that's what YOU MAY CALL THE WAY OF 

THE WORLD. 

Free Translation. 

Of course, nobody speaks of a man's private 
affairs to liis face. Accordingly, when Mr. 
Behringbriglit entered the smoking-room of the 
Dolce-Far-Niente Club, the whole conversation 
about the go-ahead Lady Incognita of the Eing 
. which, in two senses, in her favour, might 
have been styled the Prize Eing . ceased. Had 
ceased, in point of exact fact, only that people 
were still thinking the subject over in their 
minds . such, at least, as thought at all ; which 
was a minority. By far the majority simply . 
smoked. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 99 

"Do you mean a cigar?" said Mr. Fauntle- 
roy, as Mr. Beliringbriglit seated himself beside 
liim, stretclied himself, and yawned a little ; . 
perhaps at the very sight of an elderly gentle- 
man opposite, who, acting on a supposition 
that he was a man of wit and vivacity . which 
he was at quarter sessions, in that part of the 
country where his estates lay . was the most 
insufferable bore in the Club . or in the world, 
indeed . and merited the name of a Social Evil 
quite as much as a good many persons of the 
feminine gender, for whom the politeness of 
the modern Midnight Kettledrum has invented 
the term. 

" Yes, and a glass of absinthe." 

"Bitters to the bitter!'* muttered Mr. 
Fauntleroy, with difficulty keeping his joke 
undertoned ; but he knew a great deal better 
than to lose a moneyed friend for a joke. On 
the contrary, he was all the while considering 
what he could say to oblige Mr. Behringbright ; 
meanwhile producing a richly-arabesqued straw- 
paper fold of cigars . in the original Turkisli 
wrapper, as they came from the Sultan's manu- 
factory, you may believe . from which he 
7. :» 



100 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

requested him to select, summoning a fine 
gentleman in an imposing suit of gorgeously- 
hued plusli, with a wink of his little finger, to 
do the other part of the attendance. 

" Thank you.. What kind are they ?" 

" You know I deal only in the mildest 
articles of all sorts . everywhere but in the 
'Deadly-Lively'!" replied Mr. Vivian, naming 
a celebrated, but since defunct, Eeview; . 
defunct, at least, in the sense in which the 
great Lord Chesterfield (he of the maxims 
which have formed so many fine gentlemen) 
in his advanced age observed to a friend in a 
similar predicament, "You and I have long 
been dead . but let us keep the secret." How- 
ever, no living Eeview can take ofience under 
the circumstances ! 

" I know you do ; but I like coarse tobacco. 
Haven't you any Trinchinopoly by you ?" said 
Mr. Behringbright, speaking as heavily and 
clumsily as he could, on purpose, in the 
observation. 

" The brute !" tlioiiglit Mr. Fauntleroy ; but 
he said, *' My dear sir, no ; I should as soon 
think of smoking oakum." 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 101 

'' Field n(/ oakmn, you mean, don't you?" 
Ills interlocutor rejoined, with an innocent ex- 
pression of query, for Mr. Behringbriglit was a 
cynic of the school of Democritus of Abdera, 
if he was a cynic at all, and did not laugh 
much at his own good things. 

Sir Solomon Comynplace made up for that 
reticence, however. He burst into a guffaw 
you might have heard at the Fountains (by 
courtesy) in Trafalgar Square, from where he 
sat . no great distance, certain]}^ " Ha ! ha ! 
ha ! Capital . capital ! That's what I call a 
good hit . a regular oner, Fonty, my boy ! 
How are your digesters after it ? . By-the-bye, 
Mr. Behringbriglit, have you heard my last ?" 

"No ; I should like to,'' returned that gentle- 
man, in the same equable tone ; adding respect- 
fully to the waiter, who now approached, " A 
meerschaum of some good flavoury tobacco, Mr. 
Mullon, if you please." 

Mr. Behringbriglit was not one of those 
frequenters of public establishments of the 
kind who believe that all waiters are christened 
John or George, according to the caprice of 
the godfather addressing them. 



102 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Meanwliile, it had been Mr. Vivian Fauntle- 
roy's turn to laugh at Sir Solomon Comyn- 
place's ''oner,' which he did very heartily; 
because Sir Solomon, though a rich landed 
proprietor, never lent money in town, whereas 
the rapper of the repartee (/ave it, under that 
form, both in country and town. " How do 
you like yours . come, now? Mr. Behring- 
bright would be glad to have your lasf^ Sir 
Solomon ; and I'm sure I join in the request. 
Bo let's have it." 

" Mr. Behringbright didn't mean tJiaf. I 
know what he meant !" said Sir Solomon, 
pettishly. *' How you do giggle, Mr. Fauntle- 
roy ! . like some great girl just out of long- 
clothes . I mean, in frocks and trousers, with 
a hoop, and all that.. It's about the garotters, 
you know, Mr. Behi'ingbright ; a capital 
thing l" 

"It must be, if you extracted fun out of 
them, worthy to be your last. Sir Solomon," 
the gentleman rej)lied, very quietly. 

This conversation took place, of course, ever 
so long ago; but, as the system of catching 
vermin, fattening them, and then shaking 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 103 

them out loose in the barns, has been in vogue 
for some time, it was not an anachronism, Mr. 
Critic ! 

" Eegular fun, I tell you ! It's in the form 
of a conundrum." 

" Is it?" said Mr. Behringbright, and his jaw- 
did rather fall at the notion. In reality, can 
there be a greater nuisance in society than 
being set a puzzle when you want to be quiet, 
and not to think even about anything worth 
thinking of? 

"Yes: a first-rate one, though. Would you 
like to hear it ?" 

" I can't help myself, if you ivill set it me, 
Sir Solomon," replied the victim, mournfully. 
" But Vivian here, who is so quick-witted at 
everj^thing, will have to guess it for you." 

" I shall charge handsomely, Sir Solomon, 
if I do," the latter gentleman said . " by 
the hour, in fact; so mind it isn't very 
difficult." 

" Ha ! ha ! ha ! by the hour 1 The way 
they charge on Hampstead Heath !" vocife- 
rated Sir Solomon. Decidedly the laugh was 
with him on this occasion, and against Mr. 



104 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Fauntleroy, who flushed scarlet . but speedily 
rallied. 

"Do you usually take asinustrian exercise, 
Sir Solomon, when you are airing your wits ?" 
he inquired. 

" Never mind. Sir Solomon ; let us have the 
conundrum," good-naturedly interposed Mr. 
Behringbright. 

" You shall, my boy ! It's this," said Sir 
Solomon, drawing nearer on the divan cushions, 
where they all sat like a group of enchanters 
over a fumigation, to the favoured individual, 
while an indignant glance seemed to exclude 
Mr. Y. F. from any share in the advantages. 
There is nothing, be it noted, your flingers of 
sarcasm at others like worse than the ball back 
again, as hard as it was thrown. " ^^'^/T be 
continued, wdth the usual italicized emphasis 
of a professional conundrum-maker . ''why 
ought the College of Siirgeoiis to meet and change 
the name of one of the principal arterial com- 
munications of the human hoclg ?'' 

Mr. Behringbright shook his head hopelessly, 
and fumbled in his pocket for a piece of paper 
to light his meerschaum. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 105 

"Give it up?" 

"No, /don t!" said Mr. Fauntleroy, with 
convulsive eagerness ; for, after all, there is 
something quite irresistible, in the smell of the 
burned bacon-rind in the trap of the conun- 
drum-maker. We all like to show our parts 
by finding out his . and so fall into it. 

"What is it, then?" 

Mr. Vivian Fauntleroy, like most other per- 
sons of particularly brilliant talent, thought ten 
thousand explanations in a moment, but not 
the right one among them all. 

" I'll give it up . unless you mean that the 
carotid artery ought to be re-called i\\Q(/aroffed 
artery ?'' then queried Mr. Behringbright, wdio 
was not a person of particularly brilliant 
talent. 

" Ha ! ha ! ha ! Yes, yes ; but why don't 
you laugh, Behringbright ? Ha ! ha ! ha ! 
Why, can't you even see a good thing when 
it's set before you ? Ha ! ha ! ha ! why even 
Fauntleroy laughs, who's envious, and grudges 
everybody's good things." 

"So I do, Sir Solomon . everi/hodys but 
yours r 



106 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" It's very good," said Mr. Behringbright, 
still with perfect gravity, but with a quietly 
rebuking glance at Mr. Fauntleroy, who was 
evidently getting rude. " Original, of course ? 
I'm only asking for Vivian's benefit ; it may 
be of use to him next time he dines out . and 
he likes to be original. But I hope none of 
us will be called upon to see the joke in its full 

beauty as we are toddling home at night 

Eh?" 

This latter exclamation was occasioned by 
Mr. Y. F. suddenly interposing his hand be- 
tween Mr. Behringbright's and one of the jets 
of a gas-lamp, which he had drawn down on 
the pulley, with a view apparently to light a 
paper medium at it, which he had drawn from 
his pocket, for his meerschaum. 

" Why, you are going to burn a billet-doux, 
no doubt ! Downright sacrilege ! Evidently 
a female paw. What are you thinking of, Mr. 
Behringbright ?"' 

" Ah, yes, so it is, . not a billet-doux, how- 
ever; not exactly all treacle and honey; a kind of 
epistle I don't relish much, however sweetened 
up for the palate. . An anonymous one." 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 107 

" Anonymous !" I dare say I could tell 
you the name if I saw the handwritmg," said 
Mr. Fauntleroy, who besides an inexhaustible 
fund of curiosity in other people's affairs, 
j^rided himself on being as knowledgeable in 
everything scandalous and improper about town 
as the devil-on- two-sticks himself, shifting the 
scene from Madrid to London. 

" Look at it, then : if it is a secret, it's one 
confided to me without my knowledge or con- 
sent ; but it's only worth burning to light 
one's pipe." 

Mr. Vivian Fauntleroy took the paper 
eagerly, and not only scanned the caligraphy, 
but in a very brief glance mastered the con- 
tents. It was no additional difficulty for him 
that it was written in the French language, 
which of course, as an original English novelist, 
and also with a view to a di^^lomatic situation, 
he carefully studied. 

" Why, it's a regular bonne foriiuie, no 
doubt ; allow me to congratulate you," he 
observed, laughing as he read. 

"A bonne fortune? how do you mean? 
Don't you see it's altogether an attack on that 



108 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

. that poor stupid girl, who is making such a 
noise just at present, because there's nothing 
else happening, in the parks ?'' 

"I see that it says that the writer has it in 
her power, and is perfectly willing, to expose 
to the best, the noblest, the most generous of 

men " 

" Spare my blushes, my good fellow !" 
" When I see them. . To the best, the most 
generous of men, . the incomparable perfidies, 
the infidelity without examj)le, of the most 
ungrateful, the most lost, the least-Avorthy-of- 
consideration woman in the world; who 
astonishes the same by her exhibition without 
pudeur every day, among the nobility and 
greatness of this virtuous England, whom she 
scandalizes as well as the main beneficent cause, 
by the splendour of her iniquity ! I see all 
this ; but I see also that the writer appoints a 
place where to make her revelations; states 
that she is permitted occasionally to accompany 
a most lovely and interesting youtlifid lady 
. her charge and pupil . to the French plays 
at the Theatre of Saint Jacques, as the nearest 
opportunity to bring the language and correct- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 109 

ness of the Parisian phraseology to the ears of 
her pupil. And I see that she will be there 
next Friday, and that the number of Jier box is 
given, if Monsieur requires any further eluci- 
dations of a mystery which ought to be mortal 
to the generous confidence he reposes in the 
detestable Incognita !" 

"Well, what of all that?" said Mr. Beh- 
ringbright, who looked at the lively and sar- 
castically-smiling man about town, with even 
more than customary seriousness and sim- 
plicity of meaning in his own eyes. 

" Oh, nothing particular ; you go, of 
course r 

" I know the night, at all events, and the 
box is Number One, and I shant forget that 
any more than other people ; so there's no rea- 
son why I shouldn't light my pipe with the 
communication," said Mr. Behringbright, suit- 
ing the action to the word. 

" Well, I own I myself should have some 
little curiosity to know the worst that can be 
said about this extraordinary creature, who is 
shaking llotten Row from its propriety," said 
Vivian, eyeing Mr. Behringbright, and won^ 



110 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

dering how far he durst venture in that direc- 
tion ; for although he had so confidently given 
his auditory a few minutes before almost statis- 
tical figures on the subject, he really knew very 
little more than other people concerning the 
relations alleged to exist between the million- 
naire and the driveress of the celebrated ponies 
in the silver harness. 

" / haven't : I know the worst that can be 
said about her," Mr. Behringbright replied, 
drawing his first puff of consolation. 

" Somebody must be at a dreadful expense 
with her." 

" Somebody is." 

" And don't you think, sir, . I put it to you 
as a member of this community, sir, . as a 
British citizen, sir, . as a subject of Queen 
Victoria, sir, living in the nineteeth century, 
sir !" began the extremely right-minded 
British Independent Member . when he was 
let down rather flat by Mr. Behringbright's 
sliding in the calm and unobtrusively querent 
monosyllable." Yes ?" 

" ' Yes', sir ! . Do you mean to tell me, sir," 
the right-minded British Independent Member 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. Ill 

resumed, after a moment's pause, and evidently 
lasliing himself up to a high foam of eloquence, 
" that any man, or person, or thing, . however 
rich, however wealthy, however endued with 
the best gift of fortune and of successful 
mercantile speculation . that any person what- 
ever, I repeat, no matter what his qualifica- 
tions . has the right to insult the whole British 
nation, sir, individually and collectively . I 
repeat individually and collectively, . from the 
proudest peer of the realm down to the hum- 
blest crossing-sweeper " 

" An Englishman's house is his castle : I 
grant you that," said Mr. Behringbright, 
tranquilly smoking on, but contriving to thrust 
the observation into the cataract of words, like 
a boy's stick under Niagara, during one of 
the orator's gaspings, either for breath, or 
some accumulative expression of his Demos- 
thenic emotions. 

" You may have personal reasons of your 
own, Mr. Behringbright !" the orator now 
thundered, exasperated at the general laugh 
that followed on the millionnaire's interposed 
political truism. 



112 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" Of course, if I liave jpersonal reasons, 
they would be my own !" that gentleman now 
observed, but with a sudden flash in the calm 
grey eye, and a brightening colour on the 
cheek, which denoted that the Saxon Smith 
within him was rather getting the upper hand of 
the descendant of the Amsterdam Dutchman. 
He concluded, however, relapsing into his 
usual phlegm, . 

"And I hope other gentlemen wiU allow 
them to remain exclusively so. Only this 
much I will say, Mr. Eibblesdale, in addition : 
that people's motives are sometimes better than 
their actions; and that when the Spartans 
made their slaves drunk before their childi'en, it 
was not to teach them to indul^ce in inordinate 
vinous potations " 

" Bravo ! bravo ! . Gad, there's a moral even 
for Incognita's doings !" roared out a really 
hearty, wholesome, red-and-white Sir-Eoger- 
de-Coverley-looking elderly gentleman, with 
county M.P. written on him from head to 
foot, from a corner, " Gad ! if I didn't always 
think so, when I knew who was at it, though 
I couldn't quite find out at first, either." 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 113 

" Corae, all of us, there's enough concerning 
this magnificent Urganda the Unknown of our 
new Amadis of Gaul !" said Mr. Fauntleroy, 
who saw that his patron was looking seriously 
grim and displeased ; a mood in which he was 
to be respected ; " let's talk of the new sjoecu- 
lation, Behringbright ; you'll be at the Theatre 
Michel, won't you, on Friday night ?" 

"AVhat should I go for? . to listen to a 
Frenchw^oman's abuse of another that isn't ? 
Is it worth while, do you think ?" Mr. Behring- 
bright replied, easing off his indignation in a 
series of rapid pufis, that perhaps transferred 
the sentiments in his soul into the bowl of his 
pipe, for it glowed up like a red-hot coal. 

" Oh, stop now, softly ; you are not quite 
such a young beginner as all that, Mr. Behring- 
briglit ! Odds my life ! I shouldn't a bit wonder 
but what some French gouvernante or another, 
allured by the glorious renown of the Uherality 
of Incognita's millionnaire, has a project in 
hand to betray some innocent young beauty 
confided to her charo:e !" 

" Good heavens ! you don't think so ?" ex- 
claimed Mr. Bchringbriglit, now turning quite 

VOL. I. 8 



114 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

sickly pale, and staring at his vivacious 
illuminator with an extremely startled ex- 
pression. 

" Just the thing I should expect." 
Mr. Behringbright's face grew scalding- 
hot for a moment . then very much paler than 
ordinary again. 

" I shall go to Michel's on Friday evening," 
he said, at last, wdth an apparently painful 
effort at forming the resolution. " Thank you, 
Vivian, for putting me up to this . this bonne 
fortune, I think you call it ! God bless me !" 
he continued, in a sort of muttered reverie 
rather than to his hearer, " I didn't mean such 
a horror as this ! The Spartans never made 
their slaves drunk before the women, I sup- 
pose, since that is the way they take example ! 
But I'll bring one of them to justice," this 
confirmed misogynist concluded, " if I find 
her out in such a devilish piece of mischief as 
this !" 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 115 



CHAPTER VII. 



THE UPPER FALLS. 



"I WONDER what it is Mademoiselle Loriot 
lias so much to say to Madeleine !" said Miss 
EosabeUa Sparx, surveying the pair, pupil and 
Parisienne instructress, from the window of 
the schoolroom, as they walked arm-in-arm, 
apparently in earnest conversation, in the 
enclosure of the grounds. 

" She tells me that she wants to polish her 
off completely in her French, before she leaves 
at the end of this quarter," said the eldest 
Miss Sparx, who, on matters of business, was 
rather rational, and used vernacular phrases. 

" And I think she will manage it," said Miss 
Eosabella, drily ; "only I don't think I would 
have too much of it, sister Susannah, if I were 
you, while I am away at Captain TroUer's 
mother's at Fulham. I don't half like that 

8.2 



116 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

woman ; and if anything should happen, you 
know what ruin and disgrace it would bring 
upon the school." 

" Oh, what could happen ? You had better 
not go, dear, if you think anything would ! 
And I am sure I don't know what you want 
going among that Captain Troller's friends !" 
said Miss Sparx, entering a feeble protest 
against things in general. 

" Perhaps not, Susie dear ; only I received 
an invitation, and have accepted it," said the 
youngest sister, in a coaxing way. 

Eosabella Sparx was a clever woman; but 
even the cleverest of us like to be sometimes 
happy. 

"You shouldn't, dear . at least, until the 
regular partnership is dissolved. AVhat a pity 
you mud marry, and go on this visit !" said 
the eldest sister, with a vague consciousness 
of impending destiny. 

" Pho ! nonsense ! nothing will happen if 
you attend to my advice while I am away. I 
don't think you need mind about having the 
tile put on the out-washhouse, although we are 
bound to it by our lease ; but do take care of 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 117 

the girls, Susan. I am very glad that 'Made- 
leine is going so soon . and I really think it 
would be best if Mademoiselle Olympe left the 
school before I did." 

"Oh, why so? She knows French so 
well !" sighed Miss Sparx. 

"For that very reason," rather absently 
observed Miss Rosabella ; but at that moment 
the little prim under-housemaid of the estab- 
lishment entered with a small but handsome 
bouquet of flowers, which she tendered to 
Miss Eosabella with a significant smirk, 
and the observation, " With Captain Troller's 
compliments. Miss Eosabella !" and everything 
else was forgotten in examining, smelling, 
savouring to the heart's core those wretched 
flowers. Women are so foolish ! 

I am of opinion that the acute and far- 
seeing Eosabella Sparx (in what concerned 
other people) would have been still less satisfied 
with the extremely friendly and confidential 
relations existing between Miss Madeleine 
Graham and the French governess in that per- 
fected Gymgynoecium, if she could have over- 
heard the conversation which was taking place 



118 MADELEINE GRAHAM, 

at the^ moment between the attached Olympe 
and her favourite pupil. 

" But . wont he think it . dreadfully odd?'' 
Miss Graham was remarking, in a rather agi- 
tated undertone, to her affectionate and 
judicious adviser. 

"Why should . he ? . wdiy should he? . ^I 
ask myself, I ask you, I ask everybody. I 
proffer him a good counsel . an avertissement 
. which, from my relations with Madame 
Millefleurs, celebrated modiste of Paris, resi- 
dent in London, I may be supposed capable 
to communicate without criminality. You 
have nothing to do with it ; you are my 
pupil; your riches parens wish to have you 
every advantage. We have a box entirely to 
ourselves at the Comedie Frmigaisej transported 
to this capital by an entrepreneur of obliging 
genius, who wishes the English people to 
survey his national di'ama in the original. 
Who should wonder? . who should hold up 
his hands ? And how are you in any way 
compromised, I ask you ? If it is anybody, it 
is I . it is I alone ! And I explain to him 
that, touched with the illustrious generosity of 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 119 

his sentiments, I cannot support to see liim 
made tlie victim of a perfidious woman who 
derides his benefits !" 

" But will he not wonder to see me there 
with you and nobody else ?" 

" Let him wonder ! What matters how 
much he wonders if he . what you call it ? . 
if he falls over head, ears, in love with the 
charming Madeleine ? " 

" I don't see how it follows that he will, 
Olympe." 

" It is that you do not look in the looking- 
glass that I look you in." 

" But are you sure that he will not think it 
very queer of me ? . very bold and strange, you 
know ?" 

" How so ? What have you to do with it ? 
You go to the play in quality of my eleve . 
nothing more." 

" Yes ; but then . should I go with a . a 
lady . who pretends to know all about Incog- 
nita?'' 

" Leave to me to explain everything, without 
the least concern of yours ! Do you think I 
am not aware it is an honourable matrimony 



120 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

we propose, to secure legitimate claims to tlie 
enjoyment of so vast a wealth ? Is it creatures 
of a moment we propose to be, like this 
unhappy Incognita, who is an air-balloon of a 
young child, which mounts to the sky, only to 
collapse and fall to the ground at the first touch 
of the damp ?" 

*' Take care, then, what you do, Olympe, or 
you might get me into a horrid mess too. I 
own I don't half like it, when I think of it. 
Papa wouldn't approve of it, I know, and 
mamma would be quite frightened. Still, I 
shall have to go home so soon if I don't tiy at 
something, and I would rather be married in 
England. . But don't you say novj, besides, he 
is a widower ?" 

" It is true : I concealed the most disaorree- 
able of the situation to the last. Xo ; he is 
not a widower, but he is tant soit jjeu as good 
. he is a divorce : he cannot reproach you wdtli 
his wife . which always they can otherwise !" 

" The one before me, you mean, don't you ?" 
said Miss Graham, rather drily. 

" And we will not concern ourselves about 
the one after me, if such a misfortune should 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 121 

arrive," said Mademoiselle, facetiously. " Ah, 
quel plaisir . what a satisfaction . it is, to 
avenge ourselves upon men ! After my treat- 
ment by Camille. my beloved Camille . there 
is nothing I do not think to myself to owe the 
whole human race !" 

"He behaved very unhandsomely to you, 
poor dear," said Miss Graham, trying to utter 
the commiseration so as to provoke -a^s little as 
possible the fluent reminiscences of her friend. 
But precaution was of no use. 

" In the event . in the end . but, ah ! how 
happy we were, exhausting the torrents of a 
never- wearying sentiment, until he found out 
by an unhapp}^ accident I had no money !" 
continued Mademoiselle Loriot. " Up to a 
certain point I had persuaded him that I was 
ric/ie ; almost had I induced him to believe 
that I was the young immense fortune whose 
education I superintended ; . obliged therefore, 
by the circumstances of such a position, to a 
clandestine correspondence and interviews only 
. which accounted for all. Ah ! to what extra- 
vagances does a love i'or one moment not 
authorized by society drive us ! . Until that 



122 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

unhappy discovery, what praises did he not 
heap upon me for my preference of the intoxi- 
cation of a delicious sentiment to every motive 
of interest, every concern for the parvenu 
views, the mercenary susceptibihties, of a 
family which aspired to take rank among the 
loftiest exaltations of the Second Empire, based 
on material motives and interests only ! Ah, 
what a dreadful scene when he discovers all ! 
I remember . my heart remembers, like the 
echoes of a tomb ! I meet him in the Jardin 
Mabille, because that, of all places in the world, 
is the least where a young lady, well educated, 
of a certain rank, is to be dreaded to be found. 
What father, of the highest respectability, 
however animated by a restless suspicion, 
would seek for us there ? Alas ! it is in one of 
the most delightful bowers of that Garden of 
Armida, remote, as far as we can procure our- 
selves, from the intrusive scent of tobacco, that 
we are seated, in a pause of the dance, ex- 
changing vows of eternal fidelity, when the 
agent of the police surprises us, with his detest- 
able accusation of me as a person who has 
forged letters, and expressions of the devotion 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 123 

of a passionate emotion on the part of a young 
simpleton altogether innocent, . incapable of 
descending, I mean, from the avide self-love of 
her position as the daughter of a financier, who 
aspires to the vulgar elevation of a wife of some 

count or duke of the Second of December 

To ascend, I should say rather . it is my word 
. to a height of so noble a wing, so full of an 
abandonment of egotistic motives, so. altogether 
beyond praise !" 

" You were found out, were you, before you 
could regularly entrap the greedy fellow ? A 
regular fortune-hunter, I suppose?" said Miss 
Graham, who could not see herself . as the 
stage phrase runs . in the fac-simile character 
placed before her, or she might not have been 
so severe upon it. 

"By an unhappy mistake, in the con- 
fusion and hurry of my toilette for the 
Jardin (it is supposed I am going to the 
Innocents for devotion), I leave a fatal letter 
on the table, of which a femme de chawbrCy 
my enemy, possesses herself to my destruc- 
tion." 

*' It is a stupid sort of thing to write letters. 



124 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

I don't intend ever to write letters if I can help 
it," said Madeleine. 

Conld she have foreseen lohat letters she 
should write ! . loltat destruction they would 
entail ! 

No more was said at present. The school- 
bell rang for tea, and no one w^as expected to 
be absent from that solemn muster round the 
smoking twdlight urn. 

The next day Miss Eosabella went on her 
visit to her intended's relations . his mother 
and sister ; who were under strict injunctions 
to be pleased with her, but did not well know 
how, as a considerable portion of their income, 
and all their enjoyments in life, depended upon 
keeping their brother unmarried. But in good 
truth it was like the Discreet Princess turning 
her back for a few hours on her sisters, shut 
up albeit they were in a like Tower- without- 
an-Inlet ! Hardly was Eosabella gone (she 
w^ore one of the prettiest bonnets, I tliink, \ 
ever saw ; wdiite chip, trimmed with a shim- 
mering of lilac feathers and lace and flowers, 
like an April garden) than Mademoiselle Loriot 
hastened with her little petition to Miss Sparx 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 125 

. eldest, not wisest, of the daughters of her 
father and mother. To-morrow was Made- 
moiselle's fete-day, she explained, with touch- 
ing sensibility, venting itself in a shower of 
tears as she spoke ; a day which she should 
scarcely think a year had elapsed, unless she 
was allowed to celebrate with a little rejouis- 
sa?ice cle famille. Uh Men, her aunt, Madame 
Millefleurs, celebrated artiste of Paris and 
Londres . in brief, an artiste in embellishment 
of the most recherchee of the Arcade Whirling- 
ton . she arrives once more from that beautiful 
city of her (Mademoiselle Olympe's) tenderest 
souvenirs ; and she demands with an extreme 
solicitude to see her beloved niece, td spend 
one heureuse soiree with her, and tell her all 
the news of the family. It is in the name of 
the fondest ties of family, so respected in 
England, that Mademoiselle demands permis- 
sion to go to see her aunt to-morrow, to inspect 
all her beautiful articles of Paris of the first 
luxury ; and she promises herself to lead with 
her her favourite pupil, Mees Graham, with the 
end to bestow upon her the whole nomenclature 
of the Parisian boutique dc toilette. Alas ! she 



126 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

departs so soon ; when shall she have another 
opportunity ? 

Now, the eldest Miss Sparx was of her own 
nature the most inoffensive, unsuspicious 
British woman it is possible well to imagine. 
She had her weak points certaiuly ; she be- 
lieved, for example, that she understood 
Botany ; and as she had several hundred shells 
neatly arranged in three drawers, on pale-green 
paper, to represent the ocean, she knew she 
understood Conchology. But on the whole she 
was a specimen of an almost extinct species of 
her genus, we fear, which, knowing no harm, 
feared none ; and in spite of all Miss EosabeUa's 
w^arnin^s and cautions, she really and truly be- 
lieved that Mademoiselle Loriot was simply ani- 
mated by a good-natured desire to bestow the 
finishing touches to perfection on her favourite 
pupil, and procure her at the same time a little 
pleasing feminine amusement in the inspection 
of an importation of Parisian knickknacks. 
More than this kindly British conviction. Miss 
Sparx had felt rather snubbed and presumptu- 
ously called to attention by her younger sister, 
and she felt an irresistible inclination to exhibit 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 127 

some signs of free will and action accordingly, 
in a reverse manner to that enforced ujDon her, 
in that sister's absence. The divines are cer- 
tainly right, and there is a natural tendency 
in human nature to go the way it is ordered 
not to ; so that even their sign-posts point so 
often over grass-grown and desolate roads ! 

" I don't mind giving you your holiday. 
Mademoiselle ; but if you take Madeleine on 
the excursion, it must be in the morning," she 
kindly acquiesced, on these considerations. 

*' But my cousine will not be at home in the 
morning ; she returns fatigued from the pur- 
suits of her commerce only in the evening, to 
a tranquil cup of . what you call it ? . a strong 
green tea!' 

"Your cousin! I thought you said your 
aunt?'' 

"It is that I am a foreigner, and do not 
understand the difference." 

""Well, but I wont have Madeleine out 
after dusk," said Miss Sparx, resolutely. 
" And I don't know that Eosabella would let 
her out at all without some one . some one 
else with her." 



128 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" Ah, it is an empire of the most unusual, 
to reign also in our absence !" sneered 
Mademoiselle, judiciously ; adding coaxingly, 
" And Madeleine has asked it of me as the 
greatest favour, without which I should not 
consent . merely to give her satisfaction. For 
it is of a necessary diplomacy, Madame is 
aware, to infuse the best reports of our school 
in the city, commercial and rich, whither she 
returns. But after ditsh ? Oh, no, no, no ! 
Bush lasts till quite night now. We shall 
return, at latest, at nine." 

Mademoiselle Loriot knew that it would be 
very easy to miss the omnibus; hazardous, 
perhaps, but possible, to fail in getting a cab ; 
so to be able to plead the excuse of a long 
walk home, to account for a couple of extra 
hours ; not to mention that Miss Sparx was 
taking upon herself a responsibility of volition, 
which might be used to place her in the posi- 
tion of an accomplice, and, as such, bound to 
screen any moderate degree of licence into 
which Mademoiselle might extend the liberty 
accorded her. 

Still, I am not sure she would have carried 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 129 

lier point if Miss Hortensia had not come in 
at the moment, and^ on learning the subject 
in debate, had not pronounced in the most de- 
cided manner that Madeleine Graham should not 
be permitted to leave the sheltering walls of 
the seminary, for even only a couple of hours, 
under the sole charge of Mademoiselle Loriot. 

This very properly irritated Miss Sparx, and 
determined her not to submit to dictation. From 
a person, too, who was always telling people she 
was I don't know how much younger than . 
than the person whose opinion she was for setting 
so unceremoniously aside, . whose authority, it 
appeared, was to go for nothing in the school ! 
No : Bosahella had, perhaps, some right to be 
listened to ; she generally gave some reasons 
for what she wanted done or not done. But 
Miss Hortensia seemed to think that because 
she spoke in that loud, hectoring, play-actress 
sort of a fashion . put her absolute " Xo " on 
everything . she was to have it all her own 
way ! In short, was she. Miss Sparx, the head 
of the establishment . the achiowled(jed head 
. the senior partner ; or was she not ? If she 
teas, she thought she might be considered com- 

VOL. I. 9 



130 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

petent to decide itpon such a mere trifle as 
whetlier a pupil parlour-boarder, quite a grown- 
up girl too herself, might or might not be 
allowed to go out for a couple of hours' innocent 
recreation with one of the senior teachers, who 
promised to take the greatest possible care of 
her, and who, every one could see, besides, was 
greatly attached to her. 

There was a grand quarrel upon this, in 
which Hortensia used a great deal of line 
language. She even made her elder sister cry 
at last, with the Ciceronian weight and majesty 
of her arguments and invectives. And then 
Pratilia herself got frightened, and gave in, for 
Miss Sparx had a most uncomfortable way of 
going off into hysterics whenever she thought 
proper; and Finetta being, as we have seen, 
away on her own concerns, the simple eldest 
sister's fiat went forth without further opposi- 
tion, and the young lady was permitted to go 
out with her attached preceptress, for a few 
hours, to take tea with Madame Millefleurs, of 
Paris and Londres, and acquire the nomencla- 
ture of the articles de Paris of which that lady 
was an approved marchandL\ and her house the 
esteemed entrepot. 



.^kTADELEINE GRAHAM. 131 



cc 



CHAPTER VIII. 



CE QUE FEMME VEUT. 



" Wouldn't it be delightful, Olympe, if one was 
not so much afraid ? What a beautiful little 
house ! What nice boxes ! One is as snug as 
if one was quite at home, with people getting 
ready to amuse one. Only I am so frightened. 
If we should be found out 1'^ 

"Who shall find us cit? Who of the 
Gynec(^e Sparx ever thinks of to enjoying the 
pleasures of the theatre ? . a thousand times 
more, of the T/iedfre Franc^ais ? Which of all 
that menagerie would dream for one moment of 
transporting itself to a scene of satisfaction so 
legitimate ?" 

"But we must take care not to stay too 

long, Olympe ; we shall be like Cinderella 

and tlie pumpkins if we do. I suppose we can 

get home in a cab, as hard as we can tear, \\\ 

9.2 



132 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

about half an hour ? So we must go at ten ; 
half-past ten will be hard enough to account 
for, you know." 

"But we shall have to change our robes" 
again, dear child." 

*' Certainly. How kind of that Madame 
Millefleurs to lend me this pretty white muslin 
gown, belonging to her daughter ! What a 
sight I should have looked here in my blue 
stuff frock, shouldn't I ?" 

" Madame Millefleurs is all goodness. One 
should not say it of one's aunt, but it is per- 
fectly true." 

" But I thought you told me you had no 
relations in the world . were a pupil of the 
Enfans Trouves .^" said Madeleine : not dis- 
approvingly, but with a smile at the ridiculous 
oversight in so clever a person. 

" She is my aunt . by adoption. Corinne 
Millefleurs loves me . we love one another. 
She is one of the best of women . she will 
take care, if even we a little exceed our 
time, to invent the most plausible excuses 
for our absence. We can confide in her; 
do not torment yourself with vain appre- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 133 

hensions, but a23ply yourself to look all your 
beauty towards the fiftli box from the centre 
opposite. All ! and, to confess a truth difficult 
from one woman to another, never did you 
exhibit yourself more perfectly charmante than 
in this 7iegli(]ee of white muslin merely, with 
this simple white rose, sparkling from a 
shower, with silver dust, in your hair. It is 
a costume that would become, to admiration, 
Virgi7iie about to fall beneath a dagger of her 
father, to preserve her from a tyrant ! 
' M- ahandonneS'tu done, mon pere ?' . ' Noii ; 
mourez, nwurez.JlUe!' " concluded Mademoiselle 
Loriot, with tears in her eyes, and in so loud 
and theatrical a tone, on her own account, 
that if Leicester Square had not mustered very 
strong in the pit and upper galleries, a large 
majority of the audience would have been very 
much surprised. Of such splendid but imma- 
terial stuff are sentimental virtue and goodness 
of all sorts made ! 

"Is that Mr. Behringbright's box, Olj^mpe ?" 
" When he occupies it, as it is certain he 
will to-night.'* 

" What makes you so sure ?" 



134 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" Is it possible even for insular phlegm to 
resist, at all events, to a movement of curiosity 
so certain to be provoked? For tliere is 
nothing men and women more desire to know 
than what they are convinced it will make 
them miserable to learn ; witness the torment- 
ing anxieties of jealousy to discover what will 
make it deplorable for ever !" 

" But you said he does not care at all about 
that woman in reality ?" 

" Nevertheless, I persist that he will come ; 
I have been assured so by a person, attendant 
on the boxes, who has no motive to deceive 
me, . on the contrary, on whom I have bes- 
towed a benefaction. Do not spoil your ex- 
pression with anxiety of the kind. 

" What is the name of the piece, Olympe ? 

" Ah, that delightful. that full of a frank 
sensibility co)nedie-vaudcviUe/ Qq que Femme 
Yeut !' How astonished the Ens^lish audience 
goes to be ! only it will understand nothing 
about it ! Pure Parisian is Greek always to an 
English, no matter how skilful otherwise in 
the language ; and I do not believe that one 
of them would be here, were it not that always 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 135 

in England to he fashionable reconciles to every 
disgust." And not satisfied witli lier recent 
display in tlie liiglier evolutions of tlie dram- 
atic art, Mademoiselle began humming one of 
the impudent airs of the vaudeville with all 
the necessary j7<ra*(?i^^' and espiefjlerie, . . 

" ' Yous avez vu, parfois, faiine d, le croire, 
Le hanneton, cet insecte naif, 
Bourdonner un chant de victoire, 

S'U rompt lefil qui le tenait captif I 
Eeureux aussi d'un conge qui meflatle 
Du liannetonje comprends lafierte I ' " 

" I can't help thinking you must have seen 

Break from the web a tangled fly, 
And hum off into the blue serene, 

With a sprightly chant of victory ! 
Rejoicing also my freedom to employ, 
I understand, methinks, the cheerful insect's joy." 

" Hush, Mademoiselle dear ! don't you see 
the people are beginning to look up at us ?'* 
said Madeleine, in apparent alarm; for, in 
truth, the demonstration was rather too 
jprononcee even for Leicester Square, and ''Chut ! 
chut ! Quest ce que cela signifie .^" arose from 
the pit like the hissing and fizzing of a whole 
pond of soda and tartaric acid cast into fusion. 



136 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" Oh ! for tlie people . hrihe^ens de parterre, 
. who cares for the peopled" said Made- 
moiselle, throwing herself back in her velvet 
armchair as insolently as if she had been an 
Austrian archduchess by birth, and a Queen 
of France by right divine of an unlucky 
spouse. 

" Sit forward, Olympe ! You ought to be on 
the look-out, you know. . Mr. Behringbright 
will be sure to be coming just now, if he means 
to come at all ; and I must not seem to be 
looking his way, or he will see through the 
whole thing at once." 

" It is true, admirable child ! And it is also 
true that a good pupil always surpasses his 
master. Behold me, then, beside you, deter- 
mined to countenance you to my utmost 
possible. You are right, Madeleine ; the door 
at the back of Mr. Behringbright's box is 
opened . the vivid light of the gas in the 
corridors is visible . he enters ! But also 
another with him ! I confess it surprises me 
to see him with another. . And what an- 
other !" 

"Oh, but do look, Olympe, below !. Oh, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 137 

wliat a handsome-looking young man staring 
up at us . at me ! Don't make sucli a noise, or 
he will think we are doing it on purpose." 

" Do not look at the handsome 9/ou)i(/ men, 
Mees Graham, or you will ruin all ! Have I 
not told you to beware of the sensibility of 
your nature until you have secured a rich hus- 
band? Look only as I advise you . nearly 
opposite." 

" How can I look at him ? "Wouldn't it 
make him think something strange at once ?" 

" In this side-glass, which I have brought 
on purpose. You shall seem to be looking at 
quite another person, and you shall see him 
alone." 

Mademoiselle Loriot now produced one of 
those dishonest German opera-glasses, which 
fleet objects from the sides, while the vision 
seems directed straightforward. Madeleine took 
it, and, ignorant at first of its qualities, levelled 
it with eagerness towards a figure in the pit, . 
exclaimed the moment afterwards, with evident 
vexation, " No, I don't see him . but I do see 
the man in Box Number Five. Tioo men. . 
One of them quite an old fellow, I think, and 



138 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

SO glum and stern . looking towards our box. 
Can that be Mr. Bebringbriglit ? Oh, I don't 
like his appearance at all, Olympe ! He isn't 
a bit like a person I should fall in love with of 
my own accord. He looks exactly like a 
widower ! What a contrast to the handsome 
young Frenchman . I suppose he is . in the 
pit ! . I am sure he is much more deserving to 
be in the boxes ! And what can the person 
who is with Mr. Behringbright be? I almost 
think he is a policeman in plain clothes. He 
sits so stiff in those he has on, as if he had a 
poker down his back ; and his coat is buttoned 
as hard as armour over his breast. I am sure 
he can't be a gentleman." 

" A policeman . an agent of the police . 
w^ith Mr. Behringbright ?" said Mademoiselle 
Lori6t, evidently greatly startled, and shrink- 
ing back in the box. The acquaintance she 
had made on a former occasion with func- 
tionaries of the description seemed not to have 
appetized her to cultivate an enlarged ex- 
perience. 

"I should say we had better take no further 
notice of Mr. Behringbright, Olj^mpe, or we 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 139 

sliall get into trouble. He tliinks I am staring 
like a great child at the picture on tlie curtain, 
but I see everything he does; and he is looking 
so savage over at you, and is whispering the 
man in the stiff coat, who nods, and, I declare, 
takes a great vulgar red-and-blue pocket hand- 
kerchief out of a hat which he has set down at 
his feet in the box, and wipes the perspiration 
off his forehead ! It isn't a glazed hat either. 
But if it is a detective in the disguise of a 
gentleman ! . Olympe, don't pretend to have 
anything to do with that letter you 
wrote. Don't you know that handsome 
young countryman of yours in the pit? 
He might protect us, if you did know 
him." 

" Tell me what sort of a handsome young 
man it is ? Since you call him so, clilre pcf'tfe, 
explain to me what you comprehend by him 
. handsomeT' replied Mademoiselle, endea- 
vouring to preserve her calm in the conjunc- 
ture, but by no means exhibiting now the 
insouciance of the " cheerful insect" celebrated 
in the vaudeville song. 

" He is of a good height, T should think, 



140 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

and, oil, sucli a beautiful figure ! . such a di\dne 
waist !. just like the pictures in the fashion- 
books, Olympe ! But it is his face that is so 
handsome. I declare he almost looks as if he 
were painted ! Oh, such glorious black hair 1 
. so thick, and cut the way military men have 
it ; and such a darling, darling moustache on 
his upper lip ! I didn't think the Emperor's 
way of doing the moustache and beard was 
pretty at all until now ; but oh, how well it 
looks upon this handsome young fellow ! I 
suppose it don't become the other man be- 
cause lie is so ugly, though he has married 
such a pretty woman." 

'* Oh, for the Emperor, he is plus he an que 
beau, mon enfant I Let us say it, to provoke 
these people in the pit, who are mostly emigres 
of the Second of December. But this Adonis 
. on the other hand . that you describe. 
Voyons un pen. After all, a very handsome 
man is becoming a rarity in our days," said 
Mademoiselle Olyrnpe, somewhat rallying from 
her alarm, and seized with a very natural 
feminine impulse of curiosity. 
. " Oh, he is looking up again ! Take care, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 141 

Olympe ! He will know you have turned 
your glass upon him." 

" Well, let us suppose it so always. Is a 
man too modest to be looked at, mafoi ? We 
shall not devour him !" replied Mademoiselle 
Loriot, producing an ordinary opera-glass, 
which she had hired for the evening, and 
levelling it with tranquil effrontery at the 
object, who, standing upright in the pit, wdth 
one white-kidded hand turned backwards and 
resting, with a scented white handkerchief, on 
the glossy black broadcloth of his surtout, seemed 
to challenge the world to match him for per- 
sonal charms, and, in particular, to claim the 
suffrages of the ladies then and there present. 

" Well, what do you think of him ? Is he 
some young French Count of the Emperor's 
new court, Olympe, do you suppose? And 
don't he keep his splendid black eyes turned 
up towar4s our box ?" 

" Eh, mon Lieu r exclaimed the personage 
addressed, in a tone most surprisingly changed 
from her previous one of lounging indifference. 

" Good heavens ! what is the matter. Made- 
moiselle Olympe? What makes you get up 



142 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

in sucli a friglit?" said Miss Graliam, amazed 
at her friend's suddenly excited demeanour. 

" Qicest ce que je vols ? . what do I see ? . 
Ah, quel coup terrible, inattendu /" 

" What is the matter ?" 

" C'est que je me trouve mat . cest que je meurs, 
mon enfant ! " 

" Nonsense ! What can make you so ill all 
of a sudden ? . There, take my smelling-bottle ; 
it's beautiful vinaigre i)arfu)ne, you know ; your 
aunt made me a present of it." 

" Let us leave this place, or . or I'm lost . 
we are all lost !" 

"What do you mean? Do you think that 

Mr. Behringbright ? It may only be a 

military man with him ; they are as stiff as 
policemen sometimes, and " 

" I tell you we are lost if we remain ! . Do 
you not know that Vanity never forgives ? 
Hear and tremble, my poor child ! This hand- 
some young man, this Adonis of the parterre 
you praise so much, . ah, won Dieu! it is 
Camille ! . Camille Le Tellier, the adored of my 
earliest sensibilities, but who is capable of 
overwhelming me with the most terrible disco- 



-MADELEINE GRAHAM. 143 

veries in revenge for wliat he supposes to be 
tlie trick I played on liim in Paris." 

" Couldn't you sit back ? and he wouldn't 
see you." 

.' Ah ! and you parade before him charms but 
too certain to excite his attention, since they 
belong to an occupant of the boxes." 

" Oh, if you 2irQ jealous of me, Olympe, let us 
go, by all means !" said the young beauty, with 
a contemptuous, irritated sneer, that certainly 
added no charm of expression to her counte- 
nance ; " let us go, by all means, and lose all 
we came for, besides the expense !" 

" That is true. But at least, dear Made- 
leine, let me recover myself in the foi/er . 
arrange my hair before a mirror, with some 
little more attention to effect. You compre- 
hend, chere petite, that I dressed myself with 
a rare prudence on this occasion, to impose 
upon the apprehensions of the sober English 
Behringbright." 

" You mean to go to the saloon ? . I don't 
mind that. I should like to see how I am 
looking m3^self, if it is quite where other ladies 
go, of course." 



144 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

^^ Certainement . cela va sans dire! Of a 
course, of a course ! Support my arm on this 
side, in this direction, 7non enfant!' 

They made their way accordingly to the 
saloon of the Thedtre St. Jacques de Londres, 
which its habitues of that time will remember 
was fitted up with much luxury and tasteful- 
ness of Parisian embellishment, and besides, in 
compliment to the climate, or submission to 
the opinions entertained of it by the majority 
of the frequenters, enjoyed the advantage, in 
the height of summer, of an excellent fire in 
an enormous grate, before which people ate 
their ices, and talked almost as pleasantly, as 
freely, and as loudly as at the ''foyer' of the 
Varietes itself. 

When Mademoiselle Lari6t and her charge 
entered upon this scene of social relaxation, it 
was pretty well filled, though still rather early 
in the evening. But the performances had 
not yet commenced, and the salo7i was, besides, 
one of the principal entrances to the genteeler 
parts of the theatre. 

The arrival on the scene of so very pretty 
a youDg girl as Miss Madeleine Graham neces- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 145 

sarily attracted some attention. A buzz of 
admiration went round tlie salon. Two French 
gentlemen, wlio were stuffing themselves with 
sponge-cake and strawberry ices, nearly choked 
each other in demanding who she was, and 
complimented " the fortunate Albion," on pro- 
ducing charms so ndifs^ and capable of exciting 
emotion even in Parisian breasts. But this 
first excitement over, it seemed easy- enough to 
cross to one of the great mirrors in a recess on 
the other side of the saloon, where any disorder 
of the toilette might be remedied in compa- 
rative privacy. And thither Mademoiselle 
Loriot directed her march ; and all would have 
been well, if it had not been that the execution 
of the manoeuvre compelled the pair of illicit 
jDlaygoers to traverse the folding-doors, which 
admitted from the exterior world to -the 
Thespian antechamber. And, lo and behold I 
just as they reached the exact point, one of the 
leaves flew open, and there entered, in full 
evening costume, witli a little crush-hat set 
knov/ingly under his arm, and an air of 
expectant enjoyment diffused over his whole 
visage, no other and no less undesirable a 

VOL. I, 10 



146 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

personage than the Eeverend Jabez Bulteell 
Miss Hortensia Sparx's sweetheart ! . the 
Eeverend Jabez Bulteel ! 

He explained afterwards, to the Misses 
Sparx in general, and to Hortensia in parti- 
cular, that he was at the Theatre St. Jacques de 
Londres on a new principle of modern divinity ; 
that it is necessary to know the world jorac- 
ticalJy . to bring oneself into direct contact 
with its weaknesses and wickednesses . in 
order to be enabled to warn its unhappy 
- denizens of their dangers and delusions. Just as 
it is advisable for a shepherd to be familiar with 
all the rocks and precipices of the mountains 
amid which he pastures his wandering flocks. 

He explained so; completely to Miss 
Hortensia's expressed satisfaction, whatever 
might be her mental reservations. She felt 
that at her maturity it would not do to quarrel 
with a lover. But it is certain that the ren- 
contre, in the present instance, was neither to 
the expressed nor secret satisfaction of any of 
the parties assisting in it. 

" You here, Miss Graham ! Mademoiselle 
Loriot !" 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 147 

Mademoiselle Loriot concluded, with the 
decision of a great general, that it was impos- 
sible to prove either an alihi or a case of mistaken 
identity. She took refuge in impudence. 

*' You here, Monsieur 1' Abbe ! I should never 
have dreamed it. As for us, our appearance is 
perfectly natural and explicable. My aunt, 
Madame Millefleurs, had received a present of a 
. what you call everything ? . a hox\ which she 
desires me to accept in homage to my fete ; 
and, overcome by the curiosity and entreaties 
of Madeleine, I consented." 

" Mademoiselle Loriot, how can you say 
so? You know it was you proposed it all 
along, and tooidd have me come !" 

There was no honour among these thieves of 
pleasure, at all events. 

" It is false, utterly false ! My aunt, who is 
the best of women, will prove it !" passionately 
ejaculated the Frenchwoman. 

" Beg pardon, ma'am ; but are you the lady 
wot wrote to a gentleman of the name of 
Behringbright, about being here with a young 
lady, in Box Number One ?" said the sombre 
voice of destiny at this moment, through the 
10.3 



148 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

lungs of the man in the stiff clothes, who had 
been observed seated with Mr. Behringbright 
in Box Number Five, and who now made his 
entree, tremendous as the statue of the Com- 
mander in Bon Giovanni, at the portal. 
" Non, Monsieur . non; je vous le jure!^ 
" Olympe ! how can you say so ?" 
" Does any one about know this here French 
lady's handwriting ?" said the detective, pro- 
ducing a letter from his side-pocket, which he 
swung on high, carefully above the possible 
snatch of Mademoiselle. 

" I do. Mademoiselle Loriot wrote that 
letter, I am sure," exclaimed Madeleine, 
agonized at her own fearful complication in 
the affair, and anxious to escape at any sacri- 
fice of her friend. 

" Then I've orders to find out your em- 
ployers, Mad'maselle, and submit this here 
letter to them, and hact according as they shall 
decide on ; whether to prosecute you for a 
conspiracy or not," returned the minister of 
justice, with stern clarity of exposition. " So, 
if you please to say who they are, it may save 
some little time and trouble, and that's aU." 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 149 

" Policeman, I . I know this young lady . I 
will take charge of her home. It is an error 
of judgment simply on the part of the elder 
lady, which . which . further exposure is en- 
tirely unnecessary, and will only damage all 
parties !" interposed the clerical visitant. 

But the well-feed official was inexorable. 

" I must do my duty. I must see Madam's 
principals, and go by what they- says, and 
nobody else," he said; and perceiving that 
the altercation was exciting a degree of public 
attention likely to be as destructive as any 
other species of exposure, all the delinquejits 
finally submitted to accompany the detective 
to a cab, which conveyed them to the Sparx 
Grymgynoecium, . unconscious, for the most 
part, that a young gentleman, with a fine black 
Napoleon-the-Third moustache and beard, who 
arrived in the midst of the discussion, and 
listened to it with great interest, without 
taking any part in it, immediately ordered a 
Hansom to follow in the wake of the four- 
wheeler that conveyed the belligerents in one 
cargo home. 



150 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



CHAPTEE IX. 



TURNS OF EATE BELOW. 



After all, no great harm came of the affair. 

It is astonishing what humane and Chris- 
tianlike views one takes of people's conduct, 
when one's own interests are concerned in 
keeping things quiet and all right on the sur- 
face. The eldest Miss Sparx was too really 
agitated even to think of hysterics, when, 
already growing exceedingly alarmed at the 
protracted absence of Madeleine and her 
chaperon^ she was suddenly called upon to 
receive a whole cabful of contending state- 
ments and eclaircissements of causes and effects 
of so strange a description. But even Miss 
Sparx perceived, without Hortensia's (for 
once) plain and unrhetorical statement to the 
effect, that this affair was not the kind to 
which to challenge the public attention by any 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 151 

great outciy. And tilings might have been 
managed even more comfortably than they 
were, . glossed over, explained away, put out 
of sight, . but for that confounded detective, 
who insisted on throwing his bull's-eye on the 
whole mystery, and directing other people's 
observation. This gentleman had been so 
well paid to be honest, that he could not think 
of being otherwise on the present occasion; 
and accordingly, in spite of the general wishes, 
insisted on the principal of the Sparx Gym- 
gynoecium being put thoroughly " up" . in his 
own expressive language . to all that had 
occurred ; handed her Mademoiselle's epistle 
to Mr. Behringbright, and fully explained how 
he came in possession of it, until that British 
old-maid's spectacles trembled like diamonds 
in an ague on her nose while she endeavoured 
to read it ; and otherwise went on in the mer- 
ciless manner of a man who expects no fee or 
recompence on the other side of the question. 
Had it not been for the Eev. Jabez Bulteel, 
who thought that he did not himself figure 
altogether to his liking in the transaction, Miss 
Sparx might, in consequence, have gone on like 



152 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

a good many other feeble people, thrown into 
a position that required decision and resolu- 
tion, and have proceeded at once to extremes. 
She might, indeed, have given the unfortunate 
Olympe into custody on the charge of con- 
spiracy, . vnih whom or for what would have 
been subjects of after-consideration, . upon the 
detective's suggestion, had not Hortensia's 
sweetheart explained to her that it would be 
the complete ruin of the school, to prove the 
mistress of it no more competent for the care 
of young girls than would appear on the face 
of this transaction. Ultimately, he prevailed 
upon Miss Sparx to send her compliments to 
Mr. Behringbright, with many thanks for the 
trouble he had taken, but with every assurance 
that, from the high character the principals of 
EosE-CoLOUR House Gymgyncecium had re- 
ceived with Mademoiselle Loriot, they could 
not for a moment entertain the notion that she 
had any but the best intentions ^ however erro- 
neously directed, in the violation of regulations 
she had committed in taking her pupil, un- 
authorized, to the theatre ; and that, conse- 
quently, they must decline to prosecute. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 153 

This ivritten message, and a sovereign, satis- 
fied the detective, who thereupon took his 
departure; and there was not much further 
trouble with Mademoiselle Loriot : for, on 
learning, to her inexpressible surprise and grief, 
of what she was accused, she wept profusely, 
and, calling on all the gods of her native land 
to witness her innocence, declared herself 
thenceforth perfectly incapable of filling any 
position in an establishment where the bare 
suspicion of such perfidy could enter the heads 
of the principals, and consequently gave her- 
self an immediate dismissal ; desiring that her 
clothes (which she carefully packed) and let- 
ters might be sent after her to her dear friend 
and relative's, Madame Millefleur's, Mafjasin ; 
whither she went at once in a second cab, all 
midnight as it was, pretty certain to find 
Madame still out of bed and wide awake for 
the reception of company. 

As for Madeleine Graham, it had already 
been arranged that she was to leave school at 
the end of the quarter. And Mr. Bulteel 
further prevailed . on her sincere assurances 
that she would never do so a^^ain, and had 



154 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

never, in fact, done so at all, but had merely 
improperly accepted her naughty teacher's 
invitation to look in for an instant and see a 
French play . that no more should be said on 
the subject, and that she should be allowed to 
stay until the fortnight yet intervening . 
when her parents had agreed to send for her 
. elapsed. She was only placed under strict 
surveillance for the time. And thus the whole 
troublesome matter was pretty nicely hushed 
up ; and after those few mutterings of thunder, 
and that one vivid flash, the tempestuous 
horizon cleared, and nothing more of a harmful 
character seemed likely to ensue during the 
whole week of Miss Eosabella's absence. How 
to explain Mademoiselle Loriot's sudden de- 
parture, on the return of the latter lady, 
remained the only stumblingblock with the 
two inculpated Misses Sparx ; but, women as 
they were themselves, they managed at last 
to take comfort in the conviction that, as Miss 
Bosabella had recommended the dismissal of 
this talented instructress, she would not be 
too curious to investigate the causes why she 
had her own way given her. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 155 

Nevertheless, another event, and one of 
some importance, occurred to roughen the 
wavelets of what should have been a quiet 
seven days of intellectual labour and improve- 
ment in the Finishing Academy presided over 
by the harassed Drona and Pratilia. On the 
third morning after Miss Eosabella's departure, 
the clerical guide, philosopher, and friend of 
the establishment presented himself at an 
unusually early hour in its precincts, and, with 
a countenance almost as pale as his cravat . 
wontedly, indeed, of a very bloodless hue . 
and an agitation which he had some difficulty 
in concealing from the penetrating glance of 
the upper housemaid, asked to see the two 
mistresses of the house, in a private apartment. 
The audience being speedily granted, . with 
particular velocity on the part of Miss Hor- 
tensia, who imagined that a direct proposal, 
which she had long panted to hear, was about 
at length to exude from her lover's otherwise 
fluent lips, . a very different fact was made 
patent to her unwilling sense. It was Gazette 
day ; and as the Sparx Gymgynoecium was 
intimately connected with commercial circles> 



156 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

and Mr. Bulteel took a most friendly interest 
in the welfare of its conductresses, lie usually 
perused that somewhat dry and uninteresting 
portion of the public intelligence very dili- 
gently through. And he now came to 
announce to the Misses Sparx that among the 
names in the muster-roll of commercial ruin 
he was greatly concerned to observe that of 
the father of one of their best pupils, . and 
their own banker, he was afraid ? . Ichabod 
Maughan, Maughan, and Co., of Threadneedle 
Street and Calcutta. 

It was even so ; and in the first vehement 
moments of consternation the poor women had 
the folly to admit that they had placed the 
greater part of their lives' savings in the hands 
of the Messrs. Maughan and Company, who 
paid the best percentage they could find 
anywhere ; and thus, in all j)robability, all was 
lost! 

Fortunately for Mr. Bulteel, he had never 
yet decisively compromised himself in matri- 
monial overtures to Miss Hortensia, and he 
was not so alarmed as he might otherwise 
have been. He kept his head, and gave the 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 157 

best advice in liis power : for, having ascer- 
tained that Miss Emily Maughan's payments 
were nearly a year in arrear, owing to a 
hitherto inexplicable oversight on the part of 
her sire of late, he recommended that the 
matter should be broken as gently as possible 
to that young lady ; that it should be ascer- 
tained if she had the meanness to know 
anything about what had happened ;. and that 
if, as was likely, she pretended ignorance. 
Miss Sparx should accompany her home at 
once to Waveringstone Square, to ascertain 
the truth of the report, and leave her there. 
For, in reality, there could be no doubt at all 
about it, and there was no occasion to increase 
the debt already outstanding. The Eeverend 
Jabez then partook of lunch, and took his 
departure, declining, through feelings of the 
humanest sympathy, which did him honour, 
to be the medium of conveying such uncom- 
fortable intelligence to the young lady in 
question ; and thenceforth . probably from an 
unwillingness to add to housekeeping expenses, 
which his once liberal hostesses were no loncfcr 
so well able to afford . came seldomer and 



158 >IADELEINE GRAHAM. 

seldomer, for a season, to tlie Sparx Gymgy- 
noecium, until he finally dropped the acquaint- 
ance altogether; having managed things so 
discreetly, that Miss Hortensia had it not in 
her power to produce a tittle of evidence, or 
the smallest scrap of paper . except a volume 
of crabhedly- written MS. sermons, which she 
was copying for him in a fine clear hand . ^to 
support an action for breach of promise of 
marriage. All that accrued to her, therefore, 
from the transaction, was a very common 
emolument of the British old-maid . the con- 
viction that she had been extremely ill used 
by a member of the opposite sex, and the right 
thereupon to consider all men the most 
faithless and unhandsome creatures in the 
world. 

This Emily Maughan, of whom the prattle 
now is, was the same cordial and frank- spoken 
young creature who, on the famous wishing- 
night, when we first took occasion to introduce 
the reader to the interior economy of a 
Einishing School in its hours of recreation, 
had scandalized Mademoiselle Loriot so much 
by her declaration that she should like such a 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 159 

kind, good husband as her papa made to her 
mamma, for her portion in life. No great 
marvel certainly for a man to be so, of sup- 
posed great wealth, who had married a very- 
handsome woman for love ; but it was to be 
seen if this matrimonial tenderness would bear 
the rough winds now likely to be let in upon 
its paradisiacal bowers. And poor Emily 
herself was now to receive her first initiation 
into the ugly-clawed and sorrowful realities of 
the world, which the golden wand of the fallen 
Prospero, her sire, had hitherto kept waved 
at a distance, while only delicate and rosy- 
winged sprites tripped attendance on her 
happy hours. 

It is true that she did not at first in the 
least understand the meaning of the thing. 
Emily, though a banker and a merchant's 
daughter, had never had occasion hitherto to 
attach any definite ideas to the terms specula- 
tion and failure^ and found the greatest diffi- 
culty in bringing herself to comprehend that 
an English banker, who was supposed to be 
worth thousands on thousands of pounds, 
could on a sudden become a beggar, and 



160 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

beggar liundreds with him, in consequence of 
placing himself at the head of an abortive 
scheme to carry a railway through the jungles 
and forests of Central India. 

Miss Hortensia, who undertook the task of 
enlightening this unfortunate pupil on the 
subject . Miss Sparx declaring herself unequal 
to the task, and ordering up a knob of sugar 
and some peppermint, as an excuse for a little 
good brandy- and- water, which she kept con- 
venient . found Emily busy at her hour's 
practice on the piano, executing the variations 
of a popular melody, contrived with a view 
solely to dijQ&culty, but with a firm and brilliant 
touch quite equal to the situation; . all which 
suggested to Miss Hortensia a very clever way 
of breaking her disastrous tidings. 

" If ever you should be so far reduced, 
Miss Maughan," she said, in tones of austere 
condemnation, "you can fta'/i governess. You 
can play very well, and are perfectly qualified 
for the position of an assistant of the kind, 
even in a nobleman's family." 

" Oh, how queer of you to say so. Miss 
Hortensia! Governess, indeed, in a noble- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 161 

man's family ! Papa lias often told mamma, 
laughing, that if I like to marry a young lord, 
or anything of that kind, he will buy me one. 
He thinks one can do everything with money, 
I do believe, and he has nothing else to do 
with his ; for we are all girls excepting little 
Eobert, who, he says, shall be a great man too, 
and Prime Minister, like Sir Eobert Peel, and 
all sorts of things, some day," said Emily, still 
making the keys of the piano fly beneath her 
fingers, as she passed through the ingenious 
mazes contrived by Liszt or Herz; for th^ 
express purpose of trying the performer's 
patience, doubtless, since they answered no 
other. 

" Then I must say I think it very unhand- 
some of Mr. Maughan to have deceived and 
taken in his own child too ; if it is the case, 
you know nothing about it," said Miss 
Hortensia, with irrepressible indignation ; and 
she burst, without further preamble, into as 
full a revelation of the news as she found it 
possible to convey to that nursling of ajffluence 
and luxury. 

But poor Emily began to understand the 

VOL. I. 11 



162 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

matter a little better, even before slie quitted 
the scholastic roof, in the course of the after- 
noon, in the custody of the eldest Miss Sparx ; 
to hasten home and ascertain the worst, no 
less for that lady's relief than her own. 

Her fellow-pupils and companions, who had 
always hitherto regarded her with the respect 
due to the daughter of a banker, stared at her 
as if she had suddenly been struck with some 
dreadful contagious malady, and showed the 
undeniable traces of it on her fair young 
blooming visage. One of the housemaids called 
her " Hemily," ])ure et simjjie, to her face ; and 
Molly Elders, the cook, who had taken a strong 
but altogether unfounded suspicion that it was 
Miss Emily (it was Mademoiselle Loriot) who 
had peached about a certain surreptitious party 
she had given on a level with the area and 
pantry, said she always thought that pride 
would have a downfall . that there was a just 
judgment on everything, and that for her part 
she did not at all wonder that people who 
turned up their noses at poor servants, and did 
what they could to hinjure them, was them- 
selves brought to the same despicable level. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 163 

All in good time : God pays debts without 
money; and though she (Molly Elders) was 
far from wishing Miss Emily ill, she would, 
perhaps, now find enough to do in her own 
affairs, without meddling with other people's. 

But it was at home, in the magnificently- 
furnished mansion of her once wealthy sire, 
that the most tremendous shock of fate awaited 
poor Emily. 

Arriving under charge of the eldest Miss 
Sparx, in a hired conveyance, both of them 
were struck by observing all the blinds in the 
stately abode of wealth and commercial gran- 
deur drawn down closely to the window-sills, 
and a considerable crowd gathered about the 
handsome portals. But, in the ignorance 
and simplicity of the inexperienced arrivants, 
they thought such an appearance of things 
was usual in like disasters ; and it was not 
until they had alighted, and were about to 
knock at the massive doors, that these sud- 
denly opened, and quite a procession of some 
twelve grave and sad-looking gentlemen, mar- 
shalled by a functionary in a cocked hat, an 
immense caped coat, and a mace, emerged, and 

U.2 



164 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

they heard the fatal buzz running among the 
crowd. 

" It's the coroner's jury. They've a-been to 
see THE BODY, and they are going to sit on it at 
the ^ Crown.'" 

" No doubt they'll bring it in ' Suicide under 
extenuating circumstances !' " said a facetious 
ragged-looking fellow in the throng; "for I 
don't know what you call themy if it isn't when 
you've a-been a rich banker, and awake some 
morning without a rap in your pocket, and no 
taste for backy and beer to comfort you 1" 

Emily fainted, and was borne into the house, 
where her mother already lay, and had lain for 
hours, insensible under the shock of her tre- 
mendous bereavement ; but to the last hour of 
her life utterly unable to comprehend how the 
man, who had seemed to love her dearer than 
himself ever since he had known her, could 
bear to leave her alone to ruin and despau' . a 
desolate widow, and the mother of six orphan 
children . thus ! 

To do the eldest Miss Sparx bare justice, 
however, she came out in a most remarkable 
manner in this awful conjuncture, and for about 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 165 

six hours exerted herself like a true Christian 
and tender-hearted woman, amidst the calami- 
tous scenes on which she had so suddenly 
stepped ; in truth, forgot all her own ailments 
and weaknesses in her endeavour to do some 
good to these so much more afflicted and un- 
happy souls around her. But hers were not 
virtues of stamina to outlast the immediate 
stimulus of emotion and sympathy ; and when, 
in the evening, Susannah Sparx left that palace 
of misery and despair, where the daughter and 
mother lay moaning and screeching in each 
other's arms, surrounded by five younger girls 
and a little boy who howled for sympathy with- 
out knowing at all why, it was with a firm 
determination not to expose herself again to 
the terrors and sorrows of such a spectacle. 



166 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



CHAPTER X. 



CI-DEVANT LOVERS. 



These untoward events were probably the 
causes why neither of the two bewildered prin- 
cipals of the Sparx Gymgynoecium took much 
notice at the time of certain circumstances 
which would otherwise have attracted their 
severest notice and circumspection, had they 
been brought in proper official form under 
cognizance. 

In the first place, a creature of the most 
baleful sort known to the heads of seminaries 
for young ladies, and indeed every other 
description of guardian of female juvenility . 
a very handsome young man . had been ob- 
served prowling around the Gymgynoecium in 
a most suspicious and unaccountable manner, 
unless on the supposition that he was insti- 
gated by those wolfish propensities most to be 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 167 

dreaded by the shepherdesses of such-like silly- 
sooth flocks ; particularly at the hours when it 
was to be thought, or report might indicate, 
that the Grymgynoecium sallied forth on its 
daily airings and exercises in Kensington Gar- 
dens. And, what added to the uncomfortable 
character of the whole proceeding not a little, 
this very handsome young man had all the 
appearance, in addition, of being a foreigner ; 
most probably, from his elegantly- shaped waist 
(the male British figure, and that of most other 
nationalities in that division of the human 
race, seldom presenting to the contemplation 
any waist at all), a Frenchman. Consequently 
a personage whose revenues would chiefly lie 
in his brave spirits and the capital cut and 
fit of his clothes ; . not to mince the matter, 
who had probably more knobs of sugar than 
half-crowns in his pockets; therefore, "Ana- 
thema Maranatha" for the daughters of wealthy 
commercial parents. 

Madame Furschener herself, on whom had 
devolved the duty of parading the young ladies 
in and out, in safety, after Miss Eosabella's 
temporary retirement and Mademoiselle Lo- 



168 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

riot's resignation . Madame Fiirschener, the 
most unsuspicious of women, and whose 
thoughts were always wandering away, from 
the smooth green lawns and former woodlands 
of Kensington Gardens to the craggy steeps 
and wine-distraught pine forests, crowned with 
the eternal snow summits of her native 
mountains . and chiefly to yonder quiet little 
nestling churchyard, under a sky-piercing Alp, 
where lay the husband of her youth, and two 
little marble figures that had once been living, 
prattling cherubs at her side . even Madame 
Fiirschener remarked this hovering of the 
enemy on the skirts of her little host at last ; 
not, it is true, until every girl in the regiment 
had remarked the fact of the constant reappear- 
ance of the foreign gentleman on their line of 
march, and had pronounced him, " Oh, such a 
beauty of a dear 1" and wondered whom of the 
company he was in love with, and whether he 
was the French ambassador or not ; not until 
Dowsabella Dollards herself had commented on 
the brightness of his eyes, and wittily won- 
dered whether he polished them with scouring 
powder, and the alderman's daughter had 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 169^ 

popularized an opinion that he owed them to 
the fact of the French having such lots of nice 
champagne to drink whenever they were 
thirsty, at home. But hy this time the 
Maughan calamities had occurred, and the 
good-hearted Swisswoman felt that it was no 
time to add to the perplexities and anxieties of 
her employers. 

More acute observers than any of these 
young damsels or their dreamy conductress, 
might possibly have remarked that the hand- 
some young man had, nevertheless, almost 
always an aspect of disappointment and sur- 
prise succeeding the eagerness of the scrutiny 
with which . treading off the pavement and 
holding his well-brushed hat aloft with the 
politesse of his nation . he passed close along 
their fluttering, chattering, ribbon-flying ranks, 
reviewing them with those gleaming Proven9al 
eyes of his. 

Why should this be ? Miss Madeleine Gra- 
ham, wdio was not permitted to stir out of the 
grounds of the Gymgyncjecium until a fort- 
night should consign her to the charge of her 
jparentele, might possibly have guessed, if she 



170 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

had been correctly informed of the circum- 
stance. As it was, she could only form secretly 
proud conjectures, from hearing the warm dis- 
cussions of her young companions as to which 
of them the homage was addressed to, that it 
was to none of them, but to a far prettier and 
likeher individual than all put together, but who 
was unjustly and shamefully secluded by her 
superiors, and even forced to give herself out as 
indisposed, and unwilling to share the out-of- 
doors recreations of the rest of the fair denizens 
of the Sparx establishment. 

However, Madame Fiirschener's worst fears, 
under the responsibility with which she found 
herself invested, were allayed in a very reason- 
able manner, a few days after they had begun 
to develop themselves, and she had resolved to 
lead her flock quite a different route to their 
usual one, until this alarming prosecution 
should cease. The housemaid, who answered 
the bell, reported that such a fine, handsome, 
polite young foreigner . who kept his hat 
off* all the time he spoke to her, though 
he' must have seen, by her apron and 
mob-cap, she was only an upper servant . 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 171 

had called, and asked to see Mademoiselle 
Loriot, . no doubt a countryman of hers, 
. perhaps a relation, or cousin, or something 
of that kind (Fanny Clavers was herself 
much addicted to visits from cousins in the 
Life Guards) ; for he seemed so disappointed 
when he heard she was not at home, and 
wanted so much to know when she might be 
expected there (which Fanny did not know, 
and Miss Sparx would not tell), and would a 
letter left there reach her ? Flattered by find- 
ing herself treated like a duchess, Fanny said. 
Of course it would; and a letter accordingly 
came, directed to the absent Olympe in a 
small, excessively neat French hand . which, 
greatly against her will, and after a severe 
struggle with a wish to break it open, and 
ascertain what the correspondence was about, 
Miss Hortensia re-directed and re-posted, 
without deigning to prepay, to Mademoi- 
selle, at her relative's, in the Arcade Whir- 
lington. 

Could this missive have contained a summons 
which Mademoiselle Loriot either dared not, or 
did not think proper, to refuse obedience to ? 



172 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

I cannot say, not having read it, for it is one of 
the few documents connected with this history 
which have escaped my researches. I think I 
could have made out more, however, than Miss 
Hortensia did, if I had had the same chances, 
and . as she had . a candle to make the en- 
velope transparent ; taking care, of course, not 
to scorch the paper. But it was the case, that 
at nine o'clock on a rather windy and wet 
night, a female form, indifferently well clad 
but closely veiled, passed before the Marble 
Arch, with a white pocket-handkerchief, richly 
scented, in its hand ; and that it was almost 
immediately afterwards joined by the hand- 
some young foreign Unknown, whom the 
daughter of the ex-maid-of-all-work, pupil at 
Eose-Colour House, conjectured, from his 
resemblance to a figure stepped from the lid of 
a box of French prunes, to be the representative 
of his Imperial Majesty, the Emperor Napoleon 
the Third. 

" It is you, Mademoiselle Loriot ?" said the 
Frenchman, in French. 

" It is I, cher Camille !" 

The voice of Mademoiselle Loriot quivered 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 173 

something of real and, perhaps, in a degree, 
natural and womanly emotion in the response. 

" Do not call me so ! I forbid you. After 
the wrongs you have inflicted upon me, I forbid 
it altogether . now and for ever ! Do you not 
remember that I am that injured Camille Le 
Tellier, whom you only failed by the merest 
chance to involve in a ruinous matrimony, and, 
as it was, engaged in one of the most disagree- 
able imaginary discussions with Justice . to 
say nothing of the horror of a situation which 
convulsed all France with laughter at my 
expense ?" was the inexorable reply. 

Mademoiselle's vanity maxim was correct, at 
least as regards her own countrymen ; and true 
it is, that to be made ridiculous is the most 
unpardonable of offences with a Frenchman. 

" Mercy, Camille ! I loved you." 

" I did not love you . and even the strongest 
proof of it would be, if I should find it possible 
to forgive you ! But take my arm, and let us 
walk as we speak, and while I name the condi- 
tions on which I consent not to expose your 
criminality in the eyes of this strict and 
prudent English society, which, it seems, has 



174 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

received you into the position of an honest and 
honourable woman, . but which would soon 
change its opinions, if it once heard that you 
had lost the original luxuriance of your hair . 
which, I observe, is the case . under the scissors 
of the matrons of St. Lazare." 

" Your threats would have been more formid- 
able, Camille, a few days ago. At present, I 
find myself in a condition to dispense with an 
altogether blameless reputation, if only I could 
boast any degree of the beauty as a woman 
which, as a man, you can . and do !" replied 
Mademoiselle, in extremely bitter accents, but 
taking the arm that was offered her with 
eagerness. 

" It is only to avoid observation !" returned 
the cautious ex- victim of the impostress of the 
Jardin Mabille, receiving Mademoiselle into a 
lifeless and even repulsing link. " Let us 
proceed across this park, which exults in the 
statue of Achilles Surprised . to find himself 
the Duke of Wellington, no doubt ! . All is 
dark and silent here, and no spies of the police 
are to be dreaded in this innocent England, we 
are assured." 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 175 

" But what do you want with me, Camille, 
since pardon is imj)ossible ? . since you never 
loved me . never sought my society . except 
for a supposed wealth, the illusions of which 
have so long vanished?" 

" Tiens ! I will declare myself without 
ambages. You are not a woman whose feel- 
ings require to be respected too much. Tell 
me, on the other hand, do you not conceive 
that you owe me some reparation for the dis- 
graceful intrigue of which you made me almost 
the victim ?" 

" I am willing to make you any in my 
power, my dear Camille ; but if you ask money, 
alas ! I have none, or so little that Madame 
Millefleurs, who should have been the most 
zealous and compassionate of my friends, this 
very morning exhorted me to lose no time in 
seeking another location than her house ; 
whither I have betaken myself unwillingly, as 
a sole refuge in this vast and sepulchral 
London, the inhabitants of which should rather 
be styled its mournful and insensible appari- 
tions !" 

"Is it possible you have left the Sparx 



176 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Gynecee ? . why so ?" demanded the handsome 
prowler around that domicile. 

" You were present at the discussion at the 
Thedtre St. Jacques . why do you ask? Do 
you not understand English sufficiently well 
to have comprehended all that there was of 
disastrous and unforeseen in that unhappy 
conjuncture ?" 

" I speak English well . very well ; 1 can 
pronounce the ws and the tJis ; I am often 
mistaken for a native English," returned the 
Frenchman, proudly, and really now in remark- 
ably English English for a foreigner, continu- 
ing . " But the explanation is clear enough. 
For a long time I travel, in the interests of the 
various manufacturers that honour me with 
their confidence, in the three kingdoms." 

*' I comprehend. But it is very difficult to 
speak a language which is a compound of all 
the languages of the world, and has come down 
to this excellent Britannic people from the 
Tower of Babel. . Very well ! You know, then, 
all that I know myself in tliat affiair ?" 

" I know nothing ; I arrived at the end of 
the discussion ; but it seemed to me that, as 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 177 

usual, 3^ou were inculpated with the authorities, 
represented by tlie man wlio handed you a 
letter, and demanded to know if you had 
WTitten it." 

" I will explain : in brief, since you have re- 
sided in England, you understand the rigidity 
of manners and etiquette that prevails. Very 
well. I presume to dispense with the per- 
mission of my employers, and accompany a 
young girl, one of my pupils, who ardently 
desires the occasion, to a theatre, where a 
French piece is to be performed, which, at the 
time I am myself ignorant, is of a moral which 
even the most ingenious play-writers of this 
nation . the countrymen of the boasted 
SHAXSPEBE, who devote themselves only 
to the task . have found impossible to adapt 
to British habitudes. As this young girl is 
the daughter of parents of great wealth and 
consideration, I am judged in a high degree 
culpable, and dismissed from my situation." 

" What ! that lovely young person who, I 
saw, distinguislied v^c in the parterre, the 
daughter of people of wealth and considera- 
tion? Mo/i Lien! this is news worth hearing. 
VOL. I. 12 



178 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Seeing her with you, I concluded . I concluded 
quite otherwise, Mademoiselle !" 

" She is what I say ; but in wdiat can that 
concern you, Monsieur Le Tellier ?" 

" Did you not admit but this very moment, 
Olympe, that jo\x owed me a great reparation?" 

"Ah !" And Mademoiselle Loriot gave 
somewhat of a little scream as she uttered the 
ejaculation. 

" Do you not admit it, I say ?" 

" I admit whatever you wish me to declare ; 

but . Ah, Camille, Camille ! you cannot 

have the cruelty . the unmanliness . to . to 
What is it you are about to say ?" 

"The young lady by whom you were 
accompanied is a familiar acquaintance of 
yours, you say, in the relations of pupil and 
instructress ? Well, then, I inform 3^ou that 
I am attracted, as I never felt before, by the 
charms of this young lady's beauty, and I de- 
sire an introduction to her above all things 
. and in a certain light/' 

" You are attracted, you mean, as you have 
always been, wretched butterfly ! by the golden 
glare of wealth, in which you pretend to re- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 179 

cognise the lustre of a noble sentiment, of 
which you are incapable !" returned Ol^^mpe, 
with fierce vivacity, and suddenly withdraw- 
ing her arm from that of her accompanier 
with a gesture of disdain and malice which 
would have done honour to a tragedy queen. 

" This is the first occasion in which I behold 
beauty and wealth in a fortunate combination, 
Mademoiselle Loriot ! You yourself only pre- 
tended to wealth when you attempted to en- 
trap me as your prey in Paris," the handsome 
young man replied, with cynical relentlessness 
and composure. 

" Ah, we do not bait traps for jackals with 
bonbons !" exclaimed Olympe. 

" I have a case in my pocket . you were 
always partial to honhons in those other days. 
Let me ofier you some sweetener for your ex- 
pressions, Mademoiselle !" retorted the justly 
offended CamiUe, but, strange to say, actually 
producing a very pretty enamelled silver com- 
fit-box, and presenting the sugared contents 
to his still more irritated companion . who, 
stranger yet, quietly helped herself to three or 
four candied almonds. 

12.2 



180 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

These produced a good effect. 

" At present that I am calmer, speak on ; 
explain yourself without hesitation. Alas ! I 
am accustomed to hear little that does not 
grate on my heart, like the instrument with 
which they pulverize the nutmeg in the Eng- 
lish kitchens ;" and Olympe resumed her hold 
of her former lover's arm. 

" I have stated to you that I desire, above 
all things, an introduction to that charming 
young Miss, the daughter of the most wealthy 
parents; and adopting a hint from the un- 
handsome trick you played me in a former time, 
Olympe, I desire you to introduce me to her 
as a young Frenchman of distinguished rank 
and ample inheritance . possibly as a Count of 
the old noblesse, on my pleasure in London . if it 
be possible to imagine pleasure to be sought 
in a metropolis the bare aspect of which de- 
presses the spirits." 

" A Count of the old 7iohlesse I Ha ! ha ! 
No ; when she does not care in the least for 
rank, but attaches her ideas exclusively to 
money, and in England every species of foreign 
nobility is derided and despised !" snapped 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 181 

Mademoiselle, with a running laugli tlirougli 
the whole, not unlike the click of an alarm-rattle. 

" Then you must introduce me to her as a 
person of enormous wealth . one of the illus- 
trations of the new Eifipire . a fortunate specu- 
lator." 

Mademoiselle laughed again in the same 
manner. 

" I shall have to unsay all I have said, then, 
on your account ; for observing you in the pit 
at St. Jacques', I took the liberty to boast of 
the acquaintance, and state exactly who and 
what you are : . Commis-voyageur of a Lyons 
silk-house, native of Marseilles, with an old 
father living in a garret in the quarter of the 
weavers." 

"You did?" 

'a did." 

" And you will not introduce me at all to 
Miss ? . as what I am, j^nr d sinqole^ since you 
have revealed it ?" 

Camille uttered this query considerably more 
in the tone of a menace. Somehow or other, 
threats always frighten women, especially if 
they are vague, and unlikely to be executed. 



182 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

"I cannot, Camille," Olympe replied, in a 
much meekened and, indeed, humbled and 
deprecatory tone. " I have already told you 
I have been turned out of my position near 
this young girl." 

" But you yet have influence over her ; you 
yet have means of communication." 

" None at all. I have tried to write to her 
a simple request to forward me a pincushion 
she had employed herself to work for me ; as a 
souvenir, for she is about to return also to her 
native province. And the letter has been re- 
turned to me unopened, and with the seal 
scarcely tampered at all with." 

"Perhaps, then, she has already returned 
to her province ? I have sought her in vain 
for days . many promenades . among the pupils 
of the Sparx Grynecee." 

" Ah !" . a cry of physical pain from 
Mademoiselle Loriot, which, however, ex- 
pressed anguish of another kind, rather deeply 
seated in the moral constitution of her sex. 

" Most likely : it is certain !" she then eX" 
claimed, with vindictive satisfaction. " They 
have anticipated the fortnight which alone 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 183 

remained to be fulfilled of her half-year's 
pension; for the English have not the sense to 
study appearances when they are in a passion." 

" But at all events you can tell me where her 
province is situated . the names of her parents 
. her own. Do so, or, trust me, I will render 
it impossible for you to delude any new family 
into receiving you as an instructress of youth 
in England ; and you know, if the police are 
sufficiently furnished with your renseignemens 
in France, to render it difficult for you to earn 
the honest bread which you are compelled to eat, 
in France 1" 

So spake this handsome young Gaul . a 
very poor representative of 

" Ces francs Gaulois, aimables et courtois 
Envers toutes les femmes^ mais surtout 
Celles quails aimaient /" 

"I will tell you then," said Olympe, re- 
membering with anguish some passages in a 
recent conversation she had held with Madame 
Millcfleurs. ''She is a native of the humid 
Ireland, of the North, though of a Scottish 
descent . of the wealthy and famous city of 
Belfast." 



1S4 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

"Her name?" 

" Graham . Madeleine Graham." 

" Wlio is her father?" 

" A rich manufacturer of his city who has 
abeady been twice its Lord Mayor. No, no, 
not its Lord Mayor; that is only of London. 
But he is dignified also with a temporary title of 
nobility, because he is Mayor, when some great 
public event occurs to distribute honours : . Sir 
Orange Graham, Knight. Madeleine has told 
me so a thousand times." 

"And yet you say she despises rank !" 

"As the English despise it . to adoration !"i 

" Ah, then, all is well ! . What joy ! Learn, 
Olympe, that it is specially to this city of the 
humid Ireland that I am accredited by two of 
my chief houses, to spread their merchandise !" 
exclaimed Camille, actually executing some 
steps of a waltz, and compelling his unwilling 
partner to join in the evolution, in a manner 
which excited a degree of unfavourable atten- 
tion from a man in a complete suit of green, 
like a grasshopper, with a white band round his 
hat, and her Majesty's badge on his collar and 
cuffs. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 185 

"^A / ccssez done. . Let me die quietly ! 
But do you really presume still to cherish de- 
signs on the daughter of a wealthy British 
manufacturer, who is also of the temporary 
nohility of this haughty Albion ?" 

'.Am I not of a figure and general appear- 
ance to justify some confidence in my resources, 
Mademoiselle Lori6t ?" said the handsome 
young man, drawing himself up under a gas- 
lamp in an attitude, the supreme conceit of 
which could not, nevertheless, obliterate much 
of the fact that he loas a remarkably handsome- 
looking foreigner. 

Mademoiselle Loriot glared at him for a 
moment, with eyes in which shone several 
opposite feelings at the same instant . con- 
tempt, admiration, hatred . and a still mor^ 
unwomanly sentiment than all, which we will 
not desecrate the word by calling Love ; and 
then these passions seemed to fuse like glow- 
ing metals into one, compounded of all, but 
different from all ; and she pronounced . or 
rather hissed like a serpent . these memorable 
words . ''Go, then, Camille Le Tellier, and 
woo ^Madeleine Graham to be your bride ; and 



186 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

learn, in your turn, with what hardness and 
insensibihty the human heart is armed, into 
which the Thirst of Gold has entered, like a 
master-demon into the frame of the possessed 
one . expelling all the others, but rending and 
lacerating the wretched breast itself in which 
it finds a home !" 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 187 



CHAPTER XI. 



A GIRL IN BLACK. 



Mr. Behringbright sat in liis office, in a dark 
chamber of a dark court, separated by its 
gloomy, ill-paved space from a vast roaring 
thoroughfare of London City, down which con- 
stantly thundered one of the great cataract 
streams of traffic, with its jostling, struggling, 
headlong roll of mingled mercantile humanity 
and omnibuses. Nevertheless, a silence which 
almost stunned people stepping out of that 
prodigious tumult, reigned in the great mer- 
chant's precincts, and kept a sort of guard 
upon his money-making meditations. Clerks 
shuddered if they heard their own pens 
scratching on the thick ledger paper, and 
elderly captains and centurions of the same, 
in ill-made brown trousers, with pale, tliin, 



188 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

aritlimetical heads, partially encased in liigli 
collars and chokers, and almost to a head 
bald, stepped on tiptoe as they passed in and 
out of the sanctum sanctorum, transmitting 
the commands of their laconic chief. 

" We will take Spurzheim and Olaf's con- 
signment of wheat from the Baltic, Barnstaple. 
. Mr. Milroy, Euiz Alarcos's sherry-warrants 
are not a sufficient security for the cargo he 
wants us to furnish him for Gribraltar. . I have 
not had time, Freshwater, to examine the 
offers of the house at Pernambuco you men- 
tion. . Are those acceptances of the Maughans 
of Calcutta looked after, Mr. Baillie ?" 

The great merchant's cranium was evidently 
divided into pigeon-holes . at least it seemed 
as if he had separate compartments in it for a 
hundred different kinds of business arrange- 
ments. 

" Yes, sir." 

The last person spoken to was the onlj^ one 
of the four head-clerks in attendance who 
made any audible reply : all the rest merely 
signified comprehension and obedience by jerks 
of the head, passing in procession, with heavy 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 189 

tomes under tlieir arms, before tlieir evocator, 
like the shadowy kings from tlie witches' 
caldron in " Macbeth." 

Mr. Behringbright said no more at that 
time to any one, but taking up the Times, 
began, as it seemed, to peruse the leading 
article. 

It was only in seeming ; for surely the Times 
could not have contained a leading article to 
the following effect : . 

" What a pretty girl she was ! . very young . 
very young. Eich black glossy hair, a fine 
complexion, rosy with youth and health; 
splendid eyes ! Utterly unconscious, evidently, 
of that dreadful Frenchwoman's designs ; for 
with what an innocent childishness of attention 
she kept those lustrous eyes fixed on that 
stupid curtain ! To be sure there was nothing 
particularly attractive in a grey old iron-pot 
head like mine opposite. I don't think she 
ever looked once at my box, and that shows it 
is impossible she could have been at all in the 
plot. And yet it was queer, too, what Digby 
tells me, that she declared at once the letter 
was in the handwriting of the wretch of a 



190 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

(/ouvernante, althougli it was only a copy from 
Fauntleroy's recollection of the words and 
penmanship, as I was such a donkey as to 
burn the original before I remembered that it 
would be necessary as evidence. However, he 
boasts that he can imitate a hand^vriting so . 
well that he hopes he shall never come upon a 
blank cheque-book of mine, or it will, he fears, 
bring him to grief. / will take care he shall 
not. It is bad enough to lend him one's 
money, and regulate the amount. No doubt 
the poor young creature, in her flurry, made 
sure she recognized the niggling French cali- 
graphy. What a danger she ran ! What 
mi(jJtt have happened if I had been a rascal 
like most other fellows, and taken the goods 
the gods . no, the devil . provided ! No ; I 
am very glad I managed the affair as I did. 
A good conscience is a pleasant thing, and, in 
fact, I don't think one can attend properly to 
business with a bad one. How could one 
calculate the value of a cargo of Odessa wheat, 
for example, with a brain full of all sorts of 
wicked plots and contrivances ? It is even 
very difficult to fix one's attention properly on 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 191 

i business when one's inner man is agitated by 
the very best of feelings . and all that ; and 
besides, I have had enough of women and their 
ways to last one man's life. To be sure, I 
married t/ieti for money ! But for what else, I 
wonder, should I expect any woman to take 
a fancy for me now at my time of life, with 
hair as mottled as a partridge's breast, and 
crow's-feet clawing in the corners of my eyes 
as if they meant to dig them out ? Dull grey 
eyes, too ! I am not such an ass as to fancy 
it possible any woman . above all, a young girl 
in the first lustre of her own beauty and 
attraction . could marry me for anything but 
my money ! And if I only wanted to be loved 
for my money, there are plenty of charming 
young creatures . of high rank and lineage, 
too . who are ready to do that . or say they 
do so at the altar. Mademoiselle is mistaken, 
however, concerning the fair Incognita. To 
do that lady bare justice, she does not pretend 
to the slightest regard or respect for me ; and 
it is time also to finish tliat outrageous farce. 
She is discontented, forsooth, because I furnish 
her with any amount of this coveted gold . to 



192 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

sliow tlie contempt I myself have for it, and- 
for her, and for the vile mobs of high and low, 
whom its flaunt and glare have amazed and 
dazzled into an applause and acquiescence 
which stamp the age . and yet despise and 
shun her personally. I will send her a note 
to-day for a thousand pounds, inform her that 
I am aware of her partiality for my Lord 
Ninnington, and that I beg henceforth to 
resign her society in his favour. There will 
be another villanous creature of the sex properly 
served out, for Ninnington is little better than 
a beggar, and a fortnight of this mad woman's 
extravagance will make him a complete one. . 
And so perhaps, after all, I am not such a 
good fellow as I try and persuade myself I am 
in this transaction? It may be merely the 
bitter recollections I cherish of that woman 
which make me thus impenetrable and hard- 
hearted towards all of her crafty and faithless 
kind !" 

''Beg pardon, sir, for interrupting you," 
said the staid, lugubrious tones of one of the 
principal clerks, who at this moment thrust his 
cadaverous-looking head into the room, where 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 193 

it glared from its spare upholding framework 
over the rails of Mr. Behringbright's desk, 
almost like a decapitation on a pike in the 
heyday of Eobespierre and Danton . "Beg 
pardon, but there's a young lady in black asking 
to see you. Can't make it out, but she comes 
on most particular business, she says. Shall 
I show her in ? or shall I say . you are 
engaged ?" 

'' Kyouny lady in black, Wrightson?" 
And the merchant's mind, steadily fixed on 
the right and proper, as he deemed it, suddenly 
startled up with something like an emotion 
of hopeful expectation in connexion with the 
words, that would scarcely have analyzed 
exactly into such component parts. 

" Yes, sir ; about seventeen, I should say." 
" What can she want ?" 
" She says she must see you, sir, to-day . 
must see Mr. Behringbright himself," said Mr. 
Wrightson; a head-clerk of the most correct 
principles, having a wife, a grandmother, ten 
children, and two hundred and fifty pounds a 
year to keep him . a model of virtue in his 
proper person, but who was not unaware that 
VOL. I. 13 



194 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

richer people sometimes deviated from the 
standards of propriety. 

" What's her name ?" 

" Won't give it, sir. Says, in point of fact, 
she's afraid you wouldn't see her if she did." 

" Does she ? That's candid, at all events. 
She can't even be seventeen, I should say, Mr. 
Wrightson. . Who's with her ?" 

" No one, sir." 

"No one?" 

" Not anybody, sir." 

" Queerer yet. But perhaps that French 
she-devil is lurking about somewhere ? No, it 
won't do. The Song of the Syrens is all very 
fine, but I see the drowned corpses festering 
deep down in the depths of the green rosy 
sea!" 

"Sir! . you see . you see tv/iat F'' ejaculated 
the head-clerk, fairly aghast at such an obser- 
vation. 

" Ah, you have not had the advantages of a 
liberal education, Wrightson 1 You know / was 
originally designed for a parliament man, so of 
course I learned all the proper claptrap quota- 
tions. Say I a?ii engaged on most important 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 195 

business, and . and can't be interrupted, espe- 
cially by a person wlio gives no name, and will 
not say what she comes about ! . She isn't the 
innocent, harmless young creature I took her 
for, and Digby himself is ready to take his 
davy, he says, she is, from her conduct in the 
transaction," sighed Mr. Behringbright, in 
conclusion. 

''Yes, sir." 

"Wrightson!" 

" I understand, sir." 

" No, you don't. Say I am in, and . and 
disengaged for a few minutes. I don't know 
what she can want, but perhaps it's something 
about a . a little occurrence that took place at 
a theatre where I was the other night. There 
was a sort of row, and a policeman took up 
some woman, and I saw it. And there was 
another of them in it who was not to blame, 
and perhaps my evidence may be required in 
her behalf. Don't you hear ? You stand as 
if you wore turned into a statue 1 Show the 
young lady in, . and be ready to show lier out 
again in a couple of minutes, for I have no 
time to waste this morning on the rubbish 
13.2 



196 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

women talk, at best, . and this was a squabble 
at a tlieatre." 

Mr. Wright son smiled a smile equivalent to 
a gleam of sunshine on ice, and disappeared. 

" If it be as I think, I never will believe in 
tlie harmless looks of mortal woman 'creature 
again!" said the mercantile misogynist, as his 
attendant retired. " It is plain enough what 
Wrightson thinks ; but he is so good himself, 
he thinks evil of everybody else. Oh, but 
won't I give this naughty girl an annihilating 
reception if she can by possibility have under- 
taken to carry out her odious preceptress's 
plan !" 

In spite of this excellent resolution, I do not 
positively know or affirm that Mr. Behring- 
bright was not considerably disappointed, as 
well as surprised, when, the door opening, 
admitted a very young person, . of the feminine 
better half of creation, certainly, but of a 
taller and more slender figure than Madeleine 
Graham's full rounded outlines : with a fine 
face, no doubt, but one absolutely colourless ; 
with fair hair in plain bands, instead of black 
glossy waves ; and eyes red and swollen round 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 197 

the edges, so as almost to destroy the effect 
of the clear blue, translucent, tender-souled, 
and pathetic visual orbs, which did not recall 
the diamond-bright but diamond-impenetrable 
glance of the syren of the previous adventure. 
And the general doleful effect of this exhausted 
and woebegone figure was heightened by a 
mourning dress of inferior and carelessly run- 
together stuff, which was little more fashioned 
than the garb of a Sister of Mercy in the 
streets. 

Mr. Behringbright perceived at once that he 
had never seen this young person before ; and 
his look expressed that, as well as the feelings 
previously hinted at, as he rose to receive his 
visitor, with a good deal more than the average 
counting-house politeness to strangers. 

The Girl in Black evidently comprehended 
this part of the position, at all events, for she 
stammered out some faint, unintelligible 
apology for the intrusion, and seating herself, 
or rather sinking into a chair, which Mr. 
Behringbright instinctively hastened to offer 
her . to his immense dismay, immediately 
fainted away in it. 



198 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" Good heavens ! slie is going to tumble on 
the floor. I must support her. . What will 
the clerks think? Wrightson, for goodness' 
sake open the window, if you can ; the young 
woman has fainted. You can't ? Pan the 

door, then, only don't let the other clerks 

Who on earth can she be ? and what can she 
want ? Stop ! she's coming to. You need 
not open the door." 

Mr. Wrightson looked as the father of ten 
children, on two hundred and fifty pounds a 
year, paid punctually quarterly, ought to look 
. -as if he thought his employer was very much 
to blame in the transaction, but that it was 
not his business to intimate so much in any 
shape or form whatever . and he did not open 
the door. 

Meanwhile Mr. Beliringbright humanely" 
supported the young lady in her chair, as- 
siduously fanning her himself, with his hat, 
snatched from the desk. 

'' She's better now, and I'd better leave them 
to themselves. I suppose they don't want me 
to hear their explanations," muttered the head- 
clerk, preparing to retire, as he witnessed the 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 199 

return to consciousness of the mysterious 
visitant. But Mr. Beliringbright rather un- 
politely ordered him to remain. 

"You are an ass, Wrightson, I tell you!" 
he said, fiercely ; " and you shall stop, and see 
that you are one." 

And, indeed, as soon as the poor girl could 
find a broken utterance to express her meaning 
and purpose in so strange a visitation, Mr. 
Wrightson, at all events, acknowledged the in- 
justice of his suspicions, though it would be 
too much to require of any biped so full an 
admission of quadrupedal standing as was im- 
plied in the above intimation. 

She stated that her name was Maughan . 
Emily Maughan; that her father was Maughan, 
Maiiglian, and Company ; that her mother was 
nearly dead with grief, and incapable of doing 
or saying anything ; that poor Papa was to be 
buried ; that they had no relations in England 
to apply to ; and she . Emily . was obliged to 
try and do it all herself, though her heart was 
broken too. . Only five little orphans, all 
younger than herself, in the family. . But the 
execution people that had been put in the 



200 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

house on his . Mr. Behringbright Brothers' . 
suit had taken possession of all the money in 
the place ; and . and the undertakers, hearing 
everything was seized upon, would none of 
them agree to bury poor Papa, unless . unless 
they might be allowed, through his goodness, 
only ten pounds out of the money found in 

poor Papa's purse, to . to But then sobs 

and hysterical emotion rendered what should 
have followed unintelligible. 

" What is the meaning of all this, Wright- 
son?" exclaimed Mr. Behringbright, consider- 
ably bewildered. 

" Didn't you see in the paper this morning, 
sir, that Ichabod Maughan, of the firm of 
Maughan, Maughan, and Co., of Threadneedle 
Street and Calcutta " 

" I haven't seen the paper, man alive, to look 
at it ! . What has happened ?" 

" He had a grand party on the very night, 
sir, and shot himself in his bedroom, while the 
footmen were putting out the waxlights. The 
jury brought it in * Temporary insanity ;' but 
it ought, in my opinion " 

*' D . n your opinion ! God bless me ! I 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 201 

haven't heard a word about it. But what is 
it she says about an execution, and . and all 
that P" 

"TJiat's Mr. Baillie's department, sir; of 
course we got judgment on the protested bills, 
and are the execution creditors." 

"Are we indeed?" said Mr. Behringbright, 
quite aghast at the intelligence. . '' My poor 
girl, I will not only see to your being furnished 

with sufficient funds to No ; I will myself 

undertake wdiatever ought to be done to give 
your unhappy parent decent interment. And, 
believe me, though it was done in the usual 
course of my business, without my having any 
degree of personal action in the matter, no 
one in the whole world can regret more than I 
do the rash deed into which the pressure put 
upon him has probably driven your unfortunate 
father." 

'* No, sir," said Mr. Wrightson, " we did not 
come in till next day. Baillie lives in the 
neiglibourhood, and heard of the transaction 
early on the morning after, and thought we 
had better go in at once for what we could get, 
as there were certain to be plenty after. And 



202 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

we were only half an hour before Lazarus 
Groldhar's man." 

"Yes, yes, it was the night before . -just 

after the ball . when poor Papa You were 

not at all to blame, sir ; you had a right ! He 
only went upstairs first, and kissed poor little 

Eobert in his bed . and then Grod for ever 

bless you, sir, if you will let us only have 
enough to bury poor Papa !" 

Mr. Behringbright made no reply, but some- 
thing that was not very unlike a stifled sob 
rose under his waistcoat, and half choked him 
in an effort to repress. Then, finding that 
Emily could now retain her seat without sup- 
port, he left her suddenly, and flew to an 
antique triangular cupboard which stood in a 
corner of the apartment. Thence he returned 
with a decanter of wine and a goblet in either 
hand ; filling which latter half full, he insisted 
that Miss Maughan should swallow the con- 
tents at once. She could only, however, sip 
at the edges ; and Mr. Behringbright, finding 
himself more agitated than he exactly liked, 
emptied the vessel at a quaff when she handed 
it quivering back. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 203 

Such was the first mterview between George 
Cocker Behringbright and Emily Maughan . 
but not the last. 

The wealthy merchant seemed touched with 
a kind of remorse for a catastrophe in which 
he nevertheless felt himself to be as innocent 
of all art and part as the rules of trade, and 
legal procedure on dishonoured bills, could 
possibly permit. He himself escorted Emil}^ 
back to her mournfal home, darkened by the 
horrible event which had taken place within 
its once gay and joyous walls. He would 
have dismissed the officers in possession of the 
house and effects, under the judgment his sub- 
ordinates had secured, had it not been clearly 
demonstrated to him that their departure 
would only give the signal for a ruder invasion, 
on the part of half a score of disappointed 
functionaries of the same species. And he 
relieved her by his personal offices from all 
necessity of further interference in the dismal 
duty of consigning her rash-handed sire to his 
eternal rest from bills, and banking, and rail- 
roads through the lurking-places of tiger and 
serpent. Nay, Mr. Behringbright's bcnevo- 



204 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

lence towards the bereaved flimily of his 
escaped debtor stopped not there ; albeit so 
many of us arrogate to ourselves that portion 
of the Divine attributes which avenges the 
sins of the father on the children. For Mr. 
Behringbright interested himself, greatly more 
than even in his quality of creditor for a very 
considerable amount he otherwise might, in 
the winding-up of the affairs of the banking 
firm whose main pillar had so unhandsomely 
withdrawn, and thus allowed the whole ruin 
to crumble hopelessly in. He pretended to 
make the widow and her children an allo^vance 
from the estate during this process . though 
anything of the sort was refused in an indig- 
nation meeting of the creditors, . supplying 
the deficiency from his own purse ; and when 
he could no longer veil his generosity under 
this delicate cover, he asked Mrs. Maughan to 
oblige him by the acceptance of a hundred 
and fifty pounds a year, until her little boy 
could be educated, and be of age to take a seat 
in his office, and repay the outlay by his ser- 
vices. And the merchant made this request with 
such blushing hesitation and confusion, that 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 205 

Mrs. Mauglian, who had been brought up a 
beauty, faintly revived from her widowed de- 
jection to a notion that her matronly charms 
were still appreciated, and that in all proba- 
bility she had made a conquest of the wealthy 
Behringbright, Brothers, himself! 

But, truth to say, that man of money was 
guarded in his triple-plated armour of suspicion 
and incredulity and experience against far 
fresher and more seductive, though most inno- 
cent and scarcely conscious, influences of 
attraction. 

Perhaps, indeed, we have no right to surmise 
that such could in actuality have been the 
case, or that any warmer feeling than the 
deepest gratitude and admiration for the 
manly and noble qualities of the plain-featured 
but magnanimous and tender-hearted mer- 
chant had entered the youthful bosom of 
Emily Mauglian at this period. But we are 
forced to admit that Mr. Behringbright him- 
self grew to remark, with pain and alarm, the 
brightening of the cheek and eye of the young 
girl whenever he entered her presence, . the 
candid simplicity of joy and affection that 



206 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

broke out as it were in beams all over her fair 
and innocent face when be addressed the most 
casual observation to ber. Possessed witb the 
notion that it was impossible for any woman 
to prefer him to all mankind for himself alone, 
and that the whole sex was animated by 
sordid and ambitious motives, and was of so 
false and dissembling a nature, that it was 
absurd to place any stress on its external 
demonstrations, of vv^hatever kind, Mr. Behring- 
bright saw in these signs only the evidences of 
a natural appreciation, on the part of a modern 
young lady reduced from affluence to poverty, 
of his value as a moneyed man. It is true that 
at the same time he discerned a brave direct- 
ness and candour of spirit in all Emily 
Maughan said or did, which seemed at v^ariance 
with the supposition that she was capable of 
the insidious meanness his fancy imputed to 
her. But distrust and suspicion of the whole 
sex had become a solid foundation of prejudice 
in his mind, on which to erect every super- 
structure that could be devised of the sort, and 
from whose battlemented towers his imagina- 
tion kept a perpetual and restless watch. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 207 

To all this we may add that the brilliant 
and voluptuous vision of Madeleine Graham, 
in the fulness and richness of her early- 
developed beauty, swam vaguely before Mr. 
Behringbright's mental vision still, and paled 
those soft and ineffectual charms on which his 
actual optics might rest at will. 

Not that the former had made upon him an 
impression of a strongly commanding and 
energetic character ; for Mr. Behringbright 
took no further interest aj)parently of any sort 
in either the persons or circumstances of Lis 
adventure at the Theatre St. Jacques ; made 
no inquiries, and accepted the carefully weighed 
and meted-out information on the subject of 
Madeleine Graham which his detective trans- 
mitted, without analysis or insistence of any 
kind ; though we are afraid Miss Hortensia 
Sparx indulged in the figure of rhetoric styled 
Metonymy . by which places and things are 
put for others, the cause for the effect, the 
subject for the adjunct . in the account with 
whicli she favoured that agent of justice con- 
cerning the young lady's birth, parentage, and 
place of residence when at home. 



208 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

The senseless coquetry of the spoilt beauty, 
mother of Emily Maughan, succeeding so soon 
upon her husband's tragedy, also contributed 
to disgust and annoy Mr. Behringbright to a 
very high degree, and confirm all his contempt 
and apprehension of the ill designs and merce- 
nary tendencies of the women of his time. He 
saw her settled comfortably with her younger 
children (three he sent to school) in a pretty 
cottage in the salubrious district of Peckham 
Eye, and then began to fall off very perceptibly 
in his complimentary visits ; finally dropping 
them altogether, to the prodigious astonish- 
ment and incredulity of the silly, weak-minded 
woman who had taken him so pleasantly and 
rapidly into the calculations of her widow- 
hood. 

Even when Emily wrote some time after, 
very coldly though most respectfully, to Mr. 
Eehringbright, to beg him to interest himself 
in procuring her a situation as a governess, 
that she might be enabled to become an assist- 
ance instead of continuing a burden on the 
resources his generosity supplied to her family, 
he took it into his possessed brain that it was 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 209 

a ruse to bring Mm to a declaration of a kind 
of paiiialitj, the germs of wlaicli lie was not 
unconscious might exist in his bosom, but 
which he was determined should never grow 
up into a harvest for cupidity and craving of 
the kind he imputed to this poor girl. Willing 
also to extinguish any species of hope she 
might have formed on the subject, he not only 
complied with the request, but in a manner 
which evinced anything but a desire on his 
part to oppose Emily's apparent project of 
removing herself from his possible presence and 
association. He offered her a situation with a 
friend of his own in Ireland . a lady of rank, 
who had been left a widow with two children, 
of whose extensive inheritance Mr. Behrinof- 
bright had accepted the guardianship, under 
the will of their late father, who had been 
a particular friend of his ; though he dis- 
liked the post very much, and had endea- 
voured to excuse himself from it on the 
plea of the multiplicity and absorbing na- 
ture of his own affairs. The younger of 
these children was a little girl, just of age 
to require instruction; and this was the 
VOL. I. 14 



210 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

pupil destined for Miss Emily Maughan's 
superintendence. 

Mr. Behringbright had a vague notion that 
Emily would decline the offer ; perhaps he had 
^ven a still vaguer wish that she would do so. 
He certainly did not represent it under the 
most alluring aspects. Lady Glengariff, he 
stated, was an invalid, labouring under an in- 
curable and very distressing form of malady, 
who resided in complete seclusion in a dismal 
old manor-house among the mountains of 
Kerry. Tlie climate was watery and uncer- 
tain ; Miss Maughan would live surrounded 
by a wild and sometimes dangerously im- 
pulsive and ignorant population ; her only, 
or at least her chief, companion would be a 
child of eight or nine years of age. The heir 
of the family. Lord Glengariff, was a youth 
.still under age, had entered the army, and of 
course was mostly away. Mr. Behringbright 
certainly added, that if she could make up her 
mind to these inconveniences, a liberal salary 
would be apportioned to her, which would 
enable her to contribute, as she so dutifully 
desired, to her mother and family's comforts. 



.MADELEINE GRAHAM. 211 

and tlie retrieval of their position in the 
world. 

In short, it was a little to the kind patron's 
chagrin that this uninviting (in most respects) 
situation was most readily and gratefully 
accepted. 

He went to see the Maughans, and to make 
Emily some little parting present for her 
expenses, with the letter of introduction to her 
new patroness. And he was rather perplexed 
and touched to find her looking unusually pale 
and thin; and even his well-seasoned incre- 
dulity sustained rather a liard strain when he 
observed . which he could not help . how a 
scarlet flush of excitement mantled over all 
that paleness, and the blue loving eyes shone 
up humid with tears, as he pressed the young 
girl's hand kindly in farewell, and expressed 
his hope that he should hear good tidings of 
her occasionally through her mother, or little 
brother, who had become under his auspices a 
Blue-coat boy. But it was no time for regret 
or recall, even if he had felt decisively inclined 
that way, which was far from being the case» 
And so they parted . Emily to prepare imme- 
14. a 



213 MADELEINE GRAHAM/ 

diately for her departure to the south of 
Ireland, and Mr. Behringbright to return 
to his self-appointed taskwork of converting 
everything he touched to hard, unenjoyable, 
unpalatable gold. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 213 



CHAPTEE XII. 

WESTWARD ho! 

On reflection, it does not strike one as very 
singular that Mr. Beliringbright should cherish 
so great an antipathy to being loved . we beg 
pardon, married . for his money. To say no- 
thing of his previous domestic experience of 
the delights of an union contracted under the 
auspices of Plutus, there is certainly some 
principle in the human mind which indisposes 
it to this species of bargain and sale. It is 
true that it is easily overcome when reason is 
once permitted to raise her voice in the ques- 
tion ; especially among the female portion of 
modern mankind. The days of romance seem 
to be as thoroughly over there as the most 
inexorable of fathers or wealthy of uncles of the 
old school could possibly desire, speaking as to 
the fact in general. Nevertheless, there may 



214 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

be some exceptions, as the progress of this 
truthful history may perhaps demonstrate. 
But at present it is through Mr. Behring- 
bright's organs of vision we contemplate the 
sex; a little jaundiced, no doubt, from an 
indigestion of matrimony, but on the whole 
but too faithful and discouraging to any re- 
newal of appetite. 

What but this species of obstinately-rooted 
prejudice could have preserved this wealthy 
merchant (who, like all great woman-haters, 
was at heart devoted to the sex) against all the 
thousand charms and allurements lavishly 
paraded in his way, and have enabled him so 
constantly to elude the fling of those wreaths 
of artificial roses and eglantine from the legions 
of white-armed nymphs who danced before 
him constantly in the mazes of society, and 
took every imaginable chance to hoop him over 
into those scentless and only gaslamp-blooming 
circlets ? Tor there were plenty who tried at 
it, both before and after this little mysterious 
episode of Emily Maughan . which Mr. Beh- 
ringbright himself sometimes felt as if he 
did not quite understand. Eank, beauty. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 21 & 

Fasliion, occasionally even largely-endowed 
sharers in tlie magnetic influence lie did and 
did not enjoy in his proper person, were 
amongst tlie figurantes in tliis sorrowful ballet. 
But still, like the chaste Prince of the adven- 
ture of the Valley of False Delights, Mr. 
Behringbright drew his golden-tissued mantle 
tighter and tighter round him, and manfully 
held on his way, avoiding every path, however 
flower-bestrewed, that seemed to have a ten- 
dency to debouch at the portals of St. Greorge's, 
Hanover Square. 

If rank had been an object with him, where 
was it ranker than in the august pretensions of 
the Lady Flora Diana Macdonald, a duke's 
eldest daughter, descended from prehistoric 
Scottish kings, and the unmixed sjolendour of 
whose lineage was attested in a dozen pages of 
Sir Bernard Burke, and even only slightly 
hinted at as having come to grief, two hundred 
years ago, in the pages of the Count de Gram- 
mont ? It is true that the excessive purity of 
this lady's blood was in part attested by its 
degree of attenuation and dryness, as in fifty- 
year-old port, and that it was in like manner 



216 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

prone to deposit deep purple incrustations, 
though rather on the exterior than internal 
portions of her containing surfaces. And this 
more especially at the approach of the genial 
season of spring, when nature, reviving in all 
her fibres, buds and leafs in every variety of 
form. Antumn, too, had its vintage in the 
far-descended Lady Diana's scorbutic visage ; 
so that on the whole Mr. Behringbright, who 
never once dreamed of such a thing, had a right 
to feel exceedingly surprised when my Lady 
Duchess of Axminster, one fine morning, 
informed him that everybody had observed for 
a very long time his afiectionate attentions to 
her daughter, which she was sure were fully 
reciprocated; so that, conceiving his silence 
occasioned solely by a sense of the difference 
of ra?iky she herself, as a mother, felt it her duty 
to remove every cause of diffidence, and declare 
that there was no one the family would 
welcome more as a son-in-law, however superior 
in rank, than Mr. Behringbright. 

Mr. Behringbright was rather taken aback ; 
but his defences were in too perfect order, his 
gates too well secured, his stores of provisions. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 217 

too carefully laid in, liis artillery too judiciously 
manned, to be carried, even by so resolute and 
sudden an assault on the part of the most 
skilful and enterprising of the dowagers of her 
time. You would have said, however, that 
there was neither man nor gun in the citadel, 
from the silence and passiveness of the resist- 
ance he opposed, in the first instance ; but 
when his surprise allowed him utterance, he 
replied to the enemy with a single discharge, 
that shattered her whole advance, declaring 
that the difference of rank was so great between 
a merchant of the city of London, descended 
only from merchants, and a lady who had 
the honour to boast of kings among her an- 
cestry, that he had never for a moment ven- 
tured on the presumption my Lady Duchess 
so erroneously imputed to him, and never 
.should. 

And he refused ever after to acknowledge 
himself mistaken, even when Lord Eonald 
Macdonald, Lady Flora Diana's brother, called 
upon him in his chambers in the Albany, to 
assure him that he either must, or stand up as 
a target for his lordship's pistol practice, who 



218 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

was notoriously skilful at that arm. Behring- 
bright declined both alternatives; and on 
Lord Eonald producing a riding-whip, and 
threatening him with it, merely took it from 
him and turned him out of his apartment. On 
receiving a written document to the same 
effect, he further contented himself with swear- 
ing the peace against his lordship ; but men of 
honour in general, I believe, thought it very 
ungentlemanly behaviour on Mr. Behring- 
bright's part, not to allow his brains to be 
blown out because it had pleased the Dowager 
Duchess of Axminster to select him for a 
victim at the sacrificial altar of Hymen, 
whereat she officiated as high-priestess. 

If beauty could have carried oJff the palm . 
aristocratic beauty of the most refined and 
exquisitely delicate and fascinating order . 
should not the Lady Eosamond de Vere have 
figured with the said emblem of triumph in 
her hand, a veil of the transparent modesty of 
Chantilly lace falling to her fairy feet, and 
a wreath of myrtle and orange-blossom on her 
queenly brow? Was she not currently re- 
ported to have refused the hand of a young 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 219 

Guardsman, her cousin, whom she really loved, 
on the mere dim and uncertain prospect of 
entrapping the great millionnaire ? Yet that 
was a failure too ; the Lady Rosamond was 
such a determined coquette that she staked on 
too many ventures at the same time, and all 
her balls ran agye. 

Then there was the prodigiously wealthy 
Miss Muckross Malines, who vras in a some- 
what similar condition to Mr. Behringbright 
himself, and had remained unwedded from a 
suspicion of the motives of her suitors ; which, 
if one can suppose so much modesty of self- 
appreciation in woman, her personal appear- 
ance abundantly justified her in entertaining. 
But now the equal wealth of the great merchant 
might have obviated such objections on the 
heiress's part ; yet there were others on his 
own, which proved insurmountable. 

Meanwhile time elapsed, and Mr. Behring- 
bright could not have been supposed to have 
grown any younger, or to feel any increase of 
confidence in his unaided personal resources to 
win the genuine favour of the fair, two years 
after the date of the period when the reader 



220 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

first made his acquaintance in these pages, at 
the Dolce-Far-Niente Club. About that in- 
terval had taken place, I find, when one even- 
ing, just before the closing of Parliament, Mr. 
Behringbright walked into the great room of 
the club, looking towards the intended bas- 
reliefs of the statue of Nelson, with a newly- 
purchased tourist's knapsack in his hand, a 
helmet-of-Mambrino-looking wide awake on 
his head, a thick crabstick, with a bayonet- 
spring in the handle, tucked under his arm, 
and attired in a complete suit of strong brown, 
serviceable-looking tweed, and knickerbockers. 
The club porter himself, accustomed as he was 
to the eccentricities of costume on the part of 
the gentleman who made him the handsome i 
Christmas-gift of the year, hardly recognised 
his patron on this occasion, and was about to 
ask his business as a stranger, when he recog- 
nised the voice and civility that addressed one 
of the waiters. 

" Have you a Bradshaw convenient, Mr. 
Dobson ? I want to look at it ; the one that 
has the steamboats and all that in it too, 
you know." 



.MADELEINE GRAHAM. 221 

" Yes, sir ; the thick sixpenny." 

The "thick sixpenny" was produced, and 
Mr. Behringbright, tucking his stick tighter 
yet under his arm, turned the luminous pages 
over in search of the information he required. 

" What can Mr. Behringbright be after 
now ? " said one of the habitues to another. 

" Can't imagine. But ithn't he funny to 
look at ? " replied the person addressed, putting 
up his eye glass, and surveying the figure 
engaged in looking over the Bradshaw with 
as much interest and curiosity as a naturalist 
might some new species of animal. 

"Just like Don Quixote starting on his 
second sally ; fot he looks deuced ill and out of 
sorts, as if he was hardly quite well yet of his 
stoning by the galley-slaves,'' rejoined Mr. 
Vivian Fauntleroy. "But it don't much 
matter to anybody but himself, I should think, 
where he goes, how he looks, or what becomes 
of him, such a greedy old curmudgeon as he 
has grown, with all those acres of bank-notes 
and mountains of bullion of his." 

A coldness had arisen of latter times between 
the wit and moneyed man, in consequence of 



222 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

the latter getting tired even of so clever a 
person's, and who was fast becoming a political 
celebrity's, autograph, in the shape of I U's. 

" Do you think he can intend to do Mont 
Blanc this recess, on foot ? But isn't that now 
rather out of fashion with you people that are so 
fond of wearing out good British shoe-leather 
among those humbugging foreign mountains, 
Vaticans, and all that ?" said the Independent 
British Member, who happened to pass at the 
moment, on his way to three British mutton 
chops, nearly raw as to cooking, and to be 
washed down with a bottle of the strongest 
British beer ; a diet which made the Inde- 
pendent British Member rather pufiy and fat, 
and not himself very apt to the climbing of 
mountains and " Yaticans" . which latter it is 
very possible he confounded in his own mind, 
from the great resemblance of the spelling, 
with " Yesuviuses." 

" What's he asking Dobson ?" 

" Mr. Dobson, you're cleverer than I am if 
you can find me out what train I must take on 
the London and North-Western to catch the 
next Belfast steamer," said Mr. Behringbright, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. £23 

throwing the ** Gruide" over to the waiter, who 
stood expecting orders ; after vainly puzzling 
for a time over columns that not unfrequently 
suggest to the human mind the humbling con- 
viction that there's nothing more difficult of 
comprehension than what appears easiest. 

*' Belfast! Do you hear that? Going to 
buy a shipload of linens, I suppose/' said Mr, 
Fauntleroy, sulkily. 

" But I thay, Vivian, ithn't Belfast in Ire- 
land ? Mayn't he be going to KiUarney, like 
everybody elth this year, to see the Meeting of 
the Waterth, and all that thentimental busi- 
ness ? That'th a thort of thing every fellah 
mutht do, you know." 

*' I should think he would go to Dublin or 
Cork for that; and in his own yacht, most 
likely. No, he's going to Belfast on some 
nasty money-scraping business, no doubt ; and 
he likes to make his bargains looking as hard 
.up as he possibly can, to get the people to let 
him have things cheaper," said Mr. Faunt- 
leroy. 

*' Wliatascrew!" 

" Dobson has found him what he wants, and 



224 JtfADELEINE GRAHAM. 

I declare lie lias tipped him half-a-sovereign 
for his pains," remarked another member, who 
was apparently reading a newspaper in a 
frame, but who was doing no such thing, but 
attending to everything else to be seen or heard 
in the room; only preventing other people 
from usurping the place. 

" He spoils all the servants for us poor 
devils !" muttered Mr. Vivian T. 

" He's going now. No, he is turning back. 
What is it about ? '* 

"Mr. Dobson, if any letters come for me 
after the end of this week, will you post 
them to me at Glengariff Castle, Grap of 
Dunloe, County Kerry ? . Put Ireland on it 
too, for fear of a mistake." 

" Yes, sir ; it is in the books punctual 
already ; you was there three years ago." 

" So I was . at poor Glengariff's funeral. 
What a memory you have, Mr. Dobson ! 
Would' nt you pass a Civil Service examination, 
now ! Good morning. Sir Charles ; I'm off for 
Ireland in half an hour." 

"Ireland! Where's that ?" 

" In the Atlantic." 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



9.^: 



" Good shooting the part you're going to ?" 

"No; some hares and lots of stags; but 
rather too big a country." 

" jBon voya()e r 

" Thank you . I hate French ; and I am 
almost sure to be sea-sick." 

Exit George Cocker Behringbright. And now 
it is very seldom, excepting immediately after 
the grand exit of all, that one's friends find any- 
thing very particularly good to say of one on 
such an occasion, and then only on consideration 
that it cannot possibly do one the least service 
or kindness. Accordingly, Mr. Fauntleroy had 
no sooner satisfied himself that his of late 
unfreely-bleeding skinflint of a patron was out 
of hearing, than he observed, " I'll be sworn, 
it's true, then, and he is cutting out of town 
from the ridicule of the affair that took place 
last night at the Treehorne Fete !" 

" What affair? I have not heard of any," 
said half a dozen male voices at once . though 
curiosity is chiefly a female failing. 

" The Treehorne Gardens Private Fete, you 
know, got up by the nobility and gentry, to 
enjoy themselves for once in a way. Perfectly 

VOL. I. 15 



226 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

select, of course, as usual . Almack's out of 
doors . admittance only by vouchers, signed 
and countersigned by a committee of peers and 
dowagers and . and all that sort of thing. But 
you must, some of you, know about it?" 

" I was there ; but it rained so, there wathn't 
much fun,'' said one of the group now collected 
around the usually rather entertaining, because 
always bitter and malicious-tongued, tale- 
teller. 

" You must have put up an umbrella for 
once then, Mr. Dundreary, not to have seen it, 
for there was some capital fun. Only think ! 
Although the Duchess of Axminster and the 
daughter were to be there, Mr. Behringbright 
meant to go, and had bought himself a 
voucher." 

" Quite right for a fello^y to amuse himself, 
if he can and has the money, in spite of all the 
dowagers in the world." 

" But Behringbright goes about in such a 
drowsy, Dutch way ever3^where, that he lost 
his voucher somewhere in the streets ; and the 
fun I'm going to tell you about is, it was 
found by a swell-mob fellow, who determined 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 227 

at once to go as tlie rich Mr. Beliringbright, 
and pick people's pockets under the name !" 

" Ha ! ha ! ha ! Ho, Fauntleroj ! you 
don't say so ?" 

" I do. A terribly impudent fellow too he 
was ; for as soon as ever people were driven in 
by the weather into an immense dreary sort of 
a ballroom they have there . except when it's 
filled with a jolly mob . he showed his voucher 
to the master of the ceremonies, and asked to 
be introduced as partner to a young lady who 
he saw had some valuable jewels to prig ; and 
when she heard his name (I know hers, but 
perhaps I oughtn't to mention it), she thought 
he was the real rich Beliringbright, in propria 
persond, and set herself, tooth and nail, to 
fascinate him, as they all do ! And although 
the fellow could not speak commonly decent 
English, and put in h's and w's in all sorts of 
wrong places, he persuaded her that he only 
did it to enter thoroughly into the humour of 
such a world-turned-upside-down fete ; and 
actually carried out the thing so strong, that 
at last he proposed to Sir Harry Huntsman's 
only unmarried dauglitcr now left, . dear me ! 
15 . 2 



228 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

I ouglitn't to have mentioned the name, . and 
was accepted." 

" That'll do, Fauntleroy ! That's your last, 
I suppose, and it will do for a capper. Ne 
sutor ultra crepidmnr said Sir Solomon Comyn- 
place, one of the auditory. 

" It is true, I assure you." 

" Is it in the papers ?" 

" Is that the place to look for truth ?" 

" In the police reports it is.'^ 

" No, then ; it is not to be found there. 
Of course the case was hushed up. The 
friends of the young lady would not come 
forward . was it likely? But everybody 
knows all about it . or will in a few hours 1" 
concluded Mr. Fauntleroy, in an undertone, to 
the inventor of the story . his own dear self. 
But, provided his story was a good one, Mr. 
Yivian Fauntleroy was of too poetical and 
brilliant a genius to concern himself about such 
prosaic and wing-clogging stuff as the reality 
of his facts. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 229 



CHAPTEE XIII. 



A LETTER. 



Mr. Behringbright's true motives for leaving 
London on an Irish trip are, however, con- 
tained in the foUowinsr letter : . 



^t) 



" Glengariff Castle, Go. Kerry j 
^^July., 18.. 

"Dearest and most valued Friend, . 
" You will, in all ^probability, be greatly sur- 
prised, and no less grieved, at the extraordinary 
piece of disastrous intelligence which I am 
obliged to communicate to you, as the 
only person on whose sound judgment and 
unshaken friendship I know I can at all times 
rely. As the sole guardian of my son, also, 
in his nonage, although he has now attained 
what the law so erroneously calls the age of 
discretion, and as the benevolent protector and 



230 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

patron (which I have always been assured, 
from every source, you are) of the unfortunate 
young woman whom you recommended under 
my roof, and whose name is likely to be most 
unpleasantly associated with that of the House 
of Glengariff, I implore your interposition ! 

"It is now nearly two years, as you must 
very w^ell remember, since Miss Emily Maughan 
first became an inmate of Glengariff Castle, in 
the capacity in which you had recommended 
her, of governess to my daughter. Lady Gwen- 
doline. She came to us with a testimonial 
under your hand, than which it would have 
been impossible, I should think, anything more 
flattering, and calculated to conciliate every 
species of esteem, could be conceived. And 
notwithstanding my present unhappy con- 
victions, I must add that, however lavish the 
eulogium, it seemed more than justified in the 
person and qualities of the amiable 3^oung girl 
who presented herself with your letter of re- 
commendation, but with a still stronger one 
written in her modest and ingenuous coun- 
tenance, at Glengariff Castle, two years ago. 
The mildness of her temper, in combination 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 231 

with a decision and energy of character, re- 
markable in several instances that called for 
the exercise of those qualities very shortly 
after her arrival here, were found fully equal 
to all you reported. In particular, I may 
mention that, although I was seized with a 
paroxysm of my frightful mental malady, with 
shocking unexpectedness, one day in Miss 
Maughan's presence . ^before she had obtained 
the least inkling of the dreadful secret of my 
mournful and secluded existence, . although, 
in fact, I must declare that, overcome with the 
horror of the vision (you know, alas ! too well 
what those fearful words veil), I rushed to the 
edge of the rocks over the Eagle's Crag, and 
was about to hurl myself headlong into the 
lake, . she seemed to comprehend the tremen- 
dous fact with a single dart of intuition, rushed 
after, seized me by the hair of my head, 
tore me back, and held me through the most 
powerful convulsive efforts of my, to be sure, 
much-shattered and enfeebled frame, until 
assistance arrived. No doubt, I am willing to 
admit. Miss Emily Maughan saved my life by 
her presence of mind and undaunted courage 



232 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

on this occasion ; for there was no one else at 
hand to preserve me from the terrible impulse, 
which came on at an unusual season and hour, 
or I should have had my faithful giantess, 
Norah, in attendance night and day, as is my 
wont. And I do not deny that I owe to Miss 
Emily Maughan a debt of gratitude ; to pay 
which, however, it cannot be that I am called 
upon to sacrifice the honour of the princely 
line of the O'Donoghues of Glengariff, of whom 
my son is the last representative ! 

" I say nothing of the fine talents and accom- 
plishments of yoMV prote(/eey except that they 
fully equalled what you had led us to expect. 
Grwendoline, who is a slow and torpid child, it 
cannot be denied, improved rapidly under her 
care. The little girl took a fancy to her precep- 
tress, who certainly has something peculiarly 
engaging and attractive in her whole person and 
demeanour, the secret of which it is not easy 
to discover. I cannot say that I consider her 
as what one may style regularly beautiful in 
the countenance ; she has a charming expres- 
sion, a look of clear honesty and integrit}' . 
which it does one good to see . a lovely fair 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 233 

complexion, and an elegant figure. But when 
you have said this, you have said all ; and I 
cannot in the least understand the infatuation 
of my son, unless on a supposition too dreadful 
to be dwelt upon, that the hereditary malady 

of our race But no ; I will not suffer 

myself to adopt so fearful a conclusion, and 
will continue to hope everything from the 
ascendancy which the calm sagacity and reso- 
lute determination of character that have 
always marked the dearest friend of my late 
husband, will also doubtless secure him over 
his wayward son. 

" I need not now repeat what I have written 
to you so often . though the correspondence 
on your part has necessarily, from the multi- 
tude of your avocations, been limited to very 
general acknowledgments . concerning the 
rapid advance made by Miss Maughan in the 
good graces of my entire household and of the 
wild but generous and loving-hearted race who 
dwell, as their progenitors have dwelt, around 
the home of my ancestors. With me also, I 
readily admit, she speedily established herself in 
the warmest favour and approbation. There was 



234 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

no visible drawback, and I did not suspect decep- 
tion in one so young, and so replete, in appear- 
ance, with candour and every kindly sensibility. 
Or if anything of the sort[existed, it lay, perhaps, 
in the fact that, for a considerable time after 
her arrival among us, there w^as something of a 
pensive abstraction and sadness to be remarked 
in Miss Maughan's demeanour, wliich at times 
almost suggested to me the notion that there 
were regrets of the heart and affections over- 
shadowing her young existence, independent of 
the sorrowful incidents of her starting in life 
of which you had placed me in possession. 
But it was not an oppressive or a gloomy 
cloud . ^rather one of those soft, silvery exhala- 
tions which arise from the bosom of our lakes 
in the heat of summer, and throw that dreamy 
shadowing of splendour that gives so peculiar 
a magic to the beauty of our scenery. It 
suited me well, besides : the presence of 
youth, brilliant and vivacious with its cus- 
tomary high spirits and insensibility to the 
sufferings of others, would have jarred incon- 
ceivably on my unstrung and quivering nerves. 
As it was, Emily Maughan seemed to have in 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 235 

Iier nature some gift of soothing and sway over 
mine, that even proved powerfully influential 
for good in the severest crisis of my malady, . 
an influence which I might, perhaps, liken to 
that of the inspired minstrel of Israel over his 
similarly-afflicted king, but which has also been 
of as baneful consequence on the general for- 
tunes of my house 1 

" But to make myself intelligible. Last 
summer, as you are well aware, my son, Lord 
GlengarifF, attained his majority. I think it 
was against your advice, but upon his own 
earnest wish, that he was indulged with leave 
of absence from his regiment, and returned to 
celebrate the event among his prosperous and 
devoted tenantry, . prosperous, thanks to your 
most admirable management and care, and by 
ways and means which my own and my 
husband's riotous and headlong ancestry had 
never deemed compatible with the wild habits 
of our people. You saw Ferdinand just before 
here turned to us ; so you will not impute it alto- 
gether to a mother's partiality for an only son, 
when I state that in my eyes lie appeared the 
very perfection of noble and manly grace, . a 



236 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

soldier and a gentleman in all lie said, did, 
and looked; gallant and gay; witty and 
poetical in his language and temperament ; . a 
youthful chieftain worthy indeed to be the 
last representative of the most illustrious of 
ancient Irish races ! You may judge, there- 
fore, whether any confidence is to be placed 
in the pretended refusal and withdrawal of 
this young girl, the daughter of a ruined 
mercantile family ; and whether it is not, on 
the contrary, a refinement of artifice to secure 
to herself so splendid a personal prize and 
elevation of rank as the frenzied passion of ray 
son has, I am led to believe, placed at the 
option of Emily Maughan ! 

" For, not to prolong so painful a recital, 
and so wounding to every species of just pride 
and tenderness in the breast of a mother, I 
must inform you, my dear Baron [this word 
was, however, obliterated, and mj/ dear Mr. 
Beltringhrighi followed on], that almost imme- 
diately after his arrival, it is extremely probable, 
my son began to imbibe the insensate passion 
which is likely to cause us all so much trouble. 
I myself noticed, though at the time without 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 237 

misgiving, that at the grand fete which we 
gave in celebration of the majority to, I may 
say, the entire county, he led out my daughter's 
governess more than once before all the assem- 
bled nobility and gentry, and particularly in- 
sisted on dancing the last country-dance with 
her for his partner. But as he also danced jigs 
with half a score of peasant-girls, and his 
foster-sister, Norah's daughter, I looked upon 
it (as other people, I suppose, did at the time) 
as a piece of high-born condescension and 
popular gallantry, well befitting the youthful 
chieftain of GlengarifT; and my mother's heart 
was so delighted with the praises of the young 
man's free and graceful manners, that I have 
no doubt I shared unsuspiciously in the general 
opinion that Lord Glengariff never showed 
to more advantage througliout the fete than 
when he had for his partner the fair young 
Sassenach from beyond the bitter sea ! 

" Nothing of special moment occurred for a 
considerable time after to open my eyes. 
GlengarifT is so secluded a spot of the world, 
. my long illness and widowhood have so 
removed me from intimate association with 
our few equals, separated from us by wide 



238 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

circuits and rough mountain roads, . that 
the constant association into which the 
young people were thrown, in my presence, 
gave me no uneasiness. Indeed, I should as 
soon have dreamed of the formation of an 
honourable attachment between the Chief of 
Glengariff and a governess, as of any at all 
between creatures of different species ! On 
the other hand, my son's noble, high-souled 
character prevented me from conceiving the 
remotest suspicion of any ill results of another 
nature to the intimacy. It happened, more- 
over, that I had an unusually protracted attack 
of the horrible melancholy which precedes and 
follows the paroxysms of my disorder, and I 
was too exquisitely consoled and revived by 
the constant company and cheerful devotion 
of these two richly-endowed creatures, whose 
association seemed to sustain both equally in 
their task, to dream for a moment of severing 
it. I am even still unwilling to think that 
Emily could at this period have formed the 
insidious design she has since so dangerously 
carried out. She has assured me, with every 
mark of sincere and passionate emotion, that 
she never apprehended in the least the 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 239 

fatality wliicli has occurred, until a much later 
period. She did not believe herself capable, 
she declared, of inspiring sentiments of the 
kind in any one ! She even, in the confusion 
of her final avowal, dropped something to the 
effect that, on an occasion when she had 
herself endeavoured to inspire affection in a 
person of the opposite sex, she had failed ! 
Glengariff has not even the honour to be 
the first love . the first matrimonial prize, I 
should say . of this most wonderfully artful 
and designing English girl ! 

" I speak of her avowal ; for imagine if you 
can . and I remember well you had not too 
good an opinion of women in general, my 
dear friend, nor have cause . the exceeding 
artifice and subtlety of the plan hit upon to 
bring the whole contrivance to bear, in the 
least offensive and startling manner, it was 
doubtless thought, as respected myself 

" How, indeed, she could have wrought 
Glengariff up to such an excess of infatuation 
as to enter into her scheme, and to hope for 
any success with me, I cannot dream. The 
women of tlicse times . must surely be in 
possession of the philtres and charms of which 



240 MADELEINE GKAHAM. 

we hear in ancient stories, or deal in tile- 
witchcrafts of the Middle Ages ! And yet, in 
a creature so seemingly frank, disinterested, 
and generous-hearted as this young girl has 
always impressed herself to be on all who 
beheld her, how could I conjecture a faculty 
of dissimulation and intrigue so perfected? 
Even Glengariff's expression of a wish and 
intention . so sudden and unaccountable, one 
might say, in a young man of his years, just 
beginning to taste the pleasures of society and 
of the great world to which his birth and 
wealth gave him the readiest access . to retire 
from the army and become a resident landlord 
on his estates, had not awakened my sus- 
picions. The project certainly somewhat 
annoyed and disquieted me, for a solitary and 
inactive life was never suited to the genius of 
our family ; and I cannot but think that my 
own too complete withdrawal from society, on 
the sudden death of my beloved husband, con- 
tributed more than anything else to the 
development of the dreadful malady I inherit 
with the grandeur of my descent. But I was 
too completely besotted by my affection for an 
only son . too blinded by the credulity, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 241 

perhaps, of self-love . to perceive tlie young 
man's real motives and design. Nay, I must 
admit, with such extraordinary skill and 
artifice had the whole project been concerted, 
that even when the momentous fact was 
brought directly to my cognizance, my trust 
in Emily continued for a while quite unabated 
and assured. 

" It was she herself then, in short, who 
revealed to me, with every apparent sign of 
grief and disapprobation on her own part, that 
Lord Glengariff had made the avowal to her 
of a passion which he declared would prove 
his destruction unless as warmly responded 
to ! . A passion which, he announced, nothing 
could ever change or diminish, and which a 
natural eloquence and poetical fervour of 
expression he is gifted with would certainly 
have rendered irresistible in the ears of any 
woman, even if greatly prepossessed in favour 
of another. But what other living man 
would not my Glengariff eclipse, in any 
rational comparison ? Who can vie with him 
in the endowments of personal beauty, polish 
of manners, cultivation of intellect, all that 

YOL. I. 16 



242 MADELEINE GRAHAM.' 

would stamp the lowliest-born of mankind 
a nobleman of nature's costliest workmanship ? 
But is he not rich, high-born, loftily titled 
too ? . descended from that great O'Donoghue 
of the Lakes whose renown has passed into 
the regions of mythic and fabulous grandeur, 
in the traditions of the peasantry of the South 
of Ireland ? 

" And yet Miss Emily Maughan . the 
beggared daughter of a bankrupt trader, who 
had perished by his own hand, . at best a 
nondescript between a servant and a humble 
companion in a great household . would have 
persuaded me . did persuade me . that she 
had turned a deaf ear to all the passion 
and entreaties of a wooing prince, as it 
were, and that she desired nothing more 
than to remove herself from the necessitj^ 
of repeating her refusal ! She did not, indeed, 
venture to try my credulity so far as to 
allege, at that time, anything so wonderfully 
out of all understanding and calculation as 
an offer of an honourable union on the part 
of a chief of Grlengariff declined by a destitute 
adventuress. That was another part of the 
programme, and to be carried out by an agency 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 243 

to which some j^ossible credit, it was thought, 
misfht be attached. For was it to be conceived 
that my son would invent, against himself, so 
humiliating a statement, but so artfully con- 
trived to do honour to the pretended good 
faith and fidelity of the treacherous girl, who 
doubtless contrived and conducted the whole 
intrigue ? 

" Under these appearances, of course I con- 
sented at once, though, I own it, with the 
deepest regret, . while my hallucination con- 
tinued, . to Miss Maughan's expressed earnest 
desire to leave Grlengariff, and remove to a 
distance ; at least until such time as that my 
son might be led to perceive the vanity of his 
hopes, and return to his proper brilliant posi- 
tion in the world, and enjoyment of the ad- 
vantages at his disposal. We even, as I 
thought, concerted a plan in perfect confidence 
and intelligence with each other, by which 
Emily was to remain, as it were, within call 
of a speedy return, the moment we had reason 
to believe a return compatible with the kind 
of safety we desired to secure. She herself, 
indeed, skilfully hinted at family and personal 
IG. 2 



244 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

reasons wliicli rendered lier nnwilling to return 
to England ; so, in conclusion, we agreed to 
advertise for another situation for her in 
Ireland, for a season ; and as we set about the 
insidious project at once, I had reason to take 
comfort in the prospect of the approaching 
separation, and to consent to the artful girl's 
suggestion that I should consult my health 
and peace of mind by entering into no kind of 
explanation with my son on the subject. Of 
course I took care . good heavens ! and even 
in compliance with her own inexpressibly 
deceptive request . to obviate the dangers of 
any further private intercourse by my own 
constant presence and vigilance in their com- 
pany. But no doubt they found opportunities, 
which eluded both, to arrange and carry 
forward their plans. 

" Success seemingly awaited our first sup- 
posed harmonious action. The advertisement 
was answered by a citizen of Belfast, who 
required a governess in his family . at a very 
moderate salary, certainly, considering the 
qualities and accomplishments which he seemed 
to consider essential to the position. But our 
plan was only for a temporary exigency. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 245 

Belfast seemed admirably remote for the main 
object I believed her as well as myself to have 
in view. And also Miss Maughan either re- 
cognised, or affected to recognise, in the 
applicant the father of a schoolfellow of her 
own, whom she remembered as a very hand- 
some and good-natured, girl who would pro- 
bably contribute to make her new home less 
strange and desolate. From very proper 
motives, however, as I thought at the time, 
she laid no claims to this early association, but 
forwarded the amplest testimonials to her 
merits I could devise, without comment. The 
reply was such as we had a right to expect ; 
and Sir Orange Graham even expressed him- 
self quite proud and gratified at the prospect 
of an instructress for his younger children 
who had been thought worthy to conduct the 
education of a daughter of the noble house of 
Grlengariff. 

"To complete the whole mockery. Miss 
Maughan affected to take advantage of an ab- 
sence, which my son was certainly induce<l on 
her private instructions to feign, on a shooting 
excursion in the mountains, to take her depar- 
ture from Glengariff.J The manoeuvre was 



246 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

effected witli what I consider great dexterity. 
"We had a pretended discussion before the 
domestics concerning some point of difference 
in my notions and hers regarding Gwendoline's 
course of instruction. I dismissed her seem- 
ingly in a passion, and she left the house, 
seemingly in a pet, without leaving any 
guidance or information as to whither she in- 
tended to proceed . had she kept our arrange- 
;nent . after being driven in one of the family 
jaunting-cars to the nearest coach-town. She 
left . I am ashamed to say it now" . under my 
warmest tears and benedictions, parting with. 
as fond embraces and assurances of mutual 
regret and tenderness as if we had been indeed 
mother and daughter, separated by the most 
disastrous circumstances. As for Gwendoline, 
the poor child is not yet consoled for that 
specious loss. 

" The whole craft and hypocrisy of the plan 
was, however, unveiled on my son's return, 
which was also unexpectedly early and abrupt. 
But what foundation could there be for his 
allegation, that he had some kind of mysterious 
and perhaps supernatural intimation of mis- 
fortune threatening him, though he inherit^ 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 247 

the blood of tlie great O'Donogliue, since wliat 
had befallen had rather been to his preserva- 
tion ? Perhaps even, if I had questioned him, 
he would not have scrupled to pretend that he 
had seen his ancestor rise from the bosom of 
Glengariff lake, in the golden armour, on the 
snow-white water-steed, with its finny fore- 
paws ! There is no profanation of which I 
do not fancy Glengariff capable, under the 
inspirations of that wicked girl ! But as it 
was, he no sooner learned from me that Miss 
Maughan had left the castle, in consequence of 
a dispute with me, and that I did not intend 
her to return, than he passed at once into an 
access of rage and despair that proved but too 
well that he inherits the stormy spirit of his 
ancestry . perhaps their dark and inscrutable 
malady ! Or else, unaccustomed to deceit, he 
overacted his part, and taking, as he imagined, 
advantage of the awe and alarm into which I 
was thrown by the outbreak, burst out with 
the insane assertion that he had actually 7;; 'o- 
posed marriacje to Miss Maughan, and that she 
had declined the offer, but that he was deter- 
mined to win so priceless a blessing at the cost 
of erery other, if need were. Yes, that . that 



248 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

he would find her out, and bring her back as 
its mistress to Glengariff Castle, if I had 
hidden her in the centre of the earth ! My 
son had even the barbarity to thunder forth 
that the illustrious unmixed ancestry of which 
I reminded him had entailed the most fearful 
of diseases on their descendants, probably from 
that very circumstance, and that he was re- 
solved to transmit his name by fresher streams 
to posterity, or suffer it to perish for ever from 
the land ! 

" It began to dawn upon me then that in 
reality I was made the sport and plaything of 
a craftily devised intrigue, and that my un- 
happy son, made the victim of the perfidious 
artifices of a strange woman, took this shallow 
means to break his insane projects to me ! 
But he speedily found that I also inherit the 

heroic fervour of my race, and that . We 

had an awful scene . a fearful quarrel ! But I 
did not surely curse my child, my only son ? 
No ; I but pronounced upon the alliance with 
which he threatened me a parent's maledic- 
tion ! What followed I scarcely know. Glen- 
gariff fled from my presence ; but all would 
have been well, only that '' 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 249 

Here tins lengthy epistle seemed to have 
come to an abrupt pause, for what followed 
was written in a fainter kind of ink, in a 
shaky and uncertain hand, differing consider- 
ably from the previous caligraphy : . 

"I have had, I believe, one of the most 
fearful attacks I have ever yet survived, . of 
several weeks' duration. I am very weak, ill, 
incapable of any resolution or movement. 
But it was perfectly plain it was all a delusion 
and deceit. They are doubtless together 
somewhere . perhaps married . perhaps not. 
My son may have proved a villain to her, poor 
girl! . He has proved one to his own mother ! 
What am I saying ? . I know not. But oh, 
Behringbright, Behringbright ! if ever my 
poor late husband was dear to you . if he 
saved your life when you were all but swal- 
lowed in the crevasse on the Alps when you 
visited them together . cross the sea at once, 
at once, dear friend ! and come, come, come, 
and save us all ! " 

There was a slight postscript added ; . 

" The business person whose fiimily she 
pretended to enter is called Sir Orange 
Graham, a trader in Belfast." 



250 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



CHAPTEE XIY. 

FASCINATION. 

It will appear from the foregoing document, 
that Mr. Behringbright's business in Ireland 
might very possibly relate to matters of as 
Tiiuch importance, considered under some points 
of view, as any shipload of linens ever manu- 
factured at Belfast. The happiness of the 
lives of two young persons . the honour, 
perhaps, of a woman . seemed concerned in it. 
To be sure, these things are not to be reckoned 
as much in comparison with aught that 
relates to the great purpose of the modern 
Britisher's creation . moneymaking. But by 
^ome strange perversion in the order of nature 
which is sometimes witnessed in the material 
world . as when, from a sharp crab stock, the 
sweet and juicy-flavoured Adam-and-Eve apple 
is produced . the rich Mr. Behringbright him- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 251 

self postponed a variety of important business 
enterprises to attend to one involving only 
sucli trifling considerations as those alluded to 
above. 

And yet it would be no easy task to describe 
exactly with what particular feelings and emo- 
tions Mr. Behringbrioiit was animated in the 
resolution he took to cross the Irish Sea in 
person, and ascertain the real condition of 
affairs to his own satisfaction. Using the 
common phrase, that is ; for somehow or other 
the resolved vo3^ager himself was conscious of 
a strange and unaccountable irk of uncomfort- 
able experience awakened in his breast, and 
threatening to grow in painfulness and irrita- 
tion, like the first start of the gout in some 
unwonted member of the human frame. 

It is rather singular . if everything else 
relating to the genus liorno were not so strange 
. if, when one's uncle's King in Denmark, and 
married to one's mother, anything else could 
appear surprising ! But what we have, or can 
easily win into possession, seems by no means 
to excite the sam^ degree of interest and 
activity towards that result as desirable things 



252 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

placed under exactly contrary conditions. 
Would Juliet, I wonder, have persisted in 
doting on Eomeo . doting on the young 
gentleman to the extent of dying for him . if 
the quarrel of the Capukts and Montagues had 
not rendered it virtually impossible that he 
and she should ever be comfortably married 
and settled in Yerona ? There are cases, too, 
on record, of men unable to survive their wives, 
widows their dear defuncts ; but they are rare, 
and not within the limits of everybody's ex- 
perience. But now this particular mood of 
mysterious humanity, by which we no sooner 
see an object, previously slighted and under- 
valued because in our grasp, suddenly removed 
by any accident of fate and circumstance into 
the regions of the unattainable, than it becomes 
of extraordinary worth and anxiety of pursuit, 
is a mood not at all so rare and exceptional 
as for the credit of human consistency 
and propriety it should be ! And this might 
be a little Mr. Behringbright's condition at 
the moment of his departure for Ireland. 
Emily Maughan . devotedly, uncomplainingly, 
perhaps almost unconsciously to herself, wor- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 253 

slii23ping liim ; offering incense in tlie temple 
she had raised to him in her boundless grati- 
tude and admiration . was, on the whole, rather 
an annoyance, . an unpleasing claim on atten- 
tion ! But Emily Maughan, deserting the 
temple she had raised, serving no longer at the 
altar, incensing the idol's shrine no more ; on 
the contrary, herself elevated to the goddess 
rank, and receiving the homage of so glorified 
a worshipper as the young chieftain of Glen- 
gariff, possessed of all the like advantages, and 
so many more of those he imagined himself 
chiefly to lack ; . all this presented a disturb- 
ing and exceedingly unwelcome and uneasy 
series of reflections and convictions to the mind 
of George Cocker Behringbright. 

He managed, however, to persuade himself 
that the only real interest he took in the 
lamentable aflfair was prompted by a sense of 
duty towards the heir aud family of a dear dead 
friend ; and also . although she had proved 
herself no different from the rest of her sex, in 
fact, an artful, contriving, ambitious minx, 
introduced by him (unfortunately) into a noble 
house, to become the banc of it ! . a feclinor 



254 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

that lie ought not to allow a young creature 
whom he had in some degree taken under his 
protection to be altogether abandoned of 
friends and good counsel ! Nay, Mr. Behring- 
bright thought it pretty certain that Emily 
.must already be in need of both ; for, on the 
one hand, he placed no belief whatever in 
Lord Griengariff having really been cajoled into 
so total an oblivion of what was due to his 
own high rank and position in the world as to 
offer marriage to an unprotected governess girl 
of eighteen or nineteen ; and on the other, the 
misogynist merchant concluded that her own 
cupidity and blind pursuit of aggrandize- 
ment would mislead her into any snare of 
the kind that might be spread before her 
feet. 

But whatever were his motives or intentions, 
there he stood, Mr. Behringbright, of the firm 
of Behringbright Brothers, of London and half 
the world besides, on the deck of the General 
Steam Navigation Company's roj^al steamer 
Prince Alfred^ as she lay panting and puffing 
and palpitating up her "motive power" off 
Fleetwood Pier, in Lancashire, at half-past 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 255 

seven, on a serene and beautifully-moonlit 
summer evening. 

Is there not something real, after all, in the 
theory of presentiments ? There was nothing 
otherwise to account for the feeling of pro- 
found dejection which weighed upon Mr. 
Behringbright's spirits on this occasion. On 
the contrary, the noble expanse of Morecambe 
Bay shone all over, in the bright and full- orbed 
moon^ like a sea of sparkling emerald. Yery 
tranquil, too ; the most uneasy of land stomachs 
had as yet no justification for a qualm. But 
still a vague sense of approaching disaster 
overhung him, like an unseen cloud in the blue 
expanse above. In vain he endeavoured to 
smoke off the sensation ; it resisted the most 
soothing efforts of the Cuban weed ; and Mr. 
Behringbright, who had long had the clean- 
washed deck of the steamer almost to himself, 
felt relieved as if from a horror of desolation 
when the tolling of the pier-bell produced the 
customary hurry-scurrying of passengers down 
to the place of embarkation. 

He strolled to the gangway to divert his 
mind by witnessing this; but, finding the 



256 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

confusion and bustle in tlie immediate neigh- 
bonrliood of action rather more than he liked, 
mounted one of the paddle-boxes, and surveyed 
the scene from that calmer elevation. 

Thus he stood, leaning against some rope- 
ladder, stiff with tar, his thick, coarse plaid 
fluttering in the sea-breeze, and his cigar 
burning away at a fierce rate in the passionate 
puffings of that uninvited sharer, lost in a 
still heavily overhanging reverie . when on 
a sudden Mr. Behringbright started ! . Started 
to find his own unmeaningly fixed gaze encoun- 
tering a glance so full of brilliant life and 
electricity of expression that it in a manner 
galvanized him into emotion and curiosity be- 
fore it was at all plain to his own consciousness 
what had happened to him. He then remem- 
bered that this singular glance had emanated 
from under a black velvet hat and feather 
and bugled veil, whicli tbe wind had blown 
aside ; surmounting a figure fluttering in its 
travelling habiliments, in like picturesque 
disorder to his own plaid, and led on over 
the heaving plank between the steamer 
and the pier by a tall, gaunt-looking gen- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 257 

tleman in a long black, undertaker-like 
cloak. 

What was it that struck Mr. Behringbright 
at once with a conviction that these dazzling 
orbs were no strangers in his own ? And he 
was strengthened in the notion by a vague 
and yet positive idea, communicated in the 
same shock of encounter, that those eyes 
expressed on their part also a singular disorder 
of recognition, which apparently induced the 
owner to clutch down her floating networks 
and cover herself, as it were, in conceal- 
ment, in their shades ! 

Mr. Behringbright plunged into a gulf of 
recollections as this idea struck deeper and 
deeper into his mind. "Where had he seen 
this face ? Where encountered ere while that 
strangely fascinating glance? In a moment 
his memory wandered back through half a 
thousand balls, assemblies, presentations at 
court, operas, theatres, continental wanderings ; 
a hundred and more submerged beauties shone 
up again from the sharky deeps of his 
unnumbered matrimonial temptations . were 
knocked on the head, and sent down again 

VOL. I. 17 



258 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

in the abyss, ere Mr. Behringbriglit plumped 
with a curious chill at the heart, as if he had 
himself been suddenly drawn literally into 
the cold wave . on the remembrance that those 
brilliant orbs had first attracted his attention 
on the famous night of the Theatre St. 
Jacques de Londres ! 

We can do a great deal of thinking in a little 
time ; and probably Mr. Behringbriglit was not 
more than a single minute in passing through 
all this chaos of reminiscences ere he alighted 
on the convicton. But he was a good deal 
longer in endeavouring to fathom to his own 
satisfaction whether in reality there was recog- 
nition in the lady's glance. If so, what 
became of all his pretty imaginative theories 
regarding the total unconcern of the beautiful 
young creature herself in the plans of that 
execrable Frenchwoman ? 

It astonished Mr. Behringbriglit, when he 
afterwards came to consider of it, why the 
suspicion thus flashed into liis cogitations 
annoyed him so very much ! 

What did it matter, any way ? But was it 
go ? . To satisfy the doubt, this wise merchant. 



.MADELEINE GRAHAM. 259 

who traded with half the globe, and traded 
mostly to advantage, thought he would present 
himself again to the young lady's notice ; 
and if she did recognise him, cut her dead, 
at once, as just such another specimen of the 
dissembling sex as any man of sense and 
experience would expect to find any and all ! 

Accordingly Mr. Behringbright' wrapped 
his plaid about him so as to restrain its play- 
fuller gambols ; and as the vessel was now in 
movement, began to descend as cautiously as 
he might from the paddle-box. 

On the whole, certainly, his figure might 
not have appeared to much advantage in this 
transit. He was a thorough landsman, and 
felt giddy and perturbed in the action, and 
he clutched rather airily at imaginary ropes 
and other assistances in descending the 
steep, semi-circular incline within which the 
swimming giant's steam arms foamed and 
tore at the waves to assist his progress with 
his load. Still it was very rude of the two 
persons who did it, we must say, who burst 
into a tremendous guffaw, at witnessing the 
operation ; themselves the while warmly and 
17.2 



260 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

comfortably ensconced on a pile of luggage 
round tlie funnel. Moreover, to complete the 
fun, Mr. Beliringbriglit stumbled wlien he 
came within a rung or two of the deck, and 
endeavouring to prevent himself from going 
backward overboard, arrived on it with a 
violence that sent him the reverse way, full 
shock, on one of the laughers. The two men 
met indeed in a manner not untypical of their 
future antagonism. 

" Sacre nom I what do mean, sir ? You have 
almost thundered my heart out of my ribs 
with your unparalleled awkwardness !" ex- 
claimed the person struck against, in an 
exceedingly irate, and, in truth, insolent and 
provocative manner. Not every one, however, 
quarrelled with Mr. Beliringbriglit who wished 
to do so ; he had not much of the jDliosphoric 
blood of Normandy in his veins, and very 
slowly gave out fire. "I beg 3^our pardon, 
sir," he said ; " it was an accident. I am hurt 
m3^self ; I trust a good deal more than you 
are. 

"Don't take his apology, Camille! . It*s 
only patient camels that do that ! Stand on 



MADELEINE GRAHAM, 261 

the point of honour, and have satisfaction out 
of his hide !" said the unpeacemaking com- 
panion, in a strong nasal tone, evidently 
enjoying the diversion, and endeavouring to 
egg on his companion to some still more 
amusingly formidable a demonstration. 

And the merchant's meekness seemed indeed 
to put it into the hero of the Sacre Norn's 
head to enlarge in the bullying style he had 
adopted from the first. 

"It is no accident, sir !" he exclaimed, as 
ferociously as a somewhat effeminately-toned 
voice admitted. " You saw that we were smil- 
ing at the awkwardness of the evolutions you 
executed in descending to the deck, and hare 
purposely precipitated your disastrous weight 
upon me !" 

" Well, sir, if you think so I cannot help it, 
. have it your own way. I can only repeat, 
in mine, that I am, at all events, very sorry 
for the severe inconvenience I have given my- 
self in the fall." 

" There it is, . British domineering and in- 
solence all over the world ! . Don't stand it, 
Frenchy ! . Ecmembcr Waterloo, and pitch 



2C2 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

into liim !" said the ill-natured fellow who was 
enjoying and creating this sport, as he doubt- 
less considered it ; bursting into a huge, coarse 
laugh, wliich showed all his long, thin, panther - 
like teeth halfway down the tliroat. 

"I demand satisfaction for the affront, 
sir ;" exclaimed the champion addressed as 
" Frenchy," but by no means in so fierce and 
formidable a tone as should have been, had his 
heart been quite in the same place with the 
tall words he used. 

" Are you two madmen, gentlemen ?" ex- 
claimed Mr. Behringbright, really astonished, 
and eyeing the opposite parties in the alterca- 
tion with now some sternness of observation. 

" I can answer for one Mr. Behrw(/hri(jJit !" 
returned he of the nasal tones, in a strong, 
defiant accent, although he had pronounced 
that name which was the very synonym of 
riches. "I think you know it a little to your 
cost, that / am pretty tarnation comfortably 
watertight in my brain compartments ; for 
you can't have forgot the action you brought 
against us . and lost . concerning those rotten 
bulialo skins, as you pretended they was, and 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 263 

came as fresh off the creatures' backs as if 
they had been stripped alive !" 

" Oh, Mr. Flamingo Brown !" said Mr. 
Behringbright, no longer dissembling the 
marked disgust in his tones. 

" And I am not ashamed of the name, sir, 
in either hemisphere !" was the extensive 
retort. 

" Well ! . if the name is not ashamed of you, 
Mr. Brown, I do not see why you should be," 
was the mild rejoinder. 

" That is an ample retractation, sir, as regards 
your humble servant, as you call one another 
over here for pride's sake. But if I was this 
young gentleman I would have another and a 
bigger out of 3^ou, or know the reason why," 
resumed this mischief-maker, backing fast 
enough out of the quarrel on his own account, 
but adding in an insidious whisper to his 
companion, " Go in at Jdni I Don't you see 
he'll take any amount of bullying? . And 
there's a chance for you to cut a tremen- 
dously fine figure before that pretty girl you 
were boasting of, with as little risk as possible 
to your own leather !" 



264 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" But . . . but ... I do not perceive . . . 
I am not so much hurt ! Monsieur has asked 
my forgiveness in all the forms!" stammered 
the younger of the two injured voyagers . as 
he very plainly appeared to be. 

" Ah ! it's such sneaking fellows as you that 
let the Britishers put the heel of their iron 
calkers on the smashed face of all creation !" 
bitterly ejaculated Mr. Mamingo Brown, quite 
willing to get up a mortal quarrel between two 
strangers, merely because he had himself been 
detected and brought to justice . or attempted 
to be brought to justice . for cheating in a 
cargo of Californian hides. If the principle 
of justice is innate in the human mind, it lies 
pretty low down sometimes, it must be 
admitted, in a Yankee trader's cargo of con- 
science ! 

Mr. Behringbright himself had no manner of 
wish to press the quarrel farther ; and bearing 
what his hondi fide antagonist had said, even 
courteously raised his wide-awake and proceeded 
on his original intention ; haunted, however, for 
some distance by the extremely diverse phan- 
tom resemblances of a very handsome Parisian 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 265 

eler/anf, though but evidently of feeble and cox- 
comical character, and that other tall, bully- 
ing, " half-man, half- alligator" Yankee, who 
had laboured with so much zeal to promote the 
accidental ill-will aroused between them. 

Xor did the latter cease from the unchristian 
task even when Mr. Behringbright had removed 
his obnoxious presence. 

" Didn't you say, Momlcewer Leteller^' he re- 
remarked, as they watched the receding figure, 
"that you hated riches, and rich men, and all the 
overbearing, aristocratic feeling of this rotten 
old country, in all its roots and branches? 
. Well, yonder man is the richest merchant in 
all London city ; and that's to say, I suppose, 
according to the Britishers, in all the 
world !" '^ 

" Ah ! wlio is he ? What is he ?" 

" Behrin^brisrht Brothers !" 

" Ah ! it is a name whose celebrity in- 
fluences all the exchanges of Europe. But do 
not mistake me, Mr. Brown, so infinitely as to 
imagine that I dislike riches in themselves. 
On the contrary, Tantalus himself never 
thirsted for the waters rushing close below his 



266 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

lips so ardently as I desire for myself riches ! It 
is to see them in tlie possession of others only 
that I feel so profound a repugnance ; and to 
know to what humiliations, what restraints, 
what perversities of fate, what dishonourable 
and unhappy conduct, I may even say, an 
unfortunate must submit to, who, with all the 
desire to enjoy the world like a prince, is con- 
demned to the miserable stipend and existence 
of a . what do you call him? . a commercial 
traveller /'' 

" Pho ! I was one myself for years till I 
made that reglar sunburst of a speculation in 
a run of black cattle from Cuba, in Walker's 
time, under the pretence of filibustering for 
liberty, and all that, thar," replied Mr. Fla- 
mingo Brown, patronizingly. " But I suppose 
what you mean to say is, that your are crossed 
in your love affairs . perhaps with that splen- 
dacious gal you observed you must not notice 
for your life, because she was with some rich 
sort of an old fellow, her father, just now? 
And like most other green critturs in the dawn 
of creation, as one may call being in love (I 
was once, I think, almost in love myself), 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 267 

fancy the end of the world is come, because 
they wont pack her up in a gold wicker 
basket, and make you a present of her with 
their unanimous compliments. That's what 
about ails you, isn't it ?" 

" What would be the use of a man's obtain- 
ing to himself the daughter of Croesus, if the 
father vowed upon the instant to cast her 
off and disinherit her for ever ?" said the 
young Frenchman, with a deeply sentimental 
sigh. 

" Not much, of course, in the dollar depart- 
ment ; but once upon a time young people did 
not look altoerether to that consideration, . or 
hardly at all, I've heard say in the songs, . but 
would bolt together the first opportunity, and 
take their chance for making it all right with 
the old dad or starving. Put it on a toss-up 
. heads, I win ! tails, you lose !" 

"Ah, yes, but she also ! . she also is animated 
with the conviction of the necessity of wealth, 
and utterly refuses any such coup of extrica- 
tion," exchumcd the Frenchman, precipitately, 
and api)areiitly thrown off his guard. 

'' Who does ? What does ?" said the Yankee, 



268 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

witli evidently, on his part, a very livelily- 
startled curiosity. 

" I am sworn to an eternal, an impenetrable 
secrecy," said Monsieur Le Tellier, with an air 
of inexorable fixity of purpose. 

The Yankee laughed. " Then all I can say 
is, that I wish you your health to wear it ; and 
if the object of your afiections is such anoiUer 
as you describe, you may depend upon it she 
will play you a jade's trick some day, and 
kick you and your milk-paH over both in the 
mire ! 

" No !" returned the Frenchman, with a 
singularly vain-glorious and self-confident look, 
that for a moment even subdued the incredu- 
lous Yankee into acquiescence ; " I have secured 
her mine, in links which it is impossible that 
any woman, endowed with the common feelings 
. the sentiments of a woman . can ever think 
to break !'* 

But Mr. Flamingo Brown, speedily rallied. 

" Oh, bosh !" he said ; " that's the way all 
you Frenchmen gabble, boasting of kisses in the 
dark when no one can see whether 3'ou are lying 
9r not. Links, indeed ! There are no links 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 209 

now that bind people to anything unless they 
are made of gold. I'll wager the sun, moon, 
and stars, now in one truck . for example, that 
if that hulking mammon-god, that came bang 
against us like an exploding shell a few mo- 
ments ago, were to offer his hand and money 
to this boasted fine young ladj Juliet of yours, 
she'd jump at him without a skipping-rope, and 
leave you to hang or drown yourself, as you 
thought proper, with no more compunction 
than a fishmonger boils a crab !" 

^' Ha ! ha ! . we shall see." 

" So we shall, perhaps ; for, by Jove ! tliat's 
the grisly bear's with the golden claws fifth 
circulation round where the young lady 
with the eyes is sitting . with her 'pa, I 
suppose ?" 

" Aha ! let him circulate, it is all in vain. 
What ! to parade a person that reminds one 
only of a Diogenes without his tub, before 
Miss Madeleine Graham ! Aha ! It is vain, 
had he a mountain of gold to coin into sove- 
reigns and napoleons, and would fling tliem 
all at her feet." 

" Miss Madeleine Graham ! . Commend me 



270 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

to a Frencliman for keeping a lady's name under 
the rose," said the Yankee, bursting into a 
hoarse peal of laughter. '' Well, be it all as 
you say, I still strongly reconunend you not 
to put her up to the fact that we have such a 
claim on board as we have, or you'll see she'll 
be for putting in her spade in the diggings, 
too, like any other sensible woman who knows 
what money's worth means ! But I grant 
you, if nobody let's her into the secret, she is 
not likely to suspect she sees a two-million man 
in such a steerage-passenger-looking fellow as 
that !" 

" Ah ! if by any chance I shall spy my 
opportunity to address her, it is not concerning 
any other man that I shall dissipate the time 
in amusing her," said the young Frenchman, 
with a smile full of the most inexpressible 
vanity. " But, alas !" he added, relapsing into 
a gloomy sentimental mood, which he seemed 
to think became him . '' but, alas ! she has 
passed upon me the most rigorous sentence, . 
not to venture even on a humble recognition 
of her, on any public occasion, on pain of for- 
feiting all the happiness of our private meet- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 271 

ings and assurances of mutual devotion on 
which we both repose !" 

" Well, good night, then ; sleep well on your 
air mattress ! But now let's find out the bar, 
and liquor, like men of this world." 



272 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



CHAPTEE XY. 

CALIPH HAROUN ALRASCHID. 

Meanhwile, Mr. Behringbriglit had strolled in 
the usually careless and unobservant manner 
of a man who wants to observe, towards what 
he now discerned to be a family group of three 
persons ; of whom the object of his attraction 
was one. Father and mother and daughter 
appeared to form it. The first of these was a 
severe, puritanical- looking man, with a car king, 
anxious, business expression, rather deepened 
in gloom and austerity than softened by the 
shadows of time. The second, on the contrary, 
was a short, stout, strunty little woman, much 
younger than her consort ; with a face that 
must at some time have been particularly hand- 
some, and was still remarkable for the showy 
colours of the complexion, and a lively, saucy, 
have-at-you expression, that marked the flow 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 273 

of the rale Milesian blood in her veins. And 
now considering these varied qualities of sire 
and dam, it seemed sufficiently explicable how 
Madeleine Grraham's figure had come to com- 
bine such an unusual mixture of charm and 
attraction . of graceful, slender, and yet volup- 
tuous rounding in the stature . so bright and 
vivaciously careless an expression, .with an 
internal power of calculation and self-control 
that would have qualified her, on the greater 
theatres of ambition, to have played the part 
of a Clytemnestra or Lady Macbetli, as un- 
shrinkingly as either of those admired imj)er- 
sonations of colossal and magnificent crime. 

So Mr. Behringbright thought as he slowly 
made his way, pausing at various obstructions 
which he chiefly found for himself, towards 
the company, keeping the figure always, never- 
theless, in his eye, at least, so far as related 
to physical considerations. He was very far, 
indeed, from giving Madeleine Graham credit 
for the capacities of exalted mischief she pos- 
sessed, and perhaps could scarcely have con- 
ceived them, not having himself a particle of 
the perfcrvidum inc/enium, either of Scot or 

VOL. I. 18 



274 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Hibernian, in liis own calm Dutch and Saxon 
compounded nature. He also thought she was 
very much improved from her exceedingly 
girlish appearance when he had first seen her, 
under circumstances so inauspicious to favour- 
able consideration, but in which she had 
stamped her image so ineffaceably on his 
memory. There was even a something of 
passionate sentiment and physical exaltation 
in her general expression, which, while it 
puzzled conjecture, had a singular species of fas- 
cination and attraction for Mr. Behringbright, 
who, without knowing it, had been all his life 
sighing for sentiment and enthusiasm in his 
relations with the fair sex. Alas ! the fairest 
gave him no opportunity to enjoy those exqui- 
site alternations of hope and fear which make 
up the lover's irrational delight, and keep aHve 
the kindled fire ! Everybody was so ready to 
have him ; he had only to glance to see diifi- 
culties vanish, Hke darkness before the flash of 
a lamp ! 

It was different in this case ; and Mr. Beh- 
ringbright was forced to acknowledge to him- 
self the injustice of his previous inklings of 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 275 

suspicion wlien, passing for tlie second time 
pretty close to Madeleine, as she stood watch- 
ing the foamy flooding of the sea from the 
paddle-wheels below, apparently in reverie, he 
caught again the glance of those wonderful 
eyes, and felt, in their utterly unmoved and 
unchanged expression, how completely he must 
be a stranger in them ! Perhaps if he had 
been aware what a strong, and even startling 
meaning there was in his own, he w^ould have 
seen an excess in the unconcern exhibited, 
somewhat injurious to the impression intended 
to be produced. But of course he could not, 
and was justified in arriving at the conclusion 
he anchored in, after that momentary, soft, 
uninterested observation had fallen upon him, 
and had then reverted, with an increased un- 
consciousness of indifference, to the tumblincr 
waves below the paddle-wheel. 

Yet somehow Mr. Behringbright . after 
some brief satisfaction in the circumstance . 
grew uncomfortable at it. It annoyed him to 
think that he must continue a stranger in such 
very fine eyes ; though it was all ver}^ well 
to find that he could not possibly, in this 

18.2 



276 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

instance, be indebted to any adventitious cir- 
cumstance to make advances towards an ac- 
quaintance, on his part, too readily acceptable. 
Garbed as he v^as, he knew that he would 
certainly be taken for anything but a million- 
naire. A cattle-dealer looked more probable, 
saving that there certainly was an air of 
superior education and mental power in his 
expression than were not likely to be devoted 
to that kind of occupation. 

And now, strange to say, Mr. Behringbright, 
the most unimaginative of men, formed a little 
project in his own mind, such as might have 
entered the head of the Caliph Haroun Alras- 
chid, but not, one would have thought, the sober 
brains of a merchant of London. He deter- 
mined, at least for once, to enjoy the luxury 
of believing himself appreciated on the score 
of his own merits alone, and to contrive to 
introduce himself to the young lady's notice 
(he was determined upon thaf) in a manner 
which would secure him against his wonted 
mortification of finding himself honoured rather 
as a money-bag than as a man ! Though why, 
or with what intent, he desired to bring about 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 277 

this result, Mr. Behringbright had really him- 
self no very clearly formed notion. 

Chance offered him some assistance in his 
project. The steamer had now got into the 
open fling of the sea, and rose and dipped 
rather heavily against the run of the water, 
driven by a contrary wind. One of these 
buffets set everything loose and rattling about 
them, and among the rest a block, by some 
accident left unfastened, swung heavily down 
from the rigging, almost on Madeleine's head, 
if Mr. Behringbright, happening to pass on his 
fifth majestic, Grhost-in- Hamlet sort of pacing 
the deck, had not perceived the danger, and 
with great presence of mind and activity, 
suddenly seized the young lady by lier bur- 
nous, and drawn her, with some saving violence, 
out of the orbit of the attack. 

Madeleine and her whole party discerned 
instantaneously that she had escaped the danger 
of a very severe blow. Her mother gave a 
scream, and her father himself, awaking from 
an apathy of inattention which seemed habitual 
to him, uttered an exclamation. 

" God be praised !" he exclaimed, when he 



27S MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

perceived what had occurred, with a Puritan 
twang in the pious expression, which might 
have hecome a Cromwellian Eoundhead. " My 
daughter had a narrow escape there, sir," he 
continued in a more natural, nineteenth-cen- 
tury tone. "Thank the gentleman, Made- 
leine, for your whole skull ! I am sure you 
ought." 

'' And I am sure I do, papa, from the bottom 
of my heart," replied the young lady, with a 
sweet and melting earnestness of intonation 
on the words that seemed to How like a stream 
of music into Mr. Behringhright's corporeal 
frame. And yet . and yet . he shuddered! Was 
it with the reaction of the rapid and decided ef- 
fort he had made, which was only usual with him 
in matters of business ? Or was it some chill of 
the now darkening night-wind ? Or was it 
that in all those harmonious accents mino^led 
something of the dread and nameless horror of 
fascination, still not to be resisted, of the treach- 
erous syren daughters of the wave ? Certain 
it is Mr. Behringbright shuddered ; while he 
felt that there w^as something indescribably 
winning and attractive in these few simple 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 279 

words that never before had he discerned in 
any accents feminine. 

" I'm sure we're all very much obliged to 
you, sir. Madeleine's face mi^ht almost have 
been knocked to pieces by a thing like that 
hitting against it, and that would have been a 
rum joke !" said the mother, heartily, in by no 
means such soft and dulcet tones as her 
daughter's, nor in language so refined, but 
possibly with a good deal more sincerity and 
honesty in those she used. " Grive him your 
card, Sir Orange ; I am sure we shall be very 
glad to see you at home, sir, if you're a stranger 
in Belfast, as I see by your appearance you are. 
We are not above any sort of Christian fellow- 
ship in the world, provided you are not a 
Eoman, sir. Particularly when one feels an 
obligation." 

Mr. Behringbright, rather amused at this 
display of general Christian charity, exonerated 
himself from the supposition. Nor was he at 
tlie moment struck by the name he heard thus 
pronounced, until Sir Orange Graham produced 
a card inscribed with it ; to say truth, ratlier 
slowly and reluctantly, though he seemed toyield 



280 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

a singular degree of submission to his consort's 
decrees ; singular in a man who was so appa- 
rently otherwise of an austere and unbending 
personal character. 

"Sir Orange Graham!" then exclaimed 
rather than read Mr. Behringbright, struck 
by the recollection that this was the designation 
of the Belfast ''trader," or manufacturer, with 
whom Emily Maughan was declared to have 
feigned a resolution of accepting a domicile as 
a governess. 

" Yes, sir : what occasions your surprise at 
that being my name ? The glorious, pious, 
and immortal memory of the man who redeemed 
these islands from the yoke of the Pope and 
the Inquisition " 

" Hold your bother, now, to a stranger. Sir 
Orange ! can't you ? What's the use of talk- 
ing such old-fashioned stuff as that to an 
Englishman who has forgotten all about racks 
and thumbscrews and all that nonsense these 
hundreds of years ?" interposed Lady Graham ; 
with very proper impatience and disdain, as it 
seemed to Mr. Behringbright himself, who 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 2S1 

hated nothing so much as any species of reli- 
gious rancour and animosity. 

"But I am not surprised at anything in 
your name, Sir Orange, except at the accidental 
coincidence that . that I believe there is some 
young relation of mine ! . resident as a gover- 
ness in your family," said Mr. Behringbright, 
not knowing how else to put it so as not to 
trip up his own excellent notion of playing the 
Caliph in discjuise. Almost certain, besides, 
that he should hear tidings of the fugitive of 
Glengariff's non-appearance, where she had in- 
tended to go, and confirmation of her being the 
usual sort of creature his experience figured in 
all the varieties of womankind. 

" Is she a relative of yours ? Is Miss Emily 
Maughan ? . Then I am sure, sir, you ought 
to be proud of her ; for a sweeter and better 
behaved, though rather down spirited young 
creature, I never saw in my life ! and it quite 
took away all the anxieties I felt on my spirits 
at the idea of leaving my little darlings without 
their mother, on this treat of Sir Orange's about 
the new Grand Trunk Line before Parliament, 



282 MADELEINE GRAHAM. ^ 

wlio took US with liim to London, in the ex- 
penses, as he had a right, for the corporation," 
said Lady Graham ; not expressing herself too 
clearly, perhaps, and laughing as if she had 
never had an anxiety in her life. 

" Miss Manghan's a very good girl, I must 
say, certainly, and quite the lady in all she 
says and does, and is an acquisition to any 
Christian family ; and so I've found her in 
mine," said Sir Orange, pompously, adding, 
"She came recommended to us from the 
Countess of Glengariff, of Glengarijff Castle ; 
but that is a true-blue Protestant ascendancy 
family, and has been for centuries, though it 
resides in the south ; or I should never have 
admitted her into mine, you may be sure, sir !" 

" Of com'se. Sir Orange. She really did 
come to your family, then, from Glengariff 
Castle ? And is still resident in it ?" said Mr. 
Behringbright, rather puzzled. 

*' Certainly. I had a letter from her only 
yesterday, saying that little Mary Anna's ear- 
ache is quite gone . . . and everything com- 
fortable . . . as usual," remarked the mother 
of the family. " Why, she's scarcely been a 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 283 

montli among us, and they're all as fond of her 
as if she had been six years/' 

"Well, mamma, you know she was not 
quite a stranger ; she was my schoolfellow in 
London, I soon found out," said Madeleine, in 
a rather altered tone, but probably deeming 
candour and amiable reminiscence of the kind, 
under the circumstances, best. 

" Are you Miss Maughan's uncle, sir ?" in- 
quired Sir Orange now, with rather unexpected 
hardness and abruptness. 

Mr. Behringbright, besides being thrown out 
of his calculations in general, felt this question 
jarred on some fine nerve. He winced. He 
certainly did not look very young ; he was no 
beardless Damian, though he shaved pretty 
close. Yet on the whole, did he look like an 
uncle ? Like Miss Emily Maughan's . uncle ? 
It was towards Madeleine Graham, hardly 
knowing that he did so himself, that he looked 
fur information on this point. 

"You mean her cousin, papa, surely, like that 
otheryoung gentleman wlio looked like amilitary 
man, that came soon after Emily did . and in- 
sisted on seeing: her . as such !" murmured the 



284 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

deep-melodious undertones of Madeleine Gra- 
ham at this conjuncture. 

This was rather strong 1 but 0, ye gods and 
little fishes ! it went down as smooth as honey ; 
even that nobbled throat, so practised at re- 
jection, swallowed it, administered from the 
peculiar papboat ! 

" Do you mean to say that Lord Glengariff 
. I mean, a Sergeant-Major in his Lordship's 
troop . Miss Maughan's cousin . our cousin . 
called upon her ?" said Mr. Behringbright. 

" Yes ; and I believe they had quite a scene," 
replied Madeleine, demurely, yet with a sparkle 
of secret mischief in her eye. " The young 
gentleman insisted she had no business to leave 
Glengariif Castle . although she had been 
ordered out . without his permission and sanc- 
tion, being her only relative and friend, he 
said . for one of our servants heard him making 
the noise, and what he said . not only in Ire- 
land, but in all the world !" 

" He was not right there !" said Mr. Behring- 
bright, with an emotion that did not escape his 
observant informer . '' he was not risrht there ! 
Miss Maughan has several tried and faithful 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 285 

friends, at all events. As for relations, tliey 
are not always the staunchest in afflictions. 
But do you mean to say, then, that her cousin 
could not induce her to return to GlengarifF 
Castle ?" « 

" No, sir ; she is still with us ; not teaching 
the young idea how to shoot, for they're all 
girls, of course, she has in training with us. 
But what I look to is this . I'm truly thankful 
for it. But what on earth could induce Miss 
Maughan to leave Glengariff Castle when she 
might have stayed there ? And what had that 
young man, her cousin, to do with ordering 
her back, and flying into such a fury when she 
refused? I suppose you know all about it, 
sir .^ 

Yes. ... of course !" said Mr. Behrincrbriirht. 
looking and feeling, however, just the contrary 
of that confident assertion. " It was a quarrel 
with the great lady there, I believe ; who is, to 
say the least of it, of a capricious temper." 

" But what right had the young gentleman 
to say that lie was sure, when his mother knew 
everything, she would be reconciled to her 
return ? Who is his mother ? And what had 



286 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

she to do in the matter ?" inquired Madeleine, 
unable, on this point, to restrain her woman's 
curiosity. 

" His mother's name is the . the same as his 
own ; and I suppose he was '^lexed to . to see 
Emily losing such a capital situation," said Mr. 
Behringbright, greatly disconcerted. 

" Is your name too, sir, Maughan ? As 1 
have given you my card ?" said Sir Orange, 
rather pointedly. 

Mr. Behringbright reflected for an instant . 
a single instant. In that instant he was lost ! 
He hit upon so ingenious an escape that he 
involved himself in all the mazy consequences of 
ingenuity, without having the requisite genius 
of intrigue to run up and down, with light and 
dexterous glide, the threads of his own meshes. 
Perhaps some vague recollection of his recent 
concussion with the American and Trenchman 
crossed his mind, and suggested the designation 
he was pleased to bestow upon himself " No, 
Sir Orange," he said, " my name is not 
Maughan ! I wish it were . Maughan is a good 
deal more stylish than my own ; my name is 
Broionjohn . Greorge Brownjohn." 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 287 

" Humpli !" said Sir Orange : adding, after a 
considerably protracted pause and a profoundly 
sagacious estimate of the stranger's apparent 
position and probable antecedents, " What house 
do you travel for i'' 

Another slight pause. 

" Behringbright Brothers," then said Mr. 
Behringbright. 

" A first-rate firm, sir, . a first-rate firm : 
couldn't wish my best friend in a better, in 
your particular line," said Sir Orange, with 
marked emphasis. 

Madeleine smiled, but not so that any one 
could discern the smile, looking down over the 
bulwarks into the rolling sea. Who could ever 
have guessed her thoughts ? 

" He wishes to be loved for himself . does he? 
Humph ! HASCHiscH !" 



288 MADELEINE GRAHAM, 



CHAPTEE XTI. 

A MARINE CHALLENGE. 

They may well say nosciiur a sociis . you are 
known by the company you keep. Sir Orange 
Graham had no other reason for concluding our 
Caliph Haroun was a commercial traveller 
than the fact that he had observed him in close 
confabulation with two persons, one of whom 
he was but too certainly aware belonged to the 
order of those wandering Tartars of civiliza- 
tion. But on the whole, it decidedly served 
Mr. Behringbright's purpose of remaining 
incog. ; and as he was not a man vain of his 
personal attributes, it concerned him not greatly 
that he had been taken to be something so 
considerably below the rank of a prince. 

Meanwhile, the circumstances of his intro- 
duction, and the common acquaintanceship of 
the company with Emily Maughan, smoothed 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 2S9 

the way to a more easy and friendly communi- 
cation tlian would have been likely under other 
circumstances. There was nothing like pride 
about Lady Graham in any sense, and she 
liked few things better than entering into a 
rattling chatter with any one, stranger or not, 
who might help to beguile the tediousness of 
a sea-passage. 

" That's what makes one sea-sick, the tadioiis- 
ness of it ! Just to see one wave as like an- 
other as haystacks, wallowing and tumbling 
ever each other's nasty cold whaley backs, 
without the least variety in life, and to stand 
staring at them till one forgets where one's 
standing at all ; and the giddiness comes over 
one, and a kind of faintness, you know, Mr. 
Brownjohn, and then it's all up with one !" 
she said, after complimenting him on the per- 
severing kindness with which he remained in 
conversation with herself and her daughter, 
when Sir Orange himself had long deserted 
them, under pretence of going down for warmth 
into the cabin ; in reality, being of a tempera- 
ment almost as bilious as his name, stealing 
away, with the modest devotion of a true wor- 

VOL. I. 19 



290 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

shipper, to tlie remotest stem of the Prince 
Alfred, there to offer his oblations to Neptune. 
Mr. Behringbright had, in fact, laid himself 
out to please ; and being a man of extensive 
general information, though he seldom chose 
to exhibit the fact at all demonstratively, had 
sufficient means of amusement at his command, 
in anecdote and allusions to well-known places 
and persons, likely to interest recent provincial 
visitors to London. The art with which he 
meanwhile avoided anything compromising to 
his assumed position in society, surprised him- 
self, and perhaps still more one of his Hsteners. 
It was in this character that Madeleine Graham 
chiefly figured on the occasion ; but she lis- 
tened with so much intelligence . every now 
and then raised her eyes, so full of beaming 
apprehension, and, as it were, admiring appre- 
ciation of the good wit and understanding in 
men and things exhibited by her new acquaint- 
ance . that Mr. Behringbright had never felt 
oefore so comfortably convinced that he pos- 
sessed ability in the conversational line, though 
he had been often very earnestly assured so by 
mothers and a ants soliciting him to join in their 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 291 

quieter little family parties and reunions. He 
knew tlie value of applause directed to the 
head of a wealthy firm ; but this silently elo- 
quent approbation, conveyed in eye-streams 
full of sentiment and modesty, was directed . 
was it not ? . to the merits of a " representative 
man" only, of the commercial order, and must 
be genuine ! And, indeed, nothing is easier 
than to find out and admire the wit and good 
sense of a rich man. But when these quali- 
ties display themselves in a shabby dress, the 
person detecting them is surely entitled to a 
very considerable share of the honour. In 
short, Mr. Behringbright was fast making- 
ready to take a header into that tempting, 
heaven-reflecting, fathomless abyss of love, on 
whose rocky precipices he had hitherto only 
amused himself with plucking samphire, or 
other bright weeds, or picking ofi* limpets and 
starfish . utterly unconscious at the same time 
that he was so nigh the edge, and about to take 
the fatal leap ! 

The syren meanwhile, wholly unmoved in 
her own heart, watched the progress of thi) 
spell. But in truth, if she ever had possessed 



293 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

such an organ in any but tlie physical use, it 
was long since given away to another : but 
that is doubtful. Sensuality and ambition were 
the master-springs of Madeleine Graham's cha- 
racter ; and, if she had possessed the like 
imperial opportunities, might, perhaps, have 
qualified her to play as illustrious a part in the 
history of her sex as the great Eussian Second 
Catherine herself ! But I may be forming too 
dazzling an estimate of my heroine's capabilities 
. a fault not exclusively confined to avAo- 
biographers. 

Very few persons in modern society, how- 
ever, who are aware of the possession of these 
higher attributes of strenuous and sensuous 
humanity, care to make an external exhibition 
of them ; and Madeleine Graham was no 
exception to the rule. She could even blush, 
I believe, when she thought proper . which is 
surely one of the most difiicult operations of 
simulation the fair sex can possibly be ex- 
pected to perform ! The statue of Psyche her- 
self, listening to the first breathings of In- 
visible Love, could not exhibit a more virgin 
modesty of reception than our poor Madeleine 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 293 

put on in lier whole demeanour, while she felt the 
progress of her triumph in every glance of Mr. 
Behringhright's honest and pure-minded, but 
warm and now tenderly -lit . though wontedly 
dull. grey, internally-thinking eyes. 

Yet, perhaps, it is the moral chemist whose 
analysis errs at this point ! Perhaps there was 
something of real shrinking . of real aversion 
. to the wickedness that might only be float- 
ing dimly then in her mind, in the modest with- 
drawal . the maidenly coldness and reserve . of 
Madeleine's manner towards the new, dart- 
stricken lover! Trained from her earliest 
childhood in the adoration of wealth, might 
not still that intervening tremendous interlude 
of guiltily-frenzied passion have wrought a 
change in her character and aspirations? . Or 
was the radiant dream discovered to be already 
such ? Had the delirium of the senses passed 
away, and left her more than ever the calm and 
calculating pursuer of material, tangible inte- 
rests ? Was she a man in this, as well as in 
undaunted nerve and hardness of resolve ? . In 
all but the bewildering softness and insinua- 
tion of the feminine nature she could exhibit, 



294 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

when it was necessary to captivate and 
enthral ? 

I prefer myself to think, that although the 
sudden reappearance of the millionnaire, and 
his scarcely disguised attraction towards her, 
might revive for awhile the ambitious notion 
first instilled into her schoolgirl fancy by 
Mademoiselle Olympe, Madeleine Graham was 
yet innocent of any formed and decided crimi- 
nality of intention as regarded Mr. Behring- 
bright. Moreover, she knew herself to be 
chained in bonds to another, which it would be 
scarcely possible to break. . The illusion of 
passion was, it is true, completely over with 
her, as regarded the lover whom she had suf- 
fered to attain such a supremacy over her ; and 
she was aware of the mingled vanity and mer- 
cenary rapacity that composed the foundation 
of Camille Le Tellier's character, and were the 
main incentives of his actions. He had placed 
his hopes of rising in the world in the chances 
of his union with the daughter, and acceptance 
in the family, of a wealthy trader, . and had 
her completely in his power. Was it likely he 
would abandon these advantages ? Was he 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 295 

not even at that very moment on board the 
same vessel with her ; against her wishes and 
the unmistakably expressed dislike and re- 
pulses of her father and family ? . Might he 
not be playing the espial on her indeed ? Per- 
haps, after all other attempts to solve the mys- 
tery, this was the true solution of the extremely 
retiring and forbearing manner of the young 
beauty towards her new victim. Madeleine 
frequently observed . though nobody else did 
. Camille's handsome porcelain face, . paler 
than the fine china his complexion emulated 
. with despiteful feeling, staring over the fun- 
nel-box which marked the lines of demarcation 
between first and second-class passengers ; 
evidently seized with suspicion at so protracted 
an interview, even with so unlikely a concurrent 
as Madeleine concluded he would consider Mr. 
Behringbright, in liis shabby array, to be. 

Be it as it may, Madeleine at last felt the 
policy of putting Monsieur Le Tellier more at 
his ease, . and professed that she was growing 
very sleepy. Nevertheless, she declared she 
entertained (not without a cause) a strong 
aversion to going down in the ladies' cabin for 



296 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

repose. She loved, slie said, to feel the fresh 
air blowing over her face ; then she was never 
sea-sick. Lady Graham thereupon protested 
that she also would stay on deck with her 
dear child ; and it became Mr. Behringbright's 
pleasing taskwork to procure cushions, and 
fashion up, to the best of his ability, a comfort- 
able couch for the ladies on the deck. He did 
this very well, considering that it was his debut 
as a chambermaid ; and when his laughing and 
thankful mistresses took possession of their 
hard couch, it was a sight to see with what 
gallantry he insisted on stripping off his plaid 
and making it their coverlet, while he himself 
accepted a sailor's coarse jacket in lieu of what 
he despoiled himself of in their service. 
Happy, then, in his success, and with a heart 
aglow with a strange, unwonted, but most de- 
licious sentiment, Mr. Behringbright modestly 
retired from the scene of so much happiness, to 
muse upon what could possibly have befallen 
him to lift the load of gloom and despondency 
from his heart, which a few short hours before 
had made existence appear to him a burden 
and a weariness scarcely to be sustained. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 297 

Such was his purpose; but wiser people 
even than the present writer have remarked 
that men are often balked of their more plea- 
sant anticipations. Misfortunes and discom- 
forts may be expected with tolerable certainty. 
Who ever knew the water-rate collector fail to 
call for his arrears, or the Queen's taxes neglect 
to demand themselves? Whereas one not 
unfrequently don't have an invitation to a ball 
or a dinner one had promised one's self, but is 
left to hear the description of the dresses at 
secondhand, concealing one's anguish under a 
pleasant, interested smile. Mr. Behringbright 
had hardly strolled a few yards away from the 
two fair sleepers (one of whom was awake, and 
continued so for a long time after) than he 
perceived the tall, gaunt figure of his Yankee 
disliker beckoning inauspiciously to him to 
approach, from the second-chiss side of the 
dividing funnel. Not that Mr. Flamingo 
Brown cared in the least for the circumstance 
that his rate of fare entitled him to consider 
himself under a ban not to pass the demarcation 
. particularly with the big cheroot in his mouth 
he was now smoking, seemingly in rivalry 



298 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

with the auofust flue that towered above him. 
But that gentleman now gave it to be under- 
stood that the communication he was to 
address to Mr. Behringbright had to be out of 
earshot of ladies, '' and such-like timorous 
cattle," as he politely phrased it. The former 
was not displeased at the arrangement ; struck 
for the first time in his life unpleasantly with 
the sound of his own name, excepting when 
his wife that had been did him the dishonour 
to bear it. 

" Well, what is it ?" he inquired, continu- 
ing his stroll until he was pretty close to his 
summoner. 

"No, come, Mr. Behringbright, that wont 
exactly do," replied Mr. Flamingo Brown, 
with something certainly of a grim and sar- 
donic humour in his expression, but none 
whatever in his tones or words. " You can be 
at no loss to know what I must respectfully 
request your attention upon. You have in- 
sulted a young gentleman, of a nation as little 
disposed as any under the universal sun to put 
up with impertinence, and you must give him 
satisfaction. He has appointed me his second 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 299 

and referee ; and liere I am to ask you to be 
so good as to name another gentleman on 
board, with whom I can make arrangement 
for you two to fight it out as soon as you get 
to land." 

Mr. Behringbright did not appear in the 
least surprised, much less alarmed; contin- 
gencies both, in all probability, expected by 
Mr. Flamingo Brown. 

" What nonsense !" he merely said, brush- 
ing the ash off a cigar of his own, which he 
had lighted, during the Yankee's address, on 
the funnel. '' In the first place, Mr. Brown, 
I am not a fighting man . don't do anything 
in the duelling way at all. In the next place, 
I don't know anybody on board whom I could 
take the liberty of asking to assist me, of my 
malice prepense, in a possible murder. And 
in the third place, I have offered to apologize 
in the amplest manner possible for an imagin- 
ary rudeness towards your principal. What 
more can he require ?" 

" A written ajpology, to be inserted in all the 
Dublin and Belfast journals." 

*' Well, no ; I have never yet been a writer 



300 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

for the press, and it is a little too late in the 
day for me to begin.'* 

" Then you must fight." 

" I don't see how that follows." 

" You must either fight Monsieur Le 
Tellier, or he will post you as a coward 
all over the noble city of Belfast," said Mr. 
Brown, bursting into a huge, hoarse, cackling 
laugh. 

" That will not damage my credit on the 
Exchange," replied Mr. Behringbright, with 
great composure, perceiving the mischief- 
maker's design. " Still, it will be rather 
awkward and unpleasant, certainly. The 
Irish ladies will think the less of me, no 
doubt . and I am rather anxious at present 
to conciliate their favour . if I refuse a war- 
like invitation of the kind," he continued, 
musingly ; and concluding . very considerably 
to Flamingo Brown's astonishment, certainly 
. "WeU, I will fight Monsieur Le Tellier, 
since he wishes it." 

" You will, Mr. Behringbright?" 

"Yes." 

" He . he will be delighted with the news ; 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 301 

thunder me if he isn't !" said Mr. Brown, so 
taken aback bj what he heard that he felt it 
necessary to asseverate the statement, which 
he knew to be contrary to the truth, with 
particular vehemence. In reality, he had with 
great difficulty worked Camille up to the mark 
announced, with the assistance of the powerful 
agency of jealousy, by urging upon him that 
Mr. Behringbright would never dream of 
fighting a duel, whatever provocation was 
given him, and that he had only to per- 
severe in demanding an apology to obtain 
one, and cut a great figure as a man of 
spirit and bloodthirsty resolution. Poor 
Camille had fallen, though diffidently, into 
the snare ; and now Mr. Behringbright's com- 
plian(;e was certainly an awkward hitch in 
the plot ! 

" I suppose so ; and he is in good hands, 
Mr. Flamingo Brown, to keep him in* the 
heroic humour," continued Mr. Behringbright, 
smiling caustically at the bullying Yankee's 
expression of doubt and surprise. 

"Who's your backer, then?" the latter re- 
joined, in a surly tone. 



302 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" I will confide in you to see fair play on 
both sides." 

" That's a compliment, at all events !" and 
Flamingo looked as if he could not quite make 
the matter out. 

" No compliment at all." 

^* We have only, then, to settle on the place 
and the weapons. But for my part, you have 
such queer notions about things over here, I 
do not so much care to be in the matter . all 
by myself," said the promoter of hostilities, 
now quite confounded. 

"As ioY place . any place where this young 
French gentleman and myself may have space 
for the exercise, will be proper enough. As 
for loeapons . of course, being the challenged, I 
have the choice of them." 

" hi course." 

" Then I choose . cudgels !" 

^^ Cudgels!" 

" Shillelaghs, if the word suits you better, 
with the wind blowing in our teeth from the 
Green Isle." 

" You are making a jest of me, Mr. Bchring- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 303 

bright . Cudgels P' roared Flamingo Brown, 
staring menacingly at his collocutor. 

" In course I am ; or, of course, as we say on 
this side of the Atlantic," said Mr. Behring- 
bright, turning on his heel, and leaving the 
Yankee second to his reflections, alone in his 
glory. 



304 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



CHAPTER XVII. 



FALSE PEARLS ARE THE LARGEST." 



No further immediate harm followed on this 
failure in the provocation of hostilities. The 
night passed . the morning came . as a vast 
many nights and mornings have passed and 
come, for so many post-geological ages. That 
is to say, nothing very particular seemed to 
happen in consequence. The Frince Alfred 
sped on her way very cheerfully over smooth 
waters, and entered the harbour of Belfast with 
colours gaily streaming over her, for the most 
part, ghastly, pallid, and sea-sick passengers ; 
among whom Sir Orange Grraham cut rather a 
conspicuously doleful figure. But this again 
was an advantage to Mr. Behringbright ; who, 
for a wonder, not being in the least indisposed 
himself, was able to render very kind and effi- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 305 

cient assistance to tlie disabled manufacturer : 
even, as he gratefully persisted for some time 
in believing, bringing him back from Orcus, 
just as he was about to die of his miserj^, by a 
plenteous pour of brandy from a flask. Mean- 
while, the warlike and hostile emotions of 
Camille Le Tellier were out-hectored by the 
violent action of the same causes, w^iich laid 
and kept him prostrate on the floor of the 
second-class cabin almost from the moment he 
had signified his adhesion to Flamingo Brown's 
challenge of his alleged insulter to when, the 
vessel sidling up into the docks, and anchoring 
quietly there, he staggered up on deck, with 
the look of a man who had been buried for a 
couple of days or so, and was then favoured 
with a resuscitation. 

The Grahams were so much taken with their 
new acquaintance that even the gloomy and 
sardonic head of the family expressed his hope 
that Mr. Behringbright would accept an apart- 
ment in their house while his affairs detained 
him in Belfast. But this, for various reasons, 
was not exactly that gentleman's wish, although 
he was astonished at the pain he felt in the 

VOL. I. 20 



306 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

notion of separation from tlie fascinating 
daugliter. It may be, the pang in question 
suggested to him reflections which he was not 
yet so sufficiently head over ears in his fanciful 
excitement to despise. Mr. Behringl3right had 
an idea that he was becoming enthralled ; and 
he had always made up his mind that no 
daughter of Eve, however richly endowed, 
should ever again lead him captive, even in 
chains of so much brighter link than those of 
his early, unblessed matrimony. He wisely 
considered, so, that it would be much the best 
to shun the danger. But, besides all this, he 
did not relish the idea of facing Emily 
Maughan, without preparation, under present 
circumstances. The conduct of that girl was 

assuredly inexplicable, unless But he would 

not suffer himself to dwell upon a solution of 
the enigma which, to a vain and heartless man, 
might have been sufficiently flattering and 
pleasant. He determined, therefore, to write 
Emily a note, explaining his arrival in Ireland, 
on her account . his having assumed a name 
that was not his own, in order to avoid the 
troublesome observation and attentions to 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 307 

which it usually subjected him . and his wish 
to confer with her in private on the subject of 
some tidings Lady Glengariff had forwarded 
to him, and which all he had ever known and 
now heard of "Miss Maughan " more than 
ever convinced him to be some baseless variety 
in the hallucinations that unfortunate lady was 
subject to. He mentioned, in the moist cursor}^ 
style, his accidental meeting with the heads of 
the Graham family on board the Belfast 
steamer, and concluded by stating his inten- 
tion of calling to see her early on the following 
morning. So much intervening time Mr. 
Behringbright determined to give himself to 
shake off the singular sort of glamour under 
which he felt himself to be passing, like the 
victim of some magic spell, to get rid of the 
domination of those inscrutable, apparently 
totally indifferent, and 3^et overmasteringly 
seductive and enthralling eyes ! So much for 
Emily Maughan to steady herself for an inter- 
view which it forced itself upon his convictions 
could not but be an extremely trying and deci- 
sively uncomfortable one for her. 

This note . which Mr. Behringbright wrote 



308 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

hurriedly, and in pencil . lie confided, properly 
secured, as he thought, in a wafered envelope, 
to the charge of Miss Graham, who very 
kindly undertook the delivery, and expressed 
her sorrow that his pressing and important busi- 
ness elsewhere prevented Mr. Brownjohn from 
accepting her papa's invitation to his house. 

It is probable Madeleine even experienced 
some twang of apprehension and irritation at 
the evident purpose and intent of her victim 
to break through the toils : for Mr. Behring- 
bright saw, for the first time, her finely- arched 
brows obscured by a frown, . which she hastily 
changed into an expression simply of sadness 
and discontent, at so soon losing sight of a 
person whom she had begun to respect and like 
so much. She as good as said it with her 
wonderfully expressive eyes ! Mr. Behring- 
bright was profoundly touched, and had a 
vague conviction that he was behaving like 
some wicked sort of a male coquette or other, 
in the laborious affectation of indifference he 
got up in response to that mute appeal ! But 
the thing was done, and he must abide by the 
consequences. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 309 

Accordingly, after seeing Sir Orange, Lady, 
and Miss Grraham safely ensconced in a vast 
hackney-coach, that at some remote period of 
fabulous antiquity might have held a Lord 
Mayor of Dublin, Mr. Behringbright trudged 
off by instinct to a first-class hotel, with his 
knapsack on his shoulders, and trying to give 
himself as much as possible the look of a 
tourist meaning to " do " the Giant's Cause- 
way, and " all that sort of thing," in the 
North of Ireland. Thereby he rather surprised 
the first-class landlord and the first-class head- 
waiter, who immediately assigned him the 
worst bedroom in the house, assuring him that 
all the others were engaged. But he escaped 
any further nuisance and discussion with his 
late fellow- voyagers, who proceeded to a com- 
mercial hotel in the centre of the active and 
bustling city, where, in the midst of a score 
of sympathizing commercial friends, Camille 
Le Tellier was at full liberty to relate how . 
in the confirmatory words of his ally . he 
" took the bounce out of a bullying English 
humbug of a fellow," and made him almost go 
down on his knees, to beg pardon for his 



310 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

offences, before Monsieur Le Tellier's no less 
heroic and inexorable second would extend it ! 

However, Mr. Behringbriglit was now en- 
sconced in a degree of comfortable privacy, 
and enabled to wash, shave, and muse at his 
leisure over his recent adventure. 

What could have been the reason why, after 
completing the two former operations, Mr. 
Behringbright spent such a time before the 
glass, brushing his rather stiff and unwilling 
hair in various comely layers, undreamed of 
before ? . experimenting on various upright 
effects, and ending with being dissatisfied with 
all, and concluding on the absolute necessity 
of finding out the most fashionable hairdresser 
in the town, and subjecting himself to artistic 
manipulations of the kind . for the first time 
for many a year ? And yet why so ? Had 
not those witching eyes looked at him in total 
oblivion of anything ungainly in his external 
characteristics ? . On the contrarj^, as if they 
had a faculty of discerning, and rather pre- 
ferred, a diamond in the rough ! 

This consideration, and an extreme natural 
aversion to barbers in the abstract, induced 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 311 

Mr. Behringbriglit to resolve not to persevere 
in the project. But his toilette finished, less 
to his satisfaction than ever before in his life, 
. dinner eaten, and about half a pint of sherry 
drunk, . a two-days-old Times and the Belfast 
News-Letter duly yawned over, . Mr. Behring- 
bright began to find time hang extremely heav}- 
on his hands, and to regret that he had put off 
to so protracted a period his visit at Sir Orange 
Graham's. The stranger's next best or, 
rather, only resource, however, remained ; and 
though he had a profound conviction that, 
except for one house in it, Belfast was the 
most uninteresting city in the world, Mr. 
Behringbriglit determined to sally forth to 
survey it, and derive what interest he might 
from the contemplation of its hicaclieries. 

It must nevertheless be confessed, that 
when he was fairly out in the fine principal 
street of Belfast, George Cocker began to re- 
ceive an impression that the town was worthy 
of some consideration on its own account. It 
is true that, accustomed to the immense 
activity of London, even the bustling and 
crowded main thoroughfare of the caj^ital of 



312 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

the linen trade did not strike him peculiarly 
advantageously in a mercantile point of view. 
But Mr. Behringbright was unaccustomed to 
see the tops of mountains from the steps of an 
Exchange, or to feel the briny freshness of the 
sea on his lips, as he threaded his way towards 
one ; and the novelty amused him. He was 
also philosophically struck by the singular 
aspect of the population, in which two races, 
kept as distinctly apart as if by some principle 
of nature, by religious antipathies and those 
of race, mingled without fusion, and occupied 
the same streets and byways, as distinctly 
separated as if by different zones of the earth. 
The wild, eager, joyous, laughing, gossiping 
Celt ; the grave, moodily reflective, masterfully- 
stepping descendant of the Scotch Puritans, 
who built up the city to its prosperity from a 
wretched fishing-village; . there they were, 
figuring with unchanged and unmingled 
characteristics, side by side, after nearly three 
hundred years of co-existence on the same 
narrow circuit of Irish ground. 

But it is not our business to play the 
cicerone of Belfast; the task has been done 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 313 

already, as well as pen and ink can perform it, 
by the immortal Michael Angelo Titmarsh 
himself! It is enough to say that, engaged 
partly in these ethnological studies of the 
characteristics of the population around him, 
but chiefly still haunted by the image of her 
whom he had grown firmly to believe was the 
loveliest girl, not only in Belfast, but in all 
the world, Mr. Behringbright managed to get 
over a great deal of time in wandering about 
the city, and surveying its comfortless bleach- 
ing-fields beyond, and trying to persuade him- 
self that, considering their great advantage to 
commerce, he was not at all sorry to see a 
summer landscape covered all over with such a 
flat and miserable-looking imitation of tie 
snows of winter, as can be produced by acres of 
linen subjected to the action of showers of 
of muriatic acid and vitriol, under the 
superintendence of the sun and a number of 
human creatures, bleached white, and shrivelled 
as lepers themselves, in the operation. And 
as, besides, he lost his v/ay on his return from 
the survey of a singular eminence, which he 
iound overlooked the harbour, it was dark 



314 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

night before Mr. Behringbriglit turned towards 
his hotel. 

On the way thither the thought struck him 
that it would serve in some manner to divert 
the restless impatience that possessed him if 
he looked out, overnight, the situation of 
Madeleine Graham's house ; and, favoured b}' 
the sliades that now overhung the citj^ formed 
a definite idea to himself of the locality glorified 
by the residence of his cynosure. 

Accordingly Mr. Behringbright inquired for 
Belhaven Square, of a ragged fellow with hardly 
a brim to his hat, but, nevertheless, circled by 
a memorial crape, now brown, but which had 
possibly once been black, and who was running 
up and down a ladder, lighting the gas- 
lamps, as deftly as a squirrel . exchanging 
his jests and remarks with almost every other 
" street-b'y" of his nationality who chanced to 
pass. 

This functionary, with characteristic vola- 
tility and obligingness, instantly leaped down 
half a dozen steps, and flourishing his link, 
declared his wish and intention to guide his 
honour *' thar" without the loss of another 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 315 

moment in life, since the best directions in tlie 
world lie could give would be himself running 
before him to show him the way . and the 
clearest ! And without waiting to be refused, 
Barney OTlanigan (so he stated himself to be 
called) set off like a will-o'-the-wisp, wriggling 
and jostling through the throng ; and although 
Mr. Behringbright by no means desired any 
such ilittertigibbeting on the private sur- 
vey he projected, with equally characteristic 
acquiescence of good nature, he allowed him- 
self to be so conducted ; determining, never- 
theless, to get rid of the inconvenient attend- 
ance as soon as he had reached the square. 

Proceeding thus . Barney, still flourishing 
his link, and looking back occasionally to make 
" sartin sure" his victim did not escape him . 
on a sudden Mr. Behringbright was not a little 
annoyed by finding a figure brush past him, 
wliich, from its peculiarly handsomely- tailored 
costume, the glance he caught of the spiral 
curl of a Napoleonic moustache, the ambrosial 
scent of millcfeurs and rondoletia which 
accompanied its progress, the velvet polished 
castor on its head, . if not by some other in- 



316 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

stinctive feeling, . lie instantly thought he 
recognised as that of his late antagonist, Mon- 
sieur Camille Le Tellier! A glance at the 
shapely shoulders and waist, and wide-bagged 
pegtops, that next presented themselves to Mr. 
Behringbright's observation, opaquing the view 
of the trusty Barney, left no further doubt on 
the subject. 

In spite of the strange excess of irritation 
implied in the Frenchman's recent demonstra- 
tions of hostility, Mr. Behringbright, it may 
be believed, was under no manner of personal 
apprehension in anything that related to him ; 
nevertheless he felt rather annoyed at the 
apparition, and, willing to avoid the ridicule 
and inconvenience at once of any further pro- 
secution of so foolish and yet troublesome an 
episode, he hung back awhile to give Camille 
. who was evidently going his way . time to 
pass out of it. The impetuous Barney mean- 
while . whistling the "Low-backed Car" to 
himself, with satisfaction at the prospect of a 
shilling's-worth of whiskey that seemed loom- 
ing in sight . shot on so far ahead that on 
looking back he found himself deserted by his 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 317 

follower, and anxiously returned on liis steps 
to discern what had become of him. 

Mr. Behringbright explained that he had 
stopped, thinking he saw an acquaintance pass, 
and desired his guide to proceed. 

"Faith, then, your honour,'* said Barney, 
" I would rather you went before, that I might 
make sure I was guiding you right, for I had 
as nearly lost you then as ever I should find 
you again if I did." 

"A guide, I think, should go before," re- 
marked Mr. Behringbright. 

" On the way to heaven I wouldn't dispute 
the case with your honour ; but the streets are 
so crowded here'' Barney replied, with a de- 
lighted guffaw at his own wit. 

" You must nevertheless go before, if I am 
to follow you," Mr. Behringbright replied, 
rather amused, and thinking to himself that, 
after all, where Madeleine Graham dwelt might 
not inaptly be likened to some such regions of 
supernal bliss ! 

Barney perceived that his temporary master 
meant to exercise the rights of the position, 
and tacitly submitted. Again he whirligigged 



318 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

on his light and devious way, until, after tra- 
versing several streets from the main thorough- 
fare, Mr. Behringbright was aware that they 
had entered what appeared to be an entirely 
new and very handsomely -built portion of the 
town ; . such a quarter as is to be found radi- 
ating, in all the glories of architecture and novel 
improvements and convenience of all sorts, 
from the enclosures of most of our large old 
cities, under the impulse and overflow of 
modern wealth and building enterprise . a 
provincial Belgravia inhabited by successful 
traders. 

By-and-bye Mr. Behringbright, still led by 
his lamplighting will-o'-the-wisp, found him- 
self in an extensive square of lofty and stately- 
adorned new houses, almost worthy of the 
name of mansions, with a large and carefully 
laid out garden, ornamented with a fountain, 
numerous statues, and plantations of almost 
the only thing which wealth cannot accelerate 
to perfection . very young trees. 

" This is Belhaven Square, and long may the 
green grass never grow over the fine broad 
pavements of it ! We were talking of the 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 319 

sweet heavens just now, your honour, but this 
is a deal handsomer than the way up there . 
now, isn't it? . and reminds one more of the 
broad road down below, . which yet hasn't 
room enough, they say, for all the people that 
take to it !" 

'*. It is a fine, handsome square. We have 
fifty like it in London," said Mr. -Behring- 
bright, rather annoyed by the latter observa- 
tion . why, is not so clear. 

He paused, and looked over the enclosure, 
feeling in his pocket at the same time for 
some loose coin with which to reward his 
guide's diligence, and get rid of him. 

Belhaven Square was lighted with gas, on 
tall, classical-looking tripod posts. But it 
was still better illuminated at the time by 
a vivid moon. This gleamed along the 
ponderous Corinthian cornice of the palatial- 
looking pile tliat formed the western side of 
the square, and made all the windows glitter 
as if with sheeted silver blinds. 

Mr. Behringbright remembered that Sir 
Orange Graham had told him his house was a 
corner one, and on the side opposite to where 



320 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

you entered from the business centre of 
Belfast. It must be over yonder there, then. 
But which ? No, he would not suffer himself 
to ask of the gossiping fellow who had thrust 
himself upon him in the capacity of cicerone, 
and ten to one, in his habitual one of lamp- 
lighter to the district, was on chatting terms 
with half the servant-girls in the neighbour- 
hood, if not all. 

While Mr. Behrino^brio^ht was thinking: 
thus . that he would ask no compromising 
questions, but was striving to make out a 
corner house that answered description to his 
satisfaction, his eye dwelt upon one nearly 
opposite. And he was curiously startled and 
stimulated into curiosity at the precise 
moment, by perceiving the haunting figure 
of that Frenchman, gliding round by the iron 
palings surrounding a garden behind the 
residence, and seeming to be looking down 
into them with peculiar intensity of observa- 
tion. So much, indeed, was he moved to 
consideration by what he saw, that his hand 
remained in his pocket, and Barney continued 
with his own outstretched, looking up at his 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 321 

patron as wistfully as a parrot for a knob 
of sugar. 

" Ocli, then, your lionour seems to see 
something a little too big for your eyes," said 
Barney, after a somewhat protracted pause of 
this kind. 

" I see that young fellow, who appears like 
a foreigner, taking some pebbles- from his 
pocket, and throwing them at the back 
windows of the house opposite," said Mr. 
Behringbright, after a moment's reflection. 

" And it's not the first time, your honour. 
I've seen as wonderful a sight meself, barring 
that it isn't wonderful at all, when one comes 
to remember what a power of pretty girls, 
with the natest ankles in nature, are living 
under the roof that's above where he's throwing 
his pibbles so sly and soft ; he'll never do 
the glazier any good that way, sartin sure." 
" Whose house is it ?" 

" Would your honour like to know? . Well, 
it's the house of as dlac/c a Trotcstant as there 
is in all Belfast ; and divil knows where there 
is a blacker . or a yellower, cither . place, for 
that same, in all Ireland ! They call him 
VOL. I. 21 



322 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Sir Orange Graham; and he has been twice 
ex-mayor of the town, and he ordered out the 
soldiers on Boyne Water day, ten years ago, 
when the widow's son in Murphy Alley was 
kilt and murthered clean outright entirely, 
and half a dozen others put in their crutches 
for life." 

" Sir Orange Graham !" repeated Mr. 
Behringbright, attending only to the name, and 
not at all to the included depreciation of the 
magisterial career of the person named, . " Sir 
Orange Graham ! . ^What do you mean, then, 
you rascal, you, by saying there are so many 
.pretiy girls under his roof ?" 

'' Why, you never did clap the eyes your 
mother gave you on purtier critturs than the 
under-housemaid and the fammy de shamher, 
as they call her, with cheeks redder than bog- 
heather, and rounder and sweeter than ripe 
apples in an orchard ! That's to say, for the 
likes of me and other poor fellows, who mustn't 
be too partic'lar in anything ; but then there's 
the young ladies too, and first and foremost 
of them all. Miss Madeleine's own beautiful 
self, that can hardly step out of her doors but 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 323 

the very stones seem to be wanting to set 
themselves up a-flowering under her feet." 

" Very likely ! very likely !" said Mr. 
Behringbright, soothed by this latter poetical 
echoing to his own dominant idea. " But 
what can this absurd foreigner be after ? . one 
of these servant-girls you mention ?" 

" No, faith, your honour ; so they have told 
me themselves more than a dozen times . 
which makes thirteen. Only women's words 
are not much to be depended on in sweet - 
hearting matters.'' 

" That's your experience, is it, Barney. . . ?" 
Too . Mr. Behringbriglit was about to say, 
but he refrained putting himself on such a 
degree and kind of equality with the young 
rattle-pate Irishman, who had yet managed to 
bring him already into the familiarity of 
addressing him by his christian name, com- 
municated at the very outset of their ac- 
quaintance. 

*' Before I was married, your honour, a year 

ago come Whitsuntide again . sorrow to the 

day and hour ! And that's why the girls 

hardly tell me anything no\v-a-days. Only I 

21.2 



324 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

use my own eyes, and sometimes see into 
houses from the top of my ladder, over my 
nose . that's all." 

" Is ^h^fammy de sJiamher, as you call her, 
a Frenchwoman ? He is courting after her, 
no doubt, if courting's the business, and not 
(which is a good deal more likely) hurglary /" 
said Mr. Behringbrig-ht, exceedingly sulkily 
and discontentedly, and looking almost ready 
to summon the police, and give Monsieur Le 
Tellier into custody on the supposition. 

" Oh no, sir j cooriins the business, if it's 
anything. It's a young man that's very 
respectable, in the travelling line, and lodges 
at Widow Walshe's, in the Sea Gate. But 
as to foreigners, the young lady's-maid is 
a tight little Limerick girl of the O'Haggartys 
there; and the only other foreigner I know 
of under the eaves yonder, is an English 
young lady they have at Sir Orange's for 
governess." 

" A foreigner !'* 

" From London, your honour." 

" Oh, from London . a foreigner ! He means 
Emily Mauyhan^' muttered the Caliph Haroun 



JIADELEINE GRAHAM. 325 

within liis teeth. " But that's impossible ! . 
No ; what can it mean ? Did you ever see 
this man here before, Barney, did you say?" 

" Ay ; and later than this ! . When his 
honour, Sir Orange, is a-reading the family 
prayers, I'll be sworn !" said the lamplighter, 
with a significance that struck very displeas- 
ingly on his listener's sense. 

" Does . well, does anybody ever come out to 
him?" 

"Faith, your honour, somebody opens the 
back front gate to him, you may depind, before 
he gets in and goes down." 

" He goes in . sometimes . does he ?'' 

*' Or else he tumbles into the air, and is 
drowned in it clean out of sight, your honour 
But I hope you are not questioning me with 
any ill on your mind towards any of the poor 
girls that may have him for a sweetheart, 
unbeknownst to Sir Orange ? 1 hope your 
honour is a stranger in the place, as 3'ou gave 
yourself out to me. With that touch on your 
tongue of rale honesty and fair-meaning, I 
coukl have laid my hand on the altar you 
meant nothing either more or less than what 



326 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

you were after saying ; and I had rather my 
tongue were on the outside of my cheek than 
have it wagging inside to do Mary O'Haggarty 
or Ellen Moore any mischief, if so be they have 
taken up with the likes of a monkey French- 
man, in the despair of me being disposed of . 
worse luck ! who was a lad once . and that not 
so long ago . all the girls were after." 

" I do not relish your senseless buffooneries, 
man ! There's somebody coming up to the 
garden-gate now! . who's that?'' said Mr. 
Behringbright, impatiently, almost fiercely. 

" That r repeated Barney, elevating himself 
on his tiptoes, as if he thought he should 
thereby be enabled to bring the object nearer 
to his vision. '' Faith, then, I can't see for 
the bright moonlight ! But it's got the little 
grey cloak on and the hood, and so it must 
be " 

" Well, who must it be ?" 

" But is your honour anything in the way 
of friendship with his honour Sir Orange ? . 
There isn't a severer master in all the black 
north for tyranny than he ; he fined Mrs. 
Maloney five pound merely for breaking the 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 327 

windies of the workus in the desperation of 
her to get out to attend at her husband's wake, 
and sent her to prison till she could pay the 
damages . which is good as saying for ever 
and a day." 

" Whos that woman speaking to the fellow, 
I repeat? I have nothing to do with Sir 
Orange or his affairs ; but . but . I -am some 
relation of the young English governess there, 
and if I thought '* 



"Oh, if it's only about her your honour's 
consarned, I'll put you at your ase mighty fast ! 
That's Mary O'Haggarty who's speaking to the 
young gentleman now ; and, by the way, he 
goes on, starting and wringing his hands and 
stepping back, . telling him to go about his 
business ; for the night leastways." 

*' ISTo . look ! She seems to consider what he 
says. She is whispering to him. And now 

Isn't his hat going in among the trees out 

of sight ? Is it possible that this foreigner is 
admitted, in this surreptitious way, into Sir 
Orange Graham's house ?" 

" He has gone into the garden, at all events, 
as certain as two and two !" said Barney. 



328 MADELEINE GHAHAM. 

" Here's a crown for you, my man ! I have 
business with Sir Orange Graham . at his 
house, I mean. Miss Maughan, the governess 
there, is my relation ! I must call upon her 
to-night . at once . this instant ! Grood-night, 
my good fellow. Don't stand in my way ; my 
business is pressing !" 

And so saying, Mr. Behringbright passed 
the mute and staring lamplighter, flinging the 
coin indicated in his hand ; and in a few 
instants was knocking at the door of No. 90, 
Belhaven Square. 



END OF VOL. I, 
MADELEINE GRAHAM 



CHAPTEE I. 

A SURPRISE AND A RALLY. ' 

There are other trifles besides marriage, done 
in haste and repented of at leisure. At least, 
Mr. Behringbright was rather uncomfortably 
impressed with the notion that there may be 
such when, after a vivid rat-tat-tat at Sir 
Orange Graham's door, no notice being taken 
of the application for several minutes, he came 
to a sense of the position which his having 
yielded to impulse was about to plunge him in. 

"What, in point of fact, did he want at that 
hour of night, standing on the threshold of 
Sir Orange Graham's residence, demanding ad- 
mission in so impetuous and commanding ;. 
style ? He who had declined a regular invita- 

vol. 11. 1 



Z MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

tion at a proper hour of the day . who had 
given himself out as an unoffending commercial 
agent . who had declared that business (stu- 
pendous word with men of business !) would 
prevent him from availing himself of the plea- 
sure offered him until the next day . what did 
he there at that unseasonable hour, presenting 
himself under such peremptory and imposing 
circumstances ? Forsooth, to demand explana- 
tions concerning what he had taken upon 
himself to decide was the clandestine entry of 
a stranger into the house of a family almost 
equally unknown to him, and over the actions 
of whose members he could pretend no right 
of interference, unless his assumed relationship 
to Emily Maughan could be supposed to confer 
any! 

Mr. Behringbright perceived, of course, that 
this would not do. But what was to be done ? 
Alas ! the repentant interval afforded him sug- 
gested only the absolute necessity of announcing 
to the Grahams that he was obliged to call and 
see his cousin that night because business engage- 
ments would prevent him on the following day, 
and he wished to lose no time in giving her 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 3 

the best advice in his power in the matter 
relating to the Grlengariff family ! Yet this 
most inevitable, most necessary excuse would 
cut him off, very possibly, from the delightful 
prospect of spending an hour or two, according 
to invitation, in the bosom of a family glorified 
by possessing so angelic a constituent as Miss 
Madeleine Graham ! 

However, what was done was done. Flight 
was out of the question. It was absurd to 
think of knocking at a door, as he had knocked, 
and then cutting and running for it like a 
larking schoolboy. More especially as Barney 
O'Flanigan remained a witness of the whole 
affair, standing petrified, with his crown piece 
in his hand, staring after the rashly-generous 
donor, perfectly unable to reconcile the facts of 
his appearance with the munificence of the gift. 
Nay, I believe Mr. Behringbright had even 
raised the knocker, in an agony of embarrass- 
ment, observing that he was thus observed, and 
that evasion was impossible, to repeat his sum- 
mons, when the door opened, and a tall, lanky 
man, in a black livery turned up with orange, 
and with a face that looked like a funeral in 
1.* 



4 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

itself, made his appearance within the space of a 
guard-chain attached to the door. But he could 
have stood in a narrower compass. In fact his 
whole figure irresistibly reminded the spectator 
of a coffin endowed with the power of locomotion. 

This human coffin stared at the stranger in 
a rebuking and unpleasant manner, but only 
queried what might be wanted, in the sour ex- 
pression of its top-piece. 

" Is Miss Maughan at home, if you please ?" 
Mr. Behringbright inquired, himself stiffening 
. by sympathy, so to speak . in the reception 
he experienced. 

"Miss Maughan? . what's that?" replied 
that glum porter, repeating the name which 
the stranger had pronounced in the usual 
English way, with a grim kind of sarcastic 
mockery in his tones, and in a Scoto-Hibernian 
accent, not too pleasant to hear. " But ye 
mean, I forgather, Miss Maffan, the bit 
governess body ? Where sulci she be but at 
family worship with all the rest of his honour's 
God-fearing family? Though I'm thinking 
she likes jingling on a kist-full of rubbish- 
ing pagan tunes they ca' a piano, a sight 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 5 

better, of an evening, than any such saving 
work." 

" I want to see Miss Maughan on particular 
business that can't well be put off," replied 
Mr. Behringbright, persisting in his accentua- 
tion of the name in a spirit of defiance to this 
surly commentator: 

" Well, if you were the King of England . 
if there was one . you'd have no call to 
interrupt his honour and his family at evening 
prayer for a blessing on the house. And I'll 
be hanged if I would have stirred a stump if 
I had known what sort of a customer was 
rattling at the door like a madman at this hour 
after sundown ; and Sir Orange himself had 
twice to bid me before I rose from my knees, as 
it was. He'll be at the portion of Scripture now, 
and I'll no be for troubling him with a message 
to one of the servant women from a stranger." 

" One of the servant women! What do you 
mean, fellow ? Do you call Miss Maughan a 
servant woman ?" 

" What is she better, I should like to know ? 
What's anyone that takes wage but a servant ? 
But fellow- worm, let's ca' her, if it pleases you 



6 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

better, and tak no for an answer, in what 
respects yonr own hurry, just at present, my 
master !" the porter now replied, in a tone 
decidedly insolent, and which proved that, 
however thoroughly imbued with religious 
principle, he retained something of the old 
Adam in his carnal organization. 

" Very well ! I shall not fail to inform Sir 
Orange with what unaccountable insolence his 

domestics receive a person who " began 

Mr. Behringbright, not ill-pleased, neverthe- 
less, with the chance of withdrawal with the 
honours of war which lie discerned in the treat- 
ment he experienced, when, on a sudden, Lady 
Graham's voice pierced from a door set ajar, 
about halfway up the passage. 

" Let the gentleman in, will you, Maclntyre? 
It's Mr. Brownjohn, Sir Orange, and there's 

that cross old stick going on at him as if 

Pray come in, Mr. Brownjohn ! You'll not 
interrupt for a few minutes or so, when we 
shall be done, and are as welcome as the spring, 
meantime." 

Lady Graham presented herself witli out- 
stretched hand, and a face beaming with jolly 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 7 

welcome, in the hall as she spoke these last 
words ; and the grim Cerberus, surprised and 
abashed, let the door-chain down, and flung it 
wide open, muttering as he did so, . 

" Nay, if my lady says so it must be. Come 
in, sir." 

Mr. Behringbright stepped forward. not too 
willingly, perhaps . until the certainty that he 
was about to see the charming Madeleine again 
recurred to him. Then his eye brightened up, 
and he cordially returned her ladyship's hearcy 
wring of the hand, expressing his earnest hope, 
at the same time, that he should not be con- 
sidered intrusive, though he particularly desired 
to see Miss Maughan that night, as business 
would prevent him on the following day from 
doing himself the pleasure of accepting the 
invitation her ladyship and Sir Orange had 
been so very kind, &c, &c. 

" Deary me, I hope not. Madeleine will be 
so disappointed ! We were all of us so de- 
lighted and obleeged with your very, very kind 
attentions on board. But she's so done up, 
poor girl, with travelling, that she's gone to 
bed quite early, and so you wont see her, and 



o MADELETNE GRAHAM. 

she wont see you to thank you. And I'm 
sure we all hoped we should, and over a good 
dinner too, and a bowl of claret-punch, which 
you wont get better, I'll be sworn, if you 
walked all Ireland over barefoot." 

"I am exceedingly sorry, indeed, if Miss 
Graham . I can endeavour to come to- 
morrow, Lady Graham. I am sure I interrupt 

at present, and " stammered Mr. Behring- 

bright, making a movement of retreat in a 
very confused state of mind at this intelligence. 

" Oh, no ! Sir Orange is pretty near the end 
of it now. It's only a custom in our family. 
Train up a child in the way he ought to go 
you know, Mr. Brownjohn. But we'll have a 
snack of supper in a moment, and your cousin's 
in here on her marrowbones with the rest of 
us, and you can have your talk out with her, 
and I'll brew us some punch to-night, too . 
store is no sore . and to-morrow you can come 

and see Madeleine, when she's up, and . 

What do you want to say, Mr. Brownjohn, 
that you are looking at me so earnest-like ?" 

Ay, what did Mr. Brownjohn want to say ? 

His eye was not usually so excessively ex- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 9 

pressive, it must be allowed ; but on tins 
occasion . it is of no use trying to put the 
change upon the sagacious and penetrating 
reader . on this occasion his eye really seemed 
to say, almost as plainly as words, that he felt 
annoyed to excess at the reported absence of 
Miss Graham from the family conclave ! And 
not only annoyed, but even, strangely enough, 
alarmed at the circumstance ; for Lady Graham 
exclaimed on, without awaiting any further 
explanation, " Oh no, she's not very bad ; only 
her head's all swimming still, and she can't get 
the clattering of the steam-engine out of it 
till after a night's rest. But I'm sure it's very 
good of you to take so much concern about 
her, Mr. Brownjohn, though most people are 
uncommon partial to her at first sight. Miss 
Maughan . Emily, my dear . here's your cousin, 
the English gentleman we told you about on 
board the steamer, come to see you. Never 
mind the rest of the portion ; you can read it 
yourself by-and-bye, dear, and Sir Orange, I 
am sure, will excuse you." 

Nevertheless Emily did not accept the ener- 
getic permit. She continued fixed to her 



10 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

chair, apparently too absorbed in attention to 
Sir Orange's nasal, Puritanical drawl, to hear 
that she was addressed. The little rosy girl 
seated on her knee, however, felt that she 
trembled, and looked up in her face with inno- 
cent wonder ; and wondered then yet more to 
see how pale that wontedly not too high- 
coloured, but gently pensive countenance had 
become. " papa ! what makes Melly so 
white? You've quite frightened her, too . 
with that story about Job and the devil ! Don't 
read any more, papa ; pray don't !" 

" Silence, child !" thundered Sir Orange. 
" I've only two more verses to read, and if 
Miss Maughan is troubled in her conscience 
over them, it may be the sign of a blessed 
awakening which " 

" O bother you, Sir Orange ! How you do 
talk of conscience ! I only wish none of ours 
wanted more sending to the bleacher's than 
Miss Maughan's," interposed Lady Graham, 
with somewhat a peculiar significance in her 
tones. But finding there was still no response 
on Emily's part, she drew Mr. Behringbright 
resolutely on by the hand into a great, heavily 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 11 

furnished parlour, where some seven or eight 
youngsters, of various ages and sizes, were 
sitting round a gloomy, tin-shaded lamp, at a 
table whence Sir Orange read prayers and the 
Scriptures every evening in his harsh, disso- 
nant tones, to a congregation whose relish for 
the tidings of salvation was probably not in- 
creased by the manner of their announcement. 
Thereupon this lay cleric closed his volume 
with an offended clash, and arose to welcome the 
intruder with a very ill grace, and an undis- 
sembled stare of surprise. Emily herself could 
no longer pretend unconsciousness, and although 
ready to faint, managed to raise herself, and 
extend her hand to her cousin, while a deep 
and burning blush replaced the deadly pallor 
of her complexion but a moment before. 

Mr. Behringbright's heart smote him, he 
scarcely well knew why, as he glanced at the 
young governess. He perceived the sudden 
change of complexion, and though not very 
deeply skilled in the external signs of feminine 
emotion, could not doubt that this meant much. 
In other respects he could not help owning to 
himself . and was surprised to find he did so 



12 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

with a strange, ffruchring reluctance . that 
Emily was very much improved. Experience 
of life and of sorrow had added a noble and 
touching dignity to her expression. The 
girlish loveliness which had always distin- 
guished her countenance, had passed into a 
more exalted type of womanly patience, sweet- 
ness, and sensibility, that communicated a sin- 
gular charm to it. And had not the fascinating 
vision of Madeleine Graham risen at the same 
moment in his gaze, Mr. Behringbright might 
have felt greatly more moved at the visible 
change than he could have deemed possible. But 
precisely at the instant a door behind Emily 
opened on the further side of the room, and Miss 
Graham entered, in a snow-white picturesque 
dressing-gown, trimmed all over with pretty 
little frills, her beautiful black hair flowing loose 
to her waist, her eyes swimming in a liquid bath 
of their own brightness, and looking in all other 
respects anything but the worn-out and ex- 
hausted voyager which she had been described. 
" Oh, I find I cannot sleep, mamma, and so 
I may as well hear papa read the Good- 
ness me ! Mr. Brownjolm here? " 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 13 

These first words were nevertheless pro- 
nounced in tones of the sweetest languor ; the 
latter, of the most vividly excited interest and 
surprise ! No actress that ever figured on the 
boards of a theatre could have done it better 
than that accomplished actress on the stage of 
actuality. And, oh me ! what a fine bright- 
ening up of hope and joy was instantly appa- 
rent, electrifying the whole being of the man in 
Mr. Behringbright, as he almost let Emily 
Maughan's hand fall from his pressure, step- 
ping eagerly forward to receive the unexpected 
happiness. 

" Miss Graham ! Have I indeed the 
pleasure " 

" Eeally, sir, I had not the faintest notion 
. Pray excuse me, I am such a figure. Some- 
body might have told me, mamma. My hair 
down and all ! But I had such a headache, 
and mamma thought bathing my head would 
do it good j but " 

" It is impossible for Miss Graham to look 
anything but most charming; }^et, believe me, if 

anything could add to the effect of " There 

Mr. Behringbright broke down in confusion. 



14 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Else, no doubt, he meant to say something 
very complimentary and uncommercial indeed. 
But the syren understood very well what was 
meant. Her rich cheek deepened in its 
splendid flush, her lustrous eyes dwelt with 
an instant's intoxicating glow upon the 
speaker . then were modestly withdrawn. But 
not until the flash had seemed to pierce 
through Mr. Behringbright's stout tweed 
waistcoat into his very soul . wherever that 
might be situated . and to radiate off in 
streams of running fire through all his throb- 
bing veins. 

Emily Maughan's fair visage, meanwhile, 
faded back to its first almost monumental 
pallor. 

"I will go and dress myself at once, 
mamma. Mr. Brownjohn will not be so cruel 
as to leave us again so suddenly ; and I know 
a little pleasant gossip with so kind a friend 
will do me a great deal more good than trying 
to doze while one feels so restless and feverish. 
Dear Emily, your cousin will be sure and stay 
and sup with us. You must make him, if he 
will not." 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 15 

"We've some prime corned beef; . we'll 
have a dish of oysters and kidneys ready in 
a moment. Archie, go and tell Maclntyre to 
bring in hot and cold water and the spirit- 
stand at once. Orange, take Mr. Brownjohn s 
hat. Eldest boy's called Orange, too. It 
isn't Sir Orange I mean ; don't be afraid. We 
wont sermonize you. Well, do go and do up 
your hair, Madeleine, and put on a frock." 

" Pray do not, Miss Graham ; you cannot by 
any possibility improve in your appearance, 
and . and I can only stay a few minutes to- 
night . and I should like to speak to my cousin 
for a moment. But I will come again to- 
morrow . whatever business I am obliged to 
put off! . I will indeed." 

This latter superfluously vehement assevera- 
tion, one would have thought, was in answer 
to the pained, beseeching . yes, tenderly re- 
proachful glance, of those wonderful eyes. 

And now it cannot be denied that in her 
loose white dishabille, falling in its soft cambric 
folds around her graceful figure, and yet re- 
vealing the svelte proportions of her exquisite 
bust, and slender, girlish waist with voluptuous 



16 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

fidelity, Madeleine Graham was a most se- 
ductive and altogether irresistible embodiment 
of youthful female loveliness. When to this 
are added the beauty of her rounded pulpy 
visage and exquisite complexion, the melting 
languid glow in her seemingly impassioned 
eyes, the luxurious splendours of her loosened 
glossy raven locks, it is no great marvel that 
Mr. Behringbright felt not only ready to re- 
tract his refusal to stay to supper, but as if he 
never wanted again to leave so divine a presence ! 
But somehow or other Emily's clear, sad eye 
falling upon him at the moment restored him 
to himself. 

" I should be most happy . very happy in- 
deed, Miss Graham 1" he said, answering the 
mute appeal, " but it is impossible to-night ! 
I have an appointment which . I beg pardon, 
Lady Graham, but . could I speak with my 
cousin for a few moments? It is a family 
affair which . which concerns more than our- 
selves, or I should not take the liberty." 

" Certainly, certainly, Mr. Brownjolm. 
Don't mention it ; no apologies are necessary 
among friends. There's the breakfast-room 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. ]7 

you can go into and be all to yourselves ; 
and I'll have something warm ready for you 
when you come out, which shant detain you 
half a moment from your work. Emily, my 
dear, show Mr. Brownjohn to the breakfast- 
room," said Lady Graham ; it must be admit- 
ted, in a rather huffed and pettish tone at the 
commencement. But her daughter gave a 
glance about midway in the harangue, which 
she seemed to understand, and thence the 
change of tone. 

Emily complied, though with a degree of 
hesitation amounting almost to reluctance, 
suddenly changing into a still more un- 
accountable brusqueness and velocity of move- 
ment as she led the way along the passage, 
followed by her supposed cousin, to a small 
but handsome chamber at the extremity, look- 
ing ihrovgh strong iron bars into the common 
garden of the square. 

Mr. Behringbright did not observe the 
vexed and suspicious glance with which Made- 
leine followed the movement, his back being 
turned; but Lady Graham did, or to. what 
had the observation reference she exclaimed to 

VOL- II 2 



18 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

her daughter the moment the door closed ? . 
" Oh no, dear ! they re no sweethearts . don't 
fancy it !" adding, in a whisper, to elude Sir 
Orange's attention, who was busied in re- 
placing his Bible in a case it occupied on the 
sideboard, " And if they were, you'd beat her 
out of the field the second look you gave at 
him I" 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 19 



CHAPTEE II. 

EXPLANATIONS MALE AND FEMALE. 

Having reached the breakfast-parlour, Miss 
Maughan found she could go no farther j else 
I am not sure she would not have liked to 
extend her walk into the open air . perhaps 
farther yet, into the sea . at the moment. As 
it was, she had no resource but to clutch at a 
gas-chandelier dimly alit over head, pull it 
down, and turn up the burners into an extra- 
ordinary glare ; evidently without particularly 
knowing what she was about. Then rallying 
from the weakness she felt in all her loving", 
feminine nature, by a still more womanly spirit 
of resolve, she turned bravely round and faced 
Mr. Behringbright with a restored calmness 
and self-possession that did him good, too. 
He was not very comfortable until then, but 
felt almost like a man detected in some act of 
9 . o. 



20 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

infidelity by one to whom his fealty was clue 
and promised. Nevertheless, he broke the 
silence that ensued for a few moments, with 
visible embarrassment . 

" You received my note, Miss Maughan," 
he inquired, " written in the name of Brown- 
john ?" 

" Yes, sir, I did." 

" I suppose you were a little surprised at 
such a . such a whim, and at my claiming you 
as a cousin ?" 

" I was rather surprised at that, in But 

I know your great aversion to be made much 
of on account of your . your money and . 
and influential position . only I" poor Emily 
replied, with an audible faltering in her tones, 
which she endeavoured to explain by a strong 
ahem ! as if the voice required clearing ; 
nothing else. 

" I have an aversion indeed to be made a 
sort of golden idol of . I don't say golden 
calf. though people make a fool of me often 
enough !" said Mr. Behringbright, adding, 
with very emphatic earnestness, " And there- 
fore I beg of you most particularly, Miss 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 21 

Maughan, as the greatest of favours, not to 
reveal who or what I am in this family ! I 
have a most special reason for it." 

"Certainly not, sir, since you desire it!" 
Emily replied, in rather faint tones ; " I . and 
my poor mother and family . all of us . owe 
you too much not to pay the most implicit 
obedience to your wishes in any respect. But 
are you quite sure, sir," she concluded, in a 
hesitating accent, as if ashamed herself of the 
meanness of the supposition, "that the Grahams 
do not know who you are? They are a family 
very kind to me, I acknowledge . but who do 
not usually treat any but wealthy persons with 
the particular respect they seem to pay to you!" 

This observation greatly and visibly annoyed 
Mr. Behringbright. 

" It is impossible . quite impossible, Miss 
Maughan! unless, in contradiction to almost the 
only request I ever made you in my life, you 
have revealed the fact!" he said, with most 
unusual pettishuess and vivacity. 

Emily was silent for a moment . rather a 
painful one, no doubt ; but she answered, with 
a noble fidelity to the truth, of which it is not 



22 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

too much to say not ever?/ woman in her situa- 
tion would have been capable, . 

"I have not breathed a word of it, sir. 
Your commands would always have been 
sacred to me. But I had, besides, no imagin- 
able motive to expose you to a kind of perse- 
cution I know you detest, and which would be 
so easily traced to my imprudence ... in 
the family of Sir Orange Graham. So far 
as regards me, they are perfectly ignorant, I 
assure you, that you are anybody but the Mr. 
Brownjohn you announce yourself to be." 

" I am quite sure of it, my dear girl ; say 
no more about it," said Mr. Behringbright, in 
a changed, pleased tone, which did not com- 
municate its pleasure to his auditress. " But 
now let us talk a little of your own affairs. 
Let us take seats. I suppose it is the same 
in Ireland as in England, in being as cheap 
sitting as standing ; and I really am tired with 
my voyage, and a long tour about the town 
all day. You owe me a little rest, besides, as 
you are the cause of my wandering." 

A slight flush revisited Emily's spiritually- 
pale complexion, as she complied with the re- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 23 

quest, murmuring in a timid undertone, " I, 
sir! I am sure I was not worth any such 
trouble. But I hope it was more on account 
of the dear kind lady at Glengariff Castle . 
your friend . to whom I have occasioned so 
much discomfort that I am sure, if I had 
known what would come of it, I would never 
have left England, if I had died there of 
misery and grief!" 

ci Died of misery and grief, Emily ! . Well, 
the change was good for you. Your mother 
had grown most nonsensically exacting and un- 
comfortable, I am sure ! . I noticed it myself. 
But do you really mean to tell me, then, that 
all this about Lord Glengariff is not a mere 
fancy and hallucination of his mother's mind ; 
that the young noble gentleman did really 
and truly . fall in love with you?" 

And Mr. Behringbright looked with a degree 
of puzzled incredulity at Emily, the nature of 
which she probably misunderstood. A kind of 
womanly resentment, of which she had scarcely 
believed herself capable, sparkled up in her ex- 
pression, as she answered, with unwonted viva- 
city . 



24 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" I do not know that I am bound to account 
to you, sir, for other people's crimes or follies ; 
or, perhaps, both in one, it would appear, in 
this case. But Lord Glengariff certainly pro- 
fessed to have taken a great attachment towards 
me, and has proved that he meant what he 
said, though quite against all my wishes and 
entreaties ! " 

" Do you mean he really did offer you mar- 
riage, Miss Maughan ?" 

Again the astonished and incredulous tone 
rasped on some fine nerve in Emily's organiza- 
tion ; but she answered, with a spirit that did 
not unbecome her, . 

"Marriage? Of course, sir! I imagine that 
even if Lord Glengariff had not been, as he is, 
a noble and courteous gentleman, incapable 
of offering an insult to any woman, but, least 
of all, one under his mother's roof and protec- 
tion.he would not have dared to venture on 
an address to me in any other form !" 

Mr. Behringbright admired the tone and 
look that accompanied this reply, quite as much 
as the words ; and yet, somehow, their general 
effect was embarrassing and disquieting to 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 25 

himself personally, more than he had bar- 
gained for. 

"What a young madman!" he exclaimed, 
not knowing what else to say. "'He must have 
known that it was impossible!" 

" He knew so when I had told him, sir ; not 
till then ! Lord Glengariff is his own master; 
no one has the power to exercise any control 
over him in that respect . I had almost said 
no one has the right ! And I do not know of 
any law to prevent even a nobleman of high 
rank, unmarried, from taking to wife any 
woman at liberty to dispose of herself, whom 
he could induce to accept what, in that case, 
was really and truly the honour of an offer!" 

Why did Mr. Behringbright dislike the 
warmth and emphasis of this admission, or 
assertion, whichever it was? He certainly did. 

" Do you mean to say then, Miss Maughan," 
he remarked, very stiffly, after a pause, " that 
thinking, as you apparently do, with so exalted 
an admiration of this young and splendid 
nobleman, you have refused an offer from him 
to make you Countess of Glengariff?" 

There was a considerable pause, during which 



26 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Emily's countenance repeatedly changed both 
in hues and expression. 

.' I have refused an offer to become the wife of 
the Earl of Glen gar iff," she said, at last, in a 
rather faint tone. " Not one offer, but many . at 
least, an offer many times repeated ! You have 
the right to question me, sir ; but I trust you 
will believe I do not make this statement from 
any paltry, vainglorious movement of female 
vanity! Not that I pretend to deny I feel all 
the force of such a compliment from the brave 
and high-hearted young nobleman, who would 
have defied the prejudices of society on my 
account, had I found it possible to respond 
fittingly to his devotion I" 

"And you really did reject him?" said Mr. 
Behringbright, not able to realize the matter 
to himself . or most perseveringly resolved not 
to do so. 

" Is it not proof enough that I am here, 
sir ?" was the reply, with a strangely sad 
and yet most musical tremble in the accents. 

" But really I can't understand, Emily 
Maughan ! Have vulgar social notions entered 
so deeply into your soul also, that you yourself 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 27 

deemed you had no right to . to accept such 
an offer ?" said the millionnaire, strangely puz- 
zled, and hardly knowing what he said, or how 
he said it. 

Emily Maughan was silent for a minute . a 
full minute. She then replied, with a quiet, 
subdued, exceedingly mournful sedateness, . 

" Such was not my motive, sir ! I believe 
that the woman whom a man desires, above 
all others, to make his own . if she can recipro- 
cate the sentiment . has the right, to become 
his wife, no matter what the difference in such 
adventitious circumstances as birth, or rank, 
or fortune can create, may exist ! But for 
any woman who does not feel a preference for 
a man, above all other men, to marry him . I 
take to be . only another name for . for . for- 
give me the dreadful word, Mr. Behringbright ! 
. there is no other for the dreadful thing ; . 
marriage in such a case appears to me only 
another name for prostitution /" 

And pronouncing the word, fraught, indeed, 
with horror so unutterable to every really 
womanly-hearted woman, Emily Maughan gave 
a dry sob, and looked aghast at Mr. Behring- 



28 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

bright (she had uttered the name !) in wonder 
what he would think of her audacity. And 
this was what he thought, for he said it, . 

" You are right, Emily ! . wonderfully right! 
. I honour, I admire, I am amazed at you ! 
Do you think that there are any more women 
that do think and act like you in all the 
world?" 

Ah, why did he not say, I love you for it ? 
It is most certain that for several minutes Mr. 
Behringbright did feel as if he loved as well as 
honoured and admired the noble girl for what 
she had done . for what she had said. But 
that other haunting image arose in his remem- 
brance . I know not how brought thither, . 
and dictated the close of his speech, and he 
only repeated several times, " I honour, I 
admire, I am amazed at you !" 

Neither did he dare to ask of Emily, . 
Why did you not prefer the noble Glengariff 
to all the rest of his sex ? He assigned her 
a motive . took it for granted . without that 
preliminary. 

" I understand it all now. You felt that 
such a match . entirely disapproved by his 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 29 

mother . by every one who had a- right to a 
voice in the matter . could only end disas- 
trously. You have acted wisely . most wisely ! 
I am only sorry for the poor youth himself!" 

" And so am I, sir . oh, so am I !" exclaimed 
Emily, melting on a sudden at this juncture 
into a flood of tears. " Oh, if you only knew 
how poor Lord Grlengariff has been going on 
in Belfast since I refused, finally and for ever, 
to go back to the castle . to become his wife . 
you would pity him ! . you would save him ! . 
for his mother's sake, noble, unfortunate fellow, 
. if for nothing else ! Oh, he has plunged into 
such extravagant courses . gets drunk . knocks 
people about . fills the whole town with the up- 
roar of the strange things he does . gambles . 
sets the officers in the barracks on all kinds of 
dreadful larks, as they call them ! They tell me, 
his horse fell dead below him when he won 
the last steeplechase. Oh, you cannot tell, 
sir, how madly he goes on ; so if you do 
not look after him and save him, sir, I do 
not know what he will come to. Do promise 
me, Mr. Behringbright, that you will save 
Lord Grlengariff! I know he respects you. 



30 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

He may, perhaps, be led by you out of bis 
madness ! I have been a thousand times on 
the point of writing to you . only I thought 

. I thought " But she grew silent then, 

unless the crimsoning of the " eloquent blood" 
in her face spoke. 

" I am sorry to hear such a sad account of the 
young earl's proceedings. . I will do what I 
can with him, if he will listen to reason," 
said Mr. Behringbright, rather coldly. " His 
mother has written to me, in fact, to beg that 
I would look after him ; although apparently 
unaware, as well as myself, that Lord Glen- 
gariff was going on in any such extraordinary 
way in Belfast, if we put aside the rest of 
the escapade. . I promise you I will, Miss 
Maughan ! . Very young man as Lord Glen- 
gariff is, he cannot be so senseless, if he sees 
that his passion is altogether hopeless. . But 
it seems to me the strangest thing in the 
world . I almost think it is most strange, 
Miss Maughan, . why, or wherefore, you . a 
young, handsome, highly accomplished, witty, 
wealthy, military nobleman at your feet, offer- 
ing you love and a coronet . I don't quite 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 31 

understand, I own What I mean to say is, 

do you think that all young ladies . that the 
young lady of this house, for example," he 
continued, desperately, " would refuse such an 
offer ?" 

Emily Maughan was evidently struck all of 
a heap, as the saying is, . not a very intelli- 
gible one, . with this question. Human nature, 
however, could not be so overtaxed as to 
answer in the affirmative, possibly expected; 
at all events, she could perceive, with the fatal 
perspicuity of the passion that possessed her, 
even in its workings in that pure and tranquil- 
welling blood . earnestly desired. 

" I do not think she would . you mean Miss 
Graham, of course ? Eosa Matilda, Honoria, . 
and little Mary Anna are too young to be 
thought of. But I have kept Lord Glen- 
garifF's secret as cautiously as I shall yours, 
sir, as long as you desire ; and although he 
forced a visit upon me in this house . . . 
twice . . . and Miss Graham saw him both 
times, by accident . he took care not to have 
himself announced to me as who he really was, 
but as a messenger from Lady GlengarifF to 



32 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

me. I had grown very uneasy, not hearing 
from her, as we had arranged, . and easily 
fell into the snare. But Miss Graham re- 
mains ignorant of who and what his lord- 
ship is." 

" Miss Graham has seen him ! . And is he 
such a handsome, such a very handsome fellow 
as you describe, Miss Maughan ?" exclaimed 
Mr. Behringbright, with a sudden flush now 
on his cheek. 

" I beg your pardon, sir ; it is you who have 
described Lord Glengariff by the epithet. I 
have not alluded to his personal appearance," 
replied Emily. 

"No; I don't suppose you have. . But he 
is a very handsome fellow . universally acknow- 
ledged to be so ; and did he see Miss Graham 
on these visits ?" 

"Certainly! He could hardly miss that," 
said Emily, suppressing the additional remark 
that arose to her lips . Miss Graham took 
abundant care both to see and be seen on the 
occasion. 

" And do you mean to say ?" Actually 

Mr. Behringbright was about to exclaim . Did 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 33 

she mean to say that, after seeing Madeleine 
Graham, Lord Glengariff could possibly persist 
in perceiving that any other woman in the 
world was worthy of the least attention or 
pursuit ! But he checked himself in time, so 
far as regarded the utterance of the words. 
Their sense glided on, like a stroke of the 
keenest steel . albeit invisible in blade and 
point . right through the heart of Emily 
Maughan. She put her hand, indeed, upon it 
with a gesture of actual physical pain for an 
instant. . Only an instant, and then she 
replied to the unuttered words, very calmly 
and steadily . 

" Yes, sir. I do not think that Miss Graham 
is at all the kind of woman . not much, at all 
events . to attract the notice of a man like 
Lord Glengariff; at least if I may judge from 
the fact that he has taken so much notice of 
me. 

"What vanity!" thought Mr. Behring- 
bright. "What wonderful creatures for 
vanity women must be, when even this 

modest, shrinking young creature fancies ! 

You must remember, Emily," he continued 

VOL. II. 3 



34 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

aloud, in a rebuking, fatherly tone, fc that you 
fascinated this foolish young fellow in the 
midst of solitude . woods, and mountains, and 
lakes, and all that sort of thing, . beside the 
sick couch of an elderly, mind-shaken woman, 
with no possible competition to disturb the 
effect of your mild insinuating ways. . Not 
that I imagine for one moment you intended 
the mischief you effected, or depreciate your 
very proper self-esteem. . But, my dear girl, it 
is really not too much to suppose that if Lord 
Grlengariff had been exposed to the influences . 
that will be sure to be brought to bear upon 
him, in a more enlarged acquaintance with the 
world . considering the great advantages of 

position he enjoys " There Mr. Behring- 

bright paused, in some confusion, feeling that 
he was making a most ungallant remark and 
inference. 

" But, so I told him, sir," said Emily, with 
perfect simplicity of acquiescence. " Only he 
would not believe me." 

"We must try and reason him into the 
belief, then ; but if he has really seen Mm 
Graham with indifference . I am not quite sure 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 35 

Beally, Emily ! if it were not for Lady 

Glengariff's prejudices of high descent and 
station, I do not know but that Lord Glen- 
gariff . if he is turning out so wild as you 
represent . might do a great deal worse, after 
all, than marry a sensible, kind-hearted, pretty 
girl, with manners and accomplishments fit for 
any rank in society . whom he seems so won- 
derfully . I mean, so passionately to prefer to 
the rest of her sex." 

Some bitter emotion, it would not be fair 
to analyse to all its component elements, 
writhed round Emily's lips as she listened to 
these words, and had not heroic female pride 
forbidden, would have burst in a shower of 
heart- wrung tears from her eyes. As it was 
she merely said, "I was not studying for a 
compliment, sir . only saying the truth, so far 
as I understand it . in the way I understand 
it," and was silent. She dared not venture on 
a repetition of her announced resolution as 
respected the wooing of this noble suitor, lest 
her voice should fall into some betraying 
quavers, or the motives of so strange a refusal 
should be demanded too cogently. But Mr. 

3.3 



36 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Behringbright understood the silence very well, 
for him, and interpreted it. 

u Well, then," he said, rising, " our con- 
ference is at an end. I must do what I can 
to-morrow to look up Lord Grlengariff, and try 
to induce him to return to a sense of duty and 
propriety. Aided so extraordinarily by the 
fair object of his Quixotic outbreak, I do not 
doubt to succeed." 

" I wish you every success, sir ; it annoys 
me more than I can say to hear of his lord- 
ship's vagaries. But how is Lady Grlengariff? 
And how is it I have never heard from her?" 

Mr. Behringbright heard the words, but his 
own attention was suddenly caught and ab- 
sorbed by another object. 

" God bless me !" he exclaimed, staring out 
of the parlour window. " Whafs that . who's 
that, sneaking out of Sir Orange's back railing 
into the public garden of the square ? I see 
there's a private gate into it from the house . 
there, just turning round that clump of holly 
bushes !" 

Emily looked in the direction indicated. 
The clear moonlight allowed an object answer- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 37 

ing the description very exactly, in point of 
manner, to be visible now on the gravel walk 
of the public garden of the square ; but a figure 
which Mr. Behringbright had distinctly seen 
glide out of Sir Orange's enclosure, despite its 
efforts at clandestine movement. 

" That person ? Did he come out of the 
house, do you- say, sir ? Do you think ?" said 
Emily, in an evidently startled tone, and also 
watching the receding figure with fixed atten- 
tion. 

" Not only did I see him come out of the 
house, but just when I arrived myself, enter it, 
in an equally furtive and forbidden manner," 
returned Mr. Behringbright. 

" You do not mean to say that I you must 
be mistaken, sir." 

" I am not. Do you know who it is ?" 

" Do I know who it is ? I am not sure that 
I do, or that in any case I should feel myself 
justified in stating," Emily replied, with visible 
hesitation. 

"Is it some sweetheart . as they call the 
poor senseless wretches . after some servant- 
girl of the place?" said Mr. Behringbright, 



38 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

with a vehemence which produced quite a dif- 
ferent effect on Emily Maughan, who replied, 
with great coldness, . 

" I really cannot say with any certainty, sir, 
and I do not feel myself called upon to hazard 
surmises on the conduct of any of the persons 
who reside beneath the roof that shelters me." 

" Well, of course, quite right, and it is no 
business of mine either ; I commend your pru- 
dence, Miss Maughan," said Mr. Behring- 
bright, quite pettishly. " Let us return now 
to the company ; I have not a minute fur- 
ther to waste. I had ordered dinner at my 
hotel, and there will be a hue-and-cry after me 
shortly. Good night ; God bless you ! Have 
you any notion where Lord Glengariff is to be 
heard of?" 

" None whatever." 

" Well, no matter ; I shall soon find him out, 
and leave Ireland as fast as I can after. It 
seems just like any other place, only duller. 
Pray don't trouble to accompany me . I can 
find my way back to wish Lady Graham . 
Good night." 

And, as if he had unwittingly pressed a nose- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 39 

gay with a nettle in it to his nostrils, the visitor 
flung himself out of the apartment, leaving 
Emily full of sorrowful surmise, and of a vague 
sentiment of jealousy mingled with indignation, 
and a strong reinforcement to certain suspicions 
and anxieties relating to Madeleine Graham that 
had long haunted her, and which she felt that 
delicacy towards the family whose salt she ate, 
and a generosity of fair-dealing innate in her 
hreast, had induced her injudiciously, towards 
herself, to suppress. 

But what had been hesitated and withheld 
had produced a great effect with Mr. Behring- 
bright. The least considerative of observers 
might have noticed the marked change in his 
demeanour when he returned to the apartment 
in which Sir Orange Graham and his family 
were now awaiting their guest, drawn up in 
battle array, with an excellent supper-table 
spread, and the promised bowl of punch dif- 
fusing its nectareous steam around. He made 
his appearance merely to wish them a formal 
good evening, protesting an absolute necessity 
to return immediately to his quarters at the 
hotel; declined the " least taste in life" of the 



40 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

brewage ; scarcely accepted, though he did not 
absolutely refuse, Lady Graham's earnestly re- 
newed invitation to " salmon and a cutlet" next 
day at four ; bowed in the most distant possible 
manner to Miss Graham ; and, in spite of all re- 
monstrance and entreaty, made his way out of 
the apartment, and out of the house, without 
tasting bite or sup in it. For if all were true 
that he heard and had seen, whom . whom 
could that French puppy come after to court, 
in so basely clandestine a manner, in Sir 
Orange Graham's house, save and excepting 
his beautiful eldest daughter ? 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 41 



CHAPTEE III. 



"DIVARSHION. ' 



It was not until lie had got fairly out of the 
house into Belhaven Square in this angry 
mood, that the consolatory recollection sud- 
denly occurred to Mr. Behringbright that he 
had seen the parties together on board the Bel- 
fast steamer, and that they had kept aloof, and 
seemed to be perfect strangers to each other. 

Yet what more likely, it came back upon 
him, than that the relations between them 
being of so clandestine a character, the lovers 
. if lovers they were . should have observed 
this distance, under the direct observation of 
the father and mother ? Yet again, why should 
she have singled him out with such evident 
kindly appreciation if her affections were pre- 
viously engaged ? Had he been known to be 
who he was, the case would have been different. 



42 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

But Mr. Behringbright felt certain he could 
depend, not only upon the word, but upon the 
interest of Emily Maughan, that she would 
not betray the fact. And no one else in Bel- 
fast was likely to have communicated the intel- 
ligence in the brief interval that had elapsed. 
Or, supposing such an improbable circumstance 
as that Mr. Flamingo Brown should concern 
himself to make it known, Sir Orange Graham's 
unaltered and, sooth to say, rather churlish 
demeanour, established a certainty that the 
tidings had not reached him, and consequently 
still remained a mystery in his family. 

A little consoled by this reflection, but still 
very uncomfortable on the subject, and re- 
solving in his resumed habitual mind that 
there was nothing but deception and misery 
attached to everything womanish, Mr. Beh- 
ringbright had gone some little distance in a 
wrong direction to his hotel, when he felt a 
light but strenuous grasp laid on his arm, and 
a friendly voice exclaim, " Plase your honour, 
are you taking your right way, now, to the 
place ye want to get at ; not to take on me the 
freedom to ask you which that is ?" 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 43 

" Why, where am I going to at present, 
Barney ?" said Mr. Behringbright, recognising 
the lamplighter, and replying in trnly Hiber- 
nian fashion, as if the genius loci were powerful 
upon him too. 

" Yer honour knows best ; . but you're not 
going the road you came, unless it be back- 
wards, and that is the way to be the farther 
off the place you're going to, the nearer you 
get to it !" 

" I want to return home to my hotel . the 
' William and Mary.' " 

" Then yer honour's face is turned clean 
against it, and yon will have to walk the world 
round before you step in at the back door I" 
replied Barney. " The way you're treading to 
leads to the Barracks; . and there's such a 
game going on there to-night, I should scarcely 
be setting a gentleman of your honour's paceful 
demeanour much in the way of presenting 
yourself among such a set of fire-rakes, no how!" 

"Why, what's going on at the Barracks, 
Barney, to deter a quiet citizen from taking 
the way to them ?" said Mr. Behringbright. 

" Fakes, then, isn't it my young Lord Glen- 



44 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

garifF's party to the Bigiment, after winning 
the steeplechase on them all the other day in 
the county Antrim ? And ain't they the 
b'ys to get a-larking at all manner of divilment 
and divarsion on their way back to the town, 
after their ''dinner and wine ? And I heard 
say they were all to patronize the theatre to- 
night, against the sober and respectable citizens, 
as they call themselves, who are for putting it 
down because there's some Frenchwoman, or 
other I-talian critter of that sort they don't 
like, come to kick about and show her airs and 
graces, in man's clothes, in what they call a 
bally. And the officers and his lordship, who 
is the merriest b'y that has been in Ireland, or 
Erin 'ither, since my Lord Slaughterford's days 
(Heaven rest his soul ! for he never did harm 
to mortal man but himself !) are all for it, out 
of spite to the others, purtinding to be such 
saints and stuff like that, as if everybody didn'. 
know what goes on among them on the sly. 
And there's expected to be the purtiest row in 
natur ! But what I am thinking is, that if 
they should meet us on the road, they'll bo 
taking us for numbers of the oppozit faction, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 45 

and perhaps riding over us, or getting some of 
their people to toss us in a blanket, as they all 
but did it to two of the town councillors a few 
days ago, in the very market-place, for saying 
they were wild Irishers, only fit to have ruffled 
and raffed it as troopers in King James the 
Second's time, that was dethroned in London- 
derry city hundreds of years ago. But your 
honour must have heard of the occasion ; . and 
how the Orangemen there fed on ' rats and 
caterpillars, before they'd give into the thruth?" 

"A curious preparatory diet, Barney, and 
they did not give in, after all. But do you 
mean to say there is some young Irish noble- 
man who makes himself conspicuous in such 
paltry and scandalous riotings as you de- 
scribe ?" 

" Is it conspicuous, your honour says P" 
replied Barney, attaching a meaning of his own 
to the word thus simplified. " Faith, thin, it's 
my Lord Glengariff that would make himself 
a hole through an army, if it stood in his way 
to life and fun. And isn't it he, then, that's 
the delight and salvation of the whole town, 
with the sport he makes in it ever since he 



46 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

come, which is little better now than a month ? 
But in that time hasn't he been up before the 
magistrates a dozen times, counting twenty 
to the same, for window and head breaking, 
and putting out the lamps, and pulling the 
mayor's nose on the bench, and all manner of 
divarsion, till everybody says he will bring 
back the good ould times again in Ireland, 
unless he's previnted ; and all the fools in 
Belfast, barring meself and a taste of one or 
two others, perhaps, will have it he's as mad 
as a March hare, or will be before he has done? 
And some of them say that his family was 
always mad before him ; but it's only the rale 
Irish blood boiling up in his veins, for he 
comes of the ould kings of Ireland who were 
before the flood, and they were alwa}'s rather 
a helter-skelter spoonful of hot broth, I have 
heard the ould people, who remimber their 
times well enough, declare !" 

" And you say this row is expected to be at 
the theatre to-night ?" 

" Yes, sir, if the officers have any luck in 
life, and can but get the Orange 'prentice b'ys 
here to show fight," replied Barney, with a 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 47 

delighted grin at the exhilarating prospect. 
" And it'll not be long now before it begins, 
for I heard say the bally was to come on 
directly after the black man has lulled himself 
first and his wife after. . No, it's the revarse, I 
mane, . and there's hardly a seat's taken but 
it's for the row about the French danseroose, as 
they say she is called, giving her her right 
name in her own country." 

" Glengariff must have gone entirely off his 
pivot indeed, if all this be true !" thought Mr. 
Behringbright. " I must try if I can ascertain 
how things stand with him before I interfere. 
Can you show me the way to the theatre, 
Barney, do you think ?" he concluded aloud. 

" For the same crown-piece, is your honour 
after maning?" said Barney, scratching his 
poll, and appearing to think that in that case 
he should decidedly get the worst of the 
bargain. 

" Why, you rascal, you ought to have guided 
me all over the town, and rocked my cradle at 
night, for half the money !" exclaimed George 
Cocker, partly amused and partly provoked at 
the extortionate spirit that appeared to have 



48 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

been aroused by his very liberality. And 
indeed the case stood confessedly thus; for 
Barney replied, with a shrewd smile, " And so 
I would, your honour, if you had not paid me 
for my throuble beforehand, and twice as much 
as it was worth. Only I'm thinking if your 
honour goes to the play, I must go too, and 
that knocks a shilling off the money for the 
gallery I" 

" You must go too?" 

" Faith, yes ; is it turning tail for you I'll 
be, when your honour's getting yourself t into 
throuble in a faction fight ? For it's all the 
same, whether it's at a theayter or a fair, if 
the shillelaghs are flourishing in the way of 
people's heads." 

" Well, I will stand the expense of your en- 
tertainment too, Barney, excepting in so far 
as it may be your pleasure to go in for a share 
of the distribution of the cracked skulls. Have 
you any further objection now to continue me 
your valuable services ?" 

" None in life . or in death 'ither, for that 
matter, your honour !" exclaimed Barney, de- 
lightedly ; and with his characteristic lightness 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 49 

and friskiness, lie flitted once more before the 
liberal English traveller towards the scene of 
dramatic enjoyment, which it appeared was to 
be heightened in so characteristically national 
a style by a violent collision and fracas. 

"What can GlengarifFmean by such conduct? 
Has love made a real madman of him ? How- 
ever, I hope I shall arrive in time to save him 
from any share or leadership in this last extra- 
vagance !" mused Mr. Behringb right, as he 
followed in . Barney's fitful footsteps ; insen- 
sible, in his anxiety, to the fact that he had 
scarcely himself eaten or drunk all day. 

It struck Mr. Behringbright, when he 
entered the Belfast theatre, as rather an 
ominous circumstance that there were ver} r 
few ladies present. Even the few members of 
the female sex who showed at all would not 
have been allowed by the once famous Man of 
Eefinement, Mr. Tremaine, to merit the 
designation in any ultra-fastidious sense of the 
word. Perhaps it would be safest to say there 
were some women present who did not appear to 
be of the higher orders of society ! Andto con- 
firm the notion, they were chiefly scattered in 

VOL. II. 4 



50 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

the pit and upper galleries, where they sat 
with bonnets hung before them, crushed into 
curious shapes by the carriage of market vege- 
tables and other burdens, which are preferably 
borne on the head by the fair sex. Men in 
general like their freights best on their 
shoulders ; it certainly cannot be for the same 
reason, since women are not usually considered 
strongest in their heads. 

Another fact Mr. Behringbright noticed at 
once. He procured himself a box with dif- 
ficulty, and yet on entering the house he per- 
ceived the boxes were nearly all empty. The 
rest of the theatre was densely crowded. 

Under these circumstances he conceived 
himself justified in bestowing an invitation on 
Barney O'Flanigan to take a seat in the same 
compartment as himself, on a conviction that 
the general tendency of things was to a 
democratic equality. Moreover, he considered 
Barney's assistance as elucidator, or even pos- 
sible physical allr, might be of advantage in 
the approaching threatened demonstration. 
The good fellow seemed to know everybody 
and everything in the town, and to be quite 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 51 

willing to communicate his information. So, 
although Barney modestly excused himself . 
firstly, on the score that he was not fit company 
for his honour ; and secondly, by a declaration 
that the tail of his coat was too long to sit 
down upon in such a narrow place ; and 
although he protested he could see and hear 
just as well through the boards at. the back of 
his honour's box . Mr. Behringbright would 
not be said nay, and Caliph Haroun soon found 
himself seated side by side with the Belfast 
lamplighter. 

" A touch of nature," as our Garrick of the 
Melodrama has so often proved to Adelphi 
audiences, " makes the whole world kin." Yet, 
though there was some very roughly-natural 
handling of the unfortunate Desdemona going 
on at the moment they took their seats, neither 
Barney nor his treater confessed the universal 
relationship predicated by attention to, and 
sympathy with, the fair sufferer's struggles for 
sweet life. " Oh, bother to her ! Let her get it 
over as asy and quick as she can ; for its then 
the rale sport will commence ! That's wliy 
the boxes are all impty now till the officers 
4.2 

LIBRARY 



52 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

come, and my Lord GlengarifTs whole tail . 
though they're as full as ever they can stem . 
I heard Barry O'Leary . that's the checktaker 
. say this very morning. Sowl and body ! 
what a scrame she gives ! as if she was not ac- 
customed to be murthered night by night ever 
since she was born I" 

" But why is there all this commotion about 
a dancer, Barney ? How can it matter to any 
one how a ballet-woman is received or rejected 
in a provincial town like this ?" 

"Oh, don't your honour know the main 
consarn in it is about religion ?" 

" About religion !" 

" Faith, then, yes ! Madame Zdtnper is what 
what one party calls a convert and the other a 
pervert, your honour. She wint out to the 
Krimeer, if yon plase, last war, with one of the 
Trench rigiments . so I hear the story told . 
as a Sister of Mercy, which is next door to a 
nun, your honour knows; and there if she 
didn't allow herself to be wheedled and fooled 
out of her own true faith by a fool of a half- 
Irish boy in one of the rigiments we sent out 
there, too . and turned Protestant, on condition 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 53 

he'd marry her. And he never mint anything 
of the kind j and so she came over here and 
persecuted him for abduction . or something of 
the kind . and seduction, and breach of 
promise, and bigamy, and all manner of 
things. But she lost the cause, the bad crittur ! 
for what could she have been else, denying the 
religion she was brought up in for the sake of 
a husband who wouldn't have her after all ? 
And so she's obliged to take to the stage, and 
twirling on the top of her toe for a living ; and 
some takes her part, and some don't, and where- 
ever she goes mostly there's a darlint of a kick- 
up between the two factions. But people come 
to the theayter anyhow, and so the managers 
don't care what it's for, and has always the 
police in riddiness with their shillelaghs drawn, 
and the military riddy to turn out, and the fun 
goes on . and why shouldn't it ?" 

This was the first time Mr. Behringb right 
had ever known religion concerned in the 
pirouettes of a dancer. But it did not seem 
very strange that it should be so, in Ireland ; 
only, when he considered the violent fever boat 
at which the antagonism of race and creeds 



54 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

was maintained in Belfast, he began to appre- 
hend that, unless something were done to pre- 
vent it, the playhouse contest was not unlikely 
to degenerate into a real and bloody affray. 
Would his influence with so principal a ring- 
leader as Lord Glengariff was affirmed to be 
suffice to restrain him from stirring up the 
mischief? Did he, in fact, possess that 
influence any longer, in the strange, unrulv 
mood the young lord seemed to have passed 
into? . Mr. Behringbright knew that he had 
once a very great sway over him ; but did it 
continue ? 

Eevolving this question, Othello went 
through his last agonies of love and remorse 
over the body of his martyred bride without 
almost any degree of conscious attention on 
the part of Mr. Behringbright. al though the 
" noble Moor " stabbed himself so well that 
there was a general uproarious encore of the 
death-blow. This was not complied with by 
the sooty hero of the evening, but he received 
all the honours of the curtain amid a prettv 
general demand of, " How are you off for soap, 
now?" and cries of, " Ye'd better have let the 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 55 

ould man kep' his daughter, now, hadn't ye, 
gineral?" and other such-like Irish playhouse 
pleasantries. Then Othello retired . let us 
hope, to oysters and Dublin stout . from the 
scene of his sufferings, and the band struck up 
a tune ; from which moment the real diversions 
of the evening commenced. 

" What are you after calling that jig, Mr. 
Mellows ?" cried a b'y from the gallery, at the 
conclusion of the first musical interlude. 

"The 'BiviVs Br am el sure, ye blaggard!" 
shouted a voice, instantaneously, from a remote 
part of the pit. " Fiddlers ! let's have the 
* BiviVs Brame again !" 

" Sure, ye've only to wait till you're fast 
asleep yourself, blaggard to ye back again ! . 
to have it without throubling the bagpipes !" 
yelled the first voice in reply. " But it's not 
the ' BiviVs Brame at all, I tell you ; it's the 
' Cuckoos Nest' that's after being played. And 
we'll have it again. Larry O'Leary, if it's 
you with the bagpipes I see, . strike up the 
'Cuckoo's Nest!'" 

" No, no, no . the ' Divil's Drame !' ' 
now resounded in clamorous response from 



56 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

different quarters of the theatre, while an 
equally stirring uproar in nearly as many 
quarters demanded the " Cuckoo's Nest." 
And the contest continued for upwards of five 
minutes, amidst the most astounding uproar 
and confusion ; the partisans of what appeared 
to be almost equally popular but rival melodies 
increasing in fury and violence until the house 
resounded with the noise of the contending 
hurricane, the band meanwhile not daring 
apparently to comply with either demand. 

" What is the meaning of this, Barney ? Is 
religion concerned in the noise about these two 
tunes, too ?" said Mr. Behringbright to his 
companion, who had taken a considerable 
share in the demonstration. 

" Oh, bless your honour's life, and take you 
to the angels when you're too old to go an}^- 
where else ! it's one and the same tune they're 
all calling for, only, be dad ! by the differing 
names." 

This did confound Mr. Behringbright ! 
This was, he thought, out-Irishing everything 
Irish ! But so the case stood : To the Celtic 
portion of the audience the " Cuckoo's Nest" 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 57 

was the "Divil's Drame !" and they would 
not have it played under any other designa- 
tion, though identical in all the notes of the 
music and its variations. 

Luckily, something occurred to turn the 
attention of the pugnacious auditorium at this 
moment. A clattering of doors, a noise of 
movement, laughter, and confabulation, which 
seemed in no way restrained by respect for the 
assembled audience, announced a numerous 
arrival. In effect the boxes filled all of a 
sudden, as if by magic, with a throng, chiefly 
of young men, many of them in officers' un- 
dress, who took possession of the seats that 
had hitherto been unoccupied, with every 
appearance of designed swagger and challenge 
to a portion of the audience that, immediately 
on the arrival, changed the uproar they were 
making over the rival tunes to a storm of 
hisses, and the noisiest imaginable demands 
for " Silence ! silence !" 

Mr. Behringbright glanced with anxiety 
among these groups to recognise Lord Grlen- 
gariff ; but when he did so . which was not 
immediately, in consequence of the singularity 



53 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

of the costume his lordship had adopted . he 
was struck with dismay in the conviction that 
the young nobleman must in reality have 
bidden adieu to his senses ! 

Certainly a costume of a most peculiar 
fashion, and of as peculiar a hue and texture ! 
Lord GlengarifTs tall and noble figure was 
arrayed from the neck to the ankles in a garb 
that fitted it almost as closely as the natural 
skin . of coarse stuff, and of a deep saffron 
colour ! Over this he wore a long black cloak 
of rough, curly wool, descending almost to his 
heels : a broad-brimmed felt hat, with an im- 
mense yellow plume, a silver-embossed leather 
girdle, decorated with a case of pistols, and an 
ancient flat-bladed Irish dagger, called a 
skene; and half-boots, or rather brogues, of 
untanned deerskin, completed his strange 
garb. And this alone would have settled the 
fact of his madness in the sober estimation of 
George Cocker Behringbright, had not Barney 
O'Flanigan whispered him that it was his 
lordship's proper dress as an ancient Irish 
chieftain of the O'Dono^hue blood, and that 
all the " makings" of it were of pure Irish 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 59 

manufacture, "forebye the colour," which 
should have been " green as the grass under 
your feet." But Barney was mistaken there, 
for saffron was the ancient Irish national 
colour before Henry VIII. granted or dictated 
green, with much poetical, and some slang- 
metaphysical suitability, as the proper field for 
the armorial bearings of the verdant Isle of 
the West. 

In other respects the young chieftain of 
Glengariff looked every inch a chieftain . a 
natural-born ruler and leader of men. His 
frame was of remarkable strength and muscular 
activity in its development, for so young a man. 
A beholder, imbued with classical lore, might 
have figured to himself that he contemplated a 
realized ideal of the goddess-born Achilles, 
allowance being made for a strongly Celtic cast 
of physiognomy. Still, Mr. Behringbright 
could not but own to himself that the effect 
was very handsome and striking on the whole. 
The long, gleaming black hair; the square, 
but flexible and shadowy brows ; remarkably 
brilliant, fire-fraught, impassioned eyes, thai 
changed their expression with every varying 



60 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



mood and thought of the fierce, tender, resent- 
ful, melting, restless spirit within, redeemed 
some degree of disproportion and harshness in 
the rest of the features, and plunged Mr. 
Behringbright into renewed surprise and in- 
credulity at the possibility of any woman . 
above all, a youthful woman in the situation 
of Emily Maughan . having proved really 
insensible to so much personal attraction, 
in union with the allurements of rank and 
position. 

Mr. Behringbright . no man, perchance . 
could or can form to himself a notion of the 
absorbing dominion of the first attachment a 
woman's heart conceives for an object of the 
other sex . the exclusive desire, the disgustful 
rejection of every other . which takes posses- 
sion, as it were, of the very root and fibre of 
her affection : a kind of sentimentality which, 
a good deal more than any other cause, 
fosters the numerous race of old maids, in 
whom these islands abound, and who oudit 
rather on that account to be considered their 
choicest decoration and honour, instead of 
being the subjects of the impolite jeers and 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 61 

mockery of absurd chits and beardless boys, as 
too frequently we find they are ! 

Indeed, considering the masquerading dress, 
the extravagant gaiety and no?ichalance ex- 
hibited by Lord Grlengariff, surrounded as a 
leader by some half-score of the wildest young 
bloods and larkers of the neighbouring bar- 
racks, . which, being blessed at the time with 
the lodging of three Irish regiments, made all 
Ireland ring with the renown of their game- 
some, headlong doings, . in conjunction with 
his engaging person and attributes, Mr. Beh- 
ringbright's mind was crossed by a very ugly 
and uncomfortable suspicion that matters were 
not, and could not be, as they had been repre- 
sented to him, between Emily and her pre- 
tended honourable wooer. Had she not, on 
the contrary, fallen a victim to the seducer's 
artifices? and was the whole story of her 
flight, and Lord Grlengariff s offer of marriage, 
a romance invented to throw a saving veil 
over the realities of the case ? The pain this 
notion gave Mr. Behringbright sufficiently 
punished him for forming it, and surprised 
him by its depth and poignancy. 



62 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

What was certain, however, was that Lord 
Grlengariff appeared not only in good but in 
extremely lively spirits and good humour with 
all around him. Yet the uncomfortable con- 
viction forced itself upon Mr. Behringbright, 
that the young man owed no slight portion of 
his visible elation to the influence of intoxi- 
cating drinks ; nay, there was something even 
of wildness and extravagance beyond the usual 
conditions produced by a profuse indulgence 
in hospitality, which seriously alarmed his ex- 
guardian. The young earl laughed excessively 
as he bowed to the burst of cheering which 
greeted his entrance into the theatre ; for his 
lordship had become the darling of the Belfast 
populace in a wonderfully short time, by feats 
of daring and defiance of authority, that of all 
others most attract and dazzle the Hibernian 
imagination. 

" Something must be done/' thought Mr. 
Behringbright, " or he is indeed going off on 
the ancestral track 1" 

Perhaps, though, after all, Lord Glengariff 
had done the best thing for himself he could 
in plunging into the riotous amusements and 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 63 

dissipations lie had resorted to, on his chagrin 
and disappointment in the failure of his suit 
with Emily Maughan. Nature is seldom mis- 
taken ; and while with one sex she relieves 
the overburdened heart by a good strong fit of 
lrysterics proper . with the male sex she be- 
takes herself to what may not improperly be 
styled hysterics in action. A mad and senseless 
gaiety of external existence, which has no 
foundation in the inner realities of the feelings, 
but serves to scatter and dissipate emotions 
that, if pent up, might do a great deal more 
mischief to their unlucky possessor ! 

Barney O'Flanigan, with the intrinsic sa- 
gacity often remarked in the lower orders of 
his countrymen, in estimating the qualities of 
their superiors, seemed quite to understand this. 

"It's the broth of a boy his lordship is to 
look at, your honour," he remarked to Mr. 
Behringbright ; " but he laughs somehow a 
good deal louder than if he enjoyed it quite ! 
It isn't the sort of laugh one can go along wid 
quite to the end ; and I don't like the jags it 
goes off with there, at all, at all !" 

The arrival of the support for the debutant'' 



64 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

of the ballet seemed, however, the signal for 
no further delay. The prompter's bell rang, 
the curtain arose, an Arcadian landscape with 
moonlit waterfalls appeared, and the Taglioni 
of the evening, whose Terpsichorean feats 
were so strangely mixed up with the religious 
feuds of her spectators, made her appearance 
in a rapid and agile leap and run ; arrayed in 
the costume of a nymph, chased on, as it 
seemed, by a couple of satyrs, executing a 
frenzied gallopade in pursuit. And she rushed 
to the front of the stage, flinging her arms 
aloft, in the most approved ballet form of 
demanding the help of the gods and the 
plaudits of the spectators, springing high into 
the air to alight at last on the right toe. But 
in that brief space, one of the most awful con- 
tending uproars it is possible to imagine had 
arisen on all sides of the theatre ; and Mr. 
Behringbright had recognised in the skinny, 
berouged, and recklessly audacious candidate 
for the honours of the Belfast ballet . the 
Madame Limjper of Barney O'Flanigan . the 
Mademoiselle Olympe Loriot of his own ex- 
perience on a former theatrical occasion ! 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 65 

It must be confessed that, on the first im- 
pulse of this recognition, Mr. Behringbright 
joined most furiously in the hissing demon- 
stration into which a pretty fairly balanced 
half of the audience broke on the appearance 
of the debutante. But he was very far indeed 
from countenancing or approving the way in 
which the occupants of the galleries . chiefly 
the very lowest of the populace, in all respects 
but elevation of material position, which some- 
times happens in other cases . proceeded to 
exhibit their disapprobation. A shower of 
orange-peel, nuts, and even larger and more 
formidable missiles descended upon the stage 
. some of them rather unpleasantly near the 
danseuse. She faced it all, however, with 
great courage and determination, supported 
by the deafening cheers and vociferations of 
her partisans, for several minutes, with much 
the scornful,' defying look and attitude of the 
famous actress of yore, who declared it was 
enough for her if the " knights applauded." 
But still rougher experience awaited Madame 
Olympa, . such was the name she had now 
assumed on the bills (transmuted by Barney 
vol. n. 5 



66 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

into Madame Limper), . and some one in the 
upper gallery aimed a mockery wreath of 
carrots and cabbages at her head therefrom, 
with such force and good-will that it covered 
the unhappy debutante s visage with blood, 
and either stunned her, or induced her to let 
herself fall flat, as if she were deprived of life 
and consciousness, on the stage. 

The uproar that had been was as nothing 
compared with what followed upon this. 

The partisans of the danseuse arose in a 
frenzy of exasperation ; hundreds of voices 
demanded who had done the deed. Another 
hundred tumultuously declared the doer ! 
Condign vengeance was threatened and depre- 
cated on all sides, while the culprit, terrified at 
his own success, and the punishment threaten- 
ing in consequence, partly pointed himself out 
to reprisals by making an attempt to escape. 

It was at this moment that Mr. Behring-* 
bright distinguished, in the midst of the 
deafening tumults, shouts of u Glengarifi has 
him ! Glengariff has him !" " Long life to your 
lordship ! throw him right over amongst us ! 
We'll make room for him to get to the ground !" 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 67 

The next moment, and he perceived with a 
really sickening sensation of horror and dread 
the elegantly arrayed person of Camille Le 
Tellier struggling frantically in the grasp of 
the young chieftain of GrlengarifT in the upper 
gallery, who seemed literally and truly bent on 
complying with the humour of the populace . 
on forcing down to the edge, and hurling over 
the barrier, the doer of the (to say the least) 
very unmanly outrage committed on the pros- 
trate danseuse. 

" Good heavens ! GrlengarifT is mad . he is 
drunk . he will do it !" flashed through Mr. 
Behringbright's brain. 

A moment after, with a vigorous rapidity of 
decision and action which fairly " tuck the life 
and the breath out of Barney O'Flanigan," 
and left him planted behind with amazement, 
the quiet, dilatory Englishman had dashed out 
of his box . rushed up stairs to the upper 
gallery . arriving precisely at the moment he 
was most needed ; when Lord Glengariff, wild 
with a fury and exasperation which frightened 
off all interference, had dashed his shrieking 
antagonist backward, close to the balusters of 

5.2 



68 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

the gallery, and was applying all his herculean 
strength to heave him bodily over among the 
excited crowd below ! 

So, at least, it seemed to Mr. Behringbright ; 
who, pushing his way headlong through the 
throng, appeared to himself to arrive just in 
time to prevent the completion of the effort by 
the most strenuous exertion of his own strength, 
exclaiming at the same time, . 

"Glengariff! are you going to make yourself 
a murderer, for the sake of a miserable dancing 
drab like this woman on the stage ?" adding . 
for he, too, was for the instant dismayed with 
the dreadful glare the youth turned upon him, 
on the interruption of his vengeance, . " You 
must know me! . You must remember your 
father's and your mother's oldest friend ! 
Glengariff ! in their names " 

"Mr. Behringbright !" exclaimed the noble 
young desperado, staring as if he had seen an 
apparition, " you here !" 

" Let this French fellow go . }^ou have 
punished him enough . and leave this disgrace- 
fully riotous scene with me, Lord Glengariff," 
said the opportune arrivant, assuming at once 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 69 

the authority his age and former position 
seemed to give him the right to assume. And 
he even ventured to withdraw, with some 
violence, the angry nobleman's grasp from 
Camille's collar, which had been severely torn 
with other portions of his habiliments in the 
struggle. But Lord Glengariff had by this 
time probably returned in some degree to his 
senses, or was subdued by the manner of his 
ex-guardian into acquiescence. Camille found 
himself released. 

" My God !" the latter exclaimed, staring 
at Mr. Behringbright with eyes almost out of 
his head. " It is you have saved my life ! . 
How shall I repay you ?" 

" By completing your escape immediately . 
without another word !" replied Mr. Behring- 
bright ; and Camille, desperately taking the 
hint, darted past his late opponent, and suc- 
ceeded in effecting an exit from the house, 
though not without some further scuffling and 
exchange of blows and vituperation with some 
of the persons in the gallery, who were not in- 
clined that he should escape thus scot-free. 

Luckily, by this time the police . whose 



70 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

presence had been all along anticipated to be 
advisable . made their appearance in great 
strength in various parts of the theatre ; and 
Olympe's debut in Belfast came to the usual 
conclusion of her occasions of display in 
Ireland. The house was cleared out ; half a 
dozen of the rioters or so marched off to the 
nearest station-house ; and some score of broken 
heads and bloody noses presented themselves 
in the streets of Belfast to tell the tale of the 
night's amusement. 

Greatly to Mr. Behringbright's own surprise 
and satisfaction, Lord GlengarifT yielded to his 
further display of authority in inducing him to 
leave the theatre quietly in his company, 
without a struggle or a remonstrance. Nay, 
he consented, with scarce a mutter of refusal, 
to get into a car with him, and allow himself 
to be driven, in his company, to the " William 
and Mary" hotel, remote from the scene of 
riot, and from the companions at whose head 
he had figured so portentously. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 71 



CHAPTER IV. 

ROMEO AND FRIAR LAURENCE. 

Mr. Behringbright continued to be astonished 
at the powerful influence he found he possessed 
over the wild young Irish chieftain of the 
flame-spirited blood of the O'Donoghues, so 
evidently set alight with the sparkle of cham- 
pagne and claret. Lord GlengarifF allowed 
himself to be led into the hotel without ob- 
servation ; and his companion conceived very 
good hopes on that account . never having 
been in love himself at the age of twenty-one 
. that he should be enabled to bring back the 
young man to a sense of what he owed to his 
family, and society in general, and a relin- 
quishment of his insensate passion for a go- 
verness, who didn't even return the frenzy ! 
But I must say that I do not understand all 
the satisfaction this idea gave Mr. Behring- 



72 MADELEINE GRAIIAM. 

bright, since lie had no notion whatever of 
Emily for himself! We are made up of very 
subtle networks of brain and heart filaments, 
no doubt, we mortals ; but could the vague 
consciousness that he teas beloved by Emily 
Maughan inspire a shadowy jealousy of the 
possibility of another's finally usurping his 
place in her affections? Or did it give Mr. 
Behringbright yet more airily-founded satis- 
faction to continue to find reason to believe it 
possible for a woman to be insensible to the 
attractions of so glorious a young wooer . in 
some inexplicable connexion with Sir Orange 
Graham's charming, but perchance coquettish 
daughter ? 

Still, the Dutch-descended Englishman was 
not in the least prepared for the demonstration 
of feeling . the passionate climax of emotional 
excess . that awaited him, when entering the 
private apartment he had requested of the 
first-class waiter at the " William and Mary," 
and sedately inquiring of Lord Grlengariff what 
he would have for supper, that young Celtic 
nobleman threw himself desperately on the 
hard, professedly horsehair- stuffed sofa, and, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 73 

covering his face with his hands, burst into 
what appeared to Mr. Behringbright a per- 
fectly womanish and hysterical passion of tears 
and sobs. 

" Mutton chops and crisped parsley, . and 
bring up some brandy and soda-water at once 1" 
said Mr. Behringbright, with apologetic em- 
phasis, to the waiter ; desirous at once to get 
rid of his witnessing, and to insinuate the par- 
donable occasion (in Ireland) of the weakness 
to be witnessed. 

" Yez, zir," said the waiter ; " coming I" and 
he vanished. 

" Brandy and soda- water ! You think that 
I am drunk, then, Mr. Behringbright?" 
exclaimed the object of the solicitude, fiercely 
springing up from his recumbent attitude, and 
dashing his tears and long black hair from his 
visage, with the action and snort of a wild 
young horse which it is attempted to snaffle. 
" But I am not, sir ! I am not drunk ! I 
am mad with misery and despair ; but it is not 
in the power of any kind or quantity of in- 
toxicating liquids to give me a moment's 
relief from the tormenting consciousness that 



74 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

my whole existence is gone . that I must be 
wretched to the last hour of my life ! Nothing 
can do it ; a whole keg of whiskey might kill 
me, but could not give me forgetfulness of 
that one thought ! Existence has become a 
dream of hell . it is hell ! Although I am 
here seemingly on earth and in the flesh, 
I am, in reality, one of the damned in 
hell!" 

"You rave, Lord Glengariff ! Let me tell 
you, you are . you must be . either drunk or 
mad !" said Mr. Behringbright, greatly alarmed 
at this outbreak. 

" Have it your own way, Mr. Behringbright ! 
If I am not mad now, it is only a matter of 
time ! It runs in the family, and you are quite 
right ! I tried to escape it, by devoting myself 
to a quiet country life, with a calm, lovely 
woman, whom I adored, and with whom I 
could be content to spend existence in a desert. 
But my mother will not have it so. S/u> will 
not have it so ! And what they have made me 
they have in me ! All Ulster will tell you 
what a headlong madman I have become in my 
doings ! and my intellects will soon follow I" 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 75 

So saying, the young earl clasped his hands 
with a frantic gesture to his brows. 

"Good God, my dear GlengarifT! I had no 
notion that . that . love could so besot a man!" 
exclaimed Mr. Behringbright, very much dis- 
tressed, and perhaps a little puzzled. "So it 
is all true, then, and no hallucination of your 
poor mother's fancy, and you are in love to 
this frantic excess with . with the little gov- 
erness I sent for your sister from England ?" 

" The little governess !" repeated the youth- 
ful Celtic lover, glaring with utter contempt at 
the speaker. " She is the light of the earth 
in my eyes ; and were she gone from it I 
would never open them again ! The little 
governess! She is the loveliest, kindest, 
truest, sweetest, dearest woman in the world ! 
. the only woman in it ! And if I cannot 
win her to be mine, I will never, never, never 
wed another I" 

Mr. Behringbright was astonished at what 
he heard. Could Emily Maughan in reality 
be such a concentration of every feminine per- 
fection? Was it his eyes that wanted the 
requisite clearness of vision to perceive such 



76 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

surpassing attraction, or were those of my Lord 
Glengariff rilled with delirious reflections of 
his own imaginations ?" 

" It is the case then," he inquired, affirma- 
tively, " that you are gone off crazy, Ferdinand, 
with a fancy for Miss Emily Maughan, and 
you are so nonsensical as to suppose you can- 
not live without her ?" 

" I will not live without her !" 

" Why . hut bless me ! if the whole romance 
I have heard be founded in any degree in fact, 
Miss Emily Maughan wont have you, my dear 
boy ! What are you talking about ? Fran- 
tically in love with a governess who refuses 
you r 

If Mr. Behringbright had been very pro- 
found in the mysteries of the tender passion, 
lielas ! he might have known there is nothing 
more certain to fix one's young affections than 
to have them declined, " with thanks for the 
perusal." Half the authors are made through 
indignation at the senseless publishers, who 
reject one's first sublime effort . and all the 
faithful lovers ! 

" Eefuses me ! Ay, she refuses me, as you 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 77 

say, and it is therefore . it is therefore I am 
going on as I am in Belfast ! The cold- 
blooded, cruel, heartless, mercilessly calm creature, 
I am determined, shall witness the rnin she 
has made ! Her blue, placid, unalterable eyes 
shall watch me pouring headlong down the 
steeps of destruction ! And when I am dashed 
to pieces at the bottom of the rocks, she can 
smilingly look over, and murmur in her softest, 
meekest tones, ' It is my work !' ' 

And again the late doughty, terribly-in- 
earnest champion of the playhouse burst into 
another torrent overflow of passion, in the 
shape of tears, inarticulate ejaculations, and 
hysteric sobs. 

Mr. Behringbright looked at the young 
Celtic chieftain as the entire British nation has 
for many an age looked at the entire Hibernian 
one . with a conviction that he did not under- 
stand him, and was not likely to. 

" You don't mean to say, my dear Ferdi- 
nand," at last he remarked, timidly, " that you 
mean to disgrace yourself, and all your friends, 
and your illustrious descent, and I don't know 
what all, and hurry yourself by all kinds of 



78 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

mad excesses into your grave, because Miss 
Emily Maughan cannot . she has told me so 
herself . cannot reciprocate your attachment ?" 

" She has told you so herself, has she ? God 
help me ! I am lost then, indeed ! I'll blow 
out m} r brains instantly ! But is it really the 
case ? Do you think it really can be the 
case ?" continued the aghast lover, staring at 
Mr. Behringbright as if indeed now partly 
bereft of his reason. 

"Perhaps she only says so. /don't say so. 
I know nothing about it. It does seem highly 
improbable that a young woman in her con- 
dition can really be in earnest in her refusal," 
soothed Mr. Behringbright. 

" No, no ; it is all my mother's mad pride 
and folly that have banished her from Glen- 
gariff, and induced her in her turn to show a 
natural and becoming spirit in rejecting an 
alliance so contemptuously repudiated by the 
only person in the world who has the right to 
any opinion on the subject. Don't } r ou think 
this must be her reason ? . her only reason, 
Mr. Behringbright?" ejaculated Lord Glen- 
gariff. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 79 

Thereupon Mr. Behringbright himself felt a 
flush of hot colour to his brows and cheek. 
But truthfulness was a part of his nature, and 
he answered by a counter query, " Unless you 
think she has somebody else whom she 
prefers ?" 

" Whom she prefers !" exclaimed GlengarifF, 
in a voice that would have done a good deal 
better than the wonted horn to awaken the 
echoes of his native lakes. " Ah ! let me but 
find out who that is preferred by Emily 
Maughan, and I'll hurl him from Belfast over 
the Giant's Causeway into the sea ! Prefers 
another ! Whom can she prefer ? She has 
never, I may say, seen anybody almost but me ! 
Nobody ever came to GlengarifF ! It is impos- 
sible." 

" Here is the waiter with the brandy and 
soda-water. Be calm," said Mr. Behringbright. 
But somehow or other he felt his manhood 
impugned by the seeming acquiescence he gave 
to the fiery chieftain's assertion. Yet, after 
all, did he know anything to the contrary of 
the statement made ? 

" Leave the stuff, and begone !" said Glen- 



80 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

gariff, passionately, to the unoffending waiter ; 
though, to say truth, the poor man was diluting 
the duties of his attendance rather needlessly, 
to " take a good look," as he phrased it, at the 
hero of so many notorious adventures as the 
young Munster earl had of late figured in. He 
started. and disappeared. 

" Well, what do you say ? You never heard 
of anybody, did you, she preferred v& England ?" 
continued Lord Glengariff, with rather wild 
eagerness. 

" Take a little of the soda, at all events ; it 
will quiet your excitement ; for it must be 
owing chiefly to the strange, disorderly life you 
have been leading of late," said Mr. Behring- 
bright, eluding the question. 

" What ! you have heard of some one, then ? 
I have a rival in England ? But how can that 
be ? She never had any letters, excepting 
from her mother, all the time she was at Glen- 
gariff. Tim Molloy, the steward, who has 
the care of the post-bag, has told me so a 
thousand times ! Excepting, perhaps, one 
letter . no, two, from you, Mr. Behringbright. 
And she could not have received letters on 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 81 

the sly, among the mountains there, at 
Grlengariff. 

" Then all I can say," replied Mr. Behring- 
bright, feeling rather confused, and anxious to 
get out of the dilemma, "is, that it is alto- 
gether inexplicable, if she don't prefer anybody 
else, why she don't accept you. And even if 
she did prefer somebody else . unless he had 
superior worldly advantages to yours, and I 
don't see well how that could be possible, to 
say nothing of your personal endowments, 
Ferdinand . nay, you know I never natter . I 
can't make it out how any woman could pos- 
sibly refuse such an offer." 

" Oh, but you don't know this woman ! 
"What a beautiful, candid, high-souled creature 
she is ! She would refuse an emperor, unless 
she loved him ; and that's what renders it so 
priceless to win her . would render it, I mean ! 
You don't suppose, Mr. Behringbright, I could 
not get . hundreds of thousands of girls, I was 
going to say . but plenties on plenties . 
who would marry me, and think themselves 
very lucky . dukes' daughters, and all that 
sort of thing ? But I would not take a 

VOL. II. C 



82 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

million such in exchange for this one peerless 
creature I" 

" Oh, you are absurd, Glengariff ! You talk 
downright madness ! Why, there's the young 
lady in whose father's house she lives ; . have 
you seen her? I should think, if you had, 
you would never rave on so again about Emily 
Maughan !" said Mr. Behringbright, with 
more warmth a good deal than he had hitherto 
exhibited in his part of the dialogue. 

" What ! that girl ? . that girl with the hor- 
rid glowing black eyes, and hair that seems to 
me to be always glittering and twining like 
black snakes round her head ?" said Lord 
Glengariff, in a tone of disgust and aversion, 
which only excited Mr. Behringbright's incre- 
dulity and suspicion. " Oh, but I tell you 
what," his lordship continued, with sudden 
animation, . " she might do to provoke Emily 
out of her apathy and pretended indifference ! 
for she can't, as you say, be in real earnest . 
unless she is in love with some one else, whose 
throat I'll cut at once, if I can . find him out I 
Oh yes, oh yes ; don't you think it would be 
a capital dodge of me to pretend to transfer 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 33 

my affections to Miss Graham? I am sure 
she gives one encouragement enough for a flir- 
tation . and it would go on quite direct under 
Emily's eyes ! There would be no mistake 
about that ; whereas I don't know if she hears 
of half the frantic things I do on her account 
in this cursed town ! Isn't it a capital idea, 
don't you think ? If once Emily could fancy 
herself in danger of losing me, really and truly, 
she would alter her tactics, I dare say, and not 
care whether my mother liked it or not !" 

"What a despicable, unmanly notion !" ex- 
claimed Mr. Behringbright, with great indig- 
nation. " It is perfectly plain you are not 
sober, Glengariff, to talk such degrading non- 
sense ! One would think you were some vile 
coquette of a woman ! . -Moreover, I am certain 
you are quite mistaken in Miss Graham ! I 
never, in all my life, saw a more modest, retired, 
diffident young girl ! I dare say she has never 
seen you yet, though you may have been in 
her company. . . . And, egregious as 
your vanity seems to be " 

" Forgive me, my dear sir ! I know I am 
talking horrid nonsense, and that I could 
6.2 



S4 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

not get tip even the appearance of indifference 
to my Emily, much less feign to address any 
other woman, were it save all man and 
womankind from perdition ! But what would 
you have me do under the circumstances ? 
I must have Emily Maughan for my wife, or 
I will never have another ! I wish I had 
"been shot in the trenches before Sebastopol . 
and my mother was so pleased when I came 
back alive 1" 

Now, Mr. Behringb right was . as I have all 
along declared . about the reverse of a Machi- 
avel in the whole uncomplex structure of his 
mind; and his views of bringing about his 
purposes were as little as possible in the 
artfully-involved, deep-contriving, serpentine- 
weaving style of the Italian politican. Never- 
theless, I do not take upon me to say that the 
answer which arose to his lips, suggested by 
the simplest instincts of self-preservation, could 
have been much improved upon by the subtle 
Florentine. 

" What would I have you to do ? . recommend 
you to do, Lord Glengariff, of course you 
mean ? You are your own master now, and 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 85 

responsible only to yourself for your actions. 
Why, if you really think that Emily's chief 
objection (and a very proper objection it is, 
too, . a very proper pride it is !) lies in her 
consciousness of your mother's aversion 
to your union, I should say your best, 
your only course is to go home, and 
endeavour to obtain your mother's consent 
to it." 

" Ah, I never thought of that !" said the 
poor youth, eagerly clutching at this straw of 
hope. " But do you think it possible that 

Lady Grlengariff ?" Pie paused, seeming to 

revolve the utter unfeasibility of the chance. 

" I am satisfied of one thing, that your 
mother has already the greatest possible kind- 
ness and regard for Miss Maughan, though 
she labours under the delusion that she has 
deceived her, and has in reality laid herself 
out to entrap you ! You can easily dissipate 
this notion now ; you have certain proofs to 
offer of Emily's noble sincerity and disin- 
terestedness in the whole affair. Your mother 
is passionately attached to you, Ferdinand, 
and if she sees that the happiness . perhaps 



86 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

the reason . of her only son are concerned so 
deeply, as they evidently are, in the matter, I 
think her prejudices must yield . I really think 
they must ! Besides, your mother is very ill, 
Glengariff . very ill indeed, I fear 1 . and you 
will be wanting in all natural affection to 
the best and tenderest of mothers, if you 
refuse to return and console what may possibly 
prove her deathbed by your presence, and the 
assurance that you have not plunged into the 
irretrievable misfortunes her excited imagina- 
tion has shaped in your absence and silence !" 
" Is my poor mother so ill ?" said Lord 
Glengariff, evidently rather affected at the 
picture. " Why, then, would she refuse her- 
self the gentlest, the kindest, the most lovingly 
attentive and beneficent of nurses and friends, 
in such a daughter-in-law ? Talk of ' minis- 
tering angels/ Mr. Behringbright ! Oh, if 
you had seen that divine young creature 
watching over mamma with me in that sick- 
chamber, in her last terrible attack ! You 
can't imagine it ; but she diffused a sort of air 
of paradise around a poor madwoman's dun- 
geon . for it is little better, you know, when 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 87 

my mother is in one of her paroxysms ! There 
was something so delightfully cool, reflective, 
tender, in all she said or did ! . It was like 
going into a garden after a beautiful sunshiny 
shower, to hear and to see her at times, when 
she was comforting and soothing her poor 
mamma . as Gwendoline calls my mother ! 
Everything became so ravishingly sweet, and 
lovely, and serene all at once when she stepped 
into the room ! Oh, I cannot, I will not . I 
will not live without Emily ! And how can 
my mother, even for her own sake, think of 
such a thing ?" 

" Well, Ferdinand," said Mr. Behringbright, 
looking and feeling rather queerly, "I am 
sure, if you pleaded your cause as well to 
your mother as you have to me, she must yield 
to your wishes !" 

" Do you think so ? I would kneel a month 
at her feet if I thought it would do any good, 
for I am now convinced . you have convinced 
me, Mr. Behringbright. that Emily's objec- 
tion to me can only be my mother's ridicu- 
lous prejudices and holding back !" said Lord 
Glengariff, brightening up in every feature, as 



88 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

if with a sudden burst of sunshine upon his 
visage. " But I don't think either I could do 
much with her, unless I had the support of 
some one in whose judgment she places de- 
pendence. Now, I know my mother looks 
upon you as a sort of god of clear and passion- 
less reason, in everything ! and if you would 
go home with me into Kerry, and lend me the 
assistance of your opinion and arguments in 
favour of my offering my hand where my 
heart is irrevocably engaged, I will set off for 
Grlengariff to-morrow in your company ! I 
know I am going on like a madman in Belfast 
. and shall become one very soon in reality if 
I am not put a stop to, and no one can put a 
stop to me but myself. So you will doubly 
save me . doubly save the only son of your 
dearest friend, who once saved your life, I have 
heard, Mr. Behringbright ; and there will be at 
least one happy marriage in the world . of 
your making ! And instead of a race of mad- 
men ruling at Glengariff, and assisting to make 
the councils of the nations . oh, what sober, 
wise, benevolent, half -English O'Donoghues will 
nourish at last under my father's roof- tree!" 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. S9 

And in the caressive, wheedling style of 
a child eagerly demanding a favour (and 
the earl was in truth very young), Lord 
Glengariff took Mr. Behringbright's hand in 
one of his own, and smoothed back his 
rather hard, grey-tinted hair from his forehead, 
looking him, with earnest entreaty, full in 
the face. 

Now, it must be said that, in the first place, 
Mr. Behringbright was exceedingly moved by 
the appeal. He had a kind of fatherly affection 
for the youth, who had been reared under his 
supervision, and whose noble and generous 
qualities he well knew. All his own opinions 
and feelings, derived from woful experience, 
were in favour of marriage effected on motives 
entirely apart from the ordinary considerations 
of lucre and advancement. He had no preju- 
dices whatever as respected the illusions of 
high birth and descent . how should he ? He 
cherished philosophical or physiological notions 
. one hard word is as good as another . that 
fell quite into the ideas of the heir of the great 
O'Donoghue, as to the propriety of changing 
the course of a blood which had become tainted 



90 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

with, insanity ; perhaps . and from very good 
motives too . had early inoculated the young 
chieftain with his ideas in that respect, ob- 
serving how foolishly bent his mother was on 
pursuing the system of limited intermarriage 
which had produced such a result. There 
werehalf-a-score of motives besides, if the union 
in question could be brought about, which ren- 
dered it desirable. Poor Emilv ! what could 
more effectually wean her from that most un- 
suitable . above all, that hopeless . direction to 
her affections, which Mr. Behringbright had 
begun to dread? How else could it be pos- 
sible to save Glengariff from the frantic abyss 
he was galloping towards ? Even a little time 
gained might prove of incalculable advantage ! 
It would retard the catastrophe, at all events, 
and reasons might be found in the delay to pre- 
vent its occurrence altogether ! 

As for himself . a journey into Kerry at 
this particular time, would it suit his views ? 

Mr. Behringbright recalled the seductive 
image of Madeleine Graham in his mind's eye, 
and murmured to himself . No ! The next 
instant, and the clandestine figure of the 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 91 

French coxcomb came back on his recollection, 
sneaking out of Sir Orange Graham's back 
premises : his presence within altogether un- 
accounted for, excepting on a supposition that 
he was received there as a surreptitious wooer ! 
. And by whom else, in that case, but by 
Madeleine Graham? And Mr. Behriugbright 
firmly muttered to himself . Yes ! 

This private decision he communicated to 
Lord GlengarifT aloud, in the form of a reluct- 
ant acquiescence in the request made to him 
to accompany him home to GlengarifT Castle, 
and join his expostulations, with those of the 
enamoured prodigal returned, in favour of his 
desired union with Emily Maughan. 

He should be ready, he concluded, to start on 
the following evening, by the mail-train, at six 
o'clock, for Killarney. He had engaged to 
dine with a friend, he said, aifour. He could 
not deny himself this last satisfaction (so he 
intended it should prove), but he took care not 
to inform Lord GlengarifT where his engage- 
ment was, lest he should be taken with a desire 
to accompany him. Only, he promised the 
young earl that he would see Miss Maughan 



92 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

before their departure ; and though he did not 
hope to obtain any direct consent to its objects, 
would secure that she was thoroughly aware of 
them, which would probably prepare her mind 
for a favourable reception of any good results 
they might be enabled to obtain. 

Upon this conclusion the Kerry chieftain 
passed, with the usual facility of his race and 
character, from the depths of dejection and 
despair to the most buoyant hopefulness and 
gaiety. The offending waiter . who had left 
him in tears and ready to blow out his brains, 
according to his own statement, when he 
brought the soda-water . returning with the 
broiled chops and crisped parsley, found him 
frisking about the room, with a face beaming 
with cheerfulness and vivacity; and far from 
receiving a repetition of the snub which had 
previously dismissed him, was called upon to 
catch a half-sovereign sent spinning through 
the air . an operation which he executed as 
skilfully as Barney OTlanigan himself could, 
and as instantaneously on the word. Then 
Lord Glengariff, who had eaten an excellent 
dinner with his military friends that day, set 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 93 

to work at quite as good a supper as Mr. 
Behringbright made, who had scarcely broken 
his fast for the same period. So medicinal 
was the hope now poured into his aching 
wounds ! 



94 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



CHAPTEE V. 

EMILY AND MADELEINE. 

Matters went on of course, outwardly, in a 
much more tranquil fashion in Belhaven 
Square, during the stormy interval elsewhere 
passed through by the other personages of the 
drama, which was rapidly grouping around 
Madeleine Graham's central but yet unrecog- 
nised protagonism ! 

Indeed, it is strange to think how many 
silent tragedies and comedies are in rehearsal 
behind the brick frontage of the world's 
scenery, not only invisible to the passers- b}% 
but often enough to the closest inmates and 
intimates ! How curiousty we should all look 
. we who sit down to dinner daily with one 
another, hand each other the pepper and salt, 
and make our remarks on the weather, in 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 95 

perfect confidence and domestic intelligence . 
if we knew what eacli other was plotting 
thinking . had been doing, perhaps, . a few 
hours or minutes previously ! 

But, as Horatio remarks, it were to pursue 
the matter too curiously. What profits it, 
supposing even we do follow "dead Alex- 
ander's " clay from the throne of the East to 
the stopping of a bunghole ? It is best to 
take the painted trees and rocks and fountains 
for realities ! We lose our relish for the 
drama very considerably after having been 
behind the scenes ; and, on the whole, it is as 
well for the heads of families that it generally 
happens their entire households are in a tacit 
conspiracy to keep them ignorant and happy ! 

What puts all this wise commentary into 
the present writer's head will not, perhaps, be 
very clear, apropos the opening remark of the 
chapter. Nevertheless, there exists some 
sequence in the ideas. I am quite sure, for 
example, that no one besides Miss Madeleine 
Graham herself, in No. 90, Belhaven Square, 
knew why, for a considerable time after Mr. 
Behringbright's abrupt departure therefrom, 



9b MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

she sat so puzzled and alarmed, in reverie, 
endeavouring to account for it; nor why, at 
the conclusion of a long interval of thought- 
fulness, she suddenly woke up to wonder what 
had become of Emily Maughan . took her 
bed-candle, and declared she would just go and 
wish the poor dear girl good-night, and go to 
bed herself. 

" I really was tired, and was just thinking 
of going to bed, mamma, brushing my hair, 
when Mary Moore came running down to tell 
me there was a strange gentleman here . that 
one that had come over with us from England, 
as you told her to say. I wonder how you 
managed it in his hearing," Madeleine added, 
taking up her little taper. 

" I whispered little Eosa Matilda to tell you, 
dear, under pretence of bidding Mary Moore 
bring up some cake," replied the sagacious 
mother. 

" But are you sure he did not observe ? " 
said Madeleine. " Didn't his manner seem 
changed . not after that, though, but after 
talking with Emily Maughan ? She is a queer 
girl, mamma, and I always told you so . a 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 97 

regular mischief-maker : and she had that 
character at school." 

This was a great fib of Miss Madeleine. 
Emily enjoyed a reputation quite the reverse 
at the Misses Sparx' Finishing Academy, 
with the single exception of the untruth cir- 
culated against her by Mademoiselle Olympe, 
in re Mary Maunders the cook's clandestine 
party in the kitchen. 

" We must try and get rid of her, I 
suppose, then, if this thing goes on," sighed 
Lady Graham : " only she is so useful, dear, 
and so good to the children ! " 

Madeleine made no reply, unless the con- 
temptuous twitch of one corner of her mouth 
was a reply; for she did not consider it 
necessary to conceal her real character alto- 
gether from her own mother. And she pro- 
ceeded at once to the breakfast* parlour at the 
end of the passage ; whence it did not appear 
that Miss Maughan had emerged, after her 
interview with her cousin. 

Madeleine found her in reality still there, 
seated in an armchair near the window, lust in 
reflection. 

vol. n. 7 



98 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" Are you not going to have any supper, 
Emily? Mamma was asking, because the 
supper-tray is just going down," said Made- 
leine, in the kindest possible tone, and even 
raising the cold though unresisting hand of 
Emily to her bosom, where she tenderly 
pressed it. " How cold you are, dear ! . and 
sitting at the open window ! " 

" Did not Mr. Brownjohn stay to supper, 
Madeleine?" said Miss Maughan, gently but 
determinedly withdrawing her hand, and avert- 
ing her head towards the garden of the 
Square. 

" No, he would not : you must have said or 
done something to huff him terribly, Emily ! 
You serve all your cousins so, it seems. He 
went off quite abruptly : and I am sure I don't 
know whether he accepted mamma's invitation 
to dinner or not to-morrow. Can you en- 
lighten us ? " 

" He will come, Madeleine ! " replied Emily, 
in tones of resignation, whose calmness was 
belied by the tremble in the protraction of the 
sound of the words she gave forth. "You 
need not doubt but that you have exercised 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 99 

your usual sorcery upon him too ! But do 
forbear for this once ! Don't make another 
unhappy dangler-in-vain after you ! . You seem 
to me to delight in such unmeaning cruelty, . 
but you may play the game too deeply at 
last ! " 

" What do you mean, silly dear ? " said 
Madeleine, laughingly. " I am sure I failed 
utterly with that other visitor of yours, . the 
young officer, I think you said he was, though 
Mr. Brownjohn did not rank him at all in the 
service ! And you would have it, you know, 
that I opened all my batteries upon him 
also ! " 

" I will tell you then now, Madeleine, the 
exact truth about that young gentleman. He 
is an officer, and he is a good deal more 
besides ; . he is a peer of the realm ! And he 
has taken a foolish fancy for me, and it was to 
avoid him that I left Glengariff Castle, and 
came into your father's service here." 

" To avoid him !" exclaimed Madeleine . 
" to avoid a peer of the realm ! . But you were 
quite right, if he only wanted to make a fool 
of you, as I suppose he did, dear ! And now 

7.2 



100 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

I will let you into a secret, in my turn, 
Emily," she continued, with a playfully caustic 
smile. "I knew all along . or at least the 
very next clay after . who your visitor was, 
for I saw him out with the officers on the 
parade, and I took care to inquire. Oh, you 
sly creature ! . but Madeleine Graham is not 
so easily to be deceived, you see !" 

" I thought as much, Madeleine, from the 
kind of reception you gave him at your next 
interview ; though you so carefully concealed 
your knowledge of the real facts of the case I" 
said Emily, with scarcely suppressed disdain in 
her accents. " But Lord Glengariff is not 
the kind of man to make a fool of any woman 
. least of all of me !" 

" Well, he is a very unusual kind of man, 
then ! But everything about you is unusual, 
Emily. You will be telling me next that 
this last cousin of yours is a prince in dis- 
guise 1" said Madeleine, breaking into a 
shower of soft, careless laughter. 

"No, Madeleine, no! . I do not say any- 
thing of the kind. He is, of almost all the 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 101 

men that ever I knew, most the man he 
pretends to be," said poor Emily. 

" Well, then, there is nothing more to be 
said about him; . except, do you think he will 
come to dinner to-morrow or not? He has 
left it quite ambiguous, I think ; and mamma 
will not have fish if you imagine he will 
not come." 

Indifferent as these words seemed, they 
were full of intense query and inquiry. 

" He 'will come, I tell you . he will come !" 
said Emily, with irrepressible bitterness in her 
accents. " But for goodness' sake, Madeleine, 
remember what you are doing ! I have 
warned you repeatedly about this Frenchman, 
and I have told you as often, if you did not 
change your conduct, I would . I must . I 
ought to inform your mother ! . And now all 
is going on worse than ever !" 

" How do you mean ?" said Madeleine, 
turning very pale. 

" Why, this very evening It is shameful 

of you, Madeleine, if you mean nothing by 

him, as you tell me ! This very evening, 

Mr. Brownjohn himself saw . and wondered 



102 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

at seeing it . the French young gentleman 
come up from the kitchen, where you must 
have ordered his admittance. It is wrong 
of you, very wrong; and I really and truly 
must tell your mother, unless you assure me 
that you mean fairly . mean to be the wife 
of the young man who meets and follows 
you . us . about in so many places. I can 
bear it no longer !" 

" Mr. Brownjohn, Emily !. You say Mr: 
Brovmjohn saw Camille making off?" stam- 
mered Madeleine, in accents very different 
from her usually musical and flowing ones. 

" He did so. We both saw it from this 
place. My kindness is mistaken, I am con- 
vinced, Madeleine, not to confess all to your 
mamma !" 

" Oh, stuff, . proper stuff! It is nonsense, 
. nothing, . merely a flirtation ! Besides, 
that's the way the people go on here that are 
courting. I will never see him any more ; . he 
came entirely against my will ! I wish I had 
never seen him. He is a detestable nuisance, 
. a regular French bore ! I'll be quit of 
him ! O'Haggarty had no right to let him in, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 103 

but lie can cry like a girl, and quite whimpered 
her over ! . You are sure Mr. Brownjohn will 
be here to-morrow to dinner ? Mamma wants 
to know . about the fish !" Madeleine said all 
this very disorderly. 

" Quite sure !" 

" How melancholy-like you speak, Emily ; 
as if it was somebody's execution you were 
announcing ! I must tell mamma, then. 
Good night, dear Emily ! I know I may 
always confide in you, but I realty do mean to 
have nothing more to do with the Frenchman ; 
he bores me ; he is a perfect nuisance ! . Good 
night, dear !" 

" And if Beliringhright comes to-morrow," 
concluded Madeleine Graham, in soliloquy, as, 
after exchanging this affectionate farewell, she 
left the apartment, "we must make him all right 
and comfortable about the Frenchman, . even if 
it be at the expense of Mademoiselle, who seems 
to be so much admired by peers in disguise 
that they cannot afford a civil glance to 
another lady, quite as good-looking, I should 
think I" 



104 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



CHAPTER VI. 



CORRESPONDENCE. 



Madeleine Graham was not so substantially 
wedded to truth in her own person that she 
should have held it impossible a divorce might 
exist between reality and words with other 
people ; but she placed an absolute reliance on 
Emily Maughan's assurances on all occasions, 
and depended so completely on that poor girl's 
" quite sure," that Lady Graham, acting on 
the information conveyed, would not only 
have ordered fish, but a regale in all other 
respects fit for a Lord Mayor of London, had 
not Madeleine herself restrained her zeal. 

" Why, mamma, what would he think if he 
saw a dinner like that set out ? Wouldn't he 
know at once that we had found him out? . 
and haven't I told you how he hates to be 
liked for being so rich . and all that ? Po 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 105 

you think I would have hindered you from 
telling papa, if I had not been certain he 
would spoil everything, by courting him up 
at once in the most absurd way? Papa 
adores money, you know ; and he would have 
been on his hands and knees, in some awkward 
way or another, before so rich a man, directly 
they met again ! No : he must have just 
such a dinner as you would be likely to give 
to a commercial gentleman who had been 
civil to one on board a steamer." 

" But couldn't we have somebody else 
invited, to account for giving him a good 
dinner, dear ? I should so like to give him a 
good dinner ! . Nothing so soothes the men, 
and brings them round, as a good dinner," 
said Lady Graham. 

" "Well, we might have one or two, in a 
family sort of way, to give one an opportunity 
of talking unobserved. There's Professor 
Doubleday ; he likes to hear himself talk, and 
also to get poor Emily into a corner, and bore 
her on all kinds of literary and scientific things 
they both pretend to know about. He's always 
hungry ; so papa has only to hint a dinner for 



106 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

him to come. And perhaps we might have 
Aunt and Uncle Bucktrout. Uncle would do 
for the children to pull about after dinner, and 
I may want Aunt Bucktrout. She'll do any- 
thing she is told, you know, mamma, and has 
no daughters of her own to marry, and so wont 
interfere any way unpleasantly." 

"Might Uncle Bucktrout bring his bag- 
pipes, do you think, Maddy ?" 

" What is the use ? Papa wouldn't allow 
him to play them. . But whoever comes, mind, 
mamma, no grand dinner ! Above all things, 
no zeal! as some great minister used always to 
say to ambassadors when he sent them on 
their errands." 

" What a pity you were not a boy, Made- 
leine ! What an M.P. you would have made ! 
Wouldn't you have forked yourself into a good 
place before you had been in the Opposition a 
fortnight !" 

" I shouldn't have gone into the Opposition, 
mamma, at all . most likely . unless I had seen 
that the others were almost close upon the 
point of being ousted!" said Madeleine 
Graham j so that one may see, even if she had 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 107 

been a politician, she would have belonged 
thoroughly to her times ! 

Madeleine imported the same moderation 
and sagacity into the style of her own dress 
and decorations as she thus managed to infuse 
into her mother's preparations for hospitality. 
You must not suppose, young lady, that she 
put on her very best gown of tea-rose } r ellow 
silk, trimmed with black velvet ; or decorated 
her head with her gorgeous party- wreath of 
jonquils and camellias. She knew better. 
Decoration in this case would have announced 
attack, . and forewarned is forearmed ! Be- 
sides, eyes so accustomed to all that wealth 
could do to embellish beauty were not likely, 
she thought, to be dazzled into admira- 
tion by the means at her command : accord- 
ingly, Madeleine adopted the simplest style 
she could possibly contrive in her attire. 
She wore a white muslin gown, delicately 
spotted with red ; no ornament whatever, 
excepting a real white rose, which hung, 
with the most delightful artlessness imagin- 
able, in the midst of a flow of splendid black 
curls, halfway down her snowy neck. It 



108 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

is true that the muslin was exquisitely fine, 
and almost as transparent as glass ; so that it 
needed remain no secret to any spectator that 
she possessed the most perfectly-shaped bust 
in the world, and that her arms were as white 
and rounded as those of Here herself . so fre- 
quently vaunted by that great poet of anti- 
quity whose birthplace was disputed, at his 
demise, by seven cities, through all of which 
he roamed a blind beggar in his lifetime. 

If art lies in concealing art, there never was 
a more successful effort. Emily, who was 
perfectly natural . that is to say, who dressed 
herself for the occasion, to the very exhaustion 
of all her resources in the toilette . looked a 
great deal more artificial in her " properties ;" 
with her black silk gown, and those richly spark- 
ling steel ornaments, which she fondly imagined 
greatly resembled diamonds ; and with her 
golden hair confined in a pretty amber silk 
network, of her own manufacture ! But her 
eyes looked red and swollen, whereas Made- 
leine's shone with extraordinary splendour . a 
circumstance in part due to the kind precaution 
of her mother, who brought her a nice little 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 109 

drop of whiskey and cold water just before 
dinner, accompanied by a fresh bottle of deli- 
cious bay- water, the receipt of which had long 
been in the family, to wash her mouth clean 
and sweetscented of the offence. 

But, indeed, Madeleine could scarcely have 
spared the time for a more elaborate toilette. 
She had felt herself obliged to spend no slight 
portion of the morning in a kind of taskwork 
that rather strained her ingenuity, prolific as 
it was. She had written a letter to Camille 
Le Tellier, in which, with many protestations 
of continued devotion and unalterable fidelity, 
she warned him of the danger of their cor- 
respondence being discovered, and of the 
information she had received, from a friend, 
that he had been observed leaving the house 
on the previous evening. In consequence, she 
desired him, on pain of offending, and doing 
her, and himself too, the greatest injury 
imaginable, not to come near Belhaven Square 
for at least another week ; and finally, as a 
measure of precaution . which could do harm 
to nobody . always in future to direct his 
letters, jpretendedly, to Emily Maughan ! 



110 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Honor O'Haggarty, who would continue to 
receive them from him, would faithfully for- 
ward them to the person really meant. But 
the contrivance would insure that no great 
mischief would he done, even if a letter fell, by 
any disastrous chance, into her papa's hands ; 
for, of course, he would not concern himself 
much about a love-affair between a governess 
in the family and any one out of it, and it 
would do no harm to Miss Maughan, who 
need never know anything at all about the 
matter. 

Madeleine considered this a masterstroke ; 
but her resources in the epistolary line had yet 
another demand put upon them, which after 
much rumination she held it not advisable to 
defer satisfying. 

Before departing on her mission to Camille 
Le Tellier, Honor O'Haggarty entered with a 
letter for her young mistress, which she had as 
usual intercepted from the postmau . who was 
induced, for a slight consideration (including 
an occasional kiss, accompanied, or immediately 
followed, by an exhilarating box on the ears), 
to allow the Abigail an opportunity of trans- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. Ill 

mitting her young lady's correspondence to 
her, un subjected to the scrutinizing eyes of 
authority, in the regular passage and distri- 
bution to and from the letter-box ; . and this 
letter proved, to Madeleine's great annoyance 
and perturbation, to be from her friend of 
other days, Mademoiselle Olympe Loriofc ! 

Nothing could be more unexpected and in- 
opportune. 

Madeleine had received several letters from 
Mademoiselle Loriot, shortly after her return 
to Ireland from the Finishing Academy, where 
their early acquaintance and amity had been 
cemented. The first, giving her a full account 
Camille Le Tellier's antecedents ; his real 
condition in society ; his poverty ; his mer- 
cenary designs upon her; and warning her 
that he wast he meanest, falsest, and most worth- 
less of mankind, the least encouragement of 
whom could only lead to her dear young 
friend's disgrace and fatal compromising. All 
the rest, complaining of that dear young 
friend's total unkind, unfeeling, altogether 
inexplicable, cruel, barbarous, assassinating . 
finally, infamous silence. And then they 



112 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

ceased, greatly to Madeleine's satisfaction ; who 
persevered with unshaken firmness, through 
all the storm of cajolery, entreaty, and ob- 
jurgation, in her resolution not to he any 
further hampered and entangled by an alliance 
with a person who she did not conceive could 
be of use to her, and might be of detri- 
ment. And two years of prolonged recess 
from any renewed application gave her reason 
to hope for a much longer one; when, pre- 
cisely at the very moment when it was most 
undesirable, Olympe Loriot again turned up. 

This unhappy friend's was a letter that 
perhaps, in some bosoms not so completely 
cased in the armour of selfishness, might have 
awakened a feeling of sympathy and com- 
passion. 

It began by declaring that it was written 
from a sick-bed, . the consequence of a detest- 
able, an atrocious outrage, which signalized 
the efforts of the unfortunate inditer to please 
an ungrateful and barbarous populace, after 
experiencing the ^inhumanity of fate in a 
thousand ways, in various quarters of Europe : 
a full recital of which the complainant sup- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM- 113 

ported herself with the hope of confiding 
speedily to her dearest friend, who, she was 
informed, still continued, to her extreme 
astonishment, unmarried in her father's house ! 
Ah, how often had the deplorable victim of 
the injuries of fortune and of the villany of 
man consoled herself in the midst of over- 
whelming disasters by the conviction that her 
beautiful friend must be happy . happy in a 
splendid alliance, such as her charms ought 
readily to have secured ! But how was it then 
not so? Olympe panted to know. And 
might she not do herself the pleasure and 
happiness of a brief visit to inquire, as soon 
as the doctor permitted her to leave the bed 
to which a nervous crisis, the consequence of 
that brutal assault, had confined her ? Mean- 
while, would her dearest Madeleine give her 
the consolation to know if the most perfidious 
of men had experienced at her hands, as she 
(Olympe) hoped and believed, all the scorn and 
rejection which his mercenary designs and 
culpable intrigues of every species merited ? 
Did he still live ? . and did he reside in Belfast ? 
It was indeed a great annoyance to 

VOL. II. 8 



114 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Madeleine to receive this note and queries at 
this particular j unc ture . An uncomfortable ap- 
prehension of the possibility that Mademoiselle 
Loriot might ascertain some of the real facts 
of the case if she remained in Belfast, with so 
many motives quickening her natural acute- 
ness and jealousy, struck her. Nor were 
the means of revenge so completely out of 
Mademoiselle's power as to render it safe to 
defy her. It was possible she might even 
make encounter with Mr. Behringbright, and 
be induced to reveal all the real facts of that 
little bygone conjoint episode to him. A man 
of so suspicious a disposition would readily take 
the alarm. Even a continuation of her pre- 
vious slights might be dangerous. Madeleine's 
conduct, under this pressure of circumstances, 
was a real masterpiece of social diplomacy, 
and might serve as an admirable model and 
guide to persons whose more exalted depart- 
ment it is to "lie abroad for the good of their 
country." 

She wrote a very short, but a very kind . 
indeed, almost affectionate . reply to her dear 
Trench instructress of yore. No, she had not 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 115 

forgotten her excellent preceptress, who had 
taken so much pains to qualify her for con- 
versation in the French language. The inno- 
cent girl declared that she still endeavoured to 
keep up the accomplishment by occasionally 
translating one of those " dear old Monsieur 
Levizac's exercises/' and reading a few pages 
of the benevolent Fenelon's " Telemaque." 
But she found it difficult, in consequence of no 
one hardly speaking French in Belfast. Had 
Mademoiselle Olympe arrived in that city 
merely as a professoress of French, Madeleine 
continued, in a very grave and demure tone, 
she should have been delighted to receive her, 
and do her any good that might be in her power, 
in the way of recommendation in families. But, 
unhappily, she herself belonged to a very serious 
family, . a family that abhorred plays and play- 
houses, and everything relating to them. 
Consequently, under present circumstances, 
it was impossible; but in any other way in 
which she might serve her kind former in- 
structress, Miss Graham . so she said . would 
be most happy. She regretted very greatly, 
meanwhile, to hear of the accident that seemed 

8~2 



116 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

to have befallen Mademoiselle Loriot ; but was 
afraid she must take it as an earnest of the 
state of public feeling in Belfast, and a warn- 
ing to her to retire as speedily as possible 
from that city. As for herself, she had no 
notion or intention of marriage. She had 
relinquished all purpose of the kind, and had 
devoted herself exclusively to looking after her 
little brothers and sisters, and attending to 
their education. By the most bizarre fate in 
the world, Miss Graham felt called upon to 
confess, she had betaken a lifelong, an utterly 
unaccountable, but all-absorbing devotion to 
the gentleman whom Mademoiselle Loriot, as 
she might remember, had once pointed out 
to her in a theatre in London . whose very 
name she had herself forgotten, while retain- 
ing his image stamped on her heart ; a man 
who was entirely ignorant of her affection for 
him . who resided in another country, . whom 
she should never see again, but for whose sake 
she was resolved to live single all the re- 
mainder of her days. She did not hope or 
expect, indeed, that these would be very long, 
. and she was not grieved to think so. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 117 

As respected Monsieur Camille Le Tellier,the 
cautions Mademoiselle had been so sincerely 
friendly as to address to her had been quite 
useless, inasmuch as, Miss Graham declared, she 
had all along appreciated the vanity and perfidy 
of his character. But her parents had, from 
the very first, put their veto on any possible 
connexion with such a person, who was little 
better than an adventurer, and looked upon as 
such in Belfast. And Madeleine professed 
that her respect for the paternal authority was 
so absolute as to render it impossible for her 
to take any notice of a suitor placed under 
such a ban ; but she believed that he still 
occasionally resided, in the service of his em- 
ployers, in Belfast, from the circumstance that 
he had now turned his attentions on a young 
lady who resided as governess in her father's, 
Sir Orange Graham's, family ; though whether 
his suit was entertained with much favour in 
that quarter, Madeleine could not undertake to 
say : she thought it unlikely, as the young 
lady . whom Mademoiselle must remember, at 
the Misses Sparx' academy, by the name of 
Emily Maughan, and to whom family misfor* 



118 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

tunes had rendered a refuge of the kind, with 
an old schoolfellow, acceptable, had a far more 
eligible offer. 13ut a man of Monsieur Camille's 
vanity and externally prepossessing appearance 
could not be easily persuaded of such a fact, 
and he certainly haunted about the house, and 
encountered herself and Miss Maughan abroad 
on their walks in a very ridiculous and uncom- 
fortable manner; still, as far as she could dis- 
cern, without receiving much encouragement, 
and possibly with a view rather to annoy and 
insult herself for her rejection than any other 
motive. 

Madeleine concluded her friendly note by 
congratulating Mademoiselle, instead of con- 
doling with her, on being confined for a time 
to her apartment. The probabilities were, she 
feelingly observed, that if discovered in the 
streets of Belfast she would be mobbed there, 
after the concussion to which she seemed to 
allude as having taken place at the theatre, 
between factions so exasperated as religious 
parties were in that citj- . especially if the 
populace were on the opposite side. And she 
renewed her advice to Mademoiselle to leave 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 119 

the town at once, before matters became worse : 
generously concluding the whole epistle by 
assuring her friend and kind preceptress of 
that dear old time, that had she been possessed 
of any money, she should have had the 
greatest pleasure in offering her a share of all 
she had in the world. But her father (who 
was far from being so wealthy as was reported) 
kept his children at a very low ebb, even for 
pocket-money ; and therefore she could only 
conclude with her very, very best wishes for 
Mademoiselle Loriot's future prosperity and 
restoration to health and comforts of every 
description, since it was quite impossible she 
could herself have the pleasure of saying so in 
person. 

About the time this despatch was ready for 
forwarding, Honor O'Haggarty re-entered, 
with an account of her delivery of the one en- 
trusted to her charge to Camille Le Tellier ; 
but the news she brought did not seem to this 
good wench of a kind to elicit the expression of 
satisfaction that visibly shone up in her young 
lady's countenance as she divulged her tidings. 
" Mounseer Le Tellier," she said, " had got the 



120 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

letter, sure as life, quite safe and sound, Miss, 
for he was at home at his lodgings at Widdy 
Welshe's, ill in bed of a terrible squeegeing he 
got the night before at the playhouse ; where 
there was the devil's own delight kicked up," so 
Honor was informed ; " all to the account of a 
foreign Frenchwoman, who would be showing 
off her nasty airs and antics before people in a 
Christian country, afther having deserted her 
own thrue religion, whatever that was ! And 
there has been the grandest fight over it that 
ever was, with my Lord Grlengariff at the head 
and tail of it all ! And is it at the fight you're 
smiling so pleasant-like, Miss ?" 

" He is not much hurt, I dare say, Honor," 
replied Miss, carelessly ; " but he pretends to 
be such a delicate creature, you might pinch 
him to death with a pair of sugar-tongs. And 
he is much better in his bed just at present, 
than worrying and dangling about the house 
here, now that papa is so particularly suspi- 
cious." 

A vague, dreadful thought, from which she 
herself shrank with terror . vague as the shapes 
of Milton's Sin and Death seated at the gates 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 121 

of Hell . crossed Madeleine's mind as she 
spoke. 

" It would be no great harm, perhaps, if he 
were out of the way altogether I" so rose the 
thought. "He will be a nuisance to get rid 
of, in case this affair with Behringbright 
goes on. But I suppose I shall be able to 
manage that. He already complains of my 
coldness and slackness of response to his non- 
sensical outbursts, and must by this time 
begin to be convinced there is no chance of 
setting himself up in life, at papa's expense, by 
marrying me. However, come the worst, if I 
can make it Camille's interest to give me 
up, he will easily agree. And surely, if I 
marry Mr. Behringbright, I shall have the 
means !" 

Yet this latter thought gave a degree of 
pain to Madeleine's vanity, which she had her- 
self a notion was a remnant of the vehement 
passion she once entertained . or fancied she 
entertained . for the object of her girlish 
predilection ; and brought her reflections to a 
halt. 

" Ah, no ; poor fellow, he would not . he 



122 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

could not resign me so easily ! But where's 
the necessity? In almost all the French 
novels . and everybody reads them now, and 
thinks them so amusing . the wife has a lover, 
too, that she greatly prefers to the husband. 
And the sympathies of the reader are expected 
to go with her and with the lover. Behring- 
bright is likely, however, to prove a suspicious 
husband, after his experience, and is quite an 
Englishman in his stupid ideas, Olympe used 
to say ; so I must only think, I suppose, of en- 
joying myself with what money can purchase. 
But that's everything ! . Oh, what will not 
money buy ! Yet have I any real chance of 
him now ? That's the only important ques- 
tion at present. Emily, I'll be sworn, dotes on 
him, and that is the real secret of her pre- 
tended rejection of such a splendid young 
fellow as GlengarifT. If I had a chance of him, 
see if I would give another turn of my e} r e at 
that formal old miser I think I may consider I 
have hooked ! Emily always was such a milky 
fool ! And yet she has had sense enough, no 
doubt, to try and do my trick with him, from 
his manner last night, and his seeing that 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 123 

donkey sneaking out too ! . unless I can do 
something to turn the tables." 

Miss Graham was informed at this juncture, 
by a message from her mother, that it would 
be proper for her to be in readiness to receive 
the visitors ; and she descended accordingly to 
the drawing-room. There she arranged her- 
self on a low stool, seemingly quite uncon- 
cernedly, at some crochet-work ; taking care, 
however, to display an exceedingly well-turned 
ankle and perfect fawn-coloured satin boot in 
the operation. 



124 MADELEINE GRAHAM, 



CHAPTEE VII. 



SOCIAL IAGO-ISMS. 



Mr. Behringbright arrived punctually at 
four o'clock, neither sooner nor later ; dressed 
as much to the mark as his scanty travelling 
equipment allowed . resolved in his own mind 
that he cared nothing about it, but very anxious 
and doubtful of the kind of reception that 
awaited him ; doubtful, indeed, of any recep- 
tion at all, after his abrupt conduct on the 
previous evening, but with a most notable 
project in his head, in case he found the oppor- 
tunity. A project which we cannot say would 
have done credit to the contriving subtlety of 
Hamlet, Prince of Denmark, when he put his 
hesitations on the reality of his suspicions to 
the experiment of a play performed before the 
guilty parties, closely resembling their own 
very bad earnest behind the scenes. He would 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 125 

discover the degree and kind of interest Miss 
Graham might be supposed to take in the 
mysterious Frenchman, by relating his dangers 
of the previous evening . in such a manner as to 
leave his escape doubtful . at some fitting mo- 
ment, when the young lady might be consi- 
dered off her guard, and liable to betray whatever 
emotion she might experience on the occasion ! 

In the first place, however, he was much 
gratified to observe the beaming cheerfulness 
and gaiety of Miss Graham's appearance when 
he arrived. She did not look in the least as if 
she had recently received any annoying in- 
telligence. Then, though her manner towards 
him was merely very gracefully polite and 
friendly, her glance . the glow that lighted 
up her splendid complexion as she welcomed 
him, apologizing for her mother's unavoidable 
absence for a few moments . said a wonderful 
deal more. He was pleased, too, with her 
perfect frankness and superiority to all fine- 
lady affectations. 

" Papa has not yet come in from the Linen 
Hall, and mamma likes to look after things 
herself, as papa is rather particular about his 



126 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

dinner ; and we have only a common sort of a 
cook, Mr. Brownjohn, unless when one of us 
superintends. But I dare say you have re- 
covered your appetite, as I have, after the sea- 
voyage, and will make the best of indifferent 
fare. . Aunt Bucktrout, this is the gentleman 
mamma and I told you was so good to us 
coming over. Professor Doubleday, Mr. 
Brownjohn . my uncle, Dr. Bucktrout. Your 
cousin will be in directly, I suppose, Mr. 
Brownjohn. She is dressing." 

"No, she isn't dressing, Mad., and you 
know she isn't. She's dressing the children for 
the party, and you wouldn't !" said a big, surly- 
looking boy, one of Madeleine's brothers, and 
the enfant terrible of the family : being an 
honest, ill-behaved sort of a little fellow, 
who was cherishing a secret determination 
to run away and turn sailor, as soon as ever 
he was big enough for a cabin-boy . not feel- 
ing very comfortable at home, where he was 
constantly snubbed for telling the truth ; his 
notions of an outfit for life beng that he should 
take with him, if possible, a box of chessmen 
belonging to his mother, his uncle's bagpipes, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 127 

and a little dog in the neighbourhood called 
"Dash." 

" What nonsense, Archie ! Mamma would 
not let me, for fear there shouldbe no one ready 
to receive aunt when she came; and Miss 
Maughan is so very good and kind and forgetful 
of self in all she does, that she quite undertook 
to make the children ready of her own accord, 
nurse being busy in the kitchen," said Made- 
leine. And Mr. Behringbright almost bowed 
at the eulogium, he felt so gratified ; not at 
the praise itself of his cousin so much as the 
generosity and goodness of heart of the beauti- 
ful young creature who made the observation ! 

The usual before-dinner arrangements then 
ensued. Mr. Behringbright seated himself in 
a chair which Mrs. Bucktrout insisted he 
should take, and which was a good deal the 
nearest to Madeleine; while she expelled Archie, 
under pretence of bidding him go and tell 
his mamma that Mr. Brownjohn had arrived 
. which combined a flattering intimation of 
the importance of the arrival. She then seated 
herself between her husband and the professor, 
on the other side of the fire, bolt upright, and 



128 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

produced a bag containing some kind of work ; 
whereat she also set herself, as if she was to 
earn her dinner before she ate it. The pro- 
fessor . a very tall, beetle-browed, high-cheek- 
boned, granite - carved - looking professor . 
sprang up on his feet upon that, examined the 
thermometer, and burst into a dissertation on 
the state of the weather, illustrated from me- 
mory by tables of the quantity of rain that had 
fallen that year in Ireland, from the First of 
January to the time of speaking. Dr. Buck- 
trout, a short, round, cod's-head-and-shoulders- 
looking man, with large, pale, gooseberry eyes, 
and a general air of resignation . even as a 
man who is thoroughly henpecked ought to 
look, . shuffled his white choker uneasily on 
his neck, as if expecting a stroke of apoplexy, 
and gave himself up as a listener. 

The only person in the room who appeared 
thoroughly calm and unembarrassed was 
Madeleine Graham ; and so Mr. Behring- 
brisrht found her when he made his own first 
awkward attempts at conversation, under cover 
of the stunningl} r loud dissertation of the pro- 
fessor, who endeavoured by noise, apparently, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 129 

to secure a more general attention to his me- 
teorological elucidations. 

"I hope my cousin . I hope Miss Maughan 
. is quite well ? Dressing the children will 
amuse her !" was the rather singular opening 
of his remarks. 

" She don't look so, however . poor dear girl ! 
. Mr. Brownjohn. It almost seems to me, at 
times, as if Emily was not altogether happy in 
her mind, . as if something preyed Upon her 
in secret," replied Madeleine, in a very feeling 
but mysterious manner, as who should say, 
She could, an' if she would, reveal ! 

" Very likely, . nothing is more probable," 
said the gentleman addressed, flurried at the 
calm glance of inquiry that fell upon him, and 
adding, rather precipitately : " You must excuse 
the supposition, Miss Graham, but it is likely 
enough she regrets taking offence so suddenly 
at Grlengariff Castle ; and I must confess I am 
going to do my best to induce her to return 
thither, and accept a reconciliation with the 
mother of her favourite pupil there." 

" Indeed ! I know mamma will be very 
sorry to lose Miss Maughan. So shall we all 

VOL. II. 9 



130 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

be j but if it is for her good . . ." and 
Madeleine again looked with dubious inquiry 
at tlie speaker. 

" I should hope it may be ; though it cannot 
be for the good of anything . of anybody, Miss 
Graham . to be removed from your society," 
said Mr. Behringbright, with most unusual 
warmth and gallantry on his part. 

" It is very kind of you to say so, Mr. Brown- 
john, . very gallant indeed ! But I do not 
suppose . although we are very good friends, 
certainly, and have been since our school-days 
. that Emily will regret me so much. There 
are other people much more regretable than 
I am, I fancy, in Belfast." 

And with an amiable, conscious-of-secret- 
meaning smile, the young lady crocheted on. 

" What do you mean, Miss Graham ?" said 
Mr. Behringbright, rather startled. 

"Is there not that other cousin of Miss 
Maughan, the sergeant-major in Lord Glen- 
gariffs regiment, who is so very like his lordship 
himself?" said Madeleine, with a playful smile, 
which nevertheless added to her collocutor's 
alarm. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 131 

" You have seen Lord Glengariff, then, and 
have ascertained who the foolish young fellow 
in realityis ?" he replied, after a pause ; finding 
himself, as usual, unable to carry on a deception, 
and anxious to satisfy himself on certain other 
points, of which this admission was a necessary 
preliminary. 

" Everybody has seen and known his lord- 
ship in Belfast, . he plays such extraordinary 
pranks amongst us ! But perhaps I may have 
a more special reason for remarking him, as he 
laid himself out at one time, I believe, for a 
flirtation with me, . met me everywhere I stirred 
out. But I soon satisfied him I was not to be 
made ridiculous in that way," Madeleine re- 
plied, smilingly. 

" I thought so ! Glengariff was humming 
me with his indifference," jealously mused Mr. 
Behringbright. " But why so, Miss Graham P" 
he continued aloud. " Did you not think him a 
very handsome, splendid sort of individual for 
a flirtation, as you call it ? An officer, too, . 
a class of idle gallants with whom such trans- 
actions are considered, I believe, strictly legiti- 
mate !" 

9.2 



132 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" Handsome! Mr. Brownjohn? Yes, in the 
Irish style, I suppose ; but I don't like that, 
though you may think I ought, as I am, in 
one sense, Irish myself. But papa never will 
allow that we are Irish, . only Scotch people 
born in Ireland ; . you know what Dean Swift 
said about people not being horses for being 
born in a stable ! I don't, however, really at 
all like the Irish style of good looks. The 
men look like banditti when they look any- 
thing at all out of the common way. I like 
people who look quiet and respectable, and as 
if they were sensible, well-behaved people, and 
paid their taxes regularly. Papa brings us all 
up in these notions. Mamma is a good deal 
flightier, but very few of us take after her. No ; 
I don't think Lord Glengariff handsome at all. 
And as for a flirtation with him, . or, indeed, 
with any one, . I detest the very idea, and 
think it worse than unladylike . thoroughly 
unwomanly . to take any kind of notice whatever 
of a young man whom one could never expect 
to marry !" 

Mr. Behringbright quite shone up with 
satisfaction at this loftily-principled statement, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 133 

and depreciation of the Celtic chieftain's rival 
attractions ; and his satisfaction, doubtless, in- 
fluenced the warmth of his tone, and the reply 
itself he gave thereupon. 

"But why, why, Miss Graham, should 
you think it impossible that a flirtation 
with Lord Glengariff might not have re- 
sulted in more permanent relations between 
you ? He is a man of high birth, it is true, 
and great possessions ; but beauty ' levels all 
distinctions. . . . And your father is, I be- 
lieve, considered one of the most respectable 
merchants in Belfast." 

" Of course, Mr. Brownjohn ; but I belong 
to the mercantile class, and would rather re- 
main in it than think of thrusting myself into 
one above me, where I am sure I should not 
be welcomed. The Glengariffs are renowned 
for family pride, and that sort of thing ; and 
the earl's mother, I am convinced, would never 
admit any one as a daughter-in-law who had 
not as many quarterings as a German baron. 
And I have a pride, too, of my own, which 

would certainly render But what are 

we talking about ! Lord Glengarilf n- 



134 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

dreams of me in any such, light, nor I of 
him." 

" Well, I believe you are right. From all I 
hear, Miss Graham, I cannot help concluding 
he cherishes, in reality, a most sincere, a most 
passionate regard for my cousin, Emily 
Maughan," said Mr. Behringbright, pleased to 
declare so much to the charming object before 
him. 

"Do you think so? But in that case," ex- 
claimed Madeleine, with irrepressible anxiety, 
" do you mean to say, Mr. Brownjohn, that you 
purpose inducing her to return to Glengariff 
Castle, and the society of a young nobleman 
whose style of good looks, I have reason to 
think, Miss Maughan would be likelier to ap- 
preciate than I am ?" 

Mr. Behringbright was rather embarrassed 
at this question. He perceived that he must 
move a step further in revelation than he had 
intended. 

" Where would be the harm, if the Countess 
can be induced to listen to reason, and consent 
to her son's happiness, even with a young per- 
son of inferior station in life ?" he inquired. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 135 

" The Countess of Grlengariff allow Emily to 
become the wife of her son ! Emily Maughan 
a countess /" exclaimed Madeleine, with an en- 
vious throbbing at the heart which almost 
deprived her of breath. But this was an emo- 
tion she had no wish to exhibit too clearly. 
"Oh, of course/' she resumed, with a sweet 
smile of intelligence "you would like that 
well enough for your cousin, Mr. Brownjohn ; 
but can you see the least probability ? What 
influence can you possibly possess with the 
old countess . who is said to be half out of 
her mind, too, at times . to bring about such 
a result ?" 

This was rather a poser for the disguised 
caliph ; but he extricated himself not amiss. 

" I represent the principal of our firm, the 
eldest Mr. Behringbright, who was Lord Glen- 
gariff's guardian, and has despatched me on 
this painful business to Ireland, being too 
much engaged himself, but who, I know, is 
favourable to the young man's views ; and 
Lord Glengariff himself is to accompany me, 
to plead his own cause with a mother who 
idolizes him, and who is weakened in her pas- 



136 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

sions by severe illness. I think we shall 
succeed !" 

Again the mysterious pang shot more rend- 
ingly through Madeleine's breast. Emily 
Maughan a countess, married to that splendid 
young fellow ! It was too much ! She had 
meant it all along ; but Madeleine's instincts 
of self-preservation were now quickened in 
what she did by the stings of other vipers 
awakened in a not unsuitable nest. 

" I am sure you mil not succeed !" she ex- 
claimed, with a vivacity that, if anything could, 
might have disturbed the rattle of the pro- 
fessor's scientific mill, from which he was 
grinding all manner of sublime truisms for the 
edification of Dr. Bucktrout, who sat listening 
hopelessly to what was said, knowing that he 
was there for that very purpose. 

Mr. Behringbright both looked and felt 
much surprised. 

" Why not, my dear young lady ?" he then 
remarked, much struck by the positive tone of 
the statement. 

" If even you succeed with the Countess, 
you will fail in the main result. I have my 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 137 

reasons for thinking so," replied Madeleine, 
with affected evasion. " Do not ask me at pre- 
sent. Emily is the best and noblest woman in all 
creation, . the most truly and completely a 
woman in her affections of all I ever knew; and 
no true woman, I am sure, would marry an em- 
peror if she did not prefer him to all mankind !" 

" All true women seem to . must resemble 
each other on that point," said Mr. Behring- 
bright, delighted at the effusion, and thinking 
to himself, " These are almost Emily's words, 
as well as sentiments !" . which was not un- 
likely, as Madeleine had plagiarized them 
directly from her ! But he grew a little con- 
fused on reflection, and added, in a rather dis- 
composed manner, " Do you suppose, then, 
that Emily prefers somebody else ? And if so, 
who can it be ? " 

"lam sure . quite sure . of the former point! 
But I do not know that even your near rela- 
tionship justifies me in communicating my 
surmises on the latter point, . for they are 
nothing more," replied Madeleine, appearing 
to consider she had said too much, and as if 
abandoning the discussion. 



133 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

"You do not mean ?" began Mr. Beh- 

ringbright, interrupting himself with a deep 
flush, which did not escape the young lady's 
notice, although she seemed busy at the mo- 
ment in taking up a dropped loop in her 
work. " Who can the person possibly be ? " 
he then exclaimed, with a still guiltier shrink- 
ing and precipitation. 

" If I tell you, will you promise most faith- 
fully never to mention it to Emily, unless she 
reveals it herself? For, after all, I may be 
mistaken ; she has made no confidante of me," 
said Madeleine. 

" I do most solemnly ! But, assuredly, you 

are mistaken if you imagine ?" began Mr. 

Behringbright, ; and he again paused, while 
Madeleine resumed, with perfect coolness and 
imperturbability : 

"It is a young Frenchman, I imagine, . 
a commercial agent, who used to haunt 
about her in England, when she was at 
school at the Misses Sparx' with me, and who 
does so still here in Belfast, though you must 
not let papa or mamma have the least inkling 
of it. I promised her no one should ; though 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 139 

I am sorry to say she encourages him so much, 
and he is such an impudent fellow, it is quite 
an annoyance to me to see how things go on. 
But he is very handsome . in the Gallic style, 
which I dislike as much as the Celtic j and I 
suppose, as he travels all over Ireland, he has 
found means to keep up an acquaintance and 
correspondence with Emily in Kerry." 

Very few people have ever been more sur- 
prisedin a drawing-room before dinner than Mr. 
Behringbright, as he listened to these words. 

As a general fact, I do not myself put much 
faith in the conventional artistic theories of 
expression ; but George Cocker certainly now 
opened his mouth and stared with his eyes 
almost exactly like the plate of "Astonish- 
ment" in Sir Charles Bell's "Anatomy applied 
to the Fine Arts !" In other respects it was a 
moral let-down, almost exactly resembling a 
descent of the sack of a fire-escape, when one 
arrives with a bump to the ground ! He was 
quite bewildered for a moment. "A French- 
man ! She jj refers a French commercial traveller!" 

All of a sudden, astonishment and discom- 
fiture yielded to another expression in Mr. 



140 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Behringbright's countenance . one of resolute 
determination and curiosity. He felt he had 
courage now to essay his grand touchstone. 
"What!" he exclaimed, "can you possibly 
mean the young Frenchman who was nearly 
killed last night in the play riot, and who, I 
understand, is called Camille Le Tellier ?* 

But what a foil was there! Madeleine looked 
at him with a look in which it was impossible, 
indeed, to detect the slightest degree of tender 
concern. 

"Nearly hilled! How was that? I was going to 
say . only it would be so unchristian . it's a 
pity he was not quite killed! for I am sure he 
is not worthy of Emily Maughan!" were her 
words. 

Quite satisfied by this carelessness, Mr. 
Behringbright fell to, and related the whole 
adventure of the previous night at the Belfast 
theatre; at the conclusion allowing it to he 
perceived that, after all, Monsieur Le Tellier 
had not come to any great grief. 

"What a pity! But I thought not !" mused 
Madeleine, when she heard this, . not much 
wondering within herself, in sooth, that Camille 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 141 

had figured as the principal assailant of his 
once-beloved Olympe ; for she had herself 
taken care to favour him with a perusal of that 
lady's revelations concerning him, at a time 
when Le Tellier had taken to the fantastic 
expedient of representing himself to her as an 
enamoured prince in disguise, by way of urging 
a plan of elopement. 

"What a mercy you interfered, sir!" . but 
she concluded aloud . "for I suppose Lord 
Grlengariff has caught a notion that he has a 
rival there ; and as he is thought half mad, too, 
he might have really murdered the horrid, un- 
manly fellow !" 

" So he might !" said Mr. Behringbright, 
who perceived an explanation of a great many 
mysteries in this new light thrown on the 
affair. "We must take care not to mention 
the matter before Emily, now it is all over ; 
but I see more than ever the necessity of in- 
ducing Lord Grlengariff to return to Kerry, to 
get him out of the way of mischief ; yet what 
you say, Miss Graham, entirely dispirits me 
for the effort I intended to make to overcome 
his mother's scruples. Emily herself, indeed, 



142 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

assured me last night she would never marry 
his lordship, and declared the most disinterested 
and generous feelings on the subject, which 
I ought to have understood better. Thank 
you, Miss Grraham ! . thank you for this new 
and most relieving light you have thrown on 
the affair ! I am only sorry for poor Glengariff; 
but it will be better for him, perhaps, too, in 
the end." 

" You must renew to me your promise not 
to mention the subject to Emily, unless she 
alludes to it first herself. It would look so 
unhandsome, so prying of me, and perhaps I 
may be mistaken after all!" 

" No ; you are not at all mistaken, I am con- 
vinced, Miss Grraham ! Believe me, you send me 
with a much lightened heart into Kerry ! Yet, 
after all, a doll of a Frenchman like that might 
easily be superseded in a woman's affections ! 
Don't you think so ?" 

" Unless she were a doll herself . by a real 
man !" replied Madeleine, with a glance at Mr. 
Behringbright that beamed as a flash of light- 
ning in a haystack, setting everything on fire 
within. Heaven knows what he was not 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 143 

about to say, if Madeleine, satisfied with the 
effect produced, had not added, sedately, re_ 
suming her work : " How curious it is you are 
going into Kerry too, Mr. Brownjohn ! I shall 
soon be there myself, I believe. That's the 
county where Killarney is situated, is it not ? 
And Aunt Bucktrout has insisted on the doctor 
taking her and me on an excursion there this 
summer, and he is so fond of fishing he has 
quite agreed. But I suppose you will be gone 
before we get there ? . and, any way, Grlengariff 
is a long way off the lakes, is it not, among 
the mountains ?" 

" It partly overlooks them ; and I had a 
notion myself of spending a little time at 
Killarney this year. I shall be sure to be 
there when you arrive, if it is at all in the 
season, Miss Graham!" returned the bedazzled 
merchant. 

" I think we shall set off in a few days. Dr. 
Bucktrout is only waiting till a patient of his 
dies, who can't be left ; and it is expected every 
day," replied Madeleine, with an extremely 
satisfied internal smile : adding to herself, 
"Pretty strong, considering uncle hasn't had 



144 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

a patient these five years, and both he and 
aunt would starve if papa did not employ him 
to buy up the linen from the poor people that 
weave it everywhere about us in the country!" 
Well might that prince of persifleurs and lite- 
rary coxcombs who persisted in signing him- 
self Horace Walpole after he was Earl of 
Orford, from a habit he had contracted in 
seventy-five years, but who was sometimes as 
profound an observer, reader, as either you or 
I, . well might he make the remark : . " Acute 
and sensible people are often the most easily 
deceived; a deceit of which it may be said, 
'It's impossible for any one to dare it,' always 
succeeds." 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 145 



CHAPTEE VIII. 

KNOWLEDGE IS POWER. 

People fall in love under very various condi- 
tions . under very strange and improbable ones 
occasionally in romances and novels, which do 
not observe that strict adherence to nature 
enforced upon us manufacturers of the same by 
our sapient critics, who on their own part 
behave mostly like that Athenian audience 
which hissed the genuine squeaking of the pig, 
as inferior to the imitative faculty of a favourite 
mimic of the theatre. When we are natural 
. when we give them actuality itself . they 
turn down their thumbs ! What will be said 
when, for example, I feel myself compelled, by 
the inevitable truth of things, to declare that 
Mr. Behringbright made his grand plunge 
souse over ears into love at . dinner? the most 
unromantic meal possibly of all the four ! 
VOL. II. 10 



146 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

But so it was. I have all Killamey before 
me, abounding in scenes far fitter for the occa- 
sion ; legend-haunted mountains, fairy-tripped 
woodland and glade, solitary lake and tarn, 
brooded over by the very spirit of imaginative 
poesy and sentiment. Sweet Innisfallen itself 
lies there, rimmed by the silver wave ! The 
hero of the experience is going to Killarney, 
and so, by a forced march, is the heroine, under 
the respectable convoy of an aunt and an uncle 
who, until late that evening, did not know 
that they had wished to take her thither imme- 
diately on a delightful excursion ; and yet 
magna est Veritas indeed, when truth forces a 
romancer, with such advantages at disposal, to 
admit that his hero fell in love at dinner in a 
commercial city ! But we can no more choose 
the time and places of our falling in love than 
we can of our other grand debt to nature. The 
inevitable moment comes when and where it 
pleases, and it is all up with us then and there- 
upon ; and we go about thenceforth with a new 
soul within us, or take our measure of the 
earth with none at all, according as the case 
may be. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 147 

If it is any apology for Mr. Behringbright, 
I would, however, remark that the dinner was 
a remarkably good one ; Lady Graham had 
not made herself the colour of the kitchen fire 
she came from for nothing. Fresher and finer 
salmon cutlets were never served : had they 
leaped from the Falls of Ballyshannon into 
the frying-pan, they could not have been 
creamier and juicier to the taste, or pinkier to 
the eye. The fore -quarter of lamb was first- 
rate . browned so delicately, " you would have 
thought," in the pathetic words of Dr. Buck- 
trout, who was a gourmand of the first water, 
".its own mother had done it." The ducks 
were as good ; and of the marrowfat green peas 
I will say nothing, lest I set the reader's lips 
a-watering prematurely, as we can scarce hope 
for any very abundant supply of those delicious 
esculents at the season of the year when this 
our predestined most-extensively-read tale will 
appear. As to the pies and puddings and 
Swiss creams and jellies that ensued, only a 
Muse, specially hired for the occasion, could do 
justice to the variety and excellence of those 
that loaded the board in due succession after 

10.2 



148 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

the more substantial viands ; the whole being 
seasoned with an agreeable mixture of cold 
punch, first-rate claret (which at that time was 
certainly obliged to be smuggled, so cheap as 
Sir Orange got it), bottled stout, and whiskey, 
all culminating into a superb port at the cheese 
and' radishes. No champagne : Madeleine had 
strictly forbidden that, for fear of awakening 
suspicion in the guest. And although the 
whole dinner was so nice, the reader will be 
pleased to remark that there was nothing 
served at it but what might well have figured 
on the table of a substantial citizen on an 
ordinary festive occasion. Sir Orange himself 
had not the faintest idea that he had a 
millionnaire in his eye when he so earnestly 
recommended him to take another toss of the 
mountain dew, on Dr. Bucktrout's authority, 
who pronounced it an infallible cure for the 
roast-duck seasoning. 

This Dr. Bucktrout was a curious sort of a 
little fellow, with the head and shoulders of a 
good big one, and all the rest of him very 
short and inadequate indeed . a circumstance 
which had, perhaps, something to do with the 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 149 

anomalies of his character and career ; for he 
was a man who had spent his life, and a con- 
siderable fortune, in all kinds of great projects, 
and failures in carrying them, out, which had 
finally reduced him to the condition of a 
hanger-on and dependent of his morose and 
purseproud brother-in-law. He was by nature, 
also, a most jovial-hearted, lively-spirited crea- 
ture, abounding in fun and frolic ; and yet he 
had married Sir Orange's veritable sister, when 
she had long passed the desperation of . what 
age is an old-maid desperate at ? . who was 
the very antipodes of mirth and wit. And 
yet he sat thankfully at that hard, ungenial 
board, very seldom daring to be facetious in 
word or deed ; despising himself for being the 
Lazarus of such a Dives, but too lazy, too 
careless, . too hopeless, perchance, . to make 
the slightest manly effort to raise himself from 
the position. He fished whenever he could ; 
played the bagpipes on the sly in the garret of 
his own house ; and kept canaries in any 
number, under pretence of exporting them for 
sale; contracted all the debts he could, and 
never paid any he could avoid : and that was 



150 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Dr. Bucktrout's way of passing through time 
to eternity. " It all comes to the same thing 
in the end," he would say ; and indeed the 
observation of the stateliest monuments, as 
well as of the lowliest churchyard mounds, 
seems to confirm the aphorism. 

Professor Doubleday was simply a bore of 
the first magnitude ; for surely no bore equals 
the bore scientific. He knew everything ; but, 
not satisfied with that, he insisted that every- 
body else should, too, from his lips. You 
could hardly mention anything upon which he 
could not give you a lecture ; and he applied 
the synthetical method of reasoning even to 
his style of eating a custard. He would 
swallow the pudding whole, and then weary 
all within hearing by his efforts at ascertaining 
the component parts. To be sure, Lady 
Graham was mostly willing enough to oblige 
him in these respects. 

Mr. Behringbright, however, lent very little, 
if any, attention to the professor. So unde- 
signedly was everything conducted, that at 
dinner he was seated opposite Miss Graham, 
instead of beside her ; but it must be confessed 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 151 

that lie was thus furnished with an excellent 
point of view to contemplate the beauty and 
artless fascinations of manner of that bright 
young creature . the grace, the sprightliness, the 
unwearied good-nature and attentiveness of her 
behaviour to all her father's guests. Nothing- 
very special at him, excepting an occasional 
glance, full of interest and inquiry ; the kindest 
but, at the same time, most unobtrusive atten- 
tion to his wants ; the most smiling, wittily- 
appreciating of rewarding looks whenever he 
said anything rather good, or which he thought 
so : and Mr. Behringbright decidedly laid him- 
self out to shine conversationally that day. 

As for Emily Maughan, she was really so 
much and so generally overlooked on that 
occasion, that I, who appreciate to the full the 
loveliness of the sincerity and purity of heart 
and feeling that marked her character, 
find I have fallen into a similar error of judg- 
ment ; and although she was placed next to the 
principal guest, I have omitted to mention the 
fact hitherto. How comes it that these sweet 
and benignant natures, which arc the salt and 
redemption of society and the world, and pre- 



15.2 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

serve both from corruption and stinking alto- 
gether in the nostrils of heaven . how comes 
it they cut so unimportant a figure mostly to 
the eye ? But the daylight does not dazzle like 
the flash and glare of an artificial illumination ; 
and the quiet, modest, retiring loveliness of 
Emily Maughan faded into insipidity, in con- 
trast with the sparkle and glow of those guiltily- 
enkindled and impassioned charms of her rival. 
After the first civilities of recognition and 
inquiry, Mr. Behringbright scarcely noticed 
she was by his side all the rest of the repast. 
He was even rude in his neglect, had he been 
conscious of it, but his whole attention was 
caught and enthralled in the invisible network 
of the skilful sorceress his vis-a-vis. I cannot 
even take it upon my credit to affirm that the 
abusive and distorting lights which Madeleine 
had cast upon her luckless schoolfellow's whole 
character and demeanour had much effect in 
producing this state of absorption in another, 
under which Mr. Behringbright had passed : 
he seemed to himself oblivious of all but the 
exquisite delight and attraction of the object 
before him. Yet I fancy, too, that Mr. Beh- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 153 

ringbright's feelings of sentimental interest 
and concern in Emily Maughan's very visible 
depression of spirits and manner must have 
been seriously modified by bis present convic- 
tion, that they were owing to a secretly- 
cherished passion and preference, not for 
himself, but for a penniless French adventurer ! 
Perhaps his own honest moral nature shrank 
with a kind of antipathy from a woman so 
young and yet so deceptive in some matters, 
and who, with an unintelligible grandeur of 
feeling as regarded the man she did not love, 
could so unhandsomely endeavour to cast the 
blame of her own perversity and folly, to say 
no worse of it, as regarded another, upon the 
faithful female friend who deserved so much 
better at her hands. 

In short, this dinner, according to previous 
reluctant admission, completed the enthralment 
of George Cocker Behringbright, who, long 
before it was over, had grown to regret most 
profoundly the circumstance that lie had faith- 
fully promised LordGlengariif tomeet him at the 
railway-station for the South, in time to start 
by the evening mail-train ; but he knew that 



154 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

his lordship would not forget the circumstance, 
and he felt that the supposed discovery 
he had made respecting Emily and her pre- 
ferred French suitor rendered it more than ever 
advisable to remove the young man from Belfast 
to other care and influences. At a distance 
. should the necessity arise . it might be 
possible to break the truth to him, without 
apprehension of any immediate tragical results 
to the frenzy of jealousy and wrath certain to 
be provoked. But anybody might have seen 
the sincerity of the extreme regret with which, 
looking at his watch, he announced the neces- 
sity of his departure in time for that unhappy 
train ; . a necessity in which Sir Orange 
Graham at once acquiesced, as might be 
expected from one man of business to the 
other, but which his fair daughter deprecated 
with so enchanting an expression of regret in 
the tremulous vibration of her tones, that Mr. 
Behringbright felt almost tempted to defy 
whatever might ensue, and remain. I think, 
indeed, he would have remained, had he not 
made certain that that extremely handsome 
young earl and officer would assuredly take 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 155 

the opportunity of inquiring him out, and 
making one of the party ; and had not Made- 
leine Graham assured him, in her ingenuous, 
careless way, that his lordship (and nothing 
could be more probable) had already tried to 
get up a " flirtation" with her ! . to console 
himself, no doubt, for that strange Emily's 
repulse. 

He persisted, therefore, in the necessity of 
leaving this delightful reunion, repeating his 
expressions of regret with eyes that directed 
them all to Madeleine Graham, and with a 
fervour which least of all escaped the observa- 
tion of poor Emily Maughan. She did not 
exhibit her emotion, however, in any unbecom- 
ing way ; did not burst out crying, or other- 
wise give vent to the choking sensation that 
swelled up in her heart, when Mr. Behring- 
bright turned to her, and calmly stated that 
he was going to Glengariff Castle, and, if the 
causes of disagreement there could be removed 
. as he hoped they might be, . trusted she 
would not refuse what would then become the 
unanimous wish of her friends for her to return 
thither. Nay, she found means to reply, with 



156 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

only the slightest imaginable faltering of tone, 
that she was very happy where she was, and 
was convinced that nothing could be effected 
to induce her to wish to return to Glengariff; 
but hoped that the young lord there . with 
whom she had the quarrel. . . . And although 
she became suddenly silent at this point, 
nobody but Madeleine Graham . who had 
sweetly and affectionately approached her in 
the adieux, and put her arm in a most sisterly 
manner round her waist . distinguished at all 
plainly the sob that choked her utterance ; 
stifled in its turn by the potent effort of will 
of which women are capable in such cases. 

" Lord Glengariff is going with me, and will 
be one of the most earnest suitors with his 
mother to remove all causes of disagreement," 
Mr. Behringbright replied, with a significance 
that made Emily . not blush with maiden con- 
sciousness, nor flush with ambitious hope, but . 
turn of a deadly pallor. Nor did that hue of 
despair and suppressed vehemence of emotion 
at all revive . rather the contrary, if possible . 
when the same gentleman exclaimed, in tones 
fervid with earnestness : " But I may look for- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 157 

ward to seeing you, Miss Graham, in a few- 
clays again? . amidst that beautiful scenery, 

which will be a fitting setting for charms 

I mean, which you say you are about to visit 
with your uncle and aunt !" 

" I hope so . yes, most certainly," was the 
cordial reply. And the uncle and aunt looked 
very much surprised, and the uncle pleased ; 
for he knew there was good fishing at the 
lakes, and that Madeleine pretty well ruled 
the house . ruling her mother, who ruled Sir 
Orange ; which latter nevertheless on this occa- 
sion scowled angrily at his wife, to know why 
she had made this arrangement without his 
sanction : . Lady Graham, confident that her 
daughter had a meaning in it, answering the 
scowl with a nod of affirmative defiance, . 

" Yes, most certainly I" and it became from 
that moment as decided a matter as it an- 
nounced itself. 

In another fifteen minutes, Mr. Bearing- 
bright, pelting up to the station at a headlong 
cab speed, found himself seated side by side 
with Lord Glengariff, in a first-class carriage, 
answering his lordship's outpour of questions 



158 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

as to how Emily Mauglian looked, what she 
said, and did, and thought on the subject of 
their journey into Kerry, quite at random ; 
himself remembering, cogitating, considering 
of importance nothing but the last beaming 
glance of those wonderful, reciprocating, recall- 
ing eyes of Madeleine Graham, as he pressed 
her hand . for the third time, in leaving her 
father's house on the journey . in his own ! 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 159 



CHAPTEE IX. 

KILLARNEY. 

All kinds of fine writing, it is notorious, have 
been for some considerable period out of fashion 
in the United Kingdoms of Great Britain and 
Ireland . not, possibly, excepting the town of 
Berwick-upon-Tweed. Also, myself, I have 
some private reason (for I too, who make, read 
novels, unlike the quack and the boluses) to 
opine that the very finest of landscape-painting 
in words seldom answers any other purpose, in 
a work of the kind, than to facilitate the 
courteous reader's advance, by the operation 
called skipping among the fair, who are worst 
of all addicted to it. Else I should have much 
pleasure in inflicting on my own a full descrip- 
tion of the far-famed Lakes of Killarney; 
partly from memory, but chiefly from the 
guide-books, as accuracy is a thing to be 
studied in topography. 



160 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

This is, in fact, my only reason for not 
attempting to describe the indescribable ; to 
transfer to the hard medium of words the soft 
magic of a scene which the fairy colours of a 
Turner could scarcely shed upon the canvas in 
one of its ever-varying shiftings of light and 
shade, that make an endlessly-changing pano- 
rama of what in less fancifully cloud-haunted 
regions would be the immoveable forms of 
mountain and rock and shore. Least of all 
should I like to undertake the task on such an 
occasion as that on which my Lord GrlengarifT 
and his equally passion-dazed mentor arrived 
on the scene, for it was then in one of its most 
melting moods of sunshine and mist; . re- 
sembling nothing so much as a beautiful 
woman yielding to some resistless, voluptuous 
charm, . glowing with passion and dissolving 
in tears of remorseful delight, and passing 
through a myriad of hues of contending emo- 
tion, until . as at the moment they descended 
in the little town from the railway carriage . 
the whole exquisite spectacle attained an un- 
rivalled moment of loveliness under a burst of 
sunbeam and rain over the Toomies Mountain, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 161 

and then But I started with the under- 
standing that I was not to attempt the descrip- 
tion of the indescribable. 

I don't mind being a little more particular 
in localities. Though, for aught either the 
reader or myself needs know or care, this 
castle of Glengariff, whither we are going, 
may be as little a solid existency as any of 
those numerous towering creations of similar 
pretension, which most of us take a delight in 
erecting and handsomely furnishing, at the 
expense of futurity, in the air. And even I 
admit that I do not think it probable Glen- 
gariff Castle will be found by the curious 
explorer precisely on the spot where it suits 
me at the moment, for the convenience of my 
story, to place it. But he or she must be 
content to impute the disappearance or trans- 
position of so massive an erection to a vagary 
of the fantastic cloud-magician of the place, 
who does far greater wonders than that occa- 
sionally . at times transferring even the dark 
purple outline of a mountain from one side of 
a lake to another ! 

Glengariff Castle, then, stood piled on the 

VOL. II. 11 



162 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

summit of some massive crags of the Toomies 
Mountain, on the Lower Lake of Killarney, 
nearly opposite the town of the name, and 
immediately above the romantic O'Sullivan's 
water-glen and cascade. About four miles' 
breadth of limpid blue wave separated it from 
my Lord Kenmare's demesne, which at all 
events is a solid reality, and may easily be 
found both in the maps and the actual locality. 
It was not a very large castle, having been 
erected originally by the O'Donoghues, when 
they were kings of Kerry, and reigned, I pre- 
sume, in the capital town of Tralee, as a sort 
of outlying stronghold, to maintain their 
claims to the supremacy of the lake portion of 
their dominions. And in the fourteenth cen- 
tury, when the chiefs of the family, shrunk 
from their royal pretensions, fixed their quar- 
ters on the spot, they were restrained from 
making any very formidable additions to the 
strength and greatness of their residence by 
the unkind interference of the Saxon Lord- 
Presidents of Munster, who found that Irish 
fortresses did not conduce to the serenity 
and well-ordering of their charge. Moreover, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 163 

Cromwell, as was said . though it was General 
Ludlow, in point of exact fact . amused him- 
self and a little army for several days in bat- 
tering the castle down about the ears of my 
Lord Muskerry and a band of determined 
cavaliers, who made the last stand of their 
faction there, in Ireland, against the Parlia- 
ment ; . the result being, that little more than 
an old tower, or central donjon-keep, remained 
of the ancient building. And the other ruins 
had been patched up and repaired in brick 
and mortar into a modern residence, which it 
did not gratify the eye of the admirer of the 
romantic and picturesque to descry from any 
point of view, but composed on the whole a 
very comfortable abode for the first of the 
O'Donoghues who showed a taste for the sort 
of thing ; . which was our Ferdinand's, Lord 
Glengariff's, granduncle. A sensible but a 
most unusual sort of man in the race this was, 
who represented his native county so effectu- 
ally in the Irish Parliament, during the Wal- 
pole Administration, that he recovered a very 
considerable portion of the forfeited familv 
property, and was even so degenerate in 
11. a 



164 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

another respect as to accept a British earldom, 
and sink his proper august chieftain's title of 
The O'Donoghue of the Lakes. 

Arriving in Killarney town about the hour 
of sunset, our travellers put up at the Eose 
and Shamrock Hotel, where it was determined 
that Lord Glengariff should remain while Mr. 
Behringbright crossed the lake to the castle, 
to ascertain the position of affairs there. This 
the latter judged best for several reasons . one 
only of which he communicated to his young 
companion. Lord Glengariff 's mother's health, 
he said, was in so dubious a state, and the 
communication he had last received from her 
betokened such a high state of nervous excite- 
ment, that any sudden shock, even of joy, 
might be dangerous to her. He would there- 
fore break the return of her son in a cautious 
manner, and signify that all w r as right, and 
that he might cross to her embrace, by direct- 
ing the Glengariff flag to be displa} r ed, as was 
usual when the lords of the castle were at 
home, as soon as he had arranged everything 
to his satisfaction. 

In reality, Mr. Behringbright was consider- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 165 

ably puzzled as to what lie himself intended to 
say or do in the conjuncture. 

He had promised Lord Grlengariff to inter- 
pose in favour of his longed-for union with 
Emily Maughan, and on those terms only had 
gained his consent to return. On the other 
hand, the information he had received, on the 
subject of that young lady's romantic pre- 
ference for a penniless French adventurer, not 
only made the project in itself more 'unfeasible 
than ever, but wrong and insulting towards 
the noble family involved, to be further enter- 
tained. 

The only refuge in his perplexity for Mr. 
Behringbright lay in his thorough conviction 
of the impossibility of obtaining any kind of 
countenance for such a misalliance from Lady 
Grlengariff; whence he argued to himself 
that lie might fulfil his engagement to the 
young lover without much fear of any ill con- 
sequences. Still it was an unpleasantly doubt- 
ful moral position for a man of Mr. Behring- 
bright's plain honesty of purpose and action in 
most cases. Undeniably, however, it was a 
relief to get out of his lordship's company for 



166 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

an interval ; for perhaps it was a mistake a 
while ago in the present writer to declare the 
bore scientific the greatest of bores'. The lover 
bore certainly beats all ! . and to be condemned 
to one for any length of time is in reality 
to be consigned to the Norfolk Island of social 
penal settlements ! They say that to the eye 
everything there blooms paradise, as the 
charms and perfections of a mistress do in the 
enchanted recitations of the enamoured indi- 
vidual. But to the convicts who drag the 
chain and lift the oar, . that is to say, the 
listeners, . the beauties of the landscape must 
often escape observation in the tecliousness 
and monotony of a constant contemplation of 
what can be supposed to be interesting to them 
only in the enjoyment of others. 

Mr. Behringbright might thus reasonably 
have grown tired of the very name of Emily 
Maughan, and exhausted with the detail of 
her goodness, kindness, and loveliness, from 
the mere tediousness of the iteration. But, 
moreover, his own mind was almost entirely 
engrossed with another and, in his opinion, 
infinitely more engaging and seductive vision ; 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 1G7 

and it was a real annoyance to him to be 
forced continually out of his own reveries to 
respond to raptures and enthusiasm in which 
he took so little share. He was obliged, in 
self-defence, at last to pretend to be asleep two 
or three hours at a time, but it was irksome to 
have to keep his eyes shut so long without 
being so in reality. The only thing that 
rendered the rhapsody at all endurable was 
the confidence it excited that the Irish 
Leander was irretrievably plunged in love in a 
direction removed from so otherwise irresistible 
a light of loveliness as Miss Madeleine Graham. 
Behold now the maturer lover embarked in 
one of the small wherries always on hire on the 
beach below Killarney, wrapped in his plaid 
against the chill of the evening breeze on the 
lake, and confiding himself and his fortunes to 
the zealous rowing of Darby O'Finn, the boat- 
man, and his handsome half water-nymph, half 
bewitching Munster peasant - girl daughter, 
Ellen . better known to tourists by the name 
of " Kate Kearney," conferred upon her by 
one of their number, who remembered the 
song, and thought it appropriate. A tall, 



168 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

perfectly-proportioned figure; a face of the finest 
classical type, though brown and ruddy as 
wind and sun together could make it ; perfect 
good -humour and modesty combined in every 
look and gesture; a laugh as musical as the 
fall of waters, and which revealed a row of 
teeth white as sunshine on marble ; total 
ignorance of the English language ; the 
strength and dexterity of a man at the oar . 
and Ave have the Beauty of the Kerry Lakes a 
year or two before she married a mountain 
farmer in the Gap of Dunloe, where she has 
become and continues as beautiful a matron as 
ever she was a maiden and water-nymph. 

Darby O'Finn himself was rather an original 
sort of a character ; a rude kind of poet in his 
way, as the word is understood among the 
peasants of Munster; possessed of all the 
legendary lore of the district, and perfectly 
competent to embellish and add to the same 
whenever it happened to be to the taste of his 
chance employer to call upon him for an 
exercise of the accomplishment. This was 
not the case in the present instance, as Darby 
speedily discerned, when, seating himself with 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 169 

his daughter at their oars, he inquired of the 
passenger whether his honour wanted to row 
to The O'Donoghue's Cellars (meaning some 
irregular rocks on the passage to the Middle 
Lake), as there would be something to offer to 
strangers there, no doubt, since it was reported 
in the country that the great O'Donoghue 
"his own self" had been rising on his silver- 
hoofed war-horse from the lake . so must be at 
home ; " and the family was always looked on 
for a welcome to strangers, from the ould, 
ould time of all, unless they came on the fight- 
ing lift, when of course they resaved the bless- 
ing they stamped on the threshold !" 

Mr. Behringbright told him, with stern pre- 
cision, to row to Glengariff Castle; and suffered no 
attempt to renew a gossip until they had passed 
right out into the middle of the water, when 
he bethought himself of inquiring after Lady 
Glengariff, of a person who was so likely to 
know all the news of the lake and its sur- 
rounding habitations. 

"Is it the princess your honour is after 
maning ?" returned Darby, giving the Saxon- 
made Countess her proper title as a descendant 



170 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

of the "ould kings" among the Munster 
peasantry, with due inflation . perhaps a little 
indignified personally at the cold reception of 
his previous pleasantry. 

" If you like to call her so ; but you know 
whom I mean by Lady Glengariff, I presume ? 

"That is herself, sure and safe . the same 
we are both talking about, your honour. "Well, 
then, your honour may draw your own references 
how she is when I tell you it's the princess 
that has seen the vision quite lately, and put 
me on the talk of saying that The O'Donoghue 
is at home, and his cellars reeking up white 
punch for visitors past them, any hour of the 
day." 

Aware of the current superstitions of the 

district, Mr. Behringbright observed, with 

alarm, " Her ladyship is veryill, then, I imagine 

. from the nonsensical statement you 

make ?" 

" She's not had a worse fit on, I'll be bonds- 
man, sir, since the day she threw the first 
young heir . the present O'Donoghue's elder 
brother . from the castle windows into the 
Jake," replied Darby, " more by token that it 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 171 

was meself fished up the poor little body, 
gnawed, as if the rats had been at it, by the 
fishes, three days after, as far down away as 
Cromaglen Base." 

"Do not mention the sad story," said Mr. 
Behringbright, with a shudder. " The un- 
fortunate lady is indeed subject to very violent 
paroxysms of insanity, but no true friend of 
the family would be fond of retailing such 
deplorable anecdotes of it." 

" Sure, but there was no secret made about 
it when there was obliged to be a crowner, and 
twelve best men of the lakes to sit on the 
body, and her ladyship screaming all the while 
up and down the castle, till we on the lakes 
here might have thought it was the ould eagles 
come back again to claim their nests on the 
Middle Lake crags, after fifty years' absence 
and more. And when it is well known that 
The O'Donoghue then and there left her lady- 
ship to live a lone married widdy by herself, 
out of grief and despair for the loss of his first- 
born, and for fear, said he, there should be 
more mad critturs born to murder himself or 
their mother, turn-about," Darby replied, 



172 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

with great warmth, evidently vexed at being 
thought to lack concern for the good report of 
the chieftains of his native wilds. " But/' he 
continued, in a lower and more mysterious 
tone, " this is not what your honour calls a 
violent proxysvi. The princess was never held 
before as they say she is now, for she has gone 
off into a mute melpnkully, they say, now, and 
sits for hours and days and weeks, until she 
tumbles senseless asleep on the floor, without 
saying a word to any body or thing, sleeping 
or waking. And this all on account, I have 
heard, of my young lord's . as your honour 
calls him . having run away from her fierce 
tempers and behaviours as far north as he can 
get, almost into Lough Neagh, and threatening 
never to come home again, as his father 
wouldn't before him." 

Mr. Behringbright's alarm was increased by 
this intelligence, which he thought was likely 
to be well founded. But, as his custom was, 
he gave little or no external sign of emotion. 
Meanwhile the boat, assisted by a livel}' breeze 
in the single ragged sail, flew rapidly over the 
water, and arrived soon after at a little pier 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 173 

contrived for the convenience of the inmates of 
the castle, immediately under the crags form- 
ing its hase ; thence a gradually winding path 
through a thick tufting of arbutus wood led up 
to the mansion and its grounds ; which w T ere 
backed by the Toomies Mountain and its 
ravines, clothed in dense forests almost to the 
misty summits of the still loftier chain of 
Dunloe. 

Here Mr. Behringbright dismissed his 
Charon and fairer roweress, and, flinging his 
knapsack over his shoulders, mounted the 
steep but not unfamiliar way to Glengariff 
Castle. Not in very agreeable reverie, and with 
a degree of doleful anticipation of what awaited 
him at his journey's end, which he never re- 
membered before to have experienced, though 
his associations with the spot were none of 
them remarkably pleasing. In fact, his first 
acquaintance with the name and race inhabit- 
ing it had been of a disastrous character. It 
began with the late earl rescuing him, at some 
considerable personal risk, from a crevasse in 
the Alps, down which lie had accidentally 
slipped on a pedestrian excursion he had made 



174 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

in the then solitary and unfrequented regions 
round Mont Blanc. And though they were of 
very different character and pursuits . Lord 
Glengariff plunging into every imaginable 
gaiety and debauchery, to escape from the 
recollection of the then recent tragical event 
in his family . the circumstance that Mr. 
Behringbright was at the time brooding over 
his own conjugal calamities, and a natural 
feeling of gratitude, had cemented a friendship 
between them, of which the present visit to 
Glengariff Castle was no slight token and con- 
sequence. 

Arrived at the residence, where he was very 
well known to the principal domestics, Mr. 
Behringbright found himself received with 
great satisfaction and relief by the house- 
steward, Mr. Molloy, but from whom he 
received a still more distressing account of 
Lady Glengariff s state than even from the 
Killarney boatman. Her ladyship, he said, 
had seen the vision immediately on the de- 
parture of their young lord, after his unhappy 
discussion with his mother ; and nothing would 
persuade her to the contrary but that the fiat 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. ] 75 

of doom had gone forth, and that the last heir 
of the O'Donoghues was destined very shortly 
to perish ; . probably at a distance from her, in 
some disgraceful brawl, leading the wild life he 
did at Belfast, which was in all the papers, the 
steward added, with tears in his eyes, though 
he believed her ladyship never read them. 
But it was known, he concluded, with a sigh 
that sounded like a pair of blacksmith's 
bellows . for Molloy was a very big fellow . 
that the gift of the second-sight was in the 
family, and her ladyship no doubt had her own 
reasons for believing as she did ! 

Mr. Behringbright formed an opinion more 
in the style of the nineteenth century from all 
this, that Lady Glengariff's violent outbreak 
had subsided into a more than usually profound 
lapse of grief and dejection, not unlikely to end 
in a settled form of that worst of all kinds 
of madness . the melancholy and moping. 
Hoping, however, that his good news would 
produce a salutary effect, he desired his arrival 
should be announced, and shortly after had the 
the satisfaction to learn, from the countess's 
favourite attendant . one might almost say 



176 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

keeperess . Nora Macnab, that her ladyship 
seemed considerably roused by the intelligence, 
and had consented to allow herself, for the 
first time for several days, to be dressed to see 
him. 

Mr. Behringbright took this for a good sign 
of revived hope and intelligence on her lady- 
ship's part, as he had refrained from having it 
mentioned that he had news to communicate 
concerning her son, fearing the effect of any 
sudden intelligence. He therefore supposed 
that Lady Grlengariff imagined he had come 
direct to Killarney in consequence of her 
letter, and that she was disposed to enter into 
some rational plan of proceeding to bring the 
wanderer back. 

Still he was not prepared for the extraordi- 
nary reality of the case. 

He found Lady Glengariff attired in deep 
widow's mourning, which she had worn ever 
since the death of her husband, though he had 
long previously forsworn her society as a wife, 
and rioted away existence remote from her in 
distant foreign lands. She was a woman of a 
very lofty and noble person, with evident 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 177 

remains of great former beauty. But her 
wasted countenance, her prematurely grizzled 
hair, the hopelessly anguished expression of 
her large black eyes, revealed the ravages of 
her fearful mental disease ; otherwise, neither 
Mr. Behringbright nor the most skilful 
physician could have detected what was at 
work within at this lucid interval, or have 
believed that at so very recent a period Lady 
Grlengariff had exhibited all the signs of the 
worst species of furious homicidal mania. 

" This is kind of you, Baron" she said, 
addressing Mr. Behringbright by a title which 
he had entirely dropped since his divorce case, 
and had never heartily affected. "But when 
were you otherwise? And you have arrived 
at the very moment I could most have wished 
it ! I have been considering for a long time, 
I fancy, what ought to be done in this case, 
and I only waited for your arrival to confirm 
me . as I am almost certain you will . in the 
view I am now disposed to take in the affair of 
my son and Miss Emily Maughan. I have 
not yielded without a struggle, you may 
believe; but I have come -to the conclusion 

VOL. II. 12 



178 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

that nothing can save Glengariff from the 
frightful malady of his race . nothing can 
preserve it from destruction . but permitting 
him to follow his own inclination, and many 
this poor girl ; whom, I confess, at the same 
time, I have always known and considered to 
be the most amiable and deserving young 
creature of her sex it ever pleased God, in His 
inscrutable wisdom, to send into this miserable 
world 1" 

Instead of being delighted with this sudden 
and apparently happy solution of the whole 
entangled difficulty, Mr. Behringbright was 
fairly thunderstruck ! How could he help 
being so, indeed, knowing what he believed he 
knew concerning Emily Maughan and her 
Frenchman ? 

He did, in consequence, as most people do 
who don't know what to do . he did nothing. 
He only looked at Lady Glengariff in silent 
amaze and bewilderment. 

This was evidently what she had not ex- 
pected. She knew enough of the baron s 
general sentiments on such subjects, it is pro- 
bable, to make- her conclude that she should 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 179 

find in his judgment and assent a support and 
comfort in the sacrifice of her own most 
cherished notions. Her excitable fancy, there- 
fore, immediately took the alarm, and spring- 
ing up with a look of renewed frenzy, she ex- 
claimed, " Great Heaven ! do you come, then, 
to announce to me that my son is dead? Yes, 
yes . it is so ! I have heard the banshee of 
our house shriek thrice, indeed, at midnight ; 
but I thought it was only to announce my own 
approaching, wished-for end. And was it for 
him the dreadful voice resounded from the 
depths of the lake where our ancestor drowned 
the whole clan of the Sullivans, with their 
wives and children, to secure the inheritance 
of these hills and waters? Speak the word, 
Baron ! My son . Ferdinand, my son . is 
dead !" 

Mr. Behringbright hastened at all possible 
speed to dissipate this idea. He forgot the 
excellent precautions he intended to take, and 
abruptly assured the countess that, far from 
being dead, her son was alive and well, at the 
" Rose and Shamrock/' in Killarney, awaiting 
only her permission to cross the water, and 
12. a 



180 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

obtain an assurance of pardon and conciliation 
in her arms. 

"Is he married to Emily, then ? and does 
he bring her with him?" inquired Lady Glen- 
gariff, turning ghastly pale, but otherwise less 
shaken than might have been expected by the 
intelligence. 

Again that strange, gasping pause, on the 
part of Mr. Behringbright ! 

How, in reality, could he shape language to 
inform the haughty descendant of the great 
O'Donoghue of the Lakes, who had just effected 
so immense a victory over her own pride of 
ancestry and consciousness of social superiority, 
that, after all, the rejected governess was, in 
her turn, so likely to reject . or, if she did not, 
would prove herself utterly unworthy of . the 
offered distinction and love ? 

In this dilemma, Mr. Behringbright took 
refuge in the notion that it would be highly 
improper and even dangerous, at such a 
moment to cause so painful a revulsion of 
feeling and ideas in the unfortunate lady before 
him. This conviction favoured his own wish 
to escape from so momentous a decision, if 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 1S1 

possible, altogether, in his own person. But 
at all events, until he had duly weighed and 
considered the bearings of the question, and 
the best means of extrication. He contented 
himself, therefore, by stating that, so far from 
having consented to a marriage unauthorized by 
her ladyship, Miss Maughan had utterly refused 
to entertain the idea, had shunned the society and 
entreaties of Lord Grlengariff with the greatest 
resolution 'and perseverance, and remained in 
Belfast, in the situation of a governess, pre- 
cisely in the manner arranged between the 
countess and herself before they parted. 

" I can well believe it, Baron ; and I must 
have been demented indeed when I deemed 
that best of young creatures capable of a crafty 
and deliberate falsehood," said Lady Glcn- 
gariff; " but what you say confirms me in the 
plan I have acceded to ; and my son has only 
to ask it of me to induce me to write to Emily, 
to entreat her to return to all my former 
affection. Kay, more . as his wife ! . and then, 
Nora," she added, with a deep sigh, turning 
to the tall and strapping attendant, who stood 
with folded arms behind her chair, and, in 



1S2 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

truth, more resembled a man than a woman in 
her powerful make . " and then, Nora, yon can 
let my poor little Gwendoline return to me 
without danger. For would you think what 
a wretched creature I am, dear friend ? They 
have been obliged to banish Emily's little pupil 
to her aunt's, the Marchioness of Towmond, 
in Scotland, under the apprehension that, since* 
I had seen the vision again " 

But then Lady Glengariff pausea, looking 
at Mr. Behringbright with aghast and horror- 
stricken, but yet most yearning and pathetic 
eyes, . such as I have seen, methinks, a cow 
give when the butcher carried off the rope- 
bound, bleating calf in his cart, . fraught with 
the like powerless look of reproach at the in- 
exorable, uninterfering destiny of the world . 
though she herself had been the hapless 
destroyer of her offspring ! 

Mr. Behringbright knew what that look 
meant, though he had only a very indistinct 
idea of what horror was included in the expres- 
sion, The Vision. Only the unhappy victims 
of the family madness of the Glengariils were 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 183 

aware, indeed, of the full, terrific meaning of 
the words. 

He hastened to interrupt the association of 
ideas. "Oh, no, Lady Glengariff; I am 
quite certain no such terrible calamity can 
ever again occur. Everybody knows that it 
only occurred then at all in consequence of the 
birth of your dear little daughter, and the 
carelessness of your attendants, in a moment 
of delirium . usual enough, I am' informed, 
after sufferings so intense. . Lady Gwendoline 
may be sent for immediately, Mrs. Macnab. 
Her brother intends to reside at the Castle 
henceforth." 

Mrs. Macnab gave a strangely puzzled and 
uncertain look at the speaker, and slightly 
shook her head. But all she said was to the 
effect that it was the joy fullest " hearing she 
had heard" for many a day in Glengariff 
Castle. Willing, in the unsettled state of his 
own mind, to shun further discussion at the 
moment, Mr. Behringbright then gave direc- 
tions that a flag should be hoisted as a signal 
for Lord Glengariff to come over to the Castle, 



184 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

and asked for leave to withdraw awhile and 
refresh himself after the fatigue of his long 
journey. 

He thus avoided any further explanations at 
the time with Lady Glengariff ; but with so 
little advantage to any conclusion he was in 
hopes to arrive at in his own mind that he 
purposely kept out of the way of Lord Glengariff 
until he had arrived and had an interview 
with his mother. And as this was of a very 
affecting nature, and the young earl dreaded 
to renew the terrible visitation under which 
his relative had so lately suffered, until he was 
assured she was prepared, and the countess 
still preserved so much of her pride and repug- 
nance to the great sacrifice she had announced 
her willingness to make, as to desire to seem 
to yield to her son's solicitations rather than 
her own convictions, . neither spoke a word on 
the subject that was uppermost in both their 
minds. Nor did Mr. Behringbright, when he 
learned this fact, attempt to raise the spirits 
of his young friend by declaring the favourable 
condition of affairs he had ascertained. Truth 
to say, the matter had become complicated 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 185 

altogether out of his calculation and sound- 
ings, and he knew not what to do. Only a 
sort of instinct suggested to him that it would 
be best to do nothing to heighten expectations 
certain to be so much more cruelly than ever 
disappointed. 



186 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



CHAPTER X. 



BUSINESS. 



Eusiness is said to be the great foe of love ; . 

" 'Tis typified 
In the fine fable, where brown Exercise, 
The hunter, young Adonis, Yenus' self 
Scorn'd, tying all a-rosy in the fields, 
Among the yellow cowslips, with stretched arms." 

And the business in which Mr. Behringbright 
now found himself engaged ought, in all reason, 
to excuse the fact that for the next three days 
after his arrival in Killarney he did not devote 
meditations so entire and unbroken as he 
otherwise might to the image of Madeleine 
Graham. For a " masterly inactivity' 5 is in 
reality more arduous than any species of exer- 
tion of the human faculties, and Mr. Behring- 
bright had arrived at the conclusion that there 
was no policy like that for him to pursue. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 187 

What in reality was lie to do, . in possession 
of two secrets which so thoroughly neutralized 
each other ? True it was that Lady Glen gar iff 
was now willing . almost desirous . that her 
son should marry Emily Maughan. But this 
Emily Maughan, according to Mr. Behring- 
bright's information and thorough credence, 
loved another. Yet was it for him to speak 
the word of the riddle, and plunge all again 
into misery and confusion ?" 

Now, in the first place, however well con- 
vinced on his own score, Mr. Behringbright 
remembered that he had no other authorhVy 
but a casual conversation with a young lady, 
and a slightly suspicious observation of his own, 
for concluding that Emily Maughan was in 
love with and engaged to Camille Le Tellier. 
This seemed but a very slight foundation on 
which to take upon himself a revelation involv- 
ing the happiness and fate of several persons, 
all of whom he wished exceedingly well. He 
could not make up his mind accordingly to the 
propriety of taking the step. On the other 
hand, it struck him as wrong . almost wicked 
. to say or do anything to encourage hopes 



188 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

and plans which he believed to the last degree 
fallacious and deceptive. 

Therefore it was that Mr. Behringbright 
maintained, during several days after his arrival 
at Glengariff Castle, a strict but most un- 
comfortable and uneasy neutrality of silence. 

In vain did Lord Glengariff, on several 
subsequent occasions inform him how delight- 
fully calm and reasonable he had found his 
mother ; . how she had herself introduced the 
forbidden subject, and spoken of Miss Maughan 
without any expression of anger or resentment ; 
nay, had even inquired how she was in her 
health when he left Belfast, with evident kind- 
ness and interest. Finally, had let fall expres- 
sions of regret, which he scarcely knew how to 
interpret, at her absence ; even a kind of wish 
and willingness to recall her. The young 
lover eagerly sought explanations of this mys- 
terious change from Mr. Behringbright, and to 
extort from him such as favoured the reigning 
passion in his breast. He only obtained sad 
and commiserating looks in return, . and that 
oracular silence which always brought down 
the soaring hopes of the enthusiast, as the life- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 1S9 

less air of the Dead Sea refuses to sustain the 
palpitating wing of the bird. 

The puzzle of this position . the conscious- 
ness of the disagreeable explanations in store . 
kept Mr. Behringbright's mind considerably 
engaged and harassed in one direction. A 
crowd of business letters poured in upon him 
in addition, as soon as he arrived at Grlengariff, 
which required consideration and answering. 
And all this, as we have said, made sad havoc 
with the beauteous Madeleine's projects ; and 
had the interregnum continued for any length 
of time, and had that skilful girl played the 
part of the losing gamester, and not appeared 
at the table, matters might have gone on 
very differently, and Mr. Behringbright have 
returned a free and but little more uncomfort- 
able man, in due course of events, to his 
counting-house in London. 

There is an inert set of beings of us in the 
world . indeed, we are by far the majority . 
who, if we were not set a-going by others, 
would never move at all, or, at least, only in 
the most orderly and undisturbing clockwork 
manner imaginable. We are the great ocean, 



190 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

tormented by the winds and storms of a 
light minority's passions and fantasies. But 
for that one little Corsican Cocked Hat's 
caprice for an Universal Empire, more than a 
million folks, it is calculated, might have gone 
to their eternal rest in quiet graves, who were 
forced to lie down in confused masses, sliced, 
shot, stabbed, and otherwise very shamefully 
abused and hacked in their persons, on all sorts 
of bloody fields and waves of glory ! And 
Mr. Behringbright, of his own impetus, would 
never have fallen into the way of such grievous 
mischief as befell him. But there was a throng 
of restless spirits about him, bent on achieving 
their own and other people's doom. 

Lord GlengarifF was the first to lose patience 
with the status quo. He renewed his repre- 
sentations to his ci-devant guardian, of the 
extremely quiet and conciliating tone now 
adopted by his mother, in all that related to 
the subject of disagreement between them. 
He drew the most flattering conclusions from 
her demeanour, and was satisfied, he said, that 
she was even desirous on her own part to 
come to some discussion and arrangement of 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 191 

the affair. It was true that she might suppose 
it would be decided in her own way, and that 
his return was accepted by her as a token 
of submission. Nothing could be less founded 
on fact than this ; and it was cruel to let his 
mother form so baseless a conclusion ! The 
longer time she had to fix it in her mind, the 
more injurious and shocking would the dis- 
appointment prove. And therefore it was as 
much as for any other motive, he said, Lord 
Glengariff claimed his friend's promise to aid 
him in breaking the true state of affairs to his 
mother, and demanding and obtaining her 
sanction to the renewal he was determined to 
make of his offer of marriage to Emily 
Maughan. 

Severely pressed, but still tormented by in- 
decision, Mr. Behringbright thought to elude 
the difficulty by assuring the young lover, in 
general terms, that it would be utterly useless 
to make the proposition to his mother. Besides, 
there was no such particular hurry. What 
hurry was there? Emily Maughan was in 
good and honourable keeping . and his 
mother's mind was not yet sufficiently poised, 



192 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

after its recent shock, to bear renewed agita- 
tion. 

" Where's the hurry, you say, Mr. Behring- 
bright?" said the young earl, looking at his 
friend over the breakfast-table, as they sat 
alone together at the meal, on the occasion 
alluded to, with an astonished, almost a hostile 
expression, in the irritation of his impatience 
at the calm advice . " where 8 the hurry / . The 
most beautiful creature in the world left in the 
midst of a great city, where she will find as 
many admirers as she looks upon men, and . 
where's the hurry, say you ? . Grood heavens ! 
I don't suppose you would mend your pace, 
Mr. Behringbright, if you saw the gates of 
Paradise open, and a notice put up that all the 
world might try and get in for one half-hour 
only !" 

What had this expression to do with the 
thought that occurred to Mr. Behringbright at 
the moment, that it was the fourth day of his 
arrival from Belfast, and he had never once 
crossed to the mainland to ascertain whether 
Miss Graham and her friends had come . as 
she had declared they probably would . on an 
excursion to Killarney ? 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 193 

Another recollection revived with this in 
his mind; and sincerely compassionating his 
young friend, and intending his good, he made 
the appalling rejoinder, without considering 
the probable effect, " You are quite right in 
your apprehension, I should say, Ferdinand; 
and, indeed, I think it very probable that Miss 
Maughan's affections are already engaged else- 
where !" 

" Heavenly powers, Mr. Behringbright ! . 
what do you mean by tormenting me so?" 
exclaimed Lord Grlengariff, starting up from 
table with a violence that almost jerked it 
over. " This is the second time you have told 
me this, in that cursedly calm and convinced 
manner ! Let me know the worst at once, 
then. Tell me the whole truth. Do you sup- 
pose . I say, do you suppose . have you 
any reason to suppose . that Emily Maughan 

is in love with ha ! ha ! ha ! . you 

must excuse me, but it really makes me 
laugh witli yourself, Mr. Behringbright ?" 

This time Mr. Behringbright was enabled 
to reply with composure, though not without 
a shade of pique. "You are quite right to 

VOL. II. 13 



194 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

laugh, Lord GlengarifT, at so absurd a supposi- 
tion. A young person fifteen or twenty years 
my junior ! . who has only seen me half a dozen 
times in my life ! . and not a very ravishing 
object to look at either, you seem to say ! 
Laugh on, pray ; . there is no occasion to re- 
strain so very natural a mirth 1" 

" Forgive me, Mr. Behringbright, forgive 
me ! but the bare notion of a favoured rival 
with Emily sent me wild. All is well, since you 
do not fancy yourself at all in the game. She 
knows nobody else ; and it was ridiculous of 
me to apprehend . I mean, I must not trouble 
you any more for your interference, after 
giving utterance to such an absurdity; but 
I will know the best or the worst of what I 
have to hope or fear from my mother at once." 

Lord Glengariff snatched up a morning 
paper, which he generally made the opening 
for his earliest visit to his mother's apartment, 
and rushed out. 

Mr. Behringbright remained alone, thought- 
fully swallowing three eggs and proportionate 
dry toast (there are good appetites to be had 
at Killarney), and gazing from the open 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 195 

windows over the scene of watery enchant- 
ments below. 

" It is the magic lake of the romances," he 
murmured to himself, gazing from the sapphire- 
tinted sky to its diamond- hued reflection in 
the water, and thence to the chimneys of Kil- 
larney town, visible in the distance ; " and is 
the sorceress fittest to rule over its splendours 
there ?" 

Upon this, Mr. Behringbright took a notion 
that he would cross the lake himself that fore- 
noon, and inquire if there were any tetters for him 
in Killarney ; and he was about to leave the 
breakfast-room in pursuance of the plan, when 
Lord Grlengariff suddenly returned. 

Mr. Behringbright did not exactly know 
what to make of the look of this young noble- 
man on the occasion. There was an extra- 
ordinary elation in it, mingled with anxiety 
and query he could not understand. 

"All is arranged . all is happily concluded 
at last, Mr. Behringbright !" exclaimed Lord 
GlengarifF. " You may congratulate me, if 
you will, upon my happiness. My mother 
herself has been the first to speak out. She 

13.2 



196 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

saw liow dejected I looked, and frankly inquired 
of me why I delayed to ask her consent for the 
return of Emily, declaring that she herself felt 
perfectly desolate and deserted in the loss of 
her society, and imputed her last dangerous 
attack entirely to it. And when I told her 
that Emily would not, of course, return to a 
house from which she had been ordered by the 
mistress, without a recall on her part, my dear 
mother told me she was quite aware of that, 
and was perfectly willing to write to Emily 
herself with her own hand, and request her, 
with every imaginable kindness of solicitation 
and reconciliation, to return to Grlengariff, 
and make it henceforth and for ever her 
home." 

" Oh . . . yes ... I suppose so ! " 
" But that is not all, Mr. Behringbright ; 
for when I told her that, of course, after what 
had occurred, Emily was only likely to consent 
to return to Glengariff on one condition, my 
mother answered, ' Yes, certainly. I have 
long made up my mind to the necessity. 
Emily Maughan can return to our roof, Ferdi- 
nand, only as the betrothed bride of my son.' 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 197 

And then my mother added, Mr. Behring- 
bright," continued the young lord, with a 
stern and scrutinizing glare at his elder friend, 
" that she communicated her consent to you 
on your very first interview with her, on your 
arrival here ! Why, then, have you never told 
me so, but left me exposed for so many days 
to the tortures of suspense and fear." 

It cannot be denied that Mr. Behringbright 
looked, on his own part, pretty considerably 
guilty and confused on this severe and evi- 
dently jealously suspicious interpellation. He 
would not have been so embarrassed, probably, 
but for the recent exposition of the young 
gentleman's ideas respecting his possible per- 
sonal motives in the matter. And now to 
throw the blame of his reserve on so air-spun 
and conjectural a suspicion of Emily's actuating 
motives, as Madeleine had furnished, seemed 
only likely to increase the suspicions he plainly 
saw were entertained against himself. One 
girl's flippant fancies about another . was that 
a basis, moreover, on which to proceed to 
decide upon the destinies of two lives ? 

Unhappily, too, a solution of the per- 



198 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

plexity occurred to Mr. Behringbright, too 
much in accordance with the quiet, confiding 
tone of his own mind, not to be adopted. If 
Emily Maughan really loved and preferred her 
Frenchman . if her mind was so magnani- 
mously constituted as had been represented . 
it was perfectly easy and safe to leave the 
decision of the affair in her hands, without his 
own evidently unwelcome and suspected inter- 
ference. 

Mr. Behringbright was not now revolving 
for the first time this way of getting out of 
the embroglio comfortably; he came fast 
enough, therefore, to the conclusion : but he 
was hardly so ingenuous as usual when he 
replied to GrlengarifT that his lordship's mother 
had certainly let fall some expressions to the 
effect he had communicated, but her mind was 
not then in a state to build with any certainty 
on what she said, and he had been unwilling 
to awaken hopes which might be destined 
thereby to severer disappointment. 

Lord Grlengariff appeared to be satisfied 
by this explanation, but it is probable he 
was not. And he then informed Mr. Beh- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 199 

ringbright that her ladyship desired his counsel 
and assistance in composing a proper letter of 
recall for Emily, and wished to see him in 
private on the subject. 

" She says / shall be sure to suggest nothing 
but enthusiastic nonsense," the young lord 
concluded ; "so I am not to be present. All 
I want you to do, therefore, is to prevail upon 
my mother to let me be the bearer of the 
}|tter in person. She is unwilling for that 
only, . and it is what I desire above all things 
in the world ! " 

" Certainly not ! " thought Mr. Behring- 
bright, who perceived how inexpedient it was, 
if the refusal he expected ensued, that Lord 
Glengariff should be at a distance from all 
friendly control and soothing, exposed to the 
fury and excitement of his violent passions, 
receiving so mortifying a check. 

In his subsequent conference with Lady 
Glengariff he therefore earnestly urged upon 
her not to consent to this part of the scheme : 
and, with a view of preparing her also for 
disappointment, slightly suggested his reasons. 
But he found her ladyship absolutely mere- 



200 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

dulous . impervious to all possible hints and 
intimations in this direction. The idea that 
any woman who had seen her glorious son 
should not prefer him afc once and for ever to 
all mankind was altogether out of Lady 
Grlengariff 's range of comprehension. She was, 
however, very willing to restrain him from a 
journey back to Belfast, though on very dif- 
ferent motives. " We must not seem posi- 
tively to beg the hand even of our bewitching 
little governess, ,, she observed, smilingly, as 
she concluded her letter. " And GlengarifF 
has confessed to me enough of his doings in 
Belfast to throw an appearance of eccentricity 
and rashness in his proceedings that ought to 
be avoided most especially on this occasion, or 
the young lady herself, and people in general, 
will be taking what we mean in such sober 
earnestness for a new freak of his extravagant 
humour. Tell him so ; but I give him leave 
to enclose the most loving letter a lover can 
indite in mine. And I think you can easily 
persuade him to be reasonable in this way, 
Baron, if you add that his going to the North 
would only probably retard Miss Maughan's 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 201 

return here, as it is not likely she will consent 
to return with him ! " 

This last argument had its effect on Lord 
Glengariff, though he heard at first, with 
evident impatience and disdain, Mr. Behring- 
bright's candid statement that he had dissuaded 
his mother from granting him the permission 
he had required. Finally, he acquiesced in the 
general arrangement ; wrote thirteen letters, 
out of all which he produced one that he still 
deemed inadequate, but which most members 
of the fair sex would have found almost irresist- 
ible in its pleading ; and folded it, unsealed, 
for enclosure in his mother's most kind and 
affectionate epistle, which he graciously ap- 
proved on perusal. 

Nothing indeed could be more complete and 
winning than Lady Glengariffs renunciation 
of her previous opinions as regarded her son's 
devotion to Emily Maughan, and the warmth 
and tenderness of the entreaty with which she 
requested that seemingly fortunate young 
lady to return to GlengarilT Castle as the bride 
elect of its lord, and the daughter of her own 
choice and love ! 



202 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



CHAPTEE XI. 

A PICNIC AND ITS CONSEQUENCES. 

This interruption occasioned that Mr. Behring- 
bright did not go to Killarney as lie had in- 
tended that day ; and anxiety as to the results 
took such possession of his mind, after the 
decision was fairly put upon the die, that he 
really lost a very great deal of his interest in 
his own concerns for a considerable subsequent 
period. 

And yet was not this, in some important 
degree, Mr. Behringbright's oicn concern ? 
Did not results of great importance to himself 
hang on the solution of the curious social 
problem of which Emily Maughan was seem- 
ingly at once the propounding and was to 
become the solving sphinx ? 

If she should prove herself, after all, an 
ordinary woman ; if dazzled by the splendid 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 203 

prize now placed in her clutch, without too 
perilous a vault, she should discard . for the 
second time, be it remarked ! . an object of 
girlish preference, and accept Lord Grlengariff, 
would not Mr. Behrin^brio-ht find himself 
thereby placed in a more difficult position than 
ever ? 

Was he to stand by and see the son of his 
friend made the dupe of a false-hearted, 
mercenary preference . the most abhorrent of 
all to Mr. Behrin^bright ? Or must he show 
up its real nature to conviction, and ruin poor 
Emily's fine prospects ? Poor Emily, he could 
not help saying to himself, what had she done 
to him to justify him in so unkind an expose? 
Loved him once, it was but too certain ! Should 
he in return do what in him lay to cut her oft' 
a splendid fortune ? 

But did no other sentiment mingle with this 
very proper and conscientious one in the heart 
of George Cocker Behringbright, when he 
bethought himself how very probable it was 
that Emily . hopeless on the score of her first 
love, with little but a dandy doll exterior to 
attach her in the second . would seethe merits 



204 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

and claims of the young chieftain of Grlengariff 
in their really irresistible light to every other 
eye? 

I am very glad that commentators of my 
calibre are not called upon to explain the in- 
consistencies of human nature, but simply to 
put them on record ; else I should be a good 
deal puzzled to account for the pain the notion 
certainly gave Mr. Behringbright. Assuredly he 
was not a man of very inordinate self-love. Had 
extremely little of that pride of old Spanish 
royalty about him, whose very steed, once 
mounted, might never again be bestrid by an 
inferior cavalier. He had no notion that 
Emily ought to pine herself into a grave on 
his account, or consign herself to one of those 
open cloisters of the world, in which so many 
disappointed persons of the female sex give 
over their hearts and affections to solitude and 
celibacy. But still, did he quite relish the idea 
of Emily Maughan, awakened from her non- 
sensical early dream, nourishing over its decay 
in all kinds of brilliant substantialities ? 

If, however, Emily remained faithful to her 
antecedents . still justified the admiration of 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 205 

her candid young friend in Belfast as to her 
disinterestedness and devotion to another . 
what an agonizing disappointment, what tor- 
tures of vain passion and regrets, were in store 
for Lord Grlengariff ! 

These mingled and opposed hopes and fears 
greatly harassed Mr. Behringhright ; to say 
truth, frightened him with the possibility that to 
indulge any further in his own daydream might 
lead himself into the danger of similar pains 
and penalties ! When women were good and 
disinterested in their feelings, what strangely- 
influenced and capricious animals they seemed 
to be ! And what was there in 1dm to induce 
him to cherish the hope of inspiring a young 
beauty with affection, when the gallant and 
gifted Glengariff failed, in such a paltry com- 
parison ? It would certainly then, all consi- 
dered, be but common sense to keep out of 
the way of Miss Madeleine Graham of Belfast, 
even if her own business or pleasure led her 
as she had intimated, so invitingly to his 
vicinity. And so Mr. Behringbright came to 
the conclusion that he would only await the 
result of the renewed oiler to Emily, to be at 



206 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

hand to do the best he could under the circum- 
stances for his young friend and his afflicted 
mother ; and meanwhile that he would adopt 
the Ulyssean policy, and tie himself to the mast, 
in the guise of not stirring out of the Glen- 
gariff grounds, or the mountains behind them, 
until he could leave the whole witching place 
on his return to London. 

In this resolution Mr. Behringbright per- 
severed for, finally, ten whole days after his 
arrival at Grlengariff Castle. Albeit every 
snort of the distantly arriving Killarney 
Junction trains went to his heart, and he fre- 
quently amazed the Grlengariff gamekeepers 
and the dogs he took out with him on pre- 
tended sporting excursions . which the very 
deer themselves, the supposed objects, seemed 
at last to ridicule . by standing transfixed 
on the sides of the hills, gazing over 
the placid waters of the Lower Lake 
towards those remote white whale-spouts of 
vapour, as if they had been rare and singular 
phenomena. 

Mr. Behringbright's perseverance in thisre- 
spect was perhaps rendered more remarkable by 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 207 

the circumstance that the young chief of Grlen- 
gariff . wontedly a very keen sportsman . rarely 
if ever accompanied him on these mountain 
strolls, but crossed as regularly as the post-hours 
over to Killarney, twice a day, when once the 
necessary interval had elapsed in which a 
reply from Belfast could be expected. Indeed, 
the longer this was delayed, the more certain 
that intelligence was about to arrive^ did Lord 
Glengariff exhibit himself, to judge from the 
increased punctuality of his visits to the source 
whence the healing waters were to flow. 

At first the countess was enabled to console 
her son by a ladylike and feminine suggestion 
that probably Emily wished to give herself an 
appearance of pause and hesitation, which well 
become a youthful woman under the circum- 
tances. But by-and-bye this explanation 
ceased to be satisfactory. The interval 
assumed became so very long ! Meanwhile it 
occurred to Mr. Behringbright that it was a 
case of real balance and hesitation between a 
preferred and a wealthy and titled lover ! But 
of course he did not like to give Glengariff the 
benefit of the illumination in his own mind. 



208 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

. Still no answer ! And the time certainly at 
last grew to be inexplicably protracted. 

There was only one person, in truth, in all 
Ireland at that time, who could have explained 
the matter ; and that person was not the Post- 
master-General. And yet the letter, to which 
a reply was so anxiously expected by persons 
of so much importance, had passed twice back- 
ward and forward by the agency of that func- 
tionary's nimble sprites, in the otherwise un- 
necessary interval. 

The inconveniences of ingenuity are some- 
times so great as almost to turn the balance 
against the advantages ; and now the truth is, 
that in so cleverly arranging her plan for 
Camille Le Tellier to write to her as to Emily 
Maughan, Madeleine Graham had not calcu- 
lated certain unpleasant consequences that now 
loomed threateningly into view. How could 
she ? She did not know the necessity of her 
going to Killarney at the time ; until, in fact, 
she had ascertained that Mr. Behrino-bri^ht 
was going into the lake district, and was not 
likely to return to Belfast. In making her 
dispositions afterwards for the emergency, get- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 209 

ting her dresses in readiness, reconciling her 
father through her mother to the expense, 
killing off Dr. Bucktrout's imaginary patient at 
a moment's notice, Madeleine also found it ad- 
visable to provide against a danger produced by 
her own excess of precaution. During her 
absence, a letter intended for her might fall, 
according to the direction, into Emily's own 
hands. A letter from Camille ! There was 
utter ruin in that. 

The risk was not great while Madeleine was 

on the spot. All letters directed to Emily were, 

by order, brought first to her, and, of course, 

Camille' s handwriting indicated what were to be 

retained. Moreover, Emily's real correspondence 

was very limited. She had only received a few 

passionate scrawls from Lord Glengariff, which 

she had not known how to decline without 

exciting suspicion; and a letter from her 

mother, who always wrote when quarter-day 

was near, to ask her dearest child to spare her 

the smallest fraction possible from her salary 

for some most necessary and pressing household 

or educational debt, with which she dared not 

trouble Mr. Behringbright, good as he was and 

VOL. II. 14 



210 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

continued to be . God bless him ! though he 
now so seldom came to receive her thanks and 
blessings in person . to her and her fatherless 
orphans; an appeal which rarely failed to 
leave Emily as bare and shillingless as if 
quarter-day never came to governesses in Ire- 
land. But Madeleine considered with alarm 
what might happen in her absence. Honor 
was faithful, but was a giddy, careless girl, 
engaged in sweethearting on her own account, 
and had only such skill in handwriting as can 
be acquired in any number of years at a charity 
school. She might easily mistake or overlook 
the all-important letter, on some fatal occasion; 
at least there existed a tremendous possibility, 
not to be hazarded when so much was upon 
the die. Not even her mother, usually so sub- 
servient to her plans and wishes, could be 
trusted by Madeleine in such a conjuncture : 
no mother could be made a confidante in such 
a case. 

On the other hand, Madeleine found herself 
unable to countermand her instructions to 
Camille. She had received a letter from him 
. in reply to the last the reader has inspected 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 211 

over the fair writer's shoulder, . conceived, 
certainly, in very vague and nighty terms, . 
stating that he had formed an immense project 
for their happiness, founded on the noble 
generosity and sensibility to the misfortunes of 
two unhappy lovers, which he conceived to 
animate the breast of a rich Englishman, 
whose acquaintance he had made, but stating 
pretty clearly that this project required his 
absence from Belfast. He did not state 
whither he was going, with the exception that 
he intended to anticipate his customary journey 
in the south of Ireland, in order to leave time 
to proceed in the execution of his plans. But 
his beloved Madeleine would not miss him, 
since she had herself prohibited his approach 
to Belhaven Square for so considerable an 
interval, or would pardon an absence her 
fondest Camille meant to devote altogether to 
the concerns of their passion ; the whole con- 
cluding witli a rhapsodical statement that he 
believed the term of their sufferings was fast 
approaching, and that the god Plutus, hitherto 
inexorably their foe, might be induced, at the 
passionate prayer of the most devoted of lovers, 
14.2 



212 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

to interpose to secure their union and perpetual 
happiness together. 

Madeleine was too well accustomed to her 
lover's flights of imagination to place much, 
or any stress, indeed, on this intimation. Her 
own wishes and purposes were turned quite 
another way; and, far as she knew Camille 
carried his Gallic ignorance of everything out 
of the sphere of his national notions on things 
in general and particular, she never for a 
moment dreamed that the writer's romantic 
projects were on the generosity of a man whom 
she also knew to be the wealthiest of British 
merchants ; encouraged simply by the fact that 
Mr. Behringbright, after refusing to fight a 
duel with him, had interposed and probably 
saved his life in a playhouse row ! 

Accordingly, had the millionnaire remained in 
Belfast, Madeleine would have been pleased 
enough at Camille's departure from the scene 
of operations. His presence would have been 
a great hinderance to her own schemes, in that 
case. He would probably have conceived sus- 
picions, and required explanations . tedious at 
best, perhaps perilous to success . however im- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 213 

plicitly she calculated on influencing him by 
the sordid motives she believed of paramount 
authority with him ; but under the change of 
circumstances, the danger previously alluded to 
was very far from being obviated by Camille's 
voluntary exodus. On the contrary, he would 
be almost certain to send news of his progress 
in his plans, whatever they were ; and it was 
to provide against so formidable a contingency 
as that of his letters falling into the hands of 
Emily Maughan, that Madeleine found herself 
driven to the extreme step of ordering Honor, 
on her life and fidelity, and as she hoped for a 
beautiful green poplin gown, on which the 
waiting- wench had long set her mind, on her 
return, to transmit all and every letter directed 
to Emily Maughan, under cover to herself, 
Miss Madeleine Graham, of Belfast, at Kil- 
larney. 

I am of opinion that Madeleine simply pro- 
vided against the danger in question by this 
precaution. I am persuaded she had no wish 
at the time to intercept any communication 
intended bond fide for Emily . on account 
chiefly, no doubt, of the danger of doing so. 



214 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

But thus it befell that the Glengariff missives 
twice crossed almost the length and breadth of 
Ireland, on a transverse line, ere they reached 
the hands for which they were originally 
intended ; and this, of course, occasioned the 
delay with which the countess and her son 
became both of them at last so extremely 
puzzled and annoyed. 

Miss Graham and her retinue, consisting of 
Doctor and Mrs. Bucktrout, arrived in Kil- 
larney the day after those communications 
had, at all events, started to their legitimate 
destination. 

The kind-hearted girl took a most affec- 
tionate and cordial farewell of all other relatives 
and friends before leaving her native city on 
this little pleasure-trip. Above all, she made 
it her business to see " dear Emily," and assure 
her how much she loved her, and how little 
she cared to go on such a tour, with no other 
company than her uncle and aunt. " You 
know they have not the least real pleasure in 
beautiful, romantic scenery and all that, dear 

Emily ! But How I should have enjoyed 

your company ! But you have made yourself 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 215 

so very, very useful and agreeable in the 
family, mamma cannot possibly do without 
you now ; and she sa} T s she will have you, and 
nobody but you, to go with her and the 
children on their sea-bathing at Derry, in 
August, and I am to stay at home and keep 
house for papa." 

" Are you going only for the scenery, Made- 
leine ?" inquired Emily, with a smile full of a 
bitter sadness she could not repress. 

From the moment she heard that her kind 
friend was bound for the lakes, on which stood 
Glengariff Castle, and whither Mr. Behring- 
bright had gone, the poor girl considered her 
doom as fixed. She knew that nothing had 
been said or proposed of this excursion until 
that gentleman, in his character of Brownjohn 
the commercial traveller, had announced his 
own intention of going thither. The fun and 
scoffing of the very Graham children had let 
her into the secret that their uncle and aunt 
had no means for pleasuring of the kind, unless 
they were aided and abetted at Sir Orange's 
expense. And so, though Emily had no 
earthly . still less supernatural . reasons for 



216 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

the belief, she felt as certain as if she had it 
on the oaths of all the deans and chapters in 
Ireland, that Madeleine knew who Mr. 
Behringbright really was, and had made up 
her mind to entrap him ! 

Strange intuition of the heart ! But what 
was Emily Maughan to do ? "What right of 
interference had she ? . when the project was 
to be realized at a distance from any possible 
hinderance on her part, too . and when, so far 
from having evidence of the full real guilt and 
dishonour of Madeleine's relations with another 
man, her pure woman's nature never so much 
as suspected such a depth of infamy and aban- 
donment; . and when, even in what related 
to the forbidden love-affair between them, 
her right of denunciation was thus cleverly 
parried ? . 

" ]STo, dear Emily, no. You are quite right 
in asking the question, and I am not going 
exclusively for the enjoyment I expect to derive 
from the scenery and company at Killarney : 
though everybody says it is the finest in the 
world . on a small scale, you know, not like 
the Alps . and that they have hardly ever had 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 217 

so splendid a season for visitors as they have 
this. I am going to be out of the way of that 
odious Frenchman's noise and upbraidings, 
because I have at last seen how right you 
always were in warning me against encouraging 
him, as papa was so determined against my 
marrying him, . and he has no money ; and I 
have written to him the only letter I ever did 
write, or ever intend to write to him, to say 
the thing must all be over now between us for 
ever. And if you would take the letter to 
Widow Welshe's, your own dear, kind self . 
for you know papa and mamma both have for- 
bidden me to go into even the street he lives 
in, . and they are so good, and papa is so cross, 
I dare not disobey. And still I don't like to 
trust the letter to the post." 

Emily, who had so often counselled her 
former school friend, and really in most respects 
kind and conciliating entertainer, under their 
altered relations, to take this precise step, and 
extricate herself from so unbecoming a con- 
nexion, could not well refuse a favour bo asked, 
and apparently so small; and thus felt herself 
deprived of her previous right to impeach Made* 



218 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

leine's good faith in any man-trapping plans she 
might pursue on Mr. Behringbright, and her- 
self made the instrument to secure her rival's 
freedom and safety. 

However, there was apparently nothing for 
it but submission to fate ; and finally, satisfied 
with the elaborate precautions she had taken, 
Miss Graham departed, as we have stated, for 
Killamey, with her avuncular retinue. Dr. 
Bucktrout himself asked no questions, and was 
told no lies. Satisfied that, somehow or other, 
there was money found for the excursion, he 
did not inquire in the least its meaning or its 
motives, but packed up his fishing-gear and 
bagpipes in a small separate hamper, and left 
the charge of everything else to his wife and 
his niece. Mrs. Bucktrout, whose mental 
capacity was not very greatly in advance of 
that of a black-beetle, excepting in the article 
of religion, where she thoroughly understood 
herself, was nevertheless very good at taking 
charge of luggage, and bargaining with hotel- 
keepers ; and had other valuable qualities 
in a chap er one, for a young lady who desired 
rather to manage than to be managed. And 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 219 

she contented herself with a general vague 
impression that the able beauty of the family, 
whom its members looked up to as certain 
some day to make a splendid match which 
would advance all the rest, had some grand 
project in view in the present march out of 
camp. 

Nor indeed was it for the first time that Dr. 
and Mrs. Bucktrout had been utilized in a 
similar implicit style. It was not Madeleine's 
first visit to the Killarney Lakes either, by 
twice. But the first time she had been taken 
up with a foolish flirtation with a foreigner, 
who gave himself out to be a French count of 
immense wealth, recreating himself aV Aiiglaise, 
in a pedestrian tour, and whom it amused her 
to know all along to be simply a commis- 
yoyagewr of Lyons and Marseilles. And the 
second time the weather was unhappily so 
excessively wet, that all the strangers worth 
trying one's charms on, after a week of cease- 
less downnour, deserted en masse from the 
district, and spread such reports that every- 
body went instead to Solferino that year, to 
see the bones and mouldy uniforms sticking 



220 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

out of the ground among the vines and olive- 
steeps of that scene of glory. 

Madeleine, however, went to an hotel she 
had not previously stayed at on this occasion. 
Her uncle would have liked the "Eose and 
Shamrock," where they broiled trout to a 
nicety ; but she disapproved : partly because 
she had sojourned there at the time of the 
flirtation with the French count, and partly 
because she knew of another " hostel or inn," 
much more conveniently situated for Glen- 
gariff, at the head of the Lower Lake. 
Accordingly, the Bucktrout party . to give 
it its ostensible principal's name . proceeded 
at once to Prospect Palace, a noted hotel 
and boarding-house in the locality indicated. 
There they entered themselves as Best 
Drawing-room Boarders, for a week certain, 
with sleeping-apartments to correspond, at 
a moderate tariff, considering the good things 
and privileges annexed to the quarters. And 
there, on the first morning after her arrival, 
Madeleine, dressed with enchanting simplicity, 
commenced a general and particular prospectus 
of her field of operations, and was voted the 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 221 

belle of the hotel by nearly all the young 
men before her first breakfast among them 
was over. 

Madeleine, however, on her own part, found 
little to turn her from her predetermined 
projects. There was, it is true, among the 
guests an old roue marquis, who was reported 
as a person of immense wealth and possessions, 
who chose to amuse himself by joining the 
general society in Prospect Palace, instead 
of consigning himself to the august seclusion 
of a suite of private apartments. But this 
great nobleman was really unconscionably old ; 
had false teeth, false hair, false almost every- 
thing ; and a reputation for debauchery which 
would have rendered anybody but a marquis 
totally disgusting, and inadmissible into all 
decent society. And though it plainly ap- 
peared that his lordship was still pervious to 
the charms of the fair, since he had very 
recently figured as defendant in a divorce case, 
attended with some unusually infamous cir- 
cumstances, Madeleine herself really could not 
bear the idea of attempting to attract this 
horrid old titled satyr, with his big, shining 



222 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

false teeth glaring as conspicuously on the gold 
wires in his wide jaws as in a dentist's show- 
glass. There were strong rumours, besides, 
that his lordship's property was so hopelessly 
involved by the extravagance of fifty years . 
dating only from his majority, whereas it 
was well known to have begun some years 
previous to that happy event . that it was 
not thought worth while putting into the 
Encumbered Estates Court's distributor's hands. 
A notion rather supported in so shrewd a 
calculator's reasoning by the marquis's con- 
descension in joining the common table, 
and other rather levelling associations for 
amusement and recreation of Prospect Palace, 
and which was much opposed to the success 
even of such a lawful address as so great a 
personage was not likely to make to a 
merchant's daughter. 

The Marquis of Ramshacklegal, however, 
preserved great influence in the elections 
of more than one county of Ireland ; and 
therefore it was, perhaps, that he was at- 
tended, as conqjanion de voyage and toady, 
by Mr. Vivian Fauntleroy, of the Dolce- Far 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 223 

Niente Club of London. He had no more 

private address, as far as I can discover, in 

the Court Guides of that time. This gen- 
es 

tleman was at Killarney, in the society of 
the great man whom he delighted to call 
" his noble friend . " not, of course, in the 
primary and original, but heraldic application 
of the epithet to be found in the. Peerages 
and Blue-Books. And Mr. Vivian Fauntleroy 
had himself rather an eye for a pretty woman, 
though he had no notion whatever of com- 
promising his own future fortunes and com- 
fort by anything so absurd as falling in 
love with a woman merely for her beauty, 
or any other unsubstantial quality either of 
body or mind. Madeleine Graham had speedily 
some reason to imagine that this gentleman 
would have no particular aversion to enliven 
his sejour at the Irish lakes by a " flirtation," as 
it is called, with the prettiest woman he espied 
thereabouts. In truth, this was a favourite 
diversion with Mr. Fauntleroy, and he had 
made a great many silly Ariadnes of the kind 
in his time. But Madeleine was thoroughly 
up to the manoeuvres of so kindred a genius; 



224 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

and though she, too, might perhaps have 
diverted herself with a little coquetry, the 
wit lost all substantial chance with her the 
moment she heard, what the marquis speedily 
took occasion to drop, that "Fauntleroy was 
a capital good fellow, no doubt, and clever 
enough in his way, only as poor as a rook, . 
the poorest devil of an author and political 
adventurer you could conceive !" While the 
marquis's trick was as effectually done, about 
the same time, by Mr. Fauntleroy's equally 
friendly aside statement that, " besides being 
the horridest old badger in the peerage, he 
was only titular owner of his vast properties, 
and, in point of fact, a good deal more a beggar 
than a fellow who lived upon his pen and wits ; 
for he had some capital to fall back upon. 3 ' 

There was another . not such a bad chance 
indeed, altogether . who, with his five sisters 
and their collective mother, also put their legs 
(if one may mention such appendages) under 
the mahogany of the best drawing-room at 
Prospect Palace. Grassgreen Sparrowgrass, 
Esq., who was said to be only son and heir to 
some great London citizen ; some most emi- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 225 

nent pastrycook, who, according to Mr. Fauntle- 
roy's version of the artless lad's own story, 
having been seized with a common English 
malady, called "founding a family," deter- 
mined to fashion one out of the unlikely dough 
of his only simple son . daughters being, of 
course, of no use in the process. Accordingly, 
Grassgreen had been left principal inheritor of 
that golden plum which had ripened over 
the fumes of the soups and cheesecakes of half 
a century. And consequently the five Miss 
Sparrowgrasses were forced to go upon the 
angle for husbands, with very moderate baits 
in the shape of fortune ; and though they 
were agreeable, tall, and well-made women, 
entitled to the best, perhaps, in personal re- 
spects, they were, in my and Mr. Fauntleroy's 
opinion, threatened with old-maidism. But 
it was likely to be just the contrary with the 
fortunate son, who was besides, of his own 
nature, a very simple, confiding, loving sort of 
a foolish young fellow . -just the one to fall a 
victim to the first bold pretendant; wth the 
exception that he was strictly watched over 
and guarded by his mother, who was as set as 
VOL. II. 15 



226 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

her lately defunct spouse on her son's achiev- 
ing an alliance with rank and greatness, and 
had brought him in pursuit of the ideal to 
Killarney. For it was thought that Irish 
peers in general were seldom so rich as to 
refuse their daughters to wealthy commoners, 
even of pastrycook antecedents. And the 
Sparrowgrasses " sunk the shop" so earnestly 
that you would never have known they had 
kept one, ancestrally speaking, from their own 
admissions. Indeed, I do not suppose that 
the proudest Howards or De Montmorencies 
ever looked down on trade and traders so con- 
temptuously as the Sparrowgrasses, from the 
height of their mushroom elevation. Pro- 
babilities were, therefore, not much in favour 
of Madeleine Graham, a merchant's daughter's 
success with this aspirer to Plantagenetism. 
And yet I do not believe she would have 
despaired of success, or have left many stones 
unturned to achieve it, had she deemed it 
worth her while with so much more towering 
a head of game in view . not to mention so 
inconsiderable a drawback as that the young 
Sparrowgrass was of an exceedingly feeble, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 227 

rickety frame, to match the feebleness of his 
understanding. 

The greater quarry was not, however, in 
any strictness of the term, in view. It has 
been shown that Mr. Behringbright kept pretty 
closely to the Glengariff domain ; at least, 
extended his excursions only in a contrary 
direction to Killarney and its .environs, 
among the mountains of the Gap and its 
ravines. But Glengariff Castle was a visible 
object from all parts of the shores of the Lower 
Lake, and became from the very first the 
cynosure of Madeleine's eyes and expectations. 

" What do you call that old castle-looking 
place, in the midst of the woods on the other 
side of the water . under those blue mountains 
there? At least, they were blue a moment 
ago, but they seem as if all turned to burnished 
gold now !" said Madeleine to a chambermaid, 
the very evening of her arrival, after choosing 
a bedroom that looked upon the Lower Lake ; 
herself rather startled into admiration at the 
gorgeous spectacle, though she took little re- 
lish in such merely natural splendours. 

"Sure, isn't it Glengariff Castle, the place 
15.2 



228 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

of The O'Donoghue, Miss, you're asking me ?" 
replied the Milesian maid. " And dunnot 
everybody know that, without the asking ?" 

" Perhaps they do : but I come a long way 
off, where people don't know everything. 
Who lives there ?" 

" Isn't there the flag waving to show that 
his honour's lordship himself is at home, the 
young earl that is called ? And madam 
hardly ever leaves the place." 

"Oh, you mean the Earl of Glengariff? 
Does he have many visitors often? . has he 
many at present ?" 

" Visitors !" repeated the maiden in astonish- 
ment. " And I should like to know who 
would have the impudence to even himself to 
The O'Donoghue, and go on a visit to him, or 
my lady either !" 

" Is he so great a personage ?" said 
Madeleine, with rather an envious twang, as 
she recollected Emily Mau^han's allegations 
concerning the young lord's honourable pur- 
suit of her . which, however, she did not be- 
lieve. " Well, if The O'Donoghue, as you call 
him, is too great to be visited . does he ever 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 229 

visit ? Don't people come over from the castle 
to the mainland here sometimes ?" 

" Often enough : for provisions and such 
like ; . especially on market day, Miss." 

" I mean, haven't you seen any strangers 
crossing to and fro the last few days, my good 
girl ? I have an acquaintance, . not a person 
of any consequence, but who told me he was 
iroins: to the castle on business about this 
time. A tall, rather thin, muscular, middle- 
aged man, dressed in a plaid chiefly ; . . . I 
think . . . you must have noticed him, if you 
have seen him ?" t 

It so happened that Mary Cruiskean had 
been on a shopping excursion in Killarney 
when Mr. Behringbright went through the 
town to get a boat to cross to GlengarifF; and 
she had been struck with the rather unusual 
figure of the tourist, and his careless and distrait 
manner. She was thus enabled to satisfy Miss 
Graham of the fact of the destined prey's 
arrival and sale harbourage. And this ren- 
dered the subsequent continued non-appearance 
of Mr. Behringbright dreadfully inexplicable 
and annoying. 



230 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

In vain did Madeleine, duly escorted by her 
aunt, frequent all the likely places to encounter 
with another stranger, . the assembly-room, 
the circulating library, the news-room, the toy 
bazaars, the beach, the railway-station, Muck- 
ross Abbey and domain, . and finally betake 
herself, like an exhausted stag, to the water, 
and make almost a daily round of the three 
lakes, in a boat. Still unsuccessfully. Crowds 
of visitors in all the land places of resort pre- 
sented themselves ; crowds of visitors in boats, 
on the waters ; but nowhere Mr. Behring- 
bright ! What could be the meaning of it ? 

At the very height of her perplexity, also, 
there arrived an enclosure from Belfast, directed 
to her in the scrawl of Honor O'Haggarty, 
but which, on opening, she discovered to con- 
tain a letter to Emily Maughan, sealed with a 
coronet in black wax. A letter which bore 
the postmark of Killarney ! . a letter which 
probably contained the secret of the true 
present, and very likely future, relations of 
the Glengariff family with Emily, since it 
was directed in a lady's hand . doubtless the 
countess's ! . a letter which might be . of great 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 231 

consequence to herself, since, if it recalled 
Miss Maughan, and if she accepted the recall, 
almost the certainty of a most damaging ex- 
planation would arise, on her insinuations 
regarding Camille Le Tellier, between Mr. 
Behringbright and his protegee. 

What was to be done ? On the one hand, 
Madeleine had an indistinct impression that 
to open another person's letter, knowingly and 
wilfully, was somehow or other very severely 
punishable at law ; yet to let this letter, 
which might contain the most important 
intelligence, pass through her possession un- 
examined, seemed a real foil}' and a tempting 
of fate. Much was already hazarded, besides, 
in the mere detention of the communication ! 
On the whole, Madeleine could not resist the 
impulse of mingled curiosity and fear, and, 
carefully scissoring round the grand seal, 
speedily found herself in possession of the 
contents. 

They could not have been very gratifying, 
to judge from the expression of her wontedly 
beautiful countenance, which became distorted 
into the hideous loveliness of a Medusa mask, 



232 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

as she read them alone in her chamher at 
dressing-time. 

Lady GlengarifFs letter of warm and 
motherly appeal and entreaty to Emily to 
return was gall and wormwood enough in 
itself. But there was also the young lord's 
impassioned enclosure to be perused. And for 
the first time having the genuine language of 
a pure, lofty, manly, high-hearted and disin- 
terested passion placed before her, Madeleine 
comprehended, with a truly fiendish exacerba- 
tion of envy, and bitter sense of her own 
incapability of inspiring such, how infinitely 
less preferable her own miserable successes of 
artifice and coquetry were, than this genuine 
woman's triumph, of the despised and simple- 
hearted Emily Maughan ! 

And this simpleton to be wooed to become 
a countess ! This impertinent, meddling 
creature of a governess, who presumed to 
sit in judgment on her conduct, and whose 
whole demeanour Madeleine had always felt a 
rebuke to her own, was summoned to her 
chosen scene of action to spoil her greatest 
enterprise ! Her finest chance to elevate 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 233 

herself from the paltry destinies to which she 
seemed enchained hj what Madeleine herself 
now considered, justly enough, a downright 
madness and hallucination of the senses in 
the past. 

Moreover, the danger of the probable ex- 
planation ! Madeleine concluded, with some 
lack of her accustomed sagacity, that it was 
not in human nature to refuse such a magnifi- 
cent opening as was now presented to Emily 
Maughan. Even if she preferred Mr. Behring- 
brisrht, it was not in Madeleine's nature to 
conceive the possibility of her refusing to 
become a countess for mere love of another ! 
. and of another, too, who treated her with 
something not far removed from neglectful 
ignoring, if not with absolute scorn ! 

Yet Madeleine reflected it would be too 
dangerous to suppress these letters altogether. 
Inquiries would certainly be set on foot ; the 
post-office authorities would track with fatal 
accuracy the non-delivery of their charge, and 
worse revelations would then, in all probability, 
be set afoot ! Madeleine meditated ; and 
while she meditated took up a pen from an 



234 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

ink-tray, placed, with other conveniences, in 
the well-furnished apartment. She tried her 
hand, almost without thinking of what she 
was doing, at an imitation of Lady Glengariff 's 
peculiarly tremulous and separated but distinct 
and characteristic caligraphy . found, with a 
little practice, she could produce almost a fac- 
simile . practised ahout half an hour, and then 
added a postscript to her ladyship's letter, 
which in her opinion ought to have filled up a 
blank which remained at the bottom of the 
last page of the paper. It was to the effect 
that Lady Glengariff had only written all that 
Miss Maughan would read previously, to avoid 
a mortal quarrel with her son, and separation 
from him; but that her objections to the 
proposed union were still as strong, as irre- 
movable as ever ; nay . were much strength- 
ened by an intimation her ladyship had received 
of the existence of a prior attachment on the 
part of Miss Maughan for another gentleman! 
She entreated her, therefore, to take the re- 
sponsibility of finally destroying the insensate 
hopes, and putting a stop to the pursuit of 
Lord Glengariff, by a refusal which could 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 235 

leave no doubt upon his mind that it was 
irrevocable. It would be but fair, indeed, to 
avow the attachment she cherished for another. 
Nothing could be more effectual to convince 
her son of the folly and futilitj^ of his efforts, 
against all the wishes and hopes of his family 
and friends ; nothing more likely to restore 
peace and happy relations between. a mother 
and son, who, until Miss Maughan's affair had 
intervened, had been the most affectionate and 
united in the world. And this the supposed 
Lady Glengariff asked as an act of mercy as 
well as of justice ; as, if these troubles much 
longer continued, the writer was convinced her 
reason must give way finally, and the most 
dreadful consequences, both to her son and 
herself, might follow. The whole concluded 
with an earnest request to the recipient not to 
mention or make any allusion to the postscript, 
whatever might be the resolution she formed. 
But the countess's imitator wound up the 
entreaty with a threat that, if driven to so 
extreme a course, her ladyship would reveal to 
her son the information she had received on 
the subject of the prior attachment she 



236 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

had alluded to, so far, only in the vaguest 
terms ! 

Madeleine had little doubt that Emily 
Maughan would be driven, by the coincidence 
of Mr. Behringbright's presence at Glengariff 
Castle, to believe that, having penetrated the 
secret, either in vanity or kindness, he had 
communicated an inkling in a quarter where 
it had been appreciated. Indignation, shame, 
doubt would prevent Emily from venturing 
on a demand for explanations ; fear of being 
forced upon them would keep her at a distance. 

Madeleine was terrified, and yet well satis- 
fied with her work ; and now had only dex- 
terously to alter the date, transfer the un- 
broken seal to a fresh environment of black 
wax, blot out the original postmark, and fold 
the letters in an envelope to her mother, 
directed in the imitated handwriting. Then she 
took it herself to the post-office, and all seemed 
right a^ain. 

Nevertheless, Madeleine felt that she must 
no longer delay the advance of her grand at- 
tack ; she therefore gave her aunt to under- 
stand that she thought nothing could possibly 



MADELETNE GRAHAM. 237 

be so pleasant as to go on an excursion to O'Sul- 
livan's Fall on the Toomies Mountain, and 
have a picnic, on the return, on the beach below 
Grlengariff Castle. That was wooded to the 
water, and would offer a most delightful shade. 
The Sparrowgrasses, she was certain, would 
like to be of the party, especially if Mr. Faunt- 
leroy would come, with whom that long, awk- 
ward Helena was getting up a stupid flirtation. 
Old Ramshacklegal was not to be asked . he 
was such an odious old wretch ; but any of the 
other boarders that liked might join in the 
party. Perhaps the servants at the castle 
might be so obliging as to let them have a 
kettle of hot water for tea or punch. At all 
events, the people there would find no fault 
with a little harmless revel of the kind in the 
precincts of the castle grounds, everybody 
being so obliging about the lakes. 

Mrs. Bucktrout, who had of late noticed 
that young Grassgreen Sparrowgrass was going 
on in a very lackadaisical, sheepish manner 
with regard to her niece, adopted the notion 
that this affair was got up with a view to ad- 
vance that matter. She did all she was ordered, 



238 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

therefore, and did it well. The party was pro- 
posed to, and eagerly accepted by, all who were 
wished to be in the arrangement ; and " old 
Ramshacklegal" only learned what was toward 
when, returning from his habitual morning 
ride for an appetite for lunch (he rode for 
another for dinner), he found all the boats 
away from Prospect Palace, and the house 
nearly deserted of its customary inmates. He 
was very much offended in consequence, and 
swore a peal of oaths that frightened the waiter 
who heard them, and who respectfully sug- 
gested that the " gineral company" did not feel 
themselves " aqual" to the honour of his lord- 
ship's presence, and had therefore not ventured 
to ask it. The Marquis of Ramshacklegal was 
not comforted by that; he had outlived the 
relish of such unsubstantial sweetmeats. 

Madeleine, meanwhile, had formed a plan, 
which certainly did more credit to her inventive 
faculties and audacity of execution than even 
the extrication she had so recently contrived for 
herself from the difficulty of the intercepted 
correspondence. She watched her opportunity ; 
and as the boat in which she sat with her 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 239 

aunt, rowed by her uncle, young Sparrowgrass, 
and Darby O'Finn, neared the Glengariff shore, 
allowed herself to slip backwards overboard, in 
what she conceived to be very shallow water 
there. But the exceeding clearness and pel- 
lucid brightness of the lake at this point greatly 
deceived her ; and Madeleine Graham, who only 
projected a ruse, suddenly found herself sink- 
ing into what seemed, to her affrighted con- 
victions at the moment, a fathomless depth ! 
What a shriek she raised ! What shrieks 
arose on all sides of the gay party of the pleasure 
flotilla as the cry was heard, " Miss Graham 
has tumbled overboard !" Dr. Bucktrout was 
so stupified by alarm that he ran the boat a 
good way off the spot where his niece arose. 
Young Grassgreen Sparrowgrass yelled amain, 
but offered no assistance. Darby OTinn, like 
a true Irish waterman, could not swim j and, 
in the universal confusion that ensued, I am 
not at all sure that Madeleine Graham and her 
story might not have come to an abrupt con- 
clusion on the occasion, if the owner of a boat, 
which at this moment rounded below the castle 
cliffs . perceiving at a glance what had oc- 



240 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

curred . had not, with most admirable readiness 
and gallantly, leaped from his barque and 
dashed like a dolphin to the rescue. 

In a moment, this intrepid stranger had at- 
tained the luckless manoeuvress, sinking, for the 
second time, in the inauspicious fluid; the 
next, and he caught her by her long floating 
hair; another, and she was raised above the 
water on his left shoulder and arm, while a few 
stout strokes with the disengaged limbs placed 
both the rescuer and the object of his care on 
the rapid shelving of the beach. A slight 
further exertion placed them in safety on the 
shore, when Madeleine Graham, staring at her 
deliverer, but still not oblivious of her own in- 
tents and purposes, exclaimed : " Lord Glen- 
gariff ! . Oh, how much obliged to your lord- 
ship I am ! Do you think I might go up to 
the castle to dry my clothes ?" 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 241 



CHAPTEE XII. 

GLENGARIFF CASTLE. 

" Miss Graham ! And I was on my way 
to Killarney, to see if there were any letters 
from . from the young lady who resides as 
governess in your father's family, Miss Graham ! 
Of course . most certainly ! . my mother will 
be delighted to receive any person . to be of 

any imaginable service to Pray accept my 

arm . my fin, I think I may call it on the 
occasion . to the place, for I shall need drying 
myself certainly before I can go on to Kil- 
larney, or else they will think I have been on 
a visit to my ancestor at the bottom of the 
lake !" 

Such was Lord Glengariff's rather confused 
reply to the young lady's very natural request 
for hospitality . himself too much pleased and 
excited with the vision of a person who, in 

VOL. II. 1G 



242 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

whatever remote degree, was connected with 
the object of his attachment, to consider the 
abruptness and predetermination he might 
otherwise have noticed in it. Nay, a trans- 
porting thought occurred to him, on recog- 
nising Madeleine, that Emily had arrived in 
Killarney under her friendly . her all but 
sisterly convoy and accompaniment. And so, 
during a good portion of the speech above re- 
corded, he was anxiously searching, among the 
now nearing flotilla, for the beloved face and 
form. But nowhere recognising either, his 
lordship concluded by offering the indicated 
assistance, after running the water as well as 
he could off the drenched sleeve of his summer 
paletot. 

" Uncle and Aunt Bucktrout are with me . 
may they come too ? The rest are going up 
to the cascade on the Toomies for a picnic, and 
they can go on. They intend to lunch on 
broiled salmon, cooked on arbutus skewers, in 
the open air . it is said to give such a fine relish 
to the fish ! . and they will not care for my 
absence. If I had been drowned, I dare say 
the champagne would have tasted just as good 



MADELEINE GRAHAM, 243 

to most of them ; but uncle and aunt are very 
fond of me, and have brought me on an excur- 
sion with them to the lakes ; and I did so want 
to bring dear Emily with me too, but she would 
not come. She seems to have taken quite a 
hatred to Kerry ever since she was ordered to 
leave it by your mamma, Lord Grlengariff. 
She is such a proud girl, though no one 
would think her so, much, to look at her ; and 
she told me a thousand times, when I offered 
to bring her, that if you and all your family, 
and the great Ghost O'Donoghue himself, were 
to come crawling to her like worms all the way 
from Killarney to Belfast, to beg her to come 
back here, she never would, until she had 
trampled on all your prides and insolence 
into the very dust !" 

"Did Emily say so? . Emily Maughan!" 
inquired the young lord, with something of the 
incredulous iteration of Grarrick, when the 
aspirant to theatrical glories informed him he 
wished to make his debut in Hamlet . " What ! 
Hamlet the Dane ?" 

" That was her answer. But I suppose your 
lordship don't concern yourself much about the 
1G. 2 



244 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

airs a governess may give herself? I should 
think you could easily enough get another 
governess for your little sister P" 

" But she did not say she would never 
return to Glengariff? When she had properly 
let people see she had a spirit of her own, and 
could resent the way she was treated . as 
she had a perfect right," exclaimed Lord 
Glengariff. 

" Oh, no ! Emily did not say she would 
never return to GlengarifF ; and I think if she 
were let alone a bit in her obstinacy, she 
would come round much sooner. That is the 
way I should do if I were Lady Glengariff. 
Some people only get haughtier and more 
insolent the kinder and more considerately 
they are behaved to by other people. A beggar 
on horseback is bad enough ; but when you 
hold him the stirrup to mount, it is no wonder 
if he gives you a kick. . Dear aunt, there is no 
occasion for a scene. I am not a bit the worse, 
I think, except that I am wet through, skin 
and all; and Lord Glengariff (this gentleman is 
Lord Glengariff) has most kindly offered to 
let me go up to the castle, and dry myself at 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 245 

the housekeeper's fire, after, I am sure, saving 
my life . for none of you would have been of 
the slightest service." 

" Don't say that of me, Miss Graham," ex- 
claimed Mr. Fauntleroy, who had now arrived. 
"I, at all events, intended to die with you; 
for though I cannot swim, I was stripping off 
my coat to plunge in after you to the bottom, 
when " 

" When my Lord GlengarhT, who can swim 
. which rather diminishes his merit, of course 
. plunged in with his coat on, and saved me ! 
Well, all you go on to the cascade and the 
picnic, and if I possibly can I will join you 
very soon. At present I do feel very cold . all 
of a shiver ! Uncle, do you think I shall have 
a fever ?" 

Dr. Bucktrout looked at his niece, as much 
as to say that it entirely depended on her own 
will and pleasure ; but only ejaculated, " I 
hope not, my dear !" and felt her pulse. 

" Hang the picnic ! Let me help take you up 
to the castle, Miss Graham," said Mr. Faunt- 
leroy, for whom the walls of a castle, or any 
other place of stately abode, always had a mag- 



246 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

netic power. What inconveniences of lodging 
. what scorns of high-born hostesses . what fag 
of mind to achieve the witty and the amusing 
(and Mr. Vivian Fauntleroy was always ex- 
pected to be funny, wherever he was invited) 
had the poor man undergone, in his time, to be 
able to say at the Dolce-Far-Niente Club after- 
wards, " I was at the Earl of A.'s, or the Duke 
of X.'s, the other day, and we did so enjoy 
ourselves ! The selectest thing imaginable . 
hardly anybody else invited I" 

" Thank you ; but Miss Sparrowgrass would 
miss her beau, and I should not like to seem 
so very selfish and inconsiderate, as I suppose 
it would not be easy to get another in the 
place to-day ; and besides, my brave rescuer's 
support is that to be most depended upon, I 
am sure," said Madeleine, turning disdainfully 
away to the young earl from Mr. Fauntleroy, 
who for the last few days had been endeavour- 
ing to pique her into attention to himself by 
affecting to transfer his admiration and homage 
to the eldest Miss Sparrowgrass . The Miss, 
par excellence, as he called her, with satirical 
emphasis, sometimes, to any of the younger 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 247 

sisters, when out of hearing of their senior, to 
give them a notion that he thought her too 
old, but not them, in case he should think it 
amusing to flirt downwards among the sisters. 
And this indeed was a common trick with him, 
by which he prolonged his own diversion in 
families, and had the fun not unfrequently to 
set the female members together by the ears, 
in a style that contributed in various ways to 
the gratification of his vanity and lively sense 
of the ridiculous. 

Luckily, Miss Sparrowgrass did not overhear 
the sarcasm, though she now arrived at the 
head of the Sparrowgrass family, in an apparent 
agony of affectionate anxiety and condolence. 
" Oh, my dear Miss Graham, I am so glad to 
see you safe ! I thought for certain you were 
drowned, . and it made me so wretched ! 1 
quite screamed ; . you must have heard me as 
you were going down. I couldn't help it, I 
was so frightened, though it did no good of 
course. And poor Sparrowgrass ! You would 
have thought he was iu love with you instead 
of Lady Clara Fitzhaughtori . which lie is, and 
mamma quite approves of it, you know ; . lie 



24S MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

turned so white, and told me he felt quite sea- 
sick, and made such a clutch at Dr. Bucktrout's 
brandy-flask the moment he heard you were 
safe ! And your beautiful muslin spoilt, too, 
that everybody said you looked so charming 
in, in the morning ! What a mercy, still, it 
was not your pretty magenta silk, with the 
tremendous lot of little flounces . I almost 
think they would have sunk you . you wore the 
other day at the regatta on the Upper Lake I" 
Such were the congratulations Miss Graham 
received after her rescue from death by drown- 
ing. And they were sincere and well-meant 
in the way of the world, where none of us is 
perhaps of so very great importance when we 
drop out of it as some of us would fain believe 
ourselves while we are in it. Though I don't 
say exactly, either, that the picnic would have 
gone on if Miss Graham had been actuals- 
submerged so long as to cause the species of 
asphyxia which learned men have discovered 
to be produced by suffocation in the water. 
That would have been too strong 1 even for a 
group of Killarney tourists, sinking an hotel 
companion in that way j . and the champagne 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 249 

would have had to be drunk quietly and 
mournfully in the boats returning with the 
body ; and the glittering salmon in the baskets 
would have had to be cooked at home in the 
hotel kitchen instead of over a gipsy fire on a 
mountain side. Society has a decent regard for 
its members, and exhibits it on all very marked 
occasions of the kind in a manner that does 
the highest credit to its good feeling and sense 
of propriety. 

On the whole, Madeleine, leaning on the arm 
of her stately young rescuer, and followed 
duteously by uncle and aunt up a cleft in the 
hills, fashioned into a good though rather steep 
road to the castle above, had the additional 
consolation of thinking that she left the general 
company much annoyed at her absence. More 
especially as, in spite of some broad hints, 
Lord Glengariff extended no invitation to any 
one else, but seemed in reality lost in a gloomy 
abstraction, until Madeleine, renewing her 
shiver, begged him to lead on at once to the 
mansion, as she felt most uncomfortably chilled 
and depressed. Dripping then like a naiad 
and merman, the twain paired up on the path 



250 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

to Glengariff Castle, and very soon arrived on 
the terrace before it. 

Fortune still continued favourable to Made- 
leine at this conjuncture. She could scarcely 
have wished herself better luck than befell her 
in the fact that, precisely when she reached 
this elevation, Mr. Behringbright, having 
lunched with Lady GlengarhT, was doing 
himself the honour of escorting her ladyship 
on the very brief promenade she usually took 
on this terrace once a day, listening with wary 
attention to her alarmed conjectures on the 
causes of Emily Maughan's prolonged silence, 
without daring to allude to his own conclusions 
on the subject. But the dialogue had sent 
back his thoughts to Belfast, and revived with 
such distinctness and play of allurement and 
beauty the image of Sir Orange Graham's 
daughter, that he had come to the resolution, 
or the weakness, of crossing to Killarney, to 
ascertain whether the enchantress had arrived 
there, as soon as Lady Glengariff favoured him 
with a dismissal. And now what strange and 
mingled welcome and unwelcome vision arose 
before his actual gaze, in the persons of this 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 251 

youthful pair of streaming water-divinities 
emerging on the castle terrace from a private 
gateway, so abruptly from the deep glen below 
that it almost seemed as if they must have 
floated up direct from the lake into which the 
torrent of the 'Sullivan Falls discharged itself 
by that course ! Certainly Lord GlengarifT 
was a fitting representative of the great 
O'Donoghue of the Lakes at this moment. 
But could it really be Miss Madeleine Graham 
leaning thus familiarly on his arm, and with 
her light muslin garments hanging in as 
graceful welts around her faultless figure as 
ever sculptor fashioned on his decent water- 
nymph ? 

Mr. Behringbright could hardly believe his 
eyes ! But, in truth, people ought to distrust 
those organs of information much oftener than 
the common saying would authorize ; for what 
a beam of joyful recognition suddenly lighted 
up in Madeleine Graham's when, in her turn, 
she seemed to recognise an unexpected and most 
wished-for apparition in him ! 

" You here, Mr. Brownjohn? Oh, 1 feared 
. I thought, I mean . you must Long since 



252 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

have left Killarney, . never seeing or hearing 
anything about you, after you had so kindly 
promised 1" she exclaimed, darting her glance 
upon him, and pleased to see how he paled 
and quivered at the stroke. 

" Mr. Brownjohn !" exclaimed Lord Glen- 
gariif; and he was hastening to correct the 
mistake, if the subject of it had not prevented 
him. 

" Miss Graham knows me, in Belfast, as 
Miss Mauglians cousin, my lord, as I did 
myself the honour to introduce myself in Sir 
Orange Graham's family. Miss Graham knows 
me as Mr. Brownjohn, and it is unnecessary 
to repeat the introduction !" 

" Yes, Mr. Brownjohn ; neither mamma nor 
I can ever forget how kind you were to us 
in crossing the Channel; though being dear 
Emily's cousin gave you so much stronger a 
claim upon any return we could make, when 
we found that you were so. But oh, I owe 
more than ever I can possibly dream of repaying 
to your noble patron here, Lord Glengariff, 
who has rescued me, at the risk of his own 
life, from a watery grave !" 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 253 

" Nonsense, Miss Graham ! Pray don't men- 
tion it. I never ran the least risk of my life ; 
I can swim like a fish !" said Lord GlengarifF, 
blushing at the warmth of this eulogiuin, but 
considerably perplexed and annoyed by what 
he now understood of the pretended relation- 
ship and assumed name of Mr. Behringbright 
with Emily Maughan. " The truth is, mamma/* 
he added, playfully, in explanation to his 
mother, who looked much surprised, " this 
young lady fell accidentally out of a pleasure- 
boat just as I was crossing to Killarney in ours, 
and I picked her out of the water, and have 
brought her up to the house to dry her clothes, 
and prevent her taking cold on her return with 
her party." 

" Every attention shall be paid .... Miss 
Graham, I think you say, Ferdinand ?" ob- 
served Lady Glengariff, with singular coldness 
and austerity of manner, even considering her 
usually haughty and reserved demeanour to 
strangers. " Mrs. Macnab will see to it. Nora, 
procure Miss Graham a change of clothes from 
my wardrobe, and " 

" Oh no, your ladyship, I am not tall enough, 



254 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

and I do feel so ill and chilly. If I might 
just go to a bed for a few hours, while my own 
clothes dry !" ejaculated Madeleine, shivering 
now excessively. 

" Good heavens ! Miss Graham seems very 
ill ! Lady Grlengariff, for goodness' sake let 
an apartment be prepared for her at once !" 
said Mr. Behringbright, rallying from his 
surprise into another emotion of compassion 
and alarm. " Dr. Bucktrout, don't you think 
it much the best ?" 

" Much the best !" echoed that gentleman, 
who thought he perceived an intimation to 
that effect in his principal's eyes. 

It was so decided. Nora Macnab, summoned 
from the dining-room, where she sat seemingly 
quietly at work knitting woollen stockings for 
her half-dozen sons, but keeping her eyes on 
her unfortunate mistress in her promenade, 
undertook to convoy the young lady to a proper 
chamber. And thither she was about to retire, 
attended only by her aunt, Lord GrlengarirT 
evidently considering he had accomplished all 
that could be expected from his courtesy as 
master of the house. She went at first with a 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 255 

firm step, as if lier strength had quite returned. 
But on a sudden Madeleine wavered in her 
advance, gave an imploring, giddy look back 
on the group she was leaving, and would no 
doubt have fallen to the ground if Mr. Behring- 
bright, touched by an electric shock of sym- 
pathy, had not sprung forward at the moment 
and caught her round the waist, and supported 
her in both his arms while she fainted on his 
breast ! At least, her whole frame appeared 
to lose animation, her beautiful head sank upon 
his shoulder in the most approved broken-lily 
attitude ; and though her colour did not change, 
as her eyes closed, and she remained power- 
lessly drooping in that alarmed embrace, as 
Dr. Bucktrout immediately certified that she 
was insensible, I do not see why any suspicion 
of a feint rather than faint should arise in 
the innocent minds either of reader or 
biographer on the occasion. 

But whatever was the reality of the case, 
Mr. Behringbright took it all for gospel, and, 
almost swooning him self with anxiety, tender- 
ness, and satisfaction at being the mortal so 
blessed, carried the beauteous, exhausted form 



256 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

into the dining-room opening on the terrace, 
where every species of restorative was imme- 
diately called for and applied. With the 
happiest results in the end, . thanks as well to 
Dr. Bucktrout's skill, who held the pulse and 
prescribed the general treatment, while Mr. 
Behringbright officiated with almost laughable 
zeal and assiduity as principal executant of the 
iEsculapian decrees. He was rewarded, how- 
ever, poor man, by the exquisite expression of 
gratitude, confidence, and affection in those 
beauteous eyes, when, at last, they reopened 
and perceived who was holding Mrs. Buck- 
trout's vinaigrette to her nostrils . whose kind 
arm propped her head to the exact elevation 
ordained by Dr. Bucktrout on the sofa. 

Of course, after this nervous crisis, there 
could be no thought of transferring the lovely 
patient to any other place of quiet and repose 
than she had found, particularly as she ex- 
pressed a great wish to remain undisturbed 
where she was until she was sufficiently re- 
freshed to return to Killarney. "For," she 
repeatedly observed, witli a species of wildness 
and confusion in her manner, " I don't want 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 257 

to remain here, dear aunt ! It is not a proper 
place for me ! I have no right, no claim, 
though Mr. Brownjohn is so good as to assure 
me of his lordship's permission. Dear Mr. 
Brownj ohn, how very, very good you are to 
me ! How good you all are ! . his lordship too, 
after saving my life at the risk of his own !" 

Mr. Brownjohn was secretly touched and 
nattered with the notion that it was dread of 
the increasing interest the poor young creature 
felt in her casual steamer acquaintance that 
induced her now to desire to leave the place 
he inhabited. At the same time he was greatly 
annoyed at the exaggerated estimate she seemed 
to form of her obligations to the young earl, 
and otherwise was satisfied with the notion of 
her removal from a spot where so many persons 
knew him to be who he really was. It was so 
delicious to fancy himself liked and preferred 
for himself ! So did his waking dream lap the 
millionnaire in elysium ! 

The general result was that Madeleine, was 
left in the dining-room, on her sofa, to seek 
some interval of repose, attended only by her 
aunt and Mrs. Macnab. Lad}- GUengariff pre> 

VOL. II. 17 



258 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

vailed upon her son also to retire, and change 
his wet clothes. Dr. Bucktrout had lunch 
served him in a private apartment, awaiting 
news of his niece j and after the whole singu- 
lar episode, the countess and Mr. Behringbright 
found themselves once more promenading the 
terrace, and discussing the circumstance. The 
now rekindled elder lover, however, was not 
destined in the first instance to derive much 
satisfaction from his exchange of ideas on the 
subject with her ladyship. He had taken the 
opportunity at once to inform the countess, 
that the object of her hospitable kindness was 
a daughter of the highly respectable Belfast 
family where Emily Maughan had found an 
asylum, and to express his interest in her on 
that account, when she interrupted him with 
singular vivacity . " I hope you feel none on 
your own, Mr. Behringbright ? I hope not . 
and for your sake I" 

"For my sake, my dear Lady GrlengarifF? 
Pray explain yourself," he replied, rather con- 
sciously, but surprised too. 

"You will be vexed, and think my poor 
brain has gone off again on one of its flights . 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 259 

and it may be so," said Lady Glengariff, pass- 
ing her hand . a common gesture with her, 
and with other persons affected with her 
malady . over her brows. "But when this 
young girl sank into your arms, I saw her 
glow out all over with a curious phosphoric 

lustre, like a tainted fish in the dark 

And wherever you touched her . your hands, 
your shoulder, even your left cheek . which 
was once close to hers . I saw you crust out 
also with the same sort of bright leprosy ! 
Depend upon it, this is not a good young 
woman 1 Believe me that her soul is corrupt, 
almost to that degree which is moral death 
and putridity, and that you run the greatest 
risk of the contagion in approaching her I" 

" What a dreadful, what a horrible notion, 
Lady Glengariff! Your poor head must 
indeed be filled with horrors to imagine this ! 
If there be any light about Madeleine Graham, 
it is the light of youth, beauty, and innocence j 
and these appalling fancies convince me, more 
than the most unfortunate intervals you have 
suffered, that your mind is radically diseased | M 
replied Mr. Behringbright, with strong indig- 
17.2 



260 MADELEINE -GRAHAM. 

nation, even in his accents, and with a bitter- 
ness of expostulation which, remembering a 
moment after whom he was addressing, he as 
quickly repented. It was, however, a very 
dreadful idea ; and observers endowed with 
Lady GlengarifT's tremendous faculty . if she 
really possessed it . are not to be envied in 
this world, and do well to seclude themselves 
from general society. 

The topic was painful to both parties, and 
was then dropped. But it was destined to be 
an eventful morning: and hardly had Lady 
Glengariff heard, with considerable puzzle and 
scrutiny, Mr. Behringbright's request that he 
might always be addressed as Mr. Brownjohn 
before Miss Graham, having introduced him- 
self by that name in the family of Emily 
Maughan's protectors, ere Lord Glengariff 
made an abrupt and exceedingly startling re- 
appearance on the scene. He looked as pale 
as his own wraith, and held an open letter in 
his hand, which quivered so that the nervous 
shake of the paper plainly revealed his tremor. 
This he handed, without the utterance of a 
single word, to his mother. Nor did he speak 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 261 

to Mr. Behringbright, from whom, on the 
contrary, he tnrned with a strange expression 
of countenance, and, folding his arms, walked 
away to the battlemented edging of the terrace 
over the rocks on which the castle was based. 

Lady Grlengariff took the communication 
with eagerness. She recognised the hand- 
writing of Emily Maughan. 

In reality, it had happened with this letter as 
it often happens in such affairs. The watched 
pot never boils. What we expect with anxiety, 
look for at every turning, comes after all, in 
general, unexpectedly . very seldom indeed to 
the hour and instant of our expectation. 
This was the only day for the last ten that 
Lord Glengariif had not presented himself in 
person for the desired reply from Emily at the 
Killarney post-office ; and now it had come 
to him, when, for a short time, he had almost 
forgotten to expect it, in the regular course of 
delivery at the castle from that town. 

But the contents of that long-expected des- 
patch! Nothing good seemed implied in the 
young lover's aghast and pallid aspeet, in his 
abrupt gestures and sullen withdrawal. But 



262 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

when the countess had perused the letter with 
dazzled and staring orbs, she instinctively 
hurried to his side, as he stood, with his 
moodily-folded arms, frowning down the pre- 
cipitous heights of the Glengariif crags at the 
white stream of silver in the ravine below, 
that marked the descent of the O'Sullivan 
cataract. 

" My son ! my dear son ! think no more 
of her ! She prefers another . she avows it ! 
Eemember only what is due to the nobility 
of your birth, to the honour and pride of a 
man and a gentleman ! Dismiss her for ever 
from your thoughts !" 

And so saying, Lady Glengariff attempted 
soothingly to embrace her son ; but he repulsed 
her with an unwonted harshness . or at least 
withdrew himself from the maternal pressure. 

" ISTo, mother," he said, in a voice husky 
with emotion ; " you are the cause of the 
misery to which the remainder of my life 
must be abandoned. Do not mock me with 
this pretended kindness I" 

" You hear my son, Mr. Behringbright ! 
But tell me in what way can I be held 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 263 

accountable for the contents of this unhappy 
letter ?" said Lady Glengariff, extending the 
epistle to the family friend, who, alarmed by 
what he witnessed, had also drawn near. 

" Mr. Behringbright probably knows some 
one who is much more responsible than your 
ladyship in the matter !" resumed the young 
man, with extreme bitterness. 

Taking no notice of the implied accusation, 
though he felt it, Mr. Behringbright took the 
offered paper, and read what greatly surprised 
as well as greatly pained him. He had not 
expected, from a young woman of so much 
modesty and gentleness of character, so plain 
and almost defyingly resolute an avowal of an 
attachment for another, to the man who had 
placed his young heart so unreservedly at her 
disposal, as he now found in Emily Maughan's 
reply to Lord Glengariff's renewed and most 
passionate proffer of marriage, backed by his 
mother's assent and invitation ! 

Madeleine's insidious forged postscript had 
produced its full effect upon the intended 
victim. Her mind, already in a state of intense 
torture and irritation, was stung to a real mad- 



264 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

ness of disdain and grief by the conviction it 
forced upon her, that her unretumed love for 
Mr. Behringbright was not only known to him, 
but betrayed by him in the very wantonness 
of cruel power and scorn. What else could 
Emily Maughan imagine was meant by the 
intimation that the countess was aware she 
preferred another to her son ? Who else could 
she believe to have divined and divulged the 
secret but Mr. Behringbright ? He it must 
be who had offered her up a sacrifice to his 
own vanity ; or possibly merely with a view to 
get rid of a troublesome responsibility, and 
rescue his ward from a union with a person 
whom he himself (doubtless) so ineffably de- 
spised ! 

Emily's letter reflected the anguished and 
irritable state of her feelings on this consum- 
mation of her misfortunes. Suffering is nearly 
always unjust, and some strange principle in 
the human mind would seem to render it in 
some degree pleasant to us to make others 
share the ills we experience. I do not know 
that a row of persons in the toothache would 
be much consolation to each other ; but it is 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 2G5 

different, apparently, in moral affliction; and one 
would say that, although she permitted herself 
no other revenge on the mother, Emily had 
found a bitter alleviation for her own misery 
in heaping up that of the son. It is certain, 
at all events, that no refusal could be more 
heartrendingly explicit . no statement of pre- 
ference for another could be expressed with 
more unmistakable resolve and precision . than 
in this fatal and decisive epistle. Lord Glen- 
gariff could no longer doubt that the fate of 
his first and, as he believed it, only love was 
sealed ! 

In all other respects, Emily had more than 
observed the supposed injunctions and en- 
treaties of the false postscript. She made no 
allusion to having received them, but desired 
in conclusion, with extreme coldness, to have 
her respectful acknowledgments of her lady- 
ship's condescension and kindness duly pre- 
sented, with her regrets that she could not 
avail herself of her kind recall and generous 
proffers. 

The only sort of explicitness in which Emily 
failed was precisely the one that would huvc 



266 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

been disadvantageous to the plans of her secret 
foe. She gave no sign that she knew or sus- 
pected that this preferred " other" was Mr. 
Behringbright. She could not bring herself 
to acknowledge her feeling of his unkind and 
unhandsome conduct towards her in this in- 
stance by doing so ; not to mention the 
powerful restraints of female pride, and the 
indignation of a pureminded woman, who be- 
lieves that her innermost sentiments have been 
profaned by the cruel boasts of a traitor. 

Lord GrlengarifF himself needed no inter- 
preter of the reticence. " She gives a very 
good reason, does she not, for refusal, Mr. 
Behringbright ? " he observed, bitterly, when 
that gentleman, having finished his perusal, 
looked inquiringly towards him. " She loves 
another! . and who can that other be, do you 
think now, Mr. Behringbright ? " 

Mr. Behringbright felt that he couldno longer 
stand this sort of thing ; that he really ought 
not, considering that he had only to pronounce 
a word to exonerate himself from an unjust 
and, he began now almost to feel it, dishonour- 
ing and degrading suspicion. Moreover, it 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 267 

occurred to him that, since the blow was struck, 
it would be better to make it a decisive one, 
mortal to hope, than to haggle on with a series 
of lesser wounds, under which the victim could 
only slowly and with protracted suffering 
bleed to death. 

" Well, I do think I know who that other 
is, Lord Glengariff," he replied, sedately, on 
these considerations ; " and I should say you 
will be satisfied of the reality and hopelessness 
of Emily Maughan's preference for another, 
when I tell you it is not the rich Behringbright, 
whose pretensions to external rivalry you might 
justly hold in doubt and contempt, but a 
penniless young French adventurer, who seems 
endowed with the kind of exterior women 
admire, whom she prefers to you and all man- 
kind besides ! . The very man, in short, whom 
you nearly threw into the pit at the Belfast 
Theatre ; which is, in all probability, one of 
the reasons of the extreme hardness and insen- 
sibility to the pain she inflicts visible in every 
line of this epistle. 

Lord Glengariff stared, as if stupefied for a 
moment, at the speaker. 



268 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

"How do you know this for certain? . 
how do you know it ? Good Heaven 1 is this 
the explanation of all your lugubrious hints 
and warnings ? Why did you not speak out 
at once ? Why need you have prolonged my 
misery so ineffably ? " 

" You would not have believed me on my 
unsupported statements. It is the explana- 
tion of my attempts to make you aware of the 
baseless quality of your expectations. But to 
declare by what means I became possessed of 
a secret which was confided to me under pro- 
mise of preserving it one/' Mr. Behringbright 
concluded, reflecting how uncomfortable it 
would be for Miss Graham to be brought into 
the affair while under that roof, " you must 
excuse me, Lord Glengariff ! And, indeed, I 
may say that nothing but the confirmation 
offered by the refusal you have received satis- 
fies me that I have been truly informed, and 
that Emily Maughan preserves at least so much 
of the natural goodness and magnanimity of 
her character as to persevere in the senseless 
preference she has formed for a contemptible, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 269 

swaggering fop, in spite of the splendid allure- 
ments offered in your alliance ! " 

There was a short pause. 

" Well, I suppose she is in the right," said 
Lord Glengariff ; then, with a smile, that pro- 
bably concealed a much sharper agony than 
tears could have expressed : " She is in the 
right, and you are in the right, Mr. Behring- 
bright . and my mother was in the right 1 
But nothing but her preference for ... a tea- 
grocer's lad, do you say the fellow is ? . could 
have set me all right again, too ! Henceforth 
I shant trouble much more about these an^el- 
seeming persons ; I shall take up with mere 
mortals, and amuse myself accordingly. And, 
apropos, that sort of charming creature . 
which, after all, are the only sort people who 
feel they shant live for ever themselves ought 

to go a-gadding after You remember 

how that poor Tithonus was served, that 
couldn't die and was always old, in conse- 
quence of the stupid goddess in love with 
him asking immortality for him, and forget- 
ting to ask to keep him as young as ever for 



270 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

ever What am I talking about ? . I 

wonder, I say, how that delightful Miss 
Graham is getting on by this time ? . Mother, 
shall we go and inquire ? " 

Mr. Behringbright did not like this flighty 
turn in the tune at all; but what could he 
say? Nothing . although he felt so much 
annoyed and offended that he remained 
behind; while the countess, rejoiced to find 
her son take the affair so much more lightly 
than she had thought probable, proceeded on 
the errand with him. Mr. Behringbright, 
however, learned very shortly after, with a 
different species of concern, that Dr. Bucktrout 
pronounced his niece excessively feverish and 
excited, and had begged it as a favour . which 
could not possibly, under the circumstances, 
be refused . that she might be allowed a bed 
for the night in the castle. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 271 



CHAPTER XIII. 

ARMIDA IN THE CAMP OF THE CHRISTIANS. 

Miss Graham, I am happy to report, was 
much better on the following day. . She was 
even able to join the family dinner-party, and 
spend the evening with Lady GlengarifF and 
her son, when she was additionally favoured 
by a special invitation from the countess 
to remain at the castle for another day, 
or even two or three . until, in short, her 
strength and nerves were completely restored 
from the shock of the immersion she had 
suffered. And this was the kinder on her 
ladyship's part, since . as has been seen . she 
had taken no very particular fancy herself to 
the youthful visitant. But her son had made 
it his business to request her to exhibit this 
mark of civility ; and Lady Glengariff was 
but too glad to do anything that seemed likely 
to soothe and divert his mind. And it ap- 



272 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

peared, from the attentions lie paid Miss 
Graham, that she interested him. 

Not that Lady Glengariff wished or appre- 
hended that these would prove more than the 
promptings of a momentary caprice. It ap- 
peared, indeed, impossible to her, that a young 
man who had loved Emily Maughan, and with 
such passion and devotion, could, by any 
species of imaginative fascination, be induced 
to transfer his affection to a girl who was in 
almost all respects her exact opposite j . dark 
hair, dark eyes, a rich and glowing complexion, 
a manner sparkling with coquetry and allure- 
ment ; nothing at all of the repose and virgin 
womanliness of withdrawal which constituted 
the main charm and loveliness of Emily's 
demeanour, and matched well with her fair 
and maidenly presence and person. 

The opinion did not, however, seem so ex- 
tremely well founded to Mr. Behringbright, 
who, searching into his man's heart, almost 
believed he found there that a passion dis- 
appointed in its object turns with impatience 
and disgust from the mockery of a repetition of 
its lost illusions, or only seeks their renewal 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 273 

under forms and conditions disassociated from 
the original cheats. Men's first and second 
wives, for example . to select from those 
greatest of all disappointments achieved in 
success . I think I have observed, seldom 
exhibit any marked resemblance, either of per- 
son or character. And though a rejected 
lover's case be in some respects about the 
reverse of an inconsolable widower's, still there 
are points in common that Mr. Behringb right 
appreciated, and which drove him to the con- 
clusion that there was no safety in the fact 
that Madeleine Graham and Emily Maughan 
were young women very like reverses of each 
other in almost every mental and corporeal 
attribute. 

What increased Mr. Behringbright's an- 
noyance and apprehensions in the affair was, 
that he was not present at the dinner Miss 
Graham was enabled to partake of on declaring 
her convalescence, and consequently knew not 
exactly how things went on at it. Lord 
GlengariiT himself satirically pointed out to 
him, that the young lady would be much sur- 
prised if she found a person in the rank it had 

VOL. II. 18 



274 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

pleased him to make the acquaintance of the 
Graham family, . who seemed to have only 
come on an errand from his master to a noble- 
man's residence, . placed at the table, and 
treated on an equality with the family and 
their guests. George Cocker could not deny 
the incongruity ; . nay, anxious more than 
ever to sustain his incognito, he had resolved 
to excuse himself on this very ground when 
the occasion should arise. But Lord Glen- 
gariff's anticipation and seeming urgency in 
the matter greatly annoyed and disquieted 
him. 

His absence from the party, however (the 
reasons of which it is probable Madeleine 
perfectly divined), contributed to a result that 
relieved him. He learned from Mr. Molloy, 
the house-steward, that a carriage had 
been ordered for the evening, to convey the 
"drowned young lady" home to her hotel, 
and that she had declined the countess's invi- 
tation to remain as much longer as she could 
make it convenient at the castle . " And 
though my lord himself asked it as the biggest 
favour in life," the puzzled official added. 



MADELEINE CxRAHAM. 275 

The truth is, Madeleine Graham, acting 
under the light of her own clear intellectuals 
and full private information on the subject, 
was not for a moment the dupe of the young 
lord's sudden outbreak of gallantry towards 
her. Else she might have fallen into a great 
error ; and, stimulated besides by her natural 
spirit of coquetry, might have entered on the 
perilous process of making herself a seat 
between two stools. 

I have no doubt in my own mind that she 
would have preferred Lord GrlengarifF to Mr. 
Behringbright, in himself. He was by far the 
handsomer and younger man . ranked higher 
in society, although Madeleine did not value 
rank at much. Indeed, no philosopher of the 
most republican school did ever, it is likely, 
cherish so real and genuine a contempt for the 
prejudices of society, as regarded such mere 
external and adventitious claims to distinction. 
And Lord Glengariff was of very competent 
revenue, though not by any means so rich as 
the elder candidate for favour. But with all 
these pleas in his lordship's behalf, there was 
one great and saving drawback. Madeleine 



18. 



276' MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

was thoroughly in the secret of that affectation 
of a sudden fascination and enthralment feigned 
by Lord Glengariff, and knew that it was 
merely a reaction of despair and disdain at the 
treatment he must by this time have sustained 
from Emily Maughan ; for she calculated to 
an hour when the reply would arrive at Glen- 
gariff, and the quotient had been one of her 
motives to resolve to place herself there, in 
readiness to watch over the emergency, at the 
particular time she did. Her expressions to 
her deliverer on the subject were part of the 
plan. No considerations sufficed now to turn 
her from the precipitous steps in point of fact 
forced upon her by her audacious original act 
of treason against Emily Maughan. 

She built no hopes, therefore, on Lord Glen- 
gariff's proceedings, nor dreamed of changing 
her course of action on so fitful and unsub- 
stantial a gale of opportunity. Contrariwise, 
the overacted and delusive scorn of the pre- 
tence only increased her irritation against its 
prompting cause. And this . since she had 
injured Emily Maughan so deeply and peril- 
ously . was last deepening into as strong a 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 277 

feeling of hatred and dread as a bosom all 
whose impulses began and ended in self could 
be supposed capable of. But, in truth, the 
men and women who are thoroughly of our 
and their age neither love nor hate to any ex- 
traordinary excess, but make their feelings of 
all kinds subordinate exclusively to their 
interests. Madeleine perceived a means to 
advance her own ends in Lord Grlengariff's 
move, but otherwise it did not much distract 
her attention. Even to annoy Emily with the 
notion of her rejected lover's speedy forgetting 
and transfer of affection . which was most 
likely his lordship's fevered, pettish motive . 
had only a slight and occasional attraction for 
her. 

Thus, on full deliberation, Madeleine deter- 
mined to declare herself convalescent on the 
next morning after the accident. What use 
was there, in the first place, to lie in bed in a 
remote chamber in an old castle, attended by 
an old woman, and occasionally visited in state 
by a countess whose son she did not intend 
to marry, and who might ask inconvenient 
questions? . for Madeleine never liked to 



278 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

hazard more falsehood than was absolutely 
necessary for her purposes. No one else was 
likely to enter a young lady's sick-room. The 
purpose of her visit to the castle seemed ac- 
complished, if there was any credit to be placed 
in Mr. Behringbright's enamoured looks . in 
the perseverance with which Mr. Brownjoltn 
asked, hour by hour, after her progress towards 
recovery ! If there was any use in exhibiting 
the languid, interesting airs of an invalid, that 
could be done. "Wherever she now retired, 
Armida felt she should be followed. At the 
same time she could give a signal proof how 
little the homage with which she was treated 
by the master of GrlengarifT Castle had tempta- 
tion for so true and generous a soul ! She had, 
therefore, the sagacity and firmness to refuse 
the very kind invitation of the countess to 
remain until her strength was quite restored, 
which was pressingly seconded by her son. 
" A million, million thanks, dear Lady Grlen- 
garifT, and my Lord !" she said, her eyes filling 
with tears of gratitude as she refused, in the 
hearing of Mr. Molloy and Nora Macnab. 
" But, in spite of all your goodness, I do not 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 279 

feel at home in great mansions, among persons 
so superior in rank to myself. I need rest and 
quiet above all things, and I shall find them 
best at the hotel where we are staying. Uncle 
himself recommended it, who saw how much 
better I was when he left me last night to tell 
them not to be alarmed at Prospect Palace. 
Dear aunt is quite frightened and unhappy at 
the idea of mamma and papa hearing of the 
accident. Only, before I w T ent, I should like to 
thank that kind Mr. Brownjohn for the 
extreme care and goodness aunt says he 
showed for me when I was so ill yesterday . 
unless he has started for London again . 
has he ?" 

No : Mr. Brownjohn was still at Glengariff, 
having only just ascertained that his business 
there must be a failure. 

" Your devoted governess, Miss Emily Mau- 
ghan . Mr. Brownjohn's cousin . refuses to 
return to us," said Lady Glengariff, with a 
spasmodic smile. 

" I was afraid so . afraid for dear Emily's 
own sake. But people who have sweethearts 
. especially we stupid young girls . don't 



280 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

like to leave the places where they live," said 
Madeleine, quite artlessly. 

The countess looked at her son with a 
mixture of indignation in her compassion ; 
who started up and exclaimed . 

" Very well, Miss Graham ! If you will go, I 
will be your attendant cavalier back to your 
uncle's charge ! You very pretty young ladies 
require looking after !" and then he burst into 
a discordant, apparently causeless laugh, and 
was silent for a good time after. 

That same evening, accordingly, Miss 
Graham, persisting in her arrangement, left 
G-lengarifF, in the family carriage, for Prospect 
Palace, Killarney, under the young earl's 
convoy ; not, however, until she had seen and 
most cordially thanked Mr. Broinijohn for all 
his goodness to her . that gentleman being 
informed of her particular wish to do so by 
Mr. Molloy. 

He came . a good deal embarrassed, and 
pleased, and vexed, almost equally, to find she 
was quitting such a dangerous society, in it ! 
.to the castle gate, where Lord GTlengariff 
awaited to hand her into the vehicle. He was 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 281 

a witness of her really earnest entreaty to be 
allowed to dispense with the needless trouble 
his lordship was giving himself in escorting 
her back, and had even the happiness to hear 
her say, " If any one is necessary, I am sure 
Mr. Broivnjohti will kindly go with me !" And 
this expression was accompanied with a look, 
almost of entreaty, that went to his heart, and 
compelled him to say, . ' . 

" His lordship desires the honour, Miss 
Graham ; but I trust I shall see you again if 
you remain any longer on the lakes. I intend 
a pedestrian tour of a few days among them/' 

What a bright expression of assent shone up 
over the enchantress's features as she replied, 
" Oh, how glad you make me ! We are not 
going yet. We have seen nothing yet . almost 
. and my uncle has not half tired of his fishing 1" 

Mr. Behringbright was a doomed man 
from that hour . and he knew it. 

It is my impression that Lord Glengariff 's 
absence from the castle, on the occasion referred 
to, appeared most unusually long to his guest ; 
but, in reality, he did not return till late in the 
evening . hours after he easily might have 



282 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

made his reappearance. He found Mr. 
Behringbright sitting up for him, trying hard 
to make believe he was reading a book, which 
was certainly open in his hands, . " The CoL- 
legians" of poor Gerald Griffin ; which, like 
most works of original genius, was so little 
appreciated in that form that a bustling 
charlatan almost carried off the honours of the 
invention, and a consequent fortune, before 
its real author was well cold in his neglected 
grave . under the takingly incomprehensible 
rechristening of " The Colleen Bawn." 

" Waiting for me, Mr. Behringbright?" said 
Lord GlengarifY, with a caustic smile. " That 
fascinating young creature ! . I really could not 
tear myself away from her society before it 
became almost rudely late . and Dr. Bucktrout 
would have me stay supper with them. He's 
a jolly old fellow in his way, and would drink 
our three lakes dry if they were milk punch ! 
I shall be often over in Killarney now ; becau>e 
' I've nothing else to do,' as the song says." 

" And / am going to make Killarney my 
head quarters for a few days' wanderings," 
replied Mr. Behringbright, as carelessly as he 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 283 

could manage it ; " and then I shall go home. 
I am very glad to see how quietly and like a 
sensible young fellow you take that absurd 
girl's refusal, Ferdinand; and I feel I can 
comfortably leave you to your mother's consola- 
tions. I have explained to her that my affairs 
no longer allow me to remain away . have 
taken my farewell of her . and did not betake 
myself to bed till you came home, in order to 
do the same to you, because I shall be off very 
early in the morning." 

" Oh, you are going to stay a few days at 
Killarney, are you, Mr. Behringbright?" re- 
turned the young earl, with a somewhat lurid 
expression rising in his features. " Good . 
very good ! You will then be a witness 
how very sensibly I mean to behave myself 
on this occasion. Moore recommends it, you 
know, . 

1 When we are far from the lips that we love, 
We have but to make love to the lips we are near P 

I shall amuse myself . but not in the mad way 
I went on at Belfast . like a steady, old, know- 
ing sinner you know, on the sly ! . no parade and 



284 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

noise. You don't quite understand me now, I 
dare say; but you will before we have done 
witb eacli other !" 

Mr. Behringbright did not understand; . 
how should he ? . at least he said he did not, 
though he coloured rather vehemently. " How- 
ever, it don't matter," he concluded, taking up 
his bed-candle. " I suppose Dr. Bucktrqut's 
punch has been good . particularly strong, at 
all events ! I wish you a good-night, Grlen- 
gariff, and no headache in the morning." 

" Thank you," replied the earl, drily. 
" You are always very good to me, Mr. Beh- 
ringbright ; the only misfortune is, that I have 
taken a fancy you are not quite such a saint as 
you give yourself out to be at present ! Didn't 
they say you spent a little fortune on that 
Incognita, and amused yourself by making her 
the jest of the town? And what is the mean- 
ing of your going to Killarney now, incog., 
after this splendid girl ?" 

" I conceive that I owe no account to you, 
at least, Lord GlengarirT!" said Mr. Behring- 
bright, with indignation. 

" I beg your pardon, sir ; haven't you read in 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 285 

at least a hundred romances that when a young 
fellow saves a girl's life, he always falls in love 
with her afterwards, and protects her against 
everybody else that wants to devour her ?" 

"Good night, Lord Glengariff! You rave 
as usual ; but I hope the morning will see you 
restored to your sober senses !" 

So saying, the ex-guardian arose, and left 
the apartment with an air of offended dignity. 

" All very fine !" mused Lord Glengariff, left 
alone. " But 111 watch the old boy's game, 
and see what he is after ! If he is capable of 
bad designs on this girl, who knows what may 
be the real state of the affair between him and 
Emily ? I don't half believe this story of the 
Frenchman ; it don't seem likely in the least ! 
But I'll know the truth of the whole affair 
before long ; and if he has been cheating me . 
if he has wronged Emily, and traduced her 
with another . I will have his heart's blood, if 
he were twenty times my father's friend, and 
my own guardian ! And when I questioned 
this knowing girl, who is Emily's friend and 
confidante, she declared she was convinced, 
whatever attachment that poor dear girl had 



236 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

formed, . those were her very words, . that it 
was, for some reason or other, a profoundly un- 
happy one ! Well, I have heard these honest- 
seeming fellows are often enough the worst at 
heart ! But he wont do me so easily as 
perhaps he thinks !" 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 287 



CHAPTEE XIV. 



HASCHISCH. 



Landing early the next morning at Killamey, 
Mr. Behringbriglit took up his quarters at an 
obscure inn a little out of the town, as befitted 
a traveller of exceedingly moderate pretensions, 
when on his own hook ; and from this point 
he began (he almost persuaded himself) to 
study his health, and a taste for fine scenery 
he could conscientiously believe he possessed, 
though perhaps it occasionally bored him a 
little, by excursions on and around the lakes. 

Of course, he soon fell in with the Buck- 
trout party. They were more abroad even 
than other tourists, in consequence of the 
doctor's passion for boating and fishing. The 
ladies did not care for fishing, but they very 
much enjoyed the air and water, and could 
take their books and crochet- work with them 



288 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

quite delightfully, without attending to the 
doctor. Fish do not scream, nor worms, nor 
flies ; and consequently there is nothing to 
annoy the tenderest heart in the recreation, 
earned on by others. Madeleine's bright- green 
parasol once seen always marked out her lo- 
cality on the lake, and nothing was easier 
than for anybody else's boat to row accidentally 
that way. Young Sparrowgrass's often did, 
though his mother and sisters would have pre- 
ferred another direction, mostly. But the 
heir-general had taken a strange fit of obsti- 
nacy on water, and would follow his own 
fancies in this respect. Mr. Behringbright's 
seemed to set off of its own accord towards the 
bright-green pavilionette on the shining waves. 
At last Darby O'Finn, whom he hired as his 
boatman en permanence, ceased in a few days, 
with national tact, to ask the question, and 
his daughter steered quite naturally towards 
it. Miss Graham was there usually to be 
discerned, reclining gracefully, with an apolo- 
getical book in her hand, in the stern, on a 
heap of cloaks and cushions, in the most 
charmingly simple morning costumes that art 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 289 

could devise. Chiefly white, I think, or deli- 
cately flowered ; mostly with a little nosegay, 
carelessly gathered, and still more carelessly 
set in her hosom ; a plaid bunions cast in har- 
monious folds of softly variegated emerald 
tints around her ; and her beautiful complexion 
and sparkling eyes showing to the greatest ad- 
vantage, from the shade of her brown sailor's hat, 
with its flutter of scarlet ribands in the breeze. 

Mr. Behringbright would not have grudged, 
if he had had all the trouble of the rowing to do 
himself, any amount of hard work that way to 
secure the reward of the brilliant glance of 
pleasure . the captivating welcome which shone 
up in the heightened roses of the syren's cheek, 
on the first occasion they thus renewed their 
acquaintance. Everybody, in fact, was de- 
lighted to see him. Mrs. Bucktrout . vaguely 
understanding he was wanted for some purpose 
of her niece, though she did not well see what 
. relaxed from her usual mummylike rigidity 
over a bitter tract . to greet him. The doctor, 
indeed, fought rather shy of him at first, 
thinking him poor, and therefore not at all 
understanding what on earth his niece could 

VOL. II. 19 



290 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

mean by looking so pleased to recognise such 
a shabbily-dressed person. But he soon took 
his cue also, . fancied, perhaps, that even this 
unlikely individual, if no one else was to be 
had, was to be played off against young Spar- 
rowgrass. He did not puzzle his brain, how- 
ever, much about the matter, but did, as usual, 
as his niece seemed to wish him to do : . 
concealed his vexation at having his lines dis- 
turbed ; readily gave permission to his wife 
and Madeleine to change from his boat into 
Mr. Behringbright's, and be rowed elsewhere ; 
kindly seconded Mrs. Bucktrout's invitation to 
the civil stranger, on their return, to come and 
see them at their hotel ; and when Mr. Beh- 
ringbright joined them that same evening 
there, expanded himself into hospitality and 
sociability. Nay, Mrs. Bucktrout overcame 
an intense horror she had of cards, which she 
wontedly styled " leaves of the devil's book," 
and took a hand at whist, on the visitor de- 
claring himself partial to the game. And, 
indeed, it seemed a most excellent pretext for 
a frequent renewal of the visit, and nothing 
could be pleasanter than to play at any kind 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 291 

of game with, such a bright and vivacious 
partner as Madeleine Graham proved, and who 
seasoned almost every commonplace of the 
affair with a splendid glance, or an intoxicating 
smile, or a brilliant word, or a still more over- 
powering little, half-checked sigh. 

After their niece's accident, the Bucktrouts 
had thought it best to secure her quiet by 
taking a private apartment in Prospect Palace. 
But still it was fortunate for the preservation 
of Mr. Behringbright's incognito that Vivian 
Fauntleroy, excessively out of humour at Miss 
Graham's impolite demeanour towards him 
when drowning, had determined to cut her; 
more especially as his great patron, the mar- 
quis, likewise disgusted at his exclusion from 
the picnic, declared the Bucktrouts were a low 
set, and that he would have nothing more to 
do with them. This pair of worthies, there- 
fore, retired from general circulation in the 
hotel ; but, speedily growing weary of billiards, 
brandy and water, cigars, and one another's 
lies about women and horses, voted Killarney 
a bore and a humbug, and set off together for 
Baden-Baden. 

19.2 



292 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Vivian borrowed the necessary cash for his 
expenses (the marquis never lent to anybody, 
else he would, he said, have relaxed the rule in 
Mr. Fauntleroy's favour) from young Mr. 
Sparrowgrass, having forgotten to bring his 
own cheque-book with him . on the under- 
standing, however, that he was a person who 
possessed the most influential introductions in 
London, and would be happy to be of service 
to any young gentleman who desired to make 
the acquaintance of the great world there. 
And young Mr. Sparrowgrass was the more 
readily induced to believe this, as his sister 
Helena was thoroughly persuaded she had 
made a conquest of Mr. Fauntleroy at the pic- 
nic, and should hear a good deal more about it 
in town, in case she did not effect any other 
more to her mind before returning there. And 
all the Sparrowgrasses thought it would be a 
first-rate thing if they could get Helena married. 
She was growing cross in temper, and teas so 
tall and awkward ! her second sister, Matilda . 
who was a little less long, and a good deal more 
graceful, in her own opinion . often declared. 

Everything conspired for Mr. Behring- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 293 

briglit's destruction. Not only the artifice and 
fascination of the sorceress who had undertaken 
his entanglement, there was also the balmily- 
enervating influence of the summer climate of 
the Killarney lakes ; the witchery of the en- 
chanting scenery ; the excitement and gaiety 
of a holiday population . music and pleasure 
on all sides. And to complete the poor mil- 
lionnaire's dangers, Lord Grlengariff persisted in 
introducing the potent element, in love affairs, 
of jealousy. 

However the men deciy the use of this 
agency, the women have in all ages understood 
its powerful efficacy ; and, wherever they could, 
have mingled the ingredient, anything short 
of explosion, which they seldom like or desire, 
in their love-powder. And this young noble- 
man appeared on the new scene almost as soon 
as Mr. Behringbright . with a splendid bouquet 
of flowers from the Glengariff conservatories 
in his hand, the principal snowy camelia being 
matched in the button-hole over his heart, and 
a gallant request in his mouth, that lie might 
be allowed to do the honours of his native 
lakes to the fair visitor whom he had rescued 



294 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

from their depths. How was it possible to 
refuse ? . as Madeleine herself had pathetically 
asked Mr. Behringbright, on casually mention- 
ing the circumstance to him. Although it 
was such nonsense for a grand young nobleman 
like that to take such notice of plain, quiet 
people like them ! People would be sure to 
wonder at it ; . only it would have looked so 
ungrateful and uncivil to refuse ! 

Mr. Behringbright thus found himself fairly 
pitted against a splendid competitor, who, re- 
versing the young lord's suspicions of himself, 
he imagined might really have transferred his 
volatile affections to so superior a charmer, 
and to be as capable of honourable intentions 
towards the new object as he had been to his 
former idolatry. 

Of course this notion stimulated Mr. Beh- 
ringbright's own natural slowness of purpose, 
and in other ways greatly contributed to hasten 
on the catastrophe. On the one hand, Made- 
leine could alarm him with the apprehension of 
a rival so formidable in every outward aspect ; 
on the other, she could natter his innermost 
feelings and aspirations with the conviction 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 295 

that lie was himself preferred in the manner 
he had always most desired. Preferred for 
himself alone, since he still sustained the infe- 
rior social character he had originally assumed ; 
thoroughly humoured in the caprice by Lord 
Glengariff, who, on the contrary, displayed all 
the advantages of his own position in even 
glaring and exaggerated lights. Preferred to 
a young, handsome, wealthy nobleman ! What 
more was necessary to remove the once- impass- 
able Balkan of Mr. Behringbright's incredulity 
in the sex from Madeleine's path ? 

This eminent professoress of the art of 
marrying well (our age has made it one, in 
a very different sense from the fancies of 
romancers) set about her work in quite a 
businesslike, adept style. She had learnt a 
good deal, even in her ridiculous love affair 
with the Frenchman, as she now considered it. 
It certainly saves a great deal of hesitation 
and bungling when people know what they 
are about from experience. The human heart 
is as complex an instrument to play on as any 
cornet-a-pistons in the world, and only prac- 
tised hands can avoid making disagreeable 



296 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

ear-rending false notes upon it. As to joining 
in the harmony of the orchestral movements 
to which the cheats and phantom shows of 
William Shakspere's great stage of the world 
are set, it is entirely out of the question for 
the unpractised. And this is the only way I 
have ever been able to account to myself for 
the superior success often witnessed in husband- 
catching on the part of widows over unmarried 
females. 

It was a kind of problem Madeleine had 
placed before her, and she proceeded with 
almost the calmness and precision of a mathe- 
matician to obtain her results. Love and 
jealousy were her sines and cosines for the 
operation . her "Let A B and C represent 
so-and-so, and the quotient is so-and-so." She 
had to persuade Mr. Behringbright that she 
loved him, in the first place : a difficult pro- 
cess with a man who had learned caution in a 
school where the lash welts so deeply into the 
flesh, and leaves such life-long scores, . who 
had little or no personal vanity of any sort, . 
who was not even proud of his riches, but 
knew their vanity and nothingness for happi- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 297 

ness. Given a good, strong leverage-point of 
vanity, and you may lift the heaviest idio- 
syncrasies ! But Mr. Behringbright was ex- 
tremely far from believing in himself at all : 
no art could have persuaded him that he was 
handsome, or young, or sprightly, or witty. 
He was thoroughly aware that he could neither 
sing, nor dance, nor make poetry ; he had no 
moustaches, no matchlessly- flowing beard to 
put faith in. How was such a man to be 
cajoled? 

The enchantress knew but too well that the 
most efficacious of love-philtres is . love ! So 
divine a nectar love is, that even the least art- 
fully-compounded and deleterious imitations, 
so often commended to the human lip, find a 
ready acceptance, ever so slightly flavoured 
with the true honey of Hymettus. 

But hers was a most subtly- compounded 
potion, it cannot be denied. None but the 
gods themselves could have distinguished it 
from their proper amber drink ! How, then, 
should Mr. Behringbright . a person who I 
have never pretended to be distinguished by 
any intensity of penetration into the mysteries 



298 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

of women's natures ; who remembered that 
his wife had been dull in intellect, coarsely 
fashioned in person, impatient, irascible, inso- 
lent, and yet had been one of the worst of 
women ? Was it not reasonable, then, to think 
that a girl of bright wit, endowed with a 
beautiful person, smiling, tender, submissive 
as a cooing dove, who seemed to love him so 
well, might really do so, and thus, in that 
respect also, reverse that worthless divorcees 
characteristics ? 

Nay, I am not sure that Madeleine really 
did not take some kind of liking and affection 
for Mr. Behringbright while she was thus en- 
gaged in his enthralment. I almost think she 
did, and was sorry at times that she had so 
fatally compromised herself with another man 
as to be obliged to do so many wicked things . 
to act such a vile, false, unwomanly part . to 
secure this rich husband. I know she had her 
qualms of hesitation and relenting . of remorse, 
perchance . as she grew to comprehend what 
an honest, manly-hearted, credulous, good sort 
of a human victim she was dragging to the 
sacrifice. But these glimpses of better feeling 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 299 

had no more practical result upon her actions 
than the faint sentiments of compassion that 
may assail the butcher as he sharpens his knife, 
and hears the bleating of the sheep in the 
slaughterhouse. Nay, I do not assert it, but 
I fancy she had some notion of a degree of 
generosity and self-immolation on her own 
part in plotting to bring about the result she 
aimed at. Was she now doing her duty to 
her family and to society . following the im- 
perious mandates of the latter . at a great 
sacrifice of volition and preference ? It is true 
she was her own remorseless controller and 
persecutrix . the Lady Ashton of her own 
Lucy. But was even this last poor victim 
driven into more heartrending consequences 
by the stern mother and hateful brother than 
to desert the man she loved to marry another 
she didn't ? Yet this was the course Madeleine 
Graham set and remorselessly urged herself 
on ! Triumphantly martyred, she rose ajjove 
the sway of her own inmost natural feelings 
and inclinations, to follow the tide of opinion 
into that legitimate issue of a marriage with a 
million of money ! 



300 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Such was the object. All this trouble, diffi- 
culty, danger, guilt, betrayal, incurred, . for 
what ? To be a rich man's wife ; to have 
gilded furniture and large mirrors ; to have 
carriages, horses, a town and country house ; 
to wear silks and satins ; to have a box at the 
opera, and consequent right of despising every 
rational theatrical entertainment ; perhaps, . 
unspeakable consummation of all those earthly 
blessings ! . to be all but crushed into a pulp 
with one's feathers and jewels in the narrow 
lobbies of a dirty old palace, " going to Court !" 

These must have been the objects, I suppose; 
for these are the best things the greatest 
fortunes can purchase. Most decidedly Made- 
leine had conceived no passion, however well 
she might counterfeit one, for Mr. Behring- 
bright. She saw plainly that he was elderly . 
rather bald ; that his eyes had no particular 
lustre, and that he was not dressed in the 
height of fashion. People who are in love 
don't see these facts. But though she was not 
in love, she acted the passion, as she had known 
it in those }^oung, senseless days when she 
really felt it, before the enchanted eyes of her 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 301 

new lover, to a matchless perfection. Her 
eyes brightened, her complexion carnationed, 
when she espied him j she listened to his sim- 
plest words (and he was not eloquent) with 
rapt interest and attention ; her own voice 
mellowed to a gentler music . her expressions 
seemed to steep themselves in an unconscious 
tenderness, when she addressed him. She 
seemed wretched out of his sight, happy only 
when he was present ; and yet it was all false, 
simulated, counterfeit. 

Such is the spell of the demon money over 
our age, that this unhappy girl imagined she 
was yet doing quite right in endeavouring to 
secure it at any price. She was not even 
wronging her really preferred lover, she 
thought : she intended a share of the plunder 
for him. In fact, Madeleine was so corrupt 
she did not know she was corrupt at all. Her 
business was to secure this wealthy husband;- 
all the rest only told for counters in a game of 
skill. And secure him she did, as far as lay 
in feminine fascination and skill. Fate is at 
times stronger, of course, than our best endea- 
vours . a goddess not to be appeased, even 



302 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

when we heap her altars with all that is really 
valuable in existence . throw our hearts them- 
selves to blaze and crackle into dust upon the 
costly pile ! 

After all, this must have been a most ex- 
ceptional case, I take it as the text of a 
general homily; but Madeleine Graham's cannot 
have been anything else, or the end of the 
world must be indeed well nigh come, and 
anything but a millennium of paradise to 
follow ! There must have been something 
extremely out of the way in so young a woman 
being capable of such perfidy . something 
diabolical in so perfect an insensibility and 
death, at the core of so fervid and lifelike an 
outward simulation. Nature was outraged by 
it . by that mass of ice frozen in a centre of 
radiating fire ! It annoyed Madeleine herself 
to know that it was so. She would have given 
anything to feel the emotion she counterfeited. 
And if for no other reason, perchance from the 
trouble and anxiety attendant on a representa- 
tion . the constant risk of flaw and failure. It 
is hard to play a part consistently from 
beginning to end, even when one has studied 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 303 

it in its minutest details, for the public enjoy- 
ment, on the stage. One can't help having 
one's intervals, however brief, of lapse into the 
natural. I have heard Hamlet sneeze so 
naturally as to convulse a whole house with 
laughter, when all the rest of his enactment 
was as stagey and undertakerlike as could have 
been desired. And what is the trouble of 
playing even that most fagging of all high- 
tragedy parts compared to feigning a love one 
does not feel ? 

Madeleine's performance, however, was a 
great success with her principal critic and 
spectator. 

In the first place, the poor man had been all 
his life longing, thirsting . like the camel in 
the desert for the living springs . for this 
draught of heavenly happiness, which he now 
imagined to be raised to his parched lips ; . 
lips parched to baking and bleeding in that 
drear passage of matrimony he had undergone, 
and which he had despaired ever to see open 
on those rose-gardens of Damascus, shadowed 
by the date and fig, he now fancied he realized 
in the shining mirage rising at his feet ! It 



304 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

was pleasant to fall into such a snare . to feel 
the virgin stirrings of that most splendid sen- 
timent of existence, which Mr. Behringbright 
had so long resigned himself to believe would 
for ever elude his experience. He came to it 
rather past the season, 'tis true, in the reckon- 
ings of the almanac, but not in the un- 
ploughed freshness and luxuriance of the 
affections. Love is always young, we know . 
endowed with an immortal boyhood. And so, 
to speak the whole truth without any further 
apologetic ambages, Mr. Behringbright fell 
in love, head over ears, as passionately and 
absorbingly as if he had been a Borneo of 
two or three and twenty. 

How people go on when once they are fairly 
entangled in this sort of maze admits of very 
little variation, either in actuality or descrip- 
tion. Mr. Behringbright grew, in the first 
place, to consider that a bright-green parasol 
was the loveliest of all imaginable sights on a 
Killarney lake, with the exception of the object 
it shaded from the sun. He thought there 
never were before so matchless a hand and 
glove as were occasionally to be seen resting 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 305 

on the gunwale of Dr. Bucktrout's fishing-boat, 
no music of flute or soft recorder could equal 
the melody of that voice ; it uttered no word 
that was not replete with sense, modesty, 
sweetness, goodness, kindness, generosity, and 
feeling. No eyes in the world . the stars of 
heaven themselves . equalled those in tender 
and penetrating lustre. No one was half so 
accomplished . sung, played the piano, 
sketched, distributed cards, like the lovely 
Madeleine. Likewise, she was the most gene- 
rous and disinterested of human beings : she 
loved him, George Brownjohn, for himself 
alone : she could not rationally reckon him 
at more than three hundred per annum salary, 
if even that ! With all the sparkling and 
enchanting coquetry of her manner . of her 
delicious, enthralling smiles . of her whole 
speaking, animated, ecstatic form . she did not 
care the least for the splendid rival who osten- 
tatiously presented himself in the character . 
to fcaXov . the matchless good of existence . 
was found ! 

I am free to admit, however, that without 
the powerful resource Madeleine found in the 

vol. ii. 20 



306 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

jealousy excited by my Lord GlengarifTs oppo- 
sition, it is not likely that the short interval 
she managed it in would have sufficed to 
mature her plans. For it was towards the end 
of the second week of Mr. Behringbright's 
enamoured sojourn at Killarney Town that 
matters were brought to a crisis by this young 
nobleman's means, without his very much 
(possibly) intending it. 

After haunting Miss Graham with notice- 
able assiduity, in pursuance of his self-imposed 
duties as cicerone of the lakes and mountains 
of Killarney, greatly to Mr. Behringbright's 
annoyance, though he seemed to make no pro- 
gress with Madeleine, Lord GlengarifT ap- 
peared . as is usual in such cases . only to 
grow more obstinate and eager in his advances. 
He presented himself with a frequency at 
Prospect Palace that excited general remark ; 
and as he had made himself very useful and 
agreeable to Dr. Bucktrout, he was always at 
least welcome to the ostensible principal of the 
Madeleine party. Of course he thus greatly 
interfered with Mr. Behringbright's opportuni- 
ties of private address to Miss Graham, other- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 307 

wise not afforded him with any nnwise profu- 
sion by the aunt. But anon Lord Grlengariff 
took to endeavouring to shine down his rival, 
as it seemed, in a series of splendid diver- 
sions, which he projected and carried into 
execution ; apparently with the view of amusing 
and dazzling the young lady into a better 
appreciation of his now undisguised admiration 
and partiality. 

Perhaps in reality, besides another motive of 
sufficient power, Lord Grlengariff was surprised 
and piqued into acts, and displays much 
beyond his real incentives and purposes, by the 
extraordinary preference of which he beheld 
himself the victim. His self-love, already 
severely shaken by Emily's rejection, was 
irritated, perhaps, into an attempt at assertion 
against a repetition of so marvellous a defeat. 
A repetition of defeat his lordship still continued, 
it may be, to suspect it. He certainly meant 
nothing serious by Madeleine Graham, and yet 
he bestirred himself as anxiously now as if he 
did. And she, perceiving the advantage to 
her own purposes, skilfully accepted s<> much 
of the position assigned her as suited them . 

20. % 



308 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

and no more. What fault could even Mr. 
Behringbright find . annoyed as he might be 
. with compliances that had their source in 
gratitude for a life preserved ? 

Madeleine, successful in inspiring Mr. 
Behringbright with the most passionate and 
trustful attachment, had come now to feel her 
foot strike against an unforeseen obstacle. 
Greatly as he loved her, the extreme diffidence 
and modesty of his own nature stood in his 
way to a declaration of his sentiments. He 
was convinced that she cherished a deep 
preference for him, but it occurred to himself 
as the height of presumption and impudence 
to take such a supposition for granted, and act 
upon it ! He could not reconcile himself to 
his figure in the glass, to venture on a pro- 
ceeding of the kind. Opportunities . -judicious, 
unmeant opportunities . were afforded him ; 
but he did not avail himself of them. Words 
half- formed came to his lips, but he did not 
utter them. 

Madeleine grew tired of this, and deter- 
mined to lose no chance of bringing matters to 
a crisis. When Lord Grlengariff, therefore, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 309 

proposed to entertain her with what he said 
was one of the finest spectacles on the Lakes 
. a Staghunt . she accepted the hononr with 
unwonted alacrity, although she was certainly 
far from thinking that it would please Mr. 
Behringbright to know that she was to be 
made the object of so public a mark of homage. 
She informed him, however, of the intention in 
the most indifferent manner, and had the satis- 
faction to discern that he looked very much 
vexed and discomfited. 



310 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



CHAPTER XV. 

A PROPOSAL. 

That night Mr. Behringbright made up his 
mind to propose the next day, at all hazards. 

He began to feel his radiant prospects en- 
dangered. He comprehended a touch of dis- 
dain and indignation in the young lady's care- 
less way of giving him the information ; and 
the thought seized him, like the poisoned fang 
of an adder, that she was beginning to open 
her eyes to the superior personal qualities of 
his young rival. And what might not come 
of that ? 

It was dreadful to conjecture ! And so, 
after tossing all night on a feverish pillow, Mr. 
Behringbright arose the next day, firmly re- 
solved, as he thought, to put his hopes and 
fears to the proof . but almost as shaken and 
nervous at the prospect as if he was going to 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 311 

explore the great secret in a leap from a 
precipice. 

I dare say lie never thought so ill before of 
his little, twisted toilet-glass in the poor inn 
where he had taken up his domicile ! It made 
him look so grey and old, and almost paralytic, 
really, on one side of the face ! And yet what 
nonsense it was to dwell on these trifles ! Was 
it not plain that, with all his faults, the beau- 
tiful Madeleine liked him . preferred him to all 
mankind ? Had not her melting eyes said so 
many times now . . . and each time 
more persuasively and inebriatingly than 
before ? 

To be sure, those fine eyes had haunted him, 
Mr. Behringbright remembered, very uncom- 
fortably in his dreams that night, after he had 
parted at Prospect Palace with the fair owner, 
and she had informed him of her invitation to 
the staghunt. 

It was a horrid nightmare fancy, no doubt ; 
but Mr. Behringbright recalled, with a shudder, 
that he had seen those alluring organs of ex- 
pression shining like jewels in the head of a 
crested serpent, that had persisted, during a 



312 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

course of miserable dreams, in coiling itself 
about bis beart, and wbose horrible weight 
bad seemed to drag bim down into a hideous 
gulf of darkness and terror. 

A nonsensical fancy, no doubt ; and Mr. 
Behringbright was aware that, leaving Prospect 
Palace ratber bastily and huffily on hearing of 
tbe party of pleasure arranged for the following 
day, he had supped wretcbedly at bis inn on a 
very tough Welsh rabbit. Quite enough to 
give any one an indigestion ! And the plead- 
ing, recalling gaze with which Madeleine bad 
followed bim on bis feverish exit might very 
naturally . no, not very naturally, but very 
possibly . cause all the rest ! 

Those who have had the good . but now 
not very usual . fortune of being present at a 
staghunt on the Lakes of Killarney . or rather 
the Lower Lake, for the poor victim of the 
sport rarely deserts its native mountain sbore 
of the Toomies . are mostly of opinion tbat it 
is a very grand and exhilarating spectacle. 
The occasion usually assembles a gay and 
showily-dressed holiday multitude. Tbe waters 
are covered with a bright flotilla of expectant 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 313 

gazers, attired in lively colours, with white sails 
spread, and fluttering pennons on the slender 
mastheads. If the mountains are in a good 
humour . and they mostly are on these occa- 
sions . they display their most gorgeous and 
changeable hues. The woods and misty 
summits of the hills . haunts of the startled 
animals which are to furnish the sport . 
resound with the shouts of the hunters driving 
them from their coverts, with the mellow notes 
of the horn, with the musical baying of the 
hounds ; all repeated in a million cheerful 
echoes in the nearness . dying away to as many 
times repeated a ghostly and spiritual indistinct- 
ness in the distance. 

Such was the scene Mr. Behringbright 
embarked in his accustomed wherry to join 
from the town, having been informed by Miss 
Graham that her uncle had accepted a seat for 
her and her aunt in Lord GlengarifFs boat. 

This was a handsome, galley-like barge, 
easily distinguished by its showy appearance 
on the Lower Lake, where the company chiefly 
assembled to witness the hunt. And Mr. 
Behringbright felt very uncomfortable indeed 



314 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

when lie observed the young lord in his 
chieftain's garb . and looking one every inch 
. seated beside Madeleine in the prow of the 
craft, making her share with himself the uni- 
versal notice and distinction the presence of 
the great proprietor of the district and giver of 
the festivity naturally excited. 

Mr. Behringbright experienced a strong 
twang of jealous apprehension, I say, when he 
witnessed this spectacle, Could anything be 
more likely to impose upon the fancy of a 
girl of taste and spirit than the showy aspect 
under which Lord Grlengariff thus presented 
himself? A feeling of indignation and 
contempt at his own folly in having deprived 
himself of the claims to distinction and homage 
he also possessed in unbounded wealth, pain- 
fully struck Mr. Behringbright. He could 
resist the impulse no longer, and, ordering 
Darby O'Finn to drive his boat up to the 
" Lord's barge " . a command with which the 
waterman very timorously and unwillingly 
complied . he addressed Lord Grlengariff, for 
almost the first time since he had adopted his 
incognito, in the tone of a familiar and equal ; 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 315 

announcing his intention, rather than wish 
merely, to witness the hunt on board his 
lordship's barge with his friends from Prospect 
Palace ! 

Lord Grlengariff was, however, resolved that 
he should persevere in his assumed role, as it 
appeared. Or else he was more than a little 
out of temper, and willing to vent his pique. 
He answered Mr. Behringbright, in a- surprised 
and haughty tone, that his party was made up, 
and that no more persons could be accom- 
modated comfortably on board his galley ; and 
he was turning the rudder, pettishly siding off, 
when . singularly pale, but determined, and 
almost fierce in his tone and manner . Mr. 
Behringbright addressed the Cleopatra of 
the scene, . 

" Since Lord Grlengariff 's accommodations 
are so limited and overcrowded, Miss Graham, 
will you do me the favour and pleasure to step 
on board my boat, and see the cruel amuse- 
ment we are here to enjoy from it?" 

There was a pause. 

The Glengariff rowers, six in number, and 
attired in a most picturesque livery of scarlet 



316 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

flannel shirts and green velvet caps, held their 
oars suspended with amazement dripping over 
the sunny waves that vainly courted the stroke. 
All the boats within hearing, in fact, listened . 
particularly that containing the Sparrowgrasses 
and some other persons from Prospect Palace 
Hotel. People were thunderstruck at such 
presumption and audacity on the part of that 
shabby sojourner ! It was thought Miss 
Graham would laugh at the very idea of such 
an exchange ! But, behold now, Miss Graham 
arose ! stepped so rapidly from the barge to the 
boat that there was no time afforded for inter- 
ference, taking Mr. Behringbright's joyfully- 
extended hand, and responded, in the hearing 
of all who chose to hear, "I shall be most 
happy ; for I really don't like to be made such 
a complete exhibition of, Mr. Brownjohn !" 

Mr. Behringbright was not often what we 
may call chivalrously gallant, but he was so in 
this instance. He absolutely knelt on one 
knee, and kissed the hand that continued 
locked in his, until he had comfortably seated 
the fair owner in her new quarters. He then 
coolly asked Dr. Bucktrout to oblige him by 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 317 

passing over Miss Graham's parasol, and, 
seizing an oar himself, rowed off before Lord 
GlengarifF could recover sufficiently from his 
surprise and indignation to give vent to those 
feelings in articulate sounds. 

After such a public mark of devotion and 
adhesion, Mr. Behringbright certainly could 
not hesitate any longer to declare his own, . 
could not fear repulse for them. Yet he could 
hardly speak for agitation when, obeying his 
directions, Darby O'Finn and his aquatic 
daughter shot the boat that conveyed the 
four under the broad shadow of the Toomies, 
remote as might be from the now crowding 
company, which all made for the central Glen- 
gariff galley. 

"Do you speak French, Miss Graham?" 
Mr. Behringbright inquired, in those tremulous 
accents. 

" A little : I had two or three quarters 
at school. But why do you ask, Mr. 
Brownjohn ?" 

"I want to tell you, without being under- 
stood by these good people, Miss Graham, how 
I thank you, . how I love you, . how I adore 



318 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

you . for your goodness in complying with my 
request, and rebuking the presumption and 
forwardness of the splendid young coxcomb 
who thought to parade you about as a conquest 
in the midst of his vassalage and these gaping 
strangers assembled to hear dogs bark, and a 
wretched four-legged creature run for its life, 
from their fangs !" 

" You owe me no thanks, Mr. Brownjohn ; 
I merely followed my own inclination . I 
may almost say merely obeyed an instinct . 
when I complied with your request," Made- 
leine replied, in very pure French, and with 
an expressive glance at the speaker. 

"You preferred my society, then, to 
Lord GlengarifFs, . young, gallant, high- 
born, handsome as he is ?" said the delighted 
man. 

"I prefer your society to that of all the 
world, Mr. Brownjohn ! . I mean . I do not 
know what I mean ! Let us say no more 
about it. I shall see the show, whatever it is, 
just as well under your guidance as Lord 
GlengarifFs, and not form so unpleasantly 
conspicuous a part of it myself." 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 319 

" You do not care for show and splendour, 
then ? . you could be content to become the 
wife of a poor man, . mine ! . Could you, 
would you, ought you, Miss Graham P" 

" Your wife, Mr. Brownjohn ?" 

" My wife ! . I love you, dearest Madeleine ! 
. I love you ! My looks, my actions, my whole 
demeanour, from the first moment I have seen 
you until this, must convince you so ! And 
the step I have hazarded on this occasion can 
only be justified by my wish and intention to 
make you wholly, solely mine !" Mr. Brown- 
john exclaimed. " Do you consent ? Shall 
this day date the commencement of all the 
happiness of my life, dearest Madeleine ? . I 
am not young nor handsome, nor witty, nor 
all or anything I should be to deserve you ! 
But I love you with all the powers of my soul 
and existence, and I will make yours happy, 
if it be in human power and you will suffer 
me to devote my life to the task I" 

" But are you aware of what you take upon 
yourself in the proposition, Mr. Brownjohn ? 
My father would never forgive me for marrying 
a poor man ; I know it . he has often said so. 



320 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

He is well off, but lie has a large family . and 
would, perhaps, not be sorry for a reason 

to If you marry me, you burden yourself 

with the maintenance of a woman who will 
have no other means of support but such as 
your generosity and affection may provide," 
Madeleine said, in a tone of deep emotion, but 
extending her hand assentingly to her lover, 
who clasped it passionately to his breast. 

No one can doubt what would follow. 

" If this be the only difficulty, dearest Made- 
leine !" George Cocker Behringb right replied, 
" I am ashamed to confess it . but . but . I am 
rich myself . very rich ! I am head of the 
firm I only pretend to represent, . Behring- 
bright Brothers. I am worth, perhaps, a 
million in money ! . nothing in myself, ex- 
cepting in the devoted love I bear you. Will 
you now indeed be mine ?" 

" You are making fun of me, Mr. Brown- 
john, and it is wrong of you ! And look, who 
are these people making towards us as if they 
knew me . you ? Good heavens ! Mr. Behring- 
bright ! Mr. Brownjohn ! I am ill . so agi- 
tated ! Do let them row me back to the hotel, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 321 

or I believe I shall die ! Do row me home at 
once, Mr. O'Finn, without a moment's delay I" 
Madeleine now exclaimed, turning in very 
truth most ghastly pale and panic-stricken in 
aspect, having caught sight of a boat in the 
offing steering apparently towards them. 

" Make for Prospect Palace instantly, Darby 
0' Finn,. the young lady is ill T' said Mr. 
Behringbright; adding, after a moment's sur- 
vey of the barque which had seemed approach- 
ing them, but was easily distanced by the 
vigorous strokes of Darby's oar . "I want to 
be off myself; for I declare there's that French- 
man again, with the detestable American who 
has such a causeless spite against me ! But 
no," he added, after a slight pause of reflection, 
" I wont seem to run from either of the trum- 
pery fellows ; they will fancy next I am afraid 
of them, or am ashamed of my betrothed 
bride. Madeleine, dearest ! Miss Graham ! 
what makes you look so very ill ?" 

" Ever since that narrow escape from drown- 
ing I had, I take the most unaccountable 
panics on the water. Do, Mr. Behringbright, 
let us get to land!" 

VOL. II. 21 



322 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

"But these men have threatened me; I 
must not seem to shun them, . and you see 
they seem to want to get up to us/' said Mr. 
Behringbright, in whom a something was 
roused by this idea little akin to his customary 
phlegm. 

Madeleine looked at him, and perceived that 
she must rally her courage to face the emer- 
gency ; that there was no flying from it. 

A good deal was certainly required . the 
courage almost of despair ! There, in that 
approaching barque,. Camille Le Tellier sat, 
no doubt ; looking already a thousand recog- 
nitions, the least of which, put in utterance, 
might be the talismanic word to break into 
shivers all her splendid magic palace of glass, 
raised by the power of the great modern sor- 
cerer, whose multiplied forms make truth itself 
a puzzle and a myth wherever we turn. 

It is a great thing to be able to say of 
my heroine that she quailed not in the fur- 
nace-heat now applied to her lustrous inven- 
tions . stood to her arms with invincible 
resolution never to lay them down until they 
were beaten from her. 






MADELEINE GRAHAM. 323 

Nothing is baser than cowardly guilt. Even 
a Palmer, who plunges into Avernus with a 
hop, skip, and a jump from the gallows, dies 
the less execrated of mankind because of his 
undaunted bearing. And with all her little 
faults, it cannot be denied that, of her nature, 
Madeleine Graham was brave, and defiant, 
and cool, and resolved, against adverse fortune. 

To be sure she was tied now to the stake ; 
and 'tis confidently averred, most of our 
greatest British victories have been won by 
desperation. We were making out of France 
a hungry, half-starved, exhausted little rabble 
of us, when the French chivalry must needs 
throw themselves in our way, and, reason or 
none, force us to fight Crecy, Poictiers, Agin- 
court, what not? Waterloo itself, according 
to the best military authorities of that nation 
who admit that it was lost at all, was only won 
through bad generalship having rendered it 
impossible for us to fly the field; that Forest 
of Soignies in . our rear saved us. Still, 
though a national characteristic, it was some- 
thing wonderful, that thorough possession <)i' 
nerve and imperturbable composure evinced bj 

21 . 2 



324 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Miss Graham at this juncture . her command 
of feature and, after a moment's wavering, 
even of complexion. Every stroke of the 
stranger's oar, when once Mr. Behringbright 
had desired Darby OTinn and his daughter 
to cease their exertions, brought destiny nearer. 
But you would have said, from her careless 
glance and attitude, that Madeleine herself 
was as little concerned as any other young 
lady on the lake ; nay, she even said, finding 
no better could be done, " Oh, yes, sir, I don't 
mind now; I feel quite well again! But 
what Frenchman do you mean ? . one you 
have some dislike to ?" 

The intervening throng of boats, which had 
to be cautiously threaded, in fact gave time for 
quite a little conversation, and not of a kind 
calculated to allay anxiety in Miss Graham's 
bosom. 

" The one you told me was engaged to Miss 
Emily Maughan in Belfast . a fellow who has 
twice, besides, crossed me in a very uncom- 
fortable manner. Don't you know ?" 

" Engaged to Emily Maughan ! Did I tell 
you so ? No, I think I did not quite say that ! 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 3.25 

I could not, for I did not know! I only 
thought so from what I had observed . 
from their way of meeting and going on . 
that they were in love with each other, and 
ought to be married, perhaps ! I should not 
in the least wonder, indeed, but wdiat, know- 
ing you are here, and having finally made up 
her mind not to have Lord Grlengariff . I sup- 
pose because she dares not . she has sent him 
to ask your consent to their union !" 

Even as she said so, the conviction smote 
like a steam-hammer on Madeleine's heart 
that Camille was on the scene with a far dif- 
ferent object. Either he had discovered that 
she was there, and had come to ascertain and 
thwart her projects, or . and the thought, in 
spite of the danger and destruction involved, 
almost made her burst out laughing . Mr. 
Behringb right himself was the " representative 
of Plutus" whom the romantic son of Gaul 
hoped to render favourable to the happy issue 
of his love-affair with her! 

Perhaps the ludicrousncss of the notion 
supported Madeleine against its associated 
alarms. But she bad all along, in fact, calcu- 



326 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

lated almost with certainty on Monsieur Le 
Tellier's acquiescence in any plan, even in- 
cluding her loss, which should present the 
great material advantages to himself she hoped 
to demonstrate to him in her securing the 
millionnaire. Selfishness seldom estimates ade- 
quately the power of that amiable quality in 
others, and the intenser the selfishness the 
more liable it is to mistakes of the kind. And 
now, though sufficiently vain in her own per- 
son, Madeleine had not properly estimated the 
sway of vanity in a French coxcomb. So 
that her chief alarm at this time related to the 
unprepared character of the interview about to 
take place. And the insinuation last hazarded 
was intended, as much as might be, to remedy 
this crude state of affairs, on one side at least. 

Mr. Behringbright w T as evidently impressed, 
though disagreeably, with the suggestion. 

" I don't know whether he has come for my 
consent or not ! I don't know that my con- 
sent could be needed ! I have no species of 
control over Miss Maughan's wishes or actions ; 
but if the right is conferred on me, I shall be 
strongly tempted to exercise it in a refusal ! 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 327 

The man appears to me a vain, insolent 
strutter, altogether unworthy of any sensible 
Englishwoman's preference ! Full of his non- 
sensical French notions on everything. He 
wanted to fight a duel with me, forsooth . 
though I never mentioned it before . because 
I stumbled against him by accident on board 
that Belfast steamer ; and the American who 
is with him did all he possibly could to keep 
alive the mischief, and bring the homicidal 
absurdity to pass between us." 

" Oh, what a wretch ! How strange ! 
Would Monsieur Le Tellier really have fought 
you? I did not think he had been such a 
lion ! " said Madeleine ; who, in truth, was 
rather incredulous as to the leonine qualities 
of her discarded sentimentalist, but managed 
thus to insinuate rather a pretty compliment. 

" Do you think it needs something so 
ferociously valiant to beard me, Miss Graham?" 
said Mr. Behringbright, smiling. " Well, we 
shall see j we do not yet know whether these 
good people's intents are wicked or charitable." 

"Oh, I don't believe much in his valour," 
said Madeleine. " Emily has told me he was 



328 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

quite frightened off when the Miss Sparxes 
threatened to set the police at him, for haunt- 
ing after our school when we walked out. 
And Lord Grlengariff says that he screamed 
and squealed out like a child when he threatened 
in fun to throw him over into the pit that 
night you rescued him from the moh at the 
theatre. How curiously you seem always to 
have "been so good to him, and Lord 
Glengariff to have taken a sort of instinctive 
dislike to him, from the very first ! But you 
must continue good to him, dear Mr. Brown- 
john ; and if we are to he happy together, let 
us try and make poor Emily happy also with 
the man of her choice ! " 

The melting expression . the captivating 
" dear Mr. Brownjokn" which seemed to have 
forgotten again that it was addressed to a man 
of money . put Mr. Behringbright in a good 
humour, and in a position of stability and 
unsuspicion, as regarded his own affairs, for 
the approaching interview. 

Nor was this altogether a mere vague sugges- 
tion. It had crossed Madeleine's mind of late, 
not ^infrequently, how very convenient it would 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 329 

be . how completely several dangerous impli- 
cations might be coiled up safely . if Emily 
would marry Camille. 

Lord Grlengariff was, of course, out of the 
question : explanations there would be fatal. 
Not to mention that Miss Graham had a true 
young-lady feeling in the matter besides, and 
could not bear the idea of a contemporary 
securing so much more splendid though not 
so valuable a prize in the matrimonial lottery. 
And as Emily must soon be desperate as 
regarded Mr. Behringbright . had hopelessly 
excluded herself from competition with the 
young earl, . perhaps, rather than sink alto- 
gether into old-maidism, she could be brought 
to think of Camille. 

Camille, Madeleine said to herself, was a 
very handsome and agreeable young man. She 
knew she had thought so once, . was not cer- 
tain whether she did not think so still. And a 
fair pretext would thus arise to secure him . 
and the friend of her youth . a satisfactory 
provision from the resources and influence. 
of the millionnaire merchant. All would thus 
be most delightfully dove-tailed . or serpent* 



330 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

tangled . for future intimacy, and a commerce 
of visits and good offices . a romance of 
friendly alliance, in which the simple, spiritless 
Emily would play the part of Monsieur 
Eugene Sue's Mathilde to her own brilliant 
and gifted TJrsule, with the difference that all 
the advantages of fortune and position would 
be on her side too. Fictitious creations, it 
would appear, can have their Don Quixotes 
of imitation in evil as well as good . female 
as well as male. 

Such were the reflections that passed in 
electric touches through that rapid intellect, 
whose powers had been so fearfully misdi- 
rected by education and the perverse influences 
of the organized frenzy miscalled society ! 

Meanwhile, the Frenchman and American 
made up to the evident object of pursuit at 
all the speed a single-oared, crazy boat could 
manage it, through the pressure of the pleasure- 
seeking fleet, all set in a contrary direction. 

Kather, perhaps, against the wish of the 
former, who observed to his companion, " Yes, 
yes; I suppose it is he! But, ma foil do 
you not perceive he has a lady with him ? I 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 331 

do not wish to interrupt him at an unpro- 
pitious moment ! Let us also behold the 
spectacle, and, satisfied that he is still in the 
mountains, accost him at a more disengaged 
instant I" 

" Pho, pho ! there is no moment in all 
etarnity like the present one ! Clip its wings 
if you can ! But by all the stars in heaven, 
and on Ameriky's flag of freedom, don't you 
see the lady's the one you make such a cater- 
wauling about ? . the one we saw on board 
the Belfast steamer, and you tell such fine 
stories of, when you have half a rag of a 
French tatter of liquor in the wind ! sitting 
cheek by jowl with him as friendly as 
Britannia and Neptune on the price of a 
wooden leg ! And they see us, and don't 
like the look of us, as sure as my great-grand- 
mother was a redlegged turkey !" 

" It is Mr. Behringbright Brothers ! That 
I perfectly perceive. But the other? . the 
lady ? No, it is impossible ! I should be 
certain to know if she had left her father's 
house : she takes no step without my appro- 
bation. Neither was she at all aware I 



332 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

should find myself at Killarney this season; 
accordingly, she cannot have prepared me a 
delightful surprise ! It is impossible !" re- 
turned Camille ; for he it was. 

" If you don't spy her out and recognise 
her, it is because you Frenchmen can only 
see well through an opera-glass. But I 
thought it was all bosh and boast what you 
said about that 'are out-and-out young beautier 
on board the steamer. You picked her out 
as the handsomest crittur you saw there, and 
romanced all the other lies !" 

" It is only that I cannot believe my eyes, 
not that I do not see her well !" exclaimed 
the astonished Frenchman, whose orbs of 
vision were now certainly strained towards 
the boat containing his lady-love and her 
elder suitor like those of a boiled crab. " And 
yet . and yet it is Madeleine ! With Mr. 
Behringbright ! What a marvellous coinci- 
dence !" 

"I don't see the wonder myself. It's all 
just as I told you it would be," returned the 
American, with a jangling laugh. " Old 
Moneybags has seen what a pretty girl she is 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 333 

. and she has found out what a rich old churl 
he is. Put those two ideas together, and 
everything is accounted for, if you had found 
them at the end of Bosse's telescope in the 
moon !" 

" Let us verify the fact ! Make all possible 
diligence with your oar, young man, and I 
promise you a reward," said Camille, now con- 
siderably agitated, to the boatman. 

"They're not a-moving, your honor; we 
shall soon be upon them. But I must mind 
and not get my own nose broken . leastways 
the boat's, . as I did the other day, against a 
rock, which has rendered her sides rather 
weak," returned the conscious boatman, who 
knew that his shallop had only turned out for 
that gala-day, after lying by disabled for years. 

" Don't drown us, certainly," said Camille. 
" And my feet are already quite wet in 3^0111* 
leaky affair !" ej^eing his beautifully-polished, 
high-heeled little boots with dismay. 

"You can't drown me, Britisher! I'll defy 
you to it ! I can swim like an alligator. I've 
crossed the Mississippi twice where its cataract 
thunders into the Oroonoko, swimming with- 



334 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

out drawing my breath ! And I used to 
regularly slide down Niagara Falls every 
morning before breakfast for an appetite, 
while I was at Saratoga !" returned the 
American. 

" Ha ! ha ! ha ! Behold the genius of your 
country again . colossal in everything !" 
complimented Le Tellier. 

"Even in lies, d'ye mean?" returned Fla- 
mingo, rather fiercely and bullyingly. But by 
this time they were close on the Behring- 
bright boat. 

It will thus be seen that Madeleine was quite 
right in her conjecture, funny and improbable 
as it seemed. She knew, and had often, of 
latter times, secretly scorned and derided the 
high-flown sentimentalities and impracticabili- 
ties of her French lover. She had heard him 
more than once labour to persuade her that his 
and her case almost exactly resembled that of 
the unfortunate Julie and St. Preux, in the 
"Nouvelle Heloise;" and what more likely 
than for him to carry out the romantic delusion, 
and fancy a Mllor Edouard Bomsion in the Eng- 
lishman who had rescued him at the playhouse? 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 335 

The resemblance was even sustained by the 
circumstance of bis having almost fought a 
duel with that generous stranger ! 

"It is true I have chastised the English 
insolence, and disregard for the feelings of 
more susceptible nationalities, in Behring- 
bright Brothers," he remarked to Mr. Flamingo 
Brown, on the latter accidentally rejoining him 
in the course of a conjoint commercial move- 
ment in Cork, and forcing himself on his con- 
fidence. " But the English . admirers always 
of courage . readily pardon even offences against 
themselves due to it. Witness that Mr. 
Behringbright, who takes part with me in a 
playhouse disturbance, against one of his 
dearest friends ! Does not a Britannic poet of 
celebrity make the remark, ' What we plant, 
we love to water '? He is immensely rich ; toe 
are deplorably poor in every thing but love. 
Tenez I he has only to know how to use his 
wealth to create happiness, and all the world 
knows he is willing to do it. Veritable son of 
perfidious but goodnatured Alhion, he has only to 
know of the misfortunes of two lovers, one of 
whom is almost indebted to him for bis life. 



336 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

who adore each other, and are persecuted by 
fortune, to fly to their succour !" 

Luckily for the private views of the female 
of this pair of persecuted doves, Camille Le 
Tellier had been confined to his bed for a day 
or two by the consequences of the fright he 
had sustained in the Belfast row. He was 
very nervous and sensitive, and though he was 
willing enough to thrust himelf into mischief, 
speedily lost his sage's perpendicular at a much 
less matter than the heavens crumbling over- 
head, and the earth rolling away beneath his 
feet ; therefore, his body was not in readiness 
so soon as his mind to execute the notable pro- 
ject he very quickly conceived. And Mr. 
Behringbright had departed on his Killarney 
trip before . diligently searching him out under 
his assumed name of Brownjohn . Camille as- 
certained, by the directions left to forward his 
letters, he had gone on a visit to Grlengariff 
Castle. By a coincidence very flattering to his 
hopes, business would also take Le Tellier soon 
to the south of Ireland, and he determined to 
avail himself of the opportunity to put this pro- 
ject to the touch. Delayed beyond his expecta- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 337 

tion in one or two cities, lie yet expected to arrive 
in time on the lakes to overtake a pleasure-seeker, 
as he supposed Mr. Behringbright to be ; and, 
it would appear, he was not much mistaken. 

As for Flamingo Brown, I do not suppose 
the mere love of mischief would have sufficed 
to lure so keen a " calkullator " off his proper 
ground in commercial cities, had he not had a 
business motive in the transaction, 

He had lighted on a speculation recently in 
which he perceived, to his intens.e regret, that 
without the assistance of some great English 
capitalists he should miss a very nice thing. 
Behringbright Brothers were of the greatest, 
and if he could only effect a reconciliation with 
the head of that firm, all would go well. And 
so, with immense confidence in his own powers 
of persuasion and " hocussing " the world in 
general, and almost as much in the placability 
and tolerance of the John Bull division of it, 
Flamingo took up the notion of accompanying 
his young French friend to Killarney Lakes, 
and taking a signal part in the projected re- 
conciliation on his own score. 

Accordingly, there was a great change to be 
vol. ii. 22 



338 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

witnessed in the Yankee's demeanour on this 
occasion. 

He saluted Mr. Behringbright on approach- 
ing with a familiarity which he doubtless in- 
tended to efface all recollections of former rude- 
ness. " Mr. Behringbright ! this is a lucky 
chance to meet you here ! Out on a little re- 
creation from the desk, I suppose, like your 
humble servant? Fine country this, isn't it, 
on a small scale ? Quite remarkable !" 

Mr. Behringbright made a very cold reply. 
" It is not every nation that has a continent to 
stretch its limbs in . and not content then, Mr. 
Brown, or more of you would stay at home ! 
But Miss Graham thought somebody in your 
boat wished to speak with her . or me . and* 
that is why we stopped. Else she is not well, 
and wishes to go ashore." 

Mr. Behringbright's eye was at the same 
time fixed with curious . in good truth, with 
somewhat alarmed attention, on the young 
Frenchman. Camille had bared his head with 
national politeness on nearing the boat with 
the lady in it, but now sat staring with un- 
mistakable signs of wonder and dismay. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 339 

On lier part, however, that young lady had 
cordially . but with young ladylike unconcern 
and indifference . stretched her neatly-gloved 
little hand . she was very particular in her 
gloves . towards the French gentleman. 

" How are you, Monsieur Le Tellier ?" she 
said, with the prettiest kindness, but with 
evident distance too, in her manner, and with 
a. smiling indifference and unconsciousness in 
her eyes that quite petrified him as he met the 
glance. " Have you left all well in Belfast ? I 
know I must not ask you if you have been in 
Belhaven Square lately. But how is dear 
Emily? All well there? At least, /all's well 
that ends well ' there as elsewhere, I suppose ! 
. Come pleasuring to the lakes, in the hope of 
finding a certain person at Grlengariff again ? 
Well, I hope you will enjoy it more than I do, 
though uncle was so kind as to bring me on a 
little fishing turn-out with him. I have been 
nearly drowned, you know; and the uproar 
and tumult here to-day are too much for me, 
and this gentleman is kindly taking me home 
out of it." 

" I should have pleasure, Miss Graham, if 
22.2 



340 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" stammered Camille ; but Madeleine in- 
terrupted him, saying, with a significance that 
required the most delicate modulation not to be 
appreciated where she did not wish it to be so: 

" Oh, no: Mr. Brownjohnis my father's par- 
ticular friend, and does not care for the trouble ! 
And, as I have found out, he is dear Emily's 
particular friend . almost guardian . too : so if 
you have anything to say to me from home, 
Mr. Le Tellier, I shall be happy to render 
you all the service in my power ... if 
you call upon us some time when my uncle is 
within. We are staying at Prospect Palace, 
and Dr. Bucktrout is not so nonsensically pre- 
judiced as papa, and will be glad to see you . 
and so, I am sure, shall I . for dear Emily's 
sake !" 

Camille stared, lost in wonder, but haunted 
and withheld by confused recollections of the 
understanding between himself and Madeleine 
that the name of Emily should be used as a 
sort of symbolical one of the occult under- 
standing really existing between themselves. 
In the midst of this confusion, it seemed to 
him, therefore, that all he needed really attend 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 341 

to was the fact that he was invited to an inter- 
view . in which, no doubt, satisfactory explana- 
tions would be offered of all that was strange 
and unaccountable in what he witnessed. Ac- 
cordingly he bowed deeply, with a graceful 
cringe a la Francais, remarking, " I shall be 
most happy to make the acquaintance of Miss's 
uncle!" and the interview, so far as regarded 
him, appeared to be over. 

Flamingo Brown, however, burst into one 
of his coarse laughs, and inquired, " And are 
you staying too, Mr. Behringbright, or Brown- 
john, or what's your name, my dear sir, at 
Prospect Palace ?" 

" Does it concern you to know of my where- 
abouts, Mr. Brown ?" the other replied, with 
evident dryness and stiffness. 

" Yes ; I've a first-rate business matter to 
put before your house . which is as good as 
Raping gold . when you've time, sir. And 
this young gentleman, Monsieur Le Teller % lias 
also, as he tells me " 

The art of interrupting is a greai one. "Mon- 
sieur Le Tellier can speak English, sir; and 
this, I believe, is not quite a matter for the 



342 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

open air !" exclaimed Madeleine, colouring 
partly with fear, and partly with indignation 
at the risks Camille's imprudent confidence 
seemed now likely to occasion. 

Luckily, Mr. Behringbright was on some 
points not quite a business man. Once de- 
ceived, no man ever regained his confidence ; 
whereas a complete man of business expects to 
be cheated and over-reached sometimes, and 
readily sacrifices personal resentment to views 
of profit. 

"I have already more than once told you, 
sir, that I will never again join in any trans- 
action to which you may be a party. And I 
never will ! I beg you to believe me in earnest, 
without the necessity of going before a magis- 
trate to make an affidavit to the effect," he 
said. 

" What ! is it still on about those darned 
skins ?" roared the Yankee. " I wish they 
were all sunk to the bottom of the sea, for the 
cussed noise you make about it ! And if some 
score of you cantankerous British capitalists, 
as you call yourselves, was sewed up in 
them " 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 343 

" Eow home, Darby !" said Mr. Behring- 
bright, turning scornfully away. 

" To Prospect Palace ? Do you reside at 
Prospect Palace ? Shall I find you there ?" 
Monsieur Le Tellier now called out . also in 
a somewhat menacing and challenging tone. 

" Have you any particular business with me, 
sir?" returned Mr. Behringbright. 

"Certainly I have, sir." 

" Then you will find me . when you want 
me . at the ' Red Herring' Tavern, a little out 
of Killarney on the Glengariff Eoad, where I 
stay. Or, if the affair is very pressing, you 
may out with it now, if you please," said the 
irritated millionnaire. 

" ~No, dear sir," interrupted Madeleine, with 
an expressive gesture to Camille, which he 
understood as she would have him. " I think I 
am a little concerned in this. It is not a 
matter, indeed, for hasty consideration in the 
open air. And I think I shall prove a better 
mediator with my father's most esteemed friend 
than Mr. Brown . or even Monsieur Le Tellier 
himself . when I am put in proper possession 
of the facts by-and-bye ! And now, sir," she 



344 MADELEIxXE GRAHAM. 

added in a whisper to Mr. Bekringbright, 
which only he conld overhear, " do go off now j 
I really am very faint and ill. And I should not 
like dear Emily's name to be dragged into dis- 
cussion before so many listeners." 

Tired of the scene himself, Mr. Behring- 
bright readily complied with this intimation . 
raising his hat civilly, but almost exclusively, 
to the Frenchman, who responded with a Pa- 
risian nourish. Madeleine smiled at Camille 
also, as her companion turned to give directions, 
much more cordially and significantly than 
before, and with a suitable glance. And away 
went Darby O'Finn, plying his oars as fast as 
the fins of a swordfish, and propelling the boat 
accordingly, so that Madeleine and Mr. Beh- 
ringbright speedily disappeared in the distance. 

Camille was certainly a little puzzled and 
annoyed, but not so much, either, as his 
American friend wished him. For hardly was 
the manoeuvre described effected, than he turned 
to him, and, bursting into a huge, coarse 
cachinnation, exclaimed, " And that's the 
young damsel you pretend dotes on you in 
secret ! Very secret indeed j for I'll be sworn 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 345 

on the handsomest-bound British Bible, or 
Peerage, yon' 11 produce, she is quite ignorant 
of it herself, and scarcely knows you from 
Adam ! Or, if she does, has as surely made up 
her mind to cut you and marry that tough old 
Dutchman there, as anything in the multipli- 
cation table !" 

" Ah, you injure me by the supposition ! It 
is necessary for her to dissemble always, under 
witnesses, as I have told you. But you per- 
ceived with what art she invited me to an 
interview and explanations !" replied Camille, 
but with visibly uneasy query, and self-doubt 
in his manner. 

" You're a gone 'coon if you believe in such 
sly gammon as that ! She only wanted to 
shuffle you off out of sight of her new prize. 
Women beat all the eels in creation for slipperi- 
ness ! You fancy you have them in your basket, 
and they are a mile off in the mud!" taunted the 
Yankee. " If you want me to believe you are 
anything else but a vain talker and boaster, 
mounseer, you will do something to let all Hie 
world, and Master Pokerback in particular, see 
she is yours, and shant be anybody else's ! 



346 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Be hanged, if you don't, if I don't tell the 
gal herself what fine things you report of her ! 
And I'm much mistaken if she has not such 
a spice of the devil in her as will season your 
pottage for you many a day after the diskivery !" 

Camille turned rather pale. " I have long 
thought it might be a necessary step," he 
replied; "otherwise I do not see how it is 
possible to extort the consent of her wealthy 
family. But, as you say, I shudder when I 
consider the consequences of offending a woman 
of so much spirit and determination. Never- 
theless, if I imagined myself made the sport of 
a perfidy truly so monstrous and inexplicable, 
except on the least worthy supposition, I also 
am capable of great things ! I also understand 
the meaning of the word . Vengeance !" 

" I'll tell you how you can let her understand 
she is not to make such a complete ass of you 
. that she is known to be compromised with 
you, and can't use you as a stepping-stone to 
her millionnaire ! Send me as your friend to ask 
these promised explanations of her. That will 
settle her feathers to the right speckle, you 
may depend upon it; and I'll bring you a 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 347 

krect report of the situation, which you would 
never see with your own eyes, under such 
blinkers as she'll clap at once on your head, I'll 
wager any number of Connecticut razors against 
a grindstone !" 

" Tenez ! It is not a bad idea . and you 
shall be satisfied of the verity of the revelations 
I have confided to your friendship, Mr. Brown ! 
As for your own sagacity, it is beyond dispute. 
Well, we will see . we will see ! Give me an 
interval for reflection. In truth, it is advisable 
to reflect with great maturity of judgment 
before compromising one's self in the relations 
that may exist between one and a woman like 
Mees Madeleine Graham!" 



END OF VOL. II. 
MADELEINE GRAHAM 



CHAPTER I. 



BREAKERS AHEAD. 



Meanwhile, escaped by her great presence of 
mind and coolness from immediate danger, but 
tliorouglily aware that it was only a temporary 
security unless she could strike in some closer 
rivets, Miss Graham and her convoy landed 
safely, traversed the neatly laid-out walks of 
myrtle and arbutus between the Upper Lake 
and Prospect Palace, and, arm-in-arm, entered 
that excellent hotel. But, acquainted with tlie 
niceties of her lover's humour, the young lady 
by no means invited him up to her uncle's 
private apartments ; informing a waiter . whom 
they surprised draining a lot of bottles, which 
had contained various liquids, into his moutli, 
VOL. III. 1 



3 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

on a landing-place . that tliey wished to be 
shown into the public room. Still, as there 
was nobody there, everybody being abroad at 
the staghnnt, indecorum was saved, and one 
place was just as suitable for the purpose as 
another for the nonce. 

In this seclusion, of course, Mr. Behring- 
bright could do no less than renew, in fuller 
and more unmistakable terms . if that were 
possible . his offer of marriage, his assurances 
iof love and devotion, and of his perfect ability 
to keep a wife, . not only in comfort and ease, 
but in the utmost splendour of affluence and 
luxury. 

Now, as has been previously remarked, Mr. 
Behringbright was not naturally eloquent 
except on business matters. I am of opinion, 
indeed, that his ideas were seldom particularly 
worth clothing in the magnificences of expres- 
sion, excepting in business matters ; and there 
brocade was superfluous, and he certainl}' never 
used it. He came rather an unpractised hand 
to the kind of work therefore : and Madeleine 
Jierself frequently smiled in secret at the con- 
trast of her Anglo-Dutchman's modest and 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 3 

sober style of wooing, with the flighty exalta- 
tions and sentimentalities of her French lover, 
. which, however, interpreted themselves into 
something very different in practice. But the 
finest flowers of Parisian rhetoric shrunk into 
very poor weeds indeed in comparison with the 
glitter and glow of a British soverei(jn-tree in 
full bearing. And Apollo himself might have 
warbled to his lute on one side, while Madeleine 
would have turned to the other to hear that 
she should do what she liked with a miUion of 
money ! 

With or without eloquence, everything 
was arranged to the satisfaction of the parties 
in this memorable interview; and what 
could Demosthenes and Cicero, and Pitt and 
Fox; all thundering together, have effected 
more ? 

It was agreed, that from their first meeting 
on board the Belfast steamer to that moment, 
Madeleine Graham and her now accepted suitor 
had felt an irresistible liking towards each other 
. combated on the one side only by appre- 
hension that it was impossible he could achieve 
so charming and youthful a creature's personal 

1.2 



4 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

regard, without which. Mr. Behringbright de- 
clared he should never have entertained the 
idea of recommending himself to her favour ; 
on the other, by the belief that Mr. Brown- 
john's condition, as a mere travelling com- 
mercial agent, would preclude the hope of an 
union with the consent of Miss Graham's 
parents, without which that dutiful child could 
never think of marriage. Nay, Mr. Behring- 
bright had almost, in the overflow of his heart, 
proclaimed his conviction that he had fallen in 
love with his adored long previously, on an 
occasion not likely to have escaped the reader's 
memory. But the delicate associations of that 
circumstance restrained him, and, greatly to 
Madeleine's own satisfaction, he reserved the 
avowal for another time. Still, the main pre- 
liminaries were accepted as proven ; and it 
followed, as a matter of course, that IVIr. 
Behrinsrbrierht now announced his determina- 
tion to lose no time in making his real rank and 
position known to Sir Orange and Lady Graham, 
and asking at their hands the greatest blessing 
mortal man can ask of Heaven . a loving, 
beautiful, and virtuous wife ! 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Madeleine's mind ran all the time, mean- 
while, how to secure her rear as well as to 
advance her main battle in the success thus far 
achieved. A grand object was to prevent all 
danger of a premature interview between her 
late and present favoured lovers. Considerable 
risk, it was evident, existed. 

It was not enough that she obtained a pro- 
mise from Mr. Behringbright to m'ake his pre- 
tensions known at once to her uncle and aunt, 
and to accompany her, as speedily as she could 
herself arrange, home to Belfast, to ask her 
father's consent, and complete the whole happy 
arrangement. An untutored expression from 
Camille . the exposition of romantic hopes he 
meditated . would be sufficient to topple down 
the whole castle of cards. And his wonder 
and anxiety were evidently awakened, and 
might throw him at once on some imprudent 
demonstration. 

Madeleine bethought herself of a plan. 

In the midst of the interchange of tender 
assurances and vows, a shadow came over lier 
bright expression. . "But Lord Glengariff," 
she exclaimed. " Oh, poor liord GlengarifT! 



6 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

what will he think of our behaviour to him 
to-day, dear Mr. Behringbright ? So rude, so 
very unkind, when he had contrived it all to 
do me pleasure and honour ! And he saved 
my life, too ! Oh, dear sir, nothing but the 
knowledge of our feelings towards each other 
. of how we stand towards each other . now 
can excuse us. Do let him know it all at once.'' 

" But Lord Glengariff will not be much 
comforted by the inforaiation, Madeleine 
dearest, since it is so evident he was coui-ting 
you for himself !" the accepted suitor replied, 
struck almost with a feeling of incredulity at 
his own good fortune as he said so. 

" Oh, no, it was all nonsense . merely some- 
thing to amuse away his vexation at Emily 
Maughan's preference for another . for that 
Frenchman we saw to-day," returned Madeleine ; 
and she believed herseif, and spoke as if she 
did. " I am sure his lordship will be quite 
happy to hear that we are engaged to each 
other, for . . . don't be angry, dearest, ... it 
is not many days ago since he as good as 
warned me to beware of your designs upon me, 
and expressed his fears, which puzzled me 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 7 

amazingly at the time, that your intentions 
were not honourable. Nobody knows what he 
will think or say now unless you undeceive 
him. He may, perhaps, do or say something 
on the provocation that may disturb your 
friendly relations for life ; and I am sure his 
poor mother has trouble enough abeady. But 
what I am thinking of more than anything 
besides is this, that if he comes to Killarney 
and finds this Frenchman here, he will imme- 
diately suspect his business with you ; and he 
being such a passionate young man and the 
other, you say, a professed duellist, they are 
certain to run their heads against each other, 
and something horribly stupid will happen in 
the fighting way. Don't you think so ?" 

" It is not unlikely," said Mr. Behringbright, 
considerably struck with this very natural 
apprehension, and not ill-pleased with the 
assurance presented of Lord Glengariff's real 
motives in his recent conduct. " But what can 
I do to prevent it?" 

"Go at once to Glengariff . at least, as soon 
as the sport on the lake is over, and it 
cannot last much longer now . and explain 



8 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

all, and induce liim to remain there. Mean- 
while, uncle and I will persuade Monsieur Le 
Tellier that he cannot leave his cause in better 
hands than ours to plead with you ; for I am 
all but certain he has come to beg your assist- 
ance in establishing them together in life . 
which I think you will allow me to promise 
him ? . and get him to go on his affairs away 
from here, until we can settle the affair to 
everybody's mind. Emily's mother must be 
asked, and all that, you know. And besides, 
dear Mr. Behringbright ! . after what has 
occurred so publicly .... it would be best . . 
it would be proper . . . (and there she blushed 
very naturally), that you should stay away from 
me a little while . should not, at least, be found 
with me alone when people come back . . . 
And hark ! now I think by the shouts the 
poor stag must be taking to the water, and it 
must be soon over with it there, among such a 
lot of brutes in the boats to drive it back upon 
the dogs !" 

Mr. Behringbright glanced from the lofty 
windows . which he had thrown open to give 
his syren air . and was so particularly struck 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 9 

by wliat lie tlien witnessed of the spectacle 
enacting on the watery expanse below, that he 
even arose, from his almost adoring attitude 
beside the young beauty, to gaze forward and 
consider it. 

The windows of the principal public room 
at Prospect Palace, where the loving pair had 
found refuge, overlooked . for good eyes . the 
entire Lower Lake. You could see as far as 
where the shores narrowed in to form the 
peninsula of Muckross, and the close, rocky 
channel between its jutting headland and the 
mountains descending from the Gap of Dunloe 
on the left. 

This scene had now in itself reached an 
extraordinary effulgence of beauty under the 
meridian glories of the sun, which made the 
whole lake shine like a sheet of silver set in a 
frame of the intensest cerulean blue. All the 
primitive colours seemed, in fact, displayed, as 
in some vast cut glass, through the watery 
atmosphere. Innisfallen Island glowed like a 
great emerald filigreed with its woods in the 
midst of the lake, and the mountains exhibited 
an almost infinite variety of shades on their sides 



10 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

and summits, from the brightest pea-green to 
the saddest purple. But, in addition, these 
nataral splendours were animated by the sparkle 
of a thousand oars, the flutter of a thousand 
particoloured flags, the rapid movement of 
the entire flotilla of boats, which Mr. Behring- 
bright perceived was converging wdth great 
rapidity towards the Toomies shore. But this 
was not what so particularly attracted his 
attention ; which was that, at the very 
moment he looked towards the spectacle, what 
he perceived, even at that distance, to be Lord 
Glengariff's barge rowed right across the line 
of view, and the branching head of a stag 
appeared, fuming with terror, and blowing the 
water up in a foam beyond it. 

Mr. BehrinsrbriMit knew that it was consi- 
dered very dangerous to cross the way of one 
of those powerful animals when driven to frenzy 
and desperation . as the stag always is when it 
betakes itself in flight to so uncongenial an 
element. He looked, therefore, to see the 
barge recede, so as to allow the maddened 
creature to pass. But his attention was riveted 
by seeing that, far from this being the case, a 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 11 

figure standing upright in the boat seemed, by 
its impatient gestures, to urge the rowers right 
on the animal's advance. And he recognised 
this figure to be Lord Grlengariff, by the gleam 
of a hunting-knife in his hand, which he 
remembered he carried, as a part of his chief- 
tain's costume, sheathed in his girdle, just as 
Madeleine, w^ho had also risen, exclaimed . 

" Dear me ! I hope his lordship is hot going 
to be so foolish ! He told me he would kill 
the stag himself . to show me that there was 
something money could not enable a man to 
do . and send me the antlers as a trophy. Ah ! 
what has happened there ?" 

What had happened ? At that great distance 
it was impossible to discern distinctly, but some- 
thing of a strange and horrible nature seemed 
to occur. A dreadful cry of dismay came audibly 
to land . a movement of infinite uproar and 
confusion took place around the barge ; after 
which, the whole sweep of boats behind it 
seemed to open and scud off in all directions, 
as if in the wildest consternation ! The cries 
of alarm w^ere redoubled ; and a moment after, 
the branches of the stag appeared rising nearer 



12 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

in the waters, as if from beneath the Glen- 
gariff barge, and making towards the opposite 
shore ! 

Mr. Behringbright snatched up a telescope 
. part of the furniture of the apartment. 

" The creature's throat is cut !" he ex- 
claimed. " Grlengariif has fulfilled his boast . 
the waves crimson every time the poor beast 
breasts them \" 

"But where is Glengariff himself? Does 
not something seem wrong there in the 
barge ?" inquired Madeleine. 

" There ! it makes its last leap . and sinks ! 
They will have to drag for the antlers ! What 
a strange gift to make to a lady !" said Mr. 
Behringbright. 

"But don't you reallythink there's something 
amiss in the Glengariff barge ? T don't see Lord 
Glengariff now ; and how they all seem clus- 
tered round something lying on the gunwale !" 
persisted Madeleine. 

The telescope was readjusted. "It does 
seem rather queer indeed !" said Mr. Behring- 
bright, greatly disturbed. " Whatever can it 
mean ? Waiter ! come here I But it seems all 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 13 

right again ; tliey are rowing towards Glen- 
garifF. No, they are not ! They all of them 
seem quite busy round some one lying down 
in the boat. Eooney, what is the meaning of 
all this?" 

The waiter, who had been draining the 
bottles, himself attracted by the uproar, now 
approached the window, and, privileged by 
Mr. Behringbright's handing him 'the tele- 
scope immediately delivered an authoritative 
dictum . 

" Some acshident\ should say, sir, for sartin, 
sure-ly ! Those craturs are worse than mad 
bulls when their horns are hot ! I hope it 
isn't his lordship. The O'Donoghue, come to 
grief, though he's so ventursome, or the 
murther's out about the wailing of the banshee 
which the Princess has been hearing this 
month past, they say !" 

"I hope not, indeed!" said Mr. Behring- 
bright, turning very pale. 

" My uncle is on board, and . and may be 
useful !" murmured Madeleine. *' Indeed, I 
almost think that he's binding something . it 
almost seems like a strip of sail . round some- 



14 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

thing. But tliey are rowing back to Glen- 
gariff ! I should think all must be right !" 

" Here's a boat making shore as fast as she 
can ; perhaps she may know 1" suggested the 
waiter. 

" Eun and ask ! . lose not a moment !" ex- 
claimed Mr. Behringbright. 

The man disappeared, and they speedily 
discerned him running down the walk to the 
landing-place. A painful pause then ensued 
. such a pause as the mind instinctively 
discerns precedes some thunderclap of evil 
tidings ! 

Unluckily, Eooney's careful clearance of the 
bottles had disqualified him for immediate 
rapid motion. He proceeded on his mission in 
a very strange sort of a zigzag . stumbled 
more than once ; and the general consequence 
was that Mr. Behringbright, losing patience, 
was about to take the road for information in 
person, when Madeleine caught him by the 
arm, and begged him, in accents he could not 
but feel irresistible, not to leave her. 

"I am so agitated ! I am sure something 
dreadful has happened! Do, Mr. Behring- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 15 

briglit, stay . if I am to dejDend upon you for 
m}^ future protection and sujDport !" 

The truth, is, she had discerned that the 
approaching boat conveyed Camille Le Tellier 
and his American friend. 

She did really look very ill and ten-ified, as 
she had reason ; and, dee|)l3^ touched with pity 
and love, Mr. Behringbright drew his arm 
round her waist, and supported her back to 
her chair. 

" What is there in the whole world of worth 
or value to me compared with my dearest girl ?" 
said Mr. Behringbright, in the tenderest words 
he had, perhaps, ever before used to mortal 
woman . so the reader may judge he was no 
great matter of a love-speechifier. But there 
was more real and genuine passion in the words 
than in the flightiest ebullition, perchance, of 
the gallant lady-killing Camille ; and, quite 
vanquished by the overmastering sentiment 
that swelled in his honest heart, he drew 
Madeleine fondly to his breast, and imprinted 
his first kiss of love upon her pale and trem- 
bling lips, precisely at the moment when a 
stranger entered the apai-tment, whose long 



16 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

legs and rapid stride liad distanced all herald- 
ing from the landing-place. 

It was Flamingo Brown! hut, luckily, 
Flamingo Brown alone. 

Something resembling that snarl of the 
hyena which some naturalists will have it is a 
laugh hurst from Mr. Brown . and it was 
plain that he had seen what he had seen. 

Mr. Behringhright looked confused, but also 
angry. Madeleine, for a moment, thought 
that all was lost ; but seeing the man alone, 
she instantly resumed courage. 

" Has something happened of an unpleasant 
nature on the water, sir ?" she inquired, trying 
to look no more concerned than any other 
young lady in such a position . and succeeding. 

" Bather . a few . not quite so pleasant as 
on land, I guess. Miss !" Flamingo replied, 
with another odious laus^h. " But it's no 
business of mine, that I know of . as yet ; 
so don't look such thunders at me, Mr. Beh- 
ringhright ! I've not come here on my o\vn 
hook, but another party's. . . . Miss, if 
you please " 

"What does the fellow mean?" inquired 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 17 

tlie millionnaire, with a stern glare at tlie 
intruder. 

" Perhaps I'll tell you, but not at present ; 
bj-and-bye, when I know better myself ! Mean- 
while, this here room is for public enjoyment, 
I'm given to understand, and all the big looks 
of all the capitalists in the world shant turn 
me out of it. All I want is to speak with 
Miss in private, if she pleases, on a little 
matter of business, which wont keep very 
long . if she's of opinion she can do me the 
honour !" 

"It is on his friend's affair, I suppose, Mr. 
Behringbright. I will speak with Mr. Brown 
in private, please . if you give me leave," said 
Madeleine, in great distress both in ap^iearance 
and in reality. And indeed, in spite of all 
her skill in management, her affairs were 
getting into a very uncomfortable imbroglio, 
and were likely to become more complicated 
still . Mr. Behringbright turning with a very 
fierce and restive look on Flamingo . when 
the waiter staggered in to the relief, like a 
proper Dcais ex mac/dud, supposing the Dcus 
to be a Bacchus. 

VOL. III. 2 



IS MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" Lord preserve us ! Such news . sucH 
news, sir 1" 

" Wliat news ? . what is the matter, 
manr 

" The O'Donoghue's fairly kilt and mur- 
thered itself entirely ! The stag's gored him 
in the breast, and he was as good as dead and 
buried before they brought him to land, and 
the scrame of the banshee is out !" 

" Grood heavens !" 

'"' Wal, I heard there was somebody hurt . 
not killed out-and-out. But who's T/ie O'Don- 
ac/ioo ? . what's the meaning of a name like 
that, with a The before it ?" said Flamingo, 
staring with all his yellow, bloodshot eyes. 

"It is Lord Glengariff! . Oh, go and see 
what is the matter ! Take surgeons, Mr. 
Behringbright ! No, you shall not go by 
water. Eooney, a jaunting-car instantly. 
You \^ill have to go round by Killarney for 
the doctors !" 

Madeleine reaU}^ was shocked, and indeed 
hon'ified, by the sudden intelligence ; but she 
did not forget the advisability of keeping 
Mr. Behringbright out of the way of Camille, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 19 

in case he should be remaining anywhere 
near in his boat. 

Mr. Behringbright's mind was, however, 
too much taken up by these disastrous 
tidings to attend to much else. 

/' Thank you, dearest ! . A car, Eooney, as 
fast as you can ; . a guinea if you're ready 
in ^Ye minutes ! Good God ! what a calamity ! 
His mother will not survive the - shock ! I 
will send you word instantly, dear Miss 
Graham, of what has happened. Meanw^hile, 
go to your own apartment, and save yourself 
from vulgar intrusion." 

" It is for Emili/s sake'' murmured Made- 
leine. " I shall be quite safe. Look, every- 
body is coming back ! But every moment 
may be of value to save that good, generous 
young man who saved my life ! Do go . 
do go !" 

Mr. Behringbright was too much stricken 
with apprehension himself to delay an un- 
necessary moment, and complied, with a warm 
pressure of his betrothed's hand defiantly to 
his heart, while Flamingo Brown looked on 
with a jeering scowl. 



20 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Madeleine, however, would not suffer liim 
to leave until Rooney re-entered, breathless, 
to announce that there was a conveyance 
ready at the hotel door, with their best horse 
. ^leastways, mare . Flyaway Jib, " in the 
ropes." For the phraseology of the good old 
times of Ireland survived in the common 
speech of the ostlery, though leather harness 
had long since superseded the former approved 
Celtic style of tackling in the shafts. 

She even saw Mr. Behringbright down the 
hotel stairs, and safely upon the conveyance ; 
then she turned, and bravely and unquaveringly 
re-entered the apartment she had left, to face 
this impudent intruder, in whom she instinct- 
ively recognised a foe. But, in spite of all his 
uncomfortable craft and insolence, she felt 
herself a match for him. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 21 



CHAPTER II. 

LOVE-LETTERS. 

There can be no doubt, I think, that Made- 
leine Graham exhibited as much courage and 
presence of mind in the conduct of her affairs 
as the great heroes are lauded for exhibiting in 
theirs. Unforeseen contingencies mostly found 
her alert and confident, full of resource and 
stratagem. No spider ever spun finer webs 
than some of her contrivances, nor ever 
repaired a damage or a rent with more rapid 
ingenuity and rally of effort than she. I like 
to praise her when I can ; and I must say that 
in so very alarming a twist and dislocation as 
her schemes had now sustained, she behaved 
well. 

She found Mr. Brown not unpleasantly 
engaged in emptying the decanter of slieiTy 
unbottled for her revival, but scarcely touched 



23 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

into his second tumbler, and frothing it up 
with water. 

" Beg pardon, Miss. I've ordered a cocktail 
on my own account, but I'm as dry as an old 
beehive ; and rather than split together, while 
the fellow takes such a confounded time, I 
thought I'd venture on the liberty of your 
bottle," Mr. Brown observed. 

Miss Graham accepted the excuse with great 
amenity. 

*' You are perfectly welcome, sir ; pray take 
a seat. As a friend of the gentleman whom I 
am so desirous of serving . for the sake of the 
dearest friend I have in the w^orld . I shall be 
most hapf)y if you will be pleased to make 
yourself perfectly at home." And this was said 
with a frank, sweet smile, which, on so beau- 
tiful a face, produced its effect even on the 
obtuse perceptions of Mr. Flamingo Bro^Ti. 
But he thought it necessary, too, to vindicate 
his proper national swagger and insolence in 
his reply. 

" I'm much obliged, I'm sure ; but there's 
no occasion to tell me to make myself at home 
in a hottel, I always am at home in a hottel ; in 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 23 

fact, I never live in anything else iDhen I'm at 
home. You've heard, I dare say, how we all 
live in hottels in Ameriky, man, woman, and 
child ; and find it pay better than each sulking 
in a hole by himself, as you continue to do in 
the old country here. However, I say nothing 
against that \ it is the land of my forebears, 
and I have a respect for it and its institutions, 
however much they differ from more enlightened 
nations, according-ly." 

"Of ^owx forebears, sir?*' said Madeleine, 
who had never heard this singular word before ; 
but it is good American for ancestors. And 
the American himself, be sure, was quite guilt- 
less of the species of sarcasm he fancied he 
now detected in the young lady's repetition of 
the word. 

" Oh, I'm a hear, am I ? Wal, I calculate, 
the more I hear the more I may hear F' he 
answered, very testily. "However, Miss, it 
would, perhaps, be as well if people who are so 
particular in their language were equal so in 
their doings! . What I say I mean; so you 
need not look so contemptible-like at 



mi: 



> r 



" Eeally, Mr. Brown, I do not know what 



24 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

you mean : I am merely looking at you for an 
explanation. I understood you to bring some 
message to me from a foreign gentleman, who 
requests my interference in an affair of great 
personal interest to himself, and is aware 
that he's not regarded with any very gi*eat 
favour by the elder members of my family." 

"And you was quite right, too, about its 
concerning also the dearest friend you have in 
the world, Miss ! . Everybody knows who 
everybody's dearest friend is ! . Your own self, 
I fancy, as much with you as w^ith me ; and 
any other person of good sense and calculating 
powers !" 

" I spoke of another person in this instance, 
Mr. Brown . a young lady, a schoolfellow and 
beloved inm^ate in my father's family at 
present," returned the brave Madeleine, eyeing 
the messenger with well-dissembled alarm and 
visible querj^ 

" But no other will serve the turn in this 
instance. Miss Graham !" was the stunning 
rejoinder. " For I have MounseerLe Tellier's 
positive orders and commands to you to join him 
at once at the Red Herring Tavern, . where he's 



MADELEINE GJIAHA.M. 25 

gone himself there to await Mr. Behringbright's 

arrival, and back the application he has come 
. I don't know how far out of the reg'lar way 
of business . to address to him. And he said 
you wouldn't dare to refuse ! . And by your 
look this blessed moment I am quite of the 
opinion you wont !" 

!N"o doubt Miss Graham did look a little 
taken aback, a little astonished . '- a little 
thunderstruck, perhaps . if that experience 
admits of degrees . as she heard the words. 

Ordered . commanded, by a young French- 
man, to join him at a low outlying tavern, to 
back an " application," of what nature could 
not be doubted, to Mr. Behringbright 1 . to 
that million of money she had with so much 
difficulty got at last within her reach . not 
clutch ! Exposure, destruction, . what else 
could be expected to ensue ? 

Nay, were they not already completed in the 
delivery of such a message b}^ a man who, 
remembering the recent wrangle, Madeleine 
had reason to think had motives to do or say 
anything he believed could annoy ]\Ir. Behring- 
bright ? 



26 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

She must ascertain that point at once ! All 
aglow in her secret heart with indignation, but 
speaking with outward composure, she inquired, 
*' Has Monsieur Le Tellier then made you 
. a perfect stranger to most of the parties, 
I imagine . a confidant of his design, whatever 
it may be ?" 

Flamingo in his turn was rather taken off 
his hinges by the point-blank directness 
of the question. He remembered that his 
friend had most earnestly urged upon him 
not to provoke the young lady by any 
intimation that he had betrayed the secret of 
the forbidden intimacy between them ; much 
less the hints he had so incautiously thrown 
out, under the influence of vanity and the 
Yankee's sneering incredulity, of the resistless 
quality of the influence he possessed over her. 
Flamingo was even startled b}" the glance that 
accompanied the query, and vaguely roused to 
the notion that, in truth, he was setting his own 
foot on a somewhat dangerous movement in 
the grass ! 

"No, ma'am, Mr. Le Tellier has not!" he 
answered, rather shrinkingly. " Mr. Le Tellier 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 27 

is too much the gentleman, I should say, to 
kiss and tell ; but he seemed to think, whatever 
he wanted to do or get done with Mr. Behring- 
bright, you was the party to lend the stoutest 
pull at the ropes. For there can be no doubt 
in the almighty framework of things [he con- 
cluded with a smile of some grim humour] 
that you have a pretty considerable say there 
. in the proper quarter, I mean . for what 
Mounseer wants." 

There was no mistaking this innuendo ; 
nor had Madeleine a shadow of hope that Mr. 
Brown had missed espying her in the embrace 
of her newly - betrothed suitor. Horribly 
vexatious, no doubt, this was, but it was a 
fait accomjjli. The whole consideration, how- 
ever, suggested quite a bright expedient to 
her quick invention. 

" It is true," she answered, without a ruffle 
on her brow or lip, that " I lutvc a good deal 
of influence with Mr. Behringbright. Botli 
my unfortunate friend and Monsieur Le Tellier 
are perfectly aware of that fact . in soliciting 
its exertion. And I am anxious to use it 
always to a good purpose : for example, Mr. 



28 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Brown, if I could do anything to heal the 
little breach of friendly feeling which seems to 
have taken place between yourself and Mr. 
Behringbright, I should have very great 
pleasure in so doing ; . particularly after what 
I heard you observe, that upon some trifling 
pique, in the transactions you have been en- 
gaged in together, Mr. Behringbright is about 
to throw away some exceedingly lucrative 
prospects of investment in your power to 
suggest/' 

" And so I did ! Hog and heaven ! I never 
heard such a sensible woman talk before !" 
exclaimed the Yankee, wise as he was in his 
generation . knowing as he deemed himself in 
the ways of women, on the strength of one 
widowing and three divorces in his native land. 
" By jingo, you're a real Christian, ma'am ! 
And the first duty of that kind of crittur, I have 
always heard, was to make peace wherever 
people are at loggerheads ; and the way to do 
that isn't by pitting them together sure and 
certain, but putting them in a common notion 
of something lucrative in the way of business ! 
That's what keeps us and the old country 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 29 

always only a-snarling and growling, but never 
coming to regular clawing and tearing ! Jest 
you bring about a reconci-liation between me 
and the great capitalist, and be banged if I 
wont make it well worth your while, Miss, and 
I'll never make another stroke in the way of 
mischief about that Frenchman, s'help me ! 
He's nothing to me ; in fact, I would as soon, 
or sooner, punch his head as not. And he 
deserves it, too, for the way he speaks about 
young ladies that probably have no more to 
do with him than Mother Eve ! But these 
handsome, finical beggars do sometimes get up 
a lady's sleeve before she has the sense to 
shake 'em out, and he has boasted you must 
come if he sent for you ; and appointed me to 
bring you, as reg'lar as if I was execution 
sherifi*, safely to the spot. But I hope I can 
keep a secret, if I see no reason to the 
contrary !" 

A feeling of intense vexation and resent- 
ment kindled in Madeleine's inmost heart as 
she listened to this confirmation of her fears, 
and arrived at the conviction, that in s])ite of 
hej: requests and Le Tellier's solemnly-plighted 



30 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

word, lie had gratified liis own vanitj' so 
unfairly at the expense of hers . perhaps had 
fatally compromised her reputation with this 
meddling and audacious stranger ! Indeed, 
in spite of his disclaimers, she saw enough 
almost to convince her on this point in the 
malicious humour of the expression that shone 
on all the long hard lines of Flamingo Brown s 
physiognomy. 

Still he was a stranger, and might be got 
rid of, she mused, if well managed, without 
any ruinous results to Camille's imprudence. 
It was worth while meantime to try what 
effrontery and resolution might effect in the 
way of removing or shaking his opinion, 
however formed or to what extent. 

" Monsieur Le Tellier did not boast without 
reason, absolutely," she remarked, with a 
purposely audible sigh. "Nay, it is certain 
that he possesses a cruelly irresistible sway 
over all who cherish the unfortunate young 
lady whose confidence he has so shamefullj^ 

what was I about to say ? Ko matter ; I 

am quite ready to obey Monsieur Le Tellier's 
summons, and will thankfully accept so re- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 31 

spectable an escort as is offered me to the place 
wlier« he assigns me the rendezvous ; which, 
as the abode of Mr. Behringbright, must also 
be of the highest respectability." 

" Yes, Miss, I am respectable, and I am 
proud of the remark," returned the beguiled 
Flamingo, eagerly rising. " But I am not 
so sure of the respectability of the quarters 
we're a-going to. I hear it's a kind of inferior 
lodging-house and tea-gardens, and that sort 
of thing. And if you thought Mr. Behring- 
bright wouldn't like you to go there, why, I'll 
go back and tell Frenchy so, and advise him to 
study manners better than to ask a lady to 
such an ass-ignation." 

Madeleine had thought only at the moment 
how extremely desirable it would be to open an 
understanding with her rash lover, who seemed 
so likely to spoil everything by his interference, 
while she knew that Mr. Behringbright was at 
a distance. But this last broadly-pronounced 
word startled her. She felt she was placing 
herself in Flamingo Brown's power, as well as 
being placed so by Camille's rashness ; for she 
could not possibly pretend to Mr. Bchring- 



32 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

bright that she expected to find him at the 
"Eed Herring," after just parting with him 
on an errand of hfe or death in another 
direction. 

An intricate problem, therefore, presented 
itself for solution . How to conciliate the im- 
prudent Frenchman by a seeming assent to his 
demand, without any real compliance ; boldly 
confront the suspicions of the American ; and 
secure herself at the same time the chance of a 
private interview with Camille, which should 
remove the stumblingblocks from her path, by 
the unconscious co-operation of his deleterious 
agent. 

This was how she worked it out : . 
" Oh yes, my dear sir, I had forgotten. Mr. 
Behringbright ivoidd be surprised if I went 
to any out-of-the-way place like that in his 
absence ; though Monsieur Le Tellier, of 
course, cannot know that he is not likely to 
return to his lodgings, if at all to-night, till 
late. But you can tell him from me . if, as 1 
suspect but too strongly, his business admits 
of no delay . I will with pleasure cross the 
water with him at once to Glengariff. .My 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 33 

aunt and uncle are there . and I owe it to tlie 
unfortunate young nobleman, tlie owner, to 
make the most friendly inquiries after his late 
accident. There is still plenty of the day left 
for the excursion . or we can go round by the 
land, if you would prefer it, to save time, in a 
car, and take up Monsieur Le Tellier on the 
way ? It is a beautiful drive . and uncle and 
aunt can come home with me. So' you will 
now be convinced, I hope, Mr. Brown, that I 
am not afraid to present myself, with this 
French gentleman in my company, to Mr. 
Behringbright ?" 

The American <did seem now fairly non- 
plussed. 

Assuredly he had seen with his own eyes a 
passage of lovemaking which, coupled with 
the probabilities of th^ case, made him conclude 
Camille's boasted secret betrothed was devoting 
her energies to secure the more valuable prize. 
But how was he to reconcile this readiness to 
comply with what he knew to be Le Tellier*s 
purpose in tlie interview tlms assented to, with 
the Frenchman's declarations? . ignorant, as 
the luckless boaster had of course left him, of 

VOL. III. 3 



34 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

the facts that rendered it very unlikely he 
should take upon him to present himself in 
such a season of disorder in the house of a man 
who had treated him with public insult and 
injury? 

" Why/' Flamingo burst out, staring in 
amazement at the young lady, " aren't you the 
main party yourself, and the one that he's 
going to ask Mr. Behringbright to let him 
marry, in spite of all her relations . ^like Eomeo 
and Juliet ?" 

It was plain what Camille had been at now ! 
But Madeleine was further than ever from 
losing her head in this new whirl of the 
waters round her unsteady stepping-stones. 

" Are you crazy, sir, or is Mr. Le Tellier ?" 
she exclaimed, as greatly puzzled. " You have 
seen how Mr. Behringbrjght and I are situated, 
. . . or may guess ! But what has he got 
to do with disposing of me in marriage, sup- 
posing he himself has no pretensions that way 
with me ? I do not know, in short, whether 
it is your own misapprehension, or whether the 
young gentleman has purposely mystified you ; 
but i am entii'ely ignorant of what you allude 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 35 

to, with the exception that I have promised to 
interest myself as much as I can to bring 
about the possibility of a union between 
Monsieur Le Tellier and a governess who 
resides in my father's family, of whom Mr. 
Behringbright has charitably constituted him- 
self the protector. In this view I am perfectly 
willing, as I have said, to accompany you on 
your return to your friend, and proceed with 
him to Grlengariff Castle." 

" Wal, this does flog Barnum ! . The 
impudent little French humbug ! I wonder 
where he spied a slate off my roof, that he 
dared to let daylight into me through a cracked 
pane !" exclaimed Flamingo. " All his French 
bantam strutting, I suppose. Be darned if I 
don't go back and give him a good rubbing 
down with an oak towel, for sending me on a 
fool's errand ! And yet didn't he tell me . yes, 
by Jupiter ! he did tell me . that he had scores 
on scores of letters from you, which he could 
show to prove everything, in case you stuck up 
your back ! . Everything, I say; and he seemed 
to mean a good deal by everything, from the 
way he said it ! Every tiling ! . if you dared to 
3~z 



36 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

play him any tricks with anybody . if they 
were kings upon their golden thrones, or had 
California ready to settle on you for pin- 
money r* 

Now, indeed . and for almost the first time 
since the commencement of this startling inter- 
view . Madeleine felt the palsying touch of 
fear ! 

Letters . letters from her . her letters . to 
CamiUe Le Tellier ! 

Now, it must be confessed, that, at the very 
best, love-letters are seldom a species of com- 
position the writers, after the lapse of the 
Horatian interval, would willingly submit to 
the public approbation. There is apt to be a 
good deal in them of superfluous flight and 
fancy, which a taste sobered and chastened by 
time . or the possession of the beloved object . 
is apt to discover most absurdly exaggerated 
and out of all rational keeping. But without 
looking through the judicious lenses of time, 
Madeleine Graham knew very well that her 
letters were not of the kind to coui't a dispas- 
sionate inspection. 

Certain it was, at all events, that no other 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 37 

man in tlie world, save liim alone to whom 
tliose amatory effusions were addressed, could 
ever take Madeleine Grraham to his heart with- 
out the consciousness that he was hugging 
disgrace and dishonour of the deepest dye. 
As for the honest-minded, soher-hearted George 
Cocker Behringbright, had he himself been the 
object of such an idolatry, he would have 
loathed and rejected it as the pure, grassy- 
breathed ox-god of India would turn with 
loathing and abhorrence from a sanguinary 
fetish of Dahomey offered in his honour. But 
what judgment would he form upon such com- 
positions when he ivas not? And, of course, 
the grand danger of these letters lay in their 
capability of being submitted to Ms perusal. 

These were reflections which, flashing with 
much greater rapidity than pen and ink can 
hope to photograph through Madeleine 
Graham's mind, did certainly give an un- 
wonted quiver to her heart, and sent the blood 
blanched downward from her rich complexion. 

This was fear. But another sensation almost 
as instantly started, like a plague-spot of 
fire, in her inmost soul; and could Camille 



38 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Le Tellier's feebler and much less liarmful 
nature have appreciated how that first glow of 
resentment would spread in such a nature, 
he would have been a good deal more afraid 
than he had actually shown himself to offend 
his lady-love in so unhandsome a guise. For, 
after all, Madeleine was in the right to feel 
very much hurt and injured in the situation 
in which she was cast by Camille's vaunts 
and threats to this uncomfortable American 
stranger. Assuredly, honour should not be 
confined exclusively to the thieves of men's 
goods and chattels, and even such lovers have 
a right to expect a little among themselves ! 

What could she say or do in such an emer- 
gency ? 

I have noticed that people of matured 
wisdom and experience mostly say nothing 
when they don't knoAv what to say. Young 
beginners, however, . especially of the feminine 
sex, . frequently do exactly the contrary. Still, 
it can hardly be said Madeleine was betraj'ed 
into any very signal imprudence when, after a 
moment's pause, she exclaimed, . 

" Letters ! . letters of mine ? They must be 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 39 

solely relating, then, to Monsieur Le Tellier 
and Miss Mauglian's unhappy affair, in which 
I now almost regret to say I have interested 
myself long and rashly enough. But did 
he pretend to liave any such proofs . such 
documents, I mean . of my complicity in so 
unhappy a love-affair amongst his travelling 
paraphernalia? He easily might, for they 
must be very few . if any at all." 

" He had a good large 'portmanteau with 
him, but I thought it was filled chiefly with 
French fal-lals and perfumery,'' said Mr. 
Brown. 

" Most likely so, sir. And has he gone to 
lodge with his portmanteau at the ' Eed 
Herring' ?" 

" So he told me . that he might be sure not 
to miss Mr. Behringbright. Btit I don't think 
he is over flush of cash, either, for the great 
hotels, as you call them, over here." 

Madeleine ruminated. Could Camille possi- 
bly have those letters in conveyance about 
with him, so numerous as they were ? If so, 
it must be with a pur^Dose. And she felt her- 
self utterly in his power indeed ! In the power 



40 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

of a man who had evidently so far, in mere 
vanity and inconsiderateness, placed so much 
of the vital secret of her existence at the mercy 
of a stranger ! 

Madeleine thereupon felt like one who has 
walked asleep to the verge of a precipice, 
starting awake ! Oh me ! the horrible sea 
that churned below among the black spiky 
rocks ! . the .hideous gulfs of air that alone 
intervened ! Even her clear brain grew dizzy, 
and reeled at the thought of so horribly press- 
ing and near a destruction. Flamingo himself 
stared at the look of far- searching vacancy of 
terror she gave at him. 

" Mercy on me, Miss !" he exclaimed. " But 
you dont seem to like it, now ! For my part, 
I dare say it's all the fellow's talk. And if 
you say half a word I'll make him 2^rove his 
words . or pull his nose for him and make 
him eat them." 

" I am sure I am much obliged to you, and 
I will endeavour to prove myself worthy of so 
kind a friend," said Madeleine, extending her 
small and prettily-je welled hand to the vast 
paw of the American. "But," she resumed,. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 41 

with a great appearance of dignified composure 
and disdain, *' I have resolved on quite a 
different course. Since Monsieur Le Tellier 
presumes to speak of me in so improper a 
manner, I wiU take no further notice of him 
or his affairs. Let him do his best or his 
worst . I defy and challenge him to it ! I will 
return no answer whatever to his pretended 
commands. And if you are so kindly friendly 
towards me as you declare yourself, Mr. Brown, 
you will leave him to amuse the time till 
Mr. Behringbright's return as he best may, and 
remain to partake of the excellent dinner our 
host will not fail to place before his company 
to-day." 

*' Is it an invite. Miss ? . and am I to con- 
sider myself Mr. Behringbright's guest or 
yours ?" said the Yankee, with a hungry clash 
of his ogrelike teeth. 

" As my uncle's, sir. But I shall be happy 
to testify to Mr. Behringbright my opinion of 
the politeness and good feeling you have 
evinced in placing Monsieur Le Tcllier's wishes 
in the least impudent and disadvantageous 
manner before me," said Madeleine. "In 



42 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

fact," she added, with a fascinating expression 
not altogether lost on the recipient, " if I take 
any further interest in the matter it will be 
because I desire to do honour to the zeal and 
eloquence of your advocacy of your imprudent 
friend's objects. Shall I desire the waiter to 
place a cover for you, Mr. Brown ?" 

" But you are not afraid to write a few lines 
in answer, are you, Miss, that in case of 
Mr. Le Tellier's obstinacy I may ask to com- 
pare them with the letters he pretends to 
have?" said Flamingo, who spied his ad- 
vantages in that direction. 

A most disagreeable and involving demand, 
in good sooth ! But it would not do to 
hesitate. 

" Certainly not," Madeleine answered. " I 
have no fear to let my handwriting be com- 
pared with any other, and I will write a proper 
answer to the French gentleman in your pre- 
sence. Compare my writing when you like 
and with what you like. . Eoone}^ an ink- 
standish and paper, if you please." 

The waiter, who was getting better of his 
bottle-ends after a doze on the staircase, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 43 

obeyed pretty promptly, and Madeleine seated 
herself with seeming indifference but much 
secret agitation to her task. 

She certainly did intend to put a specimen 
of penmanship in her own real handwriting on 
record. One may easily deny any other, pro- 
vided the internal evidence is not too strong. 
Mr. Behringbright had never yet seen the 
genuine article, as she believed, and was right. 
Still, she was rather flurried by the Yankee's 
evident watchfulness ; and the only alien style 
she could think of just at the moment was the 
one she had practised up, with some little diffi- 
culty, in the imitation of Lady Grlengariff's 
handwriting in the forged postscript. So she 
wrote what she wrote in that, and the words 
ran thus : . 

" Miss Graham presents her compliments to 
M. Camille Le Tellier, and will take an early 
opportunity to mention the subject of his 
proposal to Miss Emily Maughan to her dear 
friend's beneficent guardian. She must, how- 
ever, decline any attempt io force Monsieur Le 
Tellier's wishes and jDresence upon that gentle- 
man, until duly authorized by him, leaving it 



44 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

to his own good sense and feeling of propriety 
to clioose a fitter time and place than he seems 
apparently to have selected." 

" Be darned if you seem at all afraid of him, 
however !" said Flamingo, on receiving this 
note, handed over to ]iim open for perusal ; 
"and I don't mind mentioning that I do now 
begin to think it very likely it is all gammon 
and lies on the Frenchman's part. He always 
struck me as being a deuced sight more of a 
windbag than a sack of wheat. And as a 
letter like this wont go off into spontaneous 
combustion, but will keep as cool in one's 
pocket as a cucumber in a larder, I'll do my- 
self the honour. Miss, to accept your kind 
invitation, and remain to the fahle cVhote" 

"I am very glad of it. But I see people 
coming in, and I ought to go and dress a little 
for dinner," said Madeleine, smilingly accept- 
ing the position of inviter thus thrust upon 
her ; " and so I must ask leave of absence for 
a few minutes, Mr. Brown. But there are 
plenty of newspapers and magazines, and lively 
peoj)le now, to amuse you till my return." 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 45 

And so saying, she made a light curtsy, 
and \\dthdrew from the admiring gaze of the 
American. 

"Isn't she a handsome European article, 
neither?" he muttered to himself, as she 
retired. " But still there's some double, in- 
and-out play in it, I'm sure. Only it's no 
business of mine, but rather the contrary, if so 
be as she will bring about a reconciliation 
between me and that high and mighty British 
capitalist. I haven't explained to her about 
the skins, either, but I will at dinner ! . But 
can she be intending any sort of hocus trick 
upon me ? I don't see what it can be ; but 
rU keep my eye on the staircase she's gone up, 
and see that she don't give me the slip. . 
Don't shut the door, waiter ; I'm as partial to 
air as a grampus." 

And Flamingo hastened to plant his chair 
almost in the doorway of the grand saloon of 
Prospect Palace, leaning it back against a wall, 
with his large feet set tight by the heels upon 
the seat beneath . swaying backward and for- 
ward, and affecting to read a newspaper, 
but keeping his eye on the access to the 



46 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

apartment which Miss Graham appeared to 
ascend to. 

This Mr. Brown, of America, was a person 
of great discernment, and thoroughly on his 
guard against the wiles of women ; neverthe- 
less, the apparition of an elderly female, in a 
very plain bonnet and thick veil, who shortly 
after came hobbling downstairs as if she were 
lame, and went almost closely past him, with 
her head bent stiffly down, scarcely excited 
his attention. 

Eooney was rather surprised, and muttered 
to himself, as he was laying the cloth for his 
forty-seven guests, " I didn't see Mrs. Doctor 
Bucktrout come in, that I know of . and now 
she's going out again." But it was Madeleine 
Graham, who had often disguised herself and 
mimicked her aunt in jest, but who now found 
it convenient to play the part in earnest, and 
passed thus forth from Prospect Palace, un- 
questioned and unsuspected, in her artfully- 
assumed costume. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 47 



CHAPTEE III. 

AULD ACQUAINTANCE. 

The " Eed Herring" was not exactly the 
proper designation of tlie establishment whither 
Madeleine Grraham, changing her gait as soon 
as she was fairly out of Prospect Palace, now 
swiftly directed her steps. The original pro- 
prietor had been famous as a fisherman on the 
lakes, and being a great hand at preparing all 
the necessary gear for the sport, hung out a 
gilded wooden representation of a trout, as a 
sign of his whereabouts, on the end of a 
fishing-rod, from an upper window. But time, 
weather, and the illnatured wit of envious 
contemporaries (fishermen also have them), had 
speedily transformed the "Grolden Trout" into the 
" Eed Herring." And now that the house had 
been converted into a tavern and lodging-house 
for guests of inferior respectability, the vulgar 



48 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

name stuck to it more pertinaciously tlian ever. 
It was, however, situated rather romantically 
on the roadside to Killarney, on the skiiiis of 
Kenmare "Woods, at no very great distance 
from, hut about halfway between. Prospect 
Palace and the town. A stage-coach, passing 
at the time Madeleine went out of the hotel 
grounds, seemed also to offer her a facility, of 
which she gladly availed herself. Not forget- 
ting her character, however, as an elderly 
female, she hailed it in counterfeit weak 
accents, and chiefly by flourishing an umbrella 
of her aunt's, with which she had taken care to 
provide herself The driver goodnaturedly 
stopped ; and a place being vacant in the 
vehicle, the guard, who was as like a giant as 
need be, affably lifted her in his arms, and 
stuffed her into it. 

As it was now growing towards dusk, and 
Madeleine's face was enveloped in her thick, 
old- woman's veil, it was not for several 
moments that she distinctly made out who 
were her fellow-passengers. Perhaps she was 
too much occupied with her own thoughts to 
take any particular notice at first. But she 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 49 

was rather struck, thougli vaguely, with the 
extremely fashionable figure of a lady, who 
was reclining, seemingly all but asleep, in a 
corner of the coach, but whose half-open feline 
eyes kept quiet note of all that occurred in it. 
Madeleine felt that, before she herself ventured 
to repay the stranger's furtive observation in 
kind, and then it was with the greatest diflGi- 
culty she prevented herself from giving an 
outward sign of her inward astonishment ; for 
without doubt those hard-lined black eyebrows, 
those pear-shaped, flat cheeks, that berouged 
but pallid and dissipated complexion, that 
dishonest, lurking glance, were all distinguished 
attributes of Mademoiselle Olympe Loriot ! 

It is not always so pleasant for "auld ac- 
quaintance" to rejoin one another on the road 
of life as the good-hearted old convivial song 
would make it appear. Madeleine Graham, 
at all events, felt no kind of call upon her to 
burst out into a pa3an on the occasion . con- 
siderably to the contrary. She felt that such 
an arrival was an addition to her troubles, 
with which she could most gladly have dis- 
pensed at the moment, while her general per- 

VOL. III. 4 



50 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

plexities were carried to the height to account 
for it. 

What, indeed, could Mademoiselle Olympe 
Loriot possibly want on the Lakes of Killarney ? 

Had she come on a professional visit among 
the pleasure-seekers there ? But there was 
no theatre in Killarney . no scene for her dis- 
plays ; and after the riots she had occasioned 
even in the Protestant cities of the north of 
Ireland, it seemed unlikely that she should 
have determined to try her luck as an Orange 
dancer on the Catholic population of the south. 
The other persons in the coach were not, seem- 
ingly, of her company, and otherwise did not 
look at all like stage people : just the reverse, 
. country people. 

It was very puzzling. Madeleine had no 
notion, after the strong repulse she had given 
her, that Olympe could have come after her. 
Had her old frenzy revived, then, and was she 
there in pursuit of Camille Le Tellier ? That 
would not have been so had. But how should 
she know Camille was in that part of the 
world ? He was not likely to have given her 
any inkling of his proceedings ; he was not 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 51 

SO fond of lier society. It was monstrously 
puzzling : but the height of imprudence . en- 
tirely out of the question . to inquire. Made- 
leine's principal hope and wish, on the contrary, 
were to keep altogether unknown and unob- 
served of her dear friend of the olden time. 

But all of a sudden Mademoiselle addressed 
her, in excellent English, though with a vi- 
brating, foreign accent, . 

"Since you are probably a native of this 
country, Madame, will you favour me with infor- 
mation which are the estate and mansion of M. 
le Comte . the Barl, I mean, of Glengarr-eelf ?" 

"What could Olympe want with knowing 
this ?" thought her once pupil. But she was 
in no hurry to answer. She feared the recog- 
nition of her voice, disguise it as she might . 
Mademoiselle had so often lauded its musical 
accentuation to her. She took the best plan 
she could . pretended to be deaf, slouched her 
head down, gave an old-womanish cough, and 
was silent. 

Another of the passengers in the coach, 
however, a man who looked like a farmer or a 
grazier, did duty for her. 
4 . 2 



52 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" We can't see it through the wood, my 
lady ; and besides, there is a mighty big mist 
gathered on the mountains over the place, which 
would prevint us, if we could," he said, most 
respectfully, to that showy bonnet and shawl. 

" A thousand thanks. Monsieur ! Ah, tell 
me, do you know this young lord personally ? 
For me, I only know that he is the best, the 
bravest, the most generous of men; and I 
have come a long way out of my way to tell 
him so 1" exclaimed Olympe, in an ecstatic 
tone. " Do but, at all events, point out to me 
the quarter of the horizon in which his honour- 
able residence is situated ! I have no other 
business in your mountains except to thank 
this generous young nobleman for a life, not 
worth preserving, which he has saved. "Where 
. where is it ?" 

" Good heavens !" thought Madeleine. " Is 
she still haunted by her old mania, and specu- 
lates on the chances of the conquest of Lord 
Glengariff, under pretence of expressing her 
gratitude to him ? . or has she come a-begging 
to him ? She looks poor, though so bedizened 
in her garb ! If so, she is going to be finely 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 53 

disappointed, and I shall soon be rid of her out 
of Killarney, if she don't suspect I am here." 

None of the other passengers seemed able to 
point out the probable " quarter of the ho- 
rizon" in question, not knowing what the 
plirase could mean. But Madeleine thought 
it not amiss to take the function upon her, 
which she did by literally pointing towards 
the black-peaked head of a mountain which 
reared itself in the distance, in a perfect sea of 
molten sunset gold, above the mists correctly 
described as concealing Grlengariff Castle, and 
the lake at its feet, beyond Kenmare Woods. 

Mademoiselle Loriot gave a stare from the 
exquisitely-gloved hand to the thick old veil 
of her cicerone, burst into a flourish of thanks, 
and put her head and half her lean but im- 
mensely-crinolined framework out of the coach 
window, and continued to gaze so long in the 
point of view suggested, that she almost 
seemed to intend to occupy her position as 
a fixtui'e, with all its consequences to the oc- 
cupants of the vehicle. These were at once 
ludicrous, and a nuisance to most of the pas- 
sengers ; but Madeleine was rather pleased at 



54 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

having so turned attention away from internal 
concerns . like one of those politic kings of 
old, who always got up a foreign war w^hen 
threatened with commotions at home. But 
she repented her cleverness when Mademoiselle 
Loriot suddenly drew her figure back, and sunk 
breathless into her place in seeming horror and 
dismay, exclaiming, " Dieu I encore cet homme /" 

" AVhat man /" Madeleine could not hinder 
herself from exclaiming, and in her own na- 
tural accents ; but at the instant the coach 
had stopped, the door was flung open, and the 
guard called out, in stentorian accents, . 

" Here you are, old lady ! Here's the ' Eed 
Herring' !" 

On the other hand, mealing like a proper 
Frenchman in the open air, in a species of 
Swiss balcony raised on arches of rough-hewn 
timber round the house. Monsieur Camille Le 
Tellier was distinctly visible, seated in a rustic 
chair above, with a cup of coffee beside him 
on a little table. He was sipping this, and 
affecting to study the contents of a little tat- 
tered Parisian paper in his hand. But his 
eye fell immediately on the stoppage below ; 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 55 

and it was pretty plain, from his raised eye- 
brows and general startled look, that he heard 
the exclamation, though perhaps he did not 
know exactly whence it came. 

'' Mo7i Bieu ! cette terrible femme la encore!" 
was the reciprocation of this modern Eneas to his 
Dido's similar utterance. Fortunately the coach 
made no delay; and as soon as Madeleine touched 
the ground the driver flourished his livhip, and 
the horses trotted upon their destined route. 

Madeleine found herself at liberty in a few 
instants to pursue her original object. There 
was no occasion for any announcement. She 
saw she had only to mount the outside gallery 
stairs to find herself face to face with her 
ci-devant lover. But her disguise must have 
been admirably executed, since even he did not 
at all recognise her until she spoke, although 
she straightened her figure, and altered it about 
as completely as a goddess who has adopted 
some old nurse's to do an errand of Olympian 
Jove. and has done it. 

" Camille !" she said, " Monsieur Le Tcllier ! 
. do you not know me ?" 

The accents she used were so cold and distant 



56 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

that it wonld liave been excusable enough if 
Le Tellier bad not recognised the speaker even 
then. But be did so, and started up with a 
lover-like exclamation, and seeming intention 
to clasp bis betrotbed to bis beart, wben a 
gesture from ber repelled tbe movement. 

" People may observe . and besides, all that 
sort of foUy is over for ever now between us !" 
sbe said, quite sternly ; and seeing tbat be looked 
at ber w^itli an angry as well as startled ex- 
pression (sbe meant to startle bim), sbe con- 
tinued, " If for no otber reason, I would dis- 
cbarge you for ever from my beart and confidence 
for your treason to love and bonour in tbe reve- 
lations you bave confided to an impudent 
stranger !" 

" You are mistaken, dearest Madeleine ! . 
Mees Grabam ! . I bave confided notbing. Mr. 
Brown bas told you a lie if be bas asserted to 
tbe contrary. I bave only used bim as my 
messenger . if you mean tbe American gentle- 
man . because I was afraid, as usual, tbat in 
spite of your forced invitation you would be 
displeased witb me for appearing before your 
relations," said Camille, very earnestly. 

" Have yon not told bim tbat you bave 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 57 

letters . the most compromising for me ! . 
which you cany about with you everywhere, 
at every risk of what may befall to them or 
yourself . and in them tome?" said Madeleine, 
with more anxiety than she suffered to appear 
on her countenance. 

" Letters that compromised you ? Never. 
I never said so 1 Letters full of the effusions 
of an unsurpassable affection and generosity, I 
may have said ; but no possible risk is incurred 
with them. I carry them with me always in 
my portmanteau, which I scarcely ever lose 
out of my sight, and never but under the 
most faithful locks and keys," deprecated 
Camille. Madeleine had decidedly taken the true 
and proper position of the person who is most 
to blame in a quarrel . the upper and hectoring. 

"You have tliem with you, then? And so 
often as I have asked you to destroy them !" 
she returned. 

"But I found it impossible, ma chere ! They 
are my only consolation . my only assurance . 
in your absence. I should fear to lose my hold 
entirely of the past without them. Whenever 
a doubt of your fidelity arises in my heart, I 
am obliged to read those naive effusions of your 



58 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

tenderness often and repeatedly, "before I can 
satisfy myself that I have no real reason for 
apprehension." 

" But you are wrong to do so, Camille ; my 
feelings are much changed," Madeleine an- 
swered, provoked a good deal more tlian 
softened by this loving statement. '' You 
know we have always agreed that we are not 
the masters of our inclinations, we unfortunate 
mortals ! And women can no more help feeling 
a chill of the affections than men, who are very 
subject to it. Besides, there is no chance of 
our ever forming a happy union. Fortune, my 
father, your poverty and foreign descent are 
all opposed to it. And so, I plainly tell you, I 
have made up my mind that we must part. I 
am very sorry for it, but really I cannot help 
it. And this last stupidity of yours in intro- 
ducing a great rough bear of an American 
backwoodsman into our affairs has completely 
disgusted me with you. I come to take a quiet 
but eternal for e well of you, and to propose 
termson which we can part advantageously for 
both." 

Camille listened as if he could hardly believe 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 59 

in his own senses. But a sudden idea seemed 
to restore the balance of his faculties. 

" Grreat heaven ! it is all true, then!" he 
exclaimed, clenching his fists to his forehead 
with a theatrical air of desperation. "And 
the means w^hence I hoped to draw our salvation 
will only prove the destruction of my happi- 
ness ! The worst suspicions which her going 
about with this immensely rich man so'naturally 
provoked are confirmed, and it is a traitress 
of love for money whom I am going to ask to 
share wdth me my suj)plications for assistance, 
to the very occasion of the crime !'' 

" The crime ! What nonsense you talk, 
Camille ! But you are quite right about the 
absurd plan you have formed. It was downright 
madness in the very beginning . based on the 
ridiculous notions people on the Continent have 
of the English. You grudge one another a 
knob of sugar, and you think we are always 
handing over thousands of pounds to anybody 
who likes to ask it ! Mr. Behringbright is a 
very rich man ; but he is rich for himself, and 
for others who are of use or pleasure to him . - 
not for all the world : never think it. I tell 



60 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

you also that you are quite right in supposing 
you could not make him a more disagreeable 
request than for my hand. Why do you look 
at me so surprised? I speak to you with 
perfect candour and simplicity, because I really 
want you to understand what I say, and that I 
mean precisely what I do say." 

Camille, indeed, looked very much sui'prised ; 
men seem always amazed when women do hard 
and perfidious things. Perhaps they think 
they ought to have the monopoly. 

A short interval of wonder, however, seemed 
to awaken him more effectually to the situation. 
His handsome French visage and florid cheeks 
blackened all over with rasre. 

"After such a declaration," he observed, 
with a quivering smile on the lower portion of 
the visage, in portentous contrast to the upper, 
" Mademoiselle will excuse me for repeating 
that I need every support to my convictions of her 
former sincerity, and that I believe I retain them 
in the letters to which allusion has been made." 

'' Is this a threat, Camille ?" Mademoiselle 
replied, with an expression of scorn that did 
not quite conceal apprehension. ''But do you 



.MADELEINE GRAHAM. 61 

not know tliat to betray a woman's confidence 
of the kind will be to consign yourself to tbe 
universal contempt of your fellow-men? The 
basest and most dishonourable of your sex in 
other matters own yet some last vestiges of 
respect to this sentiment. And you, Camille, 
are a Frenchman and a gentleman, and you 
will never disgrace the name of either by . by 
so unhandsome a procedure." 

" You would be alone to blame, Mademoi- 
selle, if I did so," returned Camille, with some 
feeling in his accents, but also much bitterness. 
" I warn you ; do not force me to forget every- 
thing but the just vengeance I should then owe 
to humanity and my own outraged heart." 

" Are we sure not to be overheard here ?" 
said Madeleine, looking cautiously around. 
*' But let us speak on in French ; they say 
that is the proper language of diplomacy ; 
and after all, my dear Camille," she continued, 
adopting with perfect facility the language in 
question, " it has come to that between us." 

" I am all attention to Mademoiselle." 

" And reasonableness, I hope. But to speak, 
then, plainly, and without so much useless 



62 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

circumlocution . We both of us see very clearly 
we never can marry under existing circum- 
stances. We both of us want to be rich and 
well off in all particulars. I am not saying it 
to reproach you, Camille ; but you remember 
your own little affair with Olympe Loriot . 
who, by-the-bye, seems by some strange 
chance to be in Killarney at this very moment. 
She has told me a thousand times, though I 
never dwelt on so disagreeable a circumstance 
to you, that you courted her to distraction as 
long as you thought she was wealthy, and cut 
her the moment you found she was poor." 

" She was an impostress, a swindleress . 
represented herself as a person she was not." 

" As her own rich pupil ? AYell, that only 
confirms what I say. But, remember, you 
also attempted to pass yourself off upon me as 
a French nobleman originally. Now, hear me 
patiently. My chance is of an impostor of 
quite a different order . an immensely rich 
man, who has pretended to be a poor one in 
order that he might be certain to secure him- 
self a wife who loves him for himself alone." 

*' A wife ? And do you pretend to be that 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 63 

personage to Mr. Behringbright ? . a wife who 
loves a bald old man for Jiimself alone? Alia, but 
I shall spoil that game !" ejaculated Monsieur 
Le Tellier. 

" You can destroy me, no doubt . ruin me 
in the glorious speculation I have on hand ; 
but you cannot do yourself any good thereby," 
returned Madeleine, who did not at all like 
the tone in which these words were said. 
" Whereas, by the plan I propose " 

"Be pleased to propose your plan. Made- 
moiselle/' 

But even Madeleine Graham did not like 
this uncomfortably plain way of demanding 
and putting the case. Half the wickedness of 
the world, at least, is transacted under doubt- 
ful lights, and without a word of explanation 
among the parties. Madeleine, however, felt 
she was on the tight-rope, and that it would 
not do to start and boggle at a little jerk. 

" What plan do I propose ? Why, that I 
should be allowed . if you require the phrase . 
to marry a millionnaire . this millionnaire who 
proposes to me . and to make you rich and 
happy in your turn as a consequence." 



64 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

There was a considerable pause. 

" Your intention is, then, to marry . marry 
Behringbright Brothers, you mean to say? 
And consign me . me . me, to the derision, to 
the scorn, to the incredulity of the world!" then 
thundered Monsieur Camille Le Tellier, in reply. 

The world ! . the world ! Most of us have a 
world that is not extremely wide. What icorld 
did Monsieur Camille mean in his expression ? 
Upon my honour, I think Monsieur Camille Le 
Tellier's icorld was composed of about a dozen 
commercial travellers, to whom he had confided 
the certainty of his approaching marriage . and 
settlement in a large way of business . with 
the beautiful eldest daughter of Sir Orange 
Graham, Knight, and ex-ma3'or of the great 
city of Belfast. But in this world, no doubt, 
figured the immediate and tremendous pre- 
sence of Flamingo Brown, to whom he had 
boasted more than to the rest of all his 
" world" besides, and whose bullying manner 
betokened that he would hold him firmly to 
the interpretation. 

Madeleine was not far wrong when she ex- 
claimed, in reply, " Pho ! AA^iat terrible stuff! 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 65 

Wliat need you care about the icorld, as you 
call it ? What world are you talking about ? 
There is no world where, if you are rich, 
you will not be well considered ; and I intend 
to make you so as well as myself. I must^ in 
fact, with those letters in your possession !" 

" Listen to me, then, wicked woman !" 
returned the young man, with sudden fierce- 
ness and determination; and I do not take 
upon me to say the feeling was merely one 
of wounded personal vanity, or doubtfulness of 
the advantages held out to him. " I will not 
sufer you to play this detestable part you 
assign yourself . and would fain induce me 
to become your accomplice in ! You are my 
wife in the sight of God . by all the laws of 
nature and love ! . and my wife you shall 
remain ! You shall never sacrifice Camille 
Le Tellier to your remorseless thirst for wealth 
. of all that your purseproud father hates and 
rejects me for not being able to obtain ! And 
how should I? Gold is only purchased by gold ! 
I have no capital . no fortune . no possibi- 
lities ! and you attempt to mock me with a 
shadow of contingent advantages, which your 

VOL. III. 5 



66 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

traitorous heart will repudiate the moment 
your prey is secure ! But, poor as I am, I am 
a man, and have the privileges of a man ! I 
have won you ; I have subdued . I have con- 
quered you, woman ! You are mine ! Woman, 
I am your husband, or you are the vilest of 
your sex ! And do you dare to tell me you 
will take another man, instead of me, for 
money ? I say you shall not ! I will reveal all 
to him, rather ! Do you hear me ? I will reveal 
ALL to the millionnaire Behringbright ! Do you 
defy me ? . do you deride me ? . I have 3^our 
letters . your letters. Mademoiselle ! . such 
letters as, perhaps, were never written before 
by woman to man ! These I will produce 
before the eyes of all the world ! And now 
do you deem me powerless . abject . resigned 
to see you confute me to everybody who re- 
garded me as the future son-in-law of a 
powerful merchant ? . of an insulting British 
plutocrat^ who, ha\dng no other objection 
against me, except that I am not worth five 
thousand a year, deprives me of my fair right 
to the wife I have won, and would thankfully 
condemn me to . ay, what would he not con- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 67 

demn me to, were lie the judge . and you . 
even you . the executioner?'* 

Camille Le Tellier broke short with these 
words, -remarking the strange, the horrible 
look Madeleine had now fixed upon him. It 
was vacant . and yet full of terror ! It seemed 
looking at something that was not there, and 
yet was : a spectral thought ! It terrified 
Camille with its no-meaning more than the 
most violent expression of indignation, and 
the blood almost curdled in his heart ; though 
Madeleine filled the pause by most quietly 
observing, " You are excited, Camille ; take 
some of your coffee ; you seem fond of 
coffee." 

"I am fond of coffee," Camille remarked, 
passionately drawing his cup away from her 
propinquity; "but I should fear to drink it 
after you have looked in it thus ! It seems to 
me that you have the power to infuse poison 
into my drink with such a glance . and that 
you have the criminal barbarity to wish to do 
so at this moment !" 

Madeleine laughed, a little hoarsely and 
huskily. 

5.3 



68 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" What a silly fellow you are to talk so ! 
You should not put such ideas in people's 
heads ; but I believe some poisons are good 
for the complexion ; and you are very proud 
of your complexion, you know, Camille. Did 
I not tell you once, when you said /looked 
pale and thin, that I had read in a book how 
arsenic . for example . fattened one up, and 
made one look quite plump and florid ? I 
believe you have taken the hint, you look so 
well ! I don't know that I look very well 
myself of late . I am sure I did not just before 
I left Belfast, what with your worrying and 
Emily's ; so perhaps I may try a little on 
myself . not you . and make it a pretty strong 
dose on some occasion, if ever I hear of your 
trusting strangers again, or any further, in our 
affairs ! So you see, if you have your letters, 
I have an antidote to them. Bah ! we are 
talking melodrama, like two lovers in a last 
'chapter of one of Sue's novels. Let us be 
reasonable creatures ; one of us at least isn't 
French ! Come, I admit that you have the 
power in your hands ; but do you really mean 
to say that you will not allow me to many 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 69 

where only I find it feasible to secure a respect- 
able establishment ?" 

*' I have failed, then, to make myself under- 
stood," returned Camille, with an evident 
revival of exasperation. " Listen again, then ! 
In the eyes of the law I have no power of 
control over your actions. Miss Graham ; I 
am not your husband in law. But I am the 
proprietor of the letters sent to me'; and I 
swear to you, the moment I hear of any decided 
and real intention on your part to commit a 
moral bigamy with this Plutarch Behringbright 
. a man also who has insulted me, who has 
refused me my right of reparation as a gentle- 
man, whom it will be useless now to importune 
in my favour . I will transfer all my rights to 
the entire collection in his favour, stipulating 
only that he ^\\2i^ peruse them . from the first 
young-lady billet signed in your name to the 
last, which blushed to give itself any signature 
at all, but does not need the glasses of an ex- 
pert to be recognised as undoubtedly of the 
same caligraphy." 

These words were pronounced in tones that 
carried conviction to Madeleine's inmost soul. 



70 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

She felt that, after overcoming so many obsta- 
cles to secure her grand prize . after daring all 
the risks she had incurred respecting Emily 
Maughan . after spending a great deal of 
money on an otherwise stupid and tiresome 
excursion . after having compromised herself 
completely with her family for any future 
claims to meaning and sagacity in her enter- 
prises . the vanity of a French coxcomb arose 
before her, an impassable wall of adamant, and 
debarred advance to the gleaming mountain 
of gold in prospect, for ever ! 

Had it even been a real Cupid, god of love, 
that thus refused to acquiesce in the extension 
of his name into cujpidity ! But Madeleine 
felt quite assured it was not personal devotion 
to herself, so much as the resolution to keep 
possession of a valuable " material guarantee," 
that was acting upon the mind and resolves of 
Camille Le Tellier. No woman could have 
remained so perfectly insensible to the imphed 
passionate obligation, had she believed in it. 
She felt only, therefore, the more irritated 
at the pretence assigned to the obstinacy that 
was likely to effect so enormous an injury to 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 71 

lier prospects. While she rapidly recalled 
these things, these dangers, these difficulties, 
these deprivations, this failure, this humilia- 
tion, this inextricable entanglement . that first 
burning touch of resentment which Flamingo 
Brown's revelations had kindled in her breast 
spread like a circle of ravening caustic through 
all its fibres, till her whole heart seemed to 
glow like a ball of fire in its confines. A 
feeling of the utterest hatred and contempt . 
of desperate desire and resolve to escape from 
this paltry yet overmastering thraldom . 
seemed to light up in her brain, darting up- 
ward from those lappings of suppressed but 
flaming fury. And a thought . a tremendous, 
solitary thought . started into glarifig ex- 
istence, and, growing in intensity witli every 
moment's revolution of time, seemed to con- 
vert Madeleine Graham's whole beautiful 
headpiece into a dark lantern of hell . glaring 
within with murder, malice, and revenge ; with- 
out, all black calm and impervious serenity. 

About two minutes of utter silence with 
Madeleine did a work which all the ages of 
time could not undo. Then she spoke. 



72 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" If you are really in earnest, Camille . if 
you really love me so much and truly . of 
course I will not for a moment entertain any 
project wliich you do not approve," slie said, 
in very sweet, humble, and, as it were, heart- 
subdued accents. " In fact, I love you a 
thousand times better than ever, dearest, for 
your manly determination and evident devotion 
to me; and w^henever you are prepared to 
embrace every extremity of poverty by marrying 
me, in spite of my father's refusal and renun- 
ciation, I am quite ready to become your wife 
in laio as well as in love ! . this day, this hour, 
this very minute, if you like." 

Camille, however, had no great relish in his 
secret heart for poverty. He had known and 
seen a good deal of it ; and it did not seem to 
him likely to be much more endurable with a 
fine young lady to share it, and upbraid him at 
every turn for its disadvantages, than alone. 
Had he dared to be poor, he would not have 
been the man he was . or, rather, he would 
have been a man! Of course he expressed 
this idea, which in reality chiefly related to 
himself, in the proper sentimental form. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 73 

"No, Madeleine, no!" he exclaimed, with 
heroic fervour. " I will not suffer you to 
commit a crime against love and honour. But 
I will never ask of you to share so poor a portion 
as mine is in this world till some unforeseen 
good fortune . the relenting of your avaricious 
family . points out to us the means of a happier 
fate and union." 

Madeleine knew very well what this meant. 
Monsieur Le Tellier had frequently intimated 
that her father ought to give her a portion of 
at least five thousand pounds, furnish them a 
house and all conveniences handsomely, and 
give him a partnership in his manufactory. 
Her father, on the other hand, had threatened 
to turn her out of doors if she dared for a 
moment to encourage the addresses of a " penni- 
less foreign vagabond, " and was the kind of 
father to keep his word. 

No doubt it increased her irritation to be the 
victim not only of such inordinate but such 
useless selfishness ! She looked at Camille ; 
and the handsomer she saw he was, or thought 
that he considered himself, the more she dis- 
liked and despised him for such a mean, sense- 



74 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

less, overbearing excess of personal vanity. 
But it behoved her to keep these ideas to herself. 
Perhaps, however, they partly suggested the 
new but most necessary combination of intrigue 
that arose in her protean brain. 

" I did not suppose I could be brought to 
admire you more than I have always done, 
Camille," she said,' still in those fascinating, 
melting, and molten tones ; " but I am de- 
lighted, proud . very proud . to find you prefer 
me even to that idol of fortune of which I 
once supposed you so earnest an adorer that 
you would not hesitate even at that sacrifice . 
at any sacrifice . to it ! I confess that was one 
of the motives which strengthened me to my 
own immolation, though with every imaginable 
reluctance and remorse. But let us now 
consider if it may not be possible to conciliate 
your noble scruples with the plan of extrication 
I had proposed myself. I have not hesitated 
to avow to you that I am an object of preference 
with the wealthy Behringbright . doubtless 
with the most honourable \iews, for he is in- 
capable of any other. Of a cold and lethargic 
disposition, as he is, and steeled by my aifec- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 75 

tlon and engagements to you, it would, however, 
be perfectly easy for me to play with his passion 
for almost any length of time, and meanwhile 
induce him to do almost anything I desired of 
a character to demonstrate his attachment 
towards me. He believes that I have a great 
friendship for Emily Maughan; and could he 
be brought to view in you ... no rival of his 
own tenderness . . . but rather a suitor for 
the hand of a young person, his ward, whom 
I know he is desirous to settle advantageously 
in life . I think it might be easily managed, 
and that he would do all for you your absurd 
French fancies have suggested. Once placed 
in possession of a competency, your vanity 
. if you have any . shall be more amply 
gratified than it could possibly be by any 
other means . by all the world behold- 
ing how Madeleine Graham will prefer 
you to the richest man in England as a 
husband !" 

Camille opened his large blue, hairdresser's 
model-like, lustrous eyes at this suggestion, so 
agreeable to all the most dominant impulses of 
his nature. 



76 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" All ! if this were possible, my Madeleine !'* 
he exclaimed. 

" Why should it be impossible ? I have 
already possessed Mr. Behringbright with the 
notion ; nay, I have myself sometimes been 
crossed by a jealous apprehension to that effect, 
that in reality you have a regard . I had almost 
said a preference . for Emily Maiighany 

" Absurd ! . it is utterly nonsensical ! For 
a young woman who has always treated me 
with a marked distance . I had almost said, 
with aversion and repulse !" exclaimed Camille, 
but with a conceited smile which again sug- 
gested a still more dexterous leading to 
Madeleine. 

" You are absurd now yourself, dear Camille," 
she resumed, with a glance full of secret scorn 
and seeming admiration. " I have a thousand 
reasons to consider that it was simply resent- 
ment for finding me the object of your gallantry 
that rendered Emily so malicious towards us 
^both, and put her upon doing all she could to 
warn me against you, and to sever us. Camille, 
wdiat will you say if I confide to you a secret ? 
You do not, with all your experience, under- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 77 

stand all the intricacies of a woman's nature. 
"What will you say if 1 declare to you I know 
it for a certain fact that Emily Maughan has 
refused the hand and coronet of an earl . of 
that very young nobleman who nearly threw 
you over into the Belfast pit, and who is now 
suffering himself from the effects of a reprisal 
from an exasperated animal . and that I believe 
this amazing rejection is prompted solely by a 
secret preference in her heart to another ! In 
fine, that that other . I believe I should not be 
far wrong in asserting . is, must be, the only 
attractive young man with whom she can ever 
have been thrown into contact : in brief, 
Camille, yourself T 

Le Tellier was not so struck with amaze- 
ment and incredulity at this climactical word 
as he ought to have been. Of course all the 
qualities in the male sex are miOre strongly 
developed than in the female, where they 
exist at all ; and a wrcin-coquette is free to be- 
lieve in the influence of his charms even more 
extensively than the feminine creature of tlie 
same genus. 

" Good heavens ! how is it I never suspected, 



78 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

never apprehended, so disastrous a complica- 
tion ? After all the accounts you gave me of 
Miss Maughan's unkind interference in our 
affairs . dissuasives of you against me ! And 
do you assure me it is a fact, Madeleine ? . 
Your 

" I do not assure you it is 2, fact, only a pro- 
bable surmise, . which after all may be but the 
fancy of my own too partial judgment," replied 
Madeleine. '' But, true or not, it is a great 
probability, and sufficient ground for the plan 
I have hinted to you. Eemove Mr. Behring- 
bright's apprehensions of the most dangerous 
of rivals in you, by proposing to him for Emily 
Maughan, and I assure you of a handsome 
establishment in life, which shall then be 
shared with you, I trust, by a wife a good deal 
more to your mind." 

"But it is folly. Emily Maughan will de- 
cline the offer . she will declare that she never 
entertained it. I shall seem like a madman 
to Mr. Behringbright." 

" But Emily is remote . impassably dis- 
tanced from this spot by her rejection of Lord 
Glengariff. I will make myself the medium 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 79 

of all communications, and will report what I 
please. Meanwhile Mr. Behringbright w^ll 
be engaged in your favour ; I shall dare to 
press your claims on his consideration. Not a 
moment, I swear it, shall be lost to accomplish 
the grand object we have in view, if you will 
only lend me your aid thus far in writing our- 
selves in the position. I do not ask you to 
declare anything compromising. Ask only 
permission to pay your addresses to Emily as 
the meaning of the business you declared your- 
self . and have suffered the American to report 
everywhere . you have with Mr. Behring- 
bright. Leave to me the task of convincing 
him that he will thereby promote the happi- 
ness of his ward, and his own tranquillity." 

Camille . like all men who are pretty certain 
not to arrive at a correct judgment . reflected 
profoundly. 

" You engage me a little out of my depths 
Madeleine," he said at last, in a considerably 
puzzled tone. " But I am sure that as long as 
I retain your letters . of which no one shall 
deprive me but with my life . ^}'0u Avill not 
dare to play me false in the matter. There- 



80 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

fore I may perhaps venture on the step you 
urge upon me. But know for certain that I 
remain in this country, in this very house 
which your Mr. Broionjohi . ha ! ha 1 what 
folly to deprive himself of his only merit ! . 
also inhabits, a perpetual observer of your 
actions, and that I will not suffer any increase 
of the intimacy you admit to exist between 
yourself and the millionnaire Behringbright. 
It is for you to extricate us all as speedily as 
possible from a painful position, by securing 
to me this establishment, w^hich you are 
then immediately to share with me. I have a 
right to consent to your project : I owe 
reprisals to the insolence and tyranny of 
wealth in your country." 

" He would remain on the spot, would he, 
the dangerous fool !" thought Madeleine. But 
with her customary tact she perceived it would 
do rather harm than good to add a word that 
might still seem to combat Camille's suspi- 
cions, only half lulled to rest. She took it for 
Sfranted he was convinced. Much was mean- 

o 

while gained ; the danger of an immediate 
destructive revelation to Mr. Behringbriglit 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 81 

averted ; one of her most necessary fallacies 
was to receive a tangible support ; Camille 
himself was compromised in her manoeuvres. 
Time was gained, above all . time for that other 
certainly tremendous, and horrible, and 
perilous, but, if successful, a most assured 
escape from all her difficulties 1 . or for some 
easier deliverance, if such were possible; time, 
at all events, to reflect . to lay plans deeply 
and inscrutably . to provide against the possi- 
bility of detection. Detection of what ? 
Madeleine had not yet pronounced the word 
even to herself; the idea stood erect, full, un- 
blenching in her mind, as a figure of the 
sheeted dead in a churchyard ! 

All that remained at that time to be done 
was to complete the restoration of Camille's 
credulity in her affection for him, and submis- 
sion to his will. Aided by such boundless 
vanity, this needed no great effort. But we 
need not remain present at tlie process ; it is 
enough that the treacherous syren succeeded. 

She even prevailed upon Camille to promise 
he would do all in his power to dissipate the 
impressions he had " unintentionally" given to 

VOL. Ill, 6 



82 MADELEINE GRAHA^I. 

the American Brown. Madeleine knew she 
had prepared that gentleman to receive the 
disavowal patiently, and suggested that it 
could easily he done by Camille's receiving the 
cool note she had penned him quietly, and 
seeming to acquiesce in its contents. Above 
all, he was to take no notice that it was written 
in a (liferent hand from her usual one . pur- 
posely : she would not place herself in any way 
in the power of such a fellow ! 

Eeturning, after this interview, to her 
quarters, Madeleine thought she had a right 
to congratulate herself on the results of her 
audacity in thus stealing a march along the 
entire battle-array of adverse circumstances. 
Most cleverly had she shifted her own stra- 
tegic ground. Even the certainty she had 
acquired of the arrival of Mademoiselle Ol3'mpe 
Loriot in her vicinity, which would have dis- 
quieted her at another time, rather added to 
her satisfaction now; . a power of doubtful 
hostility, perchance, at present, but in whom 
an ally might be created, if dexterously 
handled. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 83 



CHAPTEE IV. 

CONGRATULATIONS. 

Madeleine found she liad been absent about 
an hour and a half; but dinner was not yet 
served. Luckily, Flamingo Brown, having 
solaced himself with a great quantity of cob- 
blers, slings, and cocktails, and made aware 
that dinner would be at the " damned aristo- 
cratic hour" of seven, had fallen asleep in his 
post of observation. Madeleine, therefore, got 
comfortably enough past him. But she horri- 
fied Eooney the waiter again, who met her, 
and uttered a terrified exclamation . explained 
to Madeleine by finding her aunt in her bed- 
room. The poor man was assured he had 
encountered, for the second time that day, 
Mrs. Bucktrout's loraith, or double, as he 
styled it, and confidently predicted in the 
6.2 



84 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

kitchen and servants' liall that the old lady 
would shortly be called to her account. 

Mrs. Bucktront, who had made a number of 
stupid inquiries for her niece before she looked 
on her dressing-table, and saw a short pencilled 
note, to the effect that Madeleine had borrowed 
her old cloak and bonnet for a joke on young 
Sparrowgrass, was looking rather dull and 
puzzled over it, as if she did not quite under- 
stand joking at such a time. She even com- 
plained so a little to her niece on her entry in 
the disguise, and did not seem quite to like it, 
even when Madeleine admitted that it was 
very inconsiderate of her ; but that the foolish 
young fellow had wagered her a sovereign she 
could not take him in in any possible disguise 
she could assume ; and she had met the whole 
party at the landing-pier, and they had not 
known her, and she should earn her sovereign. 
But how was poor dear Lord Gleugariff? Of 
course the accident was much exaggerated . 
and how had it happened? And was he 
much hurt ? . or was it all a false report ? And 
where was her uncle? And had not Mr. 
Behringbright arrived with plenty of other 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 85 

doctors, in case tliere was any need of 
them ? 

Mrs. Bucktrout replied in the methodical 
order she usually observed in her train of 
ideas. No ; it was all too dreadfully true ! 
In bending towards the stag "to open its 
throat with his hunting-knife" (was the deli- 
cate phrase used by Mrs. Bucktrout), Lord 
Glengariff had overreached himself in- making 
an imprudent effort to grasp the terrible crea- 
ture by the antlers, and had been fearfully 
gored in the right arm and side. It was with 
the greatest difficulty, Mrs. Bucktrout 
averred, that three of the Glengariff rowers 
had beaten the stag off with their oars. The 
young lord had lost pails of blood before 
Dr. Bucktrout could bind up the lacerations ! 

He had, however, preserved all his senses 
and faculties till they got on shore ; and 
though then in a very weak state, liad 
insisted on walking up to the castle from 
the landing-place, to avoid alarming his 
excitable parent. He had even managed 
to preserve sufficient strength and energy 
to go to his mother himself, mention that an 



86 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

accident had occurred to him, and convince 
her, by his own unconcerned manner, that it 
was of no great consequence . ^being certain the 
report would soon reach her ; nay, she was 
believed to have supernatural means of intelli- 
gence in all misfortunes of the kind to her 
family. But as soon as this important duty 
was gone through, his strength had failed him 
. he was obliged to be supported to an apart- 
ment and put to bed. In this situation Dr. 
Eucktrout had dressed his wounds, and pro- 
nounced them of the most dangerous character. 
He had even declined to answer for the life of 
his patient . particularly if he w^as in the least 
disturbed or agitated. Accordingly, when 
even Mr. Beliringbright had arrived with two 
of the Killarney surgeons, the young earl had 
refused to see them, declaring that he had the 
greatest confidence in the skill of the doctor ; 
and his mother, who was in constant attendance 
upon him, had supported him in his refusal ! 
Mr. Beliringbright was excessively irritated 
and alarmed at the fact, not apparently enter- 
taining the highest opinion of the Belfast 
mediciner's skill, though he did not ex- 



MADELEINE .GRAHAM, 87 

press himself to that effect. And he had 
retained his two surgeons at Glengariff ; and 
while hastening Mrs. Bucktrput back to the 
charge of her niece, had desired her to state 
that he should remain all night at the castle, 
in hopes that he might prevail upon an 
acceptance of the reinforcement of chirurgical 
aid he had brought with him. At the same 
time Lord Glengariff had objected to. see even 
Mr. Behringbright himself, being, doubtless, 
much offended with his singular conduct on 
the lake, as regarded Madeleine, that day; 
which Mrs. Bucktrout, for the first time turn- 
ing a little rebellious, professed herself unable 
indeed to understand. 

The aunt still spoke of Mr. Behringbright 
as Mr. Broionjohi ; but Madeleine felt now it 
would be necessary for her future influence and 
proceedings to clear up this mystery to her 
relative. She therefore explained to her aunt 
that this was merely a name assumed by one 
of the richest of English merchants, who had 
taken a fancy to her, she almost believed, when 
she was a girl at school in London, had followed 
her to Ireland, and had that very morning 



88 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

made her an offer of marriage, whicli she had 
accepted. 

The whole wonderful affair was now made 
clear and patent to Mrs. Bucktrout's not 
illimitable capacity. Oh, how glad she was ! 
With what admiration she looked at her niece ! 
How well convinced she felt, in spite of the 
latter' s disclaimers, that she had all along 
known what a wealthy suitor was in pursuit of 
her ur.der that assumed name ! 

" "Wont your father be glad, and your poor 
mother, who were so plagued at one time with 
the idea of your doing something silly with 
that French beggar ! Wont Mrs. Sparrow- 
grass be ready to eat off her fingernails, after all 
the trouble she took to keep you from her son, 
to find you have done so much better ! I'll 
let them all know it at dinner ! How mad it 
will make them !" 

Neither, in spite of the addition to her risks 
it involved, could Madeleine deny herself 
this signal public triumph. She was even 
no longer apprehensive that Flamingo Brown 
should hear of it. It would rather confirm 
him in his belief of her power with the great 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 89 

capitalist, and consequent wish not to meddle 
offensively any farther in her affairs, while 
it would go far to remove any degree of 
adherence he might still retain in the boastings 
of Camille Le Tellier. 

It was rather funny to witness the effects 
of the intelligence in question ; at first 
circulated in the most quiet, unintentional, 
underhand style by Mrs. Bucktrout,.who was 
sly enough in her own way. 

Mrs. Sparrowgrass took occasion, when the 
soup was removed, finding herself with only 
her son between her and Mrs. Bucktrout, to 
express how pleased she was to think that 
her niece. Miss Graham, had been spared 
such a dreadful shock as Lord Glengariff 's 
accident must have been to everybody on 
board his lordship's barge, by accepting the 
invitation of the commercial gentleman staijing 
at the " Red Herring " into his boat. Every- 
body wondered at it, she said, at tlie time, 
but it had turned out so much for the best. 

" Of course my niece could not do otherwise ; 
she is engaged to Mr. Be]irin(jhn(jht^' replied 
Mrs. Bucktrout, with dignity. 



90 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

"Engaged to Mr. Behringbriglit ? What 
Mr. Behringbriglit ! " stammered young 
Sparrowgrass, turning very pale over his 
second plate of fish. 

" Behringbright Brothers, the head of the 
firm, Mr. Sparrowgrass ; you must have heard 
of them in London," said Mrs. Buck trout, 
with most determined coolness. 

After that, Grassgreen Sparrowgrass, Esq., 
ate not another morsel, though he took plate 
after plate of anything that was ofiered him 
during the remainder of the dinner. He 
drank, however, in great profusion ; moselle 
and brandy went down his throat at a rate 
that perfectly alarmed his mother, who in 
vain repeatedly observed what a fine match 
Lord Glengarifi"'s sister, the Lady Gwendoline, 
must now have become, in case his lordship 
should die. And Sparrowgrass had hysterics 
that night in his own bedroom, with his 
mother and all his sisters attending him ; and 
went on like a little madman, and reproached 
them with being the cause of the unhappiness 
of his whole life, by not allowing him to 
propose, as he had wished a hundred times, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 91 

before that old horrid fellow came into 
play. 

The Misses Sparrowgrass were much sur- 
prised and offended on their own account, 
when they heard all about it ! What an 
artful minx she must have been ! She must 
have known all about it ! She never would 
have looked at such a strange, shy, unaccount- 
ably-behaving man, if she had not known 
all alons: how rich he was ! But it was no 
wonder. Her father was ^V^ trade (their own 
had been out of it ever since he died, and they 
were only just out of mourning for him) ; 
and so, no doubt, she knew all about people in 
trade. For their parts, they would not have 
had a person in trade for all the world. A 
merchant, or anything of that sort, was all 
the same. Still, they did wonder at the 
artfulness she had displayed in keeping the truth 
concealed, and pretending to flirt with their 
poor brother, and trying it on everybody, in 
point of fact. Even that dear, witty, funny, 
clever Vivian Fauntleroy, she had tried it upon 
him, Helena Sparrowgrass declared, with a 
toss of her head. And though she had reason 



92 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

to know the attempt was a complete failure, 
still she must say she thought poor Mr. 
Behringbright would have a splendid catch 
of a wife, if he really meant to marry a 
woman who set her cap that way at every man 
she met with. 

*' I don't suppose she will leave it oif, either, 
even when she has married that old fellow/' 
said the eldest Miss S^Darrowgrass, who was 
about, I think, thirty-seven years of age, but 
thought people would draw a much less infer- 
ence when they heard her call a man of 
forty-two old. 

But meanwhile the news spread, and every- 
body was seized with admiration and homage 
for the successful competitor . the drawer of 
the great prize in the matrimonial lottery. 
Nobody cared a bit whether Mr. Behringbright 
really was old, and bald, and dull, and 
grumpy in temper, and what not. He was a 
good match . a splendid match . a first-rate 
match ! It was impossible for any girl to do 
better. She might Uve the life of a duchess 
if she pleased. No doubt she would have a 
house in Hyde Park. Mr. Behringbright 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 93 

had two country seats ; she could give the 
grandest parties in town ; and hearing that, 
the Miss Sparrowgrass, even, moderated 
their clamours, and made np to the bride 
elect of a million of money. And thus was 
Madeleine herself more and more formally 
plighted to society to go through with her 
great enterprise ; more and more yoked into 
the harness of her secret tremendous necessity ; 
more and more engaged to her '' world," to 
satisfy its expectations, as Camille Le Tellier 
was to his. 

Last, but not least important, among these 
flattering and unconscious but powerful agents 
of destiny, figured Mr. Flamingo Brown. 
You would have thought some considerable 
portion of his immortal soul was at stake 
with this gentleman in the successful prose- 
cution of the "spec." in which he desired 
Mr. Behringbright's co-operation, so earnestly 
did he devote himself to maintaining the 
place he considered he had achieved in the 
favour of the lady in the ascendant. He had 
his own ideas still, no doubt . though some- 
what modified . that there was some capital 



94 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

hoax in progress upon the credulity of Mr. 
Behringbright. He could not bring himself 
quite to disbelieve the Frenchman's innuendoes, 
disproved as they seemed to be. But what 
was all that to him . what was any 
nation's, let alone individual's . happiness and 
prosperity to him . provided he could carry 
out a commercial speculation likely to end in 
a great profit to himself? And so he, too, 
entered himself emulously among the courtiers 
of the successful beauty ; and though at 
times . especially after his second bottle of 
chambertin at dinner . his homage grew 
almost rudely and vulgarly pointed and exclu- 
sive, Madeleine treated him with particular 
distinction and kindness, and attached him 
with almost every other word more firmly to 
her interests, by making him believe they 
were his own. 

In other respects she bore her honours 
meekly. Indeed, people thought at times she 
seemed greatly more thoughtful and absent 
than usual. I am sure she did not hear 
repeatedly what the American said, though 
she showed her pearly teeth whenever he 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 95 

indulged in his loud, hoarse laugh over the 
excellent stories he told her of his many clever 
" strokes of business;" which, to sa ytruth, had 
most of them a strong touch of the filibuster 
or picaroon in them, but he evidently thought 
simply proofs of cleverness in his vocation. 
It is quite certain that she agreed with him he 
was in the right in his lawsuit with Mr. 
Behringbright about the Calif ornian hides, 
which he related with the utmost diifuseness, 
railing at the judge as he went on for partiality 
against him ; in spite of which, he said, the 
jury gave it in his favour, knowing ''what 
trade was " themselves much better than any 
judge in the land. But although she coincided 
in this opinion with such impartiality against 
her newly-betrothed, Madeleine was not much 
to blame in that, for she did not know in what 
she agreed ; she only knew, or thought, she 
was conciliating a dangerous foe. 

Perhaps, if she listened to anything reall}' 
very much that evening in the after-dinner 
chat of the company, it was to a conversation 
which her aunt started in the midst of a select 
circle, agreeably to her favourite custom, on a 



96 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

religions topic. It was not a kind of dis- 
cussion in whicli Madeleine Grraham wontedly 
took mncli delight. She went to church in a 
proper family way, and heard Sir Orange read 
the Bible and prayers whenever, as head of the 
family, he was pleased to require such attend- 
ance ; but she attached no particular ideas to 
anything of the sort she heard, thinking it was 
all very good and right, and all that . and 
sometimes that the preacher had a good or 
bad voice, a handsome or an indifferent 
physiognomy. But on this occasion Mrs. 
Bucktrout introducing the subject of pre- 
destination . aj)ro2JOS a doubt which she 
admitted herself to entertain whether Lord 
Glengariff was exactly in a state of prepared- 
ness for a call to the other world, in case his 
injuries should baffle the skill of his " medical 
attendant " . for perhaps the first time in her 
life Madeleine evidently lent "a serious and 
attentive ear " to all that was said on the topic. 
Insomuch that Professor Doubleday . who also 
happened to have come to Killarney on a 
geological exploration, according to him . did 
her the unusual honour (science, also, did 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 97 

homage to success in money-clutcliing !) of 
inquiring lier opinion on the subject. 

Madeleine started at the question, but said 
. Yes, she was quite a predestinarian ; she 
believed people were forced to do things 
whether they liked or no ; only she did not 
think people were punished for such a 
tremendous time as people thought for doing 
what they could not help doing. 

She said this in rather a quick, perhaps a 
little wild and strange way ; and only the first 
part of the opinion was held generally orthodox. 
But, in consideration that the lovely theologian 
was in a way to become Airs. Behringbright, 
Professor Doubleday himself merely smiled, 
and passed on to the doctrine of election by 
grace. 

Madeleine was also so gracious to her wor- 
shippers that night as not to go to bed so 
early as she usually did, to preserve her eyes 
and complexion, whenever there was no parti- 
cularly good reason for sitting up. It may be 
that Madeleine was almost afraid to trust 
herself alone with her own thoughts, . that 
THOUGHT . that night ! And yet she declined 

VOL. III. 7 



98 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

her aunt's kind invitation to share lier room 
on the occasion, as her uncle was away ; and 
finally found herself, with a shudder, . and yet 
with a kind of gladness, . alone with the over- 
mastering, terrific, inevitable idea, rising in 
more and more distinct and ghostly outlines 
before the fixed gaze of her spell-bound mind. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 99 



CHAPTEE V. 

THE ENGAGED FINGER. 

Some resolutions, however, require a great 
deal of fitting and refitting, . taking out of the 
holes we put them in originally, . shifting, 
awling, hammering, and clenching, before w^e 
can quite make up our minds that the work as 
it stands is a good work . that is to say, work- 
manly finish: for this kind of mental car- 
pentering is not always squared according to 
the rule of right . oftener the other way. 
Almost all our really good and fitting ideas 
are simple and one-sided, . the evil ones com- 
plex and full of doubts and obliquities. The 
idea which now possessed Madeleine Graham's 
brain was of the latter order. 

Perhaps, after all, slie would never have 
done what most people afterwards supposed 
(without sufficient proof, it appeared) slie did 
7.3 



100 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

do but for a most disastrously overwhelming 
complication of urgencies. Was it not Goethe 
who said that he felt within himself the 
capability of every human wickedness ? Are 
we to suppose that the great German moun- 
tain-in-a-mist meant thereby to declare that 
on a suJSicient temptation or pressure he should 
have been as black a criminal as who you 
please ? . or that he merely wished Society to 
consider what it was about in the creation of 
circumstances that influence the destinies for 
good or ev^il of average humanity ? Was this 
girl, in short, so mucli guilty of her acts as 
Society of this girl ? For m}^ part, I do not 
know : I take everything for granted, and 
relate what I find on record, without attempt- 
ing to account for it otherwise than as appears 
on the direct face of things. 

Well, then, fate would have it that Mr. 
Behringbright . after a very uncomfortable 
night at Glengariff Castle, and a singular ex- 
planation on the following morning within 
its walls . advised himself to pass over to the 
society of his lady-love. Like most per- 
sons who are diffident of their personal attrac- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 101 

tions, and desire to find favour in the sight of 
some fair object of the affections, he considered 
that he should look better neatly shaved and 
in a clean shirt. All his gear of this sort was 
at the " Red Herring" Tavern ; and thither he 
directed himself to be conveyed in the jaunting- 
car he had hired the previous day at Prospect 
Palace. I say nothing of his two surgeons 
whom he had taken from Killarney on- a bootless 
errand, Lord Glengariff persisting in refusing 
all medical aid or assistance whatever, except- 
ing that of Dr. Bucktrout, who, almost for the 
first time in his life . but most gratefully, poor 
man . found himself treated as an oracle of 
iEsculapian wisdom : unless the reader should 
be interested so far in their fate as to be glad 
to know that they received fifteen guineas 
sterling ajDiece from Mr. Behringbright for 
being jumped up suddenly on a jaunting-car 
off to a castle two miles distant, where they 
saw no patient, and, consequently, did neither 
harm nor good, and were duly forwarded by 
the same conveyance back to their homes the 
following day. 

At the ''Red Herring" Tavern, Mr. Behring- 



102 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

briglit . greatly against his will, and altogether 
out of his calculation, for he had forgotten 
about him in the hurry of events . was forced 
to grant an interview to Monsieur Camille Le 
Tellier ; who, supposing, like most other 
people, that there was no business of import- 
ance in the world but his own, took the very 
first opportunity that presented itself to go 
through the ceremonial laid down for him by 
Madeleine Graham; . that is to say, sent in 
his card ; obtained a brief interview, which he 
did not want particularly to lengthen from 
any gratification it afibrded himself ; and . in a 
manner so incoherent that even the exciting 
nature of the subject and his Grallicisms of 
language scarcely accounted for it . declared 
himself to be a fervid admirer of his 
(Mr. Behringbriglit's) beautiful ward, Emily 
Maughan, and requested his favour and per- 
mission to make " the adoration of his senti- 
ments" known to that young lady. 

This was part of the intelligence Mr. 
Behringbright came to communicate, in all the 
confidence of love and unbounded trust, to 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 103 

Madeleine Graliam tlie morning after the fatal 
stasrliunt. 

Poor man ! he did not attach that degree of 
stress to the information he might, if he had 
known what part of it would bear in his own 
destiny. If we knew it, with what respect 
should we survey the bit of a railway flange 
which, flying ofi*, would consign us . even to 
heaven ! But these are uncomfortable re- 
marks, which there is no occasion to insert in 
a work of light modern fiction like ours. 

Madeleine . who was looking lovelier than 
ever that morning, owing to a peculiar lus- 
trous glow on her cheeks and in her eyes . 
seemed much gratified by the statement. She 
expressed herself with great warmth to that 
effect. How happy darling Emily could now 
be made ! How her wonderfully disinterested 
. though very strange, certainly, and unac- 
countable . infatuation for this young French- 
man could now be recompensed ! Her (Made- 
leine's) dearest Mr. Behringbright . since Mr. 
Behringbright he was . was so rich, he could 
easily afford to make the beloved friend of her 



104 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

youth liappy with the husband of her choice. 
Would her dearest Mr. Behringbright promise 
it ? Would he set Monsieur Le Tellier up in 
business, or appoint him to some lucrative 
situation in his own service ? Or, best of all 
(and really it would have been much the best), 
would he, could he, get him some good con- 
sulship abroad? He must have interest with 
Government. Could he get him appointed 
consul at Lima, or at St. Petersburg, or at 
Hong-Kong, or at any distant place like that ? 
She was quite strangely energetic in her 
demand for a distant place of display for the 
commercial talents, and acquirements, and 
gentlemanly manners, and knowledge of various 
foreign languages, including his own, which 
Emily had always assured her Camille . that 
is, Mr. Le Tellier . possessed. Emily would 
not mind where she went . no woman of any 
feeling, who truly loved any man, would mind 
where she went . with a beloved husband. She 
thought . she knew . she was certain . Emily 
would rather prefer . would greatly prefer . a 
very distant place of settlement . for a time, at 
least. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 105 

Could this distant place of settlement liave 
been found for Monsieur Le Tellier . and could 
he have been coaxed into departing to occupy 
it . perhaps all might yet have gone well. 
The Morning Boast might yet have exulted in 
the details of the gorgeous parties, the balls, 
and other grand receptions of the Baroness 
Behringbright at her magnificent mansion in 
Hyde Park. Camille Le Tellier himself might 
have lived on, smoking his cigar over a mani- 
fest, and otherwise appetising himself for din- 
ner at the expense of the British nation, in 
some latitude more favourable to indolent 
enjoyment of existence than the exertion of 
the greater faculties of the human mind, which 
he did not possess. But unhappily, unlike 
most persons who have influence with Grovern- 
ment, Mr. Behringbright had a conscience and 
a considerable sense of patriotism; and therefore 
. although he smiled, and looked and felt much 
pleased at Miss Graham's eagerness to secure a 
distant place of residence for the handsome hus- 
band-elect of her friend . ^lie answered her 
quietly, but with evident fixity of resolve, that 
he should never think of forcing an incompe- 



106 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

tent foreigner upon the public charge of Great 
Britain, though, doubtless, he had consider- 
able interest with the minister who gave away 
such appointments. And he was convinced . 
in spite of the good opinion so sensible a girl 
as Miss Emily Maughan appeared to have 
formed of him (but there was no accounting 
for delusions of that sort) . he was a perfectly 
incompetent, coxcomical young jackanapes, 
as regarded any position of public responsi- 
bility and charge. Even with respect to his 
own private mercantile business, which only 
involved the interests of an individual, he 
should be very far (from the opinion he had 
thus far formed of him) from choosing to en- 
trust such a person with the management of 
any important branch, or remote distribution, 
which might remove him from constant con- 
trol and supervision. He might be competent 
to sell silk and lace to mercers and milliners. 
He seemed to be so, since he was employed by 
some respectable French houses ; but for his 
own part, he (Mr. Behringbright) would 
greatly prefer to all these alternatives settling 
a handsome sum of money upon Emily 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 107*^' 

Maughan, as a security against the probable re- 
sults of folly and extravagance on the part of her 
husband-to-be, and contributing something 
reasonable besides to enable him to set up busi- 
ness on his own account, as a dealer in Lyons 
manufactures, or to purchase a partnership in 
one of the two or three firms he represented. 

Madeleine thought to herself all this would 
hardly tally with the lofty ideas of- his own 
self-consequence and right to position in the 
world of Monsieur Le Tellier. And once 
more the great thought started into vivid 
relief and inevitable consequence in her vision! 
The contempt expressed on so short an 
acquaintance by a man whose calm sagacity 
and dispassionate estimate of men and things 
she had learned to respect, also fearfully 
strengthened her own. And one must have a 
great contempt for humanity before one under- 
takes to consign to the grave and worm, of 
one's own act and deed, even a single wearer 
of the outward form. Most of your mighty 
conquerors and climbers to empire have illus- 
trated this principle on a colossal scale ; but 
the liedgeside murderer and burglar ** with 



108 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

violence" do so also in their degree, and tlie 
contempt which the ticket-of-leave man enter- 
tains for humanity in Jiis own j^^f^oii is one of 
his most formidable qualifications for the gar" 
rotte and gallows. 

However, there was nothing more to be 
said at this time on the subject. And indeed 
Mr. Behringbright, after delivering his dictum, 
passed to another, which completely swallowed 
up every minor peril and dread in the con- 
sideration of Madeleine. 

She inquired after Lord Glengariif's state, 
with just the degree of kind and sj^mpathetic, 
but not too warm, interest which she imagined 
would, under all the circumstances, be agree- 
able to Mr. Behringbright. And the reply 
she received would surely have shaken any less 
firmly-seated soul to its foundation. 

According to the patient's own declared 
opinion . and the endorsement of Dr. Buck- 
trout . Lord Grlengariff was in a most dan- 
gerous state, and there was scarcely a possi- 
bility he should recover from the terrible fever 
and irritation produced by the goring of the 
stag. There was an ancient proverb indeed on 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 109 

that subject, Mr. Beliringbriglit observed, 
which asserted that cases of recovery from 
such injuries were scarcely to be hoped for : . 

" Of tusk of boar have thou no fear, 
But beware thy life from horn of deer." 

But his lordship's demeanour was besides 
of the most extraordinary character, and gave 
rise to the notion that the shock and con- 
stitutional disturbance he had undergone was 
suddenly developing the family taint in his 
blood ! He seemed to wish to die : obstinately 
. almost with fury . refused all medical as- 
sistance but that of Dr. Bucktrout, whose 
skill, even to his niece Mr. Beliringbriglit could 
not avoid remarking, he could not consider 
equal to the emergency. And the shaken and 
disordered state of his mind was further to be 
judged by certain facts Mr. Behringb right 
proceeded to detail, . how little to Madeleine's 
satisfaction may be considered. 

Lord Glengariff had in the first place alto- 
gether refused to see Mr. Behringbright ; 
alleging that he was in some inexplicable 
manner the author of the terrible cakimity he 



110 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

had sustained. When at length he was soothed 
by his mother and Dr. Bucktrout into seeing 
him, their interview had been of the most 
singular and excited description. Lord Glen- 
garifF was, of course, in bed, but evidently in 
a state of high fever and general physical 
commotion, which it occasionally required the 
strength of his mother's gigantic nurse, of Dr. 
Bucktrout, who was a strong little man, and 
even of Molloy the steward to restrain. The 
moment he saw Mr. Behringbright he burst 
into the most passionate reproaches against 
him, for having driven him upon such a mad 
display of Quixotic courage and personal 
daring as a counterbalance to the enormous 
wealth he was known to possess ; by the at- 
tractions of which he had induced Miss Made- 
leine Graham to inflict so public a slight upon 
him as she had, in the transference of herself 
from his barge to the millionnaire's boat. And 
that Madeleine herself . like a cruel, heartless 
coquette as she was . had provoked and chal- 
lenged Ihim to the absurd display, much as 
the lady who flung the glove to the lion, 
. indifferent to the results in every respect 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. Ill 

saving to enhance her own consequence, and 
stir the pretendants to her favour to still more 
exasperated recklessness of rivalry. 

Mr. Behringbright had replied, he stated, to 
all this frenzied declamation as calmly as he 
possibly could. He assured Lord Glengariff 
that up to the moment of her assenting to his 
request to join him . and for several minutes 
after . Miss Graham was entirely ignorant that 
he was anything but v/hat he represented 
himself, . a commercial agent of his own 
house ; that nothing had ever given him 
greater pain and annoyance than his young- 
friend's public . but no doubt without real 
drift or meaning . pursuit of Miss Graham : 
who, on her own part, was most thoroughly 
convinced that he meant nothing by it, except 
to amuse himself, or divert his mind from an 
uncomfortable recollection of another. She 
wished to express her sense of this by publicly 
declining the public but unreal homage offered 
to her ; but no imaginable slight of which he 
could have legitimate reason to comjolain. So 
decisive a mark of preference banished all 
notion of coquetry on her part in the action 



113 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

with whicb. lie found so mucli fault ; and he, 
Mr. Behringbriglit, was most happy to be 
enabled to state that he was assured he was 
the object of the young lady's most decided 
preference. 

" But you may judge, dear Madeleine," the 
lover continued, with almost a blush of 
womanish modesty overspreading his honest 
visage, '^ how near to a state of lunacy poor 
Glengariff must be, and what patience I had 
to display, when upon that lie burst into the 
most frantic expressions you ever heard ; . that 
I must be an enchanter, a magician, and be- 
witched the women with some kind of philtre 
and love-charm to dote upon me in the way 
they did ! And he absolutely had the ridi- 
culous insanity to yell to me that he was aware 
I was a libertine of the worst order, under a 
cloak of virtue and sobriety, and that I medi- 
tated adding 7/our disgrace and ruin to my 
other triumphs ! " 

Mr. Behringbright paused, quite breathless 
with indignant emotion as he uttered the 
words ; yet he, too, could not avoid joining in 
the peal of laughter into which Madeleine burst 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 15 

as site listened to them . ^laughter as musical 
and sweet as a peal of Lancashire bells ; only 
he thought it was a little too prolonged and 
incessant . 

" Never mind, dearest ; it is funny ; but, 
after all, the jocularity is not quite of the 
mirth-provocative order," Mr. Behringbright 
said, gently interrupting the outburst. " But 
of course, in Glengariff's excited condition, I 
could not be irritated ; and I thought the best 
way to calm him would be to dispel the idea in 
the plainest and most direct manner ; and so I 
told him that, on ascertaining that you could 
and did prefer me to all other men, I had made 
you an offer of marriage, . which jou had 
accepted." 

" That was right, perfectly right, dear Mr. 
Behrinf::bri2:ht. I did not wish our enerafre- 
ment to be too universally declared until . 
until . papa and mamma had given their 
sanction," Madeleine answered, rather con- 
fusedl}^ upon this, finding she was expected to 
say something. "But you would tlien see 
immediately, from the coolness witli which he- 
would receive the intelligence, that he never 

VOL. III. 8 



114 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

was at all in earnest in tlie attentions lie paid 
to me." 

" I don't tliink lie ever was, dear Madeleine," 
returned her lover, with a gratified expression 
so far as regarded that ; " but the idea he went 
off upon immediately on hearing the avowal 
was more extraordinarily frenzied and out-of- 
the-way than all his former ravings. He 
turned to his mother, who was beside him, 
sitting at his pillow-head, and exclaimed, 
' Then, dear mother ! I am sure the dream 
that has haunted me so often and so long is 
founded in realities ; and nothing but Emily's 
own declaration, face to face with Mr. Behring- 
bright, and in my presence, shall remove 
the certainty I all but possess from my 
heart !' " 

" The dream /" replied Madeleine, really now 
astonished, and turning a little pale. " What 
dream ?" 

"It appears that he has dreamed (all the 
Glengariffs are a strangely visionary and super- 
stitious people). I don't know how often or in 
what form, but I believe in many . that Emily 
Maughan is the victim of some most treacherous 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 115 

and improper procedure ; that she is, somehow 
or other, entangled in the mazes of some very 
vicious person or persons, who has either 
plotted or secured her destruction. I am surje 
I don't know which, for he refuses to enter 
into any clear elucidations of the subject. But 
would you believe it, my love ! my Madeleine !" 
continued Mr. Behringbright, with much 
emotion, "from his amazing demeanour 
towards myself personally, from hints lie 
formerly dropped, from some obscure intima- 
tions from Dr. Bucktrout, but, above all, from 
the remarkable resolution his mother has ex- 
pressed, I am led to believe that he fancies in 
me tbe detestable secret seducer of the young 
girl whose protector and zealous friend I have 
been . but nothing more ! . and that I am now 
sacrificing her to a fresher object of ni}- 
licentious and despicably changeful and 
villanous passions !" 

Madeleine Graham herself did stare in utter 
amazement at this revelation ; and even a sense 
of the ludicrous seemed irresistibly to mingle 
with all the tragedy and discomfort of the posi- 
tion. Mr. Behringbright thought he dis- 

8.2 



116 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

tinguislied a faint giggle in her accents as, 
after a pause, she remarked, . 

"But you could easily dissipate so pre- 
posterous an idea . which even delirium could 
scarcely account for Lord Glengariff's forming 
. by stating the real object of Emily's par- 
tiality, . this Frenchman . this Camille Le 
Tellier." 

" I did so, as soon as I could really make up 
my mind to the conviction that I was glanced 
at," replied Mr. Behringbright ; " but I could 
perceive nothing but incredulity and distrust 
in the young man's expressions and manner. 
Emily's reply to his offer of marriage, he said, 
he had studied over a thousand times, and 
found to conceal the hint of a terrific enigma, 
which could only be solved in the way he pro- 
posed, he concluded in the most determined 
style ; that is to say, by Emily declaring to him 
in my presence the actual and true state of 
things, and the reason of her rejection of so 
advantageous an offer !" 

" In your presence ! . Emily !" faintl}^ ejacu- 
lated Madeleine. 

" Yes ; but you have not heard the strangest 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 117 

and wildest of it all yet ! Thereupon Grlen- 
garifF turned to his mother, and adjured her 
. as she wished him to retain a desire to live, 
or to submit to the means by which his life 
might be preserved, or as she would administer 
to his dying hour the only consolation of which 
it was capable . to fulfil this greatest wish of 
his soul ; and to procure that Emily Maughan 
should be summoned to this solemn ordeal and 
judgment with the least possible delay !" 

" Good heavens ! What an incredulous 
madman ! Surely his mother's only answer 
would be to assure him that he was as mad as 
herself, and beg those present to put him in a 
straitjacket T' Madeleine exclaimed, in horror. 

" Not at aU, Madeleine. As you say, I do 
believe mother and son are as mad one as the 
other; for the countess immediately declared 
to her son that, if it was in human power to 
obtain for him the wish he expressed, it 
should be done, happen what might in the 
result !" 

" They ought both to be restrained." 

" There is no power to do it ; and perhaps 
the indulgence of their frenzy is the best . the 



118 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

only means of obviating its disastrous results," 
said Mr. Beliringbright. 

" But Emily will not come, . I am sure she 
will not come !" 

" I do not know that, Madeleine. It is to a 
deathbed, perchance, she is summoned, . the 
deathbed of a man young, brave, kind, and 
honest, who has loved her . who she knows 
has loved her . with all the power and purity 
of an uncorrupt and manly heart. She can 
hardly refuse so slight a return for so much 
generosity and fidelity, asked with the zeal and 
persuasion I have reason to believe it will 
be !" 

" No ; she scarcely can . she scarcely can 1" 
exclaimed Madeleine, clasping her hands with 
a despair and wildness of gesture that startled 
and astonished Mr. Behringbright. " Perhaps, 
indeed, she ought not ! . No one has more 
influence with her than I have. My absence 
from this part of the country has become 
desirable. I ought to let my father and 
mother know of the great engagement I have 
formed. I ^\ill return at once to Belfast. I 
will beg, I will implore, I will force Emily to 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 119 

comply with the poor, noble, unhappy young 
fellow's dyhig request !" 

" There is no need, Madeleine. To crown 
the whole amazement of the affair. Lord Glen- 
gariff has obstinately refused to trust the 
delivery of his appeal and supplication to the 
fidelity of any but one messenger and agent ; 
and that messenger and agent is his mother !" 

" His mother !" 

" His mother, Lady Grlengariff . the countess 
herself. Why do you look with such astonish- 
ment at me, my dear girl ?" 

" His mother ! What ! his mother leave 
her dying son on such an errand . his mother ! 
It is impossible ! Were his mother a thousand 
times a madwoman, she could not consent to 
such a proceeding !" almost screeched Made- 
leine. 

" But it is the case that she has consented 
to start immediately on this mission to Belfast," 
said Mr. Behringbright, who knew not, by any 
means, that in the words he was pronouncing 
a sentence of death. '' I left her busied in 
preparation for departure when I came away 
from Glengariff this morning, attended by her 



]20 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

faithful serving-woman and tlie steward, Mr. 
Molloy. And as I have also written a letter to 
be delivered to Emily, I may say ordering her 
to comply with the injunctions contained, by 
all the authority I can have over her as a friend 
and guardian, I do not doubt the countess will 
return at the utmost speed of railway and ex- 
press, in time to gratify her son in this most 
fantastical but, at the same time, apparently 
life-and-soul-concerning caprice." 

'' You, Mr. Behringbright ? You ?" 
"Yes, I, dearest Madeleine. How else 
could I better show my innocence of so 
calumnious a misapprehension . my willing- 
ness to abide every investigation into my 
conduct and motives with regard to Emily 
Maughan ?" 

'' Do you mean to say, Mr. Behringbright," 
said Madeleine, with a singular fierceness, a 
glare of scorn and contemptuous rebuke in her 
whole manner, which most unpleasantly affected 
Mr. Behringbright, " that you will be bated at 
the stake in this manner at the pleasure of a 
madman and a madwoman, who dishonour and 
insult you by so atrocious a suspicion ?" 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 121 

" If they are mad, tlieir doings are not to be 
regarded as worthy of attention in such strong 
lights, Miss Grraham," returned Mr. Behring- 
bright, not a little ofTendedly. *'And even if 
their suspicions are irrational, they will be best 
confuted by a calm and unmistakable elucida- 
tion of the truth. Such I take to be the 
solemn clearance from every imputation of the 
sort w^hich Emily Maughan will not fail to 
afford me." 

" But you do not know . oh, Mr. Behring- 
bright, you do not know the full horror of the 
position !" now exclaimed Madeleine, in sheer 
desperation, driven to place the climax on all 
her evildoings against Emily Maughan. " You 
do not know what I know . what has induced 
me to be so urgent and immediate with you to 
marry, and remove to a distant scene, Emily 
and the man who . the man who, as she had 
confessed to me herself in heai-tbroken anguish, 
is the seducer of her unguarded youth . 
the father of an unborn heir of shame and 
betrayal !" 

Mr. Behringbright appeared even more 
aghast than the unhappy girl herself who 



122 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

spoke, and who looked the very picture of 
horror and dismay, when he heard the words. 

" Ah, indeed . this explains all !" he then 
exclaimed, quite dizzily, as if he had received 
an actual blow. " Poor Emily ! But how 
otherwise could she have refused a glorious 
young hero of a man . an earl . like Griengariff, 
for this sorry Frenchman ?'* 

" Who is here, resident in Killarney ! . How 
will he suffer you to bring a woman in such a 
situation, all but his wife, to the bedside of a 
dying man who declares himself to be her 
lover, to acquit a third of a suspicion which 
never could have any existence but in the brain 
of madness, yet dishonours equally almost all 
j3arties concerned ?" said Madeleine. 

" You are right, my darling love ! How 
wise, how prudent, how all you ought to be, 
you are ! I will hurry back at once to Glen- 
gariff, to prevent such a crowning exposure ! 
Even if kills Griengariff, it is better that he 
should know the worst finally . at once . with- 
out further haggling of pretence to spare his 
feelings. But this detestable wretcli of a 
Frenchman ! Never . no, never shall the 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 123 

betrayer of a woman's confidence . so pro- 
digious a betrayer . reap the reward of his 
crimes from me ! Women have not been good 
to me hitherto . they have injured me ; but 
3^ou, dearest Madeleine, have restored me to 
all my belief and confidence in the sex ! I 
consider myself the champion now as well as 
the guardian of that poor, weak, wronged girl ; 
and though I will compel the villain to make 
her all the reparation marriage can, it is on her, 
and her alone, that I will confer and fix the 
benefits I had always intended when the 
occasion should arise. But oh, how little did 
I think it would come in such a form !" 

And Mr. Behringbright . albeit unused to 
such efiusions of sensibility . fairly burst into 
a paroxysm of tears and sobs. 

But Madeleine exhibited an unusual stern- 
ness, not to say harshness and peremptoriness, 
in her manner. 

"This is unworthy of you, Mr. Behring- 
bright !" she said, with a species of contemp- 
tuous asperity. " You are womanish in your 
grief! You will almost give countenance to 
Lord Glengariff 's mad suspicions, if you go on 



124 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

SO. For heaven's sake, lose not a moment in 
hastening to prevent this frantic journey . 
certain to end in the most dreadful exposures 
. on the part of Lady GlengarifF!" 

" I will not lose a moment, dearest . not a 
moment !" said Mr. Behringbright, himself 
strangely overawed and coerced by the con- 
centrated power of will and emotion in the 
young woman's whole demeanour and tone* 
" Forgive me these tears ; they are unmanly, I 
know ; but it grieves me so to the heart. I 
did so much respect Emily, for what I imagined 
her purity and goodness ! It is enough to 
finish up what remained to me of faith 'in 
woman, only that you are a woman as well as 
an angel ; and I can always find an anchorage 
for faith in your beloved heart. Hold, dearest, 
before I go ! I had almost forgotten, but I have 
brought you the ring with which the repre- 
sentative of our family has,'^ in all times since 
w^e have possessed jewels and ornaments of 
price, plighted his faith to his betrothed bride ! 
It is the great Behringbright Diamond, the 
choicest of all my grandfather's stores, who 
traded in these bright stones when he wedded 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 125 

Ins wife ! Here it is ; and thus I plight you, 
Madeleine Graham, mine!" 

So saying, the wealthy heir of a wealthy race 
produced a ring from his waistcoat pocket . the 
dazzling glitter of the gems with which it was 
set fairly lighting up his hand as he did so . 
and placed it on what is called, in lovers' 
parlance, " the engaged finger" of Madeleine 
Graham's white and beautifully-shaped small 
hand. 

In good truth, the betrothed bride's eye 
flashed with more than equal brilliancy as she 
received the precious gift ; and thoroughly 
did she mean it as she exclaimed, firmly clench- 
ing that little hand, . 

" And I will perish sooner than relinquish 
this pledge of my dearest future husband's 
love !" 

A passionate embrace responded (this scene 
took place in the Bucktrouts' private apartment, 
whence the aunt had withdrawn on some neces- 
sary business as soon as Mr. Behringbright, 
presented himself) . a renewal of promises, 
pledges, what not, of eternal love and fidcHty ; 
and then at last the much-consoled lover was 



126 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

prevailed upon to liurry back to Glengariff on 
his errand. 

He was liardl}'- out of the room before Made- 
leine rushed to the bell. 

"When's the next post north, Eooney?" 
she exclaimed, breathlessly, as the waiter 
entered. 

" It's after wanting five minutes, and per- 
haps half as many again, till the bags are 
sealed out," he replied. " So if your young 
leddyship is in a hurry, you had better wait 
till the next. And I take the importunity to 
tell your leddyship [Madeleine had been raised 
to the peerage by general consent of the hotel 
servants since it was known she was to marry 
a man worth a million of money] that I have 
made the inquiry she wished for, and find 
there is a foreign lady, wdth a fine bonnet and 
shawl, that calls herself Madame Loriot, stay- 
ing for a night and a day at the Muckross." 

"Very well, Eooney. But I cannot lose 
this post. Ink and paper instantly ! and be 
ready to rush out the moment I am ready. 
You shall be well paid for your trouble." 

"It's niver doubting your honour's lady- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 127 

ship I'll be !" grinned the worthy fellow, 
" with that ring on your finger, that beats the 
sun and all the little stars themselves for 
shining." 

"And then I shall want a car for Muck- 
ross ! 



128 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



CHAPTEE VI. 



LADY GLENGARIFF " EN ROUTE." 



The letter Madeleine found it so necessary to 
lose no time in despatching was to her mother, 
Lady Grraham, in Belfast. 

It was very businesslike and brief, as suited 
the exigency. It contained the pleasing an- 
nouncement that she had succeeded in the great 
enterprise on which she had left for Killarney. 
The millionnaire had proposed; she had accepted 
him, of course^ and he was to set out immedi- 
ately to make his wishes known to her papa. 
He might be expected at once in Belfast, for he 
was terribly in love, and as anxious as any one 
could possibly be to complete the affair, and 
make her his dear, happy wife, and all that. 
But meanwhile, Madeleine went on to say, 
underlining almost every other word, she had 
discovered that that artful creature, Emily 



MADELEINE GRAHA^f. 129 

Mauglian, who pretended to be so artless, had 
been all along mahing love to poor Mr. Belirbig- 
hrigid! He had had the greatest difficulty to 
parry her designs even before she came over to 
Ireland. In fact, he had sent her there on 
purpose to get rid of her lovemaldng, when the 
creature . as every one knew . had directly set 
her cap at jjoor young Lord Glengariff, and 
cajoled him into making such a senseless, 
ridiculous exhibition of himself . trailing over 
the country after her, and behaving in every 
other respect like a madman. And now, as 
Emily would be sure to fly into a fury at the 
final escape of such a splendid chance as Mr. 
Behringbright . and was plainly a girl of no 
prhicijjles . nothing was likelier than, if she 
saw Mr. Behringbright, she would endeavour 
to spoil %e very tiling by revealing all about that 
foolish affair, which mamma would of course 
remember . that made papa so angry . with 
the French clerk or something of that sort, 
who annoyed them all the last winter with his 
attentions to her, silly girl, that know no 
better, if mamma had not so fortunately 
stopped things in time, by telling of their 
VOL. III. . 1) 



130 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

meeting one another at the Eock. Tliat would 
destroy all that had been done. Mr. Behring- 
bright was such a curious, particular kind of a 
man in the temper, she dared not even let him 
know how fond she was of liim. Therefore her 
mother must find some pretence instantly to 
give Miss Manglian her dismissal from Bel- 
haven Square, and, if possible, from Belfast 
itself. 

If she could by any means see such a 
meddling, reckless person sltlj^jjed off direct for 
England . Madeleine went on with her rapid 
pen to assure her mother . it would be of im- 
viense advantage . make everything so delight- 
fully safe ! And the thing most likely to pre- 
vail upon Emily to go at once would be to tell 
her of the intended match being appointed to 
take place directly they returned to Belfast . 
that they were on the way, and that Mr. 
Behringbright expressly hoped and desired 
Emily would leave the town, and Ireland also, 
before his arrival. Emily herself was very 
well aware of reasons that would render it very 
painful for Mr. Behringbright to see her. And 
mamma might say so, and urge it upon her in 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 131 

a way tliat slie could understand ; because 
really the woman made it no secret to Mr. 
Beliringbriglit himself that she was after him, 
hoping, perhaps, to coax him that way into 
having her . ^like a poor mouse that is too 
frightened to run when it knows the cat is 
springing ! Papa might furnish her with any 
money she required to go, and could say Mr. 
Behringbright desired him to let her have it. 
That would be sure to satisfy Miss Maughan, 
if anj^thing could, that her room was more 
desired than her comjmnj/. 

All this was clear enough. But, besides, 
Madeleine was aware her mother would com- 
prehend the necessity of the move . not quite 
so well, certainly, as herself, but very well 
indeed. There had been an infmite deal of 
pother .and mischief already in the family 
about this Frenchman and his pretensions ; 
which latter had been most ignominiously 
vetoed by the paternal authority long pre- 
viously. 

This letter despatched in time for the de- 
parting post, with Kooney's co-operation, 
Madeleine was free to hope that it might be of 
9.2 



132 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

some use in clearing tlie embarrassed front of 
her position. 

It was decidedly of the most vital import- 
ance to get Emily Manglian's fixed but ever- 
threatening corps removed from the sloping of 
the hills ! After the last crowning calumnies 
the peril of confutation was sadly increased 
for our able young friend. Whatever plans 
were hit upon with regard to Le Tellier (and 
Madeleine herself hoped nothing was as yet 
positively decided on there !), all was useless 
unless Emily was also safely removed out of 
the way. 

In the beginning, Madeleine had felt some 
reluctance in her own mind to the harm she 
did this orphan and homeless girl, who had 
been her school friend, and whom she could 
not help respecting for her pure, candid, 
and gentle-hearted nature. She had found it 
necessary, it is true, for her own purposes, to 
do her a little mischief at first . not very 
much. What could it matter to Emily 
Maughan if Mr. Behringbright was misled 
into the belief that she had a handsome young 
Frenchman for a sweetheart? He meant 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 133 

nothing by her, himself ! Madeleine did not 
intend to follow on with any further damage. 
But she had been compelled . still, each new 
injury had been a nuisance and a trouble to 
inflict. This was over now. Everything, 
Madeleine felt, was of inferior consequence to 
her own preservation. It was the first law of 
nature, and must be obeyed as necessarily as 
those other laws called Hunger and Thirst. 
She scrupled, she hesitated at nothing now; 
nay, I .believe she began to hate Emily, for 
the trouble she was obliged to take in achieving 
the poor girl's ruin ! Her acts were no longer 
the dispassionate exequaturs of a great states- 
man or general, obliged to sacrifice a province 
or a regiment to obtain some object of policy 
or attack. Yes ; Madeleine Graham now hated 
her victim . hated her for her goodness, for 
her knowledge of her secrets, for her being so 
truly loved by Lord Glengariff . for all the 
lies, in fine, that she, Madeleine, had been 
obliged to invent against her, and for the 
terrible difficulties in which they had involved 
the inventor. I am not sure, indeed, but what 
she grew to be indignant at Emily for not 



134 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

being in reality the lost wretch she represented 
her. There seemed a kind of defiance and 
mockery in her persisting not to be the weak 
and fallen creature she was said to be, but a 
brave, pure, calm, and highminded young 
woman ; something audacious and detestably 
ill-natured in Emily not having incurred the 
guilt and disgrace attempted to be fastened 
upon her, and which were so dangerous to 
another party's views of aggrandizement and 
wealth ! . in her 7iot being Madeleine Grraham, 
in short ! 

Madeleine was, in fact, half mad with self- 
ishness and fear . not wholly so, or there 
might have been some excuse for her. She 
was not mad enough, for example, to dream 
any longer of a likelihood in the saving plan 
she had once lulled her fears with the chance 
of being able to realize for all parties : marry 
Camille Le Tellier! . Emily Maughan marry 
Camille Le Tellier ! The vague hopes she 
might possibly once have cherished in this 
respect had vanished on the least rational 
consideration. Camille himself, with all his 
vanity, ridiculed the notion. Immeasurably 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 135 

absurd ! Madeleine began to perceive that 
she had, in some strange way, bedazed herself 
with her own falsehoods, and had half believed 
in the necessities of the imaginary position 
in which her calumnies had placed Emily 
Maughan. 

Had there been a shadow of a hope towards 
this extrication, that other alternative would 
never have been looming so fast into, such tre- 
mendous horizon-closing proportions ! . so that 
not the faintest glimmering of liglit seemed 
likely shortly to remain, until the great clear- 
ance could be made ! . not with the axe, 
indeed ! . nous avons chmige tout cela. Clytem- 
nestra would never have thought of making so 
butcherlike a job of it, if she had lived in our 
days, with her opportunities in preparing her 
lord's meals, according to the custom of queens 
and other ladies of quality in the times of 
Troy's overthrow b}^ " Argive Helen's rosy- 
fingered hand l" 

It would make very little difference, Made- 
leine considered, if even Lord Glcngariff and 
his mother were induced by that last dreadful 
scandal to abandon their purposed explanation 



136 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

face to face with Emily Maughan. Camille, 
with his inordinate vanity and pretensions, 
would never submit to the only terms Mr. 
Behringbright had announced his inflexible 
resolution to grant to the supposed betrayer 
of the honour of his ward. If this audacious 
imputation had saved her one way, it had, 
therefore, destroyed her another. And so it 
began to be clearer and clearer to Madeleine, 
that she was quite right in giving in her ad- 
hesion to some such imperative power as des- 
tiny. Surely there was a destiny at work in 
her case ! What could she do but what she 
was doing, and must go on doing ? Madeleine 
did not reflect that she had first lost the con- 
trol of her will by its exercise, and that it is 
the very Nemesis of crime that . 

" Each step 
Doth force his sequent, and still hunying on, 
Breaks the waverer's knees !" 

But it was speedily evident to her that no 
part of the logical consequences of her original 
departure from truth and fair-dealing was to 
be spared her. She was about to go down to 
the car she had ordered to take her on that 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 137 

important errand to see her dear, but some- 
what of late neglected friend, staying at " The 
Muckross," when Mr. Behringbright returned 
to interrupt the excursion, with the formidable 
addition in his company of the Countess of 
Grlengariff. 

He explained to Madeleine that he had met 
with this lady on his way to the castle, coming 
from it in a postchaise, with luggage and 
attendants, on her route to the railway-station 
in Killarney, whence she was to proceed at 
once on her errand to Emily Maughan in 
Belfast. 

Mr. Behringbright also explained that he 
had left his own vehicle for the countess's, and 
had endeavoured to prevail upon her to abandon 
the frantic expedition, in the first place, by 
remonstrances on its folly and inexpediency. 
But the countess's dry and haughty manner, 
and expression of her determination to proceed* 
obliged him to declare all he knew . all 
the full guilt and entanglement of Emily 
Maughan's position with her French lover. 

And the countess was certainly, for several 
moments, thunderstruck with the revelation. 



138 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

She even went so far as to order her postillion 
to turn his horses' heads . but on a sudden 
changed her mind; and going off apparently 
on some wild hallucination of her son's jealousy, 
she inquired, in so suspicious a manner, 
whether Mr. Behringbright himself was the 
authority for so dreadful a statement ? . and if 
so, how he came to be in the confidence of a 
young woman to so shameful an extent, who 
ought to have died rather to keep her secret to 
herself? . that he felt compelled to inform 
her Miss Graham was the divulger of the 
mystery, and the sole confidante in question ! . 
driven thereto by the headlong course events 
had entered upon, and the certainty of a more 
disastrous and heartrending exposure that 
must otherwise ensue. 

And yet, Mr. Behringbright declared, the 
countess seemed as far as ever from being 
satisfied by this declaration. 

" She always disliked you, dearest," he said, 
tenderly' pressing Madeleine's hand. " From 
the first her mind was the seat of all manner 
of ridiculous fancies and prejudices, only ex- 
cusable on the ground of its total want of 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 139 

balance, and lier long seclusion from the world 
and matters of fact and reality. And, besides, 
it is plain she still works npon lier son's 
strange frenzy respecting my relations with 
Miss Maughan. In short, she insists on 
seeing you, and hearing from your own lips 
3^our reasons for the assertions I have made, 
on my perfect conviction that you have declared 
. most reluctantly declared . only the de- 
plorable truth about poor Emily. Her lady- 
ship is waiting below with great impatience, 
as the next train northward is about to start. 
But I would not allovf her to fling herself un- 
prepared upon you. Will you see her now ?" 
" Certainl}^" said Madeleine, looking so 
white and quivery that Mr. Behringbright 
himself was disturbed and smitten with a slight 
feeling of distrust. " Only I suppose her lady- 
ship will as little believe me, on my word, as 
any of the fiimil}^ seem to believe you, Mr. 
Behringbright ! Ts it not confirmation enough 
that Le Tellier has asked the young lady's 
hand of you ? . and that, although he had not 
the boldness to propose them to you, to me he 
has the most exacting and preposterous terms 



140 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

as the conditions of liis carrying out tlie over- 
ture?" 

Mr. Beliringbright shook his head. " For 
aught I know, they may fancy even that an 
invention of mine," he remarked, with an in- 
dignant though contemptuous smile. "Nay, 
the countess plainly declared to me her son 
was so convinced of the omnipotence of cash 
in my case, that he would probably take it 
into his head I had hought a husband for my 
victim, in order to remove her creditably out 
of the path of my present alliance. For I 
think they do begin to believe, dearest, I am 
in earnest in my intention to marry you !" 

"Let her ladyship come, then, and I will 
endeavour to satisfy her," said Madeleine, still 
much embarrassed ; but a sudden thought 
occurred to her, and lighted up her brilliant 
eyes, though with a sparkle not certes caught 
from on high. " Let her come !" she added, in 
a firmer tone. " I think I shall be able to 
convince even a crazy woman like this countess 
that I do not speak altogether at random and 
without proof." 

Accordingly the Countess of GlengariiF . 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 141 

whose haughty sense of social superiority was 
severely chafed by being obliged to await the 
pleasure of a young girl of the " commercial 
classes" . was summoned and escorted upstairs 
to an audience by Mr. Behringbright. Nor 
was she greatly mollified at being met at the 
top of the landing-place, as if by a contem- 
porary princess, by Miss Graham. Indeed, 
her ladyship behaved almost rudely . pushed 
past Miss Graham without extending her 
hand, or acknowledging her presence otherwise 
than by a stern nod . and flinging herself, 
unasked, into a chair, turned all the haggard, 
aristocratic terrors of her visage on the party 
who was to submit to an examination. 

Madeleine bore this gaze unblenchingh", 
though she did not like it, and respectfully 
declined the chair Mr. Behringbright drew for 
her. That gentleman then withdrew, to 
leave the ladies to an unreserved communica- 
tion on the delicate subjects likely to form 
the discussion. He had previously stipulated 
that neither Nora nor Mr. MoUoy, who were 
with the countess, should form any part of 
the auditory. 



142 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Tor some moments after this departure, 
Lady GlengarifF continued to stare as harshly 
and fixedly at Madeleine as before ; who felt 
very uncomfortable under the scrutiny. But 
she rallied meanwhile. "After all," she said 
to herself, " this is only an old, withered mad- 
woman, though she is called Countess of Grlen- 
gariff, and is a great lady at Killarney ! I am 
surely a match for her !" 

And so the countess found. Questioned, 
Miss Graham replied, with only so much 
quaver and hesitation as might naturally be 
expected in ayounglady of delicate sentiments, 
compelled to betray so sad a confidence on the 
part of a friend . but more circumstantially 
than she had deemed it necessary or advisable 
to Mr. Behringbright . with what she patheti- 
cally called " the whole miserable truth." 

Poor, dear, nnhappy Emily had confessed it 
all to her dear friend and schoolfellow when 
they last parted in Belfast, in a burst of frantic 
grief, imploring her to second the application 
which Monsieur Le Tellier had with difiiculty 
. now that he had attained his wicked ends . 
been induced to promise to make to her 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 143 

guardian ! She had been obliged to confess 
all, on Madeleine's entreating lier to allow lier 
time to bring the matter about; for every 
da}", in spite of the cleverest arts at conceal- 
ment, increased the danger of a discovery of 
lier shame ! Her seducer himself had shown 
alarming symptoms of shrinking from his en- 
gagements, and would doubtless require a heavy 
bribe to keep him in adherence even to his own 
proposals. " Still Emily," the undaunted girl 
continued, " did not confiess the truth until she 
was driven to it by visible necessity ; for she 
accidentally dropped a note which declared the 
state of affairs in a manner not to be mistaken, 
and which I myself, as accidentally finding, 
felt bound to call upon her for explanation on." 
And this note . Miss Graham now dechired . 
she had still in her possession, and was willing 
to submit to her ladyship's judgment. 

The countess eagerly assented; and Made- 
leine withdrew, to seek out the document from 
among some other papers, she said, she had 
brought with her, to verify any statements she 
might find it necessary to make on tlie subject 
to Mr. Behringbright. . 



144 MADELEINE GKAHAM. 

She took care to be absent, seeking for this 
voucher, ample time to allow of the departure 
of the mail-train with her letter to her mother. 
She then returned with the first specimen of 
those epistles she had ordered Camille to 
address to her under the name of Emily 
Maughan. This contained, as the reader may 
possibly remember, the statement of his inten- 
tion to seek out Mr. Behringbright, and obtain 
his concurrence in their union. But I may 
have omitted to mention that it was a letter 
which bore upon its every word most utter 
condemnation for the woman to whom it was 
written. 

With knitted brows and severest aspect . an 
aspect Ehadamanthus or Minos might have 
thought not unbefitting the exercise of their 
own judicial duties . the countess perused the 
whole epistle from beginning to end. 

Madeleine confidently expected judgment in 
favour of her veracity as the result of this 
scrutiny. But, like some other ver}', very, 
very clever persons, she had overlooked a trifle 
of some importance to the general stability of 
her edifice. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 145 

" This letter would have been decisive, but 
for one remarkable circumstance, which gives 
rise to a notion confirmatory of my son's 
opinion that some duplicity is at work in the 
transaction," said the countess, with a stern 
clearness of deduction that showed she was 
thoroughly in one of her lucid intervals. " 1 
have always understood. Miss Graham, that 
you did not know Mr. Behringbright ivas Mr. 
Behringbright until he made to you the de- 
claration of his intentions on the day of my 
son's accident. How, then, am I to suppose 
Miss Maughan implored your interposition 
with a man whose position with regard to her, 
and in the world in general, was unknown to 
you at the date of this intercepted letter ?" 

This was a fixer, . or would have been for 
most people. It did rather puzzle Madeleine 
Graham, but not much or long. 

" Emily, of course, was acquainted with the 
true identity of Mr. Behrinf/bri^hf, under the 
name of Broivnjo/in ; and perceiving the great 
kindness and affection he took for me at once 
on his visit at my father's house, and knowing 
we were likely to meet again on the lake? . 

VOL. III. 10 



146 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

anticipating all, in reality, that has come 
to pass . she secured my interest with Mr. 
Behringhright in advance." 

The countess smiled . a strangely lurid and 
sarcastic smile. 

" You are ready with your answer, Miss 
Grraham," she said. " However, I am more 
than ever satisfied that my son's tormenting 
dreams are founded in actualities ! . You look 
surprised, and perhaps you have a right to 
feel so. We Griengariffs are confessedly not 
the most soher-judging people in the world; 
and yet our inspirations serve us sometimes as 
well as the hoasted sanity of judgment of other 
people. And now I declare to you, that unless 
you wish me to get you to repeat your expla- 
nation in the presence of Mr. Behringhright, 
you must allow me to retain possession of this 
letter until I can confront Emily with its evi- 
dence. She may reasonably refuse to be con- 
demned, even on her friencVs unsupported 
statements against her ! But no impudence 
can explain away this fact, if. it is a fact ; and 
of course, if it is so, I am not the messenger 
to bring pollution of the kind to the deathbed 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 147 

of my noble son, even if Emily's refusal, and 
admission of her guilt in so doing, anticipates 
for him, by a brief period, the stroke of doom !'* 

Madeleine certainly made no objection to 
this impounding of the documents . on her 
own account . under the penalty announced. 
But, on behalf of her dear friend, she most 
warmly and generously pleaded that she really 
could not allow it ; that it would kill her 
beloved Emily to be subjected to such an 
ordeal ! The more she pleaded to the contrary, 
however, the more inexorable the countess 
showed herself in her resolve. 

" I have promised my son I will not look in 
his face again until I have seen Emily, and 
won her consent to the great ordeal proposed, 
if it be possible to attain it. It is not likely 
I shall succeed under these circumstances ; I 
do not desire to succeed. But I must keep my 
promise to Lord Glengariff ! . I must, T say ! 
Armed with this document, I will go at once 
to Belfast, and, happen what may, will fulfil 
my word to my dying son !" 

" The revelation will kill him ! But have 
your own will, madam ; you will have a 

10.2 



148 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

long journey for notliing ! '' said Madeleine, 
spitefully. 

" No ; it is the suspense . tlie doubt . ^that 
torments Mm which, much more than the 
fever of his wound, is wearing my son into 
his grave ! " the countess replied, with increased 
asperity. " And to show that I believe so, I 
will immediately write to him the full par- 
ticulars of what I have thus far ascertained, 
that he may know the very worst. Mr. Beh- 
ringbright will confirm to him, at all events, 
the fact of the Prenchman's arrival in Kil- 
larney, and proposal for Emily ; I shall request 
him to do so. But do not fear. Miss Graham, 
that I will reveal to Mr. Behringbright, at 
present, anything that may casually shake his 
confidence in the disinterested and reciprocal 
quality of the afiection you have inspired 
him with. This letter I retain as the price 
of my discretion." 

Madeleine smiled scornfully, but was secretly 
much annoyed at her own oversight in what she 
had intended to prove so capital a manoeuvre. 
However, she considered she had a remedy in 
store for all! 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 149 

Meanwliile, slie /lad effected one great object. 
Her letter . as tliere was no other but a special 
train now to be procured for the rest of the 
day from Killarney . would reach Belfast some 
time before the countess. There was a good 
chance that Emily might be expelled and out 
of the way before Lady Glengariff's arrival. 
Her mother, she knew, made aware of a 
pressing exigency in the case, was a woman of 
energetic action when she pleased. But if 
even Emily was, unhappily, still on the spot, 
ready to make all the confusion in her power, 
there was no danger that could not be obviated 
if only Camille . Camille ! . were removed from 
the possibility of adding his malicious or 
cowardly evidence to a discovery of the truth. 

The postscript . the forged postscript . to 
Lady Glengariff's invitation to the fugitive 
governess to return, what did that matter ? It 
was in her ladyship's handwriting. She was 
known to be proud to excess . to have always 
disapproved of her son's attachment . to be 
subject to intervals of insanity. She might 
deny the written words as much as she thought 
proper : opinion would go in favour of their 



150 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

authenticity. The great fact of Camille having 
asked Emily in marriage would always remain, 
and if meanwhile he died of some sudden attack 
. some disorder of the stomach (and he was 
subject to such) . all Emily's denial henceforth 
would stand for little : attempts to save her 
own credit, when it was useless any longer to 
admit her errors, with a view to the best 
remaining remedy. 

Still there was no time to be lost ! And so, 
as soon as Mr. Behringbright set out to ac- 
company Lady Glengariff, who had determined 
on a special train, to the railway-station . 
which he seemed to desire . Miss Graham re- 
sumed her own original plan, and proceeded 
on a drive to the Muckross Abbey Hotel. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 151 



CHAPTER VII. 



A GRAND JUNCTION. 



It is a beautiful drive, that, from Prospect 
Palace to Muckross Abbey, along the skirts of 
Kenmare Woods, and the lovely inner bend of 
Castle Lough Bay. And it was a most de- 
lightful morning . the sky as clearly blue and 
lighted with the sun as if clouds and mists 
were unknown things on the Lakes of Kil- 
larney . when Madeleine Graham emerged on 
her excursion. But Madeleine Graham was 
decidedly going to Muckross Abbey on busi- 
ness, not on pleasure. She took scarcely any 
note of what she saw of the charms of nature, 
arrayed in the transparent cloth of gold of the 
day-beam. I believe she was even hardly 
gratified when, arriving at the Muckross Hotel, 
and stepping into its capacious hall, her dis- 
tinguished appearance and beauty excited the 



152 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

attention of several groups of persons loung- 
ing and chatting with the affable hostess and 
her attendant barmaids. But Madeleine really 
did look very well, in her flowing morning 
dress, and with her coquettish plumed hat on, 
and her veil half flung back, revealing her 
earnest and excited physiognomy, rich in 
colour and character . though this last probably 
not exactly of the most attractive and femi- 
ninely soft of possible aspects at the moment. 
A. wandering harper, who was playing " The 
Last E-ose of Summer " to all whom he could 
get to listen . like a minstrel of old . in the 
hall, seemed involuntarily to change the air as 
she came in to something a good deal wilder and 
more irregular and defying in movement : as 
if he comprehended intuitively that the plain- 
tive and the pathetic were not the style of 
melody to wheedle a reward out of this new- 
comer. 

Madeleine, however, took no notice what- 
ever of the bard or his minstrelsy. She in- 
quired for a French lady staying at the hotel 
. a French lady who came the night before . 
Madame Loriot she believed. Madeleine did 



Madeleine graham. 153 

not kno^y by what name her friend chose to 
be known on her present peregrination, but 
the description, she thought, would hit her. 
And so it did. "Oh yes, ma'am ; a French 
lady . a play-actress, or something of that 
sort. She's only got a bedroom ; didn't want 
a sitting-room . leastways, not a private one. 
Who shall I say's called ?" 

"Miss Graham . Miss Madeleine Graham, 
of Belfast." 

It was lucky, however, for Miss Madeleine 
Graham of Belfast's chances of seeing her 
friend, that she determined to tread fast on 
the slatternly heels of the chambermaid who 
went to announce her. The abigail, knocking 
at a door on the third story labelled " Kate 
Mavourneen," and delivering her message to 
an unseen interlocutrix within, who unlocked 
the door, but held it nearly closed in hand, 
received for reply, after a short pause of 
doubtful import . " Mees Madeleine Graham ! 
But I know no such person in Killarney 
who does not know me in Belfast ! '' 

" Oh yes, you do . you do, dear Olympe,'* 
said the applicant, pushing the door open, 



154 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

almost by force, and entering. "That will 
do, young woman; Madame knows me; we 
will ring if we want anything. And now, my 
best Olympe, do you not know me . your dear 
old pupil of yore, Madeleine Graham?" the 
young lady inquired, in the kindest and most 
familiar manner, and making as if she would 
throw her arms around her ci-devant friend and 
instructress of the Sparx Gymgynoecium. 

But Mademoiselle Loriot stepped back with a 
most theatrical air of dignity and repulse, "What 
are you ? . what do you mean ?" she exclaimed. 
" I am me, it is true ; but Madeleine Graham, I 
know her no longer ! I do not desire to know 
her ! Pardon me ; my time is of importance, 
and I am engaged at present in the duties of 
my toilette !" 

This latter statement was visibly correct, 
and a rather strange figure Mademoiselle 
Loriot cut in the operation. It has been said 
that nothing more completely disenchants the 
eye of adoration than the sight of a human 
being, male or female, in its nightcap ! But 
really the spectacle of a Frenchwoman, pre- 
maturely old with dissipation, before rouging 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 155 

and bewigging up for society, is something to 
disenchant one of humanity altogether. And 
such was Mademoiselle Loriot's haggish and 
withered aspect as she stood, in her majestic 
attitude of repulse, in a showy chintz dressing- 
gown, with naked feet, almost bald-headed, 
and looking the very incarnation of spite and 
ill-temper at her blooming visitor, that I am 
sure it would have justified all .mankind's 
turning hermit, and refusing thenceforth and 
for ever all society and resort with the fair 
sex. 

" Oh yes, you do know me . you shall know 
me, dear Olympe, now that we are in a place 
where it is no longer necessary for me to con- 
ceal the great affection I have for you !" still 
Madeleine nobly persevered. " Killarney is 
not Belfast ; people don't go about in iron 
stays here ; and the moment I heard you had 
arrived on the lakes, I determined to call upon 
you, and remind you of old times, dear ! And 
let us talk in French, too, and I will show 
you I have not forgotten anything you taught 
me ! 

And she would have embraced Mademoiselle, 



156^ MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

but again Mademoiselle would not permit it ; 
nay, she drew back with an air of heightened 
repugnance. 

" Ah, then, I comprehend but too well what 
is otherwise inexplicable . Camille Le Tellier's 
appearance in Killarney !" she cried. " The 
perjide pursues you always ; and you have 
shamefully deceived me in pretending that this 
worthless heart is not made the victim of your 
treacherous attractions, but has transferred 
itself to another ! Hold, Miss Graham ! It 
is an indignity . an insult a thousand times 
repeated you offer me . when, not satisfied 
with your triumph, you seek to parade it 
before me, and to display in chains a captive 
whose appearance recalls to me the saddest 
and most degrading episode my life." 

" You are mistaken, Olympe ! If you will 
but hear me, I will convince you of your 
mistake. Meanwhile, do not let me interrupt 
your dressing : we used often to watch each 
other dress, you know, when we were at the 
Misses Sparx* humbug academy, and you 
taught me a good deal then in that way, and 
must know more yourself now !" wheedled 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 157 

Madeleine, seating herself, with an air of re- 
maining, beside the chamber mirror . the table 
before which was largely strewed with cos- 
metics, rouge-pots, pomades, enamel paste, 
violet powder-balls, and aromatic essences, from 
the Frenchwoman's open travelling-case. 

" But I repeat to you, this is an intrusion, 
Miss Graham ! I no longer seek, I no longer 
desire, your society," resumed Mademoiselle 
Loriot, with great vehemence. "And that 
you may believe so, I will tell you what it has 
occurred to me to ascertain ! You forbade 
me your house, you repudiated my tenderness, 
and you assured me that the devotion of this 
infcime was transferred to another ! . to a cer- 
tain Miss Emily Maughan, become, througli 
misfortune, a governess in your father's up- 
start family. Well, I remember that this 
Emily Maughan . once herself esteemed rich . 
had always, nevertheless, been of an amenity 
and kindness of disposition not to be surpassed. 
Some calumnies had been raised against her at 
the Sparx Gynecce, it is true, and, nevertheless, 
she had never made mischief there. It was 
you and I that made all the mischief there 



158 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

that was made ! Witness that affair of the 
betrayal of the poor cook and party in the 
kitchen, of which Miss Emily was always un- 
conscious . which we had both, in a degree, 
shared . and yet divulged ! 

" I have compassion, I say, on this innocent 
young girl, when I hear she is likely, in her 
turn, to become the victim of the changeable 
caprices of a man without heart, without 
honour, without remorse . who sacrifices 
women, without scruple, to the demands of 
his self-love and gratification, wherever he 
encounters folly equal to his presumption ! 
You had denied me the entrance of your 
father's house, no doubt; but Miss Maughan 
had not denied me her master's. I resolve to 
call upon her, and ascertain, if possible, the 
true position of affairs ! . I do so. I am re- 
ceived with every sign of an amiable welcome, 
in spite of the visible traces of misfortune in 
my appearance . in spite of the signs of a 
secret and overwhelming chagrin which are 
imprinted on Miss Maughan's countenance, 
otlierwise expressive of mildness and benefi- 
cence, restrained solely by the lack of means. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 159 

But wlien, encouraged by the affability of my 
reception, my heart expands itself with an 
emotion of pity and tenderness towards this 
unhappy orphan, and I proceed to warn her, 
with a sorrowful earnestness, against the 
character and designs of a man . my country- 
man . who, I understand, pursues her with 
his addresses, which are not altogether un- 
acceptable, . then her eyes flash fire, her whole 
physiognomy lights up with indignation, and 
she assures me, with expressions of a contempt 
and repudiation impossible to be feigned, that 
no calumny could exceed this in total want of 
foundation ! 

" I felt, then, that I had been deceived ! 
And, penetrated in my turn with a just 
aversion for so much falsehood and decep- 
tion, Miss Graham," Mademoiselle continued, 
without softening the realities of things in 
their expression, it must be allowed, "in 
reply to Emily's demand, I declare to her 
my informant! Petrified, but at the same 
time violently irritated, she on her part no 
longer observes any reticence on the subject, 
as regarded you, but reveals to me . so far 



IGO MADELEINE GRAHA^f. 

as she herself understood it, she assured me . 
the real state of the affairs ; the pretensions 
of Camille to your alliance. legitimately ex 
ploded by your father and mother, but which 
she had but too much reason to believe you 
continued secretly to encourage ! . Emily 
Maughan was too generous, too noble to hint 
. perhaps to apprehend . to what extent ! 
Eut I know you . and I know him- . and I 
know, therefore, better what to conclude ! 
In brief, Miss Maughan, as well as myself, 
sees in your attempt to cast the blame upon 
her a frightful disingenuity and audacity 
which excite her alarm as well as indignation. 
You are absent, and are likely to continue 
so. Her situation, even before my revelations, 
had for some reason or other become extremely 
distasteful and irksome to her. She takes 
her resolution at once . complains to Miladi 
Graham, your mother, of the scandalous 
imputation attempted to be fastened on her, 
and gives in her own dismission in the space 
of one month ! Already this period has all 
but elapsed ; and probably, returned to 
England, Miss Maughan amply justifies her 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 161 

reputation from your insinuations, wliile you 
. you here, on these lakes . haunted by the 
shadow of Caihille Le TeUier . offer proofs, 
no longer to be contested, of your real com- 
plicity and perfidy !" 

After all, this was in some degree good news 
for Madeleine, though she did not relish the 
statement much as it went on. Emily might 
be already safely out of the way ! Most pro- 
bably she had left Ireland, if she had left Sir 
Orange Grraham's family. She had little 
attraction to remain in that country, and it 
was most probable she would return to her 
native land and home. 

Satisfied with this conclusion, Madeleine 
now endeavoured to turn aside the current 
of her friend's justly aroused feelings. 

" You have done me a great good then, 
Olympe, and I thank you ; but you are wrong 
to take things in a manner so little intended 
by me ! I wished to spare you pain. I 
endeavoured to mystify you a little, I confess ; 
for your friendship was still very dear to me, 
and likely to become extremely useful, and 
I did not wish to forfeit it for the sake of 

VOL. III. 11 



162 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

SO worthless a creature," slie said, in her soft, 
cajoling accents. '*Yet, it is true, Camille 
had heen long in pursuit of me . animated 
chiefly, no doubt, by the mercenary motives 
you had warned me to exjDect only in him. 
1 must admit even that, perhaps, I had 
blameably encouraged his pretensions . I mean, 
flirted a little with him ; in a silly, unmeaning 
way, but which brought me into a great 
deal of trouble. Indeed, I cannot make out, 
at this hour, the extreme folly and inconse- 
quence of my conduct . for my heart was 
in reality all along given to another. You 
will hardly believe it,'' she continued, making 
a bold plunge into the credulity of her 
listener, " but from the moment I saw that 
Mr. Behringbright . you remember . at the 
French plays, I have not ceased to love and 
prefer him to all mankind !'* 

No: Mademoiselle Loriot did not quite 
believe this, or, if she did, she took a queer 
way of showing it. She burst into a peal 
of really hearty, genuine, unstagey laughter, 
that made her essence-bottles jingle on the 
toilet-table. Of a truth, she laughed, and 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 163 

lauglied again; there seemed no end of her 
laughter! And in spite ol the gravity she 
endeavoured to maintain, Madeleine could not 
altogether resist the contagion. Indeed, after 
a vain struggle and pause, she laughed too. 
Perhaps there was policy in the ebullition. 

"Very well, Olympe," she resumed, when 
at last the Frenchwoman paused in sheer 
exhaustion ; " have it your own way : believe 
or not, as you please, in the sincerity of the 
feelings I avow. But of this you may be 
certain, . your lessons have not quite been 
cast on the winds. I have secured this rich 
prize, . ^the wealthy Behringbright, at last . 
and have the means . or shortly shall have . 
in my power to reward my faithful friends ; 
above all, to exhibit my affection for the 
beloved guide and friend of my youth, in a 
substantial form, if only I can avoid one great 
danger 1" 

Olympe listened now with gravity. She 
laughed no longer ; she was all attention. 

" You do not mean to say so !" she ex- 
claimed. " So much good fortune and 
happiness cannot be in store for the unhappy 



164 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Olympe, in the extreme and almost hopeless 
misery she is sunk to !" 

Madeleine reiterated her assurance in a 
tangible manner ; she displayed the costly 
diamonds on her finger. 

" Look at the ring he has presented me on 
our betrothal !" she exclaimed, flourishing the 
glittering stones. 

Olympe was somewhat of a connoisseur in 
jewels. She snatched up the fair hand, and 
carefully examined these. 

" Mon Bieu r she exclaimed, letting it fall 
with an exclamation of delight, after turning 
the facets in all lights. " No, I do not dream ! 
And it is to me that this dear child hastens 
with the fortunate intelligence ! Embrace 
me indeed, my beloved Madeleine ! Forgive 
me if for a moment I doubted your tenderness. 
You marry the rich Behringbright, and 3'ou 
repudiate the perfidious Camille ! . in his turn 
to taste all the misery, the despair, the un- 
dying vulture at the heart, of rejection ! Come 
to my arms 1" 

Madeleine could perhaps have dispensed 
with this ceremony of reconciliation. But 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 165 

it was necessary to submit to it . even 
to seem to return it with warmth and 
enthusiasm. 

" Well ; and this dear Behringbright, where 
is he, since Camille is here ?" Olympe inquired, 
at last releasing her restored pupil and friend 
from an embrace which all the sweet essences on 
her toilette would not, perhaps, have rendered 
so fragrant as might have been desirable. 

" He is at Glengarijf Castle, on the other side 
of the lake," said Madeleine, with designed 
emphasis. 

" Ah ! Glengariff Castle . where I am bound 
to go . where my dear friend shall now be my 
convoy . ^to thank the angel young nobleman 
who saved my life in Belfast, and, if possible, 
to interest him yet more in my misfortunes !" 
Olympe replied, with a new enthusiasm. 

But Madeleine was forced to dissipate this 
hopeful project. She Avas not ill-pleased, 
indeed, to have Olympe placed in a complete 
dependence upon herself. So she explained to 
Mademoiselle that the young nobleman could 
see no one . that he was declared to be almost 
in a dying state, in consequence of a severe 



166 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

accident he had sustained on the previous day, 
on the water. 

" And moreover, Olympe," she added, with 
a smile, " I warn you that all these coquettish 
preparations would be likely to prove in vain ; 
for you really have the most formidable of 
rivals with his lordship in Emily Mavghan ! 
It was for her sake, I assure you, he conducted 
himself so strangely in Belfast; but he is as 
good as dead now, and there is no occasion to 
talk any more about him." 

Perhaps Mademoiselle Loriot . ^warned by 
former experience . would not have believed 
much in what she heard. But she had already 
learned from people's talk that a terrible acci- 
dent had taken place to some person of dis- 
tinction on the previous day, and she admitted 
herself dolefully to be so unfortunate nothing 
could be likelier than that it had happened to 
the person whom she looked upon as her last 
friend and patron in the world ! 

" And I have scarcely enough money left to 
convey me starving to the backdoor of some 
theatre !" she sighed, " where I must possibly 
content myself henceforth with the lowliest 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 167 

position . or accept a dangerous exaltation to 
the tifjht-rope, which has been continually 
urged upon me by my managers, in spite of my 
conviction of the misfortunes that pursue me, 
and a sort of giddiness I have often expe- 
rienced even in my evolufions on the solid 
ground.' 

"But you shall never know the want of 
money again, Olympe, if you will aid me to 
secure my own good fortune !" said Madeleine. 

" Wliat is wanting to it, my child, since this 
wealthy hlind man has proposed to you?" 
Olympe replied, with now sufficient eagerness 
and interest. 

" I have hinted to you there is still some 
danger of failure in the project ; in fact, it is 
of no use attempting to conceal the facts from 
you. I must confide in you absolutely, even 
at some risk of provoking your displeasure, if 
you still retain a regard for the wicked cox- 
comb who has been the plague, I may say, of 
both our lives, dearest Olympe !" replied the 
young lady. 

" You speak of Camille ?" said Mademoiselle 
Loriot, with a deeply sentimental sigh. 



168 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

"Exactly so. And now, to avow to you 
the whole truth," Madeleine resumed, with no 
feigned reluctance. " As I told you . as Emily 
told you . partly in fun and partly in folly . I 
amused myself, in short, to some reprehensible 
degree with the anected passion of your per- 
fidious lover. I even answered some of his 
letters . a good many, I am afraid . and I dare 
say very much in the foolish style of those 
celebrated old yellow-backed novels of ours. 
And so now Camille has followed me here with 
a whole budget of such rubbisb, and threatens 
me to produce them, and spoil all my chances of 
one of the greatest matches in the world, unless 
I give up Mr. Bebringbright, and marry 
poverty, in his person !" 

" Marry him ! . marry Camille ! But have 
you in reality inspired such a passion into that 
base soul that he desires to marry a woman 
for her heauty only ?" exclaimed Olympe, with 
a bitter malignancy of feeling that did not add 
by its expression to the charm of her own 
visage. 

Nevertheless, Madeleine thought it not 
amiss to encourage this exasperating delusion. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 169 

" If it be so, by so much the greater will 
your pleasure be to assist me in thwarting the 
designs of a man who has shown himself so 
insensible to all the claims of justice and of an 
amply-returned affection," she remarked. 

" Very true ; nothing can be truer, my 
child !" said Olympe, looking uglier and uglier 
every moment with malice. " You have, then, 
but to command me ! Speak the word ! What 
do you wish to be done ?" 

Madeleine explained, with an earnestness 
that left no doubt of her own convictions on 
the subject, that it was above all things neces- 
sary to retrieve from Camille's possession the 
letters she had mentioned. 

" You know Mr. Behringbright's character 
of old, Olympe," she observed, obliged to 
awaken what was evidently a jarring remi- 
niscence. " And I do not seek to deny to you 
that, for a man of so much prudery of ideas, 
and who has suffered so much from the vola- 
tility of other women, there might be a good 
deal that is fatally compromising for me in 
these letters. But, deprived of them, all that 
Camille can allege would sound but as the 



170 MADELEINE GRAHAif. 

ravings of disappointed cupidity. I can defy 
him; and Mr. Behringbriglit would remain 
indifferent to whatever he might venture to 
allege. In short, if you can secure these docu- 
ments for me, they shall become, on my mar- 
riage, worth to you a thousand pounds ; and I 
will exert all the influence of my new position 
to restore you to a society you are formed to 
adorn !" 

Olympe jerked her head in acknowledgment 
of the compliment ; but she seemed only half 
pleased. 

" Ma foi r she said, gloomily ; " but these 
letters must have in them something of an 
extremely disastrous nature, since you offer 
such a price for them ! But I comprehend, 
perhaps ! And you, perhaps, forget too much, 
Mademoiselle, that I also . I have once loved 
this man !" 

Madeleine discerned a strong touch of jealous 
irritation in these words, and she put in a 
counter-infusion of equal acidity to rectify the 
draught, . 

" You may have loved him once ; but surely 
not since you knew that it was he who pelted 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 171 

you with coarse vegetables from the Belfast 
stage 1" she said. 

" He ! Camille ! He threw the wreath of 
carrots at me ! Do not say so. Let me die 
without the conviction of that last excess of 
injury and contempt !" the poor woman . for 
really she was to be pitied now . exclaimed, in 
genuine accents of grief and indignation, very 
different from her usual flighty, .theatrical 
expressions of emotion. 

But Madeleine was not to be deprecated. 
She assured her unfortunate friend that what 
she had stated was the simple fact ; that Mr. 
Behringbright, who never exaggerated or told 
a falsehood, had informed her that Camille was 
her unmanly assailant, whom he had with 
difficulty saved from the wrath of Lord 
Glengariff. ^ 

After all, Olympe was a human woman. 
The poor deviless burst into a frantic passion 
of grief and indignation over the intelligence, 
which proved her decidedly to have some 
feelings of the kind. 

Madeleine Graham, on her part, luid sufficient 
command over her sense of the ridiculous to 



172 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

join very sympathizingly apparently in the 
overflow ; and she found her own purpose well 
answered in the results. After a strong ebulli- 
tion of this sort, Olympe, on a sudden, dried 
her tears and checked her sobs. 

"Come," she said, "let us resume our forti- 
tude ! Let us be calm . let us be rational ! 
Let us reflect only on the means of vengeance 1 
What is it you demand of me ? Behold me 
prepared to perish in the attainment of your 
object, since it also means vengeance on this 
traitor !" 

Madeleine modestly declared she had every 
confidence in the abilities of her friend. What 
was wanted was simply to recover her letters 
from his custody. He had them in a port- 
manteau with him. He lodged at an obscure 
inn in a wood. The problem was to remove 
every shred of these documents from his power 
and possession. 

" Ah ! I remember t/ie inn . the inn on the 
skirts of a forest !" Olympe exclaimed. But 
she remembered more. " Ma foi ! there is a 
gleam of lightning for me over that inn and 
that forest ! I see an old woman there who 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 173 

alights disguised in a tliick veil, with a beau- 
tiful pair of gloves, and who speaks with the 
accent of an angel ! . of a young angel ! 
Madeleine, it is you ! " 

Madeleine perceived the vindictive flash in 
her friend's eye. But there was nothing for it 
but to reply, . 

" It is true, Olympe ! I was there to 
implore, almost on my knees, but in vain, the 
restoration of my letters !" 

" You failed ! Who, then, can succeed ?" 
" You can ! . or rather we can succeed only 
in conjunction," said Madeleine. " I need an 
ally, in whom I can implicitly trust, and who 
will venture something on my behalf . and her 
own ! I intend to invite Camille to a dinner, 
under pretence of settling our plans ; and I w^ll 
detain him a sufficient interval while some one 
carries off the fatal secrets in his possession !" 
" But it is a robbery that is projected !" 
" Do not call things by such absurd names ! 
No ; I only desire to get back certain papers of 
which an unjust use is about to be made. The 
letters are, properly speaking, ))ii/ir, since I 
penned them. Do you not comprehend?" 



174 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" Yes," said Olympe, with a ghastly smile, 
*' I do comprehend . your wishes . your 
motives, even ! But the means ?'"' 

*' I will tell you," replied Madeleine. " I 
had formed the whole idea in my head as I 
came along. The people of the house where 
Camille lodges are very simple, unprejudiced 
people. It is almost an open house . any one 
can run in and out that chooses. While he is 
ahsent dining with my aunt and me, what can 
be easier than for you to go to this inn, and 
present yourself there as what you ought to be 
in reality, Olympe . as the wife of Monsieur 
Le Tellier . of the foreign gentleman who has 
a room in the upper floor of the ' Eed Herring '? 
You are a foreigner also . you look a lady . of 
the very age and figure to be what you pretend. 
Those simple Irish creatures will believe you. 
Then ask to be shown to your husband's apart- 
ment to await his return. They will comply. 
Once there alone with his depositories, do not 
trouble yourself with false keys or picklocks. 
Take a good stout knife with you, and cut open 
the back of the portmanteau; I have ascer- 
tained from an American, an acquaintance of 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 1/5 

Camille's, that it is a leather one. Eemove all 
the letters you can find ; and as it is now chilly 
weather enough for a foreigner, have a fire ready 
kindled in the bedroom, and fling one and 
all of these accursed documents into it ! I 
shall take care that you have time for the 
operation/' 

" Wliat skill ! what rare ingenuity ! I re- 
cognise no longer my pupil, but my mistress !" 
exclaimed Olympe, somewhat ironically, as it 
appeared ; for she continued, "But this ex- 
cellent work accomplished, who will be 
suspected of it and pwiished for it?'" 

" There is no punishment to be feared. I 
will supply you with ample means for escape, 
not only from Killarney, but from Ireland." 

" I should easily be overtaken. Do they 
not send the li2:htnino^ after criminals now ?" 

" Well, then, remain, and defy him with a 
noble defence, which will conciliate to you the 
admiration and enthusiasm of all who admire 
courage and resolution ! What need you care ? 
Avow to the world that there were letters 
compromising to your reputation in this man's 
possession, which you felt called upon to 



176 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

destroy ! Every one will honour you to the 
skies for so doing ; no jury will be found to 
convict you ! You will be the heroine of a 
noble act of self-assertion . the theme of 
second editions of the public papers. Every 
one, I say, will admire your daring and 
dexterity ! It is an age which disapproves 
nothing but failure !'' 

The raw and hitherto pallid cheekbones of 
the untoiletted Frenchwoman flushed with a 
brighter colour than her wonted rouge at the 
suo:ojestion. Yet she hesitated. She was too 
well convinced of the bad faith and selfishness 
of her proposed principal to place too much 
stress on Miss Graham's assurances, . and so 
she reflected to herself that only a part of this 
programme ought to be followed out. It 
would be necessary for her own security to 
retain the letters intact ! With these letters 
in her possession, she should indeed be mis- 
tress of the situation. Madeleine would be 
compelled to keep whatever she might promise. 
And she was the more confirmed in her con- 
victions of the valuable nature of the property 
in question by Madeleine's assent to a most 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 177 

heavy condition she proceeded to lay on her 
co-operation. 

" For the hazard of the situation I am con- 
tent ! But I must have some pledge for the 
performance of your part, Madeleine, v^hen 
once I have destroyed this evidence ! "Will 
you place that gorgeous ring in my possession 
until you redeem it at the price of a thousand 
pounds?'' she said. 

Even to this demand Madeleine, who felt 
she had no right to expect to be believed on 
her simple word, agreed. 

" Mr. Behringbright will miss it from my 
hand, but I can readily devise some excuse ; 
and as he values it so much, he will not 
grudge a thousand pounds for its restoration ! 
Take it, Olympe," she said, drawing the splen- 
did bauble from her finger, and placing it in 
the eagerly-outstretched claw of Olympe. But 
she said to herself at the same time, " If the 
old vulture plays me false, I shall know where 
to send the police for my ring !" 

The compact was now made, and Madeleine 
endeavoured to clench it yet more firmly on 
the other side. 

VOL. HI. 12 



178 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" All ! who knows, dear Olympe," she said, 
" but that this ring is the pledge of a second 
betrothal? For when Camille shall find his 
pretensions to me finally dissipated, who shall 
say that he will not return to his first love? 
You know the whole world turns upon itself! 
. especially as you will then have a good deal 
of money, and every imaginable influence with 
the wife of the wealthy Behringbright !" 

Olympe's yellow-green eyes shone up again 
at this suggestion. " Mot Bleu ! if I thought 
it possible!" she exclaimed; "if I did not 
think you mocked me T' And tears of sen- 
sibility . as she herself deemed them . over- 
flowed those orbs. 

Madeleine did mock her, in very truth . oh, 
most fearfully, most horribly mocked her! 
But you would not have dreamed so from her 
reply . nor did Olympe. 

" No, dear Loriot, I am quite in earnest. 
I am indeed all but certain he loved you once 
. ^he reverts with so much indignation always 
to your conduct; and nobody ever hates so 
vehemently unless they have first loved the 
object! Only you must furbish up your 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 179 

cliarms a little, certainly ! The hard life you 
have led has rather injured your good looks . 
your complexion especially, though that never 
was the best part of you. But you might 
easily, if you chose, have as good a one as 
mine ! 

" As yours, beautiful child ? Impossible ! 
It is the product of your humid climate 
alone !" said Olyrape, looking with a mixture 
of envy and admiration at her young friend. 

"Not at all. Don't you remember how 
freckled my face used to be at the Misses 
Sparx' ?" replied Madeleine. 

" I do indeed remember . some slight sun- 
touches . like the crimson roughness of the 
peach4 And it is true they are all disappeared 
at present." 

"I used means . and so may 3^ou . such a 
splendid cosmetic \" 

" Means ! Ah, what means ?" 

"Don't you remember what we once read 
at school . about arsenicy you know ? Well, I 
use it as a lotion, and you may see the result 
in the improvement of my complexion." 

" You do not mean that ? That lecture 
12. % 



180 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

made a great impression on my mind at the 
time, but the discreet application escaped me. 
I dreaded so powerful an agency, and mis- 
trusted the philosophic teaching. But if you 
have really applied the drug without mischief 
. ah, lend me a sufficient infusion !" exclaimed 
Mademoiselle. 

"I have none by me at present, in Kil- 
larney," replied Madeleine ; " but arsenic is to 
be sold everywhere . under certain conditions. 
You remember what Miss Eosabella said about 
the necessity of having two witnesses to the 
purchase ? But if we went both together into 
the town, I dare say we could get as much as 
we want . if we could invent any good reason. 
Of course, we don't wish people to krfbw we 
are so anxious about our beauty as to buy 
arsenic to refresh it ! It is used in dyeing, I 
believe . particularly green . and that green 
crape shawl of yours, dear, looks as if it wanted 
touching up. You yourself look like a person 
who knows all sorts of clever knickknackeries 
of the kind ; and to make a h rig lit green, such 
as would be proper for the shawl, they w^ould 
let u^ Jvave it without the black stuff in it. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. ]81 

whicli is very unpleasant in using the wash. 
Come, if you have nothing else to do, we will 
take a lounge into Killarney . buy the stuff, 
which I will divide into proper weights for 
you, and keep half . and we can have lunch at 
some nice place, and talk over old times.*' 

Irresistibly seduced by the prospect of re- 
moving what she could not but discern at the 
moment in her looking-glass was a blemishing 
sallowness in her complexion. Mademoiselle 
Loriot readily assented, and the two friends 
shortly after arrived in Killarney, in company, 
in Madeleine's car. 



182 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



CHAPTEE VIII. 



THE WEDDING LICENCE. 



The two ladies had rather a funny interview 
with the apothecary in Killarney, of whom 
they purchased the excellent cosmetic which 
Madeleine had prescribed for her friend. He 
was not by any means a lean apothecary ; he 
was a very comfortably-fed one, full of smiles 
and good humour, and was very much diverted 
when two ladies asked him for half a pound of 
arsenic. He had a whole hogshead of it stand- 
ing open in a corner of his shop, looking very 
white and tempting, like the finest flour. He 
remarked, jollily, that he had difficulty in 
hindering the children from stealing it, fancy- 
ing it was sugar. " Nasty little cormorants, 
they would soon have enough of it !" he said, 
He had not heard of the law relating to the 
discoloration of the substance when sold, the 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 183 

Legislature in general contenting itself with 
making laws for that part of the United King- 
dom called Ireland, without troubling itself 
about enforcing them. But he had heard that 
arsenic was very good in making a green dye, 
several cases of wall-paper poisoning having 
occurred within his practice. He therefore 
made no manner of objection to selling half a 
pound, to make a strong suffusion, with 
copperas and verdigris, for a green shawl. 
Perhaps he might have hesitated to sell five or 
six grains. It was only through excess of 
innocent harmlessness of intent that Madeleine 
insisted on putting her name down with her 
friend's, as purchasers of the drug, ^e took 
it away with her, in order to apportion the 
proper quantities in the cosmetic lotions for 
that friend's complexion. 

This was all very well. But it was a thing 
rather unlucky. though to be apprehended . 
that as the two friends came out of the 
apothecary's shop together, they almost ran 
against Mr. Behringbright. 

He was returning from seeing Lady Glen- 
gariff off in her special train . and I should 



184 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

think he did not expect such a piece of good 
luck, for he started on encountering Madeleine ; 
and he was a good deal more surprised, it was 
at once plain, at the company he found her in 
than at her own somewhat unexpected appa- 
rition. 

It is a great thing when the mind is pre- 
occupied by some overruling and masterful 
idea : all the minor shocks of fate pass un- 
noticed. Madeleine Graham was not at all 
troubled in her self-possession by the en- 
counter. She put a bold front on things, and, 
with a generous devotion that did her nerves, 
at all events, the highest credit, introduced 
Mademoiselle Loriot at once to Mr. Behring- 
bright as one of her kindest and most estimable 
school instructresses of yore, whom she had 
accidentally met with in Killarney. Olympe 
also took her cue with professional dexterity, 
and with a deep curtsy to Mr. Behringbright 
intimated that she hoped also for the honour 
of his inestimable patronage in an enterprise 
she had undertaken in that charming Kttle 
town . which was to give a few recitations, in 
imitation of Mesdames Eachel and Eistori, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 185 

on her way to " the Cork " for the same 
purpose. 

It cannot be denied Mr. Behringbright 
looked anything but a gracious patron in re- 
sponse to this appeah He made rather a gruff 
reply than otherwise. 

" I am astonished at your impudence, 
woman !" and he drew Madeleine's arm in his 
own, and marched her off, without the least 
ceremony of parting salute due to a lady and 
woman of talent. At least so Olympe thought, 
bitterly repeating to herself a thousand times . 

"But with these letters in my possession, 
revenge will at some time also be at my 
obedience on this beast of an English !" 

Mr. Behringbright explained, as he wallced 
Madeleine away, that this Frenchwoman was 
a most improper person for her to encourage ; 
that she was notoriously a person of bad 
character ; that Madeleine must never on any 
account be seen with such a person again. And, 
conceiving that the time had now arrived, he 
divulged to Miss Graham sufficient particulars 
of his own first acquaintance with Mademoiselle 
Loriot to satisfy even lier innocence that she 



186 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

must have had very wicked designs upon her- 
self once upon a time. 

Madeleine was much astonished. 

" Oh, how strangely they used to hide every- 
thing from us at school !'* she naively observed. 
" I thought Olympe was only dismissed for 
taking me to the play without the consent of 
the Misses Sparx, and that is what rendered 
me the more willing to make her any repara- 
tion in my power. And were you really there, 
at the play ? I do not remember ever to have 
seen you; and yet . and yet, dear Behring- 
bright, when we met on the steamer, it seemed 
to me as if I had been looking out for you 
all my life I" 

A fond pressure of the arm linked in his 
own acknowledged the tender influence of the 
expression. In truth, Mr. Behringbright was 
more in love than ever. He proved it as they 
walked back to Prospect Palace. 

" The goodness of your heaii; deceives you 
so much, darling," he said, "that I think I 
ought to have a better right than I yet possess 
to guide and restrain its rash impulses ! And 
let the GlengarifFs persist as they may in their 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 187 

absurd prejudices against you, I will give you 
a proof, if you will suffer me, of my own un- 
bounded confidence in you. If you can dis- 
pense with a ridiculous and hampering parade, 
I will marry you as soon as I can get a licence. 
Your parents wiU not disapprove of me, I know, 
as a son-in-law, and I have a right to presume 
on their consent, under the circumstances. 
"Will you . can you . do you yield it ?" 

Madeleine was so delighted with this over- 
ture that she knew not well how to reply for 
the moment. A great crime might possibly 
yet be spared her . a crime fraught with doubt- 
ful and tremendous consequences. 

" I do consent, dearest love !" she said, with 
a warmth of acquiescence that ought to have 
gratified her lover, not knowing its motives. 
" "When sliaU it be ?" 

" I will drive over to Tralee to-morrow for a 
licence,'' he replied. '' 1 would go this after- 
noon, only I should be too late ; and I have 
even solemnly promised Lady Glengarifi' to 
deliver a letter she has given me for her son 
with my own hands to-night." 

" She requires you, no doubt, to witness to 



188 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

the fact of this Frencli gentleman's proposals 
for Emily," Madeleine replied ; who, though 
sufficiently aware of the dangers of delay, could 
not decently press the point. " And I own I 
should fear some terrible collision between 
them, if Lord Glengariff were not chained to 
his bed by the injuries he has received. As it 
is, you may fearlessly prepare him for the final 
shock, which will either be his release from 
life or love, merely by delivering these tidings. 
On the other hand, your magnanimous con- 
fidence in me will be gloriously vindicated by 
the marriage you propose ! Meanwhile, dear 
Behringbright, if you would give me leave, I 
would endeavour to settle the other disastrous 
affair in a quiet manner. Aunt and myself 
will invite Monsieur Le Tellier to our hotel ; 
we will reason with him on the baseness and 
perversity of his conduct . on the little chance 
there is of his standing out upon terms, 
securing him better ones with you ! In short, 
we will try to prevail upon him to hasten at 
once to Belfast, and make the only honourable 
reparation in his power, by marrying Miss 
Maughan unconditionally and at once. "We 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 189 

should have a much better chance of influencing 
him than a man, and " 

" Influencing him !" repHed Mr. Behring- 
bright, indignantly. " The only means of 
influence / should ever think of using with 
such a rascal would be by kicking him to the 
altar !" 

" For goodness' sake, then, promise me never 
to see him again, or Emily's prospects are irre- 
trievably ruined !" said Madeleine. " Promise 
me not to leave Glengarifi*, excepting to go to 
Tralee to-morrow ; and meanwhile I hope to 
be enabled to effect all the good I suggest as 
possible." 

" Not to see you, loveliest ?" 

" As you go through the town, perhaps, in 
the morning; but at present where are we 
going : 

'' To the little jeweller's round by the chapel, 
to measure your finger, that I may buy you a 
ring in a quieter style than the one with which 
I plighted you mine, in Tralee ! . Or stay ; as 
that seemed to fit your dear little digit very 
well, I can take it as a measure." 

'' No," replied Madeleine, very firmly . *' no ; 



190 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

I will never part with tliat dear pledge while 
we two are destined to remain one ! Besides, 
dear, it is a good deal too large, and I was so 
afraid of its dropping off that I put it by in my 
dressing-case when I came out/' 

This was a little contradictory, but lovers 
in such cases do not notice contradictions. 

Mr. Behringbright and his betrothed dined 
together that day, and spent the rest of it in 
the agreeable manner usual between two 
plighted lovers who have nothing else to 
think or do but to be happy in each other*s 
society. But as Madeleine would not allow 
him . from a nice punctilio, which he respected 
. to remain at Prospect Palace all night, and 
still less would suffer him to go to the " Eed 
Herring," he was in a manner obliged to 
return to Glengariff Castle to sleep ; else I do 
believe he had altogether forgotten he had a 
letter to deliver to the young lord there, which 
was of rather particular consequence to liim at 
any rate. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 191 



CHAPTEE IX. 

SHADOWS BEFORE EVENTS. 

All seemed going very well . swimmingly, as 
they say . witli Madeleine Graham ; but some- 
how she did not rest peacefully that night. 
She had uncomfortable dreams, extremely 
absurd ones, too, . reminiscences of old school 
readings, no doubt provoked by her recent 
confabulation with her ex-French instructress. 
The reader has most likely forgotten how 
the eldest Miss Sparx reproved Emily 
Maughan, in the second chapter of this 
history, for supposing, by a too rapid process 
of induction, that people were hung on hemp. 
Yet this nonsensical association of ideas chased 
and tormented Madeleine through that whole 
miserable night ; and her fancy, wandering in 
the manufactories and bleach-fields of her 
native Belfast, represented to her an endless 



192 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

fabrication of tlie material, and always into 
ropes . ropes . ropes to hang people on ! 
Merciful Heaven ! nothing but ropes to hang 
people on ! The whole human race, it appeared 
in her delirious slumbers, was in a process of 
going to be hanged, and deservedly so : neither 
youth, nor beauty, nor sex to be spared ! 

It is really a pity that dreams have been 
adjudged a superstition. I should say they 
are often a correct mirroring of one's inner 
consciousness, when we are no longer atti- 
tudinizing to ourselves, and occasionally pre- 
sent perspectives of results to one's little 
doings, which may be truer to the probabilities 
of the case than the elaborate efforts at self- 
deception usually dignified by the name of 
reasoning. 

Still the thing, it was evident to Madeleine's 
waking thoughts, must be ! A decisive note 
arrived from Mr. Behringbright to her the 
first thing in the morning. It begged her 
pardon in a very eloquent and impassioned 
manner ; but it informed her that, in com- 
pliance with a distractedly earnest request of 
Lord Glengarifi*, he had consented not to 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 193 

pursue their plan of an immediate marriage . 
not, in short, until the explanations concerning 
Emily Maughan had taken place. The unfor- 
tunate young nobleman was evidently labouring 
under a monomanical possession ; but he had 
threatened to rise from his bed, and prevent 
his friend and guest by main force from 
leaving the castle until he had clearly ascer- 
tained that Emily had no prior claim upon his 
honour ! His lordship, indeed, went on so 
wildly that Dr. Bucktrout himself assured 
Mr. Behringbright that he could not answer 
for the consequences if he persisted in refusing 
compliance, . and so, with the greatest reluct- 
ance, he had yielded. 

A motive which his sweet Madeleine could 
best appreciate had influenced him, however, 
he added, as powerfully as the desperation and 
entreaties of the unhappy son of his dearest 
friend. But the difficulty must soon be re- 
moved, Mr. Behringbright stated, and no 
obstacle could then exist to their happiness. 
Meanwhile, his beloved girl must promise to 
write to him twice a day. To hear from her 
would be the only consolation for the species of 

VOL. III. 13 



194 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

captivity under which the demented young 
earl seemed resolved to detain him, for he 
would scarcely suffer him for a moment out of 
his sight. 

Madeleine did write a very kind, tender? 
and modest reply to this missive, by the same 
messenger. You would have said she had never 
written to a man before in her life, much less 
to a lover. She was her dear Behringbright's 
ever true and faithful Madeleine, and she 
esteemed it her duty already to honour and 
obey him in whatever might be most to his 
wishes. He was quite right to comply wdth 
the poor frantic young nobleman's desires in 
the manner indicated. A short delay could be 
of little consequence, and it would, perhaps, be 
better to conduct* things in the regular way, 
and have mamma's and papa's consent first. 
To be sure there was no need to fear a refusal ; 
but they had a right to be consulted ; it would 
look better. They could easily wait for a few 
days or weeks, &c., &c., &c. 

After this. Miss Grraham wrote a much more 
lively and fluent note to Monsieur Camille Le 
Tellier, at the " Eed Herring" Tavern, inform- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 195 

ing him, witli veiled significance in every 
period, that Mr. Behringbright would be de- 
tained at the castle that day by his friend's 
illness; and as they might not soon have 
another opportunity, she hoped he would 
favour her aunt and herself by accepting an 
invitation to dinner, at five o'clock, at Prospect 
Palace. They could have a little private con- 
versation on matters that would interest him. 
He was to be sure and come, and to come alone, 
and he would find them without any visitors. 
He should pretend, however, to the people at 
the inn that he would be home early, for fear 
inquiries were made by any one in his absence. 
But Madeleine hoped they should find interest- 
ing topics of conversation, relating to Jiis future 
establishment, to detain him for a few pleasant 
hours ! The messenger was to wait for an 
answer. 

Our friend Kooney . for we do not think 
ourselves above any of our creations of decent 
repute . found Monsieur Le Tellier at the 
place he was directed to, not perhaps in the 
best of tempers, for he was getting anxious at 
hearing from nobody, and wondering at Mr. 

13.2 



196 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Behringbrights^ not returning to hold some 
sort of satisfactory colloquy with him as to the 
amount of his expectations, and the particular 
form in which he would like to have them 
gratified. Moreover, he was at the moment 
undergoing the banter of his American friend, 
who had called upon him, after an interval of a 
day's total neglect, to deliver the note Miss 
Grraham had confided to his care. 

Flamingo was, in truth, taunting poor 
Camille . and most unmercifully . on the frigid 
style of the response. 

"No occasion to pack it in ice, to bring it 
nice and fresh, though it has been a long time 
on the road, you'll see when you read it ! 
Truth is, there was a little fellow in the hotel 
who, his mother and sisters thought, had 
delirium tremens, and begged me to come up 
to help hold him down. But I did it much 
more sensibly . got him a lot more brandy 
and water, till he lay down of his o^^Ta accord, 
quite comfortable. Only I made myself ill 
in keeping him company in the medicine, and 
slept like a top half to-day. Here, however, 
I am at last \ and what are you going to stand, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 197 

in rhubarb and magnesia, for a love-letter like 
this ?" 

Camille, agreeably to his promise to Made- 
leine, wished to retract his former insinuations. 
"Ah, bah! I was only joking," he said, cer- 
tainly without looking very jocular. 

Plamingo Brown, however, got very fierce 
and bullying on the expression. 

" Only a-joking, sir !" he exclaimed; "then 
be darned if I understand joking with a young 
lady's character in that 'here way ! And I take 
upon myself to say that, if she wishes it . or if 
she don't wish it . I have a good mind on my 
own account to give you a tarnation handsome 
cowhiding for your impudence ! And I ven- 
ture to affirm I couldn't do anything more 
acceptable to the young lady, not even if I 
was to make her an offer of marriage, plump, 
myself!" 

" You insult me, sir !" said Camille, blus- 
teringly. 

"Or I've not made my meaning clar!" re- 
plied the American, fiercely. 

"And I would resent it, if this were the 
proper place or time," said Le Tcllicr, very 



198 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

mildly. " But nonsense, my dear Mr. Brown," 
he continued, with a forced attempt at live- 
liness and unconcern ; " why should two old 
friends like you and me fall out about a silly 
girl, who is nothing to either of us, and never 
can be ? Besides, I am in no spirits for an 
encounter, mon cher^ at present/' he continued, 
in a really very melancholy and downcast way. 
" My fighting genius stands rebuked, like that 
of Brutus when he saw Caesar's ghost the 
night before Philippi ! I have not seen Csesar's 
ghost, it is true, but I have seen my own ! 
You make great eyes at me, Mr. Brown, but I 
am not mad ; though it is assuredly true I 
suffer under a very great depressmenb of 
spirits/' 

"A raising of spirits, Trn. of the opinion rather. 
Master Le Tellier," replied the American, at- 
tempting to express an enlightened incredulity 
in his poor pun. But, like most of his hard, and 
brazen, and materialistic countrymen, he was at 
heart very superstitious, and had the common 
leaning and hankering of the vulgar after the 
wonderful and strange in the discovery of rela- 
tions with that unknown world, in which the}^ 
scarcely, perhaps, believe at all. His curiosity 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 199 

was therefore excited, and for a time the 
notion on which he had probably started, of 
figuring chiefly as champion of the future 
Mrs. Behringbright, changed under the new 
impulse. 

" And so you've seen a ghost, have you ? 
And, of all the ghosts in the world, your own ! 
What m.akes you think so, you young sigh- 
away donkey, you ?" he resumed, in a more 
friendly ftianner. * 

" I wiU tell you, sir," replied Camille, with 
solemnity: "perhaps, with your enlighten- 
ment, you may offer me some explanation that 
can reconcile me to more comfortable con- 
victions than at present possess my imagina- 
tion. Your countrymen are noted for an 
incredulous sagacity, not easily the dupe of 
the illusions of the heart or fancy; and the 
ancient superstitions of the world have no root 
in your fresh and uncultivated intellects. Let 
me see ; what shall I relate ? Suffice it, as a 
preliminarj^, to state that, wearied of calcula- 
tions and conjectures as to the possible com- 
binations of destiny in an approaching con- 
juncture, I descended last night to the coffee- 
room of this hotel, in the hope to find some 



200 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

relief for the exhaustion of my mind in the 
society of my fellow-man, however inferior in 
social position . this inn being certainly none 
of the very best. Witness the coffee-room 
itself, strewed with sawdust as if for an execu- 
tion, and with small metal boxes placed all 
round beside every chair for the convenience 
of the smokers, who smoke only pipes. But, 
by a chance which I know not whether to call 
happy or not, I find in this apartment, besides 
a group of rustics who puff a rank tobacco and 
drink their vldskey in silence, a certain pro- 
fessor of a university who is here on a geo- 
logical excursion. Fatigued with the pursuits 
of the day, he, too, is refreshing himself . 
resting his mind, as he told me . over a glass 
of an excellent mixture, which I know not 
whether you call it in your great country 
also, a toddy ?" 

" Sometimes ; we know well enough, how- 
ever, what it means in any country,'' assented 
Mamingo, who listened with evident attention, 
though at the mention of tobacco he drew 
a handful from his pocket, and, smiling 
contemptuously at the spittoons, lighted 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 201 

a sliort meerschauin, and . dispensed with 
their use. 

" This professor was originally a Scotchman, 
though he had become, by long residence and 
citizenship in this island, an Irishman/* 

" Beg your pardon there, Mr. Le Tellier ; 
a Scotchman never can become an Irishman : 
'taint in the natur of the animal," interrupted 
Flamingo. 

'' Be it so ; I only mention the circumstance 
to account for another of more importance. 
Necessarily perceiving in each other a degree 
of similar intelligence and position that en- 
titled us to speak, the Professor and I entered 
into conversation to the exclusion of the rest 
of the company; and, in the first place, we 
discussed the problem of the reality or not of 
the imputed Irish wit. The Professor declared 
to me that he had never been able to discover 
it, and that for his part he believed the whole 
report a delusion, and that those who had dis- 
covered the wit of the Irish people had 
brought it all with them into the country. 
For his part, he had never had the luck to 
light on any of those wonderful, hcavenborn 



202 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Irish peasant humourists who amuse the world 
in jest-books. On the contrary, he maintained 
that the Hibernians are a people of the most 
melancholy and sombre genius, and he in- 
stanced the dismal belief in a species of spirit 
called a Banshee, universal in Ireland, which 
is constantly engaged in shrieking warnings of 
death in an appalling manner in the night. 
The GlengarifT family, he stated to me in illus- 
tration, enjoyed the deplorable privilege of one 
of these fearful attendants; and the recent 
accident, so likely to result in the extinction 
of an ancient race, had been auDOunced a long 
time ago, in this way, to Lord Glengariff's 
mother. 

"With a commendable nationality, the Scotch 
Professor then proceeded to observe that, in 
his opinion, the supernatural fancies prevalent 
among his countrymen indicated a much 
sublimer sense of the terrible and awful ; and 
he called to witness the dreadful phantasm 
designated a Wraiili. On mv demandinc: an 
explanation of this singular term, he favoured 
me with the statement that a wraith is the 
ghost of a living being, which appears to him 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 203 

as a warning of approacliing departure, . a 
gliost wMcli is in all respects the exact projec- 
tion of the figure of the unfortunate person 
beholding it . a shadowy repetition, a reflec- 
tion, a double !" 

"Everybody knows that. I don't see the 
Professor's great discovery in all this," said 
Flamingo Brown, with an attenipt at the 
pooh-pooh which did not seem a success, for it 
was evident he awaited what was to follow 
with anxiety. 

" Neither did the superstition strike me at 
the time as worthy of the immense stress laid 
upon its terrors by the learned Professor 
Doubleday," Camille resumed. " Neverthe- 
less, I had not heard of it before, and doubtless 
it made some impression on my imagination. 
A considerable interval had, nevertheless, 
elapsed; the Professor had returned to his 
quarters at another hotel, and I had remained 
musing by the coffee-house fire until everybody 
had departed, . until the waiter, who had the 
tramp of a cart-horse, entered to close the 
shutters, and admonish me that it was near 
midnight. I must have wandered far from the 



204 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

recollection of the discussion on the Scotch 
apparition; I remember, indeed, I was think- 
ing only of my old father at Marseilles, training 
his nasturtiums up the bars of a prison where 
he has long been confined for debt, and 
rejoicing in the tidings of my approaching 
good fortune, which he shall share. I am not 
altogether destitute of a certain natural sensi- 
bility, which the world has not been enabled 
to root effectually out of my heart. 

" Well, then, taking a sj)luttering tallow 
candle, which was all my inn afforded, I 
ascended to my chamber; and now I swear 
to you what I am about to relate is exactly the 
truth, without exaggeration. The moment I 
entered it, I perceived, in a fog of moonlight 
which shines over my leather portmanteau 
directly placed beneath the window, a figure 

WHICH WAS MYSELF IN EVERY PARTICULAR, 

with the exception that it was ghastlj^ pale as 
ashes . and that it was swallowing, with many 
wry faces and contortions, a cup apparently of 
some liquid like coffee, only it was all lit with 
a faint, tremulous blue flame, which shed a 
horrible light upon the livid, corpse-like 
face 1" 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 205 

" Yoiks ! you don't say so ! I sliouldn't 
have licked my lips to see that, by no means, 
as I'm a living sinner !" said tlie American, 
looking considerably aghast himself. " But I 
know how it was. You had swallowed too 
much of that same whiskey toddy, and thought 
you saw yourself going it still . on the leather 
box." 

"Not so. I am extremely abstemious in 
every respect but coffee. I had only taken a 
single small glass," replied Camille, very sadly 
and^seriously, " for which I paid threepence !' 
% " Then I'll tell you another way how it was. 
You saw yourself in a looking-glass right 
ahead, and didn't calkellate at the time what it 
was," consoled Flamingo, who really himself 
did not relish the dismal fancy. 

" But there is only a very small mirror in 
the apartment, which is placed in the opposite 
direction. I was upright, with a candle in my 
hand, and this figure was seated, with a cup of 
some beverage . not ^(/lass'' 

" Wal, then, most likely the window-panes 
had been recently polished, and reflected as 
good as a looking-glass. Anyhow . nohow . 
I'll never believe such stuff !" said Flamingo, 



206 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

resolutely. " Still I don't wonder at its having 
taken you down a peg or two, for it might a 
man of courage and grip ; and I'll not press my 
point ahout that thar gal, for fear you should 
raly pluck up and show fight, when I should 
be bound to swallow you in self-defence, and 
the ghost come trew !" 

The American laughed at his own drollery 
in this observation, and as Camille also gave a 
faint giggle, harmony seemed restored. It was 
at this moment that Eooney arrived with 
Madeleine's note of invitation. 

It was easy to see how the young man . 
after ceremoniously asking leave of Mr. Brown 
to peruse it. .brightened up over the contents. 
Yielding, in fact, to one of his imprudent 
impulses, Camille handed it over at once, 
triumphantly, to the American sceptic. 

" Ah ! ah ! Does this look as if I am 
scarcely the commonest acquaintance with this 
young lady ?" he inquired. 

" No. ; it looks a deal stronger than that, I 
own. There's a sort of double meaning: run- 
ning throughout it that rather supports your 
brags, Le Tellier," Flamingo pronounced, after 
a careful study of the document submitted to 



/ 
MADELEINE GRAB AM. 207 

him. " But 'taint the same handwriting as 
she wrote you in by me ! How's that ? Tell 
you w^hat, there's some queer mystery about 
this whole gal and affair, or my father was a 
buffalo !" 

" Ah, my folly again ! I am always in the 
wrong. Grive it me back !" exclaimed Camille, 
snatching the note from the eager scrutiny of 
his compeer. 

" Have it, and w^elcome ! But if this note 
was quilled by Miss Grraham, this other wasn't, 
and I claim it as my treasure-trove !" returned 
the American, in his turn snatching up the 
note he had brought, and which Monsieur Le 
Tellier had flung down on the table in the 
room where their colloquy took 2)lace. And 
as he pocketed it, and looked very fierce, 
and as if he meant to keep it, Camille pre- 
tended to laugh assentingl}^, and called for pen 
and ink to write his acceptance of the invita- 
tion he had received. 

When he had nearly completed this task, 
however, the American, who had been looking 
on with an appearance of profound reflection, 
remarked . 

" Tell you what, though ; T wouldn't go to 



208 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

the invite if I was you ! Slie's a rale out-and- 
outer, you may depend, where she takes it, 
though not the partic'lar sort for. exportation. 
There's a devilish corner of mischief in her 
eye . and hasn't she asked you to dinner ? So 
just you remember that ar wraith, and stop at 
home, and dine at your own expense !" 

" What do you mean ?" exclaimed Camille, 
with evident excitement. " She harm me ! 
Madeleine Graham harm me! For what 
purpose ? How could she dare ? "What would 
be the use? No," he added, but rather to 
himself than to his companion, " she knows 
too well so odious an act would also be in vain. 
The papers would remain, and more certain to 
be produced to the light in the hands of 
strangers ! She is no fool ; it w^ould be a 
madness ! Oh ! and if she could be atrocious 
enough to harbour evil designs against me," 
the unfortunate wretch concluded, melting 
into an effusion of natural though womanish 
tears, "I no longer care for my life ! Let 
her take it !" 

''The papers? . what papers? Oh, the 
letters," said Flamingo, catching at the w^ord. 



MADELEINE GEAHAM. 209 

" Wal, they are a good security, if she knew 
them in proper hands. Leave them in my 
charge." 

" And offend her mortally !" ejaculated 
Camille, remembering his scolding on the 
previous day. ''Certainly not; some secrets 
are like gold leaf . to breathe on them is to 
destroy their lustre and cohesion. I shall 
leave the key of my apartment with the 
hostess, who can depend also on the assistance 
of the apparition. For in my alarm last night 
I raised an outcry which summoned her to my 
chamber, and has diffused a salutary awe ever 
since in the household, since the maid has 
refused to make my bed unless I remain to 
protect her all the while !" 

"As you will, Frenchy; I only interfered 
for your benefit, as I have all along," returned 
Flamingo, very discontentedly, but seemingly 
oblivious that so short a time previously he 
had been threatening the young man himself. 
'* However, chalk it up that I meant well, * 
and stand tit for tat. When you see Miss, 
remind her that she has promised to make 
things pleasant between mc and old Behring- 

VOL. III. 14 



210 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

bright, and that I shall turn saucy if she does 
not do it ! . and soon, too. I want to be off 
from this confounded place, where it's always 
raining such a downpour, one's wet tlirougli 
the skin five times a day/' 

"And so do I," said Camille; "and I 
promise you if I find I have any influence on 
my own behalf, I will exert some, dear friend, 
on yours. But it is doubtless this moist 
climate which produces upon both of us so 
profound a sentiment of discouragement," he 
concluded, with a deep sigh. 

" I don't know that I'm much discouraged, 
either ; wy nerves don't go uj) and down witli 
my umbrella. What do they charge you here 
for dinner? and what do they give you for 
the money?" inquired the American, vora- 
ciously. 

Camille delivered a tariff of prices, founded 
on his own somewhat limited experience, in 
answer to this demand. 

" Wal, then, I'll make out my day here. 
I'll warrant I eat them a rare half-crown's- 
worth meal. But she might have joined me 
in the invite; she seemed taken with me 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 211 

quite remarkable last night at Prospect Palace. 
Still I shall do well enough anywhere. I've 
been on my own hook long enough to take 
care and hang myself up on a nail that'll bear 
the weight. Give Miss Gr. my compliments, 
and do your best for me, or I must for myself, 
tell her ! And harkee ! we'll see this ghost 
of yours together to-night when you come 
home, if one's to be seen at all." 

Camille smiled, yet rather sadly and absently, 
as a doomed man well might ; completed his 
note, handed it out to I^ooney, with a much- 
begrudged shilling, called for a can of hot 
water, and withdrew to his toilette, full two 
good hours before the expected time for its 
display could arrive. 



14. a 



212 MADELEINE GRAHAM, 



CHAPTEE X. 

A MODERN DINNER A LA BORGIA. 

Flamingo, lounging in a state of torpor over 
the vast gorge lie had taken in for his half- 
crown, but which he made up to the house 
by a still more plentiful proportion of liquids, 
watched Camille taking his departure, a long 
time after, with some amusement in the con- 
templation of his costume. The Rue de Eivoli 
would have been proud of Monsieur Le Tellier 
undoubtedly ; he was finished at all points 
like a car\dng in ivory, and might have 
stepped unchallenged into the dress circle of 
the most stuck-up opera-house in Europe; 
which, as we have the best of everything, is of 
course our own. His handkerchief exhaled a 
delicate odour ; he wore several rings and a 
handsome chain, which, if they were not of 
the precious materials they affected, were so 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 213 

artistically fashioned to represent them that it 
mattered little to anybody but a pawnbroker 
what else they were. Nothing could exceed 
the elegant finish of his whiskers and hair, 
and they curled and were very bright with 
cosmefiqtie hlanc. Possibly he was even rouged, 
he had so fine a colour ; and his waist was as 
the waist of a youthful wasp, though I do not 
assert that the elder members of that order of 
insect aristocracy develop very aldermanically 
in advanced existence. 

"There you go, as smart as a primrose l" 
said the American, with a sleepily-good- 
natured nod to the young Frenchman, by 
wa}^ of salute, as he passed. Boa constrictors 
themselves, it is possible, are good-natured 
after a high feed at a low figure, put he 
noticed everything from under his shaggy 
eyelashes, . the pale lavender kid gloves and 
all. 

" Tarnation fine gal !" he commented, as 
Camille disappeared. " But rather him tlian 
me, under the circumstances ; especial-ly alter 
that thar remarkable concatenation of the 
ghost on the portmant-6 !'* 



214 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

But as for Camille, Ins good opinion of him- 
self, and livelier spirits, had evidently returned 
at the toilette glass. He smiled so agreeably, 
and looked as if even a repetition of his ud com- 
fortable vision of the night before would not 
have annoyed him so very much if the wraith 
took care to present itself with an exact repe- 
tition also of the elegance of his costume. 
And no doubt the ruling principle of his mind 
. personal vanity . was again in the ascendant, 
and he believed very consolingly in his own 
irresistibility, . was determined, in fact, to put 
it to the proof 

The idea was encouraged by all he encoun- 
tered at Prospect Palace. 

He found Madeleine dressed in a feminine 
adaptation of his own style ; gay, coquettish, 
apparently delighted to receive him . and 
alone; a circumstance she prettily explained 
by informing her dear Camille that she had 
invited him purposely an hour sooner than the 
real dinner-hour, in order that they might 
enjoy a little private conversation, and discuss 
and arrange their future, while her aunt was 
out at a charitable meeting in town, without 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 215 

interruption from other people's advice and 
ignorance. 

In reality, Madeleine was more at ease in 
her mind than she had been for some time. 
She had fairly made it up ; was no longer tossed 
and tumbled on those soul-sickening waves of 
doubt and irresolution : she knew now precisely 
what she must do, and was going to do it. 
Moreover, she had just received a very com- 
forting: and streno:thenino: note from Mr. Beh- 
ringbright, couched in the most affectionate 
terms, and expressive still of unbounded confi- 
dence and devotion. And yet, he stated, he had 
communicated the last astounding revelation 
regarding Emily Maughan to Lord Glengariff, 
with his mother's confirmatory letter, . and 
was delighted to say that, after a long pause 
of astonishment, the invalid had seemed to 
rally in a very extraordinary manner on the 
intelligence ; declared that it explained every- 
thing ; set at rest all his suspicions of his best 
friend ; relieved him at once and for ever of 
the delusion of passion he had cherished for so 
mistaken an ideal of female purity and good- 
ness ; which was, in reality, the worst part of 



216 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

his disorder. And he would have proved the 
assertion, insisting that he was perfectly able 
to get lip, and would at once . if Dr. Buck- 
trout had not interfered, and by earnest exhor- 
tation prevailed on him to remain in his bed. 

But Mr. Behringbright declared his own 
conviction that the news had produced a most 
excellent effect towards the restoration of the 
young earl from the feverish and half- delirious 
condition to which, it was now probable, anx- 
iety of mind, as much as the suffering caused 
by his- wound, had reduced him. He had 
spoken on the subject with so much determi- 
nation and calmness ; was so resigned to con- 
sider that his mother's journey must and ought 
to prove entirely bootless ; and, finally, at the 
very hour Mr. Behringbright was writing, had 
fallen into the first sound, natural slumber he 
had enjoyed since the accident, and from which 
Dr. Bucktrout auo-ured the best results if it 
could be preserved for some continuance un- 
broken. And so much importance did the 
physician attach to the operation of this simple 
restorative of nature that he directed every 
one else to retire for the night, and remained 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 217 

himself in watchful attendance on the 
patient. 

This intelligence was reassuring for Made- 
leine, who was in great dread of the possible 
impetuous and destructively direct interference 
of the young earl in her devices. She knew 
they would not bear much straining in any 
way ; and though she had calculated on his 
remaining disabled by his illness, probably 
for ever, in the result, still it was good to 
know that he took the appalling communica- 
tion in so very sensible and acquiescent ^a 
manner. He might have done a great deal of 
mischief else before he died, . like a fallen war- 
horse that strikes right and left with his hoofs, 
in the convulsions of death. 

Still, if she had not known she had a grand 
panacea in store for Camille's worst follies and 
caprices, Madeleine would not have liked the 
use her ci-devant beloved put his opinion to, . 
that he was fully restored to favour witli his 
lady-lov.e . in the first effusions of their re- 
sumed confidence and tenderness. 

Camille was, of course, entirely ignorant of 
the part assigned him in all these tranquillizing 



218 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

and illuminating revelations. But he had 
come to the conviction that he had allowed 
himself to be compromised dangerously and 
foolishly, even in figuring in the affair so far 
as he himself was aware he did figure. He 
did not like it, he said, being made to pretend 
that he was courting another woman than her 
whom in reality he adored. He must have the 
wdiole thing decided upon speedily : the whole 
nonsensical subterfuge might be discovered at 
any moment, and then how ridiculous . Ciell 
how ridiculous I . he would be made to appear. 
Indeed, fraudulent : he seemed to be trying to 
advance himself in Behringbright Brothers' 
favour under false pretences ! That would 
never do . w^hen it was found out. The mer- 
chant might even punish him at law : but he 
would be too much afraid, himself, of ridicule 
to go back, if once he could be fairly committed 
to the proper course. And the proper course 
w^as for Mr. Behringbright to admit him . 
Monsieur Camille Le Tellier . into a junior 
partnership in his house, which his talents and 
industry would help to sustain (Behringbright 
himself was clearly not so young as he had heen^ 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 219 

in anything !), with a share in the profits in 
the first place, to the extent of about two thou- 
sand a year. 

Camille declared that he must be gazetted 
at once into this position, as a preliminary, in 
order that he might make sure his dearest 
Madeleine did not mean to play him any 
unhandsome trick. 

His dearest Madeleine herself seemed not to 
consider this demand at all out of the way . 
at all extortionate . at all impossible. 

" It is very likely he will do it . all as you 
require, dear Camille," she remarked, " if only 
you will give me a little more time. I will 
try him fo-morroio. It is veri/ likely, he seems 
so anxious to get Emily quartered on some 
one ! Indeed, I sometimes almost vvonder 
whether there is not some foundation for Lord 
Glengarifi"s suspicions of him with her ! He 
was tired of Emily, I suppose, or afraid things 
would come out, when he shipped her ofi" to 
Ireland from her poor widowed mother. And, 
of course, he would do an3^thing to hinder me 
from finding out how wickedly he has behaved 
in the transaction." 



220 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

*' Mon Dieu I And does he dare to think 
that his . his cast-ofF mistress . is a proper 
wife for Camille Le Tellier ? I am obliged to 
you, Madeleine ; you justify all my indigna- 
tion, and the weapons I employ against them 
are no longer those of falsehood and treachery, 
but of a legitimate vengeance !" 

" That is what I think ; but let us not dis- 
cuss the point. I assure you, meanwhile, that 
I will comply as early as possible with the 
demands of ^^our impatience. To-morrow^ I 
repeat ! I shall not see Mr. Behringbright, 
to urge the subject upon him, till then ; but 
it is plain he is completely devoid of suspicion 
of you with regard to me, which is the 
greatest point . since he himself desired me 
to invite you to dinner, in his absence, and 
ascertain precisely what you required as the 
conditions of your acquiescing in his scheme 
of providing for Emily. You have stated 
them to me now, and it is enough." 

" 'No more confirmation is needed for a con- 
jecture which so dishonours me, since you say 
Behringbright authorizes my visit here !" 
Camille responded, looking tremendously in- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 221 

dignant, but secretly flattered with the con- 
viction of the great and commanding position 
he occupied in the affairs of the millionnaire. 
It seemed to him, poor deluded creature, that 
he was already fingering his two thousand a 
year as junior partner in the firm of Behring- 
bright Brothers, and completing the confusion 
and defeat of his purseproud, domineering 
rival, by eloping with his bride-elect ! They 
might try to buy him out of the firm, then, 
it is true ; but they could not manage to get 
rid of him otherwise. 

Madeleine need not have been much afraid 
of the process, but she did not like to see 
Monsieur Le Tellier think. Yet she started 
herself from a deep meditation, when she 
remarked it, which had only lasted a few 
seconds . but had dived into so deep an abyss 
of criminal resolve that she apologized for 
being so long silent, when she spoke, imagining 
a much greater interval had elapsed. And 
thereupon she fell to rallying her lover play- 
fully on the strange manner they were spending 
their time together; and Camille, piqued on 
his gallantry, set to work to produce his 



222 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

cTioicest artificial flowers of love-making ; such 
as French Corydons have handed down to one 
another to wreathe their crooks withal, with 
very little change or variet}^, from the earliest 
age of classicism . " Cornme Venus belle . comme 
Mi nerve elle est sage /" being the tune to which 
all their chimes are set. 

The dinner was even considerably later than 
Madeleine had announced, and 3^et Mrs. Buck- 
trout did not seem to be aware she had at all 
exceeded the time assigned when they sat 
down to the repast at seven instead of ^\^. 
Time was to be got over, somehow or other. 
The dinner was a very good one, and consisted 
of several courses ; so that assisted admirably. 
Then there was the dessert, which, with a flow 
of excellent wine and conversation, could be 
protracted almost to any extent. 

Moreover, Madeleine exerted herself ama- 
zingly to keep up the ball. Camille had 
hardly ever before seen her so light, so 
brilliant, so playful . so much like a Parisienne^ 
in short . in her demeanour towards him. 
They generally prated romance at each other 
in their interviews, and neither of them had a 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 223 

particle of the real stuff in them. He was in 
proportion charmed and fascinated; pleased 
and proud also to think that she was applying 
all these newly-discovered powers to his satis- 
faction and enthralment. For there had 
been many heavy moments of late, when all 
Camille's vanity could not assure him that he 
still remained supreme with the wealthy mer- 
chant's daughter. 

Not but what there were some few intervals 
during which all Madeleine's efforts to com- 
mand her attention could not hinder her from 
sinking into pauses of forgetfulness and ab- 
sence of mind so complete that, I believe, on 
more than one occasion she looked at Camille 
fixedly for several minutes without seeing him 
at all. Bat that invaluable development of 
his organ of self-esteem persuaded him she 
was taking an admiring survey of his person 
and embellishments ; and the strange vacancy 
in such intentness of consideration did not 
strike him alarmingly. On his own part, he 
had all a Frenchman's love of chatter, and he 
was particularly anxious to produce a mag- 
nificent impression, in this first friendly and 



224 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

sociable intercourse with which, he had ever 
been favoured with a member of the family 
circle of his beloved. As for Mrs. Bucktrout, 
she listened much as a frog in a well might to 
the chirruping of the birds in the woods above 
it. But if she did not make, she did not mar, 
satisfied that so consummate a genius for 
management as her niece must be conducting 
all this airy and unmeaning palaver to some 
very suitable and tangible result. 

At last Madeleine said to herself, "It is ten 
o'clock ; it will take him half an hour to walk 
home ; by eleven Oljanpe will have succeeded, 
or never, and the tea will give her an additional 
three-quarters. Shall we have tea now, aunt?" 
she concluded aloud. 

'' Yes, my dear, if you wish. Mr. Le Tellier 
has not done anything at the fruit or decanters 
for a long time." 

"I will ring, then, aunt.'' But Camille had 
already leaped to the bell with polite velo- 
city, and jingled it. Eooney, the waiter, 
responded. 

" Tea and coffee, please. Monsieur Le 
Tellier prefers coffee; and so, I think, do I, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 225 

aunt, tliis afternoon," said Miss Grraham, quite 
calmly. 

The messenger of destiny disappeared to the 
kitchen. 

'* You, my dear ? Why, you know how 
bilious coffee always makes you, Madeleine." 

" Sometimes . yes ; so it does. But you do 
prefer coffee, Camille ?" the latter said, with a 
sweet smile at her French lover, and a fasci- 
nating forgetfulness of the presence in which 
they were, implied in the use of that familiar 
form of address. 

I think the strongest argument against the 
likelihood of supernatural interpositions lies in 
their almost invariable uselessness. How came 
it that Camille never for a moment reminded 
himself of that vision of the wraith, with a 
cup of some loathsome beverage at its lips, 
and of a remarkable allusion made in a recent 
interview to his partiality to coffee ? He did 
not ; he certainly was very fund of coffee. 

Tea and coffee and biscuits were brought ; 
there was plenty of lump sugar in a silver 
basin on the tray ; that was good for tea. But 
Madeleine, very well knowing that powdered 

VOL. III. 15 



226 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

sugar was the proper thing for coffee, got up, 
when the waiter left the room, and brought 
out a handsome Bohemian cut-glass basin from 
a small gilt sideboard cupboard, where the 
occupants of the private sitting-chamber could 
lock up any little stores they did not desire to 
return to common property at the bar below. 

" Aunt and I are very fond of sugar," she 
remarked, smilingly ; " you should see how we 
sometimes cover the puddings they send us up, 
till the plate looks as if there had been a snow- 
storm on it. We are quite obliged to buy in 
extra stores for mere shame's sake." 

Mrs. Bucktrout looked surprised, but made 
no observation. Wlien a great leader once 
acquires a reputation for generalship, it is 
scarcely possible for him to choose a battle or 
bivouac-ground amiss, in the opinion of his 
soldiery. Madeleine, indeed, grew a little pale 
herself as she said this, but for the briefest 
possible moment of weakness. 

"And I shall have coffee too, aunt, this 
evening ; it will not harm me for once . for the 
sake of the sweetening, chiefly," she said, with 
an affectionate smile at Camille, who took it as 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 227 

a complimentary sharing of his own tastes, and 
smiled and bowed. 

" Do you prefer powdered or loaf sugar, Mr. 
Le Tellier ?" inquired Madeleine, after helping 
her aunt to some tea. She knew very well 
what he would say. 

"Powdered, if you please, Miss Grraham." 

And powdered sugar he had, a good allow- 
ance of it ; and very finely pounded and 
smooth and white the sugar was. In spite of 
her avowed preference for the same, however, 
Madeleine helped herself to lump sugar, 
though she made no ostentatious display of 
the substitution ; on the contrary, helped 
herself when Monsieur Le Tellier's attention 
was accidentally called off by her remarking 
on the beautiful effect of the rising moon on 
the waters of the lake below their windows. 
She said it was quite like a scene in a theatre, 
and that interested the French observer of 
nature. 

The coffee was very nice ; it was delicious. 
Miss Graham had especially urged upon tlie 
hotel people the necessity of having some very 
nice coifce made ready for the foreign gentle- 

15.2 



228 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

man who was to dine with them that day. 
Monsieur Le Tellier had two cups, and would 
probably have taken a third if Miss Graham 
had not looked at her watch at the moment. 
She then gave a significant glance at her lover. 
Camille understood it, and complied with the 
silent admonition conveyed . and the rather 
that he did not feel so very well after that last 
cup ; and knowing what an unwonted variety 
of food he had partaken of, and that his 
digestion was rather of the weakest, he arose 
to take his leave. 

He would have been glad, perhaps, if Made- 
leine could have afforded him the pleasure of a 
few parting private words, but she either could 
not, or did not think it expedient to attempt. 
She shook hands with him in her aunt's pre- 
sence ; but she emphatically, almost con- 
vulsively, returned the slight lover's pressure 
he ventured to bestow on hers, and responded 
in a very sweet tone, and decidedly as if she 
meant it, . 

" Bonne nuif, chcr Camille : an revoir demain" 

It was quite right and fitting that Madeleine 

should make that last affectionate farewell 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 229 

and promise of soon meeting again in French. 
French is not exactly the language of sincerity ; 
and people not born in France who mean what 
they say had better say it in their mother 
tongues. 

Camille gave one of his thrilling parting 
looks at Miss Graham . one of those looks 
which he always fancied to be irresistible. She 
did not meet his tender gaze ; but he saw that, 
with the exception of two burning blotches on 
her cheeks, Miss Graham was so deadly pale 
that he had every reason to think she was much 
afflicted at the necessity of parting from him. 
He blamed the aunt for whatever besides 
seemed cold in the farewell, and, persuaded 
that his walk home to his quarters would do 
him good, finally took his departure . very well 
satisfied, on the w^hole, with his visit. 

Madeleine seemed as if relieved from the 
spell of some dreadful supernatural presence 
when the guest retired. She gave such a sigh 
of exhaustion and weariness as the door closed, 
that her aunt herself, who was wearied to death 
of the affair, was a little scandalized at it. 

" He is, however, dreadfully tedious with his 



230 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

chatter, chatter, chatter. I am so glad, dear, 
that you have given up altogether thinking 
ahout such a fellow. But did you make all 
the an-angements right ahout him and Emily ?" 
Mrs. Bucktrout inquired. 

" Yes, aunt, quite right." 

" Then hadn't 3^ou better go to bed, dear ? 
I am sure you look fagged out," said the kind 
relative. 

" No, aunt, no ; I don't feel sleepy. I feel 
quite cold and feverish," replied the niece ; 
and, indeed, she shuddered violently. " Still 
I think I'll put things by (that's our sugar, 
you know; I bought it for our own use, it 
looked so nice in the grocer's window in Kil- 
larney, and the hotel stuff, I am sure, has had 
black-beetles in it), and then, yes, we'll go to 
bed. I'll sleep with you to-night. I was 
frightened last night at sleeping alone, the 
wind made such a horrid sighing and moaning 
about the house ; it did indeed sound like the 
screeching of the banshee they talk so much 
of here.'* 

The young lady arose and removed the 
basin of pounded sugar, as if to consign it to 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 231 

the private lock-up ; but, witli most un- 
usual awkwardness for her, let it fall on the 
fender, where it broke into pieces. 

" Dear me ! but it's no use now. Lend me the 
fire-shovel, aunt, and I'll put it all on the fire." 

" Why, my dear ?" said Mrs. Bucktrout, who 
\vas a person of very saving and also very 
charitable habits. " It will do yet, properly 
sifted . at least for servants or the poor." 

" It shant. For shame of you, aunt ! I 
would not offer it to a pig," said Madeleine, 
seizing the instrument she required, with almost 
rude violence, past her aunt, and shovelling 
the fragments of the basin and its contents 
alike on the fire, which, equally against Mrs. 
Bucktrout's economical notions, she had caused 
to be kindled for the reception of their foreign 
visitor, native of a sunnier clime. 

Madeleine continued strangely peevish and 
contrary for a good long time afterwards ; but 
still complaining of being cold, would not leave 
the fire and go to bed until her aunt re- 
marked that the people in the hotel would 
begin to think it queer. She started up at 
once then, and professed her willingness to 



232 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

retire, but not, as she had previously wished, 
to share her relative's couch. She felt, she 
said, that she should be so restless and uncom- 
fortable, her aunt would not have a moment's 
sleep. Her aunt was quite right . that coffee 
had disagreed with her, and would make her 
feverish all night. that it was morning ! 
that next day, in fact, was over ! But when 
Mrs. Bucktrout asked her why, she only 
laughed, and said, " It was nothing ; she was 
only talking nonsense . only wishing that the 
time was come for Lady Glengariff to send 
word how she sped on her mad journe3^" 
Then, snatching up a bed-candle, she hurriedly 
bade her aunt good-night, and left the apart- 
ment for her own. so abruptly that Mrs. 
Bucktrout was cut half short in a solemn 
nocturnal benediction she usually bestowed 
upon her niece, ever since it was certain she 
was to enter on the duties and responsibilities 
of the married life with a millionnaire. 

Neither will I undertake to say that Made- 
leine felt much more composed and soothed 
when she reached the privacy of her own 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 233 

chamber. The reflections which accompanied 
her there were not altogether of the pleasantest. 

She had discharged her duty to Society 
now, indeed ; she had followed the maxims of 
an enlightened self-interest to their uttermost 
consequences ; she had preferred Money to 
EVERYTHING ! . to all the pleasing memories 
of a first passionate though guilty attachment 
. to the yearning sentiment of preference 
never extinguished in a woman's heart towards 
that first object of its mightiest impulse . to 
every sentiment, indeed, of pity, mercy, hos- 
pitality ; had ventured all . life itself ; . had in- 
curred the most dreadful penalties of the laws 
alike of God and man, in homage to the golden 
Moloch in whose worship she had been reared. 
And yet Madeleine Graham was not content 
with herself . could not rest comfortably, even 
on the conviction that she had provided against 
every possible danger of a discovery. 

Who would concern themselves about the 
fate of an obscure stranger, at a miserable little 
inn, surrounded by ignorant people, if he was 
assailed on the sudden by a disorder to which 



234 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Camille Le Tellier knew himself to be subject, 
and died of it ? 

If Olympe bad employed ber time as dex- 
terously and resolutely as was to be expected 
fromber cleverness, ber excited bopes of recom- 
pense, ber batred of tbe victim, not a trace 
would remain to point to any one as baving 
any possible motive or interest to do barm to 
tbis obscure stranger . mucb less to destroy 
him. 

All would be well . must be well . should 
be w^ell ! Madeleine would be able soon, with- 
out fear or hesitation, to accept tbe splendid 
destiny in reserve for ber ! 

But was it so splendid a destiny, after all ? 

A million of money, it is true ! But . to be 
shared with Mr. Bebringbrigbt ! 

And asking herself tbis question, Madeleine 
Graham . amazing contradiction in what was 
still a human nature ! miraculous proof of the 
supremacy of tbe fiend worshipped by our age ! 
. ^knew and felt that she bad consigned to a 
death of enormous suffering a man she loved, 
in order that she might marry a man she dis- 
liked, for his riches ! 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 235 

It was too late now to repent . too late! 
But a horrible grief and terror, on a sudden, in- 
vaded her heart ; and Madeleine almost shrieked 
aloud as she cast herself on her couch, exclaim- 
ing, ''And I have committed a murder, and am 
in danger of the gallows, to make myself 
miserable for life !" 

Still, however, it was of self chiefly, we see, 
that she thought, and all the rest was a matter 
of mere instinctive emotion : for any moral 
sense at work in the matter, Madeleine Graham 
might as well have been a serpent that had 
bitten a man's heel, and lay coiled again in the 
jungle, in dread of his revengeful trample. 

It must have been so ; for the only conso- 
latory thought that occurred to her was, the 
magnificence of the trousseau with which she 
should be enabled to astonish all Belfast, when 
she was married to the millionnaire ! 



236 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



CHAPTEE XI. 

RIVALRY UNDER DIFFICULTIES. 

Meanwhile Camille, proceeding on his solitary 
walk to liis inn, did not find that it did him 
all the good he expected. He felt a curious 
qualminess and heartburning. 

Something, no doubt, had disagreed with 
him at his dinner. Things often did. Or was 
it the dinner altogether ? He was not accus- 
tomed to such sumptuous feeding, certainl}'' ; 
yet it was all so nice. Could it be the broccoli 
sprouts ? No; they were very good, thoroughly 
cooked, yet of a fine lively green; were only 
unhealthy when boiled frosty, and then they 
always looked yellow. The salmon cutlets? 
Oh, no ; nothing could be fresher than the 
fish w^as. That delicious cofiee, besides, ought 
to have settled everything. No ; it must be 
one of his old bilious attacks, possibly to be 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 237 

debited to that fiery hot '^vhiskey" he took 
the night before. What nonsense to think so ! 
A little " vhiskey" might do him good : he 
had best make home sharp to his inn, and 
try. 

Moreover, the recollection of the stories he 
had heard about wraiths and banshees . of the 
dreadful proof he fancied himself, to have 
received of the existence of the former ghastly 
phantoms . naturally hurried the Frenchman's 
steps in traversing his lonely road. The ex- 
ceeding brightness of the moonlight comforted 
him but little. He knew he had to pass along 
the skirts of a dark wood to reach his quarters 
at the " Eed Herring." The illumination of 
the open road would only throw those leafy 
recesses into deeper shadow. It was certainly 
getting on to midnight, also. He had stopped 
strangely late, Camille acknowledged to himself, 
at a dinner with two ladies. But then the 
lovely Madeleine seemed to wish it, and had 
never exhibited herself more truly charming 
and irresistible . had never before appeared 
more completely under his own charm and 
influence. 



238 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

This idea soothed Camille, and almost made 
him forget he had a pain in his stomach that 
was growing singularly in uneasiness and 
sharpness. He tried to forget it, and to 
assure himself he was not in the least alarmed, 
by humming an opera air as he proceeded. 
The midnight birds, awakened in Kenmare 
Woods by the sound, turned their heads from 
side to side in wonderment, not understanding 
Italian much more than most other insular 
audiences, to hear the warbling demand, . 

" Crudely perche finora 
Farmi Ian . . . n . . . n . ,. guir cosi ?" 

But other creatures than birds seemed to have 
their attention excited by the melody . another 
creature at all events. Turning the corner of the 
road from the wood, which led by a bypath to 
the little tributary streamlet on which the 
" Eed Herring" stood, Camille became suddenly 
aware that a tall figure of a man wrapped in a 
long cloak, and with a hat slouched down to 
his eyes, stood directly in the midst of the way 
along which he must pass. 

The immovability of this figure, its unusual 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 239 

lieigM, the blackness of its vesture, cast into 
strong relief in the brightness of the moon- 
light, struck a not unreasonable alarm into 
Camille. But prepossessed with superstitious 
terrors as his imagination was, he could not 
for more than a moment alarm himself with 
the notion that he was coming upon his own 
phantom again. The figure was so much taller 
than himself . its dark and massive style of 
costume so little like a Frenchman's. 

What could it be, then ? 

It was possible . likely enough . that it 
might be his long, gaunt American friend, 
riamingo Brown, come out to spy for his return. 
On that supposition, Camille hastened his steps 
again, and as the figure did not move at all, 
rapidly gained upon it. 

" He is standing in that motionless way on 
purpose to frighten me. He will be surprised 
to see how coolly I take it, and I shall reha- 
bilitate myself in his esteem as a person of 
courage !" thought poor Monsieur Le Tellier, 
resuming his warbling, and striving to forget an 
increase of internal suffering in the occupation 
of his mind. He could scarcely help, however, 



240 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

shrieking aloud when, approaching almost close 
to the figure, in this nonclialant style, it raised 
its head, and he perceived a countenance which 
he had only seen once before, but had never 
forgotten. To be sure it was on a kind of 
occasion men do not easily forget ; and this 
recognition, in conjunction with the paleness 
of the countenance and phosphorlike glow 
of the eyes, induced Camille to exclaim, in 
horror, " Mo7i Bleu I what do I behold ? It is 
the Earl of Glengariff's wraith ! Holy Mary ! 
for what reason does it present itself, then, 
before me ? . Speak, terrific portent ! What 
does your presence mean ?" 

And Le Tellier betook himself to a wild 
rhapsody of prayers and divinities he had pos- 
sibly not had recourse to since he left his 
mother's knee. 

A very human utterance, however . hoarse 
with passion, and 3^et quite as plainly vibrating 
with contempt . interrupted him. 

"Peace, foolish ^vretcll!" it exclaimed; 
rather uncivilly, perhaps. " I am no spectre . 
I am the man whose likeness you discern. 
And I have been waiting hours for you here. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 241 

if you are the person whom I take you to 
be . a rrenchman, Camille Le Tellier by 
name." 

" My name is Camille Le Tellier, sir, and I 
am a Frenchman," returned the party described, 
recovering from one alarm only to plunge into 
another. " But what is the reason, milord, that 
you address me in these accents of scorn and 
rebuke? I could not demand of you satis- 
faction for your insult to me in Belfast, for I 
understood you were all but dying in your bed 
in a sumptuous castle, which has the honour to 
call you master ! For what reason can she have 
told me this falsehood also ?'* he concluded, in 
astonishment, as to himself. 

" I have heard news that would have roused 
me from my grave, villain 1" returned the stern 
hero of the Belfast theatrical row . continuinir, 
in the same uncompromising style : " I was 
surrounded by an atmosphere of falsehood and 
perjuries on my sick-couch, which I am deter- 
mined to pierce, and to trust to my own eyes 
only. Tell me, then, is it true you are here in 
Killarney to ask the hand of Emily Maughan 
in marriage of her guardian ? . that you 

VOL. III. 16 



242 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

have asked it, and that lie has accepted you as 
her husband ?" 

Camille Le Tellier had been informed by 
Madeleine . in hopes to stimulate him to 
rivalry against the young nobleman, who had 
also treated him with considerable indignity . 
of Glengariif's partiality in this direction. 
And now it seemed to him a justifiable morti- 
fication he inflicted; and, besides, the ques- 
tioner's tone seemed not to admit of equi- 
vocation when he replied, " All this is as you 
state it, my lord ; but to what utility ?" 

"Answer my questions, and I will after- 
wards answer you yom^s, sir," the resurrec- 
tionized chieftain answered, in accents tremu- 
lous with suppressed but not for tliat reason 
less formidable passion. " Answer me again 
without hesitation ! You are then the betrayer 
of the innocence . the seducer of this unhappy 
young girl ? . Graciousheavens ! . the father of 
an unborn heir of shame and guilt, which will 
also call Emily Maughan mother ?" 

Camille was astonished in his turn at this 
accusation ; and the terrible tone in which it 
was made, the implacable gleam of the eyes, 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 243 

made liim feel happy that he was enabled to 
reply, with all the fervour of truth and inno- 
cence, . 

"No, my lord; this latter is altogether a 
visionary imputation. I know nothing of 
what you speak now. I am almost a stranger 
personally to Miss Maughan, and have only 
expressed to Mr. Behringbright my own incli- 
nation to become her husband, not her acqui- 
escence and consent to become my wife." 

" Then, basest of all the base !" returned the 
earl, or his phantom, in very unphantom-like 
accents, '' it is as I have all along suspected. 
You have accepted a bribe to wed dishonour ; 
and it is the infamously-betrayed and cast-off 
mistress of a wealthy villain, whose desires 
have wandered to another, that you accept as 
your wife !" 

Camille felt justly indignant at this suppo- 
sition ; and not a little pleased too, from the 
tone of its utterance, that he could repudiate 
it with still more emphasis. 

" All this is still more unfounded, my lord, 
and you owe me an apology for the shameful 
imputation. The very supposition outrages 

16.2 



244 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

me . and Mr. Beliriiigbriglit, who I assure 
you I consider, upon my honour, totally inca- 
pable of the part you assign him in this 
drama, and which occurs to me as very little 
in his line of assumption. But I do not feel 
quite well to-night, and to submit to be cate- 
chized by a stranger is not altogether so plea- 
sant that " 

"It is impossible for me to understand any- 
thing, then, in the affair !" interrupted the 
earl, in an amazed and baffled tone. "And 
true it is my mother assures me it is Miss 
Graham who has revealed the weakness and 
misfortune of her friend ! Could she be 
induced so to abet and shelter Behringbright ? 
Why not ? To secure the rich prize to herself, 
and be rid of a dangerous rival ! If my 
mother's clairvoyance is not a delusion of her 
disorder, she is capable of anything mercenary 
and vile. But be it how it may, this scoundrelly 
coxcomb proposes to make Emily Maughan liis 
victim . or has already done so, in one form 
or other. And he owes me a satisfaction 
which I will have. . Monsieur Le Tellier!" he 
concluded, in tones that made the other start. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 245 

" Well, sir, but speak quickly. I wish to 
be at home. I am ill . very ill, I tell you !" 

"I believe I am speaking to a man who 
has some pretensions to the rank of a gentle- 
man . a person who knows his weapons . a 
professed duellist, since you challenged Mr. 
Behringb right formerly on a very slight provo- 
cation. I conceive myself to be injured in a 
personal respect by the style of your addresses 
to a young lady who has been the object of my 
own devoted . I mean, who has been my 
sister s governess . and I demand of you the 
satisfaction a man of honour is always willing 
to pay in such cases !" returned Lord Glen- 
gariff, flaming out regularly into fury. 

" I, sir ! . I, milord! I have more need of a 
physician, I believe, at this moment, than to 
answer you. But I repeat, you have no quarrel 
against me . nor has any man . in anything 
that regards Miss Emily Maughan. Let me 
pass, I beseech you !" returned Camille, and in 
unmistakable accents of agony. 

" Do you add cowardice to the rest of your 
villany? I tell you, I insist. Monsieur 
Le Tellier, that you shall name a second to 



246 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

whom I can send a gentleman on my part tlie 
first thing in the morning. And I will not 
leave this neighbourhood until I have ex- 
torted the real truth from your lips, or perish 
myself in the attempt!" 

"Assist me, or I shall fall dead at your 
feet !'* was the only reply to this objurgation ; 
and Camille indeed staggered forward as if he 
had received some stifling blow in the chest, 
panting for breath. 

" The fellow looks ghastly pale, in truth ! 
Can fear do this, or can he be drunk?" Lord 
Glengariff exclaimed to himself, catching 
Camille by the shoulder, and steadying him, as 
he nearly reeled to the ground. 

" No, I am not drunk . I am dying ! Get 
me some help, in heaven's name ! I feel as if I 
was poisoned." 

"You do not seem well, it is certain," 
replied Lord Glengariff, struck with the words. 
"But who would tliink it worth while to 
poison you ? Come ! I require of you only a 
slight satisfaction for my mind. Make to me 
the confession of your principal's villany, and 
I release you from all further consequences. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. :247 

It is on Ills head only I will visit the chastise- 
ment ! Confess that you are hired to cover 
Behringbright's treacherous cruelty by marry- 
ing the unhappy victim, and I have nothing 
further to say to you." 

" Were they my dying words . and I almost 
think they are, I suffer so cruel an anguish . 
I have nothing to blame myself with respect 
to Miss Emily Maughan," groaned the un- 
fortunate Camille ; " unless I may be supposed 
to have injured her by my unauthorized de- 
mand of her hand." 

"Unauthorized!" 

" Quite . quite . quite ! But she will be 
guilty of my death, I verily believe, if you 
detain me longer !" 

"Mr. Behringbright then put it into your 
head to make the offer, as I have before said?" 

" 'No, indeed . no, indeed ! Mr. Behring- 
bright was extremely surprised. So was I my- 
self! I feel now I was cajoled into making 
the proposition ; but I never meant it ! I feel 
like a dying man ; but at all events I speak 
with the sincerity of one !" 

"You proposed for Miss Maughaii, and you 



248 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

did not mean it ? Impudent coxcomb ! tins is 
too audacious !" roared Lord GlengarifF. " But 
that unfortunate young lady is not so destitute 
of friends as you and your treacherous suborner 
no doubt imagine. I will compel you both to 
do her justice ! I will cane you into begging 
her pardon on your knees . and I will compel 
the infamous Behringbright to marry her, or 
throttle him !" 

" I beg it already, if I have offended her in 
a manner to require it, milord, . though, let 
me tell you, far handsomer and richer women 

have been proud to . to . to But permit 

me, meanwhile to die in my bed ! I feel as if 
attacked by Asiatic cholera . I am, I fear ! 
Are you aware whether it has appeared on 
these unhealthy lakes ?" 

Camille uttered a cry of pain as he said 
these words : and, indeed, the symptoms he 
now presented were in several respects not un- 
like those of the terrible disorder announced. 
Heaven knows whether it did not often get 
the credit of other destruction with as little 
cause ! He looked lividly pale in the moon- 
light, and his features were racked with an 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 249 

expression of tlie severest agony. Lord Glen- 
garilF glared down at liim, and perceived there 
was no counterfeiting in the matter. " Why, 
what ails, you, man ?" he exclaimed. 

"I do not know, but I shall be better, I 
think, if I had a glass of eau-de-vie. I lodge 
at the little tavern hereby ; if you would only 
deign to escort me there, for I am almost 
blind, and so giddy ! I am a 'thousand times 
worse than seasick ! For heaven's sake, . in 
the name of that common humanity I ought 
not to invoke in vain,. support me, or I shall 
die where I stand ! I will explain all I know, 
if you will but befriend me to some place 
where I can lie down and have medical aid !" 

Lord GlengarifF, in fact, was obliged to 
stretch his arms to hinder Camille from writh- 
ing downward to his feet ; and, appalled and 
amazed with the exhibition of severe physical 
suffering he witnessed, the impetuous challenger 
suddenly found himself converted into the 
guide and support of his stricken foe ! 



250 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



CHAPTEE XII. 

A GRAND SCENA ON A SMALL THEATRE. 

The Earl was very far from strong him- 
self; for althougli . as the reader must now 
conjecture . his injury had been enormously 
exaggerated, he had really been wounded by the 
stag, and had lost a good deal of blood. But 
he managed to escort the reeling Frenchman 
the short distance that remained to be tra- 
versed to the " Eed Herring " Tavern. 

There, however, a new surprise awaited 
Camille, which for a few moments stunned his 
sense of physical suffering. Elamingo Brown 
met them at the door ; and, at first imagining 
that Monsieur Le Tellier had been brought 
home something the worse for liquor, exclaimed, 
" Wont you get it neither, my boy ? Out at a 
ladys party, and come home muddled, and 
your wife upstairs waiting for you, and has 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 251 

been there hours, . almost ever since you 
started !'' 

" My loife /" exclaimed Camille, in the words 
but not in the tones of heartbroken love and 
lamentation of the self-bereaved Othello. "/ 
have no ivife I Will the perplexities of this 
night ever cease ? Dear friend, do you also 
add your mockery to so many . disastrous 
events ?" 

" Then I was right as I thought, all along," 
returned the shrewd Yankee. "And you'll 
think now at last I have played a genuine 
friend's part in the transaction ! You had not, 
as I have said, been gone an hour to your 
dinner-party when a foreign lady arrived 
here, with a couple of bandboxes, announcing 
herself to be your wife, whom you were expect- 
ing every moment, she said. A French dress- 
maker, or milliner, or modiste, she called her- 
self, I believe, whatever that meant. I soon 
pricked my ears when I heard such a saying as 
that, you may believe, Frenchy, taking the 
interest I do in you; and I heard her say 
that you would be back directly, she knew . 
and order dinner for two. All that went down 



252 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

like buttermilk, and slie sent her boxes up to 
your room, and asked the good people here to 
light a fire there, and said she would wait for 
dinner till you came back. 

" Dinner was the rock she split on ; for 
that's what gave me the first conviction she 
wasn't what she pretended ; for it w^as plain 
she knew nothing about your movements, nor 
where you were, nor when you were likely to 
return. But the good folks of the house took 
all for gospel, and would have gone on doing 
so ; and if I hadn't slipped up silently and 
locked the door on her, perhaps she'd a-robbed 
you, and got off quietly with the plunder ; for 
she's been a-knocking these two hours to get 
out ; and I went and peeped through the key- 
hole, and saw she had a biggish bundle made 
up for carrying off with her, strapped in a pair 
of old garters. So I pitched a story to the 
people here that . ^}^es . ^you had a wufe, but 
she was a very wicked woman, . always robbing 
you when she could get a chance, . and that 
you had offered a reward of thirty shillings for 
any one who could catch her at it ; and . and 
What's the matter with him, Mr. What's- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 253 

your-name ? He seems an ugly sight more tlian 
drunk." 

" Oh, my letters ! . my letters ! Take me 
upstairs ; and, if it is as I tliink . . . she 
. she . she has poisoned me too !" gasped 
Camille. 

" It was thinking of the letters made me so 
determined she should not stir a stump. But 
perhaps she has burned them, now I remember 
the fire. Can't outdo the women, try what 
one can !" exclaimed Flamingo, staring rather 
blankly. But, supernaturally revived by the 
dread of the enormous loss in question, Camille 
staggered away before his two friends, as they 
might now be called, upstairs to his apart- 
ment. The landlord, his wife, and some other 
inmates, who had been impatiently awaiting 
the solution of the mystery which had now 
puzzled them for hours, precipitately followed. 

Camille unlocked the door, the key of which 
Mr. Brown had long retained, in spite of 
every species of expostulation ; having found 
it, according to the custom of Irish keys in 
general, on the outside of the door, wlien his 
restless curiosity had prompted him to " con- 



254 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

sider the ways" of tlie alleged wife of Camille 
Le Tellier. 

This latter gentleman was also . as he had 
the best right . the first to enter the apart- 
ment; and it would have been a coup de 
tliedtre worthy of Parisian approbation, and 
consequently of British appropriation, to have 
seen the meeting of the ghastly, poisoned man 
when, rushing in, he found himself standing 
face to face with Olympe Loriot ! 

The unfortunate lover of Madeleine Graham 
perceived at a glance what her slighted rival 
had been at. His leather trunk was cut into 
two divisions. Olympe had a parcel wrapped 
in an old shawl in her hand, . a parcel of the 
fatal letters ; for seals, and the envelopes of 
such documents, appeared at two of the open- 
ings. The correspondence was so numerous, 
it overflowed the measure. 

" Olympe ! . Traitress ! . It is then you !" 
exclaimed Camille, making a clutch at his 
securities. 

Olympe instantly assumed the only style in 
which she could discern any hope of safety, 
or at least excuse, . the heroic wronged. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 255 

"Yes, Camille !" she exclaimed, "I am 
here ! The injured woman which you are so 
well aware you have sought in marriage, . 
whose consent you have obtained. But, suspect- 
ing you but too justly of a perfidious intrigue 
with another woman . with Miss Madeleine 
Graham . I venture something . I venture 
all . to ascertain the truth. And I have 
ascertained it ! I have employed these hours 
of my inhuman detention to examine your 
correspondence with this young lady, as, 
doubtless, you are still prepared to style her ; 
and I unhesitatingly pronounce that it convicts 
you both of being the worst of men and 
women. Let who will examine the proofs . 
this shawl is mine." 

So saying. Mademoiselle Loriot tore open 
her burden, and flung the heap in a scatter, as 
it fell at the feet of her invaders. 

The truth is, Olympe perceived there was 
no longer a possibility of executing her own 
plan of eloping with these documents; and 
she had not destroyed tliem, because she 
wished no kind of good fortune to ]\Iadclcine 
Graham which would place that slippery fisli 



256 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

out of control : but, above all, the time sLe 
had devoted . having nothing else to amuse 
her imprisonment . to the perusal of these 
letters had fairly maddened her with jealousy. 

With jealousy, and another almost as potent a 
feeling; for a part of the correspondence con- 
tained the most exasperating and insulting re- 
flections on Mademoiselle Loriot herself on the 
part of her young friend, who had applied the 
keenest sarcasm to the depreciation of her per- 
son, intellect, bygones, future, objects, and obsta- 
cles in the power of imagination to conceive. 

" Seize her ! She is a robber ! . and I am 
dying !" exclaimed Camille, sinking into a 
chair, after the position of affairs had been thus 
irresistibly obtruded on his cognizance. 

" Dying !" exclaimed Olympe, in her turn 
staring at her former lover with an expression 
of horror and dismay. " Dying ! and I was to 
secure these papers while you dined with her ! 
Dying ! and you have but just returned from 
a dinner with her ! Dying ! and she purchased 
arsenic yesterday ! Camille, Camille, we are 
both her victims ! You are poisoned, and 
I . I . I But I survive for vengeance !" 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 257 

Camille had fainted as the excited French- 
woman uttered her denunciation. 

" Wal, now, I'll stake my chance of the next 
presidency, it's all as the old griffin puts it !" 
said Flamingo Brown. " I'll he sworn Miss 
Graham has put him something cooling in his 
soup ; she's the very gal !" 

" Send for a surgeon ! But at this hour of 
night, so remote from assistance as we are, the 
man will die before we can obtain medical 
advice !" exclaimed Lord Glengariff. 

But precisely at this instant . as if it had 
been so ordained . two persons additional 
entered upon the scene. And these two per- 
sons were Mr. Behringbright and Dr. Buck- 
trout. 

" Cruel young man ! whither have you 
gone ? What do you purpose here ?" ex- 
claimed Mr. Behringbriglit, staring for specific 
information to Lord Glengariff, from the 
singular grouping of the scene before him. 

" Pardon ! pardon ! Since all is known, I 
will confess all ! " exclaimed Mademoiselle 
Loriot, in a real frenzy of terror on this arrival, 
which she imagined to be part of a designed 

VOL. Ill, 17 



258 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

complete discovery. '* I am, at all events, in 
no way culpable in this act of atrocious assas- 
sination ! She induced me indeed to become 
the accomplice of her guilt so far as to promise 
to endeavour to secure these papers . which 
confess all the infamy of her relations with 
CamilleLe Tellier . in order that she might be 
enabled to proceed without detection in en- 
trapping you into a deplorable marriage once 
more, Mr. Behringbright ! . whilst she enter- 
tained her unfortunate paramour at dinner. 
But little did I know . little did I dream . 
that murder was included in this programme, 
and that poison was for ever to remove from 
the earth a presence which accused her . a 
man whom she had once pretended to love so 
passionately, as these letters declare . in order 
that she might marry Plutus . unhappy richest 
of men ! . in your person." 

" What does this woman rave ? " exclaimed 
Mr. Behringbright, though he was scarcely 
able to articulate. " Poison ! assassination ! 
It was a mad duel we apprehended, . the 
dread of which, after you had stolen away 
from your bed, Grlengariff, terrified Dr. Buck- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 259 

trout into knocking me up, and making to me 
a statement of the extraordinary artifice you 
have practised. . To what purpose ? " 

" I have not harmed the man. Whatever 
has been done to him has been done by some- 
body else, Mr. Behringbright," replied Lord 
Grlengarifi*, sulkily enough. " But if you ask 
my object, I tell you it was simply to ascer- 
tain the truth of your relations with Emily 
Maughan. Amidst so many entanglements, I 
saw but one way . to bring you together face 
to face in my presence, and under my direct 
observation. I know that Emily Maughan . 
whatever her misfortunes may be . is incapable 
of falsehood. But I have not laid a finjrer on 
this Frenchman, and if anything ails him, it is 
the work " 

" Yes, yes . of Madeleine Graham ! . of 
Madeleine Graham alone ! I am poisoned ! 
I am dying ! Have mercy on my soul, dear 
friends, and get me a doctor ! " 

" Here is one ! " exclaimed Lord GlcngarlfT, 
horror-stricken at this denunciation. " Doctor, 
administer some antidote." 

" But for what? . for what ? This is raviuLC. 
17.2 



260 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

What is this talk about my niece and poison ? 
Nothing ails this young man. It is impos- 
sible," said Dr. Bucktrout, in the utmost con- 
fusion and perplexity. 

"Administer an antidote for arsenic, I re- 
peat, and save my beloved Camille ! " shrieked 
Olympe now. " Save, oh, save him ! I can 
prove the shop where she purchased the fatal 
drug ! Save him, or I denounce you all as 
accomplices in the assassination ! I can ex- 
plain the motives of the deed ! I can . I will ! 
They strew the ground here ! Mr. Behring- 
briglit, do you know this ring ? It was to be 
redeemed at the price of a thousand pounds, 
when I had secured these letters of Madeleine 
Graham's to Camille Le Tellier. Insensate ! 
she knew all along who you were . that you 
were the rich Behringbright. She knew so 
from the disastrous night of the Theatre St. 
Jacques ; and it was rather she who instigated 
me to that dereglement, in the hope to entrap 
you ; allured by the reputation of your vast 
wealth, and the insults you offered society in 
overwhelming its contemplation with a carica- 
ture of our sex in the person of the miserable 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 261 

Incognita. Yes ; whatever she may have pre- 
tended to you since, Madeleine Graham's heart 
has always been at the devotion of this young 
man, whom she has, nevertheless, infamously 
assassinated to secure your riches. Read these 
letters, if you do not believe me ; and if you 
Avould learn to despise and hate her ! And if 
you cannot reconcile to yourself why, in re- 
compense for the barbarous treatment and 
expelling to which you subjected me, by the 
agency of the police, at the Sparx Gj/necee, I 
have endeavoured to secure you a wife who 
seems so much to your mind . ^know that it 
was always my purpose to make you the 
most miserable of men by divulging what 
Madeleine Graham in reality is, when it 
should be irrevocably too late to repair your 
error ! 

Mr. Behringbright must have looked the 
horror and astonishment that shook his soul 
to its foundations, in no light a degree ; for 
even Flamingo Brown . a fellow as impervious 
to impressions as the armour-plates of a 
Monitor . who loved him not, and was at first 
tempted to feel diverted at the cx2:)ose . turned 



262 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

pale, and canglit him by the arm. " Take 
care, sir ; you seem ill ! " he exclaimed. 

" Do not attend to me ! Save, if you can, 
this yet less miserable victim ! Doctor, save 
this man ; and save your niece from the 
gallows ! " 

" You shall not ! you shall not ! " shrieked 
Olympe. " I go with this step to denounce the 
whole conspiracy to justice ! Expect its officers 
among you in a few minutes, . and owe at last 
to the unhappy and betrayed Olympe, Camille ! 
your rescue from a gang of murderers." 

So saying, Mademoiselle Olympe, eluding 
Flamingo's effi)rt to detain her . with the dex- 
terity to be expected from so experienced a 
member of the corps de ballet, . swept past him, 
and rushed downstairs into the open road at 
a velocity which forbade all hope of overtaking 
her, if even anybody's mind had been definitel}^ 
made up to that purpose. But Dr. Bucktrout, 
Mr. Behringbright, and Lord Glengariff were 
now surrounding the unhappy patient. 

" Somebody has poisoned the 3^oung man ; 
that is certain, at all events. Most likely this 
d . d Frenchwoman herself; particularly if 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 263 

tliere is any truth in tlie statement that she is 
his wife ! " said Dr. Bucktrout, after a short 
pause of consideration, finding no better could 
be said or done. " Landlord, bring some hot 
water and mustard ! " 



264 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 



CHAPTEE XIII. 

A FEMALE " SAGE SERENE AMIDST A CRUMBLING 
WORLD 1" 

If the life of Camille Le Tellier liad been as 
dear to liim as liis own, Mr. Beliringbriglit 
could not have watched and laboured at its 
preservation with more indefatigable zeal than 
he devoted to the purpose during the ensuing 
hours in which it trembled in the balance it 
had been so unfairly cast into between time and 
eternity. The maltreated Bomeo himself . 
though inclined at first to doubt and suspicion 
of the motives of all around him . became at 
last sensible of the kindness of his Tybalt, and 
in the midst of the horrible agonies he suffered, 
heaped thanks and blessings on his friendly 
rival's head. 

Distrusting the skill . perhaps even the fair- 
play . of Dr. Bucktrout between death and his 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 265 

niece's victim, Mr. Behringbriglit called in tlie 
assistance of the two medical men lie had for- 
merly conveyed to Grlengariff Castle, and who 
had the best reputation for their science in 
Killarney. These gentlemen were very will- 
ing to oblige so liberal a fee-master, and 
exerted themselves to the utmost in a stand-up 
conflict with the skeleton that brandishes the 
ice-tipped dart ; not yielding an inch without 
the extremest pressure, and as often as they 
lost ground regaining it by the most desperate 
antidotal exertions. They really thought 
Camille must be the miUionnaire's dearest 
friend. 

*^ Save me this man's life, and I shall con- 
sider no reward too great !" he frequently ex- 
claimed, when he imagined there was any 
slackening of zeal or effort. "A hundred 
pounds apiece, gentlemen, if you save me this 
one man's life !" 

But there were other spectators who arrived 
to be witnesses that henceforth Monsieur Le 
Tellier . obscure foreigner as he was, obscure 
hole and corner as was the "Eed Herring" 
Tavern . had fair-play there for his life. Two 



266 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

of the constabulary, force of tlie county of 
Kerry were stationed liis by bedside en per- 
manence, and quite a little crowd of magistrates 
bustled in and out continually, watching the 
result of this strange affair, who had been all 
placed on the alert by the frantic denunciations 
and demands for aid of Olympe Loriot. This 
ex-beloved of Camille Le Tellier in fact fancied, 
if she did not make matters pretty clear at 
once, she ran a very considerable danger of 
figuring as the murderess herself. The apothe- 
cary also who had sold the poison, seized with 
great alarm on ascertaining the state of the law 
from a benevolent neighbour, an attorney, who 
communicated it gratis rather than miss the op- 
portunity of completing the poor man's panic . 
the apothecary arrived, with a thousand apolo- 
gies, and all the possible antidotes he could dis- 
cover in a hasty flinging over of the leaves of 
the Dublin " Fharmacojjoeia,'' to the sufferer's 
bedside. 

And who shall say that even cheating does 
not work for good in this best of all possible 
worlds? . since, had not the arsenic sold by 
that well-to-do, sleek-ribbed, regular-place-of- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 267 

worship-frequenting apothecary, and father of 
a family, have been wonderfully adulterated by 
a large admixture of pulverized lime, the libe- 
ral dose administered to Camille Le Tellier 
must inevitably have produced the effect 
intended. 

As it was, he had a terrible struggle for 
existence ; and he was several tim.es so very 
like making an end of it, that Sir Patrick 
Kilrush, Deputy-Lieutenant and Justice of 
the Peace for the Killarney District, was for 
making out a warrant at once for the appre- 
hension of the party accused in the incessant 
lamentations and outcries of Mademoiselle 
Loriot. But Mr. Behringbright prayed so 
earnestly for some forbearance yet, and Lord 
Glengariff seconded him so zealously, and the 
do(jtors still spoke so hopefully, unwilling to 
relinquish their promised splendid fee, that the 
resolution was suspended. But meanwhile a 
constable, of that milder and less externally 
terrific class known as a detective, kept con- 
stant watch and ward over Prospect Palace . at 
least, on one of its fairest inmates, who, how- 
ever, according to all accounts, appeared to 



268 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

be entirely unconscious of tlie extraordinary 
circumstances that collected daily crowds 
round the " Ked Herring" Tavern : took 
her walks, drives, and boatings quite as usual, 
attended by a whimpering and affrighted 
old woman, who, under her powerful control, 
was obliged to go through the same farce, 
and . at a respectful but duly vigilant dis- 
tance . by the aforesaid functionary in plain 
clothes. 

But it is useless to linger over these details. 
Let me admit fairly at once that Camille Le 
Tellier . unlike the hero of a somewhat similar 
romance of realit}^, with whom some foolish 
people will persist in confounding personages 
and events that have very little other relation 
than a chance resemblance . in spite of his 
vision of the wraith . in some degree, perhaps, 
in consequence of it . recovered from his for- 
midable attack. That is to say, he di:l not 
absolutely die of it ; but he was reduced to a 
pitiable extremity of weakness, could not swal- 
low anything but spoonmeat for weeks, and 
had the beauty on which he prided himself so 
much very seriously diminished, by the loss of 



MADELEINE GRxVUAM. 269 

his hair, his nails, and a considerable portion 
of the skin of his face and chest. 

All the time of this momentous cure Made- 
moiselle Olympe continued as passionately 
devoted to her ci-devant lover as could possibly 
be evinced by howls over his unhappy destiny, 
and imprecations on his murderess. Eeally, I 
almost think she was sorry he did not die, so 
anxious and determined was the fond, forgiving 
woman to avenge him ! 

Camille, nevertheless, exhibited so little 
gratitude for so much unexampled magnanimity 
of affection and generosity, that the first use 
he made of sufficient strength of voice and 
clearness of mind being restored to him to 
express his washes, he implored Mr. Beh ring- 
bright to remove " that figure of Alecto . that 
nightmare of 2^funeste recollection !" from his 
sight. 

Mr. Behringbriglit complied Avith tlie request 
in his own way. When the doctors had come 
to an agreement that Monsieur Lc Tellier 
would not die, he requested to speak with 
Mademoiselle Loriot for a few moments alone. 

He communicated to her then, in a few 



270 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

brief, stern words, liow the fact stood, in 
respect of Monsieur Le Tellier's sense of her 
devotion, and went on to say, ''You have a 
ring of mine, woman, of great value in your 
possession, and '' 

'' Yes," interrupted Mademoiselle, with a 
vehemence due no doubt to the noblest con- 
viction of her duty ; " and I retain it as an 
irrefragable piece of evidence, wdiich, in the 
interests of justice and of society, I propose 
to keep in security until their severity is 
satisfied!" 

"Make certain, then, that the lash of the 
law shall writhe the sharpest around your own 
person, woman /" continued Mr. Behringbright, 
wdio really seemed to think this designation 
quite a term of condemnation. " But I rather 
advise you to accept it as a gift which I confer 
upon you . on certain conditions !" 

" Ah ! you speak reasonably now, Mr. 
Behringbright ! But do not fear that I require 
a bribe to bear every imaginable evidence 
against that worst of women. The ring, I am 
assured, is worth a thousand pounds." 

"It is worth more than that sum . much 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. . 271 

more ! And it is yours, I repeat, on certain 
conditions." 

" Mine ! A thousand pounds and more ! 
Name them." 

" That you never open your lips again on 
this horrible occurrence, and that you quit the 
British dominions within twenty-four hours, 
and never return to them !" 

" To the latter, willingly, yes ; but for the 
former ! What ! suffer that atroce to escape 
the due punishment of her crimes ! Non, 
jamais r 

" Then I send the police at once to obtain 
the restoration of my jewels ! But I do not 
intend .5/^<? shall escape the ' due punishment of 
her offences,' nor lie either ! My ring is worth 
two thousand pounds, I repeat !" 

" If you promise me their punishment, Mr. 
Behringbright ? . botli their punishment ?" 

" I do, most solemnly." 

" I can trust in your word, Mr. Behring- 
bright. But to tell you the truth, I have 
already forwarded this piece of evidence, for 
security, to Paris. Give me ten pounds also, 
then, to convey me tliither, and I abandon for 



272 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

ever tliis land without taste, this man incapable 
of a generous sentiment . of any possible return 
upon himself !" 

Mademoiselle Loriot accordingly dej)arted 
from Killarney, attended v/ith no particular 
blessings on the part of those whom she had 
most laboured to serve and benefit. Such is 
the fate of goodness, even in its most direct 
manifestations, in our hard, unbelieving age. 
I am not, however, of opinion that Made- 
moiselle really proceeded to Paris in the speedy 
manner she had promised. Pier relations with 
Monsieur Carlier were not at that time all that 
could be wished ; and a jewel of so much value, 
in her hands, at Paris might have excited 
attention elsewhere than in the jewellers' 
shops. Besides, to say truth, the susceptibility 
of a nature " open as day " to tender impres- 
sions had been awakened in Mademoiselle's 
bosom by the engaging personal characteristics, 
the freedom of manner and conversation, the 
favourable reports he gave everywhere of his 
own position in society and tangible allotment 
of dollars, of Mr. Flamingo Brown, the 
American. And as this gentleman was sud- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 273 

denly summoned home at about the same 
period . or, at least, to that part of his home 
called 'New York, where, the civil war having 
broken out, some excellent contracts offered 
themselves to speculative industry . Made- 
moiselle Loriot took the whim to ship herself 
at Liverpool in his society. To be sure, motives 
more sensible and substantial had probably 
their weight with Olympe ; for Mr. Brown 
assured her, with irresistible eloquence, backed 
by any amount of figures, that he would and 
could turn the worth of her fine ring, in a few 
months, into a splendid fortune for her. I 
know for certain that they sold it together in 
London, for exportation to St. Petersburg. 

This was the first and a very efficient com- 
mencement of a series of countermoves against 
justice in the case, that finally resulted in a 
complete checkmating of that purblind player. 

On recovering his faculties sufficiently to be 
catechized on the subject, Monsieur Le Tellier 
refused to make any charge against any one in 
aught relating to his illness. Mr. Behring- 
bright's two doctors held their peace ; and Dr. 
Bucktrout declared, night and day, that his 

VOL. HI. 18 



274 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

patient was suffering under a violent fit of 
indigestion, although he strongly suspected, in 
addition, that some stewed mushrooms he had 
partaken of at dinner with a friend on the day 
of his seizure had, in reality, been a mess of 
the poisonous fungus, vulgarly called toadstool, 
gathered by mistake. The magistrates, and 
the police and people in general (including all 
London), who scented some delightfully hor- 
rible revelation at hand, were thrown at fault. 
But there was no remedy for it, since the 
injured party himself refused to declare any 
aggrievement. Finally, police and magistrates 
and all retired discomfited from the field, even 
withdrawing their secret ofiicial in a hufi" from 
his post of constant surveillance on the 
suspected person. 

Certainly this was a most Christianlike pro- 
cedure on the part of Monsieur Le Tellier, 
especially considering the damage he had 
sustained in personal appearance. But he had 
his mundane motives, too ; or else, could the 
influence Mr. Behringbright established over 
his mind, and exerted in this merciful sense, be 
due to the weakness consequent on his 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 275 

dangerous illness, or tlie better incentive of 
gratitude for so much totally undeserved 
kindness ? 

A mixture of motives . (mostly are the 
threads of light and darkness mingled with us, 
poor mortals, in our guiding influences) . pro- 
bably swayed with Camille Le Tellier in thus 
submitting himself to the decrees of Mr. 
Behringbright ; for it is certain that gentle- 
man stood forward on the occasion as the 
guardian genius of Madeleine Graham, in 
saving her from the consequences of her rash 
interference with the regular movements of 
destiny in the disposal of the lives of incon- 
venient men. 

Why did he so? He could not, surely, 
affect to disbelieve in Madeleine's guilt ; the 
evidence was so very clear. In private, his 
doctors assured him their j)atient had been 
poisoned ; he was a witness himself of his great 
agonies, and that he presented all the symp- 
toms of the kind of poison indicated in the 
denunciations of Olympe ; the admission of the 
apothecary ; the signature of the names in the 
latter's honest books! The certainty that 

18.2 



276 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

Madeleine had alone remained in possession of 
the deadly drug . the dinner to which the un- 
fortunate Camille had been invited, at so much 
risk of displeasure in other quarters . the in- 
cidents of the coffee . of the peculiar basin of 
powdered sugar . all which the Frenchman 
recalled to his recollection as soon as his first 
acute sensations were in some measure quieted 
by the skill of his medical allies . here was an 
abundant corpus delicti. The motives of the 
crime Mr. Behringbright . when he came to 
consider things, and piece circumstances to- 
gether . could be at no loss to assign. 

Olympe, on being questioned to explain her 
rhapsodical accusations, had made no further 
secret of any portion of her acquaintance and 
familiarity with Madeleine Grraham. She felt 
justified to herself, by her wrongs in the affair, 
even to exaggerate the general naughtiness of 
their conjoint transactions. She put upon 
Madeleine the whole shabbiness and disgrace 
of that original meretricious design on the 
wealth}^ Behringbright at the St. James's 
Theatre. The friendship of the wicked is by 
no means that of Jonathan and David ; it is a 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 277 

chain of mouldy hemp tliat does not abide 
any rough strain. Flamingo Brown was 
another case in point, who finding that all his 
overtures for a renewed friendly understand- 
ing in business matters with Mr. Behring- 
bright went for nothing, or worse than 
nothing, threw off all restraint on the score 
of his tacit alliance with Miss Graham, 
and favoured the millionnaire with a full, true, 
and particular account of his reasons to sup- 
pose that Camille Le Tellier had all along been 
her preferred lover, and the merchant's wealth 
alone the object of her seeming reciprocation of 
his tenderness. 

Thinking over matters under the lights now 
presented to him, doubtless they adjusted them- 
selves in very forcible and unpleasant " conca- 
tenations accordingly" to Mr. Behringbright. 
He remembered the fascinating glance of 
sudden selection on board the Belfast steamer ; 
and it now occurred to him that there teas an 
irrepressible look of recognition in that first 
shock. Camille's otherwise unaccountable 
fixing of a quarrel upon him, however promoted 
by the malignant diversion Flamingo Brown 



278 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

had taken in fomenting it to a challenge, he 
had by no means forgotten. The Frenchman's 
stealthy entry into Sir Orange Graham's house 
next recalled itself forcibly to his mind ; and 
he remembered that the original misdirection 
of his ideas on the subject was from the seem- 
ingly artless and careless explanation of 
Madeleine Graham. 

Yet more startled and amazed at his own 
simplicity, the recollection struck him with 
what easy art Madeleine had announced her 
intention of an excursion to the Lakes of Kil- 
larney simultaneously with his own. Nothing 
could seem more natural, more spontaneous ; 
nothing now seemed less so. All subsequent 
experience and revelation satisfied him of 
Madeleine's perfect governing power and su- 
premacy in her family movements and arrange- 
ments. Dr. Bucktrout . Mrs. Bucktrout. if 
they were not exactly her dmes damnes, how 
blindly and earnestly the poor souls acted as 
stokers in the dark engine which Miss Gra- 
ham drove along the sinuous line which was 
to lead her to high fortune ! 

But if anything had been wanting to Mr. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 279 

Beliringbriglit's complete satisfaction, besides 
all these links in the chain, there were the 
letters of Madeleine to Camille, liberally 
scattered at his feet by the vengeful Olympe . 
letters which I do not say that Mr. Behring- 
bright could or ought to have refrained from 
examining, under the recommendation that 
had accompanied their broadcasting, but 
which Camille himself, on the first return 
of consciousness, entreated him to peruse . 
letters that affrighted Mr. Behringbright : 
seeing how their passionate recklessness and 
overflow revealed indeed the most absorbing 
devotion and preference for the young man 
whom she had yet devoted to death, in the 
hope and resolution to secure the millionnaire's 
wealth. 

He was terrified, I say. He trembled at 
the terrific gulf he had escaped, . into which 
he saw another so frightfully precipi- 
tated. How likely was it . how infinitely 
still more likely . that the same or a worse fate 
might have been in store for him ! Since she 
treated thus a man whom she had loved, wluit 
might she not have done in the end to a man 



280 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

whom she had never loved, and whose gold 
was her sole object in feigning to love ? 

Mr. Behringbright knew by himself how 
joyless a possession vast wealth was. What 
would it have been to this woman of all- 
craving, unsatisfied desires, when she had at- 
tained the worthless price of her crimes and 
betrayals ? 

For what related to Emily Maughan, Mr. 
Behringbright dared not think . dared not 
conjecture the cruel enormity of Madeleine's 
offences against her, lest he should lose all 
patience and pity for the reckless slanderess. 
Only he was convinced in general that whatever 
she had stated to Emily's disparagement was 
false, without a word of defence on the part of 
Emily herself But Camille Le Tellier's as- 
surances and full confessions, in moments Avhen 
he imagined himself on the verge of death, 
left not a shadow of doubt upon the point. 

Camille declared, and most truly, that his 
whole acquaintance with Miss Maughan con- 
sisted in her very proper and honourable, 
though firm and unflinching, reprobation of 
so much of his clandestine relations with 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 281 

Madeleine as she was aware of, and lier 
anxious, friendly efforts to break off the affair. 
He avowed that all he had subsequently done 
in regard to her^-his proposals for Emily . 
were the insiduous promptings of his treacher- 
ous real object, and that Emily herself was 
perfectly unacquainted with the whole nefarious, 
underhand transaction. 

Mr. Behringbright listened to all this, and 
gave up the comprehension of his age. 

Still, as far as in him lay, he determined, 
after many a sleepless night . many a long, 
painful reverie . to disentangle the terrible 
knot, without any rude rending of the involved 
skein. And this the rather, perchance, that 
his own heartstrings were woven into some 
of the subtlest tangled threads ; for though 
I should be glad to do so, I cannot say that 
even the discovery of the vileness and perfidy 
of Madeleine Graham quite destroyed the 
effect of her elaborate spells. It very often 
happens indeed, alas ! that the nobler the heart 
betrayed . the less the reason it has to cherish 
the unworthy object,. the more powerful and 
clinging in the roots do the twined fibres adhere 



282 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

to their worthless convolution. A noble nature 
cannot, will not, dares not bring itself to the 
true comprehension of the case. It is a kind 
of denial of God, and of th-e divinity of God 
in the human soul, to believe in such un- 
fathomable faithlessness. 

Still, neither could so clear and logical an 
intellect as Mr. Behringbright had long 
enjoyed and cultivated, refuse assent to the 
overwhelming array of proof and conviction. 

Bitter, bitter, bitter hours, and even days, 
did Mr. Behringbright s|)end, holding a silent 
assize over all these mazed and crowding 
evidences. 

It was unnecessary to summon the accused 
into court. It was one of those direct and 
unmistakable judgments, wherein, according 
to ancient traditions of legality, it was not 
needful to try a criminal, . when he was taken 
with a red hand. 

Sometimes George Cocker Behringbright 
imagined he must ha\ie been bewitclied. He, 
who had had such a wife, to believe in a 
woman again ! 

But he came at last to an anchor . to a 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 288 

decision. Perchance it still cost him a strange 
pang ; but all the more for that did he deter- 
mine on what should and must be done. 

As soon as Camille Le Tellier was pro- 
nounced out of danger of his life, and that 
he had retrieved strength of mind and body 
to endure the discussion of his most momentous 
interests as a living man, Mr. Beh-ringb right 
held a long conversation with him. For a 
considerable time they differed on an important 
point in the matters submitted for debate. At 
last Camille yielded to the kindly authority 
of his preserver, for so Mr. Behringbright 
might well be considered . since it is certain 
only the most immediate and unremitting care 
and medical skill had saved Miss Graham's 
victim from so large a dose even of adulterated 
arsenic. 

Mr. Behringbright had then another still 
more earnest and eager discussion with Lord 
Glengariff, who also spent a good deal of his 
time at the "Eed Herring," before he won 
him finally over to the opinion and resolution 
he had himself formed. Then Lord Glengariff 
proceeded, in company with Dr. Bucktrout, 



284 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

to Prospect Palace, where Miss Grraham still 
remained, innocently unconscious of all that 
was going on everywhere else to her scandal 
and prejudice. 

It is true that it was only that very morning 
the silent embargo on her movements, in the 
shape of the detective officer, had been removed, 
. a haunting observation whereof Miss 
Graham had been as well aware as any of those 
hapless offenders of the good old times, whose 
misdeeds attended upon them in visible bleed- 
ing apparitions to themselves, albeit unseen 
to all others. But she preserved more calm 
and sang-froid than Macbeth at his feast, and 
never took the least notice of her Banquo. 
I think she was not at all obliged or thankful 
to Eooney, honest fellow ! when he rejoicingly 
informed her that he was quite sure that ugly 
fellow, Tim Eile}^ the detective, had been 
ordered to take his snout out of their potatoes. 

" And so, as I tould the master, there would 
be no occasion to order 3^ou off the premises, 
Miss ; for it would be sure to end, one way or 
another, in a day or two. And what signifies 
all the fine people turning up their noses, and 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 285 

vowing they wouldn't stay if you did ? Never 
having been in trouble thimsilves, the poor, 
mane snakes, what can they know about it, to 
feel for another ? And you not intruding at 
all upon their company, Miss, no more than if 
you were in a hiding in Connemara, but keep- 
ing your own and your poor aunt's, in your 
own rooms, and taking no notice of anything, 
no more than if there was nothing happening 
in life at all, than in the daisies of a church- 
yard to the poor sowls below ! And to hear 
Mistress Sparrowgrass talking as if your sleep- 
ing under the same roof could contaminate 
her big, raw-boned daughters, with no more 
sinse of iligance in them than the tongs in a 
grate ! And to hear the silly young spalpeen 
belonging to them thanking his stars night 
and day you hadn't honoured him with 3^our 
preference, . as if you would have thought the 
likes of a skinned rat's-tail like him worth the 
expinse of a dose ! It made me quite sick and 
sorry, it did. Miss, to liear them talk ; and I'm 
glad the young man that's caused all the 
trouble has come round again; for, from all 
accounts that I hear, he was noways worth the 



286 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

disgrace of being hanged for ; and even trans- 
portation is a tiling I should not like incur- 
ring myself for such a poor vagabone I" 

This artless sympathy was no doubt very 
consolatory. Eooney did unto others as he 
would have expected to be done unto if he had 
been a Eibandman, and obliged by lot to put 
some estate-agent or tithe-proctor comfortably 
under the sod from a hedgeside. But Made- 
leine Graham had been reared in a city, in city 
notions, and had finished her education at a 
select academy in London, where, after all, 
something was to be learned, if it was only 
respect for public opinion. She therefore felt 
the unpleasantness of her position, and the 
well-meaning Kerryman's consolations pro- 
duced rather a contrary effect. 

She was very uncomfortable indeed wlien the 
first rumours of discovery reached her ears. 
And yet, that dreadful night after the dinner- 
party she had imagined, in the culmination of 
her terror and remorse, that she would thank- 
fully have resigned every possible advantage the 
deed was to secure to be made certain that she 
had failed in it. But when the tidings flew 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 287 

all over Killarney, at daybreak, of the strang-e 
and sinister event tliat had come to pass at 
the " Eed Herring ;" when it was known for 
certain that Olyinpe Loriot had applied for 
assistance to the magistrates and police ; when 
her aghast annt demanded explanations of the 
frightful enigma of her, for the first time, in 
the language of authority and menace ; . then 
Madeleine Graham haughtily refused to give 
any ; professed herself most cruelly insulted by 
her aunt and her suspicions, and, shutting 
herself in her own room, meditated for a long 
time on the propriety, and even necessity, of 
extricating herself from her position in the 
only way that seemed to remain . 

Suicide ! . Inflicting on herself the doom she 
had dared to meditate for another ! 

But it does not always happen that those 
who have the courage to inflict, have the 
courage to endure. It is strange how people 
who have spent, one may say, their whole 
lives making others miserable, resent the least 
retaliation. "Who thrashes a tipsy wife with a 
more merciless arm than an habitual drunkard ? 
The philosophy of it all lies in a nutshell : the 



288 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

criminal, whom self-love and selfishness have 
made so, dislikes retributory action and con- 
sequences in exact proportion to the intensity 
of those prompting and swaying influences 
radiating from self. 

In short, Madeleine did not at all relish the 
idea of self-destruction. And this apart from 
all consideration in regard to a future existence, 
and the announced chastisement of offences 
therein. Perhaps she had no very distinct 
impression that any such were to be ap- 
prehended. Of course she had been brought 
up in all the proper general notions on the 
subject. But really these have not that 
practical influence on people's ideas, the way 
they are mostly taught, that would be desirable. 
At all events, Madeleine's notions of the in- 
convenience of depriving the world of her 
presence were strictly limited to this side of 
things ; but even there alone they seemed in- 
superable. She shrank from the idea of the 
physical pain she must suffer, I fancy, more 
than anything else ; and what gate of death 
could she expect to open unjarringly to allow 
of her passage ? Even from shame and detec- 



MAt)ELEINE GRAHAM. 289 

tion so enormous and so absolute, she slirank 
to extricate herself at so dread a turnpike 
toU! 

What she resolved upon was not without 
its fortitude and resolution, nevertheless, and 
more in keeping with her proper tone of firm- 
mindedness and tenacity of purpose. She 
determined, come what would . in common 
parlance . to die game! to own nothing, 
deprecate nothing ; to go on exactly as if 
nothing had happened, and baffle her enemies' 
assaults . if any such were intended . by cool- 
ness and composure, rather than by any 
energetic action of repulse and refutation. 
Among her stores of French maxims for the 
regulation of life and manners, Madeleine very 
well remembered " Qui s excuse^ s accuse'* 

It was certainly the best policy. Very 
likely the policy she would have adopted if she 
had had the misfortune to succeed in her grand 
coup, and then to have been found out. She 
would have answered the most searching inter- 
rogative probings with perfect candour and 
simplicity ; she would have told all her lies in 
the form of truths, and have stood at a bar of 

VOL. III. 19 



290 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

criminal justice in an attitude so elegant, and 
with a smile so full of the serenity of conscious 
innocence and harmlessness, that people would 
have believed her face against herself, in every 
other shape of conviction. And this is as it 
should be ; such natures are so rare that the 
general principles of humanity ought not to 
suffer infringement from their existence, and 
the power to appear innocent ought always to 
be taken in some sort as the actuality; at 
least, such wise personages as judges and juries 
appear to think so ; and what is the present 
writer that he or she should presume to differ ? 
Indeed, Miss Graham preserved so much of 
this noble sang-froid and determination that 
she really frightened both her uncle and Lord 
Glengariff in the interview they now sought 
and obtained with her on the subject Mr. 
Behringbright had entrusted to their manage- 
ment. She inquired of Dr. Bucktrout, quite 
feelingly, whether the poor stupid Frenchman 
who had taken it into his head to commit 
suicide, because she had finally declined the 
offer of his nonsensical affections, was out of 
danger, as she should be quite uncomfortable 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 291 

if he died on so absurd an occasion ?' And of 
Lord Glengariff she asked whether it was 
thought, on the other hand, that the French- 
man's senseless, raving, jealous wife, or what- 
ever she was, had attempted to poison the 
poor fellow ? 

Dr. Bucktrout, albeit unused to the melting 
mood, covered his face with his hat, and sobbed 
aloud behind that entrenchment ; but Lord 
Glengariff significantly informed Miss Graham 
that the identity of the supposed murderess 
was proved by the numerous letters in the 
possession of Monsieur Camille Le Tellier ; 
and thereupon concluded with a request on 
the part of Mr. Behringbright, which, after a 
few moments of profound reflection, Madeleine 
did not think proper to refuse. She accordingly 
put on her bonnet and shawl, and quietly ac- 
companied the two gentlemen, in a close 
carriage, to the '* Eed Herring" Tavern. 

"What was the nature of this grand de- 
termining argument addressed to the young 
lady deserves, however, the honourable dis- 
tinction of a separate chapter of explanation. 

19.2 



292 MADELEINE GRAHAM, 



CHAPTEE XIY. 



CLIMAX. 



About the second day of Mr. Behnngbriglit's 
benevolent watchfulness by the sick-bed of 
Camille Le Tellier, when favourable symptoms 
had begun to manifest themselves in the 
patient, and all the worst was known as to the 
occasion of his disorder, Lord Glengariff pre- 
sented himself, as was also usual with him, 
three or four times a day, in the apartment of 
the sufferer. 

The young earl's kindness and sympathy in 
his great misfortune had been Mr. Behring- 
bright's almost only consolation and support. 
Not ignorant of heart-woes, he had learned to 
comfort them ; and, indeed, the young man 
had suggested a very natural reason for rejoic- 
ing rather than grieving over the calamity that 
had occurred, since it had happened in time to 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 293 

prevent tlie betrayed lover of Madeleine 
Graliam from falling completely into the 
deepest pitfall ever laid for his unlucky steps 
in love affairs. That was surely an advantage 
Mr. Behringbright could not refuse to acknow- 
ledge, and it had not a little comforted and 
strengthened him in his misfortune; but the 
perusal of Madeleine's letters to her Camille, 
so different in style from those she addressed 
to her husband-elect, . it was that most ma- 
terially contributed to his disenchantment. 

Mr. Behringbright's own mind was now, 
in fact, at sufficient freedom to notice the 
deepened shade of melancholy that overspread 
the young earl's visage ; and yet he seemed to 
bring good news. He had received a telegram 
from his mother announcing that slie had 
arrived in time to find Emily still in Belfast, 
but on the point of quitting that city and the 
house of Sir Orange Grraham together, in con- 
sequence of a strangely peremptory dismissal 
on the part of the mistress of it, who had 
ordered her off at an hour's notice, without 
any imaginable reason that she could discover. 
And this, although only a couple of days 



294 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

remained until she was to leave for England, bj 
her own wish and stipulation, after Olympe 
Loriot's revelation of the scandals concerning 
her, started by Madeleine Graham in relation 
to Camille Le Tellier. 

Slight scandals these, however, compared 
with those it then became Lady Glengariff's 
painful duty to reveal to Emil}- Maughan ! 
Scandals the countess now declared which 
every visible circumstance and probability, 
every imaginable sign and proof of innocence 
on the part of the slandered girl, overwhelmed 
with refutation. Nay, that Lady Graham 
herself declared, even when she was given to 
understand who had made the injurious state- 
ment, were so utterly false and unfounded that 
she thought her daughter must have been 
beside herself to make the charge. But to 
complete the refutation, on hearing with what 
she was traduced, far from showing reluctance 
to meet her accuser, Emily Maughan had in- 
sisted at once on proceeding to Killarney, and, 
face to face with her there, refutins: the in- 
famous and wholly unfounded charges that had 
been brought against her. The countess inti- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 295 

mated she had willingly acceded to the pro- 
posal, and the telegram concluded by stating 
that their arrival might be expected that same 
evening, at the utmost speed of express train 
and post. 

Somewhat to Mr. Behringbright's surprise, 
Lord Griengariff announced this intelligence 
without any sign of satisfaction the former 
thought he would have experienced in thus 
obtaining what had been his anxious desire. 
His manner was, indeed, sombre and pre- 
occupied, and what he said after he had made 
the statement alarmed Mr. Behringbright with 
the notion that, in spite of all he had heard 
and witnessed to disprove Madeleine Graham's 
varied calumnies, he seemed still haunted with 
the notion that his conduct towards her ad- 
mitted of a doubtful interpretation. 

" I have to ask of you a great flxvour, dear 
Mr. Behringbright," the young earl said; *' it 
is that you will allow me to persevere in my 
original plan . deception, if you like to call it 
so, . and that Emily Maughan may suppose 
she is replying to the questions I would still 
address to her, as to a man upon his possible 



296 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

deathbed, wlio can make no use that might be 
displeasing to her of the fullest admission of 
the facts of the case. My mother and Emily 
are of course entirely ignorant of the turn 
events have taken . of the disclosures that 
have been made. They will arrive at Glen- 
gariff, and remain so for a short time. I shall 
return to my couch, and expect your co-opera- 
tion in enabling me to ascertain the real 
state of Emily's feelings towards me ; all we 
have heard may be calumny and delusion, for 
my mother adds to her telegram, than even her 
letter inviting Emily's return has been tam- 
pered with most insidiously.'' 

Mr. Behringbright coloured again, as he had 
on two former remarkable occasions when this 
delicate subject had been in debate; and feel- 
ing that he did so, rendered him still more 
unwilling to seem unwilling. He endeavoured 
to express hesitation on another score than 
the real one. 

"Why should you prolong your mother's 
anxiety, and expose Emily to an afflicting 
scene ? It is impossible, after all Vv^e have 
known and ascertained, that a breath of sus- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 297 

picioii can linger on Emily's name or conduct," 
he said, deprecatingly. 

" My mother is aware that my worst aihuent 
was the fever of suspicion and doubt that 
preyed upon me regarding Miss Maughan ; or 
deem jon she would have left me to die 
alone ?" replied Lord GlengarifF, sadly enough, 
and with a formality and unusualness in 
styling Emily Miss Maughan that struck his 
interlocutor. " But as regards Emily's con- 
duct, /never really believed in a single word 
that was uttered against her. I tried, but I 
could not. If she had simply stated to me, 
with that holy, woman-look of hers, that it 
was all false, and would have married me, I 
would have married her with a perfect assur- 
ance that I had given my honour into the 
keeping of the truest and purest of women. 
The point I would ascertain related not to 
these matters ; but as the whole chance of my 
righting myself in existence lies in being satis- 
fied of the utter hopelessness, or possibilities 
for hope, of my affection towards Emily, give 
me this only cliance in the way I desire." 

Thus pressed, Mr. Behringbright, though he 



298 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

felt all the embarrassment of the position, both 
for Emily and himself, finally acquiesced in 
the plan. Perhaps he had some vague under- 
yearning of curiosity to ascertain whether the 
notion, which he had still never clearly suf- 
fered himself to analyse in his own most secret 
thoughts, was well founded. Perhaps it gave 
him a kind of secret bitter enjoyment to con- 
sider that he was about to witness one more 
proof of the lieartlessness and instability of 
female nature. Emily would take to her 
noble suitor, no doubt, when once she could 
really be brought to believe he was in earnest 
in his proffers, and that all other obstacles were 
removed, saving such a foolish barrier as a 
preference for another. Yet, again, could it 
be possible that she preferred another ? . such 
another as she whom a detestable, assassin- 
souled coquette had, for his money . and for 

his money only But there Mr. Behring- 

bright halted in his reflections, and blushed at 
his own conceit to fancy that in reality Emih* 
Maughan could ever have given him reason 
for the suspicion. She never had, he would 
have it to himself now. She had got into a 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 299 

habit of blushing and looking foolish when she 
spoke to him before he procured her the Glen- 
garifF situation in Ireland, no doubt. But 
what of that ? He dared say, now he recol- 
lected, he looked silly enough himself on those 
occasions. And if he had been the object of 
a simple, childish liking in those days, by so 
much the more would Emily's certain accept- 
ance of Lord Glengariff's renewed offers go to 
prove the inherent fickleness and subjection to 
worldly and mercenary impulses on the modern 
female heart. 

So reasoned Mr. Behringbright. Whether 
he reasoned well or not speedily came on to the 
proof But I think people who have attained 
conviction on any point are seldom so shaky 
and irresolute when it is put to the strain as 
was this gentleman when he was summoned 
by Lord Glengariff to fulfil his part in testing 
the theory, beside his couch of supposed 
grievous and dangerous hurt, in Glengariff 
Castle. Word was brought that the countess 
and Miss Maughan were expected by tlie 
next train, which was nigh due ; and to avoid 
the shadow of any private or aside interference 



300 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

with the device, Mr. Behringbright felt bound 
to leave his other strangely constituted patient, 
and cross to the castle. 

He found Lord GrIengariiF stretched in bed, 
in a darkened room, with all the appearance 
of an invalid, though he was dressed under 
his nightgown, and with a face so pallid and 
agitated that it had needed little aid of art to 
give the notion of a person dangerously excited, 
and exhausted too. But that it had received 
with the help of powder and some lines of blue 
chalk, and his lordship had even added the 
somewhat unnecessary and ghastly adorn- 
ment of a few splashes of red ochre over the 
breast front, where he had, in reality, been 
rather fiercely gored by the dying stag. The 
illusion was completed by an array of surgical 
straps and bandages and medicine bottles, and 
the presence of Dr. Bucktrout, who had also 
been required to attend, and, in his niece's 
interests possibly, did as he was requested in 
everything, very humbly and submissively. 
Nothing more was required to complete the mise 
en scene when Mr. Behringbright was seated 
by the bedside as commiserating friend, looking 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 301 

and feeling also extremely alarmed and uncom- 
fortable. Money is a valuable commodity ; 
but I believe the millionnaire would not have 
begrudged several thousand pounds to have 
been released from the uncomfortable necessity 
of this climax to the discomforts of his visit to 
Glengariff Castle. 

Luckily, the Killarney train was particularly 
punctual that day, and within a few minutes 
of the hour they were expected, the countess 
and her charge drove up to the gates of the 
castle. Neither did they make any un- 
necessary delay when once they had arrived. 
Lord Glengariff had hardly time to start up in 
his bed, and sink back again on the pillows . 
Mr. Behringbright to shuffle half a dozen 
times on his chair . ere the bed-chamber door 
opened, and Mr. Molloy . himself in costinuc 
de voyage . entered to announce, " My lady 
and Miss Maughan, my lord and your honour !" 
and the two fellow-travellers appeared, in the 
dress they had worn on the journey, arm in 
arm. Or rather, Lady Glengariff . who was 
greatly agitated . supported herself on her 
young companion ; who, on the contrary, came 



302 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

with, a firm, resolved, perfectly self-possessed 
step. Emily looked pale, nevertheless . so 
pale, as to be absolutely colourless in her quiet 
brown straw bonnet and black stuff burnous. 
You would have said, Charlotte Corday going 
to execution . she looked so young, so fair, so 
marbled into a fixity of resolution by a deep- 
seated, internal conviction of the rightfulness 
of what she had done, or was to do . so equal 
to what extremes of suffering and calamity 
might yet be in the power of fate to 
inflict. 

Lord Glengariff read his doom in Emily's 
first glance, . a glance full of compassion, 
earnest sympathy, affectionate inquiry : but 
not all the sum of these is love ! Mr. Behring- 
brio-ht could not but look at her with a kind 
of wonder in the fascination that drew his eyes 
towards her. Emily scarcely seemed to him 
the same person ; so transfigured was the once 
soft, yielding, timorously shrinking and sensi- 
tive girl, by the high thoughts and determina- 
tion that had changed her in a few weeks into 
an heroically determined though half heart- 
broken woman ! 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 303 

I believe she saw liim before she saw Lord 
GlengarifF, though her glance seemed first to 
fall upon the latter. A kind of shock and 
quiver passed over her face ; then all was calm 
and resolute as before. 

It should be remembered that at this time 
Emily was entirely ignorant of the discovery 
that had re-established her own purity and 
innocence in the fullest light, and had revealed 
the perfidy and vileness in all other respects of 
Madeleine Graham. It was destined to form 
the subject of many future hinted revelations 
of the public press, but had not yet passed 
local bounds. She had reason to consider 
herself as presented at a tribunal for judgment, 
already convinced of her guilt. Her first words 
expressed this belief, when Lord Glengariff, 
having faintly received his mother's fond caress, 
requested that he might be raised in his bed, 
and that Miss Maughan would shake hands 
with him, to show she bore him no ill-will for 
havine: broue^ht her from such a distance to so 
uncomfortable a scene. *' Though," he added, 
purposely, " I am greatly better to-day . have 
been better ever since my mother complied 



304 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

with mj earnest wishes in requesting your 
presence, Miss Maughan; and Dr. Bucktrout 
is now quite assured I shall recover to all my 
former health and strength.'* 

" Quite certain," echoed Dr. Bucktrout. 

" I am exceedingly glad to hear of it, Lord 
GrlengarifF," said Emily, very gently, but with 
no tremble of emotion in her tones . some 
greater feeling had swallowed up all the rest ; 
" but until you are satisfied that the atrocious 
calumnies against me are such, pardon me if I 
refuse on my own part to subject you to what 
you, or any other honourable man, ought to 
deem a degradation." 

Mr. Behringbright thereupon . to his own 
surprise . took up the proper utterance. They 
had exchanged no other greeting as yet but that 
silent shock of feeling. '* There is no occasion, 
Miss Maughan," he said, " to enter into 
miserable explanations of the kind. The 
person associated with you in the detestable 
misrepresentation . Camille Le Tellier himself 
- . ^has completely exonerated you of the re- 
motest touch of suspicion, and confessed that 
he had no authority whatever for his pre- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 305 

sumptuous proposals and bargainings respect- 
ing you." 

Emily looked a little surprised, but also 
deeply gratified. " I am spared, then," she 
murmured, with that intensest sigh of emotion, 
a iDldte flush, overspreading her fair counte- 
nance, " the necessity of a most painful and 
degrading denial of the whole infamous impu- 
tation. To no one who could have required 
more of me would I ever have opened my lips 
in refutation." 

" And this is the girl," thought Mr. Beh- 
ringbright, " whom I have found so tearful 
and timorous . in other things." 

"Mr. Behringbright has spoken the exact 
facts of the case. You shall hear the particu- 
lars at more length afterwards. . You, mother, 
also," resumed Lord GlengariiF, anxiously 
cutting the former short in a kind of apology 
he began to utter. " Let me proceed now, while 
I have strength to inquire, with some ques- 
tions I must ask and have answered, still 
dearest Emily Maughan ! or die of weariness 
and suspense. And first of all . answer me 
truly, on your living soul, to this ! . (heed not 

VOL. III. 20 



306 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

tlie presence of him of whom I make the de- 
mand, or of any man, for I constitute myself 
your champion to the death, and you hear that 
I shall soon be in a condition to ' brook mine 
armour' in the cause, as they say in the ro- 
mances) . has Mr. Behringbright himself be- 
haved to you always as a true and honourable 
man, or has he, at some period, made promises 
to you which he has not fulfilled ?" 

" Lord GlengarifF " began the personage 

so spoken of, vehemently; but his lordship 
interrupted him, . 

" Peace ! peace ! Have you not promised 
me I should know the truth from her own 
lipg p . and from them alone will I accept an 
oracle!" And he turned to Emily with an 
implicitness in the noble youthful candour of 
his looks that more than the words declared 
he expected one. 

And such he received in reply, and probably 
in more senses than upon the question he 
propounded. 

" Mr. Behringbright never made me any 
promises whatever, of auy sort," said Emily, in a 
low but perfectly distinct and . so to speak . 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 307 

adamant-convictioned tone, " because his good- 
ness always anticipated any possible demand 
I could have made upon it ; and if lie lias ever 
not behaved to me and mine as an ' honour- 
able man/ it was when he became an angel of 
beneficence and generosity." 

Lord Grlengariff gave a deep sigh, and closed 
his eyes for a moment ; while his mother, who 
had moved round to his side, gently pressed 
his forehead with her hand . her favourite 
soothing action to herself. And though it was 
an action that often made him impatient, it 
seemed to comfort him now. 

" Thanks, dear mother," he said. "No man 
has lost everything who has so kind and loving 
a mother left ! But I must proceed ! Tell me 
then, dear Emily, do you really love another . 
prefer another . to all I have offered you . all 
I still could offer? Myself . my title . my 
possessions . my never-failing love ?" 

Emily only faltered for an instant, and then 
replied, while a burning blush suffused the 
countenance so pale but a moment before, 
"I do . I must ever, Lord Glengariif! I 
grieve to be forced to say it, but from the first 
20.2 



308 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

instant that my heart opened at all to impres- 
sions of the kind, I have preferred another, 
not only to yon, but to all mankind . to my 
own self infinitely ! . and so must continue to 
the latest hour of my existence. But be com- 
forted," she continued, with a grateful emotion, 
and anxiety to allay the pain she inflicted, 
hurrying her on her expressions much beyond 
her intentions : " it is also the truth, as I in- 
formed you, that the person who is the un- 
alterable object of the master-feeling of my 
existence does not return my affection, . is 
even ignorant of it, . is betrothed to another ! 
And though that other is the wickedest of 
women, I have no means of proving her so, 
and he adores her ; and henceforth I am silent 
for ever on the subject." 

There was a brief silence after this overflow ; 
and when the Earl of Glengariff spoke again, 
it was in accents as weak and tremulous as a 
child's, but instinct with the heroic generosity 
and fortitude of the manliest resolve. 

" You hear, Mr. Behringbright ! Happiest 
of men, were you but aware of your happiness ! 
The vile obstacle that existed between you is 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 309 

removed by her own atrocity of ill-doing to 
obtain all tliat which Emily Maughan despises 
and casts to the wind for your sake . ^yes, for 
yowr sake ! It is in vain to stand any longer 
on a weak punctilio. Emily herself will not 
disavow that it is you whom she prefers to all 
mankind. to youth . to rank . ^to a yet more 
distinguished social position than your own ! 
Heaven bestows on your good and charitable 
and affectionate nature this priceless consola- 
tion and recompense ! Take it . and at last 
ungrudgingly . from my hand !'* 

And Lord Glengariff, with a gesture that 
Emily could not anticipate or attempt to with- 
draw from in time, took her hand, pressed it 
for a moment to his lips, and placed it in that 
of Mr. Behringbright. And the latter received 
it, not coldly and lifelessly resigned, but 
clutching it to his heart in a passion of tender- 
ness and gratitude, to which words could do no 
justice, but which he endeavoured to express 
as follows : . 

" You have restored my belief in the angelic 
purity and superiority to every mercenary 
feeling in your sex, dearest Emily. And it is 



310 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

to you alone I can look henceforth for con- 
solation after the baseness and treachery of 
Madeleine Grraham, who had as nigh made 
me her victim as she had made you. I have 
discarded her for ever from my heart and 
presence, and there is no one left in the world 
whom I would make my wife but you, if 
your hand can follow where you confess your 
heart has been devoted so long !'* 

" You speak to me dreams . enigmas. I am 
surely asleep, and imagine all this ! But were 
it possible to be . could all be true . do not 
imagine, Mr. Behringbright, that I would 
accept . on a momentary impulse of anger or 
disappointment . what your calm reflections 

Mistake me not so far ! I do not appear 

here as the accuser of Madeleine Graham, but 
as my own defender from a gross imputation. 
But her charge against me may have been 
merely the result of a personal pique against 
me . not of her own criminality. I am aware of 
nothing but a pardonable imprudence in her 
relations with Monsieur Camille Le Tellier, 
and " 

"Pardonable imprudence," exclaimed Lord 
Glengariff, '' when she dared to accuse you of 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 311 

the dishonour she had herself incurred with 
him . when she directed her paramour to pour 
his vile effusions to her in your name, to 
secure herself, at any sacrifice of you, from the 
danger of detection !" 

" When she must have opened my letter 
inviting your return, and inserted a forged 
postscript forbidding it. By what .devil's art 
I know not ! but certain I am I never penned 
it," exclaimed Lady Grlengariff. 

" My niece writes several hands," said Dr. 
Bucktrout, unable to resist the natural impulse 
of a man who had all his life run with the 
hounds, to have a share in at the death now 
" and you remember, Mr. Behringbright, the 
letter that American presented to you, when 
he affected so curiously to stand up for my 
poor girl's innocence !" 

'' 1 do . it is here," said Mr. Behringbright, 
producing one from his pocket, and flinging it 
on the bed. Lady Glengariff snatched it up, 
and exclaimed, with almost a wild laugh, 
*' Good heavens ! my very handwriting ! . so 
identical that I could scarcely refuse to believe 
I had written it but for the contents." 

" And all these ' pardonable imprudences,' 



312 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

dear, generous child, have been crowned by an 
attempt to murder the man she really infinitely 
preferred to me all along," concluded Mr. 
Behringbright. 

" Powers divine ! what can be sufficient 
punishment for such atrocity ?" exclaimed the 
countess. 

" I have determined on the punishment. It 
will be the greatest mortal justice can inflict," 
said Mr. Behringbright. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 313 



CHAPTEE XV. 

ANTICLIMAX AND CONCLUSION. 

It was as the agents of this decreed retribution 
that Lord Glengariff and Dr- Bucktrout, at a 
subsequent interview, invited Miss Graham's ac- 
companiment to the " Eed Herring " Tavern . 
a solicitation which, being backed by such 
cogent arguments as the hopelessness and 
peril of any species of resistance amply placed 
at the ambassadors' disposal, that young lady 
did not think proper to refuse compliance 
with. 

She was still dressed as becomingly and 
coquettishly as ever ; her gloves were drawn on 
as carefully that not a wrinkle should be seen 
in the leather ; the riband bows of her bonnet 
were as faultlessly opened out. She looked a 
little' paler and thinner certainly for a fort- 
night's sleeplessness and constant parading in 



314 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

public places, where everybody seemed un- 
accountably to shun her ; paler in spite of . 
or, perhaps, the more in consequence of the 
contrast . the liberal rouging with which 
she had deemed it advisable to attempt dis- 
guising the natural operation of the despondent 
passions on the human organization. But the 
Trench . whose apt pupil Madeleine was in 
other matters . rouge even their corpses ; they 
like so much to see everything comme il faut. 
On the whole, I pronounce she looked very 
well . hardy, blooming, undaunted. The colour 
of her gloves was light blue, not . as I have seen 
it stated, where they ought to have known 
better . rose d' amour pink. 

Camille was reclining, with no mistake 
whatever about Ms paleness, in an armchair, 
arrayed in a handsome yellow Chinese morning 
gown, and looking almost as shrivelled, white, 
and bald as an almond in course of peeling for 
dessert, just out of the hot water. His eyes 
were sunk half into his skull, and surrounded 
by a purple aureola, like those of a ghost, ac- 
cording to the most authentic reports^ . not 
absurd, scientific, colourless realizations. There 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 315 

really was no occasion for Madeleine's civility, 
who, the moment slie entered the apartment, 
went np to him, and kindly inquired how he 
was . extending her neat Parisian glove on the 
right hand at the same moment. He looked 
so very ill ! and so he seemed to think ; for he 
said . allowing her to take his hand, probably 
on a prearranged programme of the enter- 
tainments . " Eegard me ! . Alas ! I may say 
now indeed with the great Malbrook, after so 
much glory and vanity of success, ' This was a 
7nan I 

" Oh, you will be sure and get quite well 
again soon, dear Camille ! Your hair will 
grow again ; there are plenty of things they 
advertise ! . But you really should take more 
care of your health ; you know how sub- 
ject you are to these dreadful bilious attacks. 
I think it must have been that coffee tliat up- 
set you at last, at our little party, for it made 
me ill too ; else I should have come and seen 
you long before now," she said, rather 
hurriedly. 

" You are very good, Madeleine. I tliink it 
wasihQ coffee/' said Camille, very drily ; adding. 



316 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

significantly, " I shall give up coffee decidedly 
after we are married T 

" It is, then, to be at last . after the cruel 
divisions and struggles we have endured . this 
marriage of ours?" said Madeleine, in sweet 
and tender accents. 

" On this condition alone Mr. Behringbright 
confers upon me ten thousand pounds, to be- 
come a partner in my house at Lyons," said 
Camille, with a deep sigh. 

" I shall make your fortune then, after all, 
dearest Camille," said Madeleine, playfully; 
"and besides, Mr. Behringbright has gene- 
rously settled upon me an annuity of three 
hundred a year, as long as we live, pleasantly 
and amicably of course, together, and in 
France. Is it not an immense generosity ?" 

This was her first allusion to the presence of 
the gentleman in question, who was, however, 
there on the arrival, with another . not quite a 
stranger, either, to Madeleine Graham . in a 
black suit and white choker. It was not any 
of the resident clergy of the Lakes, but a 
reverend gentleman who happened to be on an 
excursion there, having heard that Mrs. Spar- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 317 

rowgrass, the motlier of the Sparrowgrasses . 
who rented one of his pews, and had a capital 
jointure . was also tourifying in the South of 
Ireland. It was, in short, the Beverend Jabez 
Bulteel, whom Mr. Behringbright, in search 
of a facile binder of wedlock's bonds, had im- 
pressed on present service. 

Camille murmured, in reply to his intended 
bride's remark : " It is impossible to do justice 
to the unexampled nobleness of that illustrious 
millionnaire. Six thousand francs' yearly en- 
dowment from him ! You will need little or 
nothing from me 1" 

" Except your constant society and surveil- 
lance, it is understood. Monsieur Le Tellier," 
said Mr. Behringbright. 

" Very true . most true ! I comprehend my 
mission," replied the poor young man, shrug- 
ging his shoulders, and elevating what 
remained of his eyebrows. "She will not 
poison me easily again, and I shall preserve her 
from the danger of being tempted to inflict so 
much suffering on others !" 

This was an ill-timed observation, and might 
have proved fatal to the whole arrangement, 



318 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

had not Madeleine Graham been most 
thoroughly aware of the overwhelming urgency 
of her position. ]^othing short of being 
immediately denounced and delivered over to 
the hands of justice was assured to her, in case 
she refused an exact compliance with what had 
been determined upon with regard to her 
future destinies. She made, however, a clever 
and graceful attempt, a la Fran(}aise, to parry 
the force of her betrothed' s last remark, and 
incidentally to wound the oppressive urger-on 
of the whole proceeding. 

" I confess, then, to have made this attempt 
on your life you so properly denounce, Camille, 
in a moment of madness . driven to despair by 
the relentless necessity of marrying another 
whom I did not love. But I intended to die 
with you. You remember well that I partook 
of the coffee with you ?" 

" I remember you did so ; but also you have 
not lost your hair, Mees Graham ! That is a 
slight discrepancy . no Kalydor will ever 
restore mine !" 

" Then I am sure you ought to be obliged 
to me for life for consenting to marry such a 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 319 

ridiculous, bald -looking creature !'* said Made- 
leine, playfully but passionately. 

Mr. Beliringbright hastened to interrupt this 
interlude. " Let us proceed at once to our busi- 
ness," he said ; " our patient has not strength 
enough at present for a fatiguing altercation. 
Here is the licence for the marriage and the ring. 
Monsieur Le Tellier. . You will be pleased to 
proceed with the ceremony now, reverend sir." 

" I am ready," replied the Eeverend Jabez 
Bulteel, pleasantly. " ' Eeady, aye ready !' is 
as much my motto as that of the distinguished 
family of the Napiers. ' Who gives away this 
woman ?' I beg your pardon, Miss Graham, 
for the expression . it is in the rubric ; young 
ladij, I should have said. I remember you at 
the Misses Sparx' finishing school ; you were 
an ornament to it." 

" / give away this woman," responded Mr. 
Behringbright, quite heartily ; and the cere- 
mony, which was most truly " that same," pro- 
ceeded at once. 

It took hardly ten minutes to transform Miss 
Madeleine Graham into Madame Camille Le 
Tellier. The happy pair were not overwhelmed 



320 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

with congratulations by tlie company at the 
conclusion. There was no dejeuner given 
a lafourchette, or al cuchiUe, either ; but almost 
immediately at the conclusion of the ceremony 
a travelling carriage drew up at the door of the 
"Eed Herring" Tavern, loaded with Miss 
Graham's (that was) trunks and bandboxes 
from Prospect Palace ; to which being speedily 
added Monsieur Le Tellier's repaired portman- 
teau and shirt-front box, with all his letters 
properly restored, the married pair started for 
Paris. Dr. Bucktrout was commissioned and 
handsomely feed to see them safely so far, con- 
sidering the weak state of the bridegroom's 
health ; and on their arrival there to witness 
the receipt of ten thousand pounds sterling, 
English, on the latter's part. 

Mr. Behringbright himself handed in the 
bride, and she did not part at all bad friends 
with him : rather, she said something very 
kind, while Camille lingered in the rear ; either 
too weak for rapid motion, or feeling a certain 
faintness and dizziness come over him on the 
conviction of his completed happiness. 

" How exceedingly good you are, Mr. Beh- 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 321 

ringbright !" Madeleine said, drawing off lier 
glove for the first time that morning, and ex- 
tending her small white, delicate hand to him. 
" But if you knew all, you would perceive that 
you have rea^son to forgive me ! It was my 
really passionate love for you drove me on such 
a naughty, naughty thing ! But what could 
I do under the circumstances ? Place yourself 
in my position !" 

" It is sufficient that I have placed you in 
it," said Mr. Behringbright, declining the 
proffered hand with a deep bow, and looking 
impatiently back lor the lingering spouse. 

" Well, I form every wish for ^our happi- 
ness in return," said Madeleine, calmly draw- 
ing on her glove again. " You are going to 
marry Emily Maughan, I am told ; and I w^ish 
you joy, most sincerely, of the arrangement. 
She is rather insipid . but she will exactly suit 
you! 

Mr. Behringbright banged the carriage door 
to, and retired just asCamille came staggering 
dizzily out of the little inn, somewhat revived 
by a dose of sal-volatile, and supported by the 
sturdy little frame of Dr. Bucktrout. 

VOL. III. 21 



322 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

There was a considerable crowd to witness 
the departure, who gave a tremendous "hooroo!" 
when the bridegroom appeared. There were 
also some faint sibilations audible ; but, on the 
whole, people seemed to respect the young 
Frenchman's courage. He bowed courteously, 
and with tears in his eyes, to their signs of 
approbation . entered the carriage . took his 
seat by his fair bride . fainted, and was driven 
away. 

And so all ends happily as a fairy-tale in this 
story . or rather commentary . of ours ; for it 
is no harm now to let the secret out, and 
confess that " Madeleine Graham" is a good 
deal more the latter than the former. For 
what story, after all, have we told? Nothing 
but what everybody knew beforehand, with 
the exception of the admirable variety we have 
introduced in the conclusion of the tale, which 
surely satisfies the most exalted requirements 
of the species of justice styled poetical. 
Camille Le Tellier married to his Madeleine, 
and resident with her in Paris, under pain to 
both of forfeiting a very considerable portion 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 323 

of their income after they had wasted a fair 
proportion of the ten thousand pounds of 
Monsieur's endowment, and he had embarked 
the rest in Isthmus of Suez shares ! What 
more can earthly or critical Justice . which is 
more than earthly . and who, with the morsel 
actually in her watering mouth, forebore to 
crunch her teeth together . moved by the 
youth, beauty, courage, and pretty- coloured 
gloves and smelling-bottle of the real victim . 
demand? 

A daring mortal once pursued the conse- 
quences that might have followed a reversal of 
the untoward fates of Eomeo and Juliet . 
figured them happily married and settled in 
domestic bliss, wdth full consent of parents 
and all other authorities . and then w^hat came 
of it ? It did not end, indeed, in a case for 
the Divorce Court, for ennui unutterable has 
not yet been accepted as a sufficient reason, 
even in tliat indulgent charmer of the Queen's 
justice, for a separation of person and goods ; 
but the results were such, if I remcml)er 
rightly, as made them both sorry the Slink s- 
perian plan had not been carried out in all its 
21.2 



324 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

details, and the affair ended, as originally de- 
vised, in the Tomb of the Capulets. What, 
then, must have been the married life of the 
hero and heroine whom the Reverend Jabez 
Bulteel united in the bonds of holy matri- 
mony ? 



For the rest, if the reader's own great 
sagacity and experience in similar cases does 
not suggest to him the proper conclusions of 
the tale as respects either of the persons 
Hguring in it, he had better, perhaps, listen 
to the following brief dialogue at the Dolce- 
Far-Niente Club, some five or six months after 
the blissful union at the " Red Herring" in 
Killarney : . 

" So George Cocker Behringbright is married 
again, after all !" exclaimed Mr. Vivian Faunt- 
leroy, almost letting his newspaper drop with 
astonishment. 

" Married again !" exclaimed Lord Eonald 
Macdonald. " Who's he married ? Some 
duchess, I suppose !" 

" Does anybody know," resumed Mr. Faunt- 
leroy, drawling out the name that followed 
with a most contemptuous accent, " Miss 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 325 

Emily Maughan, of No. 17, Motherwell Ter- 
race, Dalston?" 

"What! not that deuced fine girl that 
played us such an unhandsome trick about 
the picnic to GlengarifF, you know, at the 
Lakes ?" ejaculated the Marquis of Ramshackle- 
gal, from a position in the window, whence he 
was leering out at the milliners* girls as they 
passed in the bustling thoroughfare below. 

" Lawk-a-mercy, no, my lord ! Didn't I 
tell you, my lord, and . and . everj^body . how 
she was found out poisoning a Trench fellow 
she was obliged to get rid of to marry Beh- 
ringbright, and how then he wouldn't have 
her ; and how she was tried for her life . 
no, she wasn't, but ought to have been . and 
how everybody said at the Lakes she ought to 
be hanged . and she wasn't? And it would 
have been a deuced stain, too ; such a pretty 
girl . and dressed so nicely !" 

It was young Mr. Sparrowgrass who made 
tliis observation, being in the course of his 
introduction to fashionable, political, and club 
life, under the auspices of his friend Mr- 
Fauntleroy, established as a member of the 
Dolce-Far -Niente, 



326 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

" So jou did, Sparry ; but you tell 
such a lot of silly stories, I hardly ever 
listen to anything you say," growled the 
marquis. 

"You listened to that, though . you did, 
marquis . and said you were deuced glad she 
was so well served out for the way she shab- 
bied you at the picnic !" said young Sparrow-- 
grass, rather testily; but Mr. Fauntleroy 
frowned at him, and he held his peace. 

" Oh, I remember you told me, Sparrow- 
grass; and what pretty-looking dresses she 
wore on the water. It w^ould have been a 
shame, indeed, to have hancjed her !" said the 
Honourable Francis Dundrear3^ 

" But this Emily Maughan must be a no- 
body," said Sir Solomon Comynplace. '' She 
lives at Dalston, you say, Vivian ?" 

" She did live at Dalston, Sir Solomon ; 
but, I suppose, now she will live with her 
husband at Hyde Park, and at one or other of 
his country palaces. I wonder he has never 
sent the cards ; it must be some accidental 
omission. Besides, cards are out of fashion. 
I think I must call, all the same, and offer my 
congratulations," said Mr. Fauntleroy. 



MADELEINE GRAHAM. 327 

"AVell, my mother always said Mr. Beli- 
ringbriglit would end like an old fool, just as 
the rest do, and take up with some senseless 
chit of a girl without a patircle of birth or 
society," grumbled Lord Eonald Macdonald, 
indignant as a brother of Lady Flora Helen 
ought to be at the circumstance. 

" But perhaps not a penny of fortune !" ^^I'o- 
tested the British member. " That's the stu- 
pidest part mostly of these affairs. As for 
what you call ' birth and society/ it's all fudge 
and exploded humbug stuff 1" 

" Why, her father was a bankrupt, and 
committed suicide !" said Mr. Fauntleroy, who 
had been profoundly reflecting for some mo- 
ments on the name, and had an almost univer- 
sal repertory of facts, as well as fiction, at 
command in his fertile brain. 

*' What a donkey !'' said Sir Solomon 
Corny n place. 

There was then a slight cessation of the 
intelligent dialogue. At last the marquis 
inquired, with a tremendous yawn, " Is there 
notliing else in the paper, Fauntleroy ? I) . n 
politics 1 . notliing of that rubbish . anything 
amusing ? " 



328 MADELEINE GRAHAM. 

"Well, nothing very particular, sir. The 
mad Lady Glengariff's dead . in one of her 
attacks, I suppose . so it was her own banshee 
she heard screaming; and Lord Grlengariff's 
gone to Central America, for a year or two's 
travel in that 'undiscovered country, from 
whose bourne' I wish him a safe and happy 
return, I am sure." 

" I know why he is going . it is at his 
mother's death," said young Sparrowgrass, 
who, under the auspices of Mr. Yivian Faunt- 
leroy, was rapidly getting over the early 
spooniness of his character. " He was in love, 
too, with that Miss Grraham . and so was I . 
and a whole lot of us ; but lies taken it to 
heart, I suppose, that she has married the 
Frenchman after all." 

This was accepted as good history, and 
everybody thought the earl very foolish 
indeed to concern himself so much about the 
loss of a woman, when there are so many more 
to be had everywhere ! 



THE END. 
