DIANA GAY. 



BOOK THE FIEST. 



CHAPTER I. 



AT SCHOOL. 



Peospect-House Academy . a seminary for 
young gentlemen of genteel birth . lay about 
four miles from the market-town of Cal- 
thorpe, and was known by a dignified 
entrance-gateway, always securely closed, 
and a general park-like air. It combined 
all manner of healthful advantages, and had 
formerly been the private residence of "Wil- 
liam Freeman, Esq., before that gentleman 
had broken down, and been compelled to 
retire to Boulogne. In this former residence 
the Eev. Doctor Wheeler entertained some 



2 DIANA GAY. 

seventy young boarders, of unexceptionable 
connections, at the sum of ninety guineas a 
year eacb, witli extras . wbicli impaired the 
value of the limit . the Doctor himself looking 
after the morals and the higher mathematics, 
and, it must be added, the birch department, 
in the case of serious offenders only and the 
more abandoned criminals ; while the pre- 
sence of Mrs. Wheeler (it was almost plain- 
tively put forward in the prospectus) was a 
guarantee for *'the comforts of a home," 
cookery, and for the linen, &c., being kept in 
good preservation. It must be said, however, 
that the young gentlemen were not at all 
inclined to accept this pleasant deception, 
and used to speak of this kindly guardian of 
their interests most disrespectfully as '' Old 
Mother Wheeler." 

Doctor Wheeler was accustomed to have 
periodical exhibitions of his youths, to which 
neighbours and the few parents and guar- 



AT SCHOOL. 3 

dians who lived within easy range, were invari- 
ably invited. At Christmas there was a play ; 
at Easter, Midsummer, and such seasons 
there were examinations, recitations, and 
premiums. The preparations for such dis- 
plays took up a vast deal of time and labour. 
Even the boys said they were all '' show-off" 
things, and merely " Wheeler's advertise- 
ments;" but still, when the parents and 
guardians came, and saw their charges per- 
forming such public marvels, they naturally, 
though illogically, assumed that such brilliant 
exercises were the spontaneous and habitual 
efforts of the daily life of the establishment, 
and went home singing the Doctor's praises. 
Plenty of fine meadows and some good old 
trees lay about the exiled Freeman's mansion, 
which was swept by healthful breezes, and 
had a view of a great spread of country. 
The mansion itself was good red brick, with 
a row of yellow stone vases on the top ; and 

B 2 



4 DIAKA GAT. 

the head of the house, by knocking away 
partitions, &c.,had made everything airy and 
wholesome. Fresh air and exercise were not 
charged for in the extras, and the Doctor 
well knew that a reputation for a healthy 
school was most profitable, and could be had 
very cheaply indeed. 

One day the boys were out at their cricket 
on a well-shaven lawn close to the house ; 
the air was filled with the pleasant and jocund 
cries of youth . an eager buzz and chatter 
as spontaneous as that of busy bees. There 
was the zest, the sense of enjoyment, the 
delight in the blessings of the moment, the 
fresh air, the sense of mere living, which 
perhaps will pass away later. As there came 
the smart, quick "whack," and the ball was 
seen to fly, there rose the frantic and uproar- 
ious invitation to " Run ! run ! " or " Stay ! 
stay 1" and the two white figures kept cross- 
ing each other frantically, while a third 



AT SCHOOL. 5 

seemed to bound and scud desperately after 
something, like a hare through the grass. 
The Doctor, in his academic gown (which he 
never laid aside, except when going out to 
ride, and which the boys said '' he slept in "), 
stood afar off at the edge of the garden, with 
his hands behind him, looking on with appro- 
bation. His Hps seemed to move, and say, 
" Now, there is no charge for all this . no 
extra. See what healthful advantages this 
Ease-tablishment combines 1" Mrs. Wheeler, 
with the whole linen of the whole house lying 
in perfect bales on her mind, is sometimes 
seen at the dormitory, when a roar of delight, 
aroused by some good stroke, draws her with 
uneasiness to the window ; for she is thinking 
how all this exertion would tell on her depart- 
ment. Mr. Whitty, the usher, waits about 
the ground, by courtesy acting as umpire, 
but ofi&cially present as a sort of policeman. 
Mr. Whitty had not time to read " Elia,'' or 



6 DIANA GAT. 

he miglit have cried out, with the unique 
essayist, " What a pity to think that these 
fine generous lads will in a few years be stu- 
pid members of Parliament ! '' But there 
was a special reason for the air of joyous 
elation that was abroad. A day or so more 
had to run out, and then came "going 
home." That most delightful of festivals, 
breaking-up day . enjoyed more than ever 
shall be place or title won, money earned, 
estate bequeathed, or election into Parlia- 
ment . welcomed with a rapture never to be 
known later . was drawing nigh. Every- 
body was in delight and good-humour . in all 
but maudlin affection . with his neighbour. 
The Doctor was kindly and almost womanly 
tender in his manner and address, speaking 
to his charges with plaintive affection, with a 
"Richard, now!" or an " Ah, Alfred ! ".a 
rare honour, they being usually challenged 
by their surname in a blunt, surly tone. The 



AT SCHOOL. 7 

Doctor came and mingled with his pupils, 
and almost seemed to be trying to impart an 
air of sentiment to their separation. ^' Well, 
you are going home, Richard, to en-jeeoy 
yourself. Well, we have tried to do all we 
could with you, . make you good and virtu- 
ous and learned. You are not sorry to go, I 
suppose, Richard . eh, now ?'* 

Richard, standing with a cricket-bat in his 
hand, answered off-hand, " Lord bless you. 
Doctor Wheeler, I am ready to jump out of 
my skin ! Only think . on Friday morning 
I shall be going round to the stable in the 
fresh morning to mount Sir Roger ! And 
then away . 'Yoicks!' . to the meet. How 
I long to be patting his fine coat ! Ah, very 
different that. Doctor, from turning in for 
morning prayers !'* 

The Doctor looked a little scared at this 
irreverent comparison ; but it was the time 
of saturnalia. 



8 DIANA GAY. 

** I hope you will say your prayers faith- 
fully, Richard," said the Doctor, " and let 
nothing on earth interfere with that most 
solemn and important duty. Tliink what 
would be your situation if you were brought 
home on a shutter or a gate ! How very 
small Sir Roger, and the meet, and all 
that-er sort of thing will appear at such 
a moment ! " 

It was Richard's turn to bowl or play, 
so he did not answer ; but he often boister- 
ously took off the Doctor's plaintive appeal 
. '' Think how I'd feel on a door ! I suppose 
I wouldn't feel at all ! " Indeed, it became 
a sort of standing joke among the hunting- 
men who were told the story, and who were 
vastly amused at Dick's imitation of the 
Doctor. 

Everything was enjoyment, and a flutter 
of delighted expectation. All the labour, 
the study, the hodman's work, was out of 



AT SCHOOL. 9 

the way ; tlie examinations, conducted by 
two Oxford gentlemen brought down spe- 
cially, were over. The Doctor did anything 
that brought him into relation with the 
public in the most correct style. '' We 
have no second-class way here," he would 
say to the parents and guardians. The 
coming of these university gentlemen, who 
stayed nearly a week, was an awful 
solemnity. They went through their work 
with a cold austerity that chilled the 
victims. Even their encouragement was 
as the reassuring manner of dentists. But 
on the exhibition- day one of them usually 
made a speech before the ladies and gentle- 
men assembled, conceived in a tone of 
surprising warmth and commendation, and 
seasoned with many compliments to the 
Doctor and the '' efficiency of his esta- 
blishment." Earely in the course of a long 
university experience had he heard better 



10 DIANA GAY. 

answering ; and his friend and brother 
examiner, Mr. Ferrier, who, as most of us 
know, was a little hard to satisfy in the 
direction of Greek . what scholar had not 
by heart " Ferrier on the Greek Theatre " ? . 
bade him say that the Greek answering 
and construing had really quite surprised 
him. And the speaker looked over with 
an amused air . and all the company also . 
at Mr. Ferrier, who was sitting, glasses 
on, and chin in the air, gazing sternly 
before him, as who should say, ''It's true. 
I admit it reluctantly. It has been wrung 
from me.'' 

Charming season . all joy, all recreation. 
To-morrow was what was known as 
'^packing-up day," when the seventy de- 
voted the whole morning to getting their 
property together, and putting it away in 
the great trunks which are in favour with 
schoolboys. A portmanteau will not hold 



AT SCHOOL. Jl 

jams, cakes, or bottles so conveniently. 
This was in itself a delightful pastime, and 
took some time. Mrs. Wheeler assisted, 
and indeed it was the great day of the year 
for that lady. A festival not, however, 
nntinged with sadness; for the linen, &c., 
was then fairly taken off her mind, and 
she liked the responsibility. During vaca- 
tion she wandered about purposeless, vacant 
. seeking something restlessly, she knew 
not what. It was her province, too, to 
restore goods of a contraband sort, seized 
at the frontier, and detained for the security 
of the house. For the young gentlemen 
had an almost stupid tendency to encumber 
themselves with articles . ^like fowling-pieces, 
hunting-whips, gunpowder, large meer- 
schaum-pipes, and such matters . which 
they knew could not be introduced surrep- 
titiously, and would be stopped by the 
authorities. It was perhaps with a view 



12 DIANA GAY. 

to the remote luxury of holding them in 
their possession and displaying them publicly 
even for that single day. Mrs. Wheeler 
was going about restoring the seized pro- 
perty . every article being ticketed and 
carefully labelled. She had a staff of the 
maids under her, and with their aid was 
minutely accurate about the socks, shirts, &c. 
She often told what she went through on 
that day. 

The game was going on in this pleasant 
meadow of Prospect House . which the 
Doctor with prudent forethought '' grazed " 
during vacation . a sort of parting ''match" 
between eastern and western counties, and 
played once a year with all solemnity and 
immense spirit and vigour on both sides. 
One of the Oxford examiners generally took 
a bat. Mr. Ferrier always walked by him- 
self, and sat by a river making pencil- notes 
to his new edition of the " Greek Theatre." A 



AT SCHOOL. 13 

gentleman from Bath, wlio came what was 
considered an enormous jom*ney to take 
home his son, also played, declaring "he 
was a western-counties man." The " par- 
son's son " from the village took another 
bat ; and the villagers were allowed to come 
up and stand gaping near the tent. 

" We must be keyind," said the Doctor, 
" to our neighbours and dependents. It is 
only a Httle thing, and costs nothing, eh, 
Richard ? " 

Eichard, with his eye on the bowling, 
answered, with his customary sudden and 
loud laugh . 

" To be sure, sir ; nothing like kindness 
where it comes so cheap." 

The Doctor smiled a little awkwardly. 
He stood rather in awe of this off-hand 
manner of his pupil. 

" A very high-spirited, bold, forward 
lad," he said to the gentleman from Bath, 



14 DIANA GAY. 

whose performances could be called '' play- 
ing " by merest courtesy, lie being knocked 
out generally at the first bowl, unless indeed 
his wicket had been saved by the ball 
striking his person. 

'' Do you know, I am rather anxious about 
his future career ? I am indeed. He is 
impetuous. He is a son of Mr. Lugard, 
whom, by the way, you will see on our 
ex-hi-beetion day. A most por-lished, ac- 
complished, elegant man as you'd meet. I 
hope he will turn out well, I do. . Well 
done. Master Robert ; very well indeed ! . 
a very promising lad that . careful, stay-dy," 
the Doctor chanted in this way . as though 
he were pilot of a ship, . " staydy, sir, 
and will do. We have the highest opinion 
of him. Lugard is, perhaps, our most 
brilliant lad . carries all before him. Our 
friend Eobert is all study and good sense ; 
but not much parts, you know. For years 



AT SCHOOL. 15 

Richard Lugard lias got everything we have 
to give, and with hterally no trouble to 
himself." 

It was now the beginning of the evening ; 
the sun was seen very low, through those 
dark trees where the rooks were cawing so 
noisily, and under which the late owner, 
W. Freeman, Esq., had often looked over- 
fondly at his residence. It would soon be 
time to go in, for the dew would be falling, 
and it would not do to be sending our boys 
back to parents and guardians with any- 
thing on the lungs. Prospect House was 
jealously careful about health; had the 
village apothecary conveniently at hand for 
his daily visit ; and, besides, Dr. M'Bean, in 
good practice at the great town ten miles 
off, came out regularly once a month. 

One of the lads had been "in" a long 
time, playing with a steady caution and 
wariness, never attempting a run unless 



16 DIANA GAY, 

there was an ample margin for security. 
His partner, enthusiastically rushing to make 
fresh runs, was often abruptly brought up in 
his course, as by a jerk, by seeing his com- 
panion standing coolly at his wicket, and 
had to get back in disorder. 

" Confound you, Bligh ! " this aggrieved 
player would call out, having barely saved 
himself. "What are you afraid of? We 
might have made another there. He's no 
dash or pluck, and only thinks of saving 
himself." But the other was fortified in the 
approbation of his own side, and laughed 
very good-humouredly at any pettishness. 

One voice on the other side was very con- 
spicuous in its impatience, and came from a 
tall, light- haired, high-cheeked, impetuous 
youth, of about sixteen, who was now be- 
hind Bligh, stopping the balls. He was loud ^^ 
in his directions. *' Put him out ! Now 
then, butter-fingers ! I knew you'd miss 



AT SCHOOL. 17 

that. Ton mj word. Syntax, you are 
playing a sneaking game ! Well done, my 
cautious Doctor ! " By wliicli it would seem 
tliat " Doctor Syntax " was tlie familiar 
sobriquet by wliicli Bligli was known to 
his friends. There was an almost gratuitous 
vindictiveness in the way he used to hurl the 
ball straight at the wicket, even when he 
was a little late, and not likely to do the 
player any mischief, as the ball would come 
low and stinging, and graze the player's 
leg. 

'* The Doctor" would remonstrate calmly: 

" Why do you do that, Lugard ? It don't 
help the game a bit." 

'* Never you mind," Lugard answers. 
'*You look after your stumps, or I'll have 
you out next time, for all your caution. 
Here, I'U bowl now. We must put a stop 
to this." 

" Going to bowl ? " said the Doctor, fixing 

I. 



18 DIANA GAT. 

his blue eyes on Mm earnestly. " 0, I am 
so glad, Dick; I like your bowling." 

*' Do you, Doctor, really now ? " said tbe 
other. "I suppose you think you can do 
what you like with them. Look out, I tell 
you." And Dick Lugard began to bowl a 
series of "low level," plunging "balls," 
which came tearing and " ricochetting " 
along, and were quietly "blocked" away 
by Bligh, without any exertion. In this 
effort it was possible to see the figures of 
both boys to advantage, that of Lugard 
being long, wiry, and almost Indian in its 
suppleness, and not in the least robust or 
full. His face was long also, very sunburnt 
(at other seasons pale), and his light hair 
thick and heavy, which he had a habit of 
impatiently tossing back from his forehead. 
He carried his head very high as he came 
up to any group, walking always fast and as 
if for a purpose, with his arms swinging. He 



AT SCHOOL. 19 

seemed to look downwards over them, with 
half-closed eyes, and an air of half-amused 
contempt, as who should inquire, " What 
folly is up now ? " He was ready of tongue ; 
said whatever came uppermost; did not 
measure his words when " put out." He 
had all the common attributes of a " fine 
fellow," and yet was not popular as the 
common fine fellows are. There was some- 
thing always hurtful or unpleasant in his 
jesting way of accosting his companions ; 
and when he joined a little coterie, some shy 
lad would find Lugard's eyes wandering up 
and down superciliously over his figure, with 
a smile of amused inquiry, preparatory to a 
question : " Well, my lady, where' s your veil 
on this warm day ; your complexion will ^be 
all spoiled, won't it ? " Then he would give 
a loud, hearty laugh. He would break into a 
discussion, after coming up suddenly, with a 
rough " Why, you big grown-up fool, what 

c 2 



20 DIANA GAY. 

nonsense you are talking ! wliat a figure 
you'll cut in the world ! '' And they com- 
monly had to put up with this language ; for 
Lugard, with all these powers of sarcasm, 
had strong arms and an intrepid spirit, and 
on small provocation would fly back, and, 
with flashing eyes and squared arms, offer at 
once to settle the matter then and there. 
Once, indeed, when the Doctor himself was 
but a few yards away, Lugard on some pro- 
vocation had fiercely broken out into open 
battle, and in defiance of that awful au- 
thority, who with horror in face vainly 
strove to part the combatants. 

" Mr. Whitty !. Lugard ! stop, sir ! " the 
aghast Doctor was crying. " Do you know 
what you are doing ? stop, sir ! stop, sir ! " 
to which cries the excited Lugard paid not 
the least attention, but, tossing the hair out 
of his eyes, pushed away the Doctor, utterly 
unconscious of his presence, and rushed at 



AT SCHOOL. 21 

his opponent again. Many councils were 
lield to consider '' wliat was to be done with 
Lugard ; " but his very audacity and indif- 
ference saved him. A stray blow from his 
enemy during that encounter had left a mark 
on his cheek, which the sudden interruption 
by the coming up of Mr. Whitty and others 
had prevented his revenging. And he never 
rested until he had arranged a private meet- 
ing under the trees behind the garden- wall, 
where, uninterrupted and at his leisure, his 
impetuous onslaught carried the day and 
wiped out his temporary disgrace. 

Lugard was now bowling away desper- 
ately, but without change of fortune. Be- 
tween his balls he was calling to Bligh in 
his usual taunting strain : '' You're a safe 
fellow ! You II never wet your feet. You'll 
get on, my boy . looking after every farthing, 
and picking up every pin. I'd be ashamed 
to make such a game as that ! " To which 



22 DIANA GAY. 

the other only answered by a good-humoured 
nod and smile, and a " Fire away 1 Do your 
worst, Lugard; I'm ready for you." Until 
at last came the sound of the gong, hanging 
from the branch of a tree, and sounded in 
person by Mr. Whitty ; the play had to stop, 
and Bligh was not " out." 

Lugard had flung down the ball in a rage, 
and walked in with the rest, loudly declaim- 
ing all the while. 

" He calls that playing," he said, pointing 
to the other. "We ought all to live to 
Methuselah's age to play like that. Have 
you no dash or pluck, man, that you are 
afraid to give a fellow a chance ? What was 
that old Wheeler said about a boy being the 
father of the man ? Nice cautious, canny son 
you'll have, my lad ! " And as usual Dick 
Lugard finished with a loud, vigorous, scoff*- 
ing laugh, in which he invited every one 
around to join. 



AT SCHOOL. 23 

Bligli laughed also, mucli more geiminely. 

" That's very good, though it's against 
me," he said. " If you were to say that 
when we get into the House of Commons . " 

" Lord, Lord ! you listen to the Doctor," 
said Lugard, stopping and leaning on his bat. 
*' When he gets into the House ! With that 
sort of batting you'll get there, never fear . 
ha, ha ! " 

Presently came supper in the large re- 
fectory, where all the seventy ate together, 
and performed such daily prodigies as boys 
only can do . in that direction transcending 
even ploughmen. There was a noisy ban- 
quet. Lugard loudly criticised the game in 
his accustomed tone. 

'' Ah, but Bligh is coming on," said one of 
them. ''You couldn't polish him off so 
readily." 

" Couldn't I, wiseacre ! " answered the 
other impetuously. "A precious deal you 



24 DIANA GAT. 

know. I knocked you out in good style. 
As for him, if a man chooses to take the 
trouble of a safe sneaking game, why, well 
and good. I wouldn't do it for a salary, I 
know. I'm for getting everything with a 
dash, or letting it alone. It don't pay, 
either. That medal which I suppose they'll 
be giving me on the exhibition-day, I 
wouldn't cross the room for it, if I had to 
slave and creep and drudge for it. I declare 
no, seriously now, though it looks like, affec- 
tation. It won't pay me ; it takes too much 
time." 

" But, my dear boy," said Bligh, *' that's 
very well for you ; but what's to become of 
the poor dull fellows who have nothing to go 
on but their drudgery, and haven't your 
talents ? " 

" My talents ! " said the other, in high 
good-humour. " Come ! no sawdering me. 
Doctor. I declare I am in such spirits to- 



AT SCHOOL. 25 

night I liave quite an affection for old 
Wheeler." 

'* Ah, you can be in spirits, Lugard," said 
another ; '* everything comes easy to you. 
You'll be walking up as usual to-morrow, 
and have a swell putting the great silver 
medal round your neck, while poor Bligh 
there, who has worked till he is blue in the 
face, will come up for a two-and- sixpenny 
prize for French and Catechism, or some- 
thing in that way." 

" Or good conduct," said Lugard, with a 
boisterous laugh ; " he beats me there. Not 
but that, if I set myself to shine in that line, 
I might do as well as another fellow. I 
suppose I should. . But keep up. Bob ; you'll 
get plenty, never fear, and deserve it. For 
I must say you do work hard, and I hope 
you'll succeed very well." 

And after this handsome speech every 
one looked with admiration at Lugard, and 



26 DIANA GAY. 

said afterwards how nobly lie could behave. 
Robert Bligli was touched, and said . 

" Thank you, Lugard. You have always 
been generous. It is brains after all that is 
worth anything ; any common fellow can 
work. But when a man hasn't the other, he 
has only his labour to fall back on." 

" Modest fellow ! " said Lugard, laughing. 
" Listen to him ! Well, Doctor, I do hope 
you will get plenty to-morrow ; and I am 
sure you will. I don't care twopence about 
myself; it's only for the sake of my governor, 
who is always at me, and wants me to cut a 
figure in everything, if it's only in crossing 
the street." 



( 27 ) 



CHAPTER 11. 



THE TWO BOYS. 



That last evening the boys were strolling 
about the playground, very happy, in parties 
of two and three. The sun had gone down, 
and there was a pleasant air of repose over 
the late W. Freeman, Esquire's, lawns, 
which that ejected proprietor had often 
enjoyed as its chief attraction. There was a 
sense, too, of quiet happiness in the minds of 
those who wandered about . a security in 
the sense of the grand coming enfranchise- 
ment of the morrow, the happiest day of the 
year. In that light the Doctor seemed 
almost angelic . the best of men . and there 



28 DIANA fxAY. 

was compunction for various organized an- 
noyances towards him. 

Here lie was now at the door, with letters 
in his hand ; and presently Mr. Whitty 
called, for Lugard. and Bligh. 

" I find/' said the Doctor, in a gush of 
complacent agitation, " that to-morrow's 
solemnity will quite go beyond what we 
expected. We shall have the whole of 
Calthorpe here to-morrow : Mr. Bowman 
and Lady Mary . they are thinking of 
placing one of their sons here . Dr. Windle 
the rector your father Mr. Lugard, and 
Mr. Gay of Gay Court." 

Both boys started. " Mr. Gay, sir ! Has 
he come back ? " 

'' Yes ; just returned from his tour. . 
Now, Mr. "Whitty, what I was thinking, . we 
must expand our original programme a little, 
to do honour to all this people. I was 
thinking of . er . a little debate, eh, between 



THE TWO BOYS. 29 

these two : sometliing dramatic and lively ? 
. Wliat do you say, young gentlemen ? " 

" I'm game ! " said Lugard. '' Whatever 
you like. And are you sure, sir, the squire's 
coming ? My father said nothing of it." 

" The squire," said the Doctor, dreamily ; 
" the squire . who ? " 

" Mr. Gay, of course, sir." 

" dear, yes ; here's his letter. You can 
take any subject, you know : ' Was Napoleon 
or Csesar the greatest warrior ? ' . Pitt or 
Fox ? Something that way, eh, Mr. Whitty ? " 

" Nothing better than the first, sir," said 
that gentleman obsequiously. 

" Dear me ! " said the Doctor dreamily, 
" I had no idea what curiosity seems to be 
excited about the ease-tablishment. I really 
think we must begin the alterations this year. 
And see here : send me little Brown, Mr, 
Whitty. I must put a complimentary line 
or so into his Prologue." 



30 DIANA GAY. 

The two boys Avalked away together. ^' By 
Jove, this is news ! " said Lugard reflec- 
tively ; " and so sudden too." 

'' 0, we'll pick up the facts easily enough 
to-night. I know Caesar pretty well." 

"It's not that,^' said Lugard impatiently. 
" I mean the squire ; I am so glad he's come 
back. He's a good fellow ! " 

" I wonder/' said Bligh, looking over with 
great earnestness at two far-off boys who 
were walking together, '' will she . Miss 
Diana . come with him ? " 

The other turned and looked at him 
hastily. "Do you think she will ? 0, I 
wish she did ! And why not, if they're all . 
Lady Mary and the rest . coming ? " 

" She is sure to come, I thinh,^^ said his 
friend speculatively. " The squire wouldn't 
leave her. He wouldn't have any party 
without her." 

" My dear Doctor," said Lugard enthusi- 



THE TWO BOYS. 31 

asticallj, ''you are right. I declare you 
have a world of good sense, wliicli will stand 
to you. You'll get on, after all, never fear ; 
I tell you so. Of course she'll come; I 
didn't think of that. By Jove, what a day 
it will be ! And, I say, think of my march- 
ing up there, before all the swells, to get the 
medals and prizes ; and the fellows clapping 
and cheering, and her bright little face looking 
on ! And I tell you what. Doctor ; I'll make 
my governor give Wheeler a hint to get her to 
put the ribbon round my neck. That will be 
a moment! I declare I am glad I studied now." 
Something grave and even rueful in the 
face of his companion struck Lugard, and he 
stopped. He did not relish this prospect of 
his glories not being joined in with all his 
own personal enthusiasm. "0, I see," he 
said, " what's in your cautious mind . count- 
ing my chickens, and all that. I don't deny 
it. But still, I think, for a fellow that has 



32 DIANA GAT. 

got what lie wanted every year lie tried, and 
witli very little trouble to himself, it's not 
very great vanity, or arrogance, or whatever 
you may call it. Or," he added, with sudden 
suspicion, '' perhaps you think I am dispos- 
ing of your chance ? Have you put on extra 
labour, eh? or are you going to steal a 
march on me ? " 

'' I have no chance, Dick," said the 
other calmly. " I worked hard certainly, 
but am content to have my usual luck. It 
will add to your glory too." 

" I wonder how she is looking," said Lu- 
gard softly. "What a little charmer she 
was that Christmas ! Do you remember her 
that night at Gay Court, ordering us about 
as if she was an Eastern queen . sending us 
out of the room, and calling us back ? . that 
is yoii, I believe," added Lugard, with one 
of his loud laughs ; " she seemed she couldn't 
worry you enough ! " 



THE TWO BOYS. 33 

Again that curiously wistful look came into 
tlie other boy's face. 

" She is a beauty," went on Lugard. 
" Who was it said of a girl she was a trmket 
. a charm to put at the end of your watch- 
chain ? jN'ot a bad description at all." 

" Eather free and easy, and not very re- 
spectful, I think," said the other, a little 
warmly. 

"I'd like to see the fellow say it of lier,'' 
said Lugard, with some inconsistency ; " I'd 
kick him while I could stand over him. An 
ass's head would be the thing for Ms watch- 
guard." 

JSTow came up Johnson, a companion and 
humble admirer of the Lugard despotism. 
'^ What's all this," he asked, '' about all the 
swells coming ? Is it true about old Gay ? " 

" Old Gay ! " said Lugard, his hp curling. 
" Do you hear him now ? Did you ever 
speak to the man, or stop at his house ? No, 

I. D 



34 DIANA GAY. 

of course you didn't; nor is he likely to ask 

you. Well, what d'ye want to know about 

him?" 

" Nothing," said the other, a little abashed; 

'' only I thought." 

" Only he thought ! Only, indeed ! Why, if 

fellows did think, we shouldn't have such 

foolish speeches so often ! Well, he is 

coming ; and so are lots more." 

'' ! and I say, Lugard, do you think will 

his daughter come ? . that nice girl you used 

to tell us of ? 

The other frowned. He did not relish 
'^ this making free with the name of a lady in 
public." But then he, in unguarded con- 
fidence, had on some dull evenings thrown 
out hints about this peerless young lady, 
and, on being rallied in a flattering way on 
standing high in her favour, had not at all 
repelled the compliment. The wisest and 
most philosophic, the oldest and most espe- 



THE TWO BOYS. 35 

rienced, are seldom proof against this shape of 
adulation, if the censer be but adroitly swung. 
While other ineensings wdll have but poor 
success, and are received with a smile which 
shows that the '^ smnger's " object is seen 
through, this floats up gratefally into the 
innermost recesses of the nostrils. Who, 
then, shall blame a schoolboy ? 

**I am sure she'll come," said the other. 
'' I am dying to see her. . Don't you envy 
this lucky fellow, Bligh ? We shall see him 
walking up under her eyes to get his 
medals ! " 

Boys have no delicacy or feeling for each 
other's sensitiveness ; so he did not consider 
the toiling Bligh in this speech. 

" 0, I suppose she'll come," said Lugard, 
with a careless air, "though I don't think 
it's likely. My father knows hers, and hers 
knows mine ; and I've gone over there and 
shot, you know. And bless you, why, there's 

D 2 



36 DIANA GAY. 

Ms keeper Mundy would just do anything for 
me, . sell me liis best dog, or horse, or gun, or 
anything I liked. I know every rood of the 
place. And so, you see, it comes all natural." 

Though the logic was a little imperfect 
here, and even the proof given of the 
keeper's regard not a very extraordinary 
one, still the explanation seemed to settle 
everything. And Johnson, deeply impressed, 
said with feeling (and illogically again), 
'' Jove ! she must be a charming creature." 

" 0, you don't know her," said Lugard, 
growing confidential; "how could you? I 
hope to Heaven she comes. I should like 
the fellov/s to see her ; and I am sure she is 
so improved by being abroad ; because she 
has, you see, a sort of foreign look." 

" Bligh here knows her too," struck in 
Johnson inconsequentially. 

'* yes ; I suppose he does, in a way." 

*' About the same time as Lugard," said 



THE TWO BOYS. S7 

Bligh, in his quiet way. '' Perhaps not so 
intimately." 

'' Perhaps not," said Lugard, with a laugh. 
*' Knowing a person the same time means 
nothing . proves nothing. Give me a fort- 
night, and I'll know as much of a person as 
another . take Blioii here . would in six 

o 

months." 

As usual, every one was silenced, and 
Bligh seemed to accept this refutation and 
own his inferiority. 

''Who is she like?" 

" How could I tell you ! " w^ent on 
Lugard. 

'' Is she as good-looking . as Betty who 
comes with the clothes ? I mean," added 
Johnson hastily, getting alarmed at the look 
in Lugard' s face, . ''I mean in her kclij.'" 

" In her way ! Why, Betty's the scum of 
the earth, compared to her ! Wliy, she's the 
most delicate little princess you could conceive. 



38 ])IANA GAY. 

Not SO little neither. a bit of china, you 
know, like the cup my father bought at 
Paris, for which he gave ten guineas. While 
as for poor Betty, you might as well think of 
the crockery washhand- stand jug or basin 
upstairs." 

Both listeners looked at each other in 
genuine admiration. This ready simile was 
often after retailed in the school as a proof 
of Lugard's genius. Even the Doctor smiled 
on it, and said it was " happy." 

" I know her so well," went on Lugard, 
encouraged and pleased with himself; " you 
see we are quite friendly and intimate. She 
often used to consult me on this or that 
thing, and I'd of course give her what advice 
I could . such as it was," added Mr. Imgard 
modestly, '' and my father knowing hers, 
and all that. And I can tell you she'll have 
all Gay Court and his Restates ; the squire 
will leave her every penny . no other child, 



THE TWO. BOYS. 39 

you know ; and my father, who's a man of 
the world and picks up everything, says he 
knows he can't be worth a penny Jess than 
seven thousand a year clear, w^hich she will 
be able to do what she likes w4th." 

And Mr. Lugard nodded his head signifi- 
cantly, and, really without intending it, con- 
veyed to his hearers that all these desirable 
advantages had a deep reference- to him. 

Johnson was greatly impressed, and went 
away silent. 

Presently the gong rang out. It w^as time 
to go to bed. They all went into the chapel, 
where the Doctor performed night prayers . 
shortened in compliment to the holiday 
approaching. It was to be the last time. 
Then they all went to rest, in the sweetest 
anticipation, full of hope and good-will to all 
the world, finding it a little hard to force the 
eyelids to drop. There was a sort of flutter 
at their hearts. 



( 40 ) 



CHAPTER III. 



THE GEEAT DAT. 



The next morning was a bright and hopeful 
one. They all came down betimes, buoyant 
and yet not noisy. The sense of happiness, 
overpowering almost, exercised a silent in- 
fluence. There was another more physical 
influence at work. For three weeks before, a 
delightful operation had been gone through 
of having private interviews with the au- 
thorized tailor of the establishment, and 
choosing "new clothes" from his card of 
patterns. There was something all but 
fascinating in this office . a link, as it were, 
between school and the world outside. It 



THE GEEAT DAY. 41 

was being like men. Yet, in most instances, 
the taste was a little wild and extravagant, 
tlie selection of colours gaudy, in defiance of 
the artist's protest ; whose remonstrance, 
however, was cleverly silenced by Wells, 
known as '*' little Tops}"," who asked reason- 
ably, "Why he had 'em among his patterns, 
if they weren't to be chosen ? " A remark 
that left him, as it was said, '^ without a leg 
to stand on." 

Xow these o-lorious e^arments had all come 
home, and the boys were walking about 
resplendent in their finery. Lugard, whose 
taste had been often appealed to . but he 
would only assist a friend or two . was con- 
sidered perfect, and his "get-up" was looked 
at with the sort of admiring despair which 
might have attended the clothing of the late 
Alfred d'Orsay. Even the tailor had been 
influenced by his rnan-of-the-world manner, 
and had altered again and again, quite awe- 



42 DIANA GAY. 

struck. "Witli tlie rest, lie dealt as though 
lie were measuring a company of soldiers for 
contract articles. 

There was great bustle, and a flutter that 
was delightful. The rustle of the Doctor's 
gown was heard down the passages, like the 
flapping of a mainsail. They were busy 
putting the last touches to the exhibition- 
room, where the strangers were to be 
received. 

Mrs. Wheeler, from off whose mind the 
linen, socks, &c., might now fairly be said to 
be lifted, was still not at peace, having the 
jellies, creams, &c., substituted. 

The lunch was laid out in the '' great 
refectory" (W. Freeman, Esq.'s, fine drawing- 
room, joined to the study by knocking down 
the party-wall), and was a splendid spec- 
tacle. 

The time had arrived, and some one, look- 
ing out from a top window, came rushing 



THE GREAT DAY. 43 

down with the news that a carriage was 
coming over the hill with a gig behind it. 
Every one was ordered to his post . Mr. 
Whitty at the door to receive strangers 
and show the way ; the Doctor, in his gown, 
in the drawing-room ; Mrs. Wheeler, by her 
own particular desire, and without any ob- 
jection on the Doctor's part, was excused 
from meeting company. Besides, she had a 
sort of presentiment that unless she watched 
over the delicacies she had prepared, to the 
very last moment, there was no guarding 
against some sudden crash or cataclasm, 
which might whelm the whole in some in- 
distinct shape of ruin. Perhaps too she 
suspected that the unlicensed soldiery of the 
place, now about to receive their discharge, 
might take advantage of her absence, and 
sack the place. 

The first carriage had come. Mr. Bow- 
man and Lady Margaret, with their little son 



44 DIANA GAY. 

Alfred. These august persons were received 
with much agitation by Mr. Whitty, who felt 
himself much more at home in dealing with 
boys than with ladies and gentlemen. Mr. 
Bowman was a tall bluff-looking, good- 
humoured gentleman; and his lady a fair- 
haired, fashionable-looking woman, well- 
dressed, and very stout. She was elaborately 
courteous to the usher. The Doctor came 
forward to meet them vath his hand out, and 
his head swinging and swaying as he walked, 
and a '' How do you do, sir ? " and witli 
deep obeisance, ''How do you do, my Lady 
Margaret ? " Then added : '' And so this is 
Master Alfred, who is to come to us by-and- 
by; by-and-by to become a great scholar, 
and at the same time a perfect gentleman.'* 
And with this indirect advertisement of what 
was the special feature of his school, the 
Doctor laid his hand on ''Master" Alfred's 
head in an ej^iscopal manner, to the young 



THE GREAT DAY. 45 

gentleman's great alarm. More strangers 
began to pour in, worthy local people . of 
poor degree, as compared with Mr. and 
Lady Margaret Bowman . and wdio were 
quietly "waved" over to Mr. Whitty, while 
the Doctor resumed his interrupted worship 
of his august guests. Lady Margaret had a 
hearty air of interest in all about her, that 
quite charmed strangers ; titular friends, 
or " people that knew her long," which was 
her idea of friends, remarked that this was 
intermittent ; others called it honJiomie. 
Thus she would lay her hand on the 
Doctor's wrist, with a " Now tell me this, 
Doctor " . and " Be so good," &c. . or, 
" Now I have laid this out. Doctor Wheeler ; 
you must come over for a day to Bowman 
House . you must now. St. John, I want 
him to come to ns," &c. 

But another scout had come running down 
from an eerie in the roof . not unlike a rail- 



46 DIANA GAY. 

way guard's look-out tower in a train . with 
news tliat an open carriage and four greys 
were coming over tlie hill, and that two 
gentlemen and a girl were sitting in it. 

'' That's Squire Gay," said Lugard, the 
colour coming into his cheeks ; " and my 
governor, and Miss Diana. By Jove ! it's 
coming close. I say, Bligh, how d'ye feel 
about the debate ? Mind you give me good 
cues, and don't interrupt me. For I intend 
to pour out eloquence, I can tell you." 

" But you'll give me a chance too; that's 
only fair." 

** 0, you ! Why, you're to stick to the dry 
facts of the argument ; that's your line, . at 
least you always told me so." 

The large drawing-room was crowded and 
a kind of Babel going on, when Mr. Whitty 
came nervously leading the way before the 
new party which had arrived in the open 
carriage. This was a tall fresh-looking 



THE GREAT DAY. 47 

gentleman of about fifty, very bald, and 
with great sandy whiskers, fresh and modern 
in his dress, and looking so clean and bright 
that he seemed as if he had just stepped from 
a bath. He was full of life and action, and 
had a way of throwing back his head to 
laugh at the end of a sentence. And one of 
those loud engaging laughs, finishing a re- 
mark to Mr. Whitty, made all the room look 
round at them, that is, at the young girl 
who leant upon his arm, and who was 
gazing round at every one with a smile of 
surprise and half-dehght. 

The description of Lugard was very faith- 
ful. She had that delicately-refined look 
which he had described as '^ trinket-like." 
She was not short, though she was '^ small " 
in size; a very pale skin, a delicately- cut 
face, small nose, and a long expressive 
mouth, black hair and eyes. Two little 
curls (belonging to a fashion now extinct) 



48 DIAXA GAY. 

were on lier clieeks ; but in her eyes, dancing 
with that air of roguish surprise and inquiry 
noticed as she first entered, was all her 
charm. She had a tin}^ g^^^^y bonnet on, 
and a great many gold ornaments . earrings, 
lockets, &c. . about her ; in which it was 
plain she took great delight. So entered 
Miss Diana Gay, upon her father's arm. 
Those near them, gazing stupidly, as is the 
manner of country people, saw him jerk 
down his head, almost into her face, and 
ask with affection, '' What do you think, 
Doatsey ? " 

Behind them came a gentlemanly-looking 
man, almost dandified in his dress, of over 
fifty, but appearing, by the help of great care 
and lenitives, no more than about forty. He 
had glossy hair, a little thin ; a small tufted 
imperial, and a genteel unhealthiness in the 
colour of his skin ; his clothes were of a 
juvenile cut, and he had a soft sweet smile. 



THE GREAT DAY. 49 

which he put on exactly at the moment 
he fixed his glass in his eye, the two motions 
always going together. This was Richard 
Lugard's father. 

He was whispering pleasantly to Miss 
Diana, who then gave a merry laugh at what 
he said ; for this young lady was so full of 
enjoyment in the pleasant gifts of this world, 
nay, in the very sense of mere living and 
seeing, and looking and listening, that this 
laugh of delight was quite a characteristic of 
hers : the crowd, the oddity of the scene, as 
it were, quite amused her. But in another 
moment there was a rustle, a flapping, as of 
cordage and canvas, and Lady Margaret 
Bowman had borne down on her, coming 
along side like a great argosy, and had 
carried away that light craft with her into 
port beside her on a chair, where she had 
much to say to her. 

'.' When did you come back, my dear ? You 

I. E 



50 DIANA GAY. 

must tell me all about it ; and fix a day to 
come down to us at Bowman House. We 
must liave you there, and no excuse . " 

And with great rustling of ribbons and 
silks and shawl. Lady Margaret turned her 
chair so as to face the young girl beside her, 
and have a good '* purchase'* as it were for 
conversation, much as doctors sit before the 
patient when getting ready the stethoscope. 

More were coming in now, mainly good 
local people . Doctor Windle, the clergyman, 
and all the '' swells " were arrived ; the local 
apothecary, the county doctor, an honest 
gentleman-farmer or two, the dancing-master, 
&c., were all agreeably punctual. For to 
such the notion of the substantial lunch was 
very acceptable. And now Mr. Whitty ap- 
pearing, and whispering nervously to the 
Doctor, that gentleman roused, and, rubbing 
his hands softly, turned to his neighbours 
and said . 



THE GREAT DAY. 51 

" I believe they are quite ree-ady in the 
exliibeetioii-room. What do you say ; . shall 
we, Lady Margaret ? " 

With great rustling, Lady Margaret rose 
and took his arm ; Doctor Windle smiling, as 
though he were doing something funny, 
offered his arm to Miss Diana Gay, who 
laughed herself at the notion that all the 
sport was now at last to begin. The Doctor 
thought it was at his wit. The rest fell into 
a sort of procession . the stout farming 
gentlemen, great county doctor, and others 
following behind, ''taking each other in;" 
thinking a little ruefully of the long probation 
to intervene between that time and lunch. 

The " exhibeetion " room was an addition 
which the Doctor had built out at the back 
of W. Freeman, Esq.'s, mansion, and which 
necessarily spread over a pet parterre in 
which Mrs. Freeman had taken great pride. 
It was a long and spacious apartment, with a 

E 2 






^^^mis 



52 DIANA GAY. 

dais at one end, some scarlet hangings, and 
even a gilt chair or two . arrangements, as 
the CaUhoiye Mercury remarked a few days 
later, reflected great credit on the taste of 
Messrs. Higginbotham, " the eminent up- 
holsterers of our city." The seventy were 
all clustered at the other end on raised seats, 
and stood up while the august procession 
entered. At the same moment the select 
" orchestra " of the house, led by Mr. Jen- 
nings, consisting of piano {a quatre mains), 
flute (Master Halliday), cornet, and violin 
(Gill), struck up the well-known and in- 
spiring march from Norma. And at the same 
moment the best-dressed youth of the place, 
one who was noted for his address and ofl*- 
handjman-of-the-world manner, came forward 
boldly, and went round distributing pro- 
grammes. How the ladies admired the easy 
natural way he did this ! 

'' Look at my lad coming," said Mr. 



THE GREAT DAY. 53 

Lugard rather loud, for he had to speak 
acrainst the march in Norma. '' I declare he 
looks very well." 

" Where, where ? " said Diana eagerly and 
in great excitement, for she was delighted 
with the spectacle. '' 0, there he is I Will 
he come this way ? " 

" I dare say he will notice his own father, 
Miss Diana," said Mr. Lugard sweetly ; 
" or perhaps cut me." 

" I say, how your Dick is grown!" said 
Mr. Gay ; *' why, he is a strapping grenadier ! 
I say, Lugard," he added, stooping over, 
*' he is the top one here, evidently . rules 
'em all ; their best man, eh ? " 

" Isn't he to get all the prizes ? " said 
Diana, her eyes dancing. 

" That he is," said Mr. Gay hastily ; '' un- 
reasonable, greedy lad; and leave nothing 
for the other poor fellows. . Here, Dick, how 
are you, my man ?" 



64 DIANA GAY. 

Dick, bright, handsome, resplendent in his 
new clothes, with a sudden colour in his 
cheeks, was certainly a fine fellow to look at. 
That colour deepened as he came up to Diana, 
and small white fingers, covered with rings, 
were put out hastily. 

'^ How do you do, Mr. Eichard ? " 
His larger hand was encumbered with the 
programmes, and in his eagerness to meet the 
small jewelled hand, the heap of papers fell, 
and fluttered over the floor. Diana laughed, 
and almost clapped her hands at this '^ bit of 
fun," then grew grave and very serious on a 
sudden, as if it was unbecoming to laugh at 
a misfortune. Already many eyes from the 
raised seats were turned wistfully to this 
enchanting creature . really most like the 
angels in the pantomime . their most per- 
fect idea of all that was celestial. Certain 
young hearts ached for some days afterwards ; 
and two or three unhappy wights, who had 



THE GREAT DAY. 55 

" guardians " too busy to receive them at 
home, had, in addition to their private 
troubles, to endure the pangs of " hopeless 
love." 

" How many medals are you to sweep off, 
eh, Dick ? " said Mr. Gay heartily; '* leave 
something to the other poor devils. Sure of 
the general-merit, I'm told ; large silver 
medal . no less . and ten pounds money. 
Very handsome of the Doctor." 

" You will give me some of your winnings, 
Mr. Richard," said the young girl eagerly, 
'' for a bazaar . a charity ? " 

''As much as you like . all of it," said 
Dick, promptly ; *' it would be a great honour 
if you would take it." 

" No, no, no ! " said she, delighted at this 
homage. '' I will say . ^let me see, now . ten 
shilhngs." 

'' Tell me, Dick, how's our friend Bligh ? 
I don't see him." 



56 DIANA GAT. 

'' 0, lie's here, sir ! " said Dick, looking 
round ; '' working as hard as ever. . You 
remember Bob Bligh, Miss Gay ?" 

" dear, yes," slie said, with a little 
toss ; " indeed I do. He's very good, 
isn't he?" 

Mr. Lugard, the father, laughed very 
heartily at this, and said Miss Diana had 
picked up sarcasm abroad, which he was un- 
commonly sorry to see. To hit at that poor 
boy in such a way was not fair . really not. 
On which Miss Diana grew grave and half- 
serious ; then, looking sideways from the 
corners of her glistening eyes, laughed a 
laugh of roguish inquiry ; which sort of 
change from penitence to gaiety was a 
motion very habitual with her, and, indeed, 
one of her most piquant and dramatic 
changes. 

'* Will he get anything ? I hope he'll 
get something," she said earnestly ; 'Mie 



THE GREAT DAY. 57 

does work so hard. And that poor good soul 
at home . his old mamma, who feels such 
a pride in any little book or honour he 
brings back." 

" 0, I know he'll do very fairly," said 
Dick, handsomely standing up for his friend. 
''I'm sm-e of it, indeed ; at least, quite suffi- 
cient to please her. But what I get . that is, 
the medal and all that " . he added, dropping 
his voice, . '^ it would be such an addition if 
you were to give it . it would double the 
honour." 

Mr. Gay overheard some of this. 

" All right, Dick, my lad ; leave it to me ; 
I'll manage it with the Doctor." 

The march in Norma was done . exe- 
cuted, said the Mercunj, *' with a rare in- 
stinct and spirit, that would have done 
credit to a professional orchestra." There 
was a silence, and little Brown advanced out 
into the middle, made a bow, and began the 



58 DIANA GAY. 

Prologue. " A little thing I put together 
for him," whispers the Doctor to Lady Mar- 
garet; ''just anything to lead off." But 
Mr. Whitty had, in truth, had all the labour 
of this composition . the '' putting together " 
being simply a few general remarks on the 
part of the Doctor. '' See, Mr. Whitty, 
some nice compliment to the company . glad 
to see familiar faces ; had been boys them- 
selves once ; this old place. I just give you 
the ideas." Accordingly, amid profound 
silence, the young Master Brown began . 

" Kind friends, we greet you once again ; 
A year lias gone, but not in vain." 

And his arm went up and down harmo- 
niously, according to the rules in Mr. 
Enfield's '' Speaker." And after dwelling on 
the delights of the place, and their anguish 
at parting from what he called " these 'appy 
'alls " . a pronunciation that made Miss 



THE GREAT DAY. 59 

Diana put down her head behind her fan . 
he retired amid loud applause. Then two 
young gentlemen came with books . led up 
by Mr. Whitty, who had to think of every- 
thing on this momentous day. At one of 
these Miss Diana looked eagerly as he drew 
near. There was nothing fashionable or 
elegant in the cut of his clothes, which were 
a good serviceable shooting-coat, roughly 
made, and which looked a little ill-fitting on 
his broad, square-made shoulders. The 
young girl had an amused, downcast look as 
he came up, and she put her hand out with a 
half-shy, half-patronizing air. 

" How do you do, Mr. Bligh ? " she said. 
'' Are they going to torture you ? " And 
she gave a laugh of delight at the notion. 

The other was not confused as Lugard 
had been. His calm full eyes looked at her, 
opening as they did so with inquiry, as 
though she was quite serious. 



60 DIANA GAY. 

*' Torture me . no ! " lie said. '' I think 
I know this Horace pretty well." 

" Horace ! " said Mr. Lugard, turning 
over tlie leaves. " I declare, Dr. Wheeler, 
this is most unfair. My college learning is 
all rusty. . What do you say, Miss Diana ? 
I don't know how to examine, really." 

"0, give him a difficult bit," said Miss 

Diana, excitedly ; " we really must puzzle 

him." 

''Would you be kind enough," said Mr. 

Lugard, in the politest tone of courtesy, and 

raising his voice so as to be heard by all, 

" to turn to the ode in the Second Book : . 

'^quam memento rebus in arduis.' ?" 

Robert immediately began to read sono- 
rously and firmly, declaiming the Horatian 
measure in good tones ; then translated 
fluently and correctly, and with a confident 
air that showed he knew his business. 



THE GEEAT DAY. 61 

'' Stay, stay, stay ! " said Mr. Lugard ; 
'^ not so fast, sir. What did you give for 
' inferiore nota FaJerni ' F " 

'^ With Falernian from the inner cellar, 
sir." 

Mr. Imgard looked up at a little cupola 

in the ceiling, and shook his head slowly and 

sadly. 

'. Inner cellar ! Wliere do you get that ? 
where is cellar? 

*' 0, there's no cellar, sir," said Bob calmly. 

'* There's no cellar ; well, don't let us have 
one, then. Xot that I object to one . a good 
one." 

There was a loud roar from the benches 
at this joke. 

'' Be good enough to take the words 
separately. Wliat's ' nota ' ? What's ' inte- 
riore'? What's 'FalernV ?'' 

Bligh did so at once. '' That, sir, con- 
veys no meaning, as you see. Wine of an 



62 DIANA GAT. 

inner mark. But as the oldest wine was 
always put in the farthest bin, which was 
further inside, it becomes impossible to do 
without cellar or bin. Besides, all the com- 
mentators agree in it." 

There was such an air of quiet knowledge 
in the way this explanation was given that 
Miss Diana looked very grave and serious, 
as though here was a matter not to be 
treated with levity. 

Mr. Lugard said, " No doubt so ; possibly 
so. Where was Horace born, sir ? " 

He was told, as also many other matters 
which he inquired about. In truth, he did 
not feel very comfortable, as the eye of the 
Oxford man was on him. 

*'Very well, indeed," he said; ''Mr. 
Bligh, you have answered very creditably." 

Then came a scene from Moliere between 
two of the young gentlemen ; then a Latin 
poem by Mr. Whitty, though it was '' put 



THE GREAT DAY. 63 

together " by the Doctor, on the same 
principle as the Prologue. And then we 
should have seen Dick Lugard step out 
into the middle, as into an arena, and, as 
if he was throwing down his glove, start 
off impetuously into the debate on the point 
'* Whether Ca3sar or Napoleon was the 
greater man ? " Bligh sitting at the other 
side of the round table covered with green 
baize, and watching him calmly. The father 
regarded him with a simpering air. 

" Richard will get his head now. I think 
we shall hear something lively. This is his 
line, you know." 

'' Oh, I hope so ! " said Miss Diana; "I 
am dying to hear." 

" I don't think our friend on the other 
side of the baize will make much of Dick. 
Listen to him ! " 

"He'll astonish them by-and-by in the 
House," said Mr. Gay. 



64 DIANA GAY. 

" I am surprised/' said Dick, with flasliing 
eyes, '^ to liear sucli sentiments from my 
honourable friend. What can he be dream- 
ing of? Put Cgesar beside l^apoleon . that 
brilliant genius that could write, speak, 
fight, plan, do everything,. beside a mere 
rude fighting man ! The conqueror of the 
world beside the mere subjugator of a pro- 
vince, who lived in days when the world 
was young and unkempt, when the forests 
were unhewn, when the hearts were savage ! ' ' 

" I am sorry to interrupt," said Bligh, 
rising ; '' but what does all this mean ? 
Surely my friend must know that Csesar 
could write, speak, think, sleep, almost at 
the same time. The conqueror of a pro- 
vince ! Where is my friend's history ? Does 
he not know that Caesar overran Britain, 
France, Germany, what not? I ask him, 
what province does he mean ? " 

This was so unexpected, so sudden a 



THE GREAT DAY. 65 

*' pull-up '' in the midst of his tide of elo- 
quence, that Lugard was disconcerted, and 
looked wondering at his opponent. 

" This will be interesting in a moment/' 
said the Doctor, smiling to Lady Margaret. 
" These two lads are the flower of our little 
fold." 

Dick resumed in a moment more calmly, 
but presently warmed up into generalities, 
and was again stopped. 

''Now, Mr. Chairman," said he, as Bhgh 
rose quietly, '* I must protest against being 
interrupted in this way. I will not have 
it! What d'ye mean? " he said, under his 
breath across the table, with flashing eyes. 

'' Just as you please," said Bligh, smiling 
and sitting down ; '' only I appeal to every 
one, if he did not put the battle of Austerlitz 
six years too late ? " 

There was a titter ; and the flashing eyes 
of Richard Lugard saw Miss Diana's brilhant 
I. 1' 



66 DIANA aAY. 

face quickening with enjoyment at the scene, 
and anxiously and eagerly looking for more. 
Then his lip curled with scorn. His fine 
periods and dashing eloquence to be inter- 
rupted by those wretched, mean, pettifogging 
quibbles ! But he also saw his father's 
simpering face growing bitter, and " twisted" 
with displeasure. Altogether he was put 
out, confused, disgusted, and he flung him- 
self into a chair at last, with his teeth set, 
and determined to pay off that fellow with 
the schoolmaster soul in the same way. He 
would keep a watch on him. 

But Bligh went on his way steadily, 
learned, full of his subject, . for it was a 
pet one with him, . and in a dry vein of 
sarcasm. He was specially pleasant on the 
putting forward of the battle of Austerlitz ; 
and then gave a picture of Caesar as he 
really was, so full of detail, so copious, and 
convincing . that ever yone there saw at 



THE GREAT DAT. 67 

once how little Mr. Richard Lugard could 
have known of the matter, to have been 
so fluent and so flippant. The best part 
of the whole exhibition was Bligh's earnest- 
ness, his calm quiet purpose of vindicating 
his hero on public grounds only, and with 
very little reference to Lugard. This made 
his advocacy more natural and valuable. 
And all the strangers nodded to each other 
and said, " Upon my word, there's a shrewd, 
knowing fellow.'' '* No catching him." 
"He'll do, I can tell you;" with more 
such prophecy. 

Watching him with eager eye and scornful 
lip, Lugard waited for his turn, and then 
tried a rally. But he could not retrieve 
himself . ^he had the sense of failure over 
him. His grand periods could not supply 
him with facts, and he was afraid of more 
blunders, for which his opponent was 
watching with searching eye. The strangers 

F 2 



68 DIANA GAY. 

said, " Plenty of talk in that fellow, but not 
overmucli ballast, I should say." 

The debate on Caesar and Napoleon at 
last ended. When the two had got down 
among their fellows, and Lugard heard the 
encouraging " Well done, old Bligh ! " ad- 
dressed to his companion, he turned round 
on him quickly, and with bitter reproach 
said, ''I don't call it well done; I call it 
shabby and tricky." 

" Shabby and tricky ! " said Bhgh, with 
wonder and pain in his face. " How ? " 

" Every how ! It was an unfair plant 
and a trap. You had made yourself up in 
all that, and thought you would have a 
pull on me." 

*'As I live, nothing of the kind; there 
were half a dozen others would have done 
as well. On my solemn word of honour, I 
spoke so, because I thought it would show 
you off; and so it did. Why, it seemed 



THE GREAT DAY. 69 

to me it was so spirited, and went off so 
weU." 

"0, you're deep enough, wise Mr. Bligli!" 
said the other ; '' who knows what other 
surprises you have on hand ? Why, I dare 
say," . and Lugard, stopping suddenly, 
looked at him with a look of dislike and 
alarm, . " but if you thought of that . " 

" What do you mean ? " said Bligh, with 
the most perfect unconsciousness of his 
meaning. 

But now the " band" was commencing the 
'*' Prospect-House Waltzes, composed and 
respectfully dedicated to the Rev. Doctor 
Wheeler " . it must be said very inappro- 
priately . "by his obliged and humble ser- 
vant, Henry Jennings, Professor of Music to 
Prospect-House Academy." This interrupted 
the talk of the two youths. But up at the 
distinguished end, Mr. Lugard' s face wore 
the same " put-out " and angry air, which 



70 DIANA GAY. 

contrasted oddly witli the smile lie would 
put on and fit into his mouth . like his glass. 
" What was over the man to-day, flounder- 
ing in that way ? think the other had an 
unfair pull over him; and I should say a very 
clerk-like sort of mind.'* 

''0 yes," said Diana, "poor Richard; it 
was very hard. But the other/' she added 
wisely, with the popular respect for erudi- 
tion, *' he seemed to know such an immense 
deal!" 



( 71 



CHAPTEE IV. 



THE PRIZES. 



But now there was a flutter going on in the 
crowd, and eager restlessness, . the " spout- 
ing " was finished. Mr. Whitty was seen 
rushing to and fro, whispering to the Doctor, 
then spurring ofi" on missions, Hke an aide- 
de-camp at a review. A round table covered 
with a scarlet cloth, on which were some 
richly-bound books, a blue morocco case, and 
a large porte-monnaie, ostentatiously dis- 
played, was wheeled forward to the front. 

"Well, I think so, Mr. Whitty," said the 
Doctor; "it is about time. . Lady Margaret," 
he said plaintively, " would you honour these 



72 DIANA GAY. 

young gentlemen by presenting tliem with 
their premiums ? How good of you ! . Now, 
Mr. Whitty, if you please." 

And that gentleman, with a large portfolio 
in his hand, went out into the middle . a 
signal for the whole house to stand upon its 
feet, and relieve its feelings by a cheer. 

'^ This has been the custom from time 
eemmemorial," said the Doctor, explaining 
to Lady Margaret . that is, from the fifteen 
or twenty years during which the school had 
been established. 

Then Mr. Whitty began to read out the 
list, beginning with the lowest class. 

As each name was called, there was a 
rustle and commotion in the ranks afar off, 
and some little fellow, sturdy, blushing, his 
eyes dancing in his head, would come tramp- 
ing up, with eyes of encouragement and even 
amusement bent on him, as he clutched from 
Lady Margaret's aristocratic hands the gor- 



THE PEIZES. 73 

geous red-and-golcl book wliicli made him 
happy. Then a cheer broke out, sometimes 
merely conventional ; but when Charley or 
Johnny was popular, or had come up a 
second or third time, given forth with double 
animation. As the sun shines in brilliantly, 
and lights up those joyous faces, whose 
very hearts are seen through their eyes, 
some of the grown-up people sitting there 
wander back in thought to some such scene 
twenty or thirty years before, and think of 
the delightful summer morning, and the 
pure unsophisticated joy and exultation they 
felt then, when the strangers sitting there 
and listening^ seemed like deleo^ates from the 
nations . sovereign princes . as though the 
great world were looking on ; and they 
themselves walk up in that delicious pro- 
gress, feel the medal put about their necks, 
and hear slow and kindly words of praise 
and encourasrement from some venerable 



74 DIANA GAY. 

guest of distinction, though their eyes are 
too dim with excitement and joy to see his 
face. They hear the great shout of approba- 
tion from their fellows . those dear, kind fel- 
lows ; . and they think, a little sadly, that no 
triumph since earned has ever brought them 
a tittle of the swelling delight and glory of 
that hour. 

The little procession went on ; Mr. Whitty 
declaring honours and titles sonorously, 
which the Doctor chose should run in Latin, 
as the Doctor explained to Lady Margaret : 

'* It gives a classical turn to their minds, 
and teaches them to aimmew-late the 'chieve- 
ments of Rome and Greece. The first we 
call imperator, the second jprcetor, the third 
consul, and so on . so on. By the way, 
Lady Margaret, I am greatly disappointed 
about a little matter . especially as our 
friend Mr. Lugard has come over expressly. 
But the Oxford gentlemen, it seems, say . " 



THE PRIZES. 75 

and the Doctor dropped his voice into a 
widsper. 

They were now at the last and highest 
class. 

*' Now for a general sweep," said Mr. Gay 
cheerfully. " Look out, Lugard." 

Miss Diana turned restlessly to Mr. Gay : 
'' Don't forget, papa . you promised me." 

'' To be sure, duck ; I forgot it. . Doctor 
Wheeler, I say, as my Di and Dick yonder 
are in the same parish, why, I think it would 
look nice if she presented him with the 
medal and the what-d'ye-call-it." 

An expression of embarrassment came 
into the Doctor's face. 

" Why, my dear sir, I am so distressed ; 
but really . " and he dropped his voice into 
a whisper. 

*' My goodness ! you don't tell me so ! " 

Mr. Whitty iD^eanwhile was proclaim- 
ing. 



76 DIANA GAY. 

''Frencli : Construing, Composition in 
verse and prose . Eobert Bligh." 

And to tlie usual salvo of applause he 
advanced up calmly and leisurely, received 
his book from Lady Margaret, and made 
that lady a low bow. As he turned to go, 
he saw Diana smiling and laughing with 
pleasure, and made her a bow also. 

Far down at the other end Dick Lugard, 
panting, now grown doubtful and suspicious, 
saw him return. 

'^ Catechism and Morals," again pro- 
claimed Mr. Whitty. '^ Eobert BHgh." 

Eobert, standing by Lugard, heard him 
give an impatient stamp ; yet these were 
the poor prizes which Lugard would have 
thought beneath him, and which fell almost 
as of course to Bligh. But it was adding 
to the accumulating triumphs. Never mind, 
the next would redeem all. 

Lugard turned very pale as Mr. Whitty 



THE PRIZES. 77 

began to read. Looking to the end of the 
room, he saw a little seriousness on Miss 
Diana's face. It was coming now. 

" General merit : the large silver medal, 
with ten pounds in specie . Imperator^^ . and 
Mr. Whitty paused a second . "Eobertus 
Bligh." 

There was silence for a moment from 
surprise ; then from the fickle crowd rang 
out a tremendous cheer. Bligh, bewildered, 
really confounded with delight and genuine 
astonishment, remained immovable ; for he 
had heard a deep groan come from one 
who was beside him. 

"0, Dick," he said hurriedly, '' I never 
thought this. I did not, indeed." 

He went up, the applause continuing . 
some clapping their hands into his face ; 
Mr. Whitty smiling with excitement ; every 
eye bent on him and enjoying the spectacle. 
Alas ! such moments are all the victor's . 



78 DIANA GAY. 

the triumpli is displayed without any regard 
for the feehngs of the vanquished. 

" Here he comes," said Mr. Gay, sharing 
in this feeling, " I declare ! . Well done, my 
boy ! . Doctor, I think if my Di were to 
give it to him . " 

" ! Certainly. Lady Margaret will ex- 
cuse." 

That delicate and refined face was all 
a-glow with agitation at this publicity. Mr. 
Whitty came with the prize. She had 
nearly let fall the great medal and its 
ribbon. Here was the ten-pound bank- 
note, new, crisp, and clean, all but fluttering 
away. She was laughing over the import- 
ance of the duty. 

"What am I to do?" she said. '^ 0, 
tell me ! " 

for poor Dick, afar off, seeing his rival 
going down on one knee, and the brilliant 
young lady stooping over to put the ribbon 



THE PRIZES. 79 

round his neck I Then Mr. Jennings and 
the " orchestra " . a httle courtesy surely 
at such a season, for they meant well, and 
did their best . struck up ^' See the conquer- 
ing hero," not very much out of tune. 

ISTo one thought of Dick ; perhaps not 
even Miss Diana ; for with every one success 
succeeds, and makes us all brave, handsome, 
and interesting. But hush for one moment. 
One of the Oxford gentlemen wishes " to 
say a word " . namely, that the answering 
for this prize has been very good ; and that 
the second in merit, Mr. Lugard, had done 
very fairly also ; and that therefore they 
had adjudged him " a copy of Macaulay's 
' Essays.' " But no one came up to receive 
this solatium, and Diana, with some trepida- 
tion, saw her friend Dick tramping hastily 
from the hall. 

" No matter," said the Doctor plaintively ; 
" Mr. Whitty will take care of it for him." 



80 DIANA GAY. 

Then the '' band " . we must be compli- 
mentary to the end . struck up our familiar 
National Anthem, which even the Doctor, 
though he had no ear, knew by the shape. 

Out in the garden, groaning aloud and 
half out of his wits, Lugard was pacing 
furiously round. He did not know where 
he was going, what he was doing. " My 
God ! I'm disgraced ! " he was saying : 
" ruined before them all ! What am I to 
do ? . what shall I do ? What is to 
become of me ? " 

He heard a step and looked round ; then 
drew himself up. 

''0, Lugard, this is dreadful ! I never 
expected it . I never intended it, I call 
Heaven to witness . " 

''You should be proud of yourself. you 
planned it finely," said the other, breathing 
hard. '' Don't be alarmed ; I wouldn't 
touch you. You mean, unworthy fellow. 



THE PEIZES. 61 

to throw me off my guard and creep in 
before me in that way ! " 

" I didn't, I didn't," repeated Bligh dis- 
stractedly. '' I tell you I did not. I 
thought I had no chance; but I worked 
hard, just as I have always done, for the 
spirit of the thing, to come in after you, 
and learn as much as I could ; or indeed, 
thinking there might be some chance . " 

"Yes, I understand," said the other, 
looking at him wildly. '' You are at no 
loss for reasons. What do I care for your 
reasons ! You have undone me, disgraced 
me before them all . before my father and 
before her, the girl I was foolishly telling 
you of last night. I'll never forgive it to 
you, never ! Not if I was to grow up and 
live a hundred years. If I had a medal 
round my neck, and got it the way you did, 
I'd take it off. N"o honest fellow but would 
be ashamed to wear such a thing. Your 



82 DIANA GAY. 

medal and your money, indeed ! I don't 
envy you. I wouldn't take them and your 
mean heart together." 

Yet his trembling voice and wistful glance 
at the decoration contradicted this speech, 
and showed how he envied the happy winner 
of those honours. 

Bligh was changing colour at the conti- 
nuance of this personal language. 

'' I say," he said, '' you do me injustice, 
Lugard. You should know me better than 
to charge me with such a thing. From 
any other fellow in the school I could not 
bear what I have heard from you to-day. It 
is not fair of you . indeed it is not." 

" What 1 " said Lugard, his eyes lighting 
up with a sort of joy. " Do you suppose I 
want any privilege or protection beyond 
the other fellows ? Indeed I do not. Pray 
get that notion out of your head, sir. I 
can answer for my words as well as another. 



THE PRIZES. 83 

and can stand by tliem, and back tliem up 
too. So if you think yourself aggrieved . " 

" Aggrieved ! " said the other, looking at 
him sadly with his clear open blue eye. 
- No." 

'* Ahj I thought not," said Lugard, with a 
loud laugh of scorn. 

*' You can hardly be serious, Lugard," 
Bligh said in the same tone. '' Think what 
would be said of you if anything of that sort 
took place between us, and what motives 
would be imputed to you. I care for your- 
honour too much, Lugard, to let any provo- 
cation help you into such a mistake." 

" This is outrageous ! " said the other, 
walking backwards and forwards in a fury. 
'* 0, what am I to do with this fellow ? " 

Bligh laid his hand on his arm and pressed 
it kindly. 

" See, Lugard," he said. " The other fel- 
lows would laugh at me if I told them what 

G 2 



84 DIANA GAY. 

I am going to tell you. I had a motive 
which made me work this time, and about 
three weeks ago, made me labour to try" . . 
here he hesitated . '' and beat you. I con- 
fess it." 

'' 0, it's coming now, is it ? " said Lugard. 
'' So what you said before was not quite . " 

'' I'll tell you all. At home I have a poor 
mother who lives by herself all the year 
nearly, and all that time lives, I may say, for 
me. I do not think she enjoys or cares for 
life in the least, except to keep herself alive 
for the day when I shall rise in the world. 
Well, only a month before she wrote to me, 
saying that she was beginning to be disap- 
pointed after all, and she feared she should 
not live to see her heart comforted by any 
success of mine. And I was so ashamed, 
Lugard, and felt so what she meant, that I 
set to work, and got up earlier, and sat up a 
little later, and so far took that advantage. 



THE PRIZES. 85 



Otherwise you would have been sure to have 
it as before." 

Lugard broke out with a loud and mocking 
laugh. 

'' So now it's out ! So you must introduce 
our old mammas on the scene. All to oblio-e 
her . poor old lady ! " 

Bligh turned quickly on him. 

'' Don't speak in that way," he said ; ''it's 
not fair nor gentlemanly. I see I made a 
mistake in telling you. But it is not 
generous in you to . to . " 

"To bring in an old lady and get behind 
her petticoat," said Lugard, sneering. '' So 
we did it to get a prize for its mammy ! " 

'' I told you before not to speak in that 
way," said Bligh, with a voice that trembled 
in its turn ; '' so let it drop, I advise you. I 
got the medal because I worked for it and 
won it fairly, and others couldn't ; so that's 
all about it." 



86 DIANA GAY. 

He was turning away ; but this tone had 
stung Lugard, and lie called out . 

" Well, go home, and mammy will show it 
to all the visitors . poor old soul ! . and cry 
for joy over her clever darling." 

" Stop that ! " said the other calmly, and 

coming back to him. '' I told you before . " 

"Don't give me any orders!" said the 

other in a tone of fury. ''I'll take none 

from you, and I'll say what I please." 

'' Not about her. You are welcome to me." 
" What ! must we reverence the old 
mammy?" 

In a second feet were shuffling and scram- 
bling on the gravel, . two flushed faces flash- 
ing forward and backward, and arms whirling 
excitedly. Dick had now forgotten every- 
thing . defeat, mortification, everything. 
Here was an opportunity; and on honour- 
able terms he would have some sort of in- 
demnification. And yet the same quality 



THB PRIZES. 87 

which served Robert intellectually, served 
him now. He did indeed feel a burning rage, 
mixed with grief, to think his friend could 
have been so ungenerous. And that insult 
to one he so loved made him forget all else. 
Down came his enemy's blows fast and 
furious. After the delightful holiday of the 
morning, was all going to end in this ! At 
that moment the galleries of the house were 
re-echoing to the thundering of heavy shoes ; 
delighted wearers rushing along, shouting 
with joy, to get their things ; for the car- 
riages were waiting below. And here, at 
the back of the house, were two boys, with 
all the deadly and unholy passions which 
fighting rouses, striving to mark, maim, or 
even kill each other. They did not hear a 
light step on the gravel. The calm and wary 
Bligh had at last found the opening he waited 
for, and one of his strong blows had de- 
scended full on the fair cheek-bone of Lugard, 



88 DIANA GAY. 

By-and-by that would become a *' black eye," 
fatally proclaiming tlie story of another de- 
feat ; and this thought lent a frantic fury to 
his blows. But a scream of terror inter- 
rupted both. Eeluctantly stopping and 
glaring round, Lugard saw the slight figure 
of Miss Diana Gay, with her bright face filled 
with terror, and her hands clasped, beside 
them. Covered with dust, with faces scarlet 
(and Lugard' s already swelling up angrily), 
the combatants' arms dropped, and their 
heads hung down. 

"0, what are you doing ? " cried the 
young lady distractedly. '' What a dreadful 
thing this is ! You want to kill each other 1 
0, what shall I do ? Will no one come ? " 
She was quite scared, as she might have been 
by the sight of real wounds and blood. Then, 
more distracted, " What a dreadful thing ! " 
she went on. " Will no one come ? " 

Bligh, always collected, went up to her. 



THE PRIZES. 89 

" It is over ; indeed it is, Miss Gay. I am 
ashamed of myself; I am, indeed." Miss 
Diana drew back a little. for poor Dick ! 
at that moment held back by the conscious- 
ness of the tingling swelling, and the worse 
consciousness of being detected in what must 
seem this humiliating attempt to revenge his 
intellectual defeat by this appeal to brute 
violence. " It was a mistake, indeed it was," 
said Bligh, feehng acutely for him ; '' and it 
was all about something else than what you 
know. . Lugard," he said, " we have been 
very hasty, and I took you up too hastily. 
Come, make it up before Miss Gay. Do ! " 

Miss Diana, beside herself with excitement, 
felt herself quite a little heroine at the 
moment. The glory of reconciling the two 
heroes flashed on her mind. Bligh' s hand 
was out, but Dick remained passive. 

*' This must all end," she said. " And O, 
you will for ever oblige me, if you will be 



90 DIANA GAY. 

friends, and not let the matter go farther.*' 
She had heard her father use this phrase to 
gentlemen. " 0, promise, if you would ever 
wish to oblige me. It is dreadfal to see this 
going on." And, approaching Dick softly, 
she looked into his face with a winning ex- 
pression, timidly ; then, with sudden motion, 
half mischievous, half kindly, she darted 
over, seized upon his hand, and, placing it 
quickly in Bligh's, said, " Now I insist ; you 
must be dear friends again." 

" Never!" said Lugard, drawing his away. 

The young lady coloured. She drew her- 
self up. ^' Indeed you must. I ask you." 

'* With all my heart," said Bligh warmly ; 
" and I own I was a little wrong." 

"Yes," said Lugard, " you are going to be 
generous and noble now. We can leave the 
thing as it is. We want no heroics. I am 
not offended, only I must say, of all the . " 

"It's no matter, then," she said coldly. 



THE PRIZES. 91 

"Do as you like, Mr. Richard Lugard. No 
other lady would have been refused such a 
thing . Mr. Bligh, would you take me to my 
father ? " 

She turned away. Robert Bligh went with 
her. Then Lugard called out . a little un- 
graciously in tone, it must be said ; but only 
think what a storm was raging in that school- 
boy's heart . *' Well then, there, since you 
wish it . but . " 

The other seized it eagerly. 

'^ My dear Lugard, I am sorry all this has 
happened. But . but I'll only make it worse 
if I say anything." 

The little lady looked on triumphantly. 
This was her handiwork. She felt herself a 
little peacemaker ; it seemed as if she had 
hindered some dreadful scene of bloodshed. 
She seemed to discover in herself immense 
diplomatic gifts. 

'' Now hsten to me," she went on wisely. 



92 DIANA GAY. 

" Some one will be coming, I know. Now 
that you are friends again, and that I have 
made you so, you may depend on me. I shall 
be as silent as the grave on this dreadful 
business. No one shall ever know it except 
us three. There you promise me ? " 

And having made this really diplomatic 
declaration, . the best that could be given 
under the circumstances, . she looked on her 
work in triumph. And yet poor Richard, if 
we only consider his position . under any 
attitude how humiliating ! . nothing that 
could be done for him could repair it. 

*' Where on earth is she ? "Where is m^^ 
little lady ? " 

*' Hush, hush ! Now, mind," said Diana. 

'' Ah ! so here she is, with the gentlemen. 
Nice work," said Mr. Gay. " We've been 
hunting for you everywhere, boys. Come, 
what are you about here ? We can't have 



THE PRIZES. 93 

C^sar and Xapoleon going on in tliis way. I 
want you both to fix a day to come and stay 
at Gay Court." Later Mr. Gay said he sav^ 
the whole business, . Dick's coming black 
eye, ^c, . but was discreetly silent. 

" I am sorry I cannot go to you, sir," said 
Dick, shortly, breathing fast. '' I have to be 
with my father." 

''But your father agrees. There's the 
thing, you see." 

'' He can do as he likes," said Dick, 
bluntly. '. I can't go. I am not in spirits. 
I want to go away somewhere . anywhere." 

'' 0, nonsense, my dear boy I What hum- 
bug I A clever, brilliant chap like you . " 

" Clever . brilliant ! 0, very ! " repeated 
Dick scornfully. 

" Why, you know you have twice the 
genius of our friend here ! He won't be 
angry with me for saying so. But you have ; 
you know you have." 



94 DIANA GAT. 

''Indeed lie has," said Bligli earnestly. 

" yes, yes," said Miss Diana, with en- 
thusiasm. 

Mr. Gay walked a little on with Bligh, 
taking his arm, and calling him " my gallant 
Imperator.^^ 0, the cruel world ! 

" Our friend is a little down, you know, . it's 
most natural. Who can blame him ? Between 
ourselves," he added confidentially, " I want 
our little lady there to give him some com- 
fort. She knows how, I can tell you. So, 
Master Bligh, you have had to stand up and 
do a bit of pugilism to hold your medal, eh? 
Well, well ; boys are queer fellows." 

The way in which Miss Diana comforted 
the defeated hero was this : " 0, I am sorry 
for you, Mr. Richard ; I feel for you, I do 
indeed." 

''It is very good of you," said Richard 
gloomily ; " and does me too much honour. 
But I don't care about anything now. Feel 



THE PRIZES. 95 

for me ! Yes, you have a contempt for me ! 
You must have it ; I know it. Beaten in 
every way ! ' ' 

He said this so forcibly that Miss Diana, 
who had not dreamt of such a thing, began 
to doubt whether she should not entertain 
some such thought. Perhaps it is even a 
httle impohtic, to try and convince people of 
our own humiliation ; very little argument is 
sure to do it. 

Diana knew not what to say next; she 
was not ready. In serious and grave crises 
she was only good for a few seconds, where 
dramatic action was wanting. Then she got 
a little aground. Suddenly she called out in 
alarm, ''0, 0, how dreadful ! " Her eye 
had fallen for the first time on the swelling, 
growing more hot and fierce every moment, 
changing fi:'om pale pink to deeper purple. 
** What is that shocking thing?" she 
said, retreating from him. '' 0, how 



96 DIANA GAY. 

dreadful ! Why did you let that be done 
to you ? " 

Worse and worse humiliation. Poor Dick 
looked at her steadily with trembling lips. 
The speech was in the kindest tone ; but it 
showed what was behind. There was a 
dancing light, of buoyancy of heart, and per- 
haps mischief, in Miss Diana's eyes. She 
came on the earth merely to have to do with 
the sun, and the flowers, and the colours, 
and all the delightful things. And this Dick 
saw in a moment, and with an abrupt turn 
he walked away. 

The young girl was scared. 

" come back," she said, " I am so sorry 
. indeed I am. And I so feel it; and I 
know you will beat him another time." 

But Dick never looked round. Miss 
Diana tossed her head, and glanced over to 
the other side of the garden, where her 
father was walking with his arm in the arm 



THE PRIZES. 97 

of tlie conquerer. On the neck of tlie con- 
queror the blue ribbon was glistening in tlie 
sun. After all, maundering with beaten 
people who are **down" . proverbially a 
selfish class . is dreary work : to not being 
successful, the next best thing is to be with 
the successful. And so Miss Diana walked 
over to join them. 

Presently all the carriages were going 
away; there were whole strings of them 
drawn up. Trunks were being carried 
downstairs. Delighted and exultant boys 
were bounding up and down to fetch some 
last articles of property, for the parents and 
guardians were waiting. The Doctor was 
standing, with a tender and pathetic face, 
out on the steps, and saying, " God bless 
you, Edward ! " or " Weehum ! " I don't 
know how many times over. And from 
every carriage as it drove away came a 
cheer. 

I. H 



( 98 ) 



CHAPTEE y. 



GAY COURT. 



On the Calthorpe Eoad there was a handsome 
red-brick archway, well covered with ivy, 
with a good sweep in front, and a semi- 
circular wall, with pillars and chains. To 
the traveller passing by, and thinking of his 
dull inn and coffee-room at Calthorpe, the 
next town, the glimpse through the great 
gate of the fair open meadows, the noble 
trees scattered about, and the patch of the 
mansion itself afar of, nestling in a warm 
clump, and, like a Spanish beauty, lifting 
the corner of her veil to show a little of her 
face, such glimpse gives the best sensation of 



GAY COUET. 99 

luxury and enjoyable pleasure . beyond even 
the solemn grandeurs of a palace. Every one 
passing Gay Court had this thought in his 
mind : " What a fine place it was ! " and 
the flyman always said, " It well might be, 
for there was lots o' money to back it ; and 
all this here a both sides of the road, as far 
as yer could see, was his'n." And, further, 
that it all went, " every shilling on it, to 
young Miss Dinah" at the old man's death. 
Is it one of the mysterious hints repeated 
over the world in many shapes, that man 
should look to a future state, that the vulgar 
should have this profound interest in the 
reversioner rather than in the person in 
possession ? 

On the two piers of the gateway rose two 
large carved larks, with the inscription 
underneath, " Toujoues Gai," the family 
motto. Any one asking at the gate was 
allowed, almost invited, to go up and see the 

H 2 



100 DIANA GAY. 

place. Indeed it was open in tlie summer 
for two days in the week to picnic parties ; 
and Mr. Gay liad built a little pavilion close 
to tlie lake for tlieir special use and advan- 
tage, where they dined, and could afterwards 
have their dance. 

It was not an old place, or indeed a 
''place" proper. Mr. Gay had found it a 
good, square-built, brick house ; and having 
met the well-known adapting architect Jen- 
kinson, who knew what could be "made" 
of a house without pulling down, and whose 
devotion to a peculiar style had procured 
him the name of " Middle-aged Jenkinson," 
he had secured this gentleman's services, 
who had put out a gable or two, " run up " a 
campanile, and laid out a terrace. These 
small additions had '* warmed up " the place 
a good deal, and did not interfere with the 
old air of comfort. Mr. Gay, though a pure 
country squire, had nothing to do with the 



GAY COUET. 101 

old notion of the " country squire/' but went 
with the times, and enjoyed everything of the 
present day. He was fond of traveUing, 
spoke languages, read German a good deal, 
and enjoyed " life ; " that is, even the ordi- 
nary blessings of living . a fine day, a pretty 
view, a good walk, the mere sense of draw- 
ing-in the fresh air vigorously . filling his 
broad chest, and saying, '^I never have a 
day's sickness," . ^blessings not known or 
considered until the demi-jour of old age has 
set in, and the night is drawing on fast. 
Some day we may learn the art of discount- 
ing the cheap pleasures of life, now thought 
of poorly because so universal. 

Four miles ofi* was Calthorpe, the usual 
country town, into which drove the ladies 
from the country seats round, to buy* 
at M'Williams & Co.'s, General Drapery 
House, " From London,'' (It was common 
to stand by M'Wilhams & Co. and say 



102 DIANA GAY. 

we got things as good from him as from a 
West-end shop.) At directly the opposite 
quarter, and about six miles off, was the 
great town, the metropolis of the district, 
Ironston, or Irnston as it was called, a huge 
manufacturing centre, which seemed to live, 
and thrive too, in a great yellow mist of its 
own; where, as we went flying through it 
for a mile or so on a line of heavy arches 
over its streets, we saw tiers of dull red 
houses, and great red monster buildings, 
with a gap open, as it were, where were seen 
flames, and from whence came the ring and 
ding-dong of metal ; marked out, too, with 
chimneys, thick as posts, pouring out fumes 
of black smoke with vigour and earnestness. 
Looking down below into the street, we saw 
heavy wains with four and six horses, 
sauntering, as it were, along with an easy 
pull, and on every wain a great boiler, or a 
huge girder, all over rivets, as with metal 



GAY COURT. 103 

buttons. Here was a grand town-hall, 
stately and huge, and even magnificentj but 
gaunt, and stiff, and inelegant, like the iron- 
workers themselves. Here a great organ 
thundered ; here, when the festival came on, 
iron-throated, stiff-chested men gathered by 
the hundred, and roared Israel in Egypt 
from throats like ophicleides. And here, in 
red-brick barracks at the edge of the town, 
were now quartered the 1st (Du Barry's) 
Hussars. Every one drove into Calthorpe 
at half-an-hour's notice, but to drive into 
Ironston was made a more serious business. 
It was arranged the day before : there was 
due dressing, and a regular expedition 
planned. 

There was a set of houses, all at pretty 
nearly the same distance from Calthorpe : 
Gay Court, as we have just seen ; Bowman 
House, " the scat of Mr. and Lady Margaret 
Bowman ; " and the Crowders, owners of a 



104 DIANA GAY. 

place called tlie Priory, wliicli had belonged 
to a ruined squire, in whose family it had 
been since the old Priory days. The Orow- 
ders were in the "iron" line, and some of 
the great boilers seen from the railway bridge 
lying helpless on the waggons were travelling 
from their great yards. There was Dr. 
Windle's, the rector's, house; Mrs. Bligh's 
neat road-side villa ; and Burton, Mr. 
Lugard's, M.P., a gentlemanly place, quiet, 
well cut, and well kept . like his own clothes. 
These families were grouped together. How 
they " saw each other," how wealth pre- 
vailed in the case of Gay Court, political 
position at Burton, and how often we could 
meet the livery servant going up the avenue 
at Bowman House with the note, in which 
the '' Honour of Mr. and Lady Margaret 
Bowman's company at dinner" was en- 
treated, we may well imagine. Such a bit 
of quality will keep a whole district sweet 



GAT COURT. 105 

and wholesome, and goes from house to 
house hke the old Irish sacred bell, which 
was sent for all through the parish and 
sworn upon, for a small fee, in the case of 
conflicting testimony. Such is the homage 
rank must pay to society, and every family 
in the kingdom hath a right to have its joss, 
or splendidly gilt image, which it can bow 
before, and . have to dinner. 

Thus much for a little disposition of the 
characters, and the clearing of the ground, 
as it were. School-boy days are over ; and 
some years have passed since Dr. Wheeler 
had his exhibition-day at Prospect House. 
The lodge-gates of Gay Court are wide open 
this fine February morning, and the fourth 
carriage of a series has swept in with that 
centrifugal turn which is so agreeable to a 
driver, and which, perhaps, is not unwelcome 
to the horses. The soft rumbling up the 
smooth avenue comes gratefully after the 



106 DIANA GAY. 

rougli road ; and thej pull up with, a clatter 
and scattering of gravel under the light 
glass-and-iron porch, which Middle-aged 
Jenkinson has thrown out from the door. 
Mr. Lugard was the last to arrive on this 
occasion, riding over from Burton on a fine 
horse, with a smart, correct, and gentlemanly 
groom behind. 

There must be some little festival at the 
Court that morning. For the men were 
standing about and waiting, with many a 
speech of approbation . ''Well, and he 
deserves it, sure enough. Where' d there 
be a fox only for him ? " This was the view 
of a certain interest. '' And a large-minded, 
liberal- 'arted man, . none of your sixpenny 
gents as will take a hard-working man's 
suvvises gratuitous!"^ . which stood for 
popularity in the dining-room. We go up 
with Mr. Lugard, who is dressed as though 
he were going to a London flower-show, in 



GAY COURT. 107 

an elegant frock-coat, pale trousers, . a 
scarlet geranium in his button-hole. As 
he followed the servant up very fast, for he 
was a little late, he settled his hair, put on 
a dehcate-tinted glove, and looked sur- 
prisingly young indeed. 

The large drawing-room was quite full. 
There was a buzz of voices ; but above them 
all was heard the hearty laugh of Mr. Gay. 
There were ladies and gentlemen present ; 
and beside her father, her hand on his arm, 
looking up into his face, and laughing as he 
laughed, was Miss Diana Gray, now grown 
taller, but a little " filled out," as one of the 
squires would say, and in face more refined 
and brilliant than ever. She was all excited. 
The prettily-shaped mouth was yet more 
marked ; the skin paler and firmer. And 
there were the little side accroche-coeitrs, and 
the trinkets in which she delighted clinking 
about her neck and wrists. She had on a 



108 DIANA GAT. 

white morning jacket, with "a tiny frill that 
stood up about her neck. Every moment 
that she turned her face to look at some one, 
or to listen, a bright flush seemed to pass 
across it. She gave a start and a clap 
of her hands as she saw Mr. Lugard 
enter. 

" Here he is at last ! " she said. 

Leaning solemnly against the wall was a 
large flat object covered up in baize. The 
squires were looking at it with a sort of 
veneration. It seemed like a picture. 

Mr. Lugard, conferring with two or 
three gentlemen and taking some papers 
from them, said, " I think so . quite right." 
And then, smoothing his hair and stretching 
his arm so as to have his shirt-sleeve com- 
fortable, he advanced in the middle, and 
everybody fell away for hi.m He began, in 
a clear voice, "Mr. Gay, . Sir, I have been 
deputed by a number of gentlemen and . 



GAY COURT. 109 

wliat is far more important . ladies of this 
district . ladies and gentlemen who have 
known you long, sir, and esteem you more 
the longer they know you . to present to 
Miss Diana Gay, the charming young lady 
beside you, whom we all admire, a portrait 
of her father in . er . hunting costume. We 
all know what this district was before, sir, 
yoic took up the hounds, and we know what 
it is now,^' 

And repeated "Hear, hears," low and 
growling, like hounds, indorsed this sentiment. 

Mr. Lugard went on to dwell on Mr. 
Gay's virtues, the charm of his manner (it 
had been agreed among the donors that no 
one could do a thing of this sort so happily 
as Lugard), and, he might add, his hos- 
pitality and friendliness. And there was a 
certain appropriateness, he said, in making 
such a present to Miss Diana Gay. The 
Calthorpe Hunt knew pretty well where her 



110 DIANA GAT. 

place was, whether at the death or at the 
find. And, in conclusion, Mr. Lngard, 
going over to the picture, drew the green 
baize aside, and presented it formally to 
Diana. 

She looked down ; looked up at her father; 
then, with great embarrassment, felt her 
earring. In a low voice she said, " I do 
thank you all very much for this beautiful 
picture of my dear father, which I shall 
promise to like nearly as much as I do 
himself. And I can answer for him, he will 
always keep up the old Calthorpe Hunt as 
well as he does now. Thank you, indeed." 

This little speech was greeted with im- 
mense applause. Then every one crowded 
round to look at what they had given. 
There, in a rich broad gold frame, stood 
John Gay, Esq., of Gay Court, as his name 
would be read in the next Academy Exhibi- 
tion, to which it would be sent. There he 



GAY COURT. Ill 

stood, in a hot scarlet coat and very yellow 
buckskins, witli his heavy whip held across 
his thighs ; there he stood, looking fixedly 
and stonily out . certainly as John Gay of 
Gay Court, a man most mercurial and 
changeable of face and motion, never looked. 
There were three of his black-and-white 
hounds . painted-in very " hard," with their 
tails like so many stiJS* notes of admiration . 
clustered about his boots. In the distance, 
a faint little glimpse of Gay Court. 

Saltmarshe had received five hundred 
guineas. A ''clever fellow" . a kind of 
"hunting" artist, who was a half-gentleman 
and asked to country houses. He kept a 
sort of " screw " himself, rode to hounds, as, 
he said, " to pick up bits of character, you 
know ;" which he did, in a certain sense, as 
he contrived to pick up an order now and 
then to paint a hunter or a hunter's horse. 

Hunting-men would have but a poor 



112 DIANA GAY. 

opinion of your artist fellow ; but when lie 
had done " Nero " and "Peppercorn/' and 
a few more equine portraits . "you'd see 
the very hairs in his mane/' the delighted 
admirers would cry . his name was made. 

"My God ! " cries another, with his glass 
close to the picture ; " and the very letters 
on the button ! Never saw anything like it. 
And the coat ! " 

Saltmarshe, the "hunting" artist, would 
have been delighted had he heard all these 
compliments. And yet, after all, these 
hunting-pictures are a little awful, and but 
a gaunt nightmare- shape of memorial. 

Mr. Gay then said a few hearty words. 
He thanked them from his heart ; he did 
indeed. His face and figure, he was afraid, 
was not worth all that fine colour. But 
they would have it, and his daughter there 
was content. And he would say he believed 
it was the most acceptable present she ever 



GAY COUET. 113 

got. (And Miss Diana's eyes, fixed on his 
face, began to glisten, and her classic mouth 
spread into a smile of delighted affection.) 
As for what he had done for their hunting, 
it was all purely selfish. It was a fine 
manly Enghsh sport ; and he should be 
ashamed to be a fellow . and he believed 
there were such . who would not encourage 
it. (Every one knew that this allusion 
pointed to an odious Mr. McGregor, against 
whom insinuations went about of foul and 
dark crimes in relation to foxes.) The man 
that would harm a fox, Mr. Gay went on 
warmly, he would be on his guard against. 
He would not trust him ; and he would end 
badly. Some poet said something about 
no one's laying his hand on a woman save 
in the way of kindness. And so he said 
about the foxes, who should always, as 
long as he drew breath, have a home and 
hospitality at Gay Court, and not be dis- 



114 DIANA GAY. 

turbed save by fair, honourable, open, manly 
hunting. 

This speech was received v^ith tremendous 
approbation. And presently all were invited 
downstairs to what, to the local reporter, 
poor soul, was ''a sumptuous repast," but 
which was indeed only the common shape 
of entertainment at Gay Court when guests 
were present. 

Lady Margaret, large and rustling, and 
her satin mantle and laces gathered about 
her, '' beat down " the stairs with Mr. Gay. 
She was, of course, the woman of honour ; 
and at every dinner in the district, at the 
solemn moment of announcement, the host 
had to present a crooked arm to her lady- 
ship, who, as of course, rustled away and 
led the procession. 



( 115 ) 



CHAPTER VI. 



" d'oesay/' 



Dows in the large dining-room slie looked 
round. '* Where is that dear girl ? She 
must really come next me, I have so much 
to say to her. Pretty bright thing she is, 
she is so happy to-day ! " 

" Ah, so she does ! " said the delighted 
papa. . '' Ducky, won't you come here next 
Lady Margaret ? " 

Miss Diana was in charge of Mr. Lugard, 
the important person of the day, and was 
sitting down at the other end of the 
table when she heard her father's voice. 
" Yes, yes, Widge " . a name she had for 

I 2 



IIG DIANA GAY. 

him . " I'm coming. . INTow, Mr. Lngard, you 
must come ; I couldn't stay for the world.'* 
And, much to that gentleman's annoyance, 
they had to change their places. 

The table was very crowded. It was a 
long, large, spacious, sombre room, with a 
crimson-and-gold paper, and many family 
pictures hung round. There were a great 
many guests . all the hunt and the neigh- 
bours, except, indeed, the abhorred M'Gregor, 
agfainst whom the unnatural crime was 
whispered about, and who was, of course, 
not fit company for gentlemen. There was 
a large, red-faced gentleman, very stout, 
coarse in his voice, whom we have not seen 
before, which was Mr. Crowder, from the 
Priory, who was so wonderful in the '^ iron " 
way, and who had a vulgar wife and a large 
daughter, and who went about in the morn- 
ings in a broad-tailed dress-coat. But he 
was good in the field, rode on a great strong 



'^d'orsay." 117 

brown horse with enormous quarters and a 
white star on the forehead, who carried him 
over, and through, alL This redeemed the 
wife, broad-tailed coat, vulgarity . everything. 
He was an " arrant snob " until he was seen 
one day on the great horse. Mysterious 
hunting, that levels all distinctions, or rather 
that raises the lowest to the highest ! The 
remarkable hunting-man, no matter what his 
degree, wins respect and homage ; his words 
are wisdom ; and, though but a chandler, his 
lordship is proud to have his opinion. 

''Ah ! " said Mr. Gay, looking down the 
table, " I don't see Mrs. Bligh ; I want to 
talk to her. Di, pet, can you find her out ? " 

Xot every one had yet been seated. In a 
moment Miss Diana had flown awav, and 
returned with the lady. 

" Come here, Mrs. Bligh," said the host ; 
''sit yourself down next me, on this great day 
for Gay Court. I declare I feel quite proud 



118 DIANA GAY. 

when I think of myself leaning against the 
wall upstairs in my gold frame." 

The lady, whom we know to be Robert 
Bligh's mother, was a woman wdtli a very 
remarkable face, with dark hair turning iron- 
grey, eyes not brilliant, but deep-set and 
burning with a slow and steady light. All 
her features were firm, well cut, and almost 
manly, yet were fine-looking, and had been 
handsome. She was dressed quietly and 
even richly, but in a sort of half-mourning ; 
at least with velvet set ofi* with mauve. She 
spoke with a firm clear voice. 

'' So Robert is coming down to you," said 
Mr. Gray ; " I am very glad of it. I told him 
long ago this overworking won't do ; and a 
man gets nothing by it, for in the end he has 
to give in. It is like drawing bills : you get 
the money down, but have to take it up later 
with heavy interest, commission, and what 
not." 



C ^^r^TiCAAr ' 



d'oksay." 119 

" I tell him so, too," said she, '' but he 
is ambitious. I am afraid I am a little 
responsible, for I encouraged him at the 
moment ; for a day's success in youth is 
worth a year's in after-life." 

" You're right there, Mrs. Bligh ; youth is 
the time. To hear a young fellow talking 
of poverty! Why youth is money, beauty^ 
health . everything ! Listen to that,, 
Doatsey." 

That young lady gave a laugh. '' I should 
like to be always young ; at least, never 
older than papa." Then she coloured, for she 
thought of Mrs. Bligh, who was smiling at 
her. '' Or, I mean, Mrs. Bligh, too." 

Mr. Gay threw himself back and laughed 
very loudly. " See how Di gets herself out 
of a scrape ! " 

Mrs. BHgh went on : ''I knew all this, and 
what he could do with his great abilities, and 
am afraid I pressed him too much ; but I did 



120 DTANA GAY. 

it all for the best. I want to see liim a veiy 
great man." 

Tlie slow fires in her eyes brightened up 
as she spoke this. She spoke so fervently, 
Diana looked over at her with interest. The 
young girl had the greatest reverence for 
'' mind " and talent. 

" He is getting on wonderfully, Mrs. 
Bligh, is he not?" she asked. "Do you 
recollect the day at the school ? We all 
thought him so stupid up to that. When 
Mr. Lu " 

Miss Diana's mouth took the shape of an 
from a feeling of fright, having forgotten 
Mr. Lugard, his father, who was listening. 

" ! I never meant it," said Diana earn- 
estly, and even solemnly; ''I am only joking." 

.' I know what you mean. Miss Diana ; 
and it's not fair of you to your old friend 
Dick. It was a mere accident ; he had got 
the spelling or Latin-grammar prize ever so 



"d'oesay." 121 

often before. . Your son, Mrs. Bligli, who is 
a very sharp fellow, cleverly threw him off 
his guard, and I don't blame him. . All's 
fair, Miss Diana, in love, war, or examina- 
tions." 

"Nothing of the kind," said Mrs. Bligh, 
firmly. '"' Every year, as Dr. Wheeler told 
me, he worked up nearer and nearer, and 
that year he succeeded ; he was the best man 
in the school." 

" He'll make a figure, I know," said Mr. 
Gay. 'a had Buller, the Q.C., to dinner 
when he came down on his circuit ; and he 
says, for the time he has been at it, he is the 
most wonderful junior he knows. Mind^ he 
comes over here as soon as he arrives. We 
shall all be glad to see him. Lord Bellman is 
coming, and bringing his horses; and my 
little lady here wants to fill lier house and 
have some fun. . And Lugard, . I'll write to 
Dick; he is engaged already." 



122 DIANA GAY. 

''0, Dick knows," said Mr. Lugard, with 
one of his sweet smiles. '' E^e wouldn't 
miss it. Though, indeed, how he manages 
to dispose of all the invitations they shower 
on him ! He has a wonderful tact for 
getting on. I never told you . did I ? . how 
he got on General Bateman's staff." 

''. I suppose the general put him on it. 
ha, ha, ha ! " 

" Yes ; but what made the general put 
him on it ? Why, Dick himself, simply by 
having tact and being a gentleman. He was 
walking with Harrington through the town, 
and he saw a shabbily-dressed woman, with 
a cur-dog biting at her dress. She seemed 
frightened ; and Harrington, whose father, 
by the way, is a leather man, laughed 
heartily, and was passing on when she 
appealed to him. But Dick recollected a 
bit of advice I gave him, always to be gen- 
tlemanly to every woman . for it might be a 



< T.'^T,0,A- " 



d'oesay." 123 

rich old woman, who would leave him a 
fortune ; no one could tell . and Dick went 
up, beat the dog away, took oflf his hat, and 
was greatly laughed at by the leather fellow. 
But who do you suppose this was ? Xo 
other than Mrs. Bateman, the general's wife, 
come to look out for a house. And within 
a month Dick, who knows how to build for 
himself if you give him any sort of a foun- 
dation, was on the general's staff. I assure 
you," added Mr. Lugard, raising his voice, 
'.' a little of that tact and readiness is worth 
all the drudgery and learning in the world ; 
because, you see, it does more in a minute 
than the other would do in years." 

This view certainly did impress the com- 
pany, and Diana looked round at Mr. Lugard 
with a little mysterious air of awe habitual 
to her when she heard anything verij wise. 
Who does not admire an instance of the 
exquisite science of ^' getting on in the 



124 DIAXA GAY. 

world," or ratlier the charm of ''manner" 
which acts so magically and yet so cheaply . 
and the want of which is so fatal ? 

Mr. Lngard, who always talked in a sweet 
and luscious way, which gives quite a young 
air, then told them more about his son. 

'' He's uncommonly extravagant though," 
he said. ''For a mere lad as he is, it's 
outrageous." (He always impressed on his 
hearers this fact of "being a mere lad;" 
and certainly people meeting them in the 
street had taken them for elder and younger 
brothers). "But I can't complain, for he 
has paid his way hitherto. He has a horse 
this moment, which we'll see him turn out 
on some morning, worth three hundred, and 
for which he paid forty. There, again, you 
see, judgment is worth money." 

Lady Margaret had been busy all this 
while with her lunch . for she had an 
admirable appetite, and liked her " glass of 



(( T^^T,o*^^ >> 



D OESAY. 12o 

wine," as slie said ; a mere euplmism, which 
it would be discourteous to test by cross- 
examination . and had been very busy with 
soup, chicken, tongue, salad, and other good 
things. As has been said, she was inclined 
to a full habit of person, which seemed 
clamorous for nourishment. At the first 
lull she turned to Diana and took possession 
of that young lady, absorbing her with 
speech, lips, hands, and rustling shawl, as 
though she had been a tender bit of the 
breast of a chicken. 

''And now tell me about yourself," said 
Lady Margaret in a quite confidential way 
that was her characteristic. ''What day 
will you come over and stay ? I heard your 
father talk of Lord Bellman. We know 
them, my dear child, as well as you do me. 
Met them at Aix-la-Chapelle, both of us at 
Dremel's . poor Bowman screaming with his 
liver . and that nice youth that was with 



126 DIANA GAY. 

bim. Poor Lady Bellman ! slie used to 
walk with me and tell me lier troubles ; for 
he wasn't the best of . you know. I must 
tell your father to bring them over to see 
us." 

'' yes," said Diana, listening gravely to 
this stream of talk. "I'll tell papa, and I 
am sure he will be delighted." 

'^ You must come, my dear," went on 
Lady Margaret, affecting not to see her glass 
being filled again with champagne, and then 
starting with horror ; '' and stay a long, 
long time. I want you to know our 
Canning, who will be with us. He has 
promised to get some time from his duties. 
He is getting on so. I could show you 
letters from Lord Cumberley at the Foreign 
Ofiice. Such letters ! They can do nothing 
without him. Ah, my dear, I wish we had 
all such a head as our Canning. I assure 
you," and Lady Margaret nodded her head 



"d'orsay." 127 

significantly, ^' there's many a girl in town 
would be glad to get him." 

Our Diana, as mentioned, was always 
impressed by the influence of great intel- 
lectual gifts, and listened with that little air 
of awe and mystery which became her so 
much. " And he is so clever/' she said. 
" They say so." 

"I don't like repeating these things," said 
her ladyship, looking round ; '' but I will 
show you letters when you come to Bowman 
House that will astonish you. Lord Cum- 
berley came in the other day to the oflice. 
and said, 'Who's doings this?' and they 
told him one of the ordinary people of the 
place. And he said at once, ' Send down 
for Mr. Canning Bowman.' My dear, I wish 
we could all do ^as well as Canning. 
Only wait, and we shall see." And Miss 
Diana was greatly impressed by the meaning 
of this rather trite remark, which, indeed, 



128 DIANA GAY. 

may be a propliecy of failure as well as of 
success ; and by waiting we may see the one 
as well as tlie other. 

Now the company broke out into the 
great good-humour that early luncheon al- 
ways induces. ]^ow the conversation had 
taken a special and characteristic turn, and 
the air was filled with lumbering scraps and 
fragments of incidents. Could the sounds 
in that sombre dining-room have frozen up, 
as in the Munchausen legend, and thawed 
again in a new generation, such sounds as 
''off-hock," ''pounded," "got a cropper,'* 
"hard over the fence," "finished at the 
covers," and such phrases, would have been 
floating about. Then some went away, 
others went out to the garden, and a few 
amateurs were told by Mr. Gay that by-and- 
by, when he had " settled the ladies," he 
would show them the horses ; and no con- 
noisseurs relished the pictures, books, 



" d'oesay." 129 

gardens, &c., with tlie zest witli wliicli the 
horse gentleraen do a visit to that " choice 
and rare gallery," the stable. 

Mr. Gay, going up to the drawing-room, 
found the ladies there, looking at his picture 
ao'ain. 

"There I am again," he said. " Between 
ourselves, I shall begin to hate myself, I 
look so stiff and fiery. Surely I never 
stood that way, simpering, with my leg- 
bent, and those poor wooden dogs staring 
at me. If I was on the ground, I was 
always calling to some one, or patting their 
heads, or looking out over the hills. But 
I suppose Saltmarshe knows his trade best. 
Between ourselves, I think he ain't much 
on a horse's back, whatever he is off of 
it; though he talks plenty about setting 
his beast at this jump and that jump. . -Eh, 
ducksy," he added, putting his arm about 
Miss Diana, who had come up, " do you 

I. K 



130 DIANA GAT. 

remember wlien you pulled up Saltmarshe ? 
He said he'd been out with the Linkwater 
hounds the last week ; and he and old Mon- 
boddo, and two other fellows, had stuck 
on to the end ; and he was dead-beat, and 
all that. And what did you say to him, Di, 
in your own quiet, sly way, . come ? " 

" I told him, pa," said Diana, laughing, 
but with her eyes on the ground, " that 
he must have been out hunting by himself; 
for the last hunt of the season was in 
BelVs Life a fortnight before. And he 
got so red that I think he'd have' chopped 
me in two. But," she said, becoming grave, 
'' I must go and speak to the rector's wife 
and her daughters." 

" There's a knowing young lady," said 
her father, looking after her with great 
pride. " She'll get on. I declare it was 
as good as a play, the way she plagued 
the fellow. And I wasn't a bit sorry. You 



a T^^T>OATr " 



D OBSAY. 131 

know he was by way of being fine and at 
the nobility's parties . Lady Jane and this, 
and ' Tumbletowers said to me ' . that is, 
the Earl of Tumbletowers, you know. And 
I do believe he was trying the romantic 
with my little girl, coming down in his 
velvet jacket and a Raphael sort of look 
on. But she was up to him ; and I must 
say it was rich to listen to her. The first 
time he came down in these togs, she was 
looking at him very steadily, and he was 
languishing, when she says gravely, ' I de- 
clare, Mr. Saltmarshe, you're so like Lady 
Margaret's fine postilion.' Very rude, and all 
that, but uncommon good, you know. But 
when he found her one day putting a pair of 
moustaches in my picture, it was going too 
far, and he threatened to leave the house. 
Between ourselves, I had to blow her up. 
0, he's a humbug; but the hunting-fellows 
here would have him. There's a very dif- 



132 DIANA GAY. 

ferent style at the end of tlie room. You 
know this one, of course. Lady Margaret. 
That poor fellow George ! " 

This was a picture of a fair-haired young 
man, in old-fashioned regimentals, with a 
high, choking collar. 

''So it is ; he was in the army. Yes." 

And having supplied this information, 
which was indeed surplusage, she gazed 
steadily at it. 

'' I always feel as if I was in his shoes, 
where I had no right to be," said Mr. Gay, 
with great feeling ; '' and only for my little 
woman there, I would as soon be where I 
was. He was foolish, but a good fellow. 
He was spoiled by being an elder son. Thej 
gave him his own way in everything; and 
when he was over twenty, he of course 
wanted to have it in an important matter, 
and they wouldn't give it to him, so he took 
it himself." 



(( -r^'r^-noAir " 



d'oesay." 133 

He was looking steadily at tlie picture 
of the young officer. Lady Margaret listened 
with deep reverence. 

" 0, indeed ; yes. I remember it well. 
As fine a young man as I ever saw. And 
his taking out Lord Polehampton's daughter 
at the county ball, and every one saying what 
a pair they were. Melancholy business his 
throwing himself away on such a marriage.'* 

" Poor lad ! " said Mr. Gay, now in a 
reverie : '' I stayed at Boulogne as we came 
through, to see that they took care of his 
grave." 

The group w^as but of three . Lady Mar- 
garet, Mrs. Bligh, and Mr. Gay. All were 
looking at the picture . Lady Margaret^ 
with a sort of tearful air, and Mr. Gay 
with deep affection. But the sun, as it 
poured in through the window and lit up 
the mellowed crimson of the young officer's 
coat, passed across Mrs. BHgh's cold face. 



134 DIANA GAY. 

In that face was neither sympathy nor affec- 
tion, but a smile almost of exultation, it 
seemed, at least satisfaction. Mr. Gay, turn- 
ing away his eyes slowly from the picture, 
saw it, and started. 

"Ah, to be sure!" he said quickly; 
" you knew the whole story. My poor 
wife told you everything." 

'' Yes," said Mrs. Bligh, '' I knew it all ; 
I dare say more than you did, Mr. Gay. But 
it had best be all forgotten." 

"To be sure," he said. "Look over 
there, now," he added suddenly, " the little 
heiress ! How she walks with dignity, as if 
she was married twenty years. I don't 
know how she picked up that air. She's 
shy, though she can fool and tomboy it with 
the youngest. But she'd walk into a room 
full of company like a little queen, and go 
up to the lady of the house with her train 
sweeping behind her. But I've forgotten 



ei T^'/^r,o^' " 



d'orsay/' 135 

the squires all out. Those gentry know how 
to swear. Come along. No ? Well, where 
is her highness ? Bring Mrs. Windle, dear, 
. she must come, . and show her our nags." 
The party went round to the stables, 
which were archibectural. Even here the 
spirit of '.' Middle-aged Jenkinson " had 
ruled, and that splendidly, showing that the 
noble animals who occupied them were in 
a county where they were held in the highest 
honour, and lodged and boarded quite luxu- 
riously. Their houses . '' boxes " . were 
warmed in the winter and ventilated in the 
summer; they had a whole train of upper 
and lower servants to wait on them, and lived 
a sort of Turkish existence after their day's 
professional exertion, taking their baths, and 
being shampooed and elegantly coiffeed by 
trained hau"dressers. There were five hunters 
in the stables, besides hacks, and nags, and 
many carriage-horses. These ladies and 



136 DIANA GAY. 

gentlemen were disturbed at their dinner 
.without apology, and led out just as they 
were, in their stylish, red-bordered dressing- 
gowns, to be gazed at and admired. They 
w^ere not at all pettish or ill-tempered, as 
other noble persons might have been at 
being so disturbed ; nay, were not even put 
out when the servants swept the dressing- 
gowns off their backs, and left them Eve- 
like, and not in the least ashamed. 

*'' Walk the Don, John," Miss Diana cried 
in excitement, for she was directing the 
whole operations. " Isn't he a noble fellow? 
That's papa's own horse, and no one else 
can ride him . and . I wish lie didn't." 

'*But he stands for a great deal of money, 
popsey," said her father ; "I am ashamed to 
tell all he cost me. He's not wicked." 

Admiring hands were being passed down 
over the flanks and quarters of the animal, 
with the skilful touch of which horse ad- 



CT^'r^T.c,A^ " 



d'oesat." 137 

mirers have the knack, so that, though the 
Don lunged out with his hind feet, there was 
no danger to the connoisseurs, who kept out 
of his way adroitly. Heads were put back 
and on one side, as the great tall creature 
ambled slowly by, and arched his great neck, 
and seemed to expostulate with his groom . 
''What is the use of holding me down so 
tight ? " and then continued his progress in 
a sort of stately and springing prance. 

" There's a fellow to take one over the 
stiff Garrow countrv . when he's in o-ood- 
humour, of course, for he has a trick or 
two." 

Horse connoisseurs find great delight in 
what seems fault-finding, but is indeed only 
a kindly wishing that certain fancies of their 
own were present : '' Runs off ever so little 
too fine here:" ''miofht be a trifle closer." 
But these were but faint objections. There 
was one just man, of stern authority, and 



138 DIANA GAY. 

whom every one, and Mr. Gay especially, was 
anxious to hear, . a low, black-whiskered, 
thick-set little man, who carried the stick of 
a hunting-whip in a side pocket, and whose 
rigid adherence to the ground seemed to 
figure his moral adherence to his hunting- 
creed. Every one knew Pratt, the county- 
town solicitor, who had a good business, 
which he mysteriously contrived to combine 
with the real profession to which he was 
articled, namely '^ horses." We all knew 
those inimitably racy pictures of hunting- 
days, which came out but too rarely, in the 
Calthorpe Mercury, and were signed '' Buck- 
skin," and headed, perhaps, ''A Clipping 
Day with the Calthorpe Hounds," in which 
we saw "Reynard," and had "Yoicks, hark 
for'ard ! " and all the dramatic incidents. It 
was universally agreed in the hunt that 
Pratfc could earn a sum, fixed at about two 
thousand a year, up in London, by writing 



"d'oesay." 139 

these vigorous hunting letters ; which, if 
founded in truth, seemed hke fatuity on his 
part, as he was certainly giving them gratis 
to the Calthorpe Mercury. 

This gentleman would not say much, 
though often appealed to, and even eagerly, 
by Mr. Gay. " Ay I ay ! a fair 'orse. I 
know him well," was his highest praise. But 
later he was heard to say to a friend in an 
undertone, ''A little too much sealin'-wax in 
the foreleg;" which seemed to hint at a 
slightness or brittleness in the limb of the 
Don ; a speech that was overheard by Mr. 
Gay, whose eye often afterwards settled rue- 
fully, and with misgiving, on the part 
alluded to. 

Other horses were then led out ; and then 
Diana ran over to the head groom. " Now 
then," said she, " forward with D'Orsay." 
And in a moment a fine, delicately-made, 
satin-coated bay came out, tripping daintily 



140 DIANA GAY. 

with Ms refined limbs, like an elegantly-made 
dandy as he was. This was D'Orsay . Miss 
Diana's own horse. She ran up to him. 
She had on a tiny hat, all over flowers, called 
to him, patted him, and laid her cheek against 
his soft coat. The fine creature knew her, 
and turned his head round to look at her 
Avith the strange glance which horses give. 
The two faces . his great and gaunt and 
solemn, hers small and delicate and laughing 
. were a contrast. 

'' He is the best of them all, Mr. Pratt," 
she cried. " He can do anything. He is 
my pet, my king of dandies, Mr. Pratt." 
That gentleman nodded in reply, and sucked 
the bone top of his stick. '' He'd put your 
fine horse, John Bull, Mr. Pratt," said she, 
still speaking from the neck of the favourite, 
" to all his paces." 

Mr. Pratt became enthusiastic in a 
moment, and walked forward. 



'^d'oesay." 141 

'' He won't last, you see, Miss Gaj," he 
said mysteriously. ''He'll give here," he 
added, laying his hand on his own calf. 
"And he a'n't tight enough to lift himself 
high and together, over things. Xo, no, 
Miss Gay." 

'' But you've not seen him out, Mr. Pratt," 
Diana said, less daring. '' I tell you you are 
jealous . I know you are . after that dreadful 
John Bull, which you think nothing can 
match." 

'' See here. Miss Gay," said Mr. Pratt, 
again gi^owing excited (there were two 
things only his friends said had that 
effect . a horse and a glass of something) . 
'' see here. Miss Gay. There a'n't such a 
'orse in England. No ; nor in the northern 
nor in the southern counties all put together. 
And as for D'Orsay there, he can't put him- 
self together so as to get over clean." 

Diana's eyes brightened. " Get the bar, 



142 DIANA GAY. 

then ! Get tlie bar ! Bring out my saddle ! . 
D'Orsay darling, they're slandering you." 

The grooms in a moment were fitting 
D'Orsay with his saddle of servitude, and 
elegant fetters were bound about his noble 
head. 

" Diana dear," her father said gravely, 
yet amused, " what are you about ? " 

"You'll see," she said putting her face 
close to his. '' Poor dear D'Orsay has a 
fine opportunity now, and I want to show 
him off . the handsome creature. Do let 
me. I'll get my habit." 

She had tripped away in a second. D'Orsay 
lifted his head and looked after her fearfully 
and doubtfully. Had he been " tricked ? " . 
if so, perhaps he was making up his mind to 
plunge and kick off the first fellow that 
should dare profane his noble back. 

They moved on to the lawn. Mr. Pratt, 
examining D'Orsay more critically, travelling 



i( T^'^-noATr " 



d'orsay." 143 

up his handsome legs with his eye, and then 
crossing the chest to his quarters, was now 
quite convinced he never could put himself 
together. But here was Miss Diana in a 
new costume, which, as she is the heroine of 
this little piece, and whom as such we should 
naturally hke to set in as many engaging 
lights as possible, may be described in this 
place. She had put on a little grey-felt hat 
with a green feather, and her habit fitting 
her like a French glove. Then we could see 
what a tiny yet graceful figure hers was. 
From the excitement a tinge of colour had 
come into her cheeks. D'Orsay, relieved in 
his mind, welcomed her by steadily pawing a 
hole in the grass. 

'' Papa is to put me up," she cried ; "no 
one else ! " And her father performed that 
office. 

" You are a funny child," he said. 

Funny she might be ; but the combination 



144 DIANA GAY. 

of tlie two figures . hers and D'Orsay's, both 
so refined and " well-bred ". . was delightful. 
She was now at home ; just as a pretty yacht 
is at home when the sails fill and she begins 
to move ; and here was D' Or say ambling 
softly over the grass, just to get himself into 
comfortable warmth. Her soft voice called 
out as she went by, '' Put up the bar as high 
as Mr. Pratt wants." And that gentleman, 
calmly eager for the investigation of truth, 
pointed critically with his hunting- stick to a 
particular height, and said that would try 
him fairly. Eound swept D'Orsay and his 
light mistress, swaying in as they did so. 
One touch of a little whip, both were bound- 
ing along, and D'Orsay was over in a second, 
landing lightly and airily. Yet the critical 
audience saw at that select trial that there 
was justice in what Mr. Pratt had said, and 
that D'Orsay had the tendency common to 
other beaux and dandies . '* not to put him- 



(C T^'/M^CA^r " 



DOESAY. 145 

self together " wlien lie made an exertion. 
Mr. Pratt, however, graciously allowed the 
horse had done fairly. 

"But I tell you what, Miss Diana," added 
he with an unusual energy, and digging in 
the ground with his hunting-handle, 'Mie's 
got a wild touch in his eye. You wouldn't 
hold him in if he took it into his head to bolt 
one fine mornino^. Your wrist a' n't strong^ 
enough: I couldn't hold him. And see here. 
Miss Diana. If this 'orse should be wanting 
his head one fine morning . see here," and 
he pointed without much illustrative mean- 
ing to a hole in the grass, recently made with 
his whip, " you'd have to give it to him." 

Miss Diana looked a little alarmed at this 
prophecy, then suddenly recollected herself, 
and, patting the satin neck, said, " Well, and 
I should give him his dear old head if he 
wanted it. And why shouldn't I ? " 

''Well then. Miss Diana," continued Mr. 

I. L 



146 DIANA GAY. 

Pratt, gathering fervour in his vaticination, 
" if ever that 'ere 'orse should once get his 
head." 

'' ! stop Mr. Pratt . stop him saying these 
dreadful things ! " said Diana. " I don't 
care ; D' Or say is a nobleman, and has gentle 
blood, and is not to be compared to John 
Bull such-like creatures." 

And, with a toss of her head, Miss Diana 
v\ralked away beside D'Orsay, with his bridle 
in her hand. 

Now the company had scattered a good 
deal and dropped away. The manufacturer's 
family were among those looking on, . Mr. 
Crowder and his wife, and Miss Kitty Crow- 
der, the tall young lady, who had been about 
the grounds and gardens with a young gen- 
tleman of good fortune. She was a fine 
girl . as mentioned, tall, strong, aggressive, 
and overpowering to timid natures. But one 
rude-spoken and elderly colonel, hearing this 



ii T^r^Tlc*Tr ' 



d'oesay." 147 

praise, put up his glass . '' Fine girl, d'ye 
say? Fine fifteen 'stun,' I say;" which 
coarse language was indeed an exaggeration 
of some private views about her. 

She came to the front pushing, and stooped 
forward. "What's all this ? "What's going 
on ? 0, look, Mr. Wilson, they're showing 
the horses. Well, I can tell you, we don't see 
this always. What I admire in Miss Diana 
is her perfect self-possession, and what would 
I give for such a gift ? Now I could no more 
bring myself to get up on a horse in that way 
and jump before people than I could fly." 

As a matter of comparison, the " fine girl" 
would have appeared to infinitely greater ad- 
vantage mounted on a spirited charger than 
in suspending the laws of nature and soaring 
through the air in the way she spoke of. 
But^no one knew better than Kitty Crowder 
that the amount of pubhc attention and ad- 
miration is constant and invariable, and that 

L 2 



148 DIANA GAY. 

where any favoured object attracts a greater 
portion, it is only drawn from the shares of 
others who suffer in proportion. As he or 
she ascends, so we go down. Miss Kitty, 
having many disadvantages to struggle 
against . the hated iron-foundry to begin 
with, the more plebeian airs of her parents, 
the dress-coat in the morning, &c. . had 
found that she could not afford to lose a 
point, and could only hold her own by being 
a sort of " Garibaldian " in society. She 
always went as it were with her musket 
slung behind her, which she had cocked, 
and presented on a moment's provocation. 
Need it be said that she was a true '' officer's 
girl," ranging among the warriors, delighting 
in their company with an almost manly 
frankness, and admitting them to a charming 
freedom of speech ? As the regiments came 
and stayed and went away again, with that 
economical fitfulness which characterizes the 



149 



mind of the British War-office, they bore 
away with them legends and stories of Miss 
Crowder ; and over many a mess-table in the 
United Kingdom the name of '' Kitty Crow- 
der" was mentioned with affection . nay, 
rather too familiarly. So do the warriors 
distinguish those whom they delight to 
honour. And yet the spectacle of a woman 
thus fighting her battle gallantly and single- 
handed, all up the hill, dragging after her 
such burdens as a vulgar father and mother, 
and battling on, it may be a little unscru- 
pulously, may challenge our admiration, and, 
in a sense, our respect. 

When Diana came back, in great delight at 
having vindicated her friend. Miss Kitty re- 
ceived her with the delig:ht and excess of 
warm and admirino' wonder which is one 
of the happiest light- skirmishing weapons 
known to our young ladies. Diana had at 
first liked Miss Kitty, and was inchned to 



150 DIANA GAY. 

make lier into a bosom friend, with all the 
effusion which gentle, timid natures have for 
such grand she- captains. But as there was 
a certain honesty and candour about the 
other which could not take the trouble to 
conceal any little spite or jealousy, Diana 
soon came to regard her with an undefined 
feeling of suspicion and discomfort in her 
company ; symptoms by which the Gari- 
baldian was not in the least disturbed, for 
she knew her own power and the other's 
delicacy, and was secure of getting all ad- 
vantages to be drawn from Gay Court, with- 
out the slightest risk of check or coolness on 
the side of her friend. Besides, Mr. Gay 
had joined in the cry of her being so '' fine a 
girl," and rather pitied the social condition 
of her father and mother, who he said were 
" good, coarse, worthy people," whom he 
was determined to stand by and back up. 
Now she was standing over our little 



<.r^^T,o.Tr ' 



d'orsay. 151 

Diana, overwhelming her with voluble com- 
pliments. '.' I could not make out what was 
going on. It seemed to me and Mr. Wilson 
like people at a circus. . Didn't it, Mr. 
Wilson ? . And such courage too, dear. To 
see your little figure on that great horse in 
the middle, and all those people standing 
round and looking on. I should have fainted. 
Don't you think so, Mr. Wilson ? " 

" Not at all," said that gentleman, with 
the frankness which all Miss Kitty's friends 
maintained towards her ; " indeed you 
wouldnot. I've seen you go through more 
than that." 

The Garibaldian, to do her justice, had no 
hypocrisy, and had her musket unslung in a 
moment. '' You'll do the fainting for me," 
she said. " Wliat was that story about Mr. 
Wilson and the sunk fence ? G-ates are a 
delightful invention, Mr. Wilson ? " 

That grentleman coloured. '' No man in 



152 DIANA GAY. 

liis senses would have taken it," he said, 
colouring, "at least . " 

" Then Mr. Gay and lialf the hunt were 
out of theirs," she said, laughing, " for they 
got over. . Tell me, my dear, what's all this 
about the lord who is coming . and the lord's 
son ? When are they coming . are they to 
stay long ? What's to be the divarshion, as 
the Irish say ? Who are they at all ? . tell 
me about them, do, dear." 

And now, grown affectionate. Miss Kitty's 
arm was round Diana's slight waist. This 
endearment for the time quite won Diana's 
heart. She always felt for her sisters when 
she saw them suffering from strokes such as 
Mr. Wilson had so unkindly given. 

" He is an old friend of papa's, and he has 
been obliged to live an immense deal abroad 
on account of his wife. She has got well at 
last, and papa has not seen him for years ; 
and as my birthday is coming on, why, he 



thought we should have a Httle fun here. 
And you know papa is so good to me, he will 
do whatever I ask or propose. And he says 
you're to come and stay also." 

Mr. Pratt's tax-cart now came round. 

" Good-bye, Miss Gay," he said, as he 
took the reins ; ''but D'Orsay's no 'orse, I 
must tell you." 

Mr. Gay was coming up. 

" What, taking away D'Orsay's character ? 
What's wrong with him ? What d'ye mean, 
Pratt?" 

Diana tossed her head. 



' Mr. Pratt has been at this all daA'. He's 



quite jealous of my poor horse, compared 
with his own enormous, dreadful crea- 
ture." 

"What I "cried Mr. Gay. '^ Wh}^ he'd 
beat his head off, over any country I Pratt, 
are you serious in such a criticism, and 



154 DIANA GAY. 

putting your Flemish dray-horse against my 
Diana's Arabian ? " 

Mr. Pratt swung himself up into his cart . 
what indeed seems to be part of the enjoy- 
ment of that vehicle . and, drawing on what 
looked a pair of metal gloves, said slowly . 

'^ There's to be a drag-hunt at Badgerly 
next week. If you think all that, Mr. Gay, 
you can see then." 

Diana laughed with delight. 

'' A drag-hunt ! . charming ! The very 
thing ! " 

" Then I tell you what, Master Pratt : if 
you come on the back of your great animal, 
I'll match him for a fifty on the back of 
D'Orsay, the stakes to be handed over to the 
owner of the horse . there, duckseycums ! " 
and he looked at her with fondness. 

"Done, Mr. Gay! " said the other, taking 
out his book and pencil. " It's down." 
Then he took his " ribbons " and drove away. 



i( T-'r^-nc*TT " 



D OKSAY. ' 155 

*' 0, what fun . what fun ! " said Diana. 
*' A race, a real race ! I sha'n't sleep for 
thinking of it. Poor darling D'Orsay to be 
talked of in that way ! " 

''Yes," said Mr. Gay; ''and I've heard 
the fellow goes about the country talking 
of me, saying I have no eye for a horse, and 
all that. I don't believe he's a judge 
himself at all. I wish I'd made it a 
hundred now. . "Well, you'll come to us. Miss 
Crowder ? " 

"0, how kind, how nice ! " said the 
Garibaldian, pressing her friend's smaU waist 
in a rapture of gratitude. " I don't know 
what to say to you. I shall be so glad to get 
away from our dungeon, l^o one ever comes 
near us. We have always to be running 
after them, and writing, and fixing days. 
Now I like people pouring in of themselves, 
coming spontaneously . like here. Do ask 
the officers, dear ; lots of them. They'll be 



156 DTANA GAY. 

only too liappy to come. I'll get you Major 
Spring, and Captain Gilpin. They are all 
charming ; and Captain Gilpin so funny. I'll 
ask him to be bring his dress, and do the 
knife-grinder." 

Diana's eyes began to sparkle. '' 0, how 
nice that will be ! And what dress ? " 

'' Of course the real rags. He saw it on a 
real grinder in the street, and got him up to 
the barracks and gave him ten shilhngs for 
the whole. They weren't worth sixpence ; 
but, as Captain Gilpin says, they were worth 
pounds to him; as he couldn't have got 
anything hke them made for ten times the 
money. And he had them boiled down in a 
copper by the mess-man . only think ! And 
it will make you die laughing. But you 
must tell me beforehand, to secure him in 
time." 

This splendid programme quite impressed 
Diana, who looked with some awe at her 



"d'orsay." 157 

friend. Any little plan brought out suddenly 
in this fashion became bathed in golden 
clouds on the instant, and quite dazzled 
her. 

*' What fun we shall have ! " she said. 

"0, he comes to us again and again," said 
the Garibaldian. '* You are sure young 
Chimeleigh is to be with you ? " 

'' 0, certain ! His father is to bring him. 
Why ? " 

'' Because, dear," said the Garibaldian, 
with an air of mock innocence, '' I have 
marked him down as my property. I have 
a feeling that he is charming ; and that we 
should get on dehghtfuUy. But you wouldn't 
help a poor girl, that has no advantages at 
home, and who, if she had such advantages 
as others have, would do as well, my dear. 
But your mamma and papa don't know papa 
would marry me to one of his great girders 
or marine engine-boilers, and think me 



158 DIANA GAT. 

splendidly off. But no, you would not ; no 
girl ever helps a friend." 

Was not this an artful challenge ? It was 
touching our Diana in the most sympathiz- 
ing corner of her gentle heart ; and at once 
another dazzling plan suggested itself . to 
make the splendid young Chimeleigh the 
captive of her dear friend Kitty's charms . 
not of the Kitty beside her, but of the 
romantic helpless girl, " who had no advan- 
tages at home," drawn so skilfully by Kitty 
herself. The arrangement was sealed on the 
spot by some fervent kisses. 

Now the party began to disperse. The 
agricultural faces of the " squires " were 
rather flushed with the unaccustomed cham- 
pagne so early. But it was time to go. 
Gigs and horses were coming round. The 
iron-master's carriage . a gaudy, glittering, 
canary- coloured edifice on wheels, with ser- 
vants in a very glowing crimson livery (Mr. 



a T^'/XTJOA-t'  



d'oksay." 159 

Lugard liad said to Diana it was like " a 
broken damson-tart ") . came heavily up. 
Mr. Crowder heaved himself in heavily, as 
though he were a Lord Mayor. Every one 
had had a most dehghtful morning. 



( 160 ) 



CHAPTER VII. 

MOTHER AND SON. 

On that high road along which indeed were 
disposed most of the residences of our 
characters, and at about a mile's distance 
from Gay Court, was the little villa where 
Mrs. Bligli lived . a small unpretending 
house, bright as new cream, kept without a 
speck, close to the road, with its top story 
peeping warily over the edge of a low wall, 
much as one of her '' nice " maids did when 
the coach was heard passing by. It had 
been an old house, altered, modernized, and 
beautified, much as our thrifty housewives 
will shape and decorate a dress of an old 



MOTHER AND SOX. 161 

cut ; but, like such remodelled garments, tlie 
little piecing and stretching here and there 
betrayed the old date. There were pretty 
greenhouses (which, when the sun shone, 
glistened like a fountain petrified), pretty 
little gardens, orchards, &c. . all on a small 
scale. 

There she lived all the year round by her- 
self, not by any means a recluse, dressing 
handsomely and with taste, and always look- 
ing forward to the visits of her son, who 
came down some three or four times in the 
year. Clergyman, squire, and other neigh- 
bours said she was a wonderfully clever, 
" long-headed " woman. Mr. Gay wished he 
knew about as much of the world as was in 
her little finger. 

*^ I declare she's as fond of that son of 
hers as I am of my little dame at home ; but 
my lord up there in town at his briefs, he 
don't Hke her as much as my poppet does 

I. M 



162 DIANA GAY. 

her daddy . that couldn't be beaten. Why 
don't he have her to hve with him in town, 
and make his breakfast for him hke a gentle- 
man ? He's some calculation about that in 
his head, depend upon it ; for he is a deuced 
knowing fellow. It's very odd." 

But by-and-by a nearer acquaintance with 
the .lady spoken of will show that injustice 
was done to the son, and that the mother 
had excellent reasons for remaining down in 
the country. 

On this evening she was walking up and 
down her garden, with her eyes on the 
ground, her hands joined behind her, and 
her feet stepping forward with a firm regi- 
mental tread. The time was about six 
o'clock. She was dressed in her velvet, 
which so became her, and her figure was 
picturesque. At times she stopped, and 
would call to a. window, "Hannah, look 
again, and see is he coming." 



MOTHEE AND SOX. 163 

After one of these orders, Hannali called 
suddenly, '' Here lie is ! I see a fly at the 
top of the hill." 

In a few seconds more a fly with a port- 
manteau was at the railed gate, and a young 
man had jumped out, and the lady, when she 
heard the news, had gone hastily into her 
drawing-room and sat down. She had time 
to look in the glass and settle her iron- 
grey hair, and then sit queen-like on the 
sofa to receive her son. In a moment a 
voice was heard outside, and a young man, 
entering hastily, was embracing her. 

He was broad-shouldered, strongly-built, 
with fair hair, a broad, high forehead, pale 
blue eyes that wandered thoughtfully over 
to the face of any one who made a remark, 
and rested on that face as if weighing the 
force of what had been said. He had a 
Hght moustache and small beard, and cer- 
tainly looked an experienced man of about 

M 2 



16-i DIANA GAY. 

thirty years of age ; and yet he was no more 
than two or three and twenty. 

They talked long on the sofa, until Hannah 
came to say dinner was ready ; and then 
mother and son walked in with some cere- 
mony. It was very choice ; each dish was 
small, and had been prepared with care. 

" I have got you all your favourite things, 
Robert. I know what you always liked ; 
and there is your favourite wine." 

Robert shook his head. '' I have to give 
up all those good things now, mother," he 
said; ''Doctor Saunders has issued orders 
. the plainest of the plain for me in future." 

"Ah, I had forgot," she said; ''how 
stupid ! Then Hannah shall do a chop for 
you, and you shall eat, and we shall not 
speak until you have done." 

" But that will be so stupid for you ; and 
you are taking nothing." 

'* I like to sit in this way and see you 



MOTHER AND SOX. 165 

oat, provided you enjoy it. Go on . do, 
Robert. Take some more of this ; you 
must be hungry after tliat long journey." 

At niglit, when the lamp was lighted, 
mother and son were seated in the drawing- 
room talking together. They did not rise 
till past midnight. They consulted very 
seriously together. What they said will 
show the character of both. After some 
preface she came to a point that seemed 
to be on her mind. 

" And now about your getting on, Robert. 
You are really doing: so well ? " 

" Xothing could be better. They tell me 
there is no junior of my standing so forward. 
I am so thankful. I assure you, mother, 
the day and niofht toofether is not long 
enough for all I have to get through. It 
is so delightful to be in full, swinging work. 
To start with exhilaration in the morning . 
finish off this . finish off that . then snatch 



166 DIANA GAT. 

breakfast . then on again . more work . 
snatch dinner, and light the lamps for a 
good, comfortable, quiet, delicious study . 
and all the time know that for every hour 
golden guineas are coming in, or rather 
gold and silver guineas . shillings and sove- 
reigns. I wouldn't give up the shilling, 
mother. BuUer, my Q.C., I assure you, 
my dear mother, I know can do nothing 
without me. That is such a back to me; 
for the solicitors know it, and he is so run 
on, a word from him to them . ^ Send that 
to Mr. Bhgh, he knows the papers ' . is 
quite enough." 

" But, my dear Eobert, take care of what 
you have done in interrupting all this run 
of good fortune. You know I would give 
my health for yours any day, or my life 
either; but you look strong and well, and 
take care this is not fanciful." 

The young man paused a little, and an- 



MOTHER AND SON. 167 

swered gravely, *' Do you know I was afraid " 
of that myself for a long time ; but at last it 
came to symptoms there was no mistaking . 
so queer about the head, you know ; and 
once that went, mother, then indeed all 
would be up. But I shouldn't have minded 
myself, only for Saunders, the doctor, a 
good friend, who said, as sure as I lived, in 
six months I must break down. He is a 
barristers' doctor, and has known so many 
do the same. You know I have some self- 
denial, and so I rationally agreed with him 
to stop in time and take a month or two's 
rest, which will quite set me up." 

Mrs. Bligh looked at him thoughtfully. 

''You are always sensible, Eobert. I 
wonder where you got that command of 
yourself. Another, ' getting on ' like you, 
would not have power to stop in his full 
course . and would have worked himself into 
softening of the brain or blindness." 



168 DIANA GAY. 

"There is no merit/* said he, smiling; 
" better to lose a little than lose all. I tell 
them it is drawing bills on your life. I felt 
a little ashamed about BuUer, who is fagging 
himself for a wife and family in the regular 
style . takes his dinner standing, and all 
that. By the way," he added with a little 
hesitation, '' I wanted to tell you about tliat 
also." 

" About what, dear ? " she said. 

*' About Buller and his family. He has 
three sons and" . with hesitation . ''one 
daughter. He is sure to be a Yice-chan- 
cellor one of these days." 

Mrs. Bligh's brows contracted into a 
frown and she drew herself up. 

" Surely." 

''No, no, no," he said good-humouredly ; 
" don't think of such a thing, mother. I 
was only wishing to consult you. People 
tell me it would be a very good thing . that 



MOTHER AND SON. 169 

a hundred others would give their eyes for 
the same chance ; and that it would bind 
BuUer to me securely; that if he were 
made Yice- chancellor, I should come in for 
something very good too ; and in short, you 
see, mother . it might be considered." 

Mrs. Bligh remained silent ; drawn up 
rigidly, with her eyes on the carpet reflec- 
tively. 

"Well," she said at last, ''you have men- 
tioned all the advantages . the business ones 
. but you have said nothing about the girl; 
. what about her ? Do you like her ? Does 
she care for you ? " 

Bligh slowly raised his shoulders. 

'' Well," he said, '' it has not come exactly 
to that. She's a good girl enough . a 
barrister's daughter. But there is the dif- 
ficulty . I do not'' 

" Then," said his mother quickly, '' you 
must not. Don't let it near you. Dismiss 



170 DIANA GAY. 

it altogether. A man of your genius and 
talents must look liigher than that. There 
is a great game before you, if it is played 
properly. You have all the qualities for 
it, and that which is the rarest and most 
precious . caution and self-restraint ; for 
every one breaks down on that. I know 
that you have learned how to wait for the 
right moment, and to know it when it 
comes." 

'' But, my dear mother, what do you 
mean ? " 

" A humdrum lawyer's daughter," she went 
on, " with a beggarly few thousand pounds ! 
A wretched place, and broken-down health, 
going down to a dark office every day ! 
Would you get to know people of rank and 
influence ? Would they come to you in 
your office? My dear Robert, money is 
getting so plenty, and will be getting so 
plenty by-and-by, and those comforts which 



MOTHEE AND SON. 171 

money brings are so common, that talent is 
every day rising in tlie market, and is getting 
scarcer too. They'll discover no gold-fields 
of that article." 

'' Very jnst, mother," he said thoughtfully ; 
'' but what would you have me do ? " 

She went on quickly . 

" I have been laying out plans for you. 
It is most fortunate you are down here. I 
know what can be done, and what you must 
do. Gay Court is the place.^^ 

"What, Diana! . 0, nonsense !" 

" Sense, though. I know it, and I know 
how it can be done. What is your difficulty, 
Eobert . flying too high?" 

'' Yes, I thought so." 

" My dear Robert, that is the most fatal 
delusion of all in the world ; and the best 
advantage for the wise man. Nothing is too 
high, provided you only show you thinJc 
yourself high enough for it. If you are 



172 DIANA GAY. 

timorous and apologetic, you will be taken 
at your own worth., and set down as pre- 
sumptuous. Am I right ?" 

He was listening thouglitfully. 

''It is quite true," he said; "but . *' 

"No people are so accessible as great 
people . people of rank. So with people 
whom you think are above you and ' will not 
think of you.' My dear Robert, I know 
wom^en. The determined perseverance of a 
man, even if he be every way inferior, is not 
at all so disagreeable. They think a compli- 
ment a homage ; and with this basis for a 
man of genius to work on, you see . " 

" Xo one knows and admires your sense 
more than I do, mother," he said ; " but I 
confess in this matter I don't see anything. 
You know how I used to admire her. She 
is a brilliant creature. Even when I was 
thinking^ of Buller's dauo^liter her imao^e used 

O CD CD 

to rise. But to think of this bright girl 



MOTHER AND SON. 173 

clioosing a Digest, a Book of Eeports, for a 
liusband ! She who was accustomed to every- 
thing dehghtful, cheerful ! And her father . ' * 
"What folly!" broke in Mrs. Bligh 
warmly. '^ You say, Robert, there is sense 
in what I say, and yet you donH think so. 
Look at me. You know what I was. Your 
mother. I was Avliat is called ' poor.' But 
I was a born lady in mind, Eobert. We 
were twelve brothers and sisters . my father 
a poor, broken man, my mother a helpless 
woman, overwhelmed with her cares and 
responsibilities, . sisters and brothers a per- 
fect herd, that could do nothing for them- 
selves but eat and walk. I had the only 
head among them ; and I determined I 
would work for myself and rise. I never 
told you, Robert, how I did it. But you 
will say the difl&culties were insurmountable. 
Think of a poor girl struggling out of a 
slough like that. But I did." 



174 DIANA GAY. 

Her son took lier hand kindly. 

'' It was no sclieming, or from no 
adventurous views, but self-preservation. 
I should have sunk. Some charitable 
uncle had left us fifty pounds a-piece. They 
spent all theirs out of hand ; but I kept 
mine. And when theirs was gone, they 
came on me for my wretched scrap. But 
I refused. I wanted it for what would 
benefit them as well as me ; but of course, 
being a herd, they could not understand that. 
We had an aunt who knew some 'nice' 
people, and used to go to Bath now and 
then, . a cold, selfish old maid. For years 
I had tried to get her to take me; for I 
knew I had good looks and good sense, and 
that once there I would have a chance. At 
last with some little money I had saved I 
had to bribe her, and she agreed. You 
know the rest. I triumphed over all diffi- 
calties, and got to Bath. Your father saw 



MOTHER AND SOX. 175 

me, and I married a gentleman. I did it 
myself, and in spite of all difficulties. He 
was ricli then, tliough lie died poor. For a 
poor helpless girl without money to carry out 
a plan of that sort and succeed seemed more 
impossible than what I want 7joib to do." 

Robert Bligh remained silent and thought- 
ful. 

"Now will you make me a promise," she 
went on . " or two or three promises . that 
you will give up the BuUer girl, as you call 
her, for the present?" 

" My dearest mother," he said, cheerfully, 
'* to be sure." 

" Then, that you will work yourself with 
all your will and help me as far as you can 
in what I propose, I have prepared the 
way already. You know what privileged 
people mothers are. They are the only 
people tolerated in puffing their relations : 
they are admired for doing so. I have 



176 DIANA GAY. 

talked to 'her about you ; and . Do you 
remember that business at the school ?'' 

''With Dick Lugard ? . to be sure." 

'' She was always a little curious about 
that . of course flattered, as any girl would 
be, to have even two boys fighting for her. 
I told her what was the real cause . namely, 
that you had taken up the cudgels for your 
poor old mother. Ah, Eobert, I cannot tell 
you how I felt that, my dear child ! " 

Eobert took her hand, and kissed her 
cheek. " Old mother, indeed ! " he said. 
'' What folly ! You want a compliment. 
BuUer says you're the handsomest woman 
of your time he has ever met." 

" Foolish ! " said she ; but by an instinc- 
tive motion her hand went up to her head 
and smoothed her hair. 

Who shall talk of such as vanity ? Men's 
conceit is the vanity of monkeys, and purely 
selfish ; women's, in the main, is but one 



MOTHER AND SON. 177 

more token of affection and homage . decking 
themselves, and keeping their charms fresh, 
but to retain the affection of the grand 
creatures who own and control them. 

*'Lugard," she went on softly, "or his 
father, I suspect, contrived to make her 
believe that it was all your triumph and 
overbearing manner on the victory. That 
was artful. But I told her the other day 
how nobly you had behaved. She was very 
curious, and comes back to it often. She is 
just the same ; but you will have to struggle 
for it. Young Lugard will be here himself." 

" He will ! " said Bligh, starting. 

'' Yes ; with all the tinsel of the army on 
him. His father, I can see, is bent on it, 
and means to find him the brains ; but they 
are both fools." 

" Dick Lugard coming ? " repeated Bligh, 
thinking to himself very earnestly. " Is he 
going to stop with them ? " 

I. N 



178 DIANA GAT. 

" Yes. You think that is a great and un- 
fair advantage ? " 

'' Well . " began Robert, smiling. 

" Well, it is one you shall have also. Mr. 
Gay has asked you. There is a lord coming 
down . a man of great influence; and your 
wise head, Eobert, can do something there 
incidentally. The time won't be thrown 
away, you'll see. One day in the world 
does more than months in a study. 0, . 
and this is another difficulty : Lord Bell- 
man's son is coming . that young Chime- 
leigh . and I know that is what Mr. Gay is 
thinking of." 

" And, mother, you want me to struggle 
against all these influences. Absurd ! " 

" Let me hear of no difficulties," she said, 
rising and beginning to light her lamp. "In 
the number of candidates is safety. With 
all the love of folly, girls of our time have 
nature in them still. As I told you, I can 



MOTHER AND SON. 179 

see the reign of money will go by. The 
thing is not such a rare or wonderful thing 
after all. Penniless girls are married for 
their beauty ; why not penniless men for 
their wit or talents?" 

Her lamp was now in her hand, and its 
light played on her face, showing its rather 
stem lines all lit up with a soft pleasure. 

'' I feel happier and lighter to-night than 
I have done for long. Do you know, I feel 
as I did at the hotel on the night I entered 
Bath. Others would have felt dismal and 
low-spirited ; but I was full of heart ; and, 
my dear Robert, I am so happy you are with 
me. Do you think your old mother . for I 
am your old mamma . a dreadful schemer ? 
No, you don't. Getting on in the world is 
not scheming: it is living honourably, and 
getting the fruit of the talents God has given 
us. The fools and propriety-people . who 
canH get on, but would if they could . turn 

N 2 



180 DIANA GAY. 

up tlieir eyes. Good-niglit, my dear boy. 
We shall liave Diana yet ! " 

And she walked solemnly, as she always 
did, to the door. Then she looked back, and 
nodded to him full of confidence. The clock 
on the chimney-piece had ''tinged" twelve 
with no solemnity of chime. It was like a 
crying child wanting to be taken to bed. 

Robert Bligh remained behind, and began 
to walk up and down and think . a habit of 
his every night before he went to bed. With 
this motion he had grown to like thinking 
over everything, planning things for the next 
day, and, besides, giving himself a little 
divertissement at the close of the day's hard 
labour by setting little pictures from memory 
before himself, and, what was better, paint- 
ing in more gorgeous scenery for the future 
. the next best entertainment to dreaming. 
Many an hour had he given to this little 
relaxation, and had seen himself high in 



MOTHEE AND SOX. 181 

glory on the bencli, or lower, pleading and 
gaining dramatic causes ; and very often too 
the dust-clouds rising from the law-books 
cleared away, and a delicate and bright 
figure rose up before and entertained him, 
for the boy's love still lingered. But, as the 
reader will have guessed, there was a greater 
passion than love in this gentleman's heart. 
His mind was of a highly Scotch turn, and 
to the belief that advancement in the world 
was his inherited creed everything was to 
bend. 

In this waking dream he heard the clock 
give a smart ting . '' one I " Then he took 
his lamp, and walked away softly to bed. 



( 182 ) 



CHAPTEE VIII. 

THE RIVALS MEET. 

The Galthorpe Mercury, which had many 
subscribers in that and other adjacent towns, 
and kept its eye a good deal on the movements 
of the gentry, soon discovered what was 
going to take place at Gay Court. '*"We 
understand," said the Mercury, " that the 
spirited proprietor of Gay Court intends 
shortly celebrating the birthday of his ac- 
complished daughter and heiress, Miss Diana 
Gay, by a series of festivities at his hospit- 
able mansion. Several guests of distinction 
are expected : among others, the Right Hon. 
the Lord Bellman and his son. Viscount 



THE RIVALS MEET. 183 

Chimeleigli ; Mr. and Lady Margaret Bow- 
man; Mr. Lugard and Ricliard Lugard, 
Esq., 1st (Du Barry's Own) Hussars; Mr. 
and Mrs. Crowder ; Mr. Bligli, barrister-at- 
law ; and others. We understand tliat Mr. 
Gay purposes tlirowing open his princely 
mansion for a grand ball to tlie neighbour- 
hood in honour of this most interesting oc- 
casion." The Mercury '' understood " all 
this, and much more, almost as soon as the 
scheme had been conceived in the mind of 
the princely owner. We may wonder how 
Mercuries discover these things ? Have 
they an instinct ? or through what channel, 
above or below, do they attain to their 
mysterious knowledge ? It is known, how- 
ever, that Mr. Dawkins, footman at Gay 
Court, on a recent visit to Calthorpe, had 
been met by a shorthand gentleman, and 
handsomely treated at the Greyhound Inn. 
Miss Diana was in great delight at the 



184 PIANA GAY. 

prospect. She spent a good deal of 
time planning and superintending arrange- 
ments. A careless remark of lier father's, 
to the effect that there was a good deal of 
responsibility on her little shoulders noiu, had 
sunk deep into her mind. The bedrooms 
lay a good deal on that mind and shoulders ; 
and her forehead contracted a little as she 
thought, with almost painful anxiety, how so 
many were to be fitted up with becoming 
magnificence. Her difficulty was with Mrs. 
Simms the housekeeper, a lady of generally 
tightened aspect . in face, figure, and dress ; 
and the tip of whose nose, at moments of 
contradiction, quivered like a dog's. Of this 
person our Diana stood in awe, feeling utter 
helplessness in her presence ; and, knowing 
the lady's indisposition to recognize or even 
see any responsibility on Miss Diana's side, 
that young lady, with much diffidence, pre-^ 
faced all her wishes with a " Don't you think, 



THE TvIVALS MEET. 185 

Mrs. Sims . " wliicli, according to all known 
laws of woman, was but inviting cold shak- 
ings of hea.d, and a plain '^ not thinking," 
from a person consulted. She was allowed 
her way as far as suggestion went ; and then 
the familiar, with a smile of pity, said, '^0, 
never do, miss ! You may leave it hall to 
me, miss." 

Very grand and extensive preparations 
were made under more competent super- 
intendence ; but her father, carrying out 
the good-natured fiction of Miss Diana's 
labours, would say as she came down, 
'' Working on still ? . another hard day for 
my little poodums" . he had a whole voca- 
bulary of these terms of endearment . " she 
is doing wonders, and becoming quite the 
mistress of the house." Kisses were of 
course freely lavished in return for this com- 
pliment. Her father showered guineas on 
her; but her current coin with which she 



186 DIANA GAY. 

repaid him were kisses ; and these payments 
were given with the abundance with which a 
sultan would bestow purses of gold. 

Still there were matters which Mr. Gay 
did not exactly trust to that " little 
head." The two or three best bedrooms 
were handed over to Messrs. Debenham, the 
eminent London upholsterers, for redecora- 
tion in sumptuous style, not at all in snob- 
bish compliment to the lord who was to 
occupy them ; but such restoration had been 
put off and off since the days of the late 
owner, who had partially taken the matter 
in hand, and then let all decay a good deal, 
and this seemed a good opportunity. 

A cooh of eminence . a perfect Knight of 
the Bath, if that answers to a cordon hleu . 
was coming down, with an aide-de-camp or 
two ; and it seemed also a suitable occasion 
to inaugurate the services of the new butlee, 
vice an ancient, useless, and hitherto irre- 



THE RIVALS MEET. 187 

movable retainer, who had held office during 
the last forty years. That tyrant, for such 
he was, was aghast at this characteristic in- 
gratitude ; made no remark on the matter 
to Mr. Gray, but excited much terror in 
Diana's heart, by repeating, half to himself, 
half to her, " Wait until to-morrow . or next 
day ! " 

One morning, when Mr. Gay was out, 
Diana was told that there was a gentleman 
wishing to see her in the drawing-room ; 
and that annoimcement obliging her, as it 
always did, to dart to the glass, adjust hair- 
bows, &c., with a hasty but sufficient adorn- 
ment, she fluttered down to see the stranger. 
It was a tall banker-hke-looking gentleman 
with a gold guard-chain. He was carelessly 
turning over a photograph-book. He bowed 
to her. " Miss Gay, I believe ? Mr. Chew- 
ton, please." 

Diana remembered the name, and started 



188 DIANA GAY. 

witli surprise and a little alarm. This caused 
lier to '' blurt out " a little ungraciously, '' 0, 
the new butler ! " 

He shivered a little at this calling a spade 
a spade, but bowed with dignity as one who 
would have said, " I see you don't mean it." 
He said, '' I have jest come from Sir Wilson 
Towers, and I left the kessel this morning." 

He saw that this had great effect on Diana; 
but it was only his manner. 

"And . and," she asked in embarrass- 
ment, '.' what would you wish to do ? . 
what do you want?" 

" 0, I have jest come . I wished to pay my 
dooties to the lady of the 'ouse on arrivin', . 
only the usewl thing; the 'ousekeeper all in 
good time, m'm. With your leave, we shall 
put over business till to-morrow. I should 
be 'ardly equal to dooty to-day, after the 
journey and all that. I a-sewer you, miss, I 
felt it a good deal, parting with Sir Wilson 



THE KIVALS MEET. 189 

and his family. He came down with me to 
the door, and his last words was, * Chewton, 
we part as man and man, with feelings of 
mewtewl respect on both sides.' " 

Diana, as this gentleman withdrew, felt a 
little chill. She to be mistress ! . give Mm 
orders ! Alas ! at best she felt she conld but 
submit propositions to him for his opinion 
and discretion. 

Later on that day, which was about a week 
after the portrait had been presented, Mr. 
Gay came home boisterously. His hearty 
voice was heard in the hall, and rang upstairs 
like a bell. ''Where is she? . where's 
popsy ? Are you there, duck ? Come 
down ; I have got something here for 
you." 

Diana came running, and saw a strongly- 
built gentleman, with a fair beard, standing 
beside her father. 

"Who's this fellow?" he said, laughing. 



190 DIANA GAY. 

" Guess him as you would a riddle. Come, 
popsy, you know liim." 

" Ah, to be sure ! " said Diana gaily, and 
putting out her hand ; '' Eobert Bligh ! But 
you're so altered ! " 

'' 0," said her father, " there's a cut-and- 
thrust for you ! . unless you add, for the 
better, eh ? Come, say that, or you'll make 
the man miserable." 

"Well," said Diana reflectively, "I do 
think for the better . a little for the better." 

" There's for you ! He's to dine with us ; 
so see that we have enough to eat, poppet ; 
we depend on you. I assure you, Bligh, this 
young lady is beginning to keep the house in 
order. Only for her, we'd be all at sixes and 
sevens." 

This reminded Diana. " By-the-bye, papa," 
she said, " there was a gentleman . I mean 
the new butler . here." 

" A gentleman ! . the new butler ! Ha, 



THE RIVALS MEET. 191 

lia, ha ! " And Mr. Gay burst into one of 
his rough laughs. " Where's the fellow ? 
Towers wrote me he was a bit of a swell, but 
a good servant. Where's the fellow ? 

Bligh was looking at her with his thought- 
ful look. It was some years since he had 
seen her, and he could not but be struck 
with the change . the ripening and more 
womanly air, the little tinge of colour in the 
cheek. As usual, she had on her trinkets. 

''What are you looking at me so for?" 
she said, half seriously. " Do you know, I 
think you have forgotten me ? " 

He laughed. "No; only so much has 
happened since ; that is, so much laiv has 
happened, for that has been my life." 

'' And you are coming to stay with us ? I 
hope so. There is going to be all sorts of 
fun." 

" Yes," he said ; '' I came over to say that 
I would." 



192 DIANA GAY. 

^' Then it is a long time since you have 
been here. Would not you like to see the 
garden and improvements, and my garden 
and new summer-house ? " . 

" 0, immensely," said he. 

She cast down her eyes demurely. " Then 
shall I ring and tell them to send the 
gardener to take you round . he knows all 
the names, you see, so much better than I 
do ? Or, if you would prefer it, I could get 
my bonnet . " 

The reader will see that our heroine had a 
kind of faintly mischievous turn, and was 
subject to little fits of this sort . most per- 
fectly natural . which gave her all the 
piquancy that was her charm. 

Mr. Bligh, looking at her in his thoughtful 
way, answered her after a moment : "I 
should like the gardener . and Miss Diana 
also." 

Mr. Bligh therefore, for all his learning 



THE RIVALS MEET. 193 

and bookisliness, did not take everything an 
jpied de la lettre. 

The young lady got her bonnet, and 
presently both went away with all that old 
*' common form" of conversation known so 
long as '' going to look at the garden." 

Bligh then went home to dress for dinner. 
As he entered the drawing-room he saw 
there were others present ; and Mr. Gay, 
greeting him heartily, as though it was a 
month since they had parted, took him by 
the arm with both hands, and led him up. 

'' There's some one here you should know," 
he said. " This is a day for old friends. 
Xow, who's this ? Look at him." 

A shght, fair, good-looking young man 
Avas standing by Diana, and looked up. 
'' How do you do, Bligh ? " he said warmly. 
" You remember me ? " 

Bligh said, '' What, Lugard ! I am so 
glad." . 



194 DIANA GAY. 

Mr. Gay, with Bligh's arm still captured, 
stood listening to the greeting. 

'' I say, popsy," he said, '' shall we ever 
forget the last time these two gentlemen 
met ? . I say, Doctor, come over, and I'll tell 
you as good a thing as you ever heard." 

This was to a clergyman, who, to such an 
appeal and to such a treat held out, could 
scarcely grudge the trouble of walking 
across. Mr. Gay had him by the arm too. 

'.The best thing, Doctor, . as good as a 
play. Five or six years ago we were at a 
school on the day when the lads were 
showing off. You know what they do at 
Wheeler's ? " 

" To be sure," said the Doctor ; '^ the 
exhibition-day." 

" Well, Di was in the garden after all was 
over, and she came on these two, at it ding- 
dong . a regular duel. High words had 
passed, and they were giving each other the 



THE EIVALS MEET. 195 

satisfaction gentlemen expect. Ha, lia! That 
was the way they parted." 

Bligh smiled. " I have often laughed over 
that," he said. 

Mr. Lugard smiled and laughed ; but the 
laugh was a little forced. " I believe it has 
been said again and again that college 
victories or defeats are no signs of success 
in after-life. But it tvas funny, Miss Diana 
catching us at it so hard and fast. Boys 
will be boys, you know." 

" That used to be the case," said the 
Doctor ; " but boys will be men, is the new 
version, it seems to me." 

'' I can guess what the battle was about," 
said Mr. Gay in good-humour : " that little 
coquette there, as she was then, had been 
trying on some of her tricks . this end of 
the plank up, then down. 0, don't tel] me; 
I was watching . eh ? " 

Bligh struck in eagerly, '* No, no ; 

2 



196 DIANA GAY. 

she had. nothing to do with it ; no, 
indeed ! " 

Lugard laughed. "I see BHgh is just the 
same downright fellow he was . blurts out the 
truth always, and nothing but the truth." 

Dinner was now announced. As they 
went down, Lugard took the other's arm. 

*' Well," he said, " so we meet again here. 
I am so glad. To tell you the truth, I did 
not expect to find you here. I was told you 
were grinding away up in town, and that 
you could not spare half an hour." 

''It is very kind of you," said the other 
warmly, *' to say so ; and you are not more 
glad than I am. I was obliged to come 
here to re-fit. I had been overdoing it a 
little." 

'' Sit yourself there, Lugard," said Mr. 
Gay ; '' and you, Bligh, on this side. Now 
we'll see what Mons. Frangsay has done for 
us. But now, what ivas at the bottom of 



THE EIVALS MEET. 197 

those fisticuffs ? for there is a mystery 
among you all." 

Diana tittered, quite delighted. '.' Yes, 
papa, there is ; and you are not to know." 

'* I was just going to tell him," said 
Lugard ; " but shall not now, without your 
leave." 

^' Come, popsy, say the word ; don't let 
the poor old man famish for want of a 
secret." 

"Well, then," said Miss Diana, with an 
air of reflecting anxiously, "he may know." 

" Why, then," said Lugard, splendidly, 
" it was all my fault, every bit of it. The 
fact is, when he said he had got the prize to 
give pleasure to Mrs. Bligh, I said some- 
thing about running to his mammy and an 
old woman. I had never seen Mrs. Bligh 
then, who, as I have heard, is anything but 
an old woman, and is a very charming 
person. So it was a mere general bit oi 



198 DIANA GAY. 

impudence on my part; and I mean to go 
over to-morrow to pay my respects, and in 
that way make as handsome an apology as 
I can.'^ 

This generous amende excited great ad- 
miration. Diana looked over with a little 
awe, as she always did when there was any 
chivalry displayed ; and Eobert Bligh's face 
glowed with pleasure. 

" Indeed you must come," he said ; '' and 
I know you will like her." 

The dinner Was very good and dainty. The 
artist had not put forth all his strength. He 
had just given a hint of what he could do, as 
Meissonier would take up a pen and sketch 
on a napkin. His palette was not spread as 
yet. 

''I declare," said Mr. Gay, our friend the 
chef has done very well. Try some of this, 
Doctor." 

Such a delicate dinner, with nothing in the 



THE EIVALS MEET. 199 

gross, no joints that should have cranes to 
swing them on the table, but with everything 
choice. How it stimulated spirits, conversa- 
tion, everything ! There was an alacrity, a 
spontaneousness. Every eye glanced round 
the table joyously. In every heart there is 
that epicure corner. Lugard was in glowing 
spirits. He began to tell of his regiment . 
its doings, not in the official way with which 
the dining- out story-teller unfolds his stores, 
but with an easy rambling. Little descrip- 
tions and sketches are more entertaining 
than legends with ''points" and "jokes," 
even though they be *' uncommonly good 
things," or with more vainglorious people, 
"the best thing you ever heard." He told 
them of Spring, and of Gilpin, their inim- 
itable regimental humorist. 

"0," said Diana enthusiastically, " I am 
told he is the most diverting creature . that 
he can make you die laughing." 



200 DIANA GAY. 

" He ! On tlie contrary, he is tlie most 
wearisome fellow. I wish to Heaven we had 
him out. He's got a suit of old clothes he 
bought from a man in the street, and he goes 
about doing a knife-grinder at houses, the 
stupidest exhibition . really, I am always 
ashamed of the man." 

Diana looked grave at this account, which 
differed a good deal from the more en- 
thusiastic one given by her friend '' Kitty." 
So differently do things strike different 
minds. 

" That was the man you were talking of 
having here, dear,*' said her father. " Never 
mind, we'll have him over ; he'll amuse the 
servants." 

Then Mr. Lugard gave other sketches and 
details of their barrack-life, which were gay 
and interesting : how they were still going 
on persecuting that young child Poole, filling 
his boots with wet sand, making apple-pies in 



THE RIVALS MEET. 201 

his bed, and other such annoyances. The last 
and most ingenious device was perching a 
small tin can of T\'ater just over his door, 
with a stringy connectino- it with the door- 
handle ; so that when he came home at night 
in the dark, a watery Jupiter descended on 
his head in a shower of block-tin, and hurt 
him severely. 

This was Mr. Blio-li's classical illustration, 
which, however, was only ''taken " by Mr. 
Gay and the Doctor. 

" That," said Lugard, " was pushing things 
too far; for the poor boy's head was all cut 
and bleeding, and he was quite stunned, and, 
though I had put sand, and his own tooth- 
brushes mixed, in his boots, I think this was 
not fair ; and so I told the fellows. But 
Spring and Cadby are always at this childish 
work; and last night the poor lad came 
running in to me for protection. So I told 
them I wouldn't have it, and it must be 



202 DIANA GAY. 

stopped, or I'd bring it before the colonel ; 
and so I shall." 

Magnanimous Lugard ! protecting the 
weak, helping the helpless ! . so we may sup- 
pose he appeared to our Diana. And it must 
be said he told his little narrative, not with 
any view of showing off, but just to amuse 
the company. 

^'A most proper feeling on your part, 
sir," said the clergyman warmly, '' and 
does you great credit. The young man 
might have been driven to self-destruction." 

liUgard then continued rambling pleasantly. 
Now about Colonel Rigby, a youngish colonel, 
who presumed on his good looks, and fancied 
the ladies were sighing for him. '' Which 
indeed they are, I believe," added Lugard. 

And Mr. Gay says on that : "I don't 
know a pleasanter berth than that of an un- 
married colonel. He is positively hunted, my 
dear. Even the married old stout weather- 



THE RIVALS MEET. 203 

beaten fellows with great (I beg their pardon) 
* whacking ' wives, like big troopers in their 
own regiment . you remember ' Mrs. Mac- 
Phairson' popsykins ; I think she could 
swallow up my little woman altogether . we 
know what swells they are." 

So Lugard went on, bringing out his little 
mihtary figures and scenery with very good 
effect. The scarlet side of society is seduc- 
tive enough : it has a theatrical air ; its gold 
and colours smd fanfares are grateful to the 
eye ; and the air which the consciousness of 
their trappings inspires, the haughtiness, in- 
souciance, or superiority which is de rigueur 
with the military all the world over, excites 
curiosity and respect, if it does not attract. 
It is the most spectacular of professions, 
and beside it the colours of the others seem 
to fade and grow dull. 

Robert Bligh listened for a long time with 
great interest to these details. Lugard rose 



204 DIANA GAY. 

in his spirits, grew more voluble and com- 
municative in liis way, laughed loud and long, 
and became exuberant. Ko wonder the 
Doctor said, as he was going that night, that 
there was a fund of nature in that young 
man that was sure to carry him over every 
difficulty in life. 

'' And he will fly them, too," said Mr. Gay, 
'.'without touching a stone." 

But suddenly Bligli, who was naturally a 
silent man, and always required a sort of 
privacy and encouragement to bring out his 
gifts, looked over at Diana, and saw her 
stealing one of her half- shy, half-reverent 
looks at Lugard ; and this look, so full of 
admiration for such gifts, roused him from 
his inaction. The image of Mrs. Bligh, 
sitting up at home, with her lamp beside 
her, waiting for him to enter and tell the 
whole progress of the night, presented 
itself. He knew that even that moment, 



THE EIVALS MEET. 1.0 .:> 

thougli she was with her book, her thouglits 
were wandering over to that httle dinner, 
and speculating " how Eobert was getting 
on ; " or she had put her book away, and was 
walking up and down impatiently, with her 
hands joined behind her. So, waiting for the 
next opening, he struck iu with something 
about his oitii profession. But our Bligh had 
not that taste for " shunting " conversation 
off on to another line, which indeed requires 
a pointsman of the very neatest touch. 

'.' I don't know wlw," he said at last, 
" that taste for practical joking should belong- 
to the army alone. We don't find it in 
either of the other professions. There must 
be some special reason." 

Lugard was just opening off with a sketch of 
a certain major who had dined with them not 
long before, but was checked by this remark. 

" A bit of philosophical inquiry," he said. 
*' I see, Doctor Syntax still goes on." 



206 DIANA GAY. 

'' Doctor Syntax ! " said Mr. Gay ; " what 
about him ? " 

Diana knew the name and tittered ; and 
the Doctor saying it was a most humorous 
bit of buffoonery, though a httle profane in 
parts, she laughed still more. 

" Only a bit of old school-days," said 
Lugard, smiling from the feeling that he was 
^'leading the house" still. ''Shall I tell? 
We used to call our friend there Doctor 
Syntax, he was so much wiser than any of 
us, . a term of respect, you see, . and from 
all the little boys who were behindhand with 
their lessons running to him to help them." 

" Well, and I think it was uncommon 
good-nature of him to do so," said Mr. Gay 
heartily ; '' and if so, it was a compliment." 

Miss Diana's face, which was like a 
delicate weather-glass during a conversation, 
and reflected every change, was here turned 
to Bhgh with deep sympathy. For with 



THE RIVALS MEET. 207 

this young lady the story of anything gene- 
rous or good had always the deepest interest, 
and stirred her heart. 

Then Lugard said quickly, ''Indeed that's 
true, and I myself have come to him in my 
distresses and difficulties ; though I helieve,^^ 
added he, with a sly look round the table, 
" I showed him a little too much of the weak 
points, especially during the last quarter . 
eh, Bligh ? He was so quiet and shrewd, 
we never dreamed he was using his eyes all 
the time." 

There again was a point against that 
gentleman ; for though the speech was in 
jest, somehow it seemed to help to explain 
that old defeat a little. 

Bligh coloured. '' I should scorn such 
conduct," he said warmly; ''even as a 
school-boy I always told the little I knew 
with just the one object . just to help those 
who came to me." 



208 DIANA GAY. 

" Surely I said so," said Lugard, " and 
said it as handsomely as I could. My dear 
fellow, you don't want it illuminated and 
engrossed on vellum, and signed and sealed 
. I admit the old obligations. Mr. Gay, 
you didn't meet Bateman the general ? That 
reminds me. He requires everything by 
letters : in fact we call him Old Put-it-in- 
writing. I assure you I have asked him 
a thing, and he has agreed ; and when I was 
going away he calls out, ' By the way, you'd 
better put that in writing.' And if you 
didn't, he'd say afterwards he had no official 
knowledge of it. It is quite common to hear 
our fellows : 'Where are you going, Cadby?' 
' Only just up to Old Put-it-in-writing.' Ha, 
ha ! I beg your pardon, Bligh ; you're not 
a bit like him ; and I didn't mean to say 
you were. But somehow, what we were 
saying just suggested Bateman." 



( 209 ) 



CHAPTER IX. 



riEST CHECK. 



Now the young officer caracoled gaily and 
pleasantly on liis liglit pony, and Robert 
Bligh saw tliat liis solid conversational cob 
could not do more than amble heavily after. 
So with a sigh he felt he must be con- 
tent with this indifferent progress. After 
all, " Common Sense " and " Very-w^ell- 
informed '* are dowdy, housekeeper-looking 
women, whom we may respect for^ their 
virtue and propriety; but they are dull 
company compared with the flashy grisettes 
whom we call Nonsense and Fun. 

'' Come, Lugard," said Mr. Gay, '' what 

I. V 



210 DIANA GAY. 

name did they give you? You had one 
as well as the rest . out with it. At my 
school we had a fellow they called Bats- 
tails,^^ 

Diana laughed at this notion. " papa!" 
she said. 

'*No invention, I assure you, popsy. . 
Gome, Mr. Bligh, what was his ? " 

" Not a very pleasant one," said Lugard 
in a sort of affected confusion. " Pan . 
what do you think of that. Miss Diana ? " 

" Odious ! " said the young lady. ''' What 
does it mean ? " 

"You remember that," said Lugard, ap- 
pealing to Bligh. " It was Pan at this end 
of the playground . Pan here. Pan there. 
I used to be sick of it." 

'.' But what was the fun of it ? " said Mr. 
Gray; "was it after the god . the fellow 
with the pipes ? " 

"No: . short for Panther, The fellows 



FIRST CHECK. 211 

said I used to spring like one. Absurd ! " 
Here, again, he affected deprecation. But 
still the epithet was complimentary and 
even romantic, holding the associations of 
the glossy, brilliant coat, his lithe figure, 
and graceful spring. So here Lugard 
"scored" once more. 

Now the ladies retired; that is, Diana 
rose and fluttered to the door, smiling and 
tittering, and then passed Mr. Lugard, who 
was holding it open, and who had a mys- 
terious interview with her . his head outside 
in the hall, his figure inside with the gentle- 
men, and who came back to his seat smiling. 
Then the wine went round, and they talked 
wisdom and politics . which are of course 
wisdom . and soon introduced " the finest 
horse in the kingdom," an animal surpris- 
ingly common, and which every one has 
seen or heard of a good many times in his 
life. On the shaking out the folds of this 

p 2 



212 DIANA GAT. 

equine banner a cordiality and unanimity set 
in which no other subject could have invited. 

"Bellman and I were schoolfellows/* said 
Mr. Gay ; " and I am so glad to have him 
here. I want to show him we have a horse 
in these parts ; for he is rather sore about 
a couple he got from a dealer, and Avhich 
belonged to poor Freeman before he broke 
up. With all his money . and he was liberal 
enough of it, God knows . poor Freeman 
would do you in a horse if he could." 

" Lord bless you ! " cried Lugard in his 
impetuous way, " every man . the greatest 
saint among us . feels inclined to do that, if 
the opportunity comes." 

" Dear me ! " said the clergyman in a 
soft surprise, " how amazing that is I The 
old Adam, I suppose . always the old Adam." 

Bligh had his brow bent and his expres- 
sion of thought on. 

''It is very curious, all that," he said ; 



FIRST CHECK. 213 

*' and I am sure quite just. I wonder could 
it be explained in this way, that defects in 
a horse are so much of a moral sort that 
the warranty can be stretched a good deal ; 
just as about human ciiaracter, and . " 

*' 0, listen to Doctor Syntax!" said 
Lugard boisterously, and standing up to 
put his hands on Bligh's shoulders. '' See 
him coming down on us with his hard logic. 
Now he was going to say, like the way 
mammas will tell nothing about the 
temper, &c., of their daughters, but warrant 
them to any extent. For shame, Bligh." 

'' Indeed . " began Bligh, smiling gravely. 

'^ Putting ladies and horses on a level . 
such a coarse idea ! I suppose, sir, the 
next thing will be to have regularly-ap- 
pointed ' Yets ' . matrimonial vets . who for 
ten-and-six will lift up girl's lips, put their 
fingers on their teeth . shame ! Ha, 
ha, ha ! " 



214 DIANA GAY. 

"Ha, lia, ha!" laughed Mr. Gay, with 
his strong lusty laugh of enjoyment. But 
Lugard was gone. This was a specimen of 
his '' spirits," and he was fond of boisterously 
constructing such far-fetched sets of opinions 
for friends and giving them some such 
absurd development. 

" A cheerful fellow," said Mr. Gay. " No 
fear of his not getting on. He'd walk up 
to the biggest swell of them all, just as 
he'd walk up to a cannon ; and the first 
requires more courage, I can tell you. The 
two of them upstairs will be knocking up 
3ome fun, I can tell you." 

Bligh had looked uneasily after him as he 
left the room. He could not do the same. 
Mr. Gay would have stopped Jiim, and 
brought him back ; or, if he had persisted, 
would have thought it " free and easy 
rather, in another man's house." There are 
happy people in the world, who have the 



FIRST CHECK. 215 

art of getting doors opened, obtaining 
admission into private grounds, reserved 
seats, &c. : they have manner, which is 
better than a purse, and saves certainly fifty 
per cent, of their income. But now Bhgh 
joined in these praises with infinite warmth. 

" 0, he is sure to get on ; he is so ready 
. never at a loss. It was just the way at 
school. N'ot one of us could say the things 
to the Doctor he could." 

" Ah, yes ; ah, yes," said the clergyman 
in his plaintive voice; ''very true. There 
are persons in our profession of . er . that 
sort, who, I am afraid, use those means to 
push themselves." 

'*Ah, we could name a few, eh? " said 
Mr. Gay . " Doctor P., and our friend A., 
the vicar of M ? Help yourself : . no more ? 
Come, come, we must finish this, and no 
excuse." 

When they at last went up to the draw- 



216 DIANA GAY. 

ing-room, they saw Miss Diana and Mr. 
Lugard far off in the next room at the piano. 
She was busy teaching that gentleman to 
play a little patois air she had picked up 
abroad. Lugard was playing, and the 3^oung 
lady was standing by, correcting and chiding 
with mock impatience. Lugard, indeed, 
knew little more than his notes, and could 
only " strum." 

'' Here," he said, starting up, " sing it for 
the company . come." 

The Doctor came softly and slowly gliding 
in, with that smiling difl&dence which gentle- 
men assume after dinner. "0, do let us 
hear it," he said. 

" Come, popsy, tune that sweet little fiddle 
of yours," said her father. " Sing us the 
Sarahande,^^ 

" 0, papa," said Diana, "you know I don't 
sing before people, and Mr. Robert Bligh 
such a judge." 



FITtST CHECK. 217 

But she began nevertheless, with a very 
small, child-like touch, and, it must be said, a 
little straggling in the harmonies ; but still 
the air was pretty, and the voice very sweet : 

" O, la Sarabande, 
J'ai la vu clanser ! " 

At the end Lugard good-humouredly took 
Bligh by the shoulders. 

'' Come, you severe fellow, what have you 
to find fault with in that ? Can you pick a 
flaw, a demurrer . anything against the rules, 
eh ? If you only saAV him, Miss Diana, with 
his judicial eye on you, Avaiting for a false 
note." 

Diana tossed her head until her trinkets 
jingled again. '' He is quite welcome, I am 
sure," she said. 

At last they were going away. 

'' Recollect, Doctor, you are booked to us 
on Monday . our first day . no excuses. We 



218 DIANA GAY. 

shall have a little fun. Of course I only say 
it in the name of popsy here, who is mistress 
and empress, and all that. . Eh, Dinah duck, 
won't you invite the Doctor ? " 

Diana made him a very graceful and 
queen-like curtsey, and said gravely, ^' I 
hope the Doctor will honour us with his 
company on Monday next." 

Lugard and Bligh went home together 
part of the way. Lugard had his ''trap," 
and would drop his friend. 

" Here is a good cigar for you too," he 
said ; '' and I want to talk to you as we 
go along. I can drive and talk. What did 
you think of this evening ? Charming 
house. I like the very atmosphere of 
it . even that rough, good-natured, and 
genuine father. Nothing old-fashioned about 
him too, except his heartiness and kind- 
ness. And that piquant lively little Diana ; 
though I don't know why we call her little 



FIRST CHECK. 219 

. she's not little. Bj the way, I don't 
think you enjoyed the night so much. You 
had some Contingent Remainder or knotty 
point running through your head. I watched 
you several times. She said so too." 

'' ]^ot at all," said Bligli, a little warmly. 
''You are always saying something of that 
sort . that I am judicial, or wise, or full of 
common sense, when I am not thinking of 
such a thing." 

Luo:ard lauo^hed and touched his horse 
complacently with his whip. 

" I thought that was all in your way, and 
that it was the highest compliment. Well, 
I must mind for the future. Don't you find 
her improved, and yet much the same as she 
was when we saw her last ? I am glad 
she has not lost that native . that naivete. 
Native naivete : come now, you're going to 
say that's cacophonous . isn't that the word ? 
But I forgot. Do you know, my dear 



220 DIANA GAY. 

Syntax . you must let me call you that for 
old times and old sclioolfellowsliip . " 

'*To be sure," said Bligli, good-liumour- 
edly ; " only not before people. It makes 
one a little absurd." 

" But it will slip out. I say, what an 
enviable position that girl has ! . not a 
trouble, not a shadow of a care . everything 
is happiness, everything at her feet . a de- 
voted father ; houses, horses, happiness ; 
lands, tenements, and hereditaments, eh, 
Doctor ? . all hers. Do you know," he said 
suddenly . *' shall I tell you a little secret ? 
My father, who is as clever a man as there 
is in the three kingdoms, has laid it out ; 
and I believe will manage it. There, sir." 

" Manage what ? . not Miss Diana ! " 

''Yes, the very thing. I shouldn't object 
seriously, if I laid my mind to it regularly . 
in fact, the foundation is laid. Girls of her 
nature . light, airy . they flutter on to us, 



FIRST CHECK. 221 

and our gaudy leaves aud petals, like butter- 
flies on to flowers. There's poetry for you. 
I mean we soldiers, with our golden clothes, 
&c., have a pull . you know it. I confess 
I should like a pretty trinket." 

Lugard felt his companion move impa- 
tiently beside him. 

'' But are you so sure, Lugard ? " he said. 
" I don't think you quite know her cha- 
racter. Under all that w^hich you call 
lightness I see a great deal of sense and 
principle, which only wants the occasion to 
come out. A pretty trinket I . she is much 
more than that, Lugard. I never like to 
hear girls spoken of in that way." 

''0 my!" said Lugard; "this is quite 
heroic. Pray who spoke of them in that 
way ? You see I was right in saying to her 
that you are so practical ; you do take things 
ail pied de la lettre. I see I must weigh 
my words with you, Master Bligh." 



222 DIANA GAY. 

" No, I didn't mean that," said Bligh. 
*' Only I think you suppose the thing to be 
easier than it is." 

" That of course is to be seen," said 
Lugard, coldly. -"I may as well tell you that 
I intend taking up the business seriously ; so 
I warn off all intruders. Ha, ha ! Tell your 
friends, my dear Doctor. I know what Gay's 
notion is in getting Bellman here, and his 
donkey of a son. But still, if mademoiselle 
set her heart on a thing, I rather think he 
must let her have her own way. My father 
has managed more difficult things than that. 
Here's your gate, and I see a light over the 
wall. Your good mother is sitting up for 
you . to hear all about it, ha, ha ! But mind, 
not a word about our secret. Mind, I'll 
count on your help a little, old boy. Good- 
night, old fellow; take care of yourself! " 

Robert Bligh was set down at the gate, and 
as he rang, one of those rapid sweeps of 



riEST CHECK. 223 

thought, which stretch as far as what the 
Eastern saw in the tub of water, passed 
through his mind. The conclusion was, as 
the door opened, '^ It is absurd, hopeless, 
ridiculous 1 . a mere mother's dream ; the 
idea of my slow- moving mind hobbling after 
his brilhant soul. It is the most childish 
notion in the world." 

As the door opened, he saw his mother 
standing in the hall, tall and shadowy. 

" Come in, dear," she said ; "sit down 
and tell me all about it . about the first 
move.'' 

Robert felt a twinge at his heart. Mother 
and son sat down together on the sofa. 

'' This is new life to me, waiting for you in 
this way. After all, what is there like life 
and affection, and flesh and blood ? I used 
to try and persuade you that books were the 
only things having no malice, hatred, or 
unkindness. The worst is, I only find this 



224 DIANA GAY. 

out witli every day I grow older. Now, 
E-obert dear, report." 

She was looking at liim anxiously. 

'' Well, you know, motlier," lie said, 
taking her hand, " nothing could be done 
on a first night." 

''Nothing?" she said quickly; '' every- 
thino- ! It is tlie thins^s that take time 
which never succeed. That pottering is the 
sure way to fail. You have double the 
chance when you go at it at once. But 
you have not lost time. I know your quiet, 
sure way when you have the ground to 
yourself. Come, begin at the beginning ; 
tell me the dinner . I always like to hear 
that." 

Bligh turned slowly to her. 

'' You see," he said softly, " I had not the 
ground to myself." 

"Why who . " she said, starting, ''who 
was there ? tell me . quick." 



FIRST CHECK. 225 

" Only Lugard . Dick, my old scliool- 
fellow." 

'' What, the officer ? 0, I see ! Well, of 
course it couldn't be helped. Now tell me 
about it." 

'^My dear mother," he said quickly, 
*'you know what you were talking of 
before I went out. I did not take it up 
perhaps so warmly as you wished. But I 
see now it is hopeless . not to be thought 
of in any way." 

She rose up slowly from the sofa, and said 
hastily . 

" So I see you have done nothing . 
attempted nothing ! Is that your spirit ? 
Is that what you would dare tell a client in 
a desperate case ? I am ashamed of you, to 
come back to me with such a child's story. 
What are you good for ? Wliom are you 
afraid of? An empty-headed subaltern . 
because he is dressed up like any strolling 
I. Q 



226 .DIANA GAT. 

actor, and is daubed over witti gold lace ? 
Heaven help us !" 

She was walking up and down, stamping 
about with her hands joined behind her. 
Her son was not at all surprised at this 
burst ; he was accustomed to it. 

"You know, mother," he said, "I have 
not the gifts for this line. As far as a brief 
goes . " 

'' Yes, a wretched, few guineas . yes, there 
is the narrow view ! When can I teach you to 
get rid of this miserly view ? Precious years 
of your life wasted in scraping a pittance, 
when you might by a single stroke win all. 
What does your history tell you ? Has it 
not been the game of all the great men ? 
Your wretched tradesmen and manufacturers 
like Crowder, this money-grubbing spirit may 
do for them. But where are they at the end 
of their life ? My dearest Robert," she said, 
her tone softening, as she seated herself 



FIEST CHECK. 227 

beside him, '' I seem to speak harshly, but it 
is for your good ; I want to rouse you. So 
I suppose you were put back by that cox- 
comb ? TeU me the truth." 

"Why," said he, "it was so, mother. I 
have not the knack. He is so much readier. 
I am too ' heavy,' and . and . I can see she 
cares for him." 

" And you are imposed on by such things ! 
I am astonished at you," she said, again 
starting up and beginning to walk; "why 
a skilful man would . Ah, I see what I 
must do ! My great lawyer-son wants 
confidence out of his court or chambers. 
He must have his old mamma at his elbow 
to whisper him. I must take it in hand 
myself, I see." 

He smiled. " That would be no use either, 
mother." 

" You don't know ; you must try, my dear 
boy. You don't know the first principles. 

Q 2 



'228 DIANA GAT. 

Whatever the woman may be, whatever 
she thinks of you, she will be flattered by a 
man's preference, whatever that man maybe. 
Is not that something to start with ? Fools 
at a ball skulk by the wall, and say, ' She has 
too grand partners. She will not look at me 
if I ask her.' If she sees you think so, slie 
will think so. The wise fellow goes up 
straight and confidently, and is taken. I tell 
you, Robert, we have a basis here, which no 
one else has, and which I cannot tell you, at 
least for some time . There !" He started. 
" Yes," she said, " an advantage over all 
comers. But I see the old mamma must 
step in. I suppose I must go to Gay Court, 
and stop there a while." 

"Do, mother," he said eagerly; "we 
should be all so glad." 

" Not all," she said, smiling, " as you shall 
see. At any rate, we must start again. 
Now to your bed." 



FIEST CHECK. 229 

And with a smile and an air of exultation 
slie passed out of the room, leaving her son, 
who, as usual, remained a long time in 
thought. 



( 230 ) 



CHAPTER X 



THE HUNT. 



Now at last had come round the great even- 
ing, and the GaltlioT]3e Mercury was able to 
announce, . could there have been a decent 
excuse it would have added, " By Special 
Telegram," . that the distinguished visitors 
had arrived at Gay Court. Previously they 
had been "favoured" by a private view of 
the new state bedrooms, now being got up 
" in the most costly manner and the most 
exquisite taste," by that enterprising monster 
firm, Messrs. Debenham. The chief one had 
been '^ sumptuously upholstered" in what 
they described as bleu-de-roi tabouret . 



THE HUNT. 231 

another in diintz ''of the rarest finish." 
In short, our reporter . who had been intro- 
duced surreptitiously and shown over the 
whole by a pantry-friend . was quite dazzled. 

Mr. Gay laughed loudly as he read his 
Mercury, 

" These poor devils must earn their crust, I 
suppose. But where do they get their fine 
names ? Bleu de roi ! . why, it is only the 
ordinary blue stuff they hang up. Of course, 
I shall have a fine bill to pay." 

At last the Mercury was enabled to 
announce, ''All the distinguished persons 
who have been invited to Gay Court to cele- 
brate an interesting anniversary have arrived. 
Among those at present enjoying the sump- 
tuous hospitality of the large-hearted host 
are, the Right Hon. Lord Bellman ; the Hon. 
Mr. Chimeleigh and suite ; Mr. and Lady 
Margaret Bowman, Canning Bowman, Esq., 
of the Foreign Ofl&ce ; Lugard, Esq., 



232 DIANA GAY. 

of Burton, Ricliard Lugard, Esq., of lier 
Majesty's Hussars; Eobert Bligli, Esq., Mrs. 
Bligli ; Major Spring, and Miss Crowder of 
the Priory. It is rumoured that still more 
distinguished company is expected, and that 
Gay Court will be the scene of festivities 
rivalling in brilhancy and beauty the most 
gorgeous dreams of the 'Arabian Nights.' " 

'' Pish ! . gorgeous dreams of my grand- 
mother!" said Mr. Gay impatiently, as he 
read. " I wish to goodness they'd leave us 
alone." 

The reader will see that this quotation, 
though it does come from a country-town 
''print," saves us a world of description, 
narrative, &c., and has, in fact, carried us 
over a handsome space of ground. 

Gay Court was really bright with all its 
new finery; the hleu-de-roi tabouret was 
hung ; the French cook was ready ; Mr. 
Chewton was, as it were, standing to arms ; 



THE HUNT. 233 

and that Monday evening Mr. Gay's private 
omnibus had taken away from the station 
the noble persons. Lord Bellman and his 
son, Mr. Chimeleigh and suite (no more than 
a single valet). The select and distinguished 
party had assembled at dinner to meet them, 
though not the full strength of the company, 
who were to come and dine on the next day, 
after the hunt was over. 

What was the secret of this excitement 
about my lord ? He was but a very ordinary 
pattern of peer, and in the county we had 
already the Earl of Cumberley, Lord Killeries, 
and Lord Bays water, whom we might draw 
on again, discount, and cash when the occa- 
sion served. The truth was, that now, after 
a long term of receivers, Court-of- Chancery 
trustees, the Freeman estates had come into 
the market. For a long time back, the Mer- 
cunj had been hearing that " a distinguished 
nobleman, remarkable for his success in 



234 DIANA GAT. 

bucolic pursuits," liad been making inquiries 
about the Freeman lands ; and presently the 
Mercury began to bint that, though matters 
were not " ripe," and it might be " prema- 
ture" to ventilate the name, there could be 

no harm to say that it was Lord B n 

whom popular rumour pointed to as likely 
" to come among us " very soon. And very 
soon the same authority had discovered that 
all was well-nigh complete, and that the 
Freeman estate was about to change hands. 

The only drawback was, that there was no 
residence on the estate ; so that there was 
no prospect of having so desirable a resident 
as Lord Bellman for a neighbour. But they 
did not know that Mr. Gay was equally eager 
to secure the new-comer ; and this might 
have been a good deal of the secret of all 
this fuss and preparation ; for he knew that 
if his lordship was pleased with the hunting, 
and fancied the place, he was just the man to 



THE HUNT. 235 

give orders to have a good house built, and 
come and live there. 

It was Tuesday morning, and the company 
were dropping down to an early breakfast, 
spread festively and artistically under Mr. 
Chewton's own eye. That gentleman had 
stood many minutes at the bottom of the 
table, with his head on one side, and that 
'' hown hye " closed as if he was looking 
through a telescope, but was satisfied. In 
its own way, he thought a table was a thing 
of beauty, which, indeed, everything done on 
the most perfect principle is, to a certain 
extent. 

It was early . a fine fresh hunting-morn- 
ing. It had rained a little overnight, as his 
lordship made his august progress in the 
private omnibus. Hunting-men had gone to 
bed uneasy lest this might turn to a sharp 
frost; for the glass was not satisfactory. 
However, here was the morning itself . a 



236 DIANA GAT. 

gentlemanly, well-behaved, proper sort of 
morning, with the ground just soft enough 
to be velvety, and not soaked into a fatal 
bog condition. From the row of tall parlour- 
windows the thick evergreens and the rolling 
banks of grass looked rich and green and re- 
freshed after their pleasant bath. The meet 
was to be at eleven o'clock, on the lawn ; for 
his lordship wished to have a long, hearty, 
and satisfactory day. 

Both sides of the table were lined, and it 
was a gay, cheerful, inspiring scene, a little 
different from the interment-like gloom that 
sometimes attends a country-house breakfast. 
What would the reporter of the Mercury 
have given to be allowed to peep in, even 
to enter now and again with the cream, 
game, &c., in the undignified disguise of a 
waiter ! . a thing no pantry interest could 
accomplish. Yet he was not a hundred yards 
away, hanging about the lawn with the rest 



THE HUNT. 237 

of the crowd. A whole column in the 3Ier- 
ciiry will by-and-bj give us ample details of 
" The Meet at Gay Court." 

Now we see Lord Bellman beside Diana, 
who is presiding with infinite grace, and not 
a little confusion, and looks so tiny and quite 
fairy -like in her habit, as she stands up and 
fills out tea for every one : for Mr. Gay, in 
defiance of Mr. Chewton's respectful protest, 
will not have that cheering beverage made 
wholesale, hotel-fashion, at a neighbouring 
side-table, and served round as if it was an 
entree, 

Mr. Chewton faintly introduced the name 
of a " Lord Northfleet," when he had '' gone 
down special for one of his lordship's open- 
'ouse parties ; " but without efiect. 

'' I like that putting away the joints out 
of sight," said Mr. Gay to Lord Bellman; 
" though, mark my words, we'll be coming 
back to that as a fashion ; and we'll have the 



238 DIANA GAT. 

ladies crying out, ' How nice it is to see tlie 
saddle of mutton, and liave your slice cut off 
before your eyes ! ' But the tea-making is 
the only link between the host and his guests ; 
and my little pootens there wouldn't give it 
up for the world, would she, popsy ? " 

'' I think it such fun, papa," said Miss 
Diana, filling away hard. '' Come here, Mr. 
Bligh, and hand that down yourself to Lady 
Margaret ; and if you spill a drop . " 

Lord Bellman was a tall, good-looking 
nobleman of about fifty, with black sleek 
hair divided in the middle, and a pointed 
American beard. He had been a very hand- 
some man in his time, and was still remark- 
able for his fine even rows of teeth. He was 
a country lord ; ardent about stock, butter, 
and turnips, with which he mixed up hunting 
and Whig politics. Every farming man re- 
members the year when his lordship's brindled 
bull, " Great Tom," took the cup at the All- 



THE HUNT. 239 

England Show, beating the Earl of Wick- 
field's beast . considered unmatched in size, 
weight, and all brutish qualifications. Every 
one will remember his lordship's speech on 
the Labouring-Classes Dwelling Bill, which 
he brought in himself, and passed through 
the House of Peers, but which, when it went 
down to another place, was strangled. He 
had at one time formed part of a Ministry, 
and had been at the Board of Trade ten 
months. But the short-horns and the fine 
hunting country in which he lived drew him 
irresistibly away; and no man can serve 
those three agreeable masters, sporting 
farming, and politics, at the same time. 
Politics is the narrowest-minded and most 
greedily selfish of the three. But he took 
them up fitfully and almost alternately : his 
present hope and aim was to get an earldom ; 
it being said " he had strong claims on the 
party;" and he would have been very 



240 DIANA GAY. 

well content had he become Earl of Bell- 
towers. 

Mr. Chimeleigli was also present . of about 
five-and-twenty-years old ; an unhealthy-look- 
ing youthj with a very sharp pink nose, of 
which some of his friends, with more liveli- 
ness than courtsey, said ''he could slice 
melons with." He, too, was a politician . 
a " sucking " one, those same free friends 
remarked . and did not care in the least for 
the short-horns or the farming. He could 
hunt genteelly ; and his father said '' he was 
a knowing young Whig, and would feather 
his nest one of these days." Older members 
of the party were accustomed to prophesy 
wisely in the same spirit ; and the country 
paper, in a sort of divine afflatus, said it was 
easy to see that he was " marked out " as 
one of the rising men who would be at the 
helm of the State. Poor helm ! how many 
clumsy fingers have closed upon that well- 



THE HUNT. 241 

worn piece of timber ! He spoke very little, 
eating his breakfast in a measured business- 
like way, as through a small section of public 
affairs ; and was fond of taking senator-like 
airs. He was to go into Parliament; and 
there was a little borough in the great 
hunting country, where it was thought his 
father's interest could have placed him ; but 
his health was bad, and doctors had pre- 
scribed a two-years' voyaging and travelling 
to make him strong, before entering on 
political life. Some of the friends said of 
him, *' Clever young man ; head like a book ; 
chapter and verse for everything ; Hell cut 
a figure." While others . the free friends . 
said, *'You might put all Chimeleigh's brains 
into a little gallipot, and have room to 
spare ! " Both opinions were extreme and 
a little extravagant. 

Lord Bellman was a most voluble talker. 
Conversation with Mm was practically 

I. B 



242 DIANA GAY. 

making a speecli. He had his glass to 
his eye. 

"That's you, I see, Gay. Who did it? 
Too much of the red, I should say. Do you 
know it's uncommonly hard to get a coat 
done ? . because it is the coat merely that is 
done. I know a young fellow, exceedingly 
promising, who is coming up in this hunting 
way, and knows how to do a horse's head. 
If I had known, I could have got him, and 
he'd have been about the same price. He did 
Pownall for the Crewe Hunt, on his black 
cob; quite a Vandyke thing, I assure you." 

'^Well, I'll tell you the reason they had 
him to do my figure," began Mr. Gay. 

''Not but that's very fair," went on his 
lordship, screwing his glass into his eye ; 
'' very fair indeed, too fiery though . far too 
fiery ! What's this. post, eh ? " 

Mr. Chewton was entering with a beadle- 
liKe air; his hands full of letters carefully 



THE HUNT. 243 

sorted, and whicli he considered lie dis- 
tributed witli infinite grace and courtly 
effect. He came formally to tlie top of the 
table, where he laid down a packet, nicely 
assorted in sizes, beside Lord Bellman, with 
a half- whispered! and most obsequious '' My 
lord." He looked round the table, doing the 
same to every one. In this office he was con- 
sidered, by his dependents and admirers, to 
be unmatched. 

Lord Bellman glanced at them one by one, 
finishing his tea, toast, &c., as he did so ; 
and only indicating the probable contents by 
side-long looks, pursings of his mouth (tea- 
cup being suspended), and upliftings of his 
eyebrows. At last he pitched on one, opened 
it, and read it. 

''Well," he said, "this is from Stephen- 
son ; everything clear, all plain-sailing ; sub- 
mitted it to counsel, made searches, and all 
that. We're to sign at once." 

R 2 



244 DIA^'A GAY. 

"What? Freeman's estate?" said Mr. 
Gay, heartily. '* I'm so glad ; I'm dehghted 
to hear it. I didn't like asking you, for I 
was afraid; and I was wanting to see how 
you'd like the place. . Di, popsy, listen to 
this !. May I tell her ? " 

'' JSTow, what is it, papa? If it's a secret, 
I won't keep it." 

'' Only about Freeman's estate, Miss Diana, 
which is all virtually my property now. I 
am to be one of the powers that be of this 
county." 

I am so glad. Lord Bellman ; but you must 
promise to build a house, or we sha'n't care 
for you at all." 

''0, I shall come down occasionally to 
look after the people, get in my rents, and all 
that." 

" Indeed you must do no such thing. Lord 
Bellman. We won't have any absentee 
people spoiling our county, getting all they 



THE HUNT. 245 

can out of it, and doing* nothing. N'o, no," 
said Diana, tossing lier head ; " we won't 
have you on those terms at alL" 

" Diana, popsy ! D'ye hear her lecturing 
his lordship . bringing him to book, like 
the." 

*' I am quite serious, papa," she went on, 
composing her lips into a grave expression ; 
" I don't approve of it at all. Property has 
its duties as well as its rights ; and you know 
those poor people in Ireland . " 

" 0, what have we here? " said his lord- 
ship in great good-humour. " A Ptadical . a 
real Radical ! For shame. Gay, to bring up 
your children in this way ! " 

" I think," said Miss Diana, " the Radicals 
are the nicest people in the world. I hope 
we shall have a republic in England before- 
long; it would be such fun. Do 3^ou re- 
collect, papa, the handsome young man we 
met in the train going to London, and who 



246 DIANA GAY. 

told sucli pleasant stories ? He said lie was 
a Radical." 

'' Yes," said Mr. Gray, wlio was inclined 
to run into grave narrative on any hint; ''I 
assure you, as agreeable and pleasant a 
fellow as I'd ask to see ; quite a gentleman, 
I assure you, Bligli . manner, dress, bearing, 
information . everything. ' ' 

'' And he had eyes, hair, nose, mouth, and 
a real head, hadn't he, papa ? " said Miss 
Diana, with a sly look to both sides of the 
table. 

" Just listen to her ! " said Mr. Gay, 
delighted. " Did you hear that . hitting at 
her poor old daddy? Well, after that I'll 
say no more. God bless me, it's getting 
late ! See the country fellows looking in 
the window? . hang their impudence! Diana, 
my pet, you should keep your friends in 
order." 

"They're very forward," she said, and 



THE HUNT. 247 

fluttered over to the window, which she 
opened. 

The company followed her slight figure 
and the folds of her habit, which streamed 
behind her. 

'' Go away, Tom Holden," she said. ^" 
am very angry with you ; you have no 
business to be there; I won't have it!" 
Then she came back again. " See how they 
obey me ! " she said. 

The party broke up. In a half-hour there 
was a curious scene in front of the house. 
It seemed as if there was to be a meeting, 
and people were assembled to hear ad- 
dresses. There were a couple of open 
carriages drawn up ; an Irish outside car ; 
at least a dozen horses being walked to and 
fro ; and a whole crowd of retainers, who 
pretended to be of use in some way. From 
the windows of Gay Court looked out many 
faces, gentle and simple . but more simple 



248 DIANA GAT. 

. whicli, witli white cap and a broom or 
two faintly visible behind, betrayed tlie sus- 
pended labour of tlie housemaid. There 
was plunging of hoofs and crunching of 
gravel ; the broad steps were crowded with 
many figures, and lighted up with abundant 
and cheerful scarlet ; while the air was per- 
fumed with the morning cigar, and made 
melodious with the light chatter of voices. 
The meet was half a mile away, at what was 
called '' t'ould Garse Cover." The young 
men are pleasantly leaning against the piers 
of the steps, when suddenly out strides 
Mr. Gay, in his scarlet coat and white 
breeches and shining boots, to take the 
command. Behind him come the distin- 
guished guests ; and our Diana told later 
with many a titter how she had distinctly 
heard from the crowd, '' Theer, thot be the 
lard." That nobleman was considered to 
affect an almost unsportsmanlike appearance 



THE HUNT. 249 

in his dress, which was only a black cut- 
away coat, with buff-leather breeches and 
short black boots. Mr. Gay on public 
occasions became enero-etic and visforous. 

'*Xow, look alive," he said, "and bring* 
forward Father John I " And in a moment 
a strong brown creature appeared, well 
drawn together, short legged, and with 
small head, but fast solid quarters, and 
the well-bent hock which is the true merit 
of the hunter. A c^room led Father John 
forward, who advanced with a wise and 
composed demeanour, with no pricking of 
the ears or startings . a sober and a wise 
man, who knew he must reserve himself for 
the day's work before him. In his own 
native land Father John would have been 
attended as he walked with many a mut- 
tered "Ah, begorrah I see that, now I . that's 
the fine crather intirely I " 

"0, indeed! " said his lordship, drawing 



250 DIANA GAY. 

on his gloves and measuring him critically 
" He promises well." 

In a moment he was in the saddle, sitting 
'^like a true man," said some one in the 
crowd ; then gathering up the reins and 
ambling off in the regular hunter's jog-trot. 

Then came D'Orsay, very satiny in his 
coat, but wild-eyed as usual, and foolishly 
pricking up his ears and starting at every 
sound. Diana tripped down the steps, 
daintily holding her habit. Bligh was at 
the door, looking with interest at the pro- 
portions of Father John . for he had an 
eye for a horse as much as for a point of 
law. He did not see Miss Diana looking 
back for the expected attention. Suddenly 
she whipped her skirt a little impatiently. 

" Mr. Bligh !- . well, sir, am I to climb 
up myself? " 

He started and came down. Miss Diana 
laid her hand on the saddle. Bligh stooped ; 



THE HUNT. 251 

but D'Orsay was fretful and out of humour 
that morning . the bustle and arriving of 
horses during the night had disturbed him 
and put him out, as it would have a human 
dandy who had come home from a ball. 
Bligh in his eagerness, and perhaps awk- 
wardness, to retrieve his inattention, swung 
up Miss Diana a little too quickly, and 
D'Orsay swerving away, she came to the 
ground again. 

"You did that on purpose," she said; 
" you are thinking, of something else." 

A cheery voice called out behind, "My 
dear good Bhgh, I saw you do that. One 
would think it was a volume of Chitty you 
were putting up on a shelf. But let me 
now; please do. Don't be restive." 

There is a precious sort of obstructive 
manner which will be good-humouredly 
obstinate, and puts away such pressure as 
this. Others without this charm have to 



252 DIANA GAY. 

give way or liolcl possession in a rude 
boorish way. Bligli made a faint protest, 
and cliose the former. 

'' That's a good man. Now we'll try 
again. D'Orsay is scared with all this 
company. Poor fellow ! Let us soothe 
him first. Poor fellow ! " And Diana's 
delicate hand and a great buckskin glove 
were travelling over the dandy's neck with 
most grateful effect. '' Notv we'll try." 
And in a second Diana had fluttered up 
like a bird, and had perched ever so lightly 
on the small saddle. 

Bligh admired her thus, when D'Orsay, 
now in good-humour, began to move off in 
a playful canter. 

*' That's the way to do it," called out 
Lugard. " We'll teach this lawyer in time. 
Now," he added, taking his friend affec- 
tionately by the arm, '' to get our own nags. 
At these show-gatherings they potter away 



THE HUNT. 253 

sucli a lot of valuable time." This was a 
favourite metliod of treatment witli Mr. 
Lugard : after lie bad, as lie called it, put 
aside liis man, lie made up for it by a pro- 
fusion of almost blandishments. They were 
up in a moment. The ladies had got into 
the carriages and on cars with the non- 
hunting gentlemen, and presently every one 
drove away. 



( 254 ) 



CHAPTER XL 

THE DAY. 

'' T'ouLD Garse Cover " was in a very pic- 
turesque corner of the park, and a green 
grass coasted by it. AH the rustics had 
taken a short cut over the fields to see the 
great meet ; and as Lady Margaret Bowman's 
carriage rolls along the soft green lane, of 
which there were some miles in the demesne, 
she sees among the old trees patches of 
scarlet flashing brightly, and a general shift- 
ing and flutter of colours. It seems as 
though there was to be a race. 

The Calthorpe Hunt has mustered some 
forty strong . considered a very great meet 



THE DAY. 255 

for that time of the year. It is a perfect 
cluster of open carriages, with a couple of 
drags which have "bowled" over from Iron- 
ston, and are laden with the ladies of the 
hunting officers of the Du Barrys, and from 
beneath the white overcoats of these gallant 
gentlemen many a shining top-boot emerges. 
Scarlet gentlemen are tramping to and fro 
from one carriage to the other ; and here is 
Miss Diana looking down from D'Orsay, the' 
dandy's back, on a whole group. She is not 
unsupported ; for Miss Crowder, with a 
scarlet feather in her hat and a " stand-up " 
man's collar, has cantered up beside her on a 
handsome horse, which, though of exceeding- 
price, has a manufacturing air, as though 
he but represented money, and money 
alone. Beside him D'Orsay seemed a crea- 
ture born in the purple. As she cantered up, 
she must almost have heard from the drag- 
roof the rather free-and-easy sobriquet "Kitty 



256 DIANA GAY. 

Crowder " said all but aloud ; for such a 
penalty does tliis ^Dleasant familiarity with 
the warriors entail. 

" Kitty " was in high spirits. '^ Where is 
the lord's son, dear ? " she said, looking 
round. '' What ! doesn't he hunt ? Is he a 
sneak ? 0, I must know him ; indeed I 
must. You must . there he is with the sharp 
face. Let's ride over to him, and you intro- 
duce me." 

Diana hesitated. She had great dignity, 
and though liking '' fun," would speak and 
draw herself up in defence of the smallest of 
the proprieties. 

''Indeed, I can do no such thing," she 
said. '^ He would think it very odd. I hardly 
know him myself." 

" Indeed he would not, now," said Kitty 
in a loud voice. " You never were more out 
in your life. Never mind ; I'll manage it 
somehow during the hunt. I'll speak to him 



THE DAY. 257 

myself, and tell him you wouldn't introduce 
me. You must learn not to keep all the 
men to yourself, Miss Diana." 

Diana smiled. She knew her friend's 
ways, and was not offended. Kitty had for- 
gotten the matter in a moment, and was 
scouring the field with her large eyes. Then 
Lugard rode up, with his father by his side, 
who was exquisitely appointed, as though he 
were going to a ball, the delicate feminine 
toilette and eternal simper being marked on 
his face. His horse looked as if Ms coat had 
been carefully brushed and left without a 
speck. Mr. Lugard looked almost as gay as 
his son ; and when he took off his hat to 
Miss Diana, his thin hair seemed smoothed 
and parted elegantly, as if on a lady's 
forehead. 

'' This eager man is like a schoolboy, and 
would not let me lose a minute." 

*'I am so glad you have come, Mr. 
Lugard,'^ said Diana; ''but look at darling 
I. . s 



258 DIANA GAY. 

D'Orsay ; lie is the handsomest creature on 
the ground." 

Mr. Lugard looked down on himself with a 
simper, as who should say, " You don't count 
me, I suppose." 

Every face was there, from the straw- 
coloured terrier-dog faces of the military to 
Mr. Pratt, the gentleman who had pro- 
nounced on D'Orsay, and from whose pen 
the Mercury led its readers to expect a 
graphic account of the day's run. "We 
may promise our readers," said that journal, 
" that our valued Yenator will limn Eey- 
nard's course with more than his usually 
graphic pen." He came rocking and jog- 
ging up to Diana, and said solemnly, " Well, 
miss, I see you've Mm out to-day. No, 
no, no ! won't do, miss . want's a little 
sense." 

"You're jealous, Mr. Pratt," said Diana, 
laughing ; then to her friend : "He thinks 
nothino: like that cart-horse of his." 



THE DAY. 259 

Here now was Featherston, our esteemed 
M.F.H., coming up with a quick business 
air, attended by liis two aides-de-camp, as 
though he were about to clear the course. 
Featherston was the name in every mouth : 
we had drank his health ; we had found fault 
with him; we had not supported him with 
the subscriptions. Featherston had again 
and again said that after " this year " he 
would resign the hounds to a better man ; 
and again and again, feehng deep compunc- 
tion for so treating a man who had stood by 
the sport so nobly, we had conjured him to 
retract ; and Featherston had given way. 
The probabihties were he would " hunt *' the 
Calthorpe pack till he died or was killed. 

'' jSTow, Gay," he said, " time's up . we'll 
turn the hounds in. . Now, gentlemen, look 
out ; it won't be a second's business, for the 
place is alive with them ; and for God's sake, 
gentlemen, let's have no tailor-riding here, 
or walking over my dogs, as we had last day 

s 2 



260 DIANA GAY. 

with that man-miUiner. . Now Tom, in with 
them." 

In a moment the Calthorpe pack, that 
seemed all wooden tails and ears, and who 
were the hereditary Sweetlips, Boxers, Nip- 
pers, &c., who had an air of eager business, 
plunged into the cover. Instantly the talk- 
ing ceased, reins were gathered up, and his 
lordship was seen by the Mercim/s reporter, 
who never had his eye off him a moment, to 
throw away a cigar. There was a crackling 
and rustling in the underwood of the 
covert ; the white sterns of the hounds are 
seen among the leaves; Sweetlips, known 
for ''a true note," gives a cry, and we know 
for certain that the fox is at home. Sud- 
denly, from far to the left comes the cry, 
" Gone away ! " but from a throat as foolish 
as some^of the younger dogs ; and at once a 
"counter-jumper" and some *' tailors" . so 
our M.F.H. described them later . plunged 
away frantically. Some of the '' tailors " 



THE DAY. 261 

proved later to be Major Spring and Mr. 
Collins. 

"Look at those donkeys," said Dick Lu- 
gard to Diana ; " they've ruined everything!" 

So they had nearly, for the field was 
undecided. Some had gone on, and " Rey- 
nard " . his conventional title in all hunting 
descriptions . having made up his mind to 
escape, and rushing out through one of his 
private corridors, had suddenly turned back 
into his castle. 

Our M.F.H. was furious. He came riding 
up like a general to some cohort that has 
not done its duty. His words were sharp 
and sarcastic. Then he collects his hounds, 
and again puts them in. A sudden roar of 
delighted agony from the whole pack. There 
is no mistake this time. General M.F.H. 
is looking round with his hand up and his 
eye on the ''tailors," who but for that 
restraint would be at it again. There they 
go, in a bright dappled stream, pouring, as 



262 DIANA GAY. 

it were, from an opening in tlie hedge, 
spreading over tlie green grass country, 
heads down, tongues out, tails up. Now our 
M.F.H. settles well down in his saddle at 
the tail of the pack, with his two aides -de- 
camp ; and now the theatrical huntsmen are 
seen making quietly for the highroad. The 
carriages begin to roll along the high- 
way, the coachmen flogging their horses to 
keep up or '* head " the hounds off by some 
short cut. It was a ruck, a delightful rout . 
schoolboys on ponies, ladies on horses, and 
bumpkins on nothing at all, scouring along 
laughing and eager. Now sounded out the 
cry of the dogs, as they were full on the open 
country ; now rang out the horn ; now the 
cheerful scarlet vanished in a flash, as all . 
fox, hounds, riders . disappeared round a 
plantation. His lordship kept well up, and 
was beginning to be pleased ; only the Irish 
horse, coming to a low wall, proceeded to 
take it after the manner he was accustomed 



THE DAY. 263 

to in his own land . "with a top and a 
drop," which almost discomposed him. The 
country was stiff, and yet not dangerous; 
and his lordship found himself taken over 
everything successfully, and grew exhilarated 
under such circumstances. 

We admire and are pleased with every- 
thing when in reality we are only pleased 
with ourselves. Even the praise which in 
strict fairness was owing to his horse, his 
lordship took to himself. " I brought him 
over that fence in good style, I think." 

There was a pink flush in Diana's cheek, 
and a brightness in her eye, as she flew 
along on D'Orsay. D'Orsay took her over 
everything. Often her father's voice was 
heard beside her, gently warning . 

" Now, now, tootsums ! Do take care, 
petsy ! " 

But when she ivoulcl go on, and, flying 
over, look back with a laugh, he could only 
say to his neighbours . 



264 DIANA GAT. 

" Well, well, she is a wild child ! " 

Dick Lugard, mounted on a handsome 
horse, kept near her the whole day ; he 
rode well, but, according to his character, 
"going" at everything, and succeeding 
from sheer recklessness. He got one good 
''shaking" fall, and rose up, pettishly 
resenting the affront. As he remounted, he 
could see Robert Bligh riding steadily 
on a round-built, close-knit cob ; calmly 
hunting, measuring everything, and " taking" 
every jump with a sure and calculated pre- 
cision that irritated his friend. 

''Look at Doctor Syntax; he's managed 
to pick up a horse like himself. Wonderful 
fellow I He's as canny as any born Scotch- 
man. There he goes again ! See, he won't 
take that . there! That's a more com- 
fortable bit." 

Diana, cantering along and looking back, 
said . 

" Well, I don't know ; that seemed a 



THE DAY. 265 

stiffer part where he did take it. Dear me, 
what are they doing now ? " 

They galloped forward; they had been 
coming down a hill, at the bottom of which 
ran a httle stream, which a mile or so farther 
on widened into the great Cale river, famous 
for its fishing. All had clustered at its 
edge ; some were cantering up and down its 
side wildly; the dogs were running back- 
wards and forwards in deep agitation, with 
their noses to the ground. Our excellent 
M.F.H. is cantering this way and that. Had 
a fellow- creature fallen in, and was he then 
struggling in drowning agonies, there could 
not have been so much excitement. Alas, it 
was a far greater misfortune ! That fatal 
stream . of which some had had their fore- 
bodings . had undone them. The crafty 
Eeynard had either got across, or found a 
drain, or earth-hole. He was gone : faces 
lengthened. His lordship looked as he had 
looked three years before, when news was 



266 DIANA GAY. 

brouglit him that his under agent had gone 
off with two thousand pounds. Even Diana 
began to pout prettily. 

'' Nasty perverse thing," she said, " he 
does it on purpose." 

A speech that made her father laugh loud, 
and which he often retailed at dinners. 

'' Look at our friend Syntax," said Lugard 
to her, smiling ; "he has gone off there on 
a quiet trot, for fear his horse should get 
chilled. Never forgets the main chance. 
At school they used to call him Praise- 
worthy Bob." 

Mr. Lugard did not say '* we," for he 
never affected any air of familiarity with his 
friend. 

Praiseworthy Bob had in effect ridden 
slowly up the river, with his eye on the 
ground, and had turned the corner of a 
plantation. 

Suddenly they heard a cry . a cheerful 
note. Every one started the dogs pricked 



THE DAY. 267 

up their ears. In a second tliey saw Bligli 
afar off, and waving his cap. What joy, 
what dehght, what winding of the horn ! It 
was all scamper and rout. Every one was 
gone in a second save Miss Diana, who 
had dismounted to have her saddle-girths 
tightened. 

" Now, Di," said her father, gathering up 
his reins, and looking out wistfully, for 
nothing abated his paternal instincts ; " do 
look sharp." 

Lugard did look sharp. '' I declare our 
friend Syntax is quite coming out," he said, 
as he remounted ; " look at him jogging on 
in front.'* 

They were not very much behind, but Mr. 
Gay, on his great strong horse, had gone 
forward to join his lordship. The course 
was still by the river, which was widening 
gradually. Lugard was behind, but making 
way up ; and Miss Diana said, a little fret- 
fuUy:~ 



268 DIANA GAY. 

'* I can't make D'Orsay go, somehow. 
He's in one of liis humours to-day." 

Suddenly he pricked up his trembhng 
ears, and gave a half swerve. 

"All right," said Lugard, "it's that 
bumpkin with the gun in the plantation. 
But why on earth should he be . " 

By the next second the bumpkin with the 
gun had fired it at some sparrows. There 
was a plunge, a scattering of clay and 
stones, and D'Orsay had ]3lunged away like 
a demon . head down . heels out. He had 
gone like an arrow. And there on his back 
. as on some poor shelf . was resting the 
frail figure of Diana. 

Lugard saw this with a sort of agony, 
and in his agitation actually reined-up his 
horse. In another moment she was lost to 
view. 

Fox and hunters and hounds were far 
away by this time. When he could see her 
no more, he put spurs to his horse, and 



THE DAY. 269 

plunged frantically forward. Another horse- 
man was coming across tlie field in a 
diagonal line. He knew it was Bligli, but 
riding at a pace tliat the cob-hunter had 
not exhibited before on that day. Even at 
that moment of excitement Lugard's lip 
curled. " He wants 'to overtake her, the 
fool ! " he said ; then called out, waving his 
hand, " Keep back ; it will only make her 
horse go faster 1 Do you hear ? " But 
Bligh did not pay the least attention. '^ The 
donkey !" Lugard said aloud. 

Meanwhile he had now got to the top of a 
hill, and could look down. To his horror 
he saw that the horse and rider were gone; 
and looking down, he could see a small dark 
object struggling in the river . for into a 
river the little Cale stream had widened at 
this place, with a strong violent current. 
Trees overhung it with crooked branches, 
seated on which the fisherman watched his 
line for hours. Hounds were far away 



270 DIANA GAY. 

across the country after Reynard, who was 
beginning to show signs of weariness, as 
well he might, poor wretch. Even Mr. Gay, 
exhilarated and excited, was shouting 
" Yoicks ! " or " Hark for'ard ! " or some 
such proper cry. For the moment he had 
forgotten his little Diana. 

Before Lugard had recovered, Bligli was 
halfway down the hill. The other followed. 
In a moment both were at the edge ; and 
there, far out in the strong waters, flowing 
steadily, was seen D'Orsay plunging franti- 
cally, with one paw entangled in the habit, 
and our Diana, her cheek blanched with 
terror, clinging to his neck with both arms. 

" My God I What shall we do ? I can't 
swim ; but this horse can." 

" Don't think of it," said the other, 
hastily. "You will only be in danger: the 
current is too strong." 

" And what can we do ? . what folly you 
talk ! " 



THE DAY. 271 

" Leave it to me," said the other, quietly; 
'' I can save her ; but not here : I must get 
far lower down. Hold on," he shouted ; 
" I'll save you ! Cling to the horse for your 
life ! " 

In a moment he had his coat off, and was 
running hard along the bank. The wretched 
D'Orsay was still plunging ; but not a cry 
came from Diana, whose little figure seemed 
to be now ghding slowly away out of life. 

But Lugard's nature was the same under 
all circumstances. His lip was curling ; and 
as his friend rushed away, he said aloud, "O, 
tJmt^s his game, is it ? We'll see ! " and 
putting spurs to his horse, he walked him 
into the water, and in a second he was up to 
his middle. 

Rushing along the river- side, Bligh got 
past the point where Diana was still strug- 
ghng. At that instant she turned her pale 
face, and as she saw him pass by . only then 
. ^uttered a cry, a scream of despair, at such 



272 DIANA GAY. 

abandonment. But Bligli had observed a 
rugged point of the shore which jutted out 
farther on, and from this he had determined 
to make his start. He ran out on this, and 
stripping off his shoes, was in the water in a 
moment. So cleverly had he calculated the 
force of the current, against which he could 
only make way a very little, that it was sure 
to carry him close to the struggling horse ; 
but almost as soon as he started, another 
cry came from the unhappy maiden, who saw 
her coming deliverer turn back and make for 
the land again. 

Almost as soon as he started, he had seen, 
lying snugly sheltered in a little creek, a 
tiny flat-bottomed boat, with paddles at- 
tached, which was indeed a boat of salvation. 
After this the rescue came easy; though 
even here he showed his surprising restraint 
and thought, for he saw the force of the 
current, and waited until the unhappy Diana, 
now releasing D'Orsay's neck and tossing 



THE DAY. 273 

her arms vrildly, liad passed by some twenty 
yards ; then lie let go, and rowing hard, was 
borne down riglit upon them. 

He called to her firmly and decidedly: 
"You must do exactly what I tell you, and 
at the exact moment." D'Orsay was grow- 
ing helpless, and giving over his plunging. 
She was saved. Heaven be praised, here 
was the bank ; and at the same moment as 
he drew his last stroke he heard a faint 
shout from the bank he had left behind, and 
saw the whole crest lined with scarlet coats 
and horses and dogs. 

When he had lifted Diana ofi*, and got her 
safely on shore, she sank down sobbing and 
wringing her hands. D'Orsay stood there 
tremblino' and shrinking^, and much cowed 
and exhausted. It was pronounced in the 
stables that that wetting had done him a 
world of good. Bligh tied him quietly to a 
tree, and then pulling out his little flask 
from his pocket, put some of the spirit on a 

I. T 



274 DIANA GAY. 

handkerchief, and pressed it to lier. Sud- 
denly lie recollected Lugard, and looked up 
and down the river, but could not see him. 
Then he heard a clatter of hoofs, and Mr. 
Gay, who had galloped desperately half a 
mile, raced across the broad country bridge, 
flung himself to the ground, and had his 
darling Diana in his arms. A carriage soon 
came up ; but Diana, every moment recover- 
ing from her fright, all wet as she was, in- 
sisted on riding home, not on the faithless 
D'Orsay, who was condemned to disgrace, 
but on Mr. Bligh's steady cob-horse, who, 
like his master, would make no mistake. 

Every moment our Diana was recovering 
her spirits. She began to laugh at her limp 
habit, and put out her small hand to Bligh, 
with a '' Dear Mr. Bligh, how shall I ever 
acknowledge your kindness ! " 

Mr. Gay wrung him as a terrier would a 
rat. " My dear, dear old fellow, you are a 
hero, and you've laid us under an eternal 



THE DAY, 275 

obligation. Sucli a cool, dashing, gallant 
exploit ! My God ! to tliink of my little girl 
being so near danger ! It makes me tremble 
all over. I must keep a tiglit rein on her, 
for slie is a little too brave. Did you ever 
see sucli a spirit ? No shrieking or roaring, 
but kept her head all the time. My dear 
boy," . and he wrung him again, . " what 
can I say or do for you ? " 

Now came cantering over the bridge our 
friend Dick Lugard, who, however, slackened 
his pace into a walk as he drew near thQ 
party. Indeed, Mr. Lugard had a very 
downcast air, and seemed only half pleased. 
Only then Bligh recollected about him. 

'' How did you manage, Lugard ? " he 
said, eagerly. '' What became of you ? You 
were wise enough not to try the water with 
your horse ? " 

" I beg your pardon, I did," said the other, 
sharply ; '' but I found the current too strong. 
We had hard work to save ourselves." 

T 2 



276 DIANA GAY. 

A coimtryman was standing by, and 
struck in : " Oi, oi ! we pull out t' horse ; 
and 'ard wark it wer. 'Twer lucky for he, 
lie got on tliot tree." 

"0 yes," said Bligli; ''I saw that very 
projecting tree which you got on, and left 
the horse to swim." 

'. Iso horse could have made way against 
such a stream," said Lugard, petulantly ; 
" impossibilities are not to be done nowa- 
days. It was all very well for you, who could 
swim." 

'^~No matter, my dear fellow," said Mr. 
Gay; ''you iciU do it the next time. N"ow we 
must get along. Just go to Lord Bellman, 
and tell him they will have another fox pre- 
sently. I must go home with my pet. I 
hope to heaven she won't get cold now." 
And he cantered off; and the hunting-men, 
seeing it was no more than 'Hhat the girl 
had got a ducking," soon were at work 
at another famous covert, where Eeynard . 



THE DAY. 277 

aiiotlier Reynard . showed himself ahnost at 
once, and was " run into " about three fields 
otT. This was scarcely satisfactory; but 
there was another covert close by, and there, 
with equal promptness and courtesy, another 
showed himself . Keynard the third . a strong- 
enduring fellow, who got slyly away, and 
was seen going over the hill. Then followed 
a run indeed, well 'cross country, far away 
from brooks and rivers, nothing but good 
straight hard riding, and hard riders. The 
pace was stiff, many '' tailed" off; and after 
fifteen miles there was only his lordship, 
Bligh, the clever "^limner," the ''profes- 
sionals," and our admirable M.F.H. close 
up. Ah, we should have read the " limning " 
that appeared in the Mercuri/ : it was con- 
sidered Mr. Pratt's best effort. Indeed that 
number of the Mercury was a very remark- 
able one ; for it besides gave full details of 
" what had nearly proved a melancholy 
casualty, and had wellnigh cast a gloom 



278 DIANA GAT. 

over that auspicious day." It was, indeed, 
a great hunting-day, and towards eight 
o'clock a couple of splashed elongated horses 
came walking wearily to Gay Court, bearing 
his lordship and Bligh . the former in great 
good-humour, and protesting that he had 
not had such a day for a long time. 



( 279 ) 



CHAPTER XII, 



CONGEATULATIONS. 



OuE Diana was not in the least affected by 
her accident. She resisted all attempts at 
making her go to bed and other " coddling ;" 
and I hope that the delicate estimate which 
may have been formed of her character will 
not be impaired when it is known that she 
was induced to take a small glassful of very 
hot brandy- and- water. She indeed felt her- 
self a heroine, and could but be pleased with 
the infinite and tender interest her escape 
excited. Lady Margaret devoured, absorbed 
her into the folds and windings of the laces, 
silks, and ribbons which lay about that lady's 
capacious bosom. 



280 DIANA GAY. 

"My dear child," slie said, "you are too 
foolisli ; so full of spirits and courage . you 
run your little liead into miscliief. my ! 
only to tliink ! It gives me a tremble ! " 
And tlie lady put up lier fat liand, with a 
rustle about her sleeve, to keep out the 
dreadful prospect. " Now, dearest, you must 
promise me, when we get you over to Bow- 
man . . I tell you beforehand, I won't leave 
you. I tell you what," Lady Margaret 
added wdth great confidence . "whisper, 
darling . I'll get the political man to speak 
to you . our Canning. If he once brings 
that Foreign Office on ^^ou, there's no op- 
posing him." 

"0," said Diana, "don't, then! for I 
should be dreadfully afraid of him and his 
Foreign Office." 

" Indeed, you need not," said Lady Mar- 
garet; "he's as gentle as a girl . to girls. 
To men, of course . whisper, dear . I'll tell 
you what he said of you to-day . that you 



CONGRATULATIONS. 281 

were so like Madame Brenner's daugliter . 
tlie Belgian minister's, you know." 

Diana looked awestricken at this compa- 
rison. 

This was just before dinner . the " first 
state dinner," as the Mercury called it. 
Again I say, what would that organ have 
given to have been present ? or even had a 
glimpse from the far-off door ? How it 
would have revelled in pictures of the Gay 
Court plate, the Gay Court buffet, the flowers, 
rarest exotics, superb liveries, and delicious 
dishes ! Above all, everything characterized 
by the most refined and exquisite taste . for 
which department ouv Mercury was a pledge. 
It was indeed a handsome spectacle; and 
Diana had found time in her own calm way 
to overlook and direct matters to her father's 
infinite satisfaction. Her department was 
the flowers . and no lady, with such trea- 
sures at her command, need disdain the 
elesrant task of so decoratino- her table. 



282 DIANA GAY. 

Diana had been led in, triumphantly stepping 
out. She knew the precious value of dear 
life now, which she had never done before, 
and she regarded all these choice things with 
a sort of affection. 

We need, indeed, a little penal servitude 
and prison fare to teach us the exquisite 
value of the cheap blessings of light, sun, 
air, and moving our limbs, even. But she 
had come up almost with a little theatrical 
effect to Bligh, and said . . 

'' Mr. Eobert, won't you come and sit near 
me at dinner ? I want to talk to you, and 
have not thanked you half enough." 

Mrs. Bligh was close enough to hear this, 
and drew herself up with pride. She went 
up to Diana, and took her hands : 

" My dear child, you . you don't know 
what a happy day this has been for Mm. He 
may go back to his law now, quite content 
to plod on. For he will always be looking 
back to this day . " 



CONGRATULATIONS. 283 

" So shall I," said Diana warmly, " and 
shall always think of him." 

Indeed, Mrs. Bligh noticed a seriousness 
and an older manner about her face. And 
now Richard Lugard was looking on from a 
distance. He, too, had changed since the 
afternoon, and was openly ill-humoured. 
Bligh saw the old look of sneering on his 
face, which recalled their schooldays. Lugard 
heard Diana's grateful invitation to Bligh. 

'' Ton my word," he said at dinner, '' he 
ought to have the Legion of Honour, Grand 
Cross, and all that ! " 

"I hope," said Bligh, "we shall hear no 
more of the grand achievement after this. It 
was nothing wonderful, after all." 

"Well, you know you had a punt," said 
Lugard, " and I must say rowed hard to get 
up." 

" But you forget," said Diana, with some 
excitement, "that he plunged in first, and 
swam some time asfainst the current." 



28^ DIAXA GAY. 

" Well, I suppose a man that swims will 
swim. I don'fc want to disparage our friend or 
his glory ; but as tlie point lias been raised . " 

Mrs. Bligli was at the other side, and 
listening. 

''But we must give all credit where it is 
due," she said, in her low, quiet voice. 
"What was Mr. Lugard's share? . I have 
not heard it distinctly; but I hear it was 
most gallant . swimming across on horse- 
back, and arriving just a minute . " 

" ^o, no," said her son, laughing. ''Where 
did you pick up that, mother ? 'No, Lugard 
would have been drowned if he had; and 
wisely took my advice, and stayed where he 
was." 

The look Lugard gave her, Mrs. Bligh did 
not soon forget. She looked back at him 
steadily. At that moment a sort of chal- 
lenge had passed between them ; and Lugard 
understood that he would find what was 
wanting in the son made up by the mother. 



CONGRATULATIONS. 285 

His lordship was in high good-humour 
with his day ; and repeatedly said it was as 
o-ood a day's huntino- as he had ever had. 
He considered Diana's misha^o merely a little 
coiitretemjjs. It reminded him, he said, of 
what happened to him once when hunting in 
Datchley country, and which he related very 
fluently. Though, indeed, there was no river 
in this instance, public interest and approba- 
tion seemed to consider the cases exactly 
parallel. That reminded him of the Furley 
Common business, at which his neighbour, 
that old greedy Kelpie (the Eight Honour- 
able Angus Waters, Earl of Kelpie) had been 
nibbling for years back. He had tried to get 
an act ; but he. Lord Bellman, had met him 
there. Then he had tried wheedling, and 
offered to go shares ; but he had been met 
there ; he had encroached a little . not much 
to speak of ; but he meant to go on gradu- 
ally ; but if he took in a rood more. Lord 
Bellman would meet him in the law courts. 



286 DIANA GAY. 

We all know how pleasantly discursive a 
person of influence can be on such, grievances, 
and how interested we become in his wrongs, 
and at what length he can pursue his story ; 
whereas if the ''benevolent reader," or the 
present more humble narrator, be so prolix . 
but this is a very trite observation. 

Being in high good-humour, his lordship 
then came back to the incidents of the day . 
hunted the hunt over again, as the manner of 
true sportsmen is ; showed how, at the ten- 
acre field, he knew the game was heading off 
to the right, and he rode up and told the 
huntsman so ; who said, '' I believe your 
lordship is right ; but Mr. Featherstone will 
take his own way." And sure enough, after 
a quarter of an hour lost, a bumpkin waved 
his hat, and they had all to tail back in the 
very direction he had said. 

''You lost all that, Mr. Bligh; you were 
so busy pulling ladies out of the water . a 
very dashing thing, though, in its way." 



CONGRATULATIONS. 287 

Mr. Lugard (tlie father) was not far off; 
but lie liad not been in good-liumour from 
the beginning of dinner, though he showed 
his fine and symmetrical teeth very often : 

" What I admire in Mr. Bligh is his cool, 
measured way of going about the business . 
looking round to mark every point in the 
game, as if he was in his chambers at home. 
I am sure, if there was a fire, he would 
dress, and perhaps shave, write a note for 
the engines, put it in an envelope, and gum 
it down. I can't tell you how I admire that 
faculty, Mrs. Bligh. Your son is sure to get 
on. Still, Mrs. Bligh," said his lordship 
laughing, '' I shouldn't like that caution in 
my case. While he was sealing his envelope, 
Bellman Towers might be burnt." 

"Yes," said Mr. Lugard, showing all his 
very even teeth, '' the vulgar way is to obey 
the first impulse, and run and get a bucket 
of water. My stupid Kichard would have 
plunged in at once, without thinking whether 



288 DIANA GAY. 

he could swim; and your keeper. Gay, tells 
me lie never saw such a place. There's a 
hole twenty feet deep there ; so he might be 
near paying for his folly." 

Diana's eyes wandered with a new mterest 
over to Dick, who sat dejected and sulky, and 
was not speaking to his neighbour. 

It seemed that here was injustice ; and for 
the first time Diana thought she had scarcely 
acknowledged the well-meant attempt, whose 
only fault was that it had wanted success. 
Her soft eyes rested on him with encourage- 
ment ; and indeed, with all the public, it 
might seem that of the two portraits just 
drawn his was the most interesting. 

Mrs. Bligh perceived this impression. 

'' What Robert has done seems to be grow- 
ing smaller and smaller. It now seems to 
be a blunder." 

'' And perhaps will end by being a crime," 
said Mr. Gay, warmly. " No, no. No politi- 
cal economy in this house, my dear Bob. I 



CONGRATULATIONS. ' 289 

know tlie full value of what you have done, 
and I shall never forget it to you ; and I 
thank you here, heart and soul, for your 
gallant behaviour. Else,'* he continued in a 
lower voice, '' I might have been this night 
what I daren't think of. God Almighty bless 
you ! and I'll be old-fashioned enough to 
give your health in a bumper." 

Every one filled and drank to him. 

Diana, her eyes kindling with enthusiasm, 
looked to Bligh, and, smiling to him, put her 
glass to her lips. Dick had to stand up and 
drink with the rest. 

Mr. Gay, had he heard the first part of the 
little discussion, might have included E-ichard 
Lugard in some way. Mrs. Bligh looked 
over with calm triumph at Mr. Lugard. 

Miss Kitty Crowder, who had more tact 
in small matters, saw by this time that 
nothing was to be done with the "lord's 
son," who was dyspeptic, and whose sharp 
nose seemed to crease with suspicion as he 
I. TJ 



290 DIANA GAY. 

turned to lier. She had secured her intro- 
duction, to his infinite alarm at this tremen- 
dous coming-down on him . so might a yacht 
be scared by a huge three-decker. She tried 
him on his ''tastes." Hunting . he hated it; 
balls. he couldn't bear them; country- 
houses. he didn't care for them; books . 
they made him ill. And when she was think- 
ing of what on earth she could try him next 
with, he had abruptly slipped his moorings 
and got well out to sea in the middle of the 
room, looking back to her with almost terror. 

" What a donkey he is ! " said Miss Kitty 
to herself; and to her private friends later. 
"What an unlicked oaf!" To Diana and 
Lady Margaret she said, '' He seemed so 
absurdly shy. What a pity it was ! How 
did he get on in society at all ? " &c. ; with 
more of such comments, . sour grapery, as it 
might be called. 

Indeed, it was surprising what a net of 
contending little intrigues was being spread 



CONGKATULATIONS. 291 

that niglit in that drawing-room, which, to 
Mr. Gay's honest eyes, seemed the seat of 
pure and pastoral enjoyment. Lady Mar- 
garet was ''enthroned" far off on the sofa; 
and it was a pity that her busy mind was 
hampered by that physical unwieldliness of 
person. She was, as usual, telegraphing 
mysteriously to Diana to come over and 
have private interviews. 

''Sit down beside me, dearest; I want 
to tell you something, and we'll get Canning 
over here." 

And that gentleman. called away also 
mysteriously . had to leave a circle of gen- 
tlemen with coffee-cups in their hands, to 
whom he was explaining the critical state of 
our foreign relations. He was a white-faced 
gentleman, with small round black whiskers 
and a very large and bald forehead, with a 
small tuft of verdure growing by itself in the 
middle with an almost comic effort. He had 
always " on " a sort of perky smile, from a 

u 2 



292 DIANA GAT. 

twist in liis moutli, as thougli, one of his 
friends said, tlie upper jaw had been lifted 
off, like the lid of a china box, and wouldn't' 
fit close again. 

*' Come here, Canning," said Lady Mar- 
garet with fresh mystery ; " come close. I 
have been telling Diana here what you said 
about Mdlle. Brenner." 

" 0, quite so," said Mr. Canning fluently. 
" Really, most remarkable, in a room I 
should have gone up straight to her. I 
was quite startled . was, indeed. Miss Gay." 

" There, I told you so, my dear," Lady 
Margaret said, with a half-mournful shake of 
her head. " That was at the dinner ; Can- 
ning said so to me this morning. She goes 
into the first circle in town ; isn't it so, 
Canning? " 

" dear, yes," said that gentleman, with 
a smile. "Of course : her father's the 
minister, you know." 

"Wonderful, isn't it!" said Lady Mar- 



a;;i^. 



CONGEATULATIONS. 293 

garet, still mournful. " Canning's so inti- 
mate. He was at tlieir last grand concert. 
They tell him, dear, all about peace and war, 
and all tliat : or I suppose he gets it out of 
them. They'll make him secretary or mi- 
nister one of these days." 

" dear no," said her son, pulling Ms 
tuft a little nervously; ''but I suppose I'll 
get something." 

Diana was looking from one to the other 
with her old expression of awe, and not 
knowing what to say. Mr. Canning then 
took up the Brenners again, and spoke very 
fluently on them. We all have thus a pet 
'' family of distinction," whom we quote and 
take out to show round, and whose " din- 
ners " we retail conversationally. And so 
Mr. Canning Bowman continued to tell of 
the Brenners and the concert again, and of 
" Christine Brenner," all at great length ; 
Lady Margaret waving lier head in wonder, 
and all but making that " choking " sound 



294 DIANA GAY. 

of admiration whicli tlie lower Irisli do in 
country cliapels at powerful passages of the 
sermon. Bj this dwelling on his friends he 
felt he must have satisfactorily impressed 
Diana that he was a most agreeable man of 
the world, and as clever and important as 
the Brenners. 

But it was now time to break up. The 
rest of that night was languid. It was the 
night of a hunting-day, and the gentlemen 
were tired. His lordship could scarcely 
keep his eyes open, and was presently seen 
with his candle in his hand. People were 
wishing good-night. Lugard's eyes were 
wandering round the room, when he heard 
a whisper : *' I am sure you are angry with 
me ; and indeed I deserve it a little." 

"For what, pray?" said he, still looking 
at a photograph. 

" 0, for not thanking you as I ought. 
You tried to do so much for me, and I 
seemed so . " 



aMm 



CONGEATULATIONS. 295 

"What nonsense!" said he impatiently. 
" I did nothing. I wanted cool Scotch cau- 
tion, or I could have made as good a sJiow as 
others ; and yet, I can tell you, would 
have saved you to-day at the risk of my life, 
only I didn't know how to go about it. I 
can't make a horse swim." 

" I hnoiv that, indeed," said Diana, now 
filled with the deepest interest . even com- 
punction. '' I wish I could get you to be- 
lieve me ; but you won't." 

After all, our sympathies must go with 
the warm flesh and blood. The intellect is 
very well in its way. We may respect the 
colder and nobler virtues ; our hearts are 
with the stage more than with the senate. 
And when Diana went up thoughtfully to 
bed that night, of the images that had 
figured in that exciting day, her eyes fol- 
lowed the image of the dejected " pouting " 
Lugard, rather than that of his calm, reflect- 
ing, and sagacious friend. 



( 296 ) 



CHAPTER XIII. 

PLOTS. 

LoED Bellman was down betimes, as indeed 
tlie older huntsmen always were. He had 
stepped out of tlie breakfast-room window on 
to the lawn, and was walking on, when he 
met Mrs. Bligh. To that lady he wished a 
cheerfal good-morning. He had expressed a 
high opinion of her sense and wisdom the 
night before : " Eeally an uncommon woman, 
now . a head like a man's ! " He was in a 
very good-humour, and talked to her very 
cheerfully about that centre of interest to all 
mothers . a son. Even at that early hour of 
reticence, with the sun shining brightly, it 
loosed her tongue, and she told of his deep 



PLOTS. 297 

sense, his thouglit, and his *' law." *' No 
better opinion for his age, they say, in the 
Temple . which may mean, too, no better 
opinion for any age . not one of those tech- 
nical, unintelligible things they write on law- 
paper; but friends come to him to know 
what to do, as in a case like the common 
you were speaking of last night." 

His lordship started. " Ah, indeed, now 
. you don't tell me so ! Here he is himself" 

And Eobert Bligh appeared, walking 
eagerly, to join his mother. She, however, 
left them very soon ; and presently Lord 
Bellman, with some " hems," had introduced 
his " common." 

One of the most curious corner-cupboards 
in the human heart is that where we keep 
our private stinginess. The richest or the 
noblest among us, who will draw a cheque 
for hundreds without a thought, will yet be 
eager in some circuitous way to ^' save a 
guinea." 



298 DIANA GAY. 

" "Would you tell me all about it, now, 
from tlie beginning ? " said Bligh ; and for 
half an hour his lordship " ran on " with 
many details. Bligh thought a few minutes, 
and said promptly, '^ He has no title. The 
best thing would be to enter on his enclosure 
and level it. If he goes for redress, he can 
show no title : he cannot say you have 
levelled his enclosure." 

This idea, which at that time was a little 
new, burst upon his lordship, and was re- 
ceived with delight. He went away, won- 
dering and filled with admiration. 

Now the breakfast-room was filled again, 
the hum of cheerful morning chatter re- 
sounded. There was to be no hunt that 
day; but there was to be driving out, and 
an expedition to Calthorpe. 

Mrs. Bligh, vigilant always where her 
affection was, could hear his lordship, almost 
aloud, talking with infinite satisfaction of 
'^ that clever young man down there," who 



PLOTS. 299 

had given him a plain and practical opinion 
that morning, which was really worth all 
that ''my professional fellow" would tell 
him in a week . such a capital plan ; and 
Mr. Gay stooped to one side to get a view 
of Bligh under this new glory, a most natural 
motion in a host who feels that a guest's 
credit reflects a good deal on himself. 

Again was Diana, fresh as the morning 
itself, enthroned at the teapot. Somehow 
she had nursed her sympathy for " that poor 
wounded fellow " Lugard during the night, 
and had come down determined to make it 
up to him. 

It seemed hard to resist her, as her deli- 
cate little throat, rising out of the daintiest 
little collar in the world, seemed to convey 
the notion of the most perfect refinement. 
She was nodding to him : but Lugard was 
still ''dark" and indifierent. 

" We are to ride to-day, Mr. Eichard. Ee- 
collect you are engaged to me at two o'clock." 



300 DIANA GAY. 

He rose, with an affectation of indifference, 
to lielp himself at the sideboard. 

"I am so sorry," he said; '^bnt I shall 
have to go home to barracks to-day." 

"Go home," said Diana, "at my festival, 
and no ride, and the servants' dance to- 
night ? I won't hear of it." 

Mr. Lugard senior caught this proposal, 
and frowned. 

"Nor will I," he said, "Miss Diana. 
Master Richard and I will talk this over 
after breakfast." 

" That can't make any difference," said 
Lugard, with certainly a want of paternal 
respect. "I must; the Colonel requires 
me. 

" Ha, ha, ha ! " laughed Mr. Gay, with 
his rather blunt laugh, but he could not 
restrain himself when he enjoyed a thing. 
" I know ; we understand . sore about yes- 
terday still. I say, Robert, he'll have you 
out before he has done with you." 



PLOTS. 301 

Lugard coloured. '^ I don't understand/* 
lie said ; " I want to liave no one out." 

'' 0, you stay here," said liis fatlier, curtly. 
" I wisli you, and I want you. I'll settle it 
witli tlie Colonel. These are officers' ex- 
cuses," he added, lifting up the jalousies 
from his fine teeth ; " they are always ' on 
guard ' when they want it." 

''Ha, post!" said Mr. Gay. "A heavy 
bag this morning." 

Again Mr. Chewton distributes the letters 
with exquisite propriety and neatness, as 
though he had been brought up to being a 
sorter from his childhood. Everybody is 
busy in a moment. 

*'I declare," said Mr. Gay, "here's news 
from the borough." 

Every one looked. 

" Poor old Hodges ! I am so sorry." 

" 0, papa ! " said Diana, with the teapot 
suspended in the air from sympathy ; *' not 
dead ! . poor old man ! " 



302 DIANA GAY. 

'^ As good as dead, I fear, my child. Yes, 
liere it's all, from his nephew at Vichy. Got 
a stroke when taking the waters, . can only 
last a few months. Poor Hodges ! . a true 
gentleman and a good fellow." 

Lord Bellman had been listening, with 
eyes raised from off his own letter, with 
some eagerness. 

''Can't last long ? Then you'll have an 
election here ? " 

There was a pause. 

" Do you know what, my lord," said Mr. 
Gay . " that makes the Freeman estate some- 
thing more valuable than it was a week ago. 
I put in poor Hodges ; but Freeman had 
gone to pieces then. He could always put 
in his man . always." 

" So Lord Bellman," said Diana, " can 
put in his man. 0, but I am so sorry for 
poor Mr. Hodges." 

" He often had you on his knee, popsy. 
But come," said Mr. Gay, dropping his 



PLOTS. 303 

voice, ** there's a chance for our young poli- 
tician, Master Chimeleigh." 

" I Avas thinking of that . the very thing ! 
But, you see, it's so awkward ; it comes 
too soon. Chimeleigh must go abroad, 
and refit for a couple of years. And if 
3'oar friend resigns or dies, he could not 
come back. I'll talk with you after break 
fast in the study." 

Mrs. Bligh had been listening eagerly. Her 
dark eyes quickened with intelligence as they 
rose from the table. She went over to Lord 
Bellman. 

" I hope Robert was of some use," she 
said. " He has a wonderful head about such 
matters . in real property, as he calls it . 
and I am sure, even in this Freeman-estate 
business, he could give a hint that might be 
useful." 

** God bless me, yes ! I have all the 
papers here ; and those lawyers are such 
rogues ! But really you are too kind. He 



804 DIANA GAY. 

is a young man of remarkable ability : lie 
surprises me for liis years." 

'' An old woman like me," said Mrs. Bligli 
abstractedly, "is privileged to talk about her 
hobby. He is my hobby : he will cut a 
figure one of these days. I have put by a 
little money to help him in a way he don't 
know of. No lawyer gets on now without a 
seat in parliament." 

" Ah, yes," said the peer, starting ; then, 
looking at her steadily, "By the way . " 

Mr. Gay's hand was on his arm. '* Now, 
my lord, at your service. A cigar in my 
study, where we shall be more comfortable." 

His lordship looked again at her irre- 
solutely, and then went with his friend. 
He enjoyed his cigar in the study for 
nearly an hour, and then went to his room. 
Later, Mr. Gay, with an excited face, went 
tramping through the house, asking those 
he met, "Where's Bligh? . where's Bligh's 
mother ? " At last he met them. " Come 



PLOTS. 305 

here, botli of you," he said. "A bit of news, 
in confidence, that will warm the cockles of 
your heart. "What do you say to Master 
Bligh's becoming a senator, eh ? . too busy 
eh ? But mum's the word. It's all with 
his lordship. Hush, hush, now ! There's 
Chimeleigh going to be sent abroad to be 
tinkered up ; and if a smart, clever fellow 
could be got . discreet, and all that . why, 
in two or three years he might win 
a name and character, and end solicitor- 
general. Such things have happened before 
now." 

Mrs. Bligh's eyes sparkled. '' This is 
kind. Why, this is the very opening we 
were wishing for." 

Eobert Bligh was reflecting. '^ It is very 
kind," he said ; "but as to principles, I am 
afraid that mine and Lord Bellman's . " 

" Absurdity ! " said his mother, with 
brows contracting. *' There is time enough 
for all that." 

I. X 



. 306 DIANA GAY. 

" To be sure," said Mr. Gay. " Put your 
principles in your pocket, my dear fellow. 
But nothing's decided. I only give you the 
hint . you must work it." 

When he was gone, Mrs. Bligh turned 
almost fiercely on her son. " Surely you 
have a name for wit and sense, and are not 
going to raise such stupid points as those ! 
For God's sake, I conjure you, be rational, 
and, as that man said, put your principles in 
your pocket untill some one asks to see them. 
You go to Lord Bellman straight, and say, 
' My lord, I regret my principles prevent my 
being a member for your borough,' and what 
will he say ? " My good sir, I am sorry too, 
but really I was not thinking of you.' How 
would you look then ? But I hope, my dear 
boy, we are not to have any follies about 
political honour, and all that, in these 
days, when every one is allowed to play 
fast-and-loose in such matters. Be as 
honourable and true as you like in private, 



PLOTS. 307. 

like a gentleman; but in these wretched 
politics . no, no." 

Her son was silent. She saw she had pro- 
duced an effect. " My dear, clever boy," 
she said, taking his arm, " how proud I was 
. how I admired you yesterday ! You fol- 
lowed out all your poor old woman's instruc- 
tions to the letter. The girl is thinking of 
you. I know girls. She will have a romantic 
interest in you all the days of her life . her 
preserver. God bless you ! . and may I live 
to see it." 

During^ these hours Mr. Luo-ard senior had 

CD O 

been a little restless, and even nervous. He 
had been unfortunately placed at the end of 
the table, and could not well "catch" the 
election news that was being talked of so far 
away ; but when Lord Bellman came from 
the study with a specially pompous air, feel- 
ing himself now, indeed, about to possess the 
true touchstone of territorial influence, he 
met him in the hall, talked a few moments, 



308 DIANA GAY. 

and tlien went out with, "him for a stroll in 
the garden. 

Diana, when breakfast was over, went up 
to Dick Lugard with the demure, half-guilty 
manner which sat so well upon her. " You 
are not going away from us?" she said. 
" We should be all so sorry." 

"That is all very well," said Mr. Lugard. 
" Much they would miss me ! " 

" I don't know about that," said Miss 
Diana, innocently. " I can only guess. But 
J wish you to stay." 

'' I suppose I shall have to do so," said 
he; " and you know that I don't choose to 
get up a row with my father, who has his 
reasons, whatever they are." 

" I know them," said Diana smiling. 

Lugard coloured. " You do ? No, you 
can't." 

" But I do. He is thinking of that seat in 
Parhament. And do you know," added she, 
with great wisdom, " I think it would be a 



PLOTS. 309 

very nice tiling ; and 0, what fun to liave 
you for our member ! I should ask you for 
ever so many places . I should indeed." 

Lugard was growing eager. ''Ah, that 
indeed ! . that would be something. "Was 
that what they were talking of at breakfast ? 
I wonder would Lord Bellman do it, though ? 
Dear me, what a thing it would be ! I could 
always have leave of absence from that 
odious regiment." 

" Yet you were so anxious to get back 
there this morning," said Diana, with fresh 
innocence. 

''My dear Miss Diana, forgive me. I 
have been unwell ; I have been sulky. 
Yes ; I saw my governor and Lord Bell- 
man going to walk together. They are 
plotting that, I am sure. The only thing 
is that . " and his mouth began to look 
sour. 

" What ? " said she anxiously. 

" The wise man . your preserver . our 



310 DIANA GAY. 

friend Syntax, who seems now the centre 
of all attraction, since he put off in his boat 
to save you. Ha, ha ! " 

Diana smiled. "You can't forgive him 
that." 

"No,"' said Lugard, now in good humour, 
" because I can see he takes airs on it ^ 
and I can't forgive myself for not being 
sharper and more wide awake. Come, now, 
you hiotv he is a sober, book-learning 
fellow, and that I could buy and sell him 
in the world ? " 

"0, you mustn't abuse him now,^^ said 
Miss Diana, with infinite coquetry ; "I can't 
have it. I am to be eternally obliged to 
him, as I owe him my life." 

" Exactly," said Lugard, impetuously ; 
" and such an obligation would make me 
loathe it perpetually. Depend on it he will 
keep you in mind of it. Yet," said he, 
despondingly, '' the slow tortoise always 
wins. I am the hare, and will be made a 



PLOTS. 311 

hare. Perhaps they will make him a 
member. I shouldn't be at all surprised 
if he took that into his head, and used your 
interest with the lord. You know you are 
now, as you say, under eternal obligation 
to him, and must do everything for him." 

'' 0, not at all," said Miss Diana, tossing 
her head. " Dear, no." 

*' And yet, what would I not give to be 
in Parliament ! " said Lugard, with a very 
natural enthusiasm. Suddenly he turned 
round . " There is that girl. Miss Crowder. 
What a handsome thing she is ! Such a fine 
creature ! I admire Kitty . I do, indeed. I 
must go and talk to her." 

And he went off, leaving Diana a little 
mystified by the change. But she thought 
very often, with pity, of his natural burst of 
enthusiasm, and before long had devised a 
little scheme to benefit him. 

END OF VOL. 1. 
LI 5 R.AR.Y 

OF THE 

UN IVLR5ITY 

or ILLINOIS 



813 



The person charging this material is re- 
sponsible for its return to the library from 
which it was withdrawn on or before the 
Latest Date stamped below. 

Theft, mutilation, and underlining of books 
are reasons for disciplinary action and may 
result in dismissal from the University. 

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS LIBRARY AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 



SEP 20 



U-; 



L161 . O-1096 



DIAM GAY; 

OB, 

TP HISTORY OF A YOUXG LADY. 

BY 

PERCY FITZGERALD, M.A. F.S.A. 

ATTHOB OF "NETEE FOEGOTTEU'," "tHE LIFE OF GAEEICK," 

ETC. EIC. 



For her 'tis one long summer's day ; 

For her 'tis ever sun. 
Eound her do softest zephyrs play; 

Her do rude breezes skun. 

She knows no sorrow, knows not pain ; 

'Tis all a witching trance : 
For her 'tis all a sweet low strain, 

And life seems but a dance." 

.JoHX Maeshall (1690). 



TN THREE VOLUMES. 
VOL. IL 



LONDON : 
TINSLEY BROTHERS, 18, CATHERINE ST., STRAND. 

1868. 

DIANA GAY. 



CHAPTER XIY. 



THE servants' BALL. 



Lady Maegaeet Bowman, impeded again all 
that morning in her designs, saw an opening 
after lunch-time, when she could swoop down 
and absorb Diana all but entirely. This lady 
was an enormous eater and drinker . as was, 
indeed, rendered necessary by her habit of 
body ; and after such meals her face used to 
glow and her eyes fill somewhat alarmingly. 
She carried out a little apology, to the effect 
that the medical orders forced her to indulge 
in large draughts of port wine, &c. ; and 

II. B 



Z DIANA GAY. 

Mr. Cliewton, very soon discovering how 
matters were, would come privately, and 
softly fill up lier tumbler . under protest and 
surprise. She had a mysterious communica- 
tion for Diana. 

" Come over to me, dear ; I have some- 
thing to tell you. You're driving over into 
Calthorpe, aren't you, dear ? " 

"I didn't hear," said Diana faintly, 
thinking of the riding party, " but I shall 
be delighted." 

"It's no matter ; I was told that was all 
arranged. I can sit at home and do my 
work. But what I wanted to tell you was 
about Canning there, the politician, our charge 
d'' affaires et ministre pleni^otentiaire. Dear 
me, how I remember poor Yuillaume, the 
French minister, when I and Charles were at 
Dresden . such attention as he paid us . led 
me into the ball himself. Well, but Canning 
. who's a regular Pozzo di Borgo . comes to 
me just now, and says, ' Let me talk Europe 
over in the back seat.' I couldn't help 



THE servants' BALL. 



laughing . ' Europe in tlie back seat ! ' . 
very clever that is. He says you're tlie only 
one in the house that understands him." 

Diana looked a Httle alarmed, instead of 
pleased, at this compliment, for Mr. Canning 
had not had much communication with her. 
But she cheerfully gave up the ride, and Mr. 
Canning Bowman was dragged from his 
letter-case and forced into the back seat, . a 
sudden reluctance which mystified Diana a 
great deal, she having heard so much of his 
eagerness to go with them. However, with 
Diana driving, and he sitting behind, he 
tried to make the day as agreeable as he 
could, '' talked Europe," or rather " Baron 
Brenner," with great fluency ; Lady Mar- 
garet all the while taking half-mournful side- 
looks at Diana, with a slow shake of her 
head, in astonishment and wonder. This 
was all her contribution to the conversation, 
save now and again, a '^ Canning tell us about 
the Baron saying you were a TallyrancUste of 
the first water." 

E 2 



4 DIANA GAY. 

And Mr. Canning, with an ''0, nothing," 
started of and told '' the anecdote," which 
was really comprised in that word, . the Baron 
having merely said he was Talkjrandiste, 

When they came home from the drive, 
Diana found his lordship in the study, busy 
with his Times, Her plan suddenly darted 
into her head. She sat down beside him, 
and began a little speech. 

*' Now, Lord Bellman, I want you so 
much to do something for me, . a little 
favour; if you can, that is." 

His lordship looked down on her good- 
humouredly. 

"My dear Miss Diana, command me ; that 
is, provided it is not to get a place for 
any one." 

''No, no," said Diana eagerly; "it's quite 
another thing. You know to-morrow is my 
birthday, and papa and I have determined 
that no one is to give me a present, or any- 
thing of that sort. But I will take one, 
Lord Bellman, from ?/ozt." 



THE SERVANTS BALL. 6 

He was a man of the world, and kept a lot 
of smiles bv him of interest, enjoyment, &c. , 
which he could fit on as occasion served ; but 
this introduction alarmed him a little. 

''Now, I'll tell you," said Diana, getting 
closer to him in a most coaxing way ; '' there's 
poor EichardLugard, . a most honest, fine fel- 
low, whom we all like here, . and he has set his 
heart, I think, on getting a seat in the House." 

" 0, I see ! And he has set you to can- 
vass. Ton my word . " 

Diana coloured. ** Xo, I don't mean 
that," she said, " But one would be as 
good as another, just for a little time." 

''But," said the peer, ''what's to become 
of our friend Bligh . wlio saved you, too ? . 
isn't this rather hard on him ? " 

" 0, as for that,'' said she, confidentially, 
" I can explain all that. You see he is so 
sensible, and steady, and clever, he can get 
on any way ; whereas poor Dick requires 
help. Kobert Bligh can wait; but Richard 
mav never g^et such a chance." 



6 DIANA GAY. 

In sliort, tlie yonng lady pressed the 
matter so ardently tliat she at last prevailed, 
not knowing that Mr. Lugard the father 
had had a long talk with his lordship in the 
morning, during which he had mentioned a 
few considerations that rather shook his 
lordship's purpose : that young Bligh had a 
long head and a deep one, but was too wise 
to be pliant ; that he was full of those ad- 
vanced Radical opinions and crotchets . 
ballot, household suffrage, &c., and was just 
the man that might turn round on his patron 
and say, "I am a trustee for the people ; I 
was wrong in accepting on such conditions ; 
but now that I am here, I feel that I have a 
superior duty to remain here." "Not," 
said Mr. Lugard, "but that he is a most 
honourable fellow ; but these crotchets make 
slaves of their holders." His lordship was a 
good deal alarmed at this view ; said he'd 
given no positive assurance, and would hold 
the matter over. 

That day there was to be another " state 



THE servants' ball. 



dinner," and various neighbours had been 
invited, cliieflj hunting men. The stout, 
short Mr. Pratt, whose clironique was to 
excite such a fureur in the Mercury a few 
days hence, was invited, and found himself 
treated with distinction and respect, espe- 
cially by his lordship. 

Hunting is the true democracy, and, like 
the death it sometimes leads to, levels all 
distinctions. Perhaps it has an aristocracy 
of its own, even though it be a kind of 
'^ shoddy " sort. This gentleman was con- 
sulted obsequiously, and his replies hung 
upon with admiration. 

Diana was in infinite spirits. She had 
gone up hastily to Lugard and whispered 
him before dinner, and that whisper made 
him start and colour, and say, " No ; how 
good of you ! " 

" I am an angel, am I not ? " said she, and 
tripped away to take Lord Bellman's arm. 
" 0, do you know, pa," she called out during 
dinner, '' that illness of poor Hodges is not 



8 DIANA GAY. 

a secret ? They were all in a fuss at Cal- 
thorpe, and told us in tlie sliops tliat lie liad 
resigned already. And do you know, papa," 
she went on, with that charming serio-comic 
manner of hers, '' do you know we saw in 
my friend the Radical saddler's window an 
address to the Eadical electors, my friends, 
not to engage themselves ? " 

Lord Bellman looked a little grave. Mr. 
Gay would have looked grave too, but he was 
busy helping, and thinking of something else. 

'*Ah! there's my popsy .for you! She 
keeps her eyes open." 

About nine o'clock was to be the servants' 
ball in the large oak hall. This festival brings 
an exquisite pleasure to the ladies of that 
condition, and all the young maids were met 
during the day flitting through the house, 
looking for dresses. The " word had been 
passed" to friends at neighbouring houses, 
and the housekeeper, Mrs. Simms, had 
formally invited various " gentlemen " who 
were acquaintances ; and by particular desire 



THE servants' BALL. 



a special invitation liad been sent to a 
London footman and a town valet of dis- 
tinction, wlio were known to be on a short 
visit at a house close by. These gentlemen, 
finding themselves rather ennuijes with the 
simple pastoral pleasures of the country, 
had promised to look in. So might Major 
Marjoram and Captain de Lacy, of the Blues 
or Coldstreams, negligently promise the 
almost suppliant Mrs. Price, giving her little 
suburban party, and eager for the presence 
of these warriors, to '^ carry it off." 

It was '' Stanley," Lady Margaret's own 
'' body-maid," who had met these gentle- 
men, they having visited at Bowman in 
their professional capacity, and being sent 
into the housekeeper's room for refreshment, 
had delighted that select circle with their 
easy London manners and lively '' hanneck- 
doats." Stanley, a fresh, good-looking tire- 
woman, was supposed to have made an 
impression on the somewhat blase heart of 
Mr. Baker, who had said in a loud whisper 



10 DIANA GAY. 

to his friend that she was " dew-sidely well- 
fevered." 

No wonder it was looked forward to with 
interest, this little festival, giving the world 
of below-stairs an opportunity for playing at 
ladies and gentlemen, and 'to thus grow a 
little more refined. 

Diana took the greatest delight in this 
coming entertainment. With her own maid 
Fanny, a pretty village-girl little older than 
herself, she had been busy for such time as 
she could spare from the great people. She 
had tumbled out all her dresses, dug, and 
dived and delved in trunks to fetch up some- 
thing that would set off Fanny to the best. 

" Here, Fanny, you must have this, and 
this too. And here, take these earrings . I 
don't want them. And mind you come to 
me when you are dressed. And there. 
there's a wreath too ; I've only worn it 
once." 

'' 0, miss . the beautiful French flowers 
that came from Paris ! I couldn't . " 



THE servants' BALL. 11 

'' 0, nonsense! " said Diana. '' I'll make 
papa get me a whole box next week. Mmd 
you come to me, and I'll put tliem in." 

And so Fanny did, and, in a pale-blue silk 
of lier mistress's and a muslin ''body," she 
was the belle of the feast. 

At nine o'clock the distinguished party 
of immortals descended from above. They 
found the company already clustered at 
the door, and a little shy before their 
betters. 

The floor was cleared. The two fiddlers 
and the ''bass" . a village orchestra were 
" in high fettle," and tuning and tuning, as 
at that famous Fezziwig dance, '' like fifty 
stomach aches." They were rather squeezed 
in a corner, but could discourse spirited if 
not very correct music. 

Then the young ladies . ''in service" I 
mean . who had been clustering together 
timidly at the door, debouched quite a cloud 
of muslins and silks and flowers, aU with 
their gloves too, save Mrs. Simms the house- 



12 DIANA GAT. 

keeper, an old conservative as to sucli 
vanities, and only lending herself to such 
frivolties. 

Then Mr. Gay, without the condescension 
too often applied on these occasions as a sort 
of salvo, advanced to Mrs. Simms and begged 
her hand for the first dance. That lady 
curtseyed with a native dignity, and 
accepted. 

Then Diana went across to Mr. Chewton, 
who had been expecting the honour, and with 
a pleasant laugh invited him to dance with 
her. That gentleman indeed showed his 
training and knowledge of the world by his 
calm and almost elegant manner. 

Diana, thus secured, went over to the 
gentlemen and whispered to them with a 
business air . 

'^ Now go and be gracious, and ask those 
poor girls; and don't he condescending '' 

Mr. Eichard Lugard was in great spirits 
that night. 

" Give me your orders ; I'll do whatever 



THE servants' BALLi 13 

you wisli. Come, Bligh, sir . none of your 
aristocratic prejudices here ! " 

And Mr. Richard, by way of noble abne- 
gation and self-sacrifice, flew over and 
offered his hand for the first country-dance 
to my Lady Margaret's pretty maid, one 
of the belles of the room. 

Bligh, always a little shy and thoughtful, 
even in such trifles, felt awkward in going 
up to a cluster of servants whom he did 
not know. But Miss Diana, already taking 
her place in the dance, fluttered over to 
him. 

'* 0, ivonH you do what I ask ? " she said, 
timorously. " I dare say this all seems 
very trifling to you, and I know we ought 
not to ask you. But," she added, with a 
little mystery, '' they all expect it, just for 
to-night and at Christmas; and I only ask the 
dance." 

Bligh was looking at her with the air of 
being a little hurt at these rather gratuitous 
suppositions. 



14 DIANA GAY. 

" I have no wish," he said gently, '' to 
shirk my duty, or any duty you put on me. 
But I did not happen to know any of these 
young ladies." 

He saw Diana's little maid, and went over 
to ask her. But another gentleman was 
beforehand with him ; Mr. Baker, with curt 
and blunt promptness, which he had seen 
a good deal of in London drawing-rooms, 
'^ cut in " before him, and cut out the prize 
before his eyes. 

'' Beg pardon," he said, " but hengaged 
to me." 

My Lord Bellman's "hown gent" saw 
Mr. Baker wink at him ; by which he knew 

that this was onlv a clever invention ; but 

1/ 

Bligh felt the awkwardness of debating with 
a valet about his claim to a lady's maid, and 
withdrew. There was infinite tittering at 
Mr. Baker's cleverness. Then the music 
struck up, and all plunged forward with 
vigour and agility, and Mr. Gay's partner, 
Mrs. Simms, got into motion with a grave 



THE servants' BALL. 15 

activity that was almost amusing. Diana, vis- 
a-vis, was laughing . laughing to every one 
aU round as she '' set " to Mr. Chewton's 
portly person. 

" Now then, no shrinking . real steps . 
work away ! " said Mr. Gay, cheerily, as 
he pranced by, warming to the business. 

Bligh was looking on a little ruefully, and 
yet amused and interested. 

" She might, I think, be a little more 
kind . after what has passed." 

His mother saw him " moping " in this 
way, and came over to him. 

" I hope, dear, you are going to enjoy 
yourself like the rest. And engage her in 
time before all the others. Come . you 
know, all these are little points in the 
game." 

"My dear mother," said he smiling, 
" you are so sanguine. Yilmt is the 
game ? ' ' 

" My dear boy, when will you believe alto- 
gether in your mamma, without her having 



16 DIANA GAY. 

to explain every thing ? Why, eve n in your 
standing here, dancing with no one, there 
is an inferiority. It looks as if you had 
tried and couldnH. See ! Look round. 
Every one of your standing has succeeded 
in that. I know it is not worth anything ; 
but still it is a point lost." 

Bligh reflected a moment, then said, 
^' You are always wise, mother, and think 
of everything." He went up to Diana. 
'' There will be dancing, I suppose, later 
for us ? And, if so, would you . ? " 

'' I shall be dehghted," said she with a 
smile. '' Do you know you are beginning 
to surprise me ? . a grave barrister like you 
coming out in this way ! I shall be de- 
lighted . that is, after my dances with Mr. 
Lugard." 

" What, engaged already ! " 

" Yes," said Diana, nodding, " since 
dinner. The early bird, you know. . Thank 
you, Mr. Chewton, we had a very charming 
dance. . By the way, Mr. Robert, I want to 



THE servants' EALL. 17 

speak to you privately and confidentially. 
Suppose we take a walk round the room." 

Mr. Bligh was delighted. His mother's 
fond eyes followed them with approbation 
as they walked. Miss Diana was setting 
out that most captivating of all the little 
'^ properties ; " that moue-moue, confidential, 
mysterious, and persuasive look. 

"Kow," said she, ''Mr. Robert, I want 
you to do me a favour . a little favour. 
You know my birthday is coming on." 

"To be sure," said Bligh; anything you 
like." 

*' But you must promise me." 

"Well, I do," he said, smiling. 

''Well, you must know there is a great 
scheme on foot about this Calthorpe election, 
and I was speaking to Lord Bellman this 
very evening . canvassing him, as I may 
call it ; but he told me that ijov.. were 
thinking of it." 

< BHgh looked at her, mystified. "Well," 
he said, " and what does this mean ? " 

II. 



18 DIANA GAY. 

" Well," slie said, almost turning round 
to look into liis face ; " wliat we want is 
tliis : there is poor Eicliard Lugard here, 
as we all know . a little unsteady, you know^ 
and wants application." 

BligH was looking uneasy and doubtful. 

''Now, 3/o?i," slie went on eagerly, ''are 
sure to succeed. ! you are so clever." 

"But," said Bligli, quietly, " wliat is it 
you wish me to do ? " 

" Well," slie said, hesitating, " to let liim 
get in, if possible, for Caltliorpe. You are 
so wise, and full of sense and knowledge 
and learning, . you are sure at any time; 
whereas this is the only chance he may have. 
If you said a word to Lord Bellman . " 

" I declare," said Bligh impatiently, " this 
is rather too much. I am getting tired. 
Miss Gay, of being always told I am wise, 
and sensible, and all that. It seems to me 
to be rather a drawback than anything else. 
And let me say, too, it is a little unkind to 
make such a request of me." 



THE SEEVANTS' BALL. 19 

''Unkind ! " said site, starting, "0 no, I 
didn't mean it so." 

" I am sure not," lie said, more gently ; 
'' but you don't knov^ what you ask or tlie 
difficulties of tlie thing. It seems to me 
tliat I am to be called on to give way to 
Lugard in everything ; and why you should 
ask me above all others . unless you are 
so particularly interested . " 

Diana drew herself up ; a tinge of colour 
came into her deHcate cheek. 

" I suppose you mean after yesterday, Mr. 
Eobert Bligh ? You neednH remind me of it. 
I am quite sensible of the obligation, and 
always shall be, I hope. You will not find 
me ungrateful, I assure you. But I meant 
no harm in asking you what I have done." 

His blue eyes turned on her with gentle 
surprise and grief. 

"Was I dreaming of such a thing ? ISTo, 
indeed, I assure you. No one thinks less of 
that poor service than I do. But, with all 
respect to your wishes, I am not called on 

2 



20 DIANA GAY. 

to give way in this manner to Eicliard 
Lugard all my life long. We happened to 
be at school together ; we are neighbours 
here ; but that is all. We are not on such 
terms of romantic friendship. Besides, there 
are real difficulties in the matter, that you 
can have no idea of. The thing has gone 
further than you think ; I am half-pledged as 
it is." 

" But I tell you," said Miss Diana, coquet- 
tishly, '' I have made it all right with Lord 
Bellman." 

" There are other things besides Lord 
Bellman, "said he, ''but I am not at liberty to 
say more now." 

''0, then, you really refuse me the only 
little favour I ask you ! Very well ; it is no 
matter . none in the world, Mr. Bligh." 

" You don't know the difficulty," said 
Bligh, gently ; '' something has occurred in 
Calthorpe which has made it almost impos- 
sible. Then there is my mother, Avhom I 
mnst consult, and who has her wishes ; just 



THE SEEVAXTS' BALL. 21 

as you would do ^vliat would please Mr. Gay, 
your father. And as I say . as for Lugard, 
there is no reason why I should make any 
sacrifice for Itini, as . " 

" 0, hush ; " said the young lady in a 
frightened voice. 

A curling lip and flashing eyes were 
lookins; down on him. 

" Xo sacrifice for me, Mr. Robert Bligh ! " 
he said ; " who wants it from you ? Pray 
do not think of it. I don't require it from 
you or from any man. What were you talking 
about, pray, . where was I concerned? Would 
it be impertinent to inquire ? Ah ! there is 
the music. Come, Miss Diana . our dance. 
You'll tell me all about it. 'Pon my word, 
Mr. Robert is getting quite lofty in his 
speech since he rowed out in a boat and 
rescued a lad v." 

*' Xow you mustn't talk that way," said 
Diana, half- smiling, but greatly relieved, as 
she saw that Lugard was not going to make 
a noise or a quarrel about the matter. 



22 DIA^'A GAY. 

" All ! no, I won't complain, then," said 
he. *' But I warn you, you'll be reminded 
now and then of D'Orsay and that splendid 
rescue." 

Diana could not help smiling, but became 
grave again in a second, and shook her head, 
and looked over a little guiltily at Bligh, who 
all but knew what they were saying of him. 
This sort of polite faithlessness is based on 
a sudden confidence and good humour be- 
tween two persons : and a hundred times in 
this little state of effusion we cannot resist 
fraying, as it were, just the edges of our dear 
friend's character. Then the two went 
away merrily into the heart of the dance. 
Diana was in great spirits, but she was not 
quite pleased with Mr. Eobert Bligh . why, 
she could not say ; yet she found herself 
repeating Lugard's remark, " that he had 
merely rowed out in a boat," and that she 
would be reminded of it often enough. 

But we should now have noticed the two 
London gentlemen, who were indeed making 



THE SERVANTS EALL. 23 

an effect . Mr. Baker and friend. In dress 
tliey were scarcely distinguishable from tlie 
persons they served, having small bouquets 
and white kid gloves. It was seen before 
the night was over that of Mr. Baker Miss 
Stanley had made a conquest. He, as it 
were, appropriated her ; and a neighbouring 
footman, hitherto an admirer, and whose at- 
tentions had been accepted, found himself 
dismissed with the polite unpoliteness too 
often exercised in analagous cases in a scale 
above. The neighbouring footman glared, 
and breathed harder, as these successive 
slights were put on his head with an almost 
sweet unconsciousness. He felt his own 
awkwardness,, uncouth bearing, difficulty of 
disposing of his hands, &c. Nay, he almost 
fancied he heard his preferred rival allude 
to him as "Bumpkin." Alas! Mr. Baker 
could valse ! Miss Stanley was the only one 
of the young ladies trained in the accomplish- 
ment ; and when the persons of quality present 
were at last flying round, Mr. Baker and 



24 DIANA GAY. 

partner joined in the dance, and were quite as 
'' heasy and floatin' " (words used by Mr. 
Baker's friend) as any of the others. The 
neighbouring footman . very raw in the face, 
and feehng his hands a dreadful incum- 
brance . had to look on. He had besides to 
hear the pleasant " rally ings " from Miss 
Stanley's female friends. 

Mr. Gay was watching the scene with in- 
tense enjoyment. 

" Look at my popsy, how she spins it 
with the future member ! I am sorry 
Chimeleigh can't come down. It would do 
him good to join in this. I think he coddles 
himself too much." He was talking to the 
hunting man. "Well, I won't give up 
D'Orsay yet. I chose him out of a hundred. 
He's the stuff in him all the while. The 
groom tells me he's been off his corn lately ; 
but if we had him in good fettle . I tell you 
what ; I'll ride him over to the drag-hunt on 
Friday, and restore his character for you. 
I'd back him against the whole of them. 



THE servants' BALL. 25 

You know my little woman there can't be 
expected to have a wrist of iron, and the fox 
knows it well ; with me it's another matter. 
. I say, Bligh, my man, what's up against 
the grain to-night ? Why don't you stir 
those legal stumps of yours ? Shake 'em 
out, man. Put Blackstone and the sheep- 
skins out of your head for a while. Go and 
ask my girl to dance. Why, you ought to 
win everything you pleased to-night ; as my 
poor, little woman mightn't be footing it 
there but for you." 

" Don't say that, please," said BHgh fret- 
fully ; " everybody gives it that turn. It's 
no such obligation at all, and I don't want 
it to be considered so. So pray forget it, 
and make Miss Diana forget it too." 

Mr. Gay said afterwards, '' Curious fellow, 
that Bob BHo^h. I don't know what he is 
at." Then he thought of the old school- 
quarrel, and burst into a hearty laugh. 
'' That's going on still," he said. '' She 
. my popsy's . putting them by the ears 



26 DIANA GAY. 

still. Lord Bellman, I'll tell you as good 
a tiling as you ever heard. There's no 
love lost, I suspect, between these two lads, 
I can tell you." And then he enlarged on 
that old story with which the reader is now 
pretty familiar. 

"He is a little too magisterial for me," 
said his lordship, repeating a criticism that 
seemed destined to be always pronounced 
on poor Bligh. '' Too wise ; too much of 
a monopoly of that sort of thing. I like 
the other man ; he is so open and dashing. 
He'd make a good M.P., I can tell you, and 
I dare say rattle off a good speech. Do you 
know, I begin to be afraid Mr. Bligh would 
stand too much on . er . principle. I mean, 
what he considers to be principle." 

" 0, he's a fine honest fellow, and all 
that," said Mr. Gay ; '' but I suspect he 
hasn't shown us his politics yet. There's 
no knowing about that. 0, he'll do, never 
fear. Our friend will come on his legs 
whenever he likes. A canny boy !" 



THE servants' BALL. 27 

Thus the crowd, if it is obliged to put 
up with constantly hearing some Aristides 
called Just, takes care to indemnify itself 
by pleasant and secret carping at the mortal 
whom they are thus compelled to accept. 

Meanwhile the festival was going forward. 
It was past one o'clock; but these were 
good rustic dancers, who danced but seldom 
and meant business. They were only be- 
ginning, as it were, and showed marks of 
violence. The young girls panted through 
their exercise without restraint or disguise, 
and showed flushed crimson cheeks. Our 
genteeler ladies might have been well shocked 
at such an exhibition. But the progress 
the gentlemen from town made . and notably 
Mr., Baker . was all but appalling, to certain 
hearts at least. The native coachman, and 
more native footman, were by this time 
shouldered away out of the field, and v^ere 
glowering afar off. The latter had found 
his hands utterly odious and a burden. He 
saw it was fast drawing on to the '^yard 



28 DJANA GAY. 

behind tlie stable" and a meeting with Mr. 
Baker, . the coachman to see fair. The 
first gentleman was indeed utterly rampant. 
He had the control of the whole, suppress- 
ing the country-dances as '' wulgar," tole- 
rating only " wallsirs " and '' curdrills," in 
which he and his conquest, with the higher 
circles, alone took part. What could the 
men do ? The ladies were all charmed 
with the new gentlemen. Now comes Robert 
Bligli to Diana, enjoying herself immensely 
and quite excited : 

'' Now," he said, " I suppose this is to 
be our dance, at last ? " 

The young lady put on an air of comic 
doubt and surprise. 

*' Really now, are you sure ? or was it not 
the next after this ? Don't you think it is 
too crowded ? and I am so tired." 

So do young girls love to plague gentle- 
men of an easy temper ; with your dashing 
gallants they dare not play such tricks. 

Bligh quite understood, and smiled. 



THE SEEVANTS' BALL. 29 

" I am not going to let yon off," lie said ; 
" I have waited for my turn long enough." 

Up comes Lugard express : 

''Our dance," lie says, ''Miss Diana. I 
have got these rustics to play a good valse. 
Heaven knows what they will make of it." 

A smile of mischief came into Diana's 
face, almost breaking through an expres- 
sion of concern. 

" Dear, dear me ! " she said, " there must 
be a mistake here. Mr. Blio;h tells me I 
am engaged to him." 

" Surely," said Bligh warmly, " you can't 
really affect to say that there was a mistake ? 
I came to remind you a dozen times. 
Nothing could be clearer." 

",1^0 thing could be clearer," said Lugard 
coolly. " There was the valse first, the 
quadrille, and the valse again. It was all 
settled distinctly. But, my good Bligh, 
you're not before the Chancellor or Master 
of the Eolls asking for an injunction. Don't 
glare so at me, my dear friend." 



30 ^ DIANA GAY. 

Miss Diana tittered . she could not help 
it. Bligli ^uas glaring. She would laugh 
anywhere . in church, if a surplice was awry. 
Bligh was a little wounded. It seemed that 
since he had done her that service, she had 
all but turned against him. 

She did not answer Bligh, but with an 
attempt at a light manner, said . 

" 0, nonsense ! they're going to begin.'' 

'' Is'o ; you must give me my turn. No ? 
well, I'll never ask you again." 

Lugard looked at her and pursed [up his 
mouth, as being overwhelmed. 

" What will become of you ! " he said. 
"How will you get over that? This is 
getting serious. Hallo, there goes the 
music ! Come along. Miss Di, and drown 
care." 

The spirit of mischief was in Diana. She 
gave a helpless look at Bhgh, turned irre- 
solute to Lugard, who swept her off in 
a moment. 

Bligh turned away. 



THE servants' BALL. 31 

'.'Well, that settles all/' he said, *^ and 
I am glad of it. I have no business 
in this galere . as, indeed, I might have 
known." 

When the dance was over, Lugard came 
up to him triumphant, and took him by the 
shoulders behind. 

"Won't do," he said, "Master Robert. 
Red against black any day. All your Coke- 
Littletons ar'n't worth anything at a ball, 
except to put in a stove. I wish you saw 
your wicked look at that poor little girl." 

" I am getting quite tired of this, Lugard," 
said Bligh, trying to be very calm. " And I 
don't think you behaved quite kindly or 
straightforwardly. ' ' 

" Pray, how then ? " said Lugard gravely; 
" explain yourself. You are surely not going 
to make a business about a valse, because a 
young girl chose to throw you over in a 
dance ? that seems rather childish." 

" You understand me perfectly. I don't 
mean that. But I think, considering how 



32 DIANA GAY. 

long we liave known each other . However, 
it's no matter." 

'' My dear friend, I was at school with 
you . ^but so I was with a hundred more fel- 
lows. Come, now, no romance of this sort." 

''With all my heart," said Bligh, ''and 
certainly, considering our last day there, 
there is no reason for romance." 

Lugard's brow darkened at this allusion. 

" You had the best of it there by an acci- 
dent. I was off my guard, and you stole a 
march on me. School and college victories 
are no test, all the world knows that. Hug 
yourself in the thought and welcome, my 
good Bligh. I am for victories in real life. 
I want to win in love and elections. Ha ! 
ha ! You understand. And I think I am 
doing very well so far. Eh ! come, do your 
best, you won't score against me, I warn you." 

Bligh was now thoroughly roused. " Be- 
cause I have not tried as yet. Suppose I 
begin now ? " 

And he walked away. The other, a little 



THE servants' BALL. 33 

taken back at tke change in liis manner, 
looked distrustfully after Tiim. 

But now it was growing late. Lord Bell- 
man was in bed long ago. The ''quality" were 
dropping away gradually. Mr. Baker alone 
was unfatigued. He was sitting in a corner, 
nursing his knee, with the lady he had so 
fascinated. A little more, and the native foot- 
man's large hands would be at his throat. 
Every one was talking of the conquest. 

"When all were going to bed, Bligh stole 
quietly away. He thought of his mother 
with uneasiness. She was still up and 
watchful. He said his good-night a little 
hastily. " She will not be pleased with 
the night's work," he thought. *' What 
could I do ? " 

She whispered him, '' Good child, . good 
son, . nothing could be better ! " 

He looked up wondering. " Worse, 
mother," he said; ''it's all a delusion; 
and we'd better dismiss it, and waste no 
more time." 

II. D 



34 DIANA GAY. 

"You foolisli boy, you know nothing. I 
have been looking ; yon have made progress 
to-night. I know girls and their ways, and 
I am more than satisfied. I will tell you 
something else to do to-morrow. Dream a 
little of your politics to-night." 

And Bligli went away pleased, but won- 
dering still more. 

It did seem that Mrs. Bligh was in some 
way right, for Miss Diana came fluttering 
down. " Where is he ? Where is Mr. 
Robert ? Gone away, and I going to 
dance this last dance with him ! 0, 
Mrs. Bhgh, I am afraid he is angry with 
me ! " 

'' Angry with you ? " said Lugard, *' what 
folly ! Come along, finish with me." 

'' Ko, indeed ! " said she pettishly. " This 
was all your doing, and I'll punish you; 
but I'm too tired ; I'll talk to Mrs. Bhgh 
instead." 



OO 



CHAPTER XV. 



A NEW CHANCE 



The breakfast- table tlie next morning was 
all in clatter with talking over the arrange- 
ments for the drag-hunt. Here was a new 
excitement . who would ride, what was the 
course, who were to be the riders ? It had 
been got up by Pratt, and by that " true 
British sportsman " Mr. Featherston, the 
M.F.H. It was new to that part of the 
country, but some had seen it practised very 
successfully in Ireland, over the Kildare 
country, or with '' The Blazers." All 
tongues were once more loosed, and his 
lordship, greatly pleased with his previous 
day's exertions, looked forward to it with 
great pleasure. 

D 2 



36 DlAxVA GAY. 

Then the mail came, and his lordship 
again became absorbed in despatches . no^^ 
contracting his brow, now smiling com- 
placently, now elevating his eyebrows, as 
who should say, " Now, what are you at ? " 

''Ah!" he said, "Pollock, my man of 
business, ayIII be down here to-day about 
the Freeman estate. Curious how news 
travels ; he says, ' I suppose you have heard 
that there will shortly be a vacancy by death 
or resignation in this borough. This will 
add something to the value of the property, 
as the Freeman interest used to be all- 
powerful.' It is to be the Bellman interest 
now. This all concerns Mr. Richard Lugard. 
Give me one of your good cigars after break-^ 
fast, and come and have a talk with me on 
the lawn." 

When the dance of the night before had 
been talked over, and Mr. Baker's conquest 
and the native footman's grief and rage de- 
scribed, . how there had nearly been a per- 
sonal altercation between the two gentlemen 



A NEW CHANX'E. S7 

after midniglit ; and when Lady Margarel 
liad told liow lier maid in a flush of triumph, 
had disclaimed the idea of any relations with 
" such trumpery " as the native footman, 
the party broke up. Lord Bellman went 
out with Luofard '' for the cio'ar : " and 
Diana, bright as was the morning, came up 
all smiles to Mr. Bhgh. 

"I am sure," she said, ''you thought I 
behaved infamously last night. I know yoa 
did." 

Bligh, whose eyes were following his lord- 
ship and Lugard a little abstractedly as they 
walked on the lawn, turned to her absently : 

"How?" he said, w4tli genuine surprise. 
*' 0, I remember ! Dear, no ! " 

'- But you should have tried again. I was 
looking for you at the end of the night ; but 
you'd gone aw^ay in a huff, I am sure." 

" I assure you, no," said he laughing, and 
^^ith an earnestness that showed truth. " I 
went to the smoking-room, and had a cigar 
.with one of the officers. They were telling 



38 DIANA GAY. 

some rather funny stories, and I am asliamed 
to say liow late we stayed." 

Now, considering the amount of capital 
this little heroine had expended last night 
and on the present morning, in a sort of 
remorse, and resolution to make amende 
and soothe the wounded soul of the man she 
had treated so cruelly, this reception came 
on her a little unwelcome. She said nothing, 
and in a moment was called away. 

Lunch came round, following at a very 
close interval on the heels of breakfast. 
Instead of '' Come and stay a few days with 
me," your country-house host should surely 
write, " Come and/crts^ a few days with me." 
Lunch is a poor mongrel meal, which is not 
the cheerful herald of a day's work, like the 
brighter breakfast, nor the pleasant finish, 
as was the state-dinner that day. It was 
of extra splendour. There was a place 
vacant for some time ; no one remarked it, 
for there were many dining . the officers, 
and Captain Gilpin, the diverting panto- 



A NEW CHANCE. 39 

niimistj who had secretly brought a small 
bag, which contained his stage-dress and 
properties. His brethren told every one 
that Gilpin would kill them with laughing. 

Mr. Pratt had been asked ; and the 
Garibaldian, having long since taken the 
measure of the young lord, and seen that 
any matrimonial minings or borings were 
simply idle, had turned her attention to the 
young officer Lugard, whose spirits and off- 
hand manner she liked . 

With the young ladies who belong to the 
corps we have called Garibaldians there 
is one rule : never to be idle, but to engage 
the best that is available. Thus the warfare 
goes on ; and as Chimeleigh was out of the 
question, Lugard came next, and would do 
till something better offered. This excellent 
economy of labour and time would have its 
fruits. Besides, as she told Diana, sho 
began to feel a sort of sentiment towards 
this gallant and ready young man ; and 
Diana was delighted to portion off Mr. Dick 



40 DIANA GAY. 

with her friend. She laughed as she did so, 
and affected to think he would be pleased. 
He looked '' black" at this ill-usage ; but it 
did not make much difference, for he con- 
trived to sit very near her. He was in great 
spirits, and great good-humour with himself. 
In truth, he had noticed Bligh's absence. 

"We shall have some fun to-night," he 
said. " I made Gilpin put up his tom-fool's 
dress to do the blind man. I don't under- 
stand how any man can stand up in the 
middle of a room and buffoon ; but that's 
his concern. It makes me laugh, and is very 
good of its kind." 

" Goodness me," said Diana with a start, 
"how odd! Where's Robert Bligh? I 
wonder has anything happened ?" 

 Why, do you mean to say," said Dick, 
with scorn, " that he was expected, and that 
he has not sent?" 

" 0, 1 am sure," Diana said with a face of 
concern, " something important has hap- 
pened. I know him so well." 



A NEW CHANCE. 41 

"Yes," said Dick, "some wretclied two- 
guinea brief lias tumbled in. At tlie Bar, 
you know, they get so greedy. They 
sacrifice everything, and would kiss the very 
coat-tail of an attorney. Our friend, you 
must know, has a very wary eye to the 
pounds. I remember his saving ways at 
school. We used to call him Doctor Syntax, 
you know." 

" 0, here he is ! " said Miss Diana, half 
rising in her excitement. " I knew he 
would come." 

Miss Diana, indeed, had always an absent 
idol . a curious little perverseness, which 
sent her young mind off from what w^as 
present to what was away, or was to come. 

Dick looked black again. Bligh stole 
softly into his place ; it w^as exactly opposite 
Diana. 

" I am so sorry," he said, " but I w^as 
kept. Some people from Calthorpe came in, 
and I could not get rid of them. I tried all 
I could." 



42 DIANA GAY. 

" Every one lias been talking of you, my 
friend," said Dick. "When there is a 
dinner-party in the case, all other things 
give place, you know . even briefs. But 
what do you say to Miss Diana only having 
missed you a minute ago ? " 

" I am so glad of that," said Bligh, calmly ^ 
'' so I am just in time, you see." 

" What do you do with all your fees," said 
Diana, '' and making such a quantity of 
money ? " 

" This was not law-business," said he. 

" So much the worse," said Lugard, with 
a loud laugh. " It was settled before you 
came in, that that was your only excuse." 

'^ And what was it, then ? " said Diana. 

" Some business," said Bligh, '' which . " 

'^ 0, a mystery ! " said Lugard. " Our 
friend is so close and guarded . he won't 
commit himself. We must beg his pardon 
for asking." 

*' I meant no harm," said Diana with a 
sort of serious penitence. 



A NEW CHAXCE. 43 

'' I make no mystery," said Bligli, laughing, 
'^ and there is no harm in it. It was simply 
a deputation from Calthorpe." 

" A deputation ! " repeated Lugard, laying 
down his knife and fork. '' What on earth 
about?" 

Mr. Lugard senior, not very far away, had 
caught the words, and looked out eagerly. 

'^ So curious a thing," went on Bligh ; 
'' and I am sure you will laugh. But I have 
almost made up my mind. Eichard, you 
won't like it, I'm afraid." 

''You are getting a way of talking like a 
sphinx." 

"Well, I found our little place quite filled up; 
two gigs at the door, and the drawing-room 
full of large men. Prosser, the saddler . " 

'' Why you don't mean to say that they 
came to you about the election ? " 

'' Exactly," said Bhgh. "Wasn't it curious, 
after our talk this morning ? They had heard 
all about the present man's sickness ; and 
Prosser, who is the leading politician . " 



44 DIANA GAY. 

" A flaming Radical," said Lugard, grow- 
ing excited; '' nice sort to come to a gentle- 
man. I'd have kicked tlie dirty fellows out 
of my room." 

" Yes, lie is a Radical; but we talked tilings 
over, and I found liis opinions were nearer 
anine tlian I supposed. AYe have all a sort 
of philosophic Radicalism, which can stretch, 
and do very well." 

'' And you . what did you do ? " 

" Well, I hesitated a long time ; but they 
were so pressing, and showed me so much 
the almost certainty of the thing . " 

" That you gave in ! Ton my word these 
are nice surprises I We never know what 
will happen before going to bed. He's very 
clever, isn't he ? always planning something 
in this secret Avay." 

"There was nothing secret about it," said 
Bligh, laughing. '' It was as much a surprise 
to me as to any one." 

Miss Diana was listening with great 
interest. For the power of getting on in the 



A NEW CHAXCE. 45- 

world slie had tlie deepest respect and awe. 
Here was a fresli move in tlie game. 

" How delightful ! " she cried ; " wouldn't 
it be amusing, a regular election ; or," she 
added, laughing, '' a contest between you two ?' 
How funny it would be ! " 

''And let the best man win," said Bligh, 
with interest. '' It vjould be exciting. The 
Army against the Bar." 

Diana had turned oTave. 

'' Wo, I hope not. There must be nothing 
of the kind. What would we do ? no, no." 
She saw Dick's eyes glaring about, and fixed 
at times on Bligh with a very wild and fierce 
expression. 

He hardly spoke for the rest of dinner, or 
afiected to talk very earnestly to his com- 
panion the Garibaldian, who w^as quite 
pleased with the impression she had made. 
Though the regular army was not in sight, 
this skirmishing kept her hand in. 

At last the ladies retired, and Mr. Gay 
called to those far off to close up. He had 



46 DIANA GAY. 

hardly settled liimself comfortably, and 
thrown an eye down the table, when Lugard, 
who had moved up close, said very loudly, 

''Here's a piece of news brought in during 
dinner. It seems Mr. Bligh has been spend- 
ing his day canvassing." 

All started. 

''Hallo, Master Bob!" cried Mr. Gay, 
^'what's this?" 

" Lugard means," said Bligh, quietly, 
" that a number of the electors came to ask 
me to stand." 

"Quite unsolicited, of course," said Lugard, 
with a toss of his head. 

"Quite. They were there some hours. 
They went over all the chances, and certainly 
made out a very enticing case." 

"But, my good friend," said Mr. Gay 
gravely, "what are you talking of? Who 
are they . publicans or potwallopers ? " 

" Xo ; Prosser, you know . " 

"What, Prosser!" said Lord Bellman, 
starting. "Why, he's for me; at least, 



A NEW CHAXCE. 47 

they told me so. I declare, I don't under- 
stand . " 

His lordship was put out, Mr. Gay looked 
vexed, and Richard triumphant. Bligh put 
himself together as though he was going to 
address a throng. 

" I must explain," he said. '^ Lord Bellman 
-will understand that as yet I have been quite 
passive in the matter. Though," he added, 
smiling, " after what passed this morning, I 
think I am perfectly free." 

'' 0, quite so, quite so," said his lordship. 

"I think that's all fair," added Mr. Gay, 
relieved. 

"Well," went on Robert, "they told me 
.candidly, that as far as Lord Chimeleigh 
went they were quite content, and that Lord 
Bellman being lord of the soil, and all that, 
they would not like to go against him ; but 
with any deputy, as Mr. Prosser remarked, it 
would.be a different matter." 

"How handsome!" broke out Lugard, 
loudly ; " how condescending ! Lord Bell- 



48 DIANA GAY. 

man ought to be grateful. Do you know 
what this fellow Prosser is, whom Mr. Bligli 
has taken up ? A low blackguard of a 
Radical, a pothouse politician, that I wouldn't 
leave in the room with a half-crown on the 
chimneypiece. That's what he is. I must 
congratulate Mr. Robert Bligh on the new 
friends and allies he has picked up." 

There was something so vehement in this 
speech that every one looked with some 
wonder at the speaker. Mr. Lugard ]iere 
said quietly across the table, '' What are you 
talking of . about allies and friends ? Take 
the thing quietly, my dear boy. Keep that 
for the men. Prosser is a shrewd, long- 
headed fellow, and our knowing friend Bligh 
was quite right to make up to him." 

'' I never had a communication with him 
before to-day," replied Bligh, quietly. 

''Ah, but mamma had," said Mr. Lugard, 
showing all his white teeth ; " your clever 
mother, she knows how to do this." 

" I know nothing of it, and my conviction 



A NEW CHANCE. 49 

is . " but lie stopped ; for it flaslied on liim 
that what Mr. Lugard had said explained it. 

''Yes, I am quite right/' said the other 
triumphantly. '' But it was very well done." 

"Very well done!" said his son in the 
excited tone . '' to take up principles of that 
sort ! I should be ashamed to do it, and 
wouldn't for all the seats in the world. He 
says he is a ^Dhilosophic Radical. I don't 
understand these refinements." 

'' 0, it will soon be generally understood. 
I mean an educated Radical . educated 
morally and intellectually. All that is 
wanting is self-restraint. If the lower 
classes were well off and comfortable, and 
educated out of their violence and unreason- 
ableness . which is what is radical . there 
would be nothing to be afraid of." 

'' I suppose you'd sit down with them to 
this table ? " 

''Certainly," said Bligh, "under those 
conditions." 

" And this is the stuff you and Mr. 
ii. E 



50 DIANA GAY. 

Prosser were talking together? . 'pon my 
word ! " 

"Tm afraid tlie army is a poor school," 
said Mr. Lugard senior. '' I must tell you, 
Eichard, you are saying very foolish things. 
But if I may ask Mr. Bligh, what is he going 
to do?" 

*' Well," said Bligh, with a sort of confi- 
dence, '' we have not quite decided ; but,, 
really, I am thinking of trying it. I know I 
shall fail ; but as my friend and adviser the 
queen's counsel says . the next best thing 
to being elected is having been a candidate. 
It is everything to a barrister. As Lord 
Bellman was kind enough to speak to me 
about it, and gave me a sort of offer, I 
expressly said to them, if Lord Chimeleigh 
was in the case, I should not move in the 
matter." 

"Well, I must say that is all fair and 
aboveboard, Mr. Bligh. We must talk this 
over together, and make out something. . 
What about the Drag hunt. Gay . what is 



A NEW CHANCE. 51 

the hour? How is D'Orsay?" And as it 
was plain his lordship wished to change the 
subject, the w^hole company, except E/ichard, 
were presently riding away over the course . 
now on the back of D'Orsay, now on the 
other noble animal . inspecting this jump 
and that ; and Mr. Pratt, who had been 
silent as the grave during the dinner, sud- 
denly had his jaws relaxed, and became fluent. 
In the drawing-room, when the " gentle- 
men joined the ladies," there was a pleasant 
excitement. In that bright realm, in the 
soft light, Diana was fluttering with an air 
of mystery . a bright creature, indeed, her- 
self. Something was coming. Captain 
Gilpin was missing. She was looking to 
the ^ door. Presently it was opened by Mr. 
Chewton, who on occasion would graciously 
lend himself to undignified offices, and who 
announced, in his best professional way, 
" Mr. Slapbangl" To the amazement of the 
beholders, the wonder, surprise, and delight of 
the assembled thousands, as the Merciirij 

'i-i-'NOIS LIBRARY 



52 DIANA GAY. 

would liave said, a sort of mendicant or 
beggar-man entered, all rags, all patches, 
with an old hat without a crown, and a 
couple of long straps covered with knives. 
This stranger entered quite coolly, and 
standing in the middle of the room, began 
leisurely a sort of chant, '' Buy my 
knives ! Who'll buv, who'll buy I Knives 
to grind! . razors to grind!" . in short, 
convulsing every spectator. The Garibal- 
dian said later, '' she Avas shrieking with 
laughter," especially when the inimitable 
humorist went round to the ladies, and 
asked them for a razor to grind. Diana, to 
whom he made this proposal first, looked a 
little grave. This was the whole perform- 
ance ; yet he kept it up, on such material, 
for more than half an hour, until Mr. Gay, 
with his arm round Diana, said in a half- 
whisper, 

" I think, doatsey, we've had enough of 
the knifegrinder . " 

AYhat a thing is esprit tie corps . a sync- 



A XEW CHAXCE. 53 

iijm, surely, for charity and love ! The 
cleHght and admiration and pride of his 
brother officers was something to see. They 
looked not at him, but at the other faces, to 
see how they were affected. They grinned 
. '.' Buckstone," or 'Hhe Funny Blake" of 
the music-halls, whom they placed higher 
than Buckstone, was nothing to this . ^all, 
except Lugard, who kept apart, and 
glowered and ''pished" at it, and said it 
made him sick. But he was out of humour ; 
. and waiting for an opportunity, when he 
had retired, and everybody was saying how 
funny it was, and how "clever" it was, 
Lugard came up to Bligli, and said, 

" Come down and have a turn at the 
billiards." 

Bligh said with surprise, " Billiards 1 My 
dear Pdchard, not now, surely. We should 
have gone after dinner." 

" "Well, you needn't play. Come down ; I 
want to speak to you." 

They went down, Bligh wondering. They 



54 DIANA GAY. 

went outside on the terrace, and then Lu- 
gard suddenly turned, and placed himself in 
front of him. Bligh saw that he was excited 
. ^his eyes " savage/' his cheeks flushed. 

'^ Now, then," he said. '' what does all 
this mean ? . what are you coming to ? I 
must know, and know it here too, before you 
leave this place ! " 

" 0, this is mere absurdity," said the other 
impatiently. " I am getting tired of it ! Let 
us go back, and talk of this in the morning." 

*^ Yes," said the other scornfully, ''when 
you will have time to get up your lawyer- 
like schemes, and plot something else. 1 
am tired of it, and sick of it. You have 
laid yourself out to scheme against me, with 
all those little tricks in which you are so 



skilful." 



'' I have no tricks, Lugard," said the 
other, quietly ; " you never made a greater 
mistake. The way you go on to me . and 
]iave always gone on . really seems the result 
of some mordid delusion. Only for that . " 



A NEW CHAXOE. 55 

'' Yes, only for that ! Go on ; finish, 
please." 

"JSTo, not tins time," said tlie otlier im- 
patiently. '^ I .won't give you that opening. 
I am afraid you want to pick a quarrel w^itli 
me. And if you only think a moment, that 
won't benefit you in the least ; for you must 
see that, if I took a real enmity to you, my 
tricks, as you call them, would be doubly 
dangerous." 

" Then I'll match you, tricks and all, as 
sure as my name is Eichard Lugard. And I 
tell you, you don't leave this to-night, until I 
hear from you what you mean . what you 
are doing here in this house, and what 
wretched scheme have you." 

^^ About what ? " 

" About me . about her ? Now, don't at- 
tempt it; it w^on't do. You'll find I'm a 
man not to be played with. I've a demon 
in me that will come out one of these days, 
and won't stick at a trifle." 

" There is no need for all this," said Bligh. 



56 DIANA GAY. 

'' Now you are reasonable, or more reason- 
able; and I see what you want. As for 
threatening me, you know that is absurd. 
But you wish to know my scheme. Is it 
about the election ? Yery well ; I must go 
on with that. I wish to rise in the world, 
and can't afford to lose such a chance ; there. 
What else?" 

" You cold, crafty fellow ! That's it, is it ? 
Then you Avon't, if I can hinder you . if I 
was to beggar myself and my father both ! " 

"Fair again . quite fair. There's an 
honest and straightforward principle . " 

'^ Don't give me your sneering speeches, I 
don't want them. And what do you mean 
about he}' . Diana ? " 

" Ah ! thafs another affair. You can't 
expect me to be so candid in that. But I 
may tell you this : I do admire her, and 
always have done so ; though I should never 
dream that she would think a poor plodding 
lawyer worthy of her." 

" He will turn me mad ! " said Lus^ard, 



A XEW CHANCE. 57 

stamping witli rage. '* Never mind ; if I 
were to live for notliing else, I will live to 
defeat you liere. What insufferable airs I 
You liave laid yourself out for all this ! But 
I shall lay myself out too. Mind, I give you 
warning; expect nothing from me. I shall 
stop at nothing with such a . " 

"With all my heart," said Bligh; "then 
that's understood, and I am glad of it. You 
might have made me a warm friend, and I 
would not tlien have wished to stand in your 
way. But you have always," added Bligh, a 
little excitedly, " behaved to me so unkindly 
and ungraciously . as if you had a sort of 
hatred to me . that I am glad it has come io 
this. I shall make no more efforts at con- 
ciliating you, but just go on in my own 
course, as if you were not in the world." 

" Then don't carry that too far," said 
Lugard, in a low suppressed voice ; "I warn 
you. I can't trust myself . " 

"Why, where on earth . " said a sweet 



58 DIANA GAY. 

voice, '' are you talking of tlie law and the 
prophets ? Come back to tlie drawing-room, 
I beg. It is not decent to our little hostess. 
And young men are scarce." 

This was Mr. Lugard j;ere. 

*'You go, Bligh, at once, like a good 
fellow, and don't lose time." 

Bligh went away hastily. Mr. Lugard 
waited till he was gone ; then the sweet 
voice changed. 

''You fool!" he said; "you great, ill- 
conditioned, helpless fool ! Is this the way 
you mean to get on in the world ? Have 
yon no sense or brains, you vulgar-minded 
fellow?" 

" It is no use talking to me that way," said 
Dick; " I've to bear enough without that." 

'' Then l^ear it, and get on by yourself. I 
see nothing is to be made of you. You have 
no delicacy, no tact. Why, that man's little 
finger has more] wit in it than your whole 
twelve stone." 

" Because he schemes and plots." 



A NEW CHANCE. 59 

'' And why don't you ? But you can't. A 
clodhopper or a bumpkin would do more. 
Picking a vulgar quarrel here 1 Good Grod ! 
But its useless teaching you. I tell you 
what now, Mr. Richard, you must look after 
yourself. I've spent too much money on 
you, teaching you, as it is ; and now I'm not 
going to pinch myself, in my middle- age, to 
support you. You are as helpless now as 
you w^ere at the school, when that fellow 
disgraced you publicly." 

" I haven't forgotten that day yet, long 
ago as it is. I'll beat him yet, and get. 
interest from him too." 

"Well, do so; it's your own affair. But, 
in God's name, don't take that vulgar way of 
violence and losing your temper. You can't 
imao'ine the childish fio-ure it makes vou cut. 

o Of 

If you'll let me give you one bit of advice . 
and if you are sensible, you'll take it . your 
hands are too coarse for this delicate w^ork ; 
you haven't the neatness of touch for an 
affair of this kind. That other girl . that 



60 DIANA GAY. 

ironmaster's daughter . I think would do 
for you better. And you riiight have a 
chance there. She is coarse enough, God 
knows ! It's all plane-sailing ; and I 
could help you there with the old father. 
But how do 3^ou mean to beat him, 
pray ? " 

'' Why, at this election. If I have to sell 
my commission, I'll oppose him." 

'' And come on me afterwards. By God, 
you shan't, sir ! Do as you like, though ; 
but mind, I warn you. If I could advise 
you, I would work that lord still. But no 
matter. And as for the girl . " 

'' I'll beat him there too." 

'' And a fine way you're going about it ! 
Get back to the drawing-room, and lose no 
time. I dare say the fellow has scored a 
point or two in your absence. God help us ! 
a man like you . in a cavalry regiment . and 
to be spoon-feeding you in this way ! " 

Both o-entlemen came back to the drawino- 
room ; Mr. Lugard pere looking as sweet 



A NEW CHANCE. 61 

and placid as if he liad just gone to liis room 
. . as he said he had . for a handkerchief. 
Richard, as he entered, saw that Bligh was 
indeed scoring a few more points. The 
Httle lady of the house saw his restless eyes, 
and her almost mischievous heart was 
pleased. She was very young, and this sort 
of game, new to her, seemed the most ex- 
citino' and amusing^ thins: in the world. 
These were such happy days for her, she 
thouo'ht ; and to this nio-ht she used to look 
l)ack as one of the happiest. Her father 
came up to her. " Do you know where I 
have been, popsicums ? . taking a sly look at 
D'Orsay. He is in grand fettle. How will 
you lay out your money ? I am going to put 
another fifty to it. How will you lay it out ? 
All I ask is a little out of it ; a picture for 
old papsy . coloured, to hang in his room, 
when he gets past his work, and you are 
married. I see that's not far off." 

"Years, you foolish man; a great many 
years." 



62 DIANA GAY. 

"0, I see, miss!" with one of liis loud 
enjoying laughs. " Listen to this. Lord 
Bellman. She has some hearts to crack yet, 
before she goes into harness ! A nice plan 
she is laying out ! Never mind." 

'* And the picture, dear," she whispered; 
''why didn't you tell me to-day? To- 
morrow I will drive into Irnston, and I'll sit 
to the man there." 

" Ah, witch, witch ! " said he, looking at 
her with inexpressible fondness. " How she 
thinks of her old man ! " Many afterwards 
remembered this picture of the fond father 
and his daughter. 



( 63 ) 



CHAPTER XYI. 



THE DEAG-HUNT. 



The all -important morning, wliich liad been 
looked for witli sucli excitement, proved to 
be dull, dark, and drizzling. Tlie rain was 
streaming down. Every one appeared in low 
spirits. But sporting is rigidly independent 
of wet. It must go on "though coelum 
Tots,^^ as one of the hunting gentlemen said, 
by way of classical jest. Yet it was surpris- 
ing, with what a spirit the party set out. 
The Squire's own Tom Moody reported that 
the ground held together well ; and as the 
hunt was to be down country, starting from 
Shepherd's Bush, and to finish close to Irn- 
ston, at Furley Hatch, a stretch of some 
ten miles over about as stiff a line as could 



.64 DIANA GAY. 

be desired, tliere was every prospect of a 
very great trial being given to the horses. 
In the Hall, Squire Gay was drawing on his 
gloves, with the ladies about him, and his 
Diana looking up fondly into his face. 

'' Do I look like the picture, eh, pet ? the 
old ' Flames and Blazes ' upstairs ? Don't 
tell me that, or I'll go out low-spirited. Ha ! 
lia ! ha !" and he gave one of his loud, bois- 
terous laughs. 

*' I begin to hate the sight of it," she said 
with a pretty impatience. 

'' I wish you were coming, cricket, to see 
your nag cut out his work. But don't fear ; 
I'll carry him through, and take down Mr. 
Pratt's conceit a bit. AYliat will you do with 
yourself, dear ?" 

" 0, I have a little plan," she said with 
.confidence. ''If it clears at all, I and Lady 
Margaret will take the carriage and drive over 
to Irnston, and settle about the picture." 

'. Good cricket ! always thoughtful. So 
you're giving it to me all the same, whether 



THE DRAG-HUNT. 65 

D'Orsay gets his money or not ? I tell you 
what, . he'll take hwi in also, and he shall be 
clone in all his glory, with a medal about his 
neck. Give me a kiss, poppet. I wish you 
were comino-." 

His Tom Moody now reported that it 
would clear '^ afore eleven, sartain," an accu- 
racy which always gave an authority to Tom's 
predictions, though they failed and came true 
with tolerable impartiality. Then they all 
rode away. 

How many times was it said that Squire 
Gay had the true stuff in him . a man of the 
right sort ; which meant that he spent a 
great deal of money on horses, dogs, foxes, 
keepers, pheasants, scarlet cloth, and pigskin. 
The /^ right sort" becomes such a different 
thing to different minds ; and there were 
plenty to whom, the Squire was a man of 
low, coarse tastes, who was bringing up that 
young girl of his nicehj. Others said strongly 
that he was neg^lectino^ the interests of hm 
spiritual welfare. 

IT. F 



(j6 DIANA GAY. 

Out of Gay Court gates, between tlie two 
larks, debouched anotlier lively procession. 
The drag-bunt was to be six miles off, and 
tlie roads were already covered with strag- 
glers going to work, but just turning ever so 
little out of their way to see the sport . that 
'' ever so little " amounting to actually turn- 
ing their backs on their own proper direction. 
Tom Moody had indeed proved right on this 
occasion, and before eleven o'clock the rain 
had stopped, and the sun was seen hovering 
behind a cloud, undecided, as one of the 
'* sporting gents " remarked, whether he 
should '' peel off his greatcoat and show 
himself." The "meet" was some miles off, 
and D'Orsay had been sent on before at an 
easy trot, and was already waiting, in a 
farmer's snug stable, to be taken out and 
mounted. 

Wlien they reached Shepherd's Bush, the 
whole country-side had gathered. A drag- 
hunt was a novelty there ; many hardly 
knew what it meant, and scarcely dreamed 



THE DRAG -HUNT. Q*7 

that it was a sporting liybrid . in their own 
phrase, '' a cross " between a race and a 
hunt. By this time the rain had quite 
.cleared off, the sun had got rid of his in- 
decision, and there was a crowd of what, in 
the special language of the occasion, might 
be termed "sporting swells'' . Mr. Thomas 
Clough, M.F.H., Major Eushout, G. H. 
Washwood, " that true veteran " of the field. 
Lord Bellman, and many more, whose names 
.could be ascertained by searching an old file 
of the Mercury. Fine times indeed for the 
Mercury and its reporters. Need we say 
that that excellent journal was all but dis- 
solved in raptures over the spirit, the virtues, 
the liberality of that true English supporter 
of manly sport, Squire Gay ? And without 
going the length of this dramatic exuber- 
ance, it was felt that morning, that when 
Squire Gay "went" . which was many, 
many years off in the ordinary course of 
nature . the fast friend to true sport, the kind- 
liest and most generous country gentleman in 

F 2 



68 DIANA GAY. 

tlie world, would be gone. There lie was now, 
on D'Orsay's back, bright, healthful, genial, 
and hearty, fall of spirits and enjoyment, 
knowing everybody, glad to see everybody, 
with a goodnatured word for everybody . a 
true sportsman, and, what was better, a true 
man. '.' He was the common link," said the 
Mercii'nj in its own way, " the kindly centre, 
where the most opposite natures could meet. 
He had not a single enemy ; the poor, the 
widow, and the orphan knew him as their 
certain stay and benefactor." How hearty 
his greeting to Mr. Pratt, already on his 
''Flemish dray," in his black hunting-coat, 
his boots without tops, well shaved, with 
small '' square-inch " whisker and a yellow 
neckerchief, his limbs fitting to his animal 
as though nice smooth "beds" had been 
scooped out purposely ! . *' Here we are, 
Pratt ! Look on this picture and on that, 
my friend. Your money is lost already ! I 
wish my little lady was down here to see. 
You know you are l^ooked to me to dinner. 



THE DEAG-HUNT. 69 

winning or losing. I am only sorry I didn't 
double tlie stakes." 

" Quite in time," said Mr. Pratt, getting 
out Hs book nimbly. '' Is it done ? " 

''Done!" said Mr. Gay, impatiently. 
'* Done, and done again, and tliree times over, 
if you like. Have you eyes, man ? Did you 
ever read of the liare and tortoise ? Done ? 
. to be sure ! What a purse my little girl 
will have, to be sure ! JSTow, Lord Bellman ; 
it's time, I think. . Now, gentlemen, please." 

A friendly M.F.H. was to act as starter. 
Already the trail had l)een laid on. The 
dogs were eager ; they sniffed the red-herring 
which had gone over the ground at the end 
of a string. Towler and Sweetlips, the 
'' Nestors " of the park, were not a little in- 
trigued at the new flavour, so different from 
the usual '' reynard " bouquet. Tom Moody, 
it must be said, lent himself to the arrange- 
ments with a certain willingness, though not 
with enthusiasm. He said it was "new- 
fangled" and ''Hirish." He never had 



70 DIANA GAY. 

relished the Hirish 'orses, and their special 
tricks of going at their jumps. 

IN^ow all was ready, and the friendly M.F.H. 
is at his post. Many, looking at the two 
horses, could smile at the notion of Pratt's 
horse " holding on ; " but still, Pratt himself 
was such a steady '* knowing card," that it 
seemed that he would hold on. His gifts 
were so remarkable, that, as a friendly ad- 
mirer said, "he'd win on a broom." 

Now there rises the cry, " They're off! " 
and not only the horses and riders, but every 
living thing besides ; those on foot '' cutting 
round," taking short paths, clearing hedges 
and ditches, to come up in time and see the 
fun. They could not hope to be in at the finish, 
as the course was straight across country ; 
but there was the great jump . the feature of 
riie course . close to Giles's windmill, and 
about which "half the town" had secured 
good places. The mill-race here seemed to 
fall in with the sporting tastes of the com- 
munity, and flowed away just in front of 



THE DRAG-HUNT. 71 

a good hard iron highroad, which made 
carriage- wheels ring out musically as they 
lolled over it. At this side of the road there 
was a hedge, but at the other there was 
none ; and to make everything more " stiff," 
a good hurdle had been put across the hedge. 
The other jumps were of the common hunting 
pattern. 

Yery soon all the world saw that Mr. 
Gay's good judgment in matters of the horse- 
AYorld was right on this occasion. He him- 
self, looking back with a smile, saw that the 
'^ big " drag-horse was labouring through a 
field or two, grown boggy under the rain. 

Never was there such good, steady, 
straight, hard riding. The whole field held 
on together; no nian went through a gate 
ignobly. The dogs led in full cry after their 
imaginary fox, or the mysterious animal 
which they fancied they were pursuing. It 
was growing exciting; and now about two 
miles ahead could be seen Giles's mill, 
and Mr. Gay, looking back, saw with a smile 



72 DIANA GAY. 

*' Pratt's liorse " labouring on, as it seemed 
to him, at a jogging pace. " Ha ! Master 
Pratt, this will take the conceit out of you a 
bit. Xow, D'Orsay, my boy, think of your 
little mistress, and get ready for stiff Dick 
here." 

Suddenly he heard a thundering behind, 
and, looking round, saw that the great horse 
had now indeed ceased to '' labour," and was 
pounding along over everything . stones, 
gravel, clay ; and now came a smart crash as 
his heel touched the rail and smashed it "as 
if it was a cane." Pratt has his hunting- 
whip in the air, and was bending over him as 
if he meant to put him to it. At once a ^^air 
of spurs were in D'Orsay' s flanks, and now 
indeed the race began. '' I thought he was 
pumped out," said Mr. Gay to himself, 
pressing his hat down ; '^ but, lad, now for 
it!" 

On they came. The countrymen were seen 
running to get close to the mill to see the 
big jump. There was a large company 



THE ^EAG-HUXT. 73 

gatlierecl already, crusliing and crowding, 
througli a morbid liope, of conrse not ex- 
pressed or even acknowledged, tliat there 
would be a " smash " or two. They saw the 
little patches of scarlet flashing in the 
distance, not with the brilliancy with whicli 
race-colours flash out. Here they were, 
and they made out very well that the big- 
horse and ''Muster Pratt" had " collared " 
Squire Gay, and that brave and true-hearted 
sportsman, bare-headed . for his hat had 
burst its string, and was about a mile and a 
half behind . was striving hard to keep up 
the dandy D'Orsay. 

Ah, Dandy indeed ! inchned to pout and 
fret like other dandies when treated crossly. 
His elegant skin, that seemed as -if treated 
with cosmetics, was now all disordered, 
dusty, and dirty ; his eyes were fiery. It 
seemed to his rider that he was growing- 
sulky. Here was Pratt and the big horse 
not three yards behind. 

The expectant rustics, their " chaw-bacon " 



74 DIAXA GAY. 

faces warmed into sometliing like intelli- 
gence, or at least eagerness, straining over 
each others' heads, heard the thundering of 
hoofs ; and Holden, the farmer " bey ant 
t' mill," but who had a secret instinct for 
horses, and who always contrived to have- 
the most serviceable and valuable little nag 
in the district on which to ride round and 
see his fields and his men at work, often 
told the story to his family, '' at foireside 
loike." 

" Ye see," he said, '' I was on Robin there^ 
and I kep the pace oop for a mile befora 
they came on ; and then I saw that Squoire 
ha' found that the stuff were gone out of his 
horse. I could see, as plain as I see ye now, 
that he was workin' his mouth as t' jockey- 
lads do at t' finish ; and I see t' other fellow,. 
Pratt, on his beast, but no working there . 
his horse was a-working o' him ; that makes 
all the differ. Poor Squoire ! he was as eager 
as a boy ; and I see him cooming along, 
cooming along, oop and down, and his poor 



THE D^vAG-HU^'T. 75 

coverless liead lookin' back and lookin' ; 
and tlien they were at t'big joomp. And 
wlien lie lifted t' liorse . which he liad to . 
at the railj I saw that it wur sulky, and 
wouldn't put himself together, ye see ; and 
then there was a smash, and something like 
rolling o' stones out of a cart ; and down 
they came into the byroad, with poor 
Squoire's coverless forehead full on the road, 
hard as yon iron. I could see how he was 
flung, as I was high in my stirrups on t' 
cob's back." 

This was the story told by Farmer Holden, 
and by many more mouths, and at great 
leng-th by the Ifercunj. 

Poor Squire Gay, the best fellow in the 
world I Unlucky D'Orsay ! Skilful Pratt : 
He was indeed right : D'Orsay had proved 
that he could not ''put himself together'^ 
by the most fatal logic. 



( ^G ) 



CHAPTER XYII. 

FATAL NEWS. 

When the rain had stopped and the sun 
came out, our Diana became like a little 
-cricket, as her father would say. She flew 
to order the carriage . she flew to find Lady 
Margaret. 

"Will you oblige me," she said, ''dear 
Lady Margaret, and drive over with me to 
Irnston ? I want a surprise for dear papa 
about my picture, which he has set his heart 
upon." 

But Lady Margaret was filled with obstre- 
perous grief and consternation. 

" My darling, what can I do ? what am I 
to do ? I made an appointment with that 
man Murdoch the curate, . fifteen children, 



FATAL XEWS. 77 

I believe, . no shoes or stockings, and all 
tliat. And you know if I let liim get at 
poor Bowman, wlio's as soft as a babe . 
and tlien there's the steward comino; over 
expressly. My dear child, what shctll I do ? '^ 

Diana laughed at this distress. '' My 
dear Lady Margaret, I know what I shall 
do ; " and tripped oflP. 

She met Mrs. Bligh in the hall, and 
that lady said she would be delighted to- 



go. 



The carriage was ordered for after luncl 



"to 



During the course of this arrangement . 
and even such a little matter seemed to 
Diana a vast triumph of diplomacy, in- 
volving '^ a strain on the mind," and its 
success quite putting her in spirits . she 
had seen, to her great surprise, from the 
Avindow, Dick coming slowly round from 
the stable. 

"Well, I declare!" she said, ''what is 
over Eichard Lugard, not to go out and sec- 
papa race ? How curious of him ! " 



78 DIANA GAY. 

" Most ! " said Mrs. Bligli, coldly. '' I 
Avisli Robert had tlie same notion, who is a 
man of books. But he could not be kept." 

Later, Diana saw him again, '^ prowling 
about " restlessly, kicking the grass, his 
hands in his pockets. 

She smiled to herself, went to her room, 
changed her earrings . she had '^pets" in 
earrings, as she had dogs and horses . 
smoothed her hair before the glass, and 
jDut on her daintiest hat, of which she had 
as many as there are in a stage- wardrobe. 
Then she went down to speak to the gar- 
dener about the fruit for dinner. 

Having performed that office . perhaps a 
little to the surprise of the gardener . she 
went her way towards the house, bright and 
cheerful with the little duty she had under- 
taken, and thinking to herself, "Poor Dick! 
I have been so cross to him and inattentive ; 
I must make it up to him a little to-night. 
Wliat a pity, though, lie's not clever! But 
I must make it up to him." And then she 



FATAL XE^YS. 79 

tliouglit liow they would have sucli fun that 
night ; and she would dance with him, just 
a little more than with Eobert Bligh ; thus 
carrying out that arbitrary raising or le- 
velling the little scale she was holding in 
her fingers. And yet at that moment, while 
she laid out these plans of delight, with 
life seeming to spread itself out indis- 
tinctly in delighful ixiysages, delicious prai- 
ries abounding in soft streams and colours 
and sweet waters, so secure in their exqui- 
siteness that it was not worth while to pause 
to estimate them in detail . at this very mo- 
ment, alas, there was a great crowd of stoop- 
ing figures and faces at Giles's Mill. 
There was the contrast . the butterfly- child 
full of hopes, and the father passing, if not 
already passed, beyond the region of earthly 
hopes ! 

* * * ^ * 

" It so surprises me, Richard," she said, 
with her eyes on the ground, as if she luas sur- 
prised, " that you are not gone with them." 



80 DIANA GxVY. 

'' I am sick of it/' lie said, impatiently. 
" Horses are not everything in tlie world, 
as one might fancy from the way men talk. 
We must live for something else, I hope. 
I saw them go off, and then came back 
here." 

'.' To go and walk abont the garden, and 
hit at the poor flowers with that stick." 

'' Then you saw me ? " he said eagerly. 
'' You were looking out at me, and take an 
interest in me ? " 

''I take an interest in my flowers, of 
course, and in Mr. Richard too, I hope." 

" 0, yes, you say that in the usual con- 
ventional way ; just as you'd tell the curate 
and the doctor you were anxious about 
their wives and brats. Diana, if you 
only knew . " 

At this moment they heard a light step. 
He stopped, and Mr. Lugard senior, with 
his cigar and Times, suddenly emerged from 
a side walk. Dick coloured, and gave an 
impatient stamp. 



FATAL NEWS. 81 

'* Just a moment, Dick," said Ins father 
sweetly. . *' Talking over the race, eh, Miss 
Diana ? Over by this time ! . No, a letter, 
my dear boy," he said, putting his arm 
softly into his son's. 

" I can't go now, father. A letter will 
keep without turning sour." 

" See how they treat us poor fathers, Miss 
Diana. . See here, Richard, a moment ; " and 
he opened a letter, and drawing it aside, 
seemed to be reading it, and with his eyes 
down demurely on the writing. Dick, 
though, heard him say, ^' For God's sake, 
are you going to make a fool of your- 
self? I saw you from my window. It's 
too soon . " 

Dick flushed up. ''I know what I am 
about." 

"And see here, again, what he wTites," 
went on Mr. Lugard, in the same sweet 
tone. " I tell you you're a fool, and don't 
know your ground." 

II. G 



82 DIANA GAY. 

Dick set himself up a little liauglitily. 
Diana, bending over lier flowers, was not a 
little mystified. 

''Yery well," said Mr. Lugard, ''with all 
my heart. I won't interfere ; and I have 
all my Times to get through." 

" What was that great secret," said Diana^ 
" if I might ask ? " 

"0, nothing," said he ; '' something 
absurd. My father makes mysteries of 
everything, because he was once an 
attache J ^ 

" There ivas a secret, but I'm not worth 
telling anything to." 

'' I would tell you anything, do anything 
for you," said he, impetuously ; '' though I 
dare say you don't think so. I will prove it 
to you in any way you wish. I would do 
more for you, in my way, than those cold, 
wise creatures who profess such a deal, and 
are so good and virtuous." 

There was a twinkle of mischief in her eyes. 



FATAL XEVrS. 83 

'' Yet these are tlie people we are told to like 
and imitate, are thej not ? " 

'. ISTot hypocrites, I suppose, or scheming 
fellows, whom I could expose . " 

"Who on earth can you mean?" she 
said with the same air of pretended wonder. 
'^ Where are all these wicked people ? " 

" You don't see their plans ; but I do. If 
I chose, I could upset them in a second. 
Listen to me, Diana, one moment," he added, 
suddenly stopping before her. " You know 
how long we have known each other ; from 
before I was at that school. All that time, 
even when I was a child, your image used to 
be before me. I was always thinking of 
you, and looking forward to one day . like 
this . v/hen . " 

Diana had grown a little restless during 
this speech ; indeed, his eyes and flushed 
cheeks seemed to have spoken already what 
he was g-oing^ on to sav. She looked round 
uneasily. 



84 IJIANA GAY. 

'' I am afraid," slie said, '' Mrs. Bligli will 
he looking for me." 

*' Just a moment, Diana. I must speak 
out no^Y." 

''Xo, no, no," said slie, in alarm; '^ don't 
Ricliard, please." 

" I must go away soon to that regiment 
wliicli I bate, and wliicli I liave a presenti- 
ment I shall not stay long in. Why should 
I stay here, perhaps to be mortified more and 
more every day? " 

*' Indeed, no," said she earnestly. " 0, 
no, Richard, none of us here would do that 
. not for the world." 

" Perhaps not ; I am sure not you. But 
you don't know what I feel looking on, and 
what I suffer. Diana, you know wdiat my 
faults are . how Tvarm, and ungovernable 
even, I am. Yet still I am sure I could be- 
come better, if you, Diana, would only think 
3ne w^orthy . let me finish. You should do 
what you like with me ; I w^ould be your 



FATAL NEWS. 85 

slave for the rest of my life. I should live 
only for yov. You should do with me what- 
ever . '* 

Diana turned away a little impatiently. 

'' Ah, wdiat made you do this ? how foolish, 
how unkind ! " 

" Unkind ? " 

" Yes, you have spoiled everything, and 
made us all uncomfortable. I did not 
think you would have done this. No, 
indeed." 

" Spoiled everything ? " he repeated, 
aofhast. 

''So unkind, so cruel!" said she. ''We 
shall all break up here. You will have to go 
away ; I could not think of that. I am very 
sorry, dear Richard, to give you pain, I am* 
indeed ; but it was very foolish of you. We 
were all going to be so pleasant, and have 
such fun, and you must turn it into this sort 
of serious thing." 

He looked at her seriouslv . his eves 



86 DIANA GAY. 

moving angrily, liis lips curling ; tlien he 
tossed back his head. 

" Of course, you can do as you like in 
that. But if it be for any other reason, I 
warn you about that. Dick Lugard can 
reckon with any man, and always has done 
so. I am not accustomed to be circumvented 
by cunning fellows without setting myself 
right." 

The young girl drew herself up haughtily, 
as she could do ; she came of a haughty stock. 

'* You talk very oddly and strangely. I'll 
never forgive you for this, for treating me so 
imkindly and rudely." 

A look of triumph came into Richard's 
face. He hieio his offhand, manly style was 
irresistible. 

'* Unkind ! " he said eagerly, ana catching 
her hand. '* Not for all the world ; not if I 
were to die, dearest, dearest Di ! as I used to 
call you. I see you have forgiven me, and 
you do not quite hate me." 



FATAL NEWS. 87 

'' don't, i^ray don't/' said Diana, trying 
to set herself free. ^' 0, you should not, you 
should not, indeed ! Let me go ; please do. 
I am very angry ! Ah, there is Roloert 
Blio-h comino^ 1 " 

Dick started, and gave a stamp of anger. 
Bligh had not seen them, but was hurryhig 
across the garden and making for the house. 
As he passed the corner of this w^alk he 
stayed a moment irresolute, took a step or 
two towards them, then stopped. He seemed 
very pale. 

'' Ah, I thought so," said Dick, with 
triumph ; "he had better not interfere wdtli 
me ! " 

Diana had now quite recovered her old 
manner; her eyes were dancing . she was 
calling and beckoning to Bligli eagerly. Still 
he stayed irresolute, then advanced slowly. 

'' Why doesn't he come quicker ? Tell 
me . tell me about the race." 

He answered hurriedly, '' I did not see it 



88 DIANA GAY. 

all. I was coming to the liouse to look for 
. with a message, that is . for my mother." 

'' Didn't wait to see the finish ? Thei^e's a 
fellow ! " said Lugard with scorn. 

Of this Bligh took not the least notice. 
He was never more collected. 

.' I must find her at once ; and I am 
told poor D'Orsay has been hurt, and 
will never rmi again. Forgive me, but 
I must go. I can't stay." And he was 
gone. 

Had they been listening attentively, they 
might both have heard a faint, very faint 
report, like a child's popgun . for the air was 
very still and clear. At that moment some 
of the charitable Avho had been standing 
round the hapless D'Orsay . lying there on 
his flank, with eyes fast glazing, ''his back 
was broken," they had said. went and got a 
gun, and " put the poor beast out of his 
pain." The hapless rider . dulled, uncon- 
scious . had been removed gently to the 



FATAL NEWS. S^ 

windmill. But there Tvas no putting It hi out 
of pain, for by this time he knew nothing 
and felt nothing. 

Bligh, though he said frantically to him- 
self, as he rushed away, '' How could I tell 
her? how are we to tell her?" had really 
taken the best way in the world of breaking- 
it. There was somethino; of a coming- 
mystery in his manner, the shadow of a 
calamity. 

She looked a little wildly at Lugard. 

'' Let us go in ; let us follow him. 0^^ 
dear ! what does all this mean ? " And 
she fluttered away, leaving Lugard far 
behind. 

'' Some of his pompous exaggeration," he 
said, impatiently. 

She was gone, lost to his sight, that poor 
orphan. She had a sense of that awful care 
already at her heart. At the open glass- 
doors she came on a tall, dark figure. 

"0," Diana, said, ''what is this ? Some 



90 DIANA GAY. 

dreadful thing lias happened. Tell me, tell 
me, tell me ! " 

The stiff arms were opened to her. '' My 
poor, poor child ! Would to God I could 
give you good news ! It is a cruel blow to 
fall on one so young ! '* 



END OF BOOK THE FIEST. 



BOOK THE SECOND. 



CHAPTER I. 



DESEKTED DIANA. 



Whex a well-known owner of some old 
place, like Mr. Gay . a man whom neigli- 
bours liad grown accustomed to for years, 
and whom they look upon as they do the 
market-cross ; known at cover-side, along 
the highroad, at board and at meeting . 
w^hen such a familiar figure is known to have 
gone, and gone suddenly, the place which he 
once dwelt in seems to lie there " in state," 
very much as the beloved remains had done 
-during the dismal days that preceded the 



92 DIANA GAY. 

funeral. As we pass the gateway, going along 
tlie road, it is like looking at what divines 
call the '' earthly tenement," and the noble 
demesne seems itself to be stretched out 
there . blank, lifeless, solemn, and without a 
spirit. 

What a loss Squire Gay was ! every one 
said. The hunting men felt it more acutely 
than any of the rest. The hounds had been, 
it was well known, ''very shaky." Now and 
again the men would not come forward as they 
ought. When money-pressure and debt were 
hindering their sport, how splendidly he had 
'' stepped into the breach" . and a very wide 
one it was . and saved the hounds for that 
part of the county ! There were rueful faces 
among the top-boot community when that sad 
news got abroad, with many a '' Th' 'ounds 
will 2ro now, sure ! " . thouo-h it must be said 
that honest face, and kindly offices, and 
oreetinofs were reo-retted for themseb^es. 

Even Mr. Pratt could have wished he had 
been wrong about D'Orsay's legs. "Poor 



DESEKTED DIAXA. 93 

Squire I " ^'Xo better man 1 " ''Fine English 
gentleman I " '' True sportsman ! " . tliese 
changes were rung as vigorously as the 
parish bell that jangled on the procession 
to the graveyscrd. At that sad pageant (con- 
ducted, said the Mercury, ''by Messrs. Deben- 
ham, of London, the eminent undertakers, in 
their own unsurpassed style" . the relatives 
of the late Duke of R . had owned them- 
selves more than satisfied by the way they 
had treated lilra) there were no more un- 
selfish mourners than Mr. Pratt and his 
friends of the hunt. 

Mr. Bowman had been left an executor 
with . much to his surprise . Robert Bligli. 
The Mercury was lavish in its praises of the 
forethought, " delicate consideration," and 
true liberality of those gentlemen. The re- 
porter had indeed been entertained hand- 
somely. Messrs. Debenham's people owned 
that since the duke's obsequies they had met 
nothing more gentlemanly or handsome. On 
Robert Blio-li's shoulder all the trouble and 



94 DIANA GAY. 

management fell. Mr. Bowman took up tlie 
official position, and went through the dismal 
formality of his function with success. 

Well might there be many inquiries at the 
door for Miss Diana. She had been, as it 
were, struck down, and was lying upstairs in 
a sort of dull stupefaction. She had heard 
death preached about in the churches, and 
could believe that it was a very awful and 
disagreeable thing . she could feel heartily 
and tenderly for those so cruelly afflicted; 
l3ut she never dreamed for a moment that 
those terrors were to come into their house, 
any more than hunger, or poverty, or want 
of clothes. She had literally not known 
suffering of any sort, beyond once or twice 
. ^when, after much putting off, her dear 
father had at last forced himself to be stern, 
and brought her to a dentist's. That day of 
torture marked an era. It does seem a little 
hard that those who have never suffered 
should thus suffer doubly from want of pre- 
paration : but this is the penalty of that 



DESERTED DIANA. 95^ 

impunity. She seemed to be mimbecl, cowed, 
and shrinking. So does the victim who has 
been struck on the head with a bar look 
vacantly, and reel a little before he falls. 
She had not wept, not shed a tear even, nor 
had she spoken a word . symptoms that not 
a little alarmed the old housekeeper. She 
was wild and frightened. 

At this stage Lady Margaret came over, 
and, rustling and '' fussing," all but forced 
herself in, her husband's oflSce giving her a 
sort of footing. When she entered, with 
some trepidation, the room where Diana was 
sitting at a table with a lamp, the eyes of the 
fatherless girl seemed to rest on her with the 
same air of terrified doubt and inquiry. As 
the lady . awed and scared herself . advanced 
hesitating, Diana at last seemed to know her, 
and with a half-scream fled from her to the 
curtain, where she stood cowering and 
shrinking and trembhng. As Lady Mar- 
garet described it afterwards, she seemed to 
have *^ withered off" into half her size. 



'96 DIANA (I AY. 

Always slight and fragile, she now seemed a 
mere vapour. Poor, deserted, helpless Diana! 
Every soothing word, every step nearer of 
Lady Margaret, was checked by a low 
frightened cry. The good and well-meaning- 
lady, whose arms, outspread with silks and 
laces, seemed like a ship's mainsail, stood 
there embarrassed and shocked, the look of 
terror and agony increasing everj moment, 
at every step she tried to take. Then the 
old housekeeper, who had seen, and knew 
the incidents and treatment of, such awful 
griefs, touched her, and with an air of 
authority took her from the room. 

" Better leave her to herself, ni}^ lady. 
Wait until she cries, the poor lonely or- 
phan." 

On the morning of the dreadful j)rocession 
the Court was full and busy, and there were 
not a few who thought of the day the picture 
was presented. The whole county seemed 
to have arrived from far and near. For the 
hunting men it was a rueful business enough. 



DESERTED DIANA. 97 

How many times did they say to eacli other, 
'' Many is the pleasant morning we met here. 
Poor old Gay ! " Then was added reflec- 
tively, " What'll become of the pack now ? " 

Messrs. Debenham had done wonders ; it 
is surprising, indeed, considering the limited 
time given to such artists, what prodigies 
they perform. The senior partner of the 
firm, Mr. Sowden . Debenham was a mere 
fiction . directed in person. There was 
gold, silver, and velvet, and nodding 
plumes ; and whole ranks of the lugubrious 
supernumeraries who assist on such occa- 
sions ; and add theatrical horrors to what has 
an awful and dismal simplicity of its own, 
and stands in no need of false terrors. One 
of these days we shall think with contempt 
and repulsion of this scenical mourning. 

Some sort of interest seemed to have 
roused Diana on this dismal morning ; and 
when she heard the trampling of horses, the 
sound of wheels, and the low voices outside 
(the housekeeper told it below), she said in a 

II. H 



98 DIANA GAT. 

low tone, "Do tlie liounds meet here again?" 
and then went over softly to the window. 
" The poor, poor orphan ! " said the house- 
keeper, weeping herself; '^God knows the 
sight she saw then ! " Solemn nodding 
plumes, and white linen, and a glistening 
black wain, and the other awful parapher- 
nalia. The place was peopled, crowded, 
with the sable mourners. Where was the 
cheerful and lively scarlet? Diana gave a 
piteous scream, and with her hands covering 
her pale face, flew to the door. There she 
was stopped ; two stiif arms . soft and gentle 
to her . wound themselves about her ; a stern 
voice grown tremulous with emotion, received 
her. Mrs. Bligh, filled with grief and pity 
for this deserted child, had her to her heart, 
and there, at this cold region, Diana seemed 
to find a faint glimpse of comfort ; a few 
whispered words did more. For the first 
time, frantic bursts of tears came. 

'' You are not alone, darling," said the 
softened lady. "We cannot make up for 



DESERTED DIANA. 99 

him . for his loss ; but would it not grieve 
his noble heart if he knew you were in this 
state ? Think of that, when you feel this 
despair coming back to you." 

There was not much in this : the most 
irresistible syllogism loses its force before 
the gentle argument of grief. Yet Diana 
often turned back to that moment, and that 
not injudicious speech of the comforter had 
some little effect. There were acts of kind- 
ness which often came back on Diana when 
this dismal time was afar off, lost in mist, 
like a cold chilling mountain seen at the end 
of a distant landscape. She had no trouble 
now, no work, no terrible responsibility, 
" which would have killed her." She re- 
membered how those friends "had done 
everything," settled everything . E^obert 
Bligh and Mrs. Bligh. Lady Margaret had 
indeed made protest and shown battle, but 
it was short. Mrs. Bligh was utterly 
changed, so was Eobert ; both were firm 
and efficient. Poor Mr. Bowman, with 

H 2 



100 DIANA GAY. 

equal powers, was a cipher. No matter 
wliat one's office may be, it is the man that 
gives it influence. Those who had business 
would look to Mr. Bligh in spite of all Mr. 
Bowman's . or rather Lady Margaret's . self- 
assertion. 



( 101 ) 



CHAPTER 11. 



A VISIT. 



But now tliese times are long passed by. 
The dead past lias buried itself. The lugu- 
brious days are locked up in a gloomy room 
and closet like the old plate . ^locked up now 
three, going on to four, years. So do we 
look back at a dreadful night . a night of 
shadows and horrors. But the young will 
be young ; and our Diana was now recovered 
and grown very grave, and sober, and de- 
mure ; and, in the half-mourning which she 
wore still, was beginning to discover that 
she was now a person of some importance. 
She was Hke one awaking, and even alarmed 
at her new responsibilities. It filled her 
mind, and prevented her thinking. But the 
picture in the hunting-coat . the artist's 



102 DIANA GAY. 

worst work ; it was not a Velasquez or a 
Titian . precious to her, with all its flaming 
reds, as her whole estate. The likeness was 
tolerable, though nothing could tone down 
the fiery coat ; but she always gave a little 
shudder as she came up to it . for the dogs 
and the whip, these recalled rather too much. 
Her position was indeed curious, and a little 
embarrassing. She had literally no female 
relations, and for a young girl this was 
awkward. Gradually it was noticed how 
she had fallen under Mrs. Bligh's directions. 
Lady Margaret was unwearied in her atten- 
tions ; rustling and bustling in, and dragging 
with her Mr. Bowman, under cloak of his office 
as ^Hhe executor." Many were the lectures 
she gave that unhappy gentleman on the 
duties of that unlucky office. 

** I wish to God," he often said in private, 
'Hhat Gay had let me alone. That Bligh 
has done everything . a most sensible, long- 
headed fellow." 

" Yes," said Lady Margaret, with some 



A VISIT. 103 

scorn, *' wliicli you are not. Can you do 
notliing for Canning ? Why, another man 
with such advantages would never be out of 
the house a moment ! " 

Diana did not suspect their movements, 
but she rather shrank from Lady Margaret 
and her ''bustUng" way. It overpowered 
her ; she shrank from any work, which 
somehow seemed associated with her lost 
father ; she was delighted to be relieved. 
And thus, during the course of those three 
dismal years, she could do nothing without 
Mrs. Bligh. To Mrs. Bligh, indeed, she had 
gone ; and a hundred little matters of busi- 
ness had been arranged by Eobert, who was 
unwearied in his ofiBce. This involved much 
trouble and even interruptions to his pro- 
fession : for the late Squire Gay's affairs 
had been left in some confusion, though 
not what is called embarrassed. There was 
a lawsuit, which Bhgh adroitly, and after 
much difficulty and negotiation, succeeded in 
arranging. 



104 DIANA GAY. 

Mr. Lugard senior was very pleasant on 
these friendly offices, and not at all 
restrained in his remarks. Many heard 
him at the various dinner-parties dwelling 
pleasantly on the "cleverness" of that 
lady, and the "invasion," as he called it. 
" Really, it was scarcely fair ; a poor thing 
left in that way, and no one to look after 
her or protect her." 

At last, one morning . or one week 
rather . Diana seemed to rouse herself, and 
the world to open again before her. The 
sun was shining, the broad acres of fair 
grass, of noble trees, spread away before 
her. The hideous dream was gone; she 
must begin to live again. That dear lost 
one was not to be thought of with horror 
or awe ; but was now laid in softer, tender 
colours. And thus she was seen driving 
about, asking after this and that, even writing 
letters; she would soon be her old self. 
Kow the sense of proprietorship was 
breaking on her gradually; and when she 



A VISIT. 105 

was addressed as " the mistress," or asked 
for her directions, it was curious to see her 
face striving to compose itself to gravity and 
importance. 

Three years, then, had gone by, and one 
morning the unaccustomed sounds of a horse 
galloping up the avenue are heard. Alas 
for the old days of the meet on the lawn . 
the overcrowded stables, the band of grooms, 
helpers, and the rest ! 

Diana was in, and was told there was 
a gentleman in the library who wished to 
see her. She had duties cast on her now ; 
so she went down with as grave a face as 
she could compose ; she was even a little 
cheerfal. She gave a cry of surprise ; she 
knew the gentleman, though he was altered 
. grown taller, larger, and '^ harder." It 
was E/ichard Lugard . Captain Lugard. 

*'0 Dick, Dick!" she cried," I am so glad!" 

Somehow he seemed connected with the 
old, old times and the dear lost one, and 
her eyes filled with tears. 



106 DIANA GAY. 

''I am SO glad to see you," said Lugard, 
kindly. "It is so long ago, and so much 
has happened since . to me, I mean," he 
added hastily. " They told you all that ? " 

" Yes, I heard," she said, " about your 
marriage." 

"Yes," he said in his old manner, "that 
was a fine thing for me, as they considered 
it. getting an heiress, and selling myself 
into a low, mean, huckstering family. I feel 
ashamed, I blush for myself, when I think 
of what I have done." 

Diana looked at him a little alarmed. 

"What, poor Kitty," she says, "Kitty 
Crowder ? With all her faults, she was 
good, very good ; indeed she was." 

"I don't complain of her; she can only 
act according to her lights and the way she 
was brought up . foolishly enough, hun- 
gering after admiration, and being ' fast,' as 
they call it. I don't care for that ; and she 
is welcome. But the others . her vile 
family, that low father ! it is agony to me. 



A VISIT. 107 

You don't know ivliat I suffer, Diana, and 
what you have made me suffer." 

Again Diana started ; but she understood. 
Her eyes fell on the ground. 

"You know what I am," he went on; 
"my nature, my faults, my follies. It is 
entering into my very soul . their arrogance, 
and the slavery of it ; for I am helpless. I 
must depend on them. And even now, "vyhat 
has brought me over here . even in that I 
must depend on Mm." 

"What?" said Diana eagerly. 

" You have not heard ? " he went on. 
" Why, the election. Don't you know that 
Hodges the member has died ? and my 
father telegTaphed to me over in Ireland, 
and here I am. I am determined to succeed 
in tliat. It will take off my thoughts from 
this mean servility, and perhaps help me 
to independence. It is my only salvation. 
And you, dear Diana, though you have 
shown that you dishke me, will help me in 
this, I know?" 



108 DIANA GAY. 

*^ Indeed I will, Eicliard/' said she warmlj, 
and giving Mm her hand ; " and I pity you 
from my heart . indeed I do ; and if I could 
help you . " 

" Ah, you could have done tliaty^ he said 
bitterly ; " you know we are old friends, and 
were children, and played on that lawn 
together; so I can speak to you freely. 
You refused me. It was a pity . for me, I 
mean; for it has wrecked more than one 
life. I don't know wlmj you did it, and it is 
no matter now. I dare say because you 
liked him, as they all say you do." 

" Say I do ? Who, pray ? " asked Diana. 

" The people . the neighbours. I have 
been hearing of nothing else since last night, 
' What will she do ? ' '0, that depends on 
Mr. Robert Bligh and his mamma.' One 
fellow said that it was all settled already, as 
good as signed and sealed." 

" It is quite false," said Diana, colouring ; 
*' utterly untrue. It is cruel and unkind." 

''No, it is not," said Lugard gravely; 



A VISIT. 109 

"it is time you should know. I am mar- 
ried, so I can have no motive. I have 
known you so long, I can speak plainly. I 
tell you, Diana, I have been astonished, 
amazed, during the few hours I have been 
down here. It is Bligh here, Bhgh there. 
The dear name of Oay ivill soon not he heard 
at all. Times are changed indeed. Poor 
old Gay Court ! . It is my duty to speak to 
youj to warn you. Your name is too pre- 
cious to be made so free with. You are 
young, but not so young as to be handed 
over helplessly . not to be able to write a 
letter, or settle your own business without 
the influence of a clever barrister and his 
more clever mamma, who may have her own 
ends in view.'* 

"No, no. She has been so kind," said 
Diana hesitatingly. 

" The end in view is her son, for whom 
she would sacrifice all, and stick at nothing. 
I know women. I haven't tramped from 
garrison to garrison without learning some- 



110 DIANA GAY. 

thing. They say you are under their thumb, 
and this estate is no longer yours, but Ms . 
or as good as his." 

The colour came and went from Diana's 
cheeks. She had never been spoken to in 
this way before. 

"There," he went on, his eyes sparkling; 
" so much for duty, and old regard, and 
affection, as we call it; for that I shall 
always have for you, Diana, whatever be- 
comes of me, or however miserable I am. 
And now, if you are not angry, give me 
your promise that you will do what you 
can to help a poor old friend like me. Ah, 
but I know ! They -will not let you. They 
have the disposal, I suppose, of any interest 
that is o;oino^." 

" I promise you," said Diana, with a little 
toss of her head. " You may depend on 
me, Richard." 

" And Lord Bellman, who is going to build 
the new house there, he will help me, I think." 

At this moment the door was opened, and 



A VISIT. Ill 

a dark figure entered. She too started witb 
surprise wlien slie saw Lugard. 

" How do you do," slie said, coldly. '' I 
tliouglit you were in Ireland." 

'* So I was, Mrs. Bligli," he answered ; 
" but there is a good through service, which 
brought me here in a very few hours. I had 
an object in coming. Mrs. Bligh . not to lose 
a moment . I hope you are speaking to the 
future member for Calthorpe." 

And he made her a low and sarcastic bow. 

Something like a flush came into Mrs. 
Bligh' s well-dimpled cheeks. She could not 
answer. 

"There's my horse getting chilled," he 
said; "it's my good father's animal. It 
just suits him, you know. I never saw any 
one getting so stout as he is ! But I shall 
tell him some good news ; it will put him in 
excellent humour. If he could only keep 
his shape as well as he .does those beautiful 
teeth ! I wish I had as good, Mrs. Bligh. . 
You have sent me away quite happy, Diana, 



112 DIANA GAY. 

now that you liave given me your promise : 
goodbye." 

And lie went out, giving Mrs. Bligli a 
look half of exultation, half of defiance. 

Lugard rode away with great satisfaction. 
His father would have said he was now 
getting sense and a little wit ; but his 
father, now that Dick was married, was 
looking out for some one to take care of 
himself. 

"My dear friend," he said, '* now that we 
have swarmed you, as the bee-people say, and 
sent you out to another hive, I must really 
look seriously to myself. In twenty years or 
so I shall be an old man, and want some one 
to look after flannels, and aU that sort of 
thing . some one really nice, and with good 
blood and a title, if possible. My dear boy, 
you would be neither said nor led : you 
would rush on. If you had only waited! 
But no matter now ; only, if you watch me, 
you may learn a lesson that will be useful on 
another occasion." 



A VISIT. 113 

Poor Dick Lugard ! Every one] knew his 
story : bow lie nad been refused by Diana . 
she had not betrayed it ; it is wonderful how 
these things do get out . and how he had 
made such an aioful mistake, being bought 
by those low Crowders, as they would have 
bought a ton of their best and closest boiler- 
copper. They took it out of him, for they 
got no money, and it was said gave him 
very little, Kitty's being "tied-np" jealously 
and strictly by a knavish family attorney. 
The self-willed Eichard had managed it all 
himself, and had disdained the services of 
his father's family solicitor, and had em- 
ployed a " swell " London attorney, who had 
been very useful to him. 

" With all my heart," had said his father ; 
"as you make your bed, my boy, so you 
must lie in it." 

When he had left Gay Court, Mrs. Bligh 
stood beside Diana, and looked at her with a 
little wonder. Diana was flushed and con- 
fused, and even somewhat angry. The 
II. I 



114 DIANA GAY. 

tliouglit in her mind was, that a ladj, an 
heiress possessing this vast power and es- 
tates, should have her name sacred . not be 
talked of in such a manner. This was indeed 
a scrap of her dear old father's wisdom 
which she cherished like a verse of Scripture. 

'' You know, pet, when they have put me 
by in the old oak box, you'll have a very hard 
little card of your own to play. There is no 
one to help you. My God ! what I ought to 
have done ten years ago was to have married 
some good woman, though indeed it would 
have gone against me. But, mind, be very 
careful, popsy ; for you'll be well watched." 

At last Mrs. Bligh spoke. " I was coming 
to tell you this very nevfs. I have tele- 
graphed to Eobert from his circuit. At last 
Ills long- delayed opportunity has arrived, and 
my dear boy has well deserved it. I shall 
live to see him in Parliament, thank God ! " 

Diana was still confused, still flushed. 

" I hope he will succeed," she said ; '^ that 
is, I mean . poor Richard Lugard has just 



A VISIT. 115 

been here. 0, you would pity him, you 
would, indeed. All his life has been ship- 
wrecked. He has been sacrificed for money ; 
all his best hopes gone ! " 

'' What," said Mrs. Biigh coldly, " does 
he mean . does he dare to set himself up 
here in that way ? If he has any real 
friend that commiserates him, he will dis- 
suade him from that exhibition and certain 
failure." 

" 0, he will not fail," said Diana eagerly. 
'^ He must not ; we will all help him." 

At this strange turn Mrs. Bligh started. 

''Help him!" she repeated. ''Help 
him ! What ! ivas that the promise ? " 

Diana grew desperate. She thought of 
" the reports," of her own dignity, of her 
dear father's caution ; and with a trembling 
voice she said, ^' What I mean is, dear Mrs. 
Bligh, here am I in a very soHtary, awkward 
position. ISTo relation in the world noio . 
none whatever ; and dearest papa cautioned 
me, . you know he did, Mrs. Bligh. So I 

I 2 



116 DIANA GAT. 

think it would be better, far better, tliat we 
were not mixed up in this affair at all. I am 
very young.'* 

Mrs. Bligh was measuring lier suspi- 
ciously, but she was much relieved. " Quite 
right, my dear child. You are always sensi- 
ble ; and it can be very well managed. Eobert 
is very clever. You needn't appear at all ; 
and there are ways of doing this. Poor 
fellow ! at this moment he is posting on 
here. It has been the dream of his life, or 
one of them. It will make him so happy." 

Her eyes were fixed on Diana, as if she 
was refuting some delusion or impression 
she saw in the young girl's mind. Diana 
looked restless, and moved her foot a little 
impatiently. The head presently gave a little 
toss. 

" Sha'n't we go out and drive ? " she said 
suddenly. '^I have never visited Warren- 
hurst and the tenants of that part of the 
estate." 

Mrs. Bligh went reflectively away to get 



A VISIT. 117 

lier bonnet. This looked as though the little 
lady had at last roused herself, and was 
going to take the command. She was more 
surprised during the drive, when Diana went 
into cottages and spoke to " her tenants " 
with a pleasant little air of patronage. 



( 118 ) 



CHAPTER III. 



THE EIVALS, 



Just before dinner-time that evening came 
driving up their old friend Eobert . a little 
more thoughtful and solid in his air, havmg 
encountered many stiff cases and stiff wit- 
nesses since that fatal hunting-day. He was 
now indeed not a "rising junior/* as some 
of his rivals called him, but a leading junior. 
On a circuit that means a great deal ; and 
a clever leading junior is more useful to 
a solicitor than a leading Q.C, of which 
pattern there are plenty always in stock. 
Eobert explained all this to Diana at dinner 
that day. He had indeed gro^.vn gayer and 
more experienced in human nature. He was 
full of excitement now. 



THE ElYALS. 119 

" "We have only one other M.P. on our 
circuit. It will be a grand thing for us. 
Bullock says it is the first step on the ladder, 
but I think it looks more like the last. 
When that comes, I think we may kick away 
the ladder for good. We have lots of money. 
We shall fight the battle with spirit . poll 
to the last man, whoever opposes, if any one 
does." 

" If any one ! " repeated Diana, laughing. 
" Why, haven't you heard ? " 

" I have not had time to tell him," said 
Mrs. Bligh. " What do you think of your 
old fi:iend, Eichard Lugard? He's posted 
here express. He .says he will poll to the 
last man also." 

Eobert looked from one to the other, a 
little taken back. 

" He can hardly be serious," he said ; 
" though he is quite welcome, of course. 
Still, he will lose his time and money ; for I 
suppose that is what he will go on." 

" 0, it will be srreat fun," said Diana, 



120 DIANA GAY. 

laughing, " to see a contest of this sort ; and 
between you too, the old friends, the old 
enemies." 

" His father, or some one who knows him, 
should dissuade him," said Eobert, still 
thinking. " It would be only kindness ; for 
I know he can have no chance. Why, with 
Lord Bellman against him, and all this estate 
against him . " 

''0, as for tliat,^^ said Diana, with a wise 
air of reflection and statesmanship, '* I don't 
know. As yet, you see . " 

" Don't know ? " said Eobert, looking 
round with surprise. " Why, mother dear, 
you told me . " 

"So I did, Eobert; and I confess I do 
not see what the meaning of this change is." 

"Now, there!" said Diana, fretfully; 
" who is changed or changing ? All I want 
is to be a little free, and choose for myself. 
I must be canvassed regularly. You know, 
Eobert Bligh, I am in a very responsible 
position now, and Eichard is an old friend 



THE RIVALS. 121 

too ; and I must say, if you are this terrible 
Radical tliafc would cut up and divide all our 
estates . " 

Mrs. Bligh looked dark. Eobert laughed 
very heartily ; this notion so amused 
him. 

'' I see . I understand," he said. " It is 
quite right. I must submit my principles to 
a test. By the way, do you know the office 
I have laid out for myself this little vacation. 
Miss Diana ? I mean to get all the papers 
below in proper order . sift, sort them all, so 
that you can put your hand on any you want 
at once ; and having done that duty, I shall 
give you a proper account of my stewardship. 
I have some little surprises for you. Miss 
Diana." 

" How kind, how good you have been to 
me ! " said Diana, gratefully and warmly. 
" Indeed, I know it, and . " 

There was a cheerful voice outside. " May 
I come in uninvited ? What, the other 
candidate ! How are you, Bligh ? There 



122 DIANA GAT. 

you are, tlie same; as it now is and ever 
shall be ! Look at liim, casting up the lot, 
to see are the figures right, or has he 
got me somewhere ? Well, Eobert, do you 
find me changed ?" 

Bligh was looking at him, and did think 
him changed. He had got older-looking and 
coarser-looking; his eyes were wilder and 
freer ; his face much tanned, his bearing more 
reckless, which was not too strong a word. 

"I hear you have married since,'* said 
Eobert, quietly, when the other had sat 
down and joined the party. 

" Well, that's not such a wonder. So 
many people come up to me with a smirk, 
and say, ' 0, so you have been married since ! ' 
as if it was some sly business, and that I 
had done it secretly, and wished it not to be 
known, but that they had found it out. You 
know that sort of air. It's insujfferable, and 
insupportably impertinent. Mind, I don't 
mean you, Bhgh, but in the outsiders." 

" Of course not," said Eobert, gravely. 



THE RIVALS. 123 

'' Of course not," repeated Lugard, with a 
half-insolent glance at Diana, and as though 
he meant " of course yes." " Well, but what 
about you, my friend ? what are these 
stories ? " 

" What stories ? " said Bligh calmly. 

" All right, then, since you want to know. 
I came down in the train with a dry and 
mouldy father-in-law sort of man. I soon 
made him out to be a barrister. Now, who 
do you think he was ? " 

"Mr. Buller," said Bligh, quietly. "He 
came down here a day or two ago.'* 

" Divination ! positive divination ! Won- 
derful man ! It was BuUer, a Q.C. He 
told me all about himself, and his retiring 
from the profession, having made a colossal 
fortune." 

Diana was looking from one to the other 
with a httle surprise. 

"And then he came to speak of his 
daughter. Ah, tliat touches ! Look, at 
him ! I'm no lawyer, but I found it all 



124 DIANA GAY. 

out. He took quite a liking to me, and 
became so confidential. No wonder, after 
four hours in tlie train." 

" But what did lie tell you about his 
daughter ? " said Diana, curiously. " I 
never heard . " 

" no, no," said Lugard in the same 
mocking tone; "I dare say not. These 
things are done so slyly. You can't ima- 
gine how confidential the old fellow and I 
got. As I say, I remembered all about 
him and our friend the moment I saw the 
name. He warmed up at once about him 
and about Helen, It was Helen here and 
Helen there, and Robert every minute. Nice 
goings on . nice doings ! Thirty thousand 
pounds ! " 

" Ton my word," said Bligh, smiling, 
" he must have told you a deal, and you 
certainly made good use of your time." 

'' I don't know about that,^^ said Lugard, 
carelessly, and rising to open the door for 
the ladies. ''That is as may be. Ah, Mr. 



THE EIVALS. 125 

Robert, nice goings on ! Snug and quiet too. 
But I didn't tell all tliat the old fellow told.'' 

* Tolly ! " said Bligh, going over to tlie 
fire. '' Now, I want to speak to you in 
earnest. You are not serious in coming^ 
here to get up a contest. I mean, you 
can't really hope to have any success." 

Lugard, just filling himself some wine, 
kept the decanter suspended, and looked at 
Bligh from foot to head. 

" I am serious in every step I take. Why 
should you suppose that I should take the 
trouble of carrying out a jest of that sort 
with you ? " 

" That I can't undertake to explain," said 
Bligh, hastily. '' Only I think it is scarcely 
fair of you to put one to all this expense 
and trouble, without the slightest chance 
of success, merely to gratify a . a . " 

'' Gratify a what ? Pray don't think 
that. To gratify myself, if you like. No 
chance of success ! What vanity and rub- 
bish ! Excuse me saying so, my dear Bligh. 



126 DIANA GAY. 

Your little success at tlie Bar seems to have 
quite inflated you. Why shouldn't I com- 
pete with you ? Ai'e you exclusive cock of 
the walk here, in this county ? Am I not 
on my own ground ? My father's land is 
close by here. While you . excuse me re- 
minding you of it . have not a rood in the 
county. Your mother has a garden and 
a paddock, or something of the sort . " 

"0, I know that, of course," said Bligh ; 
" only after your knowing that I intended 
it, and after having taken so much trouble . " 

" Well, I intended it all along too, and I 
shall take trouble too." 

*^ Well, I tell you as a friend," said Bligh ; 
" you may be wasting your time and trouble 
for nothing. Of course you can take your 
own way. I have made the ground tolerably 
sure ; and really, in the face of all the 
support I have . " 

'' 0, I see," said Lugard, turning round in 
his chair and looking at him again from foot 
to head, " you count on her, the young lady 



<'-;^ 



THE EIVALS. 127 

of tlie house. That is bold of you, at any 
rate. You managed well, I hear, Master 
Eobert . taken the whole concern into your 
own hands already . the estate, the affairs ; 
and now you think you may represent us in 
Parliament, having such a irrobahle stake in 
the country." 

" Don't let us talk any more about this, 
Lugard," said the other quietly. ^' With me 
you always give everything that turn. I 
have not seen you now for some years, and 
here, the very first night we meet, you begin 
your old ways again. It was the same when 
we were at school together." 

"What do you mean by that?" said 
Lugard, his eyes flashing. " Is that what 
you plume yourself on ? I make you a 
present of that victory. I see what's in your 
mindo" 

" That has always been in your mind, 
evidently," said Bligh, '* and it seems to 
rankle there in a manner quite incompre- 
hensible to me. But no matter ; let us have 



128 DIANA GAY. 

no compliments, and do our best. I really 
meant it in kindness ; and I give you every 
notice . expect no quarter from me." 

" Who wants it ? " said the other. "-You've 
not got me before you in one of your fusty 
courts of law, that you can hector and 
always have the last word. Come, let us go 
into the drawing-room, unless you want 
more wine. I don't." 

Lugard talked a great deal to Diana that 
night, sitting in a favourite pose of his . 
stooping low, his head reclining on his hand, 
and looking into her face. The mother and 
son sat apart, and looking over, saw Diana's 
face playing with various expressions. 
Amusement, sympathy, interest, demureness 
. all followed each other in that expressive 
face. Our Diana was so glad to see her old 
friend, whom she had not met for so long, 
and who indeed had paid her the best com- 
pliment in his power. 

After a while Eobert rose, and said he 
would go downstairs "to duty," for "a 



THE RIVALS. 129 

field-niglit," as lie called it, " among tlie 
papers." 

" How kind of jou ! '' said Diana. '' I 
often thouglit of doing so myself; but tlie 
very sight of those dusty old papers would 
make me faint." 

Mrs. Bligli gave him a strange look, which 
seemed to order him to remain ; but Bligh 
would go to his office. 

"What's this about papers?" asked 
Richard Lugard with a curious air, as he 
rose to go for the night. 

" 0, he is so kind ! " said Diana. '^I can't 
tell you the trouble he has taken. He is now 
going to set all my poor darling's papers in 
order, quite neat and nice for me ; so that I 
shall have no trouble, and be able to lay my 
hand on anything I want. I assure you, 
those papers in tin boxes and bundles 
frighten me and make my head go round." 

Lugard laughed. " My dear Diana, I am 
an old married man now, and entitled to give 
advice. Xow, I must tell you again, all this 

II. K 



130 DIANA GAY. 

looks very odd, and lias been remarked upon 
a great deal. Eobert Bligh is a very good 
fellow . tlie soul of honour, and all that . and 
means well ; but, really, to allow any one to 
have the run of family papers in that way, to 
read everything and handle everything, is a 
privilege I declare I wouldn't allow my own 
father." 

*' 0, Richard ! " Diana said, greatly 
shocked. 

" 1^0 ; and what is more, a privilege he'd 
have too much delicacy to ask for, unless of 
course . and that's all a different matter . 
unless the reiports are true; and then of 
course . " 

Mr. Lugard went away that night in great 
spirits. He enjoyed his cigar, and sang as 
he went home. Eobert sat into the watches 
of the night at his work, delving among the 
old letters and documents which the late 
squire had left in sad confusion. He was 
not quite so cheerful as Richard. He had 
been, in truth, much taken aback by the 



THE BIVALS. 131 

sudden appearance of Ms old schoolfellow in 
the character of an opponent. He had, 
indeed, reckoned on a smooth, pleasant pro- 
gress. It seemed to augur badly. Diana 
went to her room very grave and thought- 
ful. For the first time she felt worried, and 
had begun to know what the luorld was. 



K 2 



( 132 ) 



CHAPTER III. 



THE CANDIDATES. 



The wliole district was presently astir with 
the coming conflict. The potwallopers of 
Calthorpe, as they were irreverently termed, 
were in great excitement. These gentlemen, 
it was well known, were scarcely "pure," 
and many of them were said substantially 
to help out their other means of livelihood 
by these elections, which happily recurred 
pretty often. A boon, too, for the Mercury 
. the candidates' addresses being kept in 
standing type, and charged for at election 
prices ; the leaders, '. accounts of the can- 
vassing," "our own reporter," and what 
not. The Ilercury had cast-in its lot with 
the rising young man and brilliant altera 



THE CANDIDATES. 138 

sjoes BritannicB, Mr. Eobert Bligli, perhaps 
quickened by the recollection of the old Gay- 
Court hospitalities or the sense of future 
favours from one " who was deservedly 
esteemed in ancestral halls." The Mercury 
was incessant . it sat up night and day ; it 
travelled about express ; it '' stopped press " 
every now and again ; it flourished exceed- 
ingly. Until one morning, '^ a wretched rag 
of a paper," . that bought, as the Mercury 
told us all, three pages of its matter ready - 
printed from London, and filled up its re- 
maining fourth with "advertisements begged, 
borrowed, or stolen," . which only came out 
once a week, suddenly woke up into notice, 
became bi-weekly, active, alive, vigorous. 
This " rag, " whose more decorous name was 
The Calthor^e Observer and General Bemem- 
hrancer, took the side of Mr. Eichard Lugard 
. the gentlemen's candidate . and advocated 
his claims with something like scurrility. A 
Mr. Magaulay, well known on the Londoi 
press as being able to " devil " a political 



134 DIANA GAY. 

article as jou would " devil a kidney," came 
down specially . sent or lent, it was said, by 
tlie Flying Banner, the London Conser- 
vative organ. This officer certainly did 
good service. The great club, it was 
whispered, had lodged 900 to Mr. Lu- 
gard's credit in the branch office of the 
Universal Bank; the sinews of war were 
thus in plenty. On the other hand, it was 
known that Mr. Buller, *' the eminent 
Q.C." as he was called in the Mercury, was 
actually staying at Irnston with his lovely 
and accomplished daughter and heiress, and 
was ready, it was said, with '' sinews '* on 
the other side. 

Diana was secretly delighted with all this 
excitement ; but she saw that the eyes of the 
county were on her, and was feeling her sense 
of responsibility more and more every day. 
She subscribed both to the Mercury and to 
the Observer, and certainly laughed and 
looked grave alternately over the dreadful 
language that was applied in the latter 



THE CANDIDATES. 135 

journal to lier friend Eobert. Mr. Bligh's 
opinions were of rather an advanced sort. 
The OhservGT denounced him as '* a howlinof 

CD 

Radical, that would bring fire and sword into 
the country, and parcel out the land " among 
his fellows. Mr. Lugard was an unflinching 
Conservative, one that stood by his own . 
what God and his forefathers had bequeathed 
to him ; but at the sam.e time would 
watch over the friendless and fatherless, 
the maid and the wife, the widow and the 
orphan. 

Kichard himself laughed loudly over the 
opinions imputed to him. 

"As for watching over the widow and 
orphan, I decline it altogether. I have 
quite enough to do as it is." And his 
handsome eyes fell on the ground, and a 
deep sigh came from his breast. 

Diana's soft eyes were turned on the 
ground also. She knew what he alluded to. 
Poor Richard ! he often now spoke to her 
gloomily of what he called his shipwrecked 



136 DIANA GAY. 

heartli ; and Diana felt too mucli sympathy 
to notice the confusion of the metaphor. 

A great coldness had sprung up between 
the two gentlemen. Lugard treated Bligh 
civilly, as they sometimes met at Diana's 
house. 

"My opponent," he said, "is a Radical of 
the worst dye. I merely quote the Observer, 
the paper that does me the honour of giving 
me its support. I know nothing about it. 
There is a fellow called Macauley, or 
Magauley, who writes these things, but I 
have not the honour of his acquaintance.'* 

" I am glad to hear it," said Robert, coldly, 
" for his language passes even the bounds of 
a county-town paper." 

"You'd better not say that openly," 
laughed Lugard, " or you'll alienate your 
friend Cox of the Mercury ; you hioiv himJ^ 

"I do," said Bligh, coldly; "but not much 
. very slightly." 

" Not much . and very slightly ? What a 
casuist ! I hope you don't inspire him with 



THE CANDIDATES. 137 

those slaughtering attacks on me. By the 
way, how is Mr. Buller ? I met him two 
days ago in Calthorpe, walking with his 
charming daughter, who, I suppose, has 
come to electioneer. Ton my word, our 
friend here won't miss a chance." 

Again Diana looked curiously at Bligh, 
who made no answer. Somethino- was risino^ 
in her little mind, to the effect that Mr. 
Eobert Bligh was really so very clever . 
made everything serve his game . had half 
a dozen strings to his bow at once . and, in 
short, was rather too knowing in his 
manoeuvres. She had made inquiries as to 
this apparition of 'Hhe famous Q.C.," and 
what the Mercury oddly spoke of as " the 
Q.C.'s lovely daughter," and discovered tvat 
they came very often to Calthorpe. She was 
seized with an eagerness to know or see 
them, and asked Mr. Lugard very often 
about them. 

'' She canvasses for him, I suppose," said 
Eichard, laughing ; " a very nice girl indeed ! 



138 DIANA GAY. 

And the father . I am having him watched ; 
and if I catch him dropping any of his 
guineas, as thej say he is, I'll expose him. 
Mce work, isn't it ? Our virtuous friend 
Eobert, so grave in his principles, descend- 
ing to such dirty work ! But let him expect 
no quarter from me. This is too serious 
altogether." 

Within a week, when Diana was in her 
little pony-carriage and pair, which she 
drove herself . and a pretty picture it was 
to see her and her ponies, and the little 
" tiger " behind . she actually obtained the 
opportunity she desired ; for there, coming 
out of M' Williams's drapery-shop, was an 
elderly legal-looking man, with a tall young 
girl on his arm. She knew at once this was 
the Q.C. and his daughter. Certainly a 
handsome girl, into whose mind came the 
same instinct, and who looked at Diana with 
a hard, cold, and bold stare, which rather 
scared her. Miss Ada Duller was a hand- 
some girl, and deservedly admired by many 



THE CANDIDATES. 139 

a gay " stuff-gown " and opulent '' sucking " 
solicitor, who, according to tlie old-fashioned 
phrase, sighed for her. These suitors she 
treated with infinite disdain ; and it was 
known that she and her '^ governor " had 
their eye on that dry chip of ISTisi Prius, 
Robert Bligh. The look the two girls gave 
each other was curious indeed ; and Diana 
owned to herself, as she drove her ponies 
back, that Miss Buller was fine-looking 
and showy. They were now stopping in the 
neighbourhood with friends. 

The news of our Diana having emerged 
from the dark caves of grief and mourning 
to the pleasant sunlight was not long in 
travelling to Lady Margaret and her family, 
who were up in town. That lady could 
generously condone the past, as indeed she 
always could do on every occasion through 
her life when the interest of her family re- 
quired it. Before long she was down at 
Bowman, and in a still shorter time was 
flapping and rustling in on Diana, folding 



140 DIANA GAY. 

that tender little figure in all lier mass of 
silks and laces . even entangling various 
loose gold chains and appendages in our 
Diana's soft hair. She was delighted to see 
this child again. Canning was away, but 
would be delighted too when he heard of it 
all. Nothing could exceed the kindness of 
the Brenners to him. He was always there ; 
that is, they were always asJdng him there. 

"But, my dear. Canning seems so insen- 
sible; another young man would be so 
flattered, you know. Poniatowski, of the 
Austrian Legation, has proposed twice, and 
been mysteriously refused. . Yes, dear ; we 
have come here for this dreadful election. 
Poor Bowman ! He says it is expected that 
none of the county families shall be away 
from their posts. That fine young fellow 
Lugard, I hope he'll get in ; we're all to 
support him. I'm told they call the other 
the schoohnaster. Ha, ha ! funny, isn't it ? " 

Diana was very young and very untrained ; 
and the reader will see that it was only 



THE CANDIDATES. 141 

natural these unfortunate assaults on our 
leading hero should gradually be weakening 
that actual romantic respect with which a 
young girl should regard a young man whom 
she is to admire. No more unfortunate term 
than that of " the schoolmaster " could have 
been applied to forward this end ; for the 
associations connected with that calling . a 
priggish air, the birch, &c. . are most difl&cult 
to struggle against. It came back very often 
on Diana's mind. 

It was a slight exaggeration of Lady Mar- 
garet's . not to use a harsher word . this 
saying she had come down for the election, 
unless indeed she was thinking of the elec- 
tion of her cherished son into a seat that 
had more charms for her than any in the 
schedule. We may pass by as quite harm- 
less the introduction of poor Mr. Bowman's 
quoted views about county families being 
at their post, there being daily so many 
opinions laid to that worthy gentleman's 
account as would certainly amaze and con- 



142 . DIANA GAT. 

found him, had lie not been also trained to 
express no surprise. Part of Lady Marga- 
ret's views, wliicli she now pressed very 
warmly upon Diana, was a proposal that 
that charming young girl should come with 
her to town, '' and see a little of the 
world." 

" My dear," she said, " we can't leave 
you shut up in this way. A girl of your 
prospects and fortune is obliged to go out ; 
it becomes a duty. And really, with such 
responsibilities on you, darling . a splendid 
estate and this noble house . you should 
look about you, and see and get some one to 
help. There might be some one you'd like ; 
there are charming young men going about 
town." 

*' 0, Lady Margaret," said Diana, " I am 
not thinking of such a thing." 

" 0, but you know it is a duty, dear ; 
many and many's the time your dear father 
spoke to me about it, while a cloud came on 
his open brow." 



THE CANDIDATES. 143 

They were just opposite the huiiting- 
picture, now beginning to soften a little; 
and Diana, looking towards it, and noting 
liow the stiff face was turned towards her, 
saw in it a sweetness and a love, and an 
appeal, and a whole train of emotions of 
which the artist had certainly never dreamed. 
Every hour that picture was growing more 
precious. 



( 144 ) 



CHAPTER IV. 



A CHANGE. 



One evening Lugard came in. There was a 
look of triumpTi in liis eye. He had a news- 
paper in his hand. 

" What did I tell you ? " he said ; "a case 
of the cloven hoof indeed ! Not that I think 
he has anything to do with it." He pointed 
with his finger to a passage. '' It seems 
unkind to show you this ; but it is a duty. I 
have a deep interest in you ; and now that 
you are in a responsible situation, you 
should know all these things." 

A little agitated, Diana took hold of the 
paper. It was our old friend the Mercury ; 
but there were new proprietors. There were 
four lines, of doggerel entitled 



A CHANGE. 145 

Sadness and Sunshine. 

Ah, why does " the Goddess of Hunting " thus sigh ? 

Ah, tell me the reason, I pray. 
For her will her fate do admii-e-a-Bligh ; 

And soon will she cease to be Gay. 

Diana coloured, and lier lips were com- 
pressed. This was the first time her name 
had ever been dragged before the public. 

'.' It is shocking . a gross lampoon," said 
Lugard. '* Yet I acquit him ; of course I 
do. But he might have prevented it; and 
he is morally accountable all the same. Is 
it not astonishing how these ruffians, the 
scum of the earth, can go such lengths ? To 
attack a harmless girl, and drag her into 
their wretched politics ! And now, if I may 
advise on this matter, you will let it rest, 
Diana. Leave it as it is. I know my 
opponent Bligh will fly ofi* to have contra- 
dictions and apologies ; but people always 
ask, ' What is this that is contradicted ? I 
must get it.' And they will be paying half- 
a-crown a-piece for the old copies." 

II. L 



146 DIANA GAY. 

That sank deep into our Diana's mind. It 
was like a misfortune. Bligli liimself came 
later ; and liis behaviour unhappily added to 
the effect. 

'' What has happened ? " he said, smiling, 
as he saw her tragedy air, which he was 
often merry with. 

''You have not seen it, then, or 
heard.?" 

" No," said Bhgh. " 0, the lines ! But 
you don't mind them. They are below con- 
tempt; only to be laughed at." 

" Only to be laughed at ! " repeated 
Diana, greatly hurt. " 0, surely not. It 
has sunk into my heart. To drag a poor 
girl in this way before the public ! It is 
shocking, monstrous ! 0, I shall not re- 
cover it for a long, long time ! But I 
did not think that you would treat it so 
lightly." 

" But I do not," said he ; " the fact was, I 
thought you would have laughed, as you 
used to do at Mr. Pratt's hunting narra- 



A CHANGE. 147 

tives. But I'll walk down and have an 
apology inserted at once." 

** I heg, I implore," said Diana, with dig- 
nity, '' that you will not do such a thing. It 
will only make it more talked about. People 
that have not seen it will be looking for the 
old copies." 

She remembered Lugard's words. Bhgh 
was accustomed to witnesses. He smiled. 

" I see. I suppose it was Eichard, my 
friend, that brought this here?" 

'' It makes no matter now," said Diana. 
" I am sure I am greatly to be pitied, and it 
is most distressing and miserable ; and if my 
poor darling was alive . " 

The lines made a deep impression in the 
county. They were considered " so good," 
the funniest, drollest things ; and certainly 
Richard Lugard was so far right, that the 
old copies were sought for with avidity. 
Lady Margaret, who came over very often 
now, dwelt much on it. 

" I am an old woman that has seen life, 



148 DIANA GAY. 

and knows a little more than you suspect, or 
could know ; and so I can speak freely. You 
see this shows you it won't do ; it can't. A 
pretty, charming girl like you, with a great 
house and estate like this to manage . all that 
on these little shoulders ! You have no idea 
of the malice of the creatures. As Bowman 
says, the way the men talk at the clubs ! 
Not that you haven't obligations to these 
Blighs ; and I am sure they have the best 
intentions, . that is, he has ; for I know very 
little of her^ . but it cannot do. Bowman 
prophesied this ; I must do him that justice. 
If you could look out some nice friend whom 
you liked and respected, and who has the 
advantages of society and position, and get 
her to chaperone you . I assure you, my 
darling child, I am only speaking for your 
good ; and it's what Bowman says, and what 
Canning says, and what we all say. And at 
nights I am very much disturbed about it, 
and lie awake thinking over it." 

These counsels sank deep into the heart of 



A CHANGE. 149 

our Diana. They were well meant, tliough 
thej were not a little artful. From that 
affair of the lines and from its associations 
Diana's eyes turned away with a sort of 
horror. Her name " dragged through the 
mire ! " . an expression of Lugard's, . it 
scared and terrified her. 

All this time the canvassing was going on 
briskly. The principles of the two candi- 
dates were before the country. If we took 
them broadly, it must be said that Lugard's 
were Conservative or Tory; and Bligh's 
Eadical. But the latter would not accept 
that designation ; he was '' an advanced 
Liberal.'' To Prosser, the Eadical saddler^, 
he was of course a Eadical. Eichard Lugard 
described him scornfully. 

" I don't pretend to understand such refine- 
ments . I don't indeed. ' Advanced ' rubbish, 
and casuistry of that kind . it's not at all 
in my way. I am one thing or the other. 
There are only two honest colours in politics 
. black and white. The fellows he's asking 



150 DIANA GAY. 

to put him in, want to cut up jour land and 
mine, and divide it into equal portions. I 
respect them ; I respect Prosser, who says so 
openly. The proof of it is, I have got many 
a saddle from him. He knows, perhaps as 
well as I do, that he will never live to see his 
principles in force, and that his grandchildren 
will never see them either. But he sticks to 
them honestly, and says so honestly. But, 
hang it ! to have a man refining, and half 
one thing, half another . afraid to say he is 
that or t'other . to be a Radical in talk and 
essays, but to go no farther . 'pon my word, 
of the two I prefer the saddler. Kow, here 
am I . plain and straightforward . a Conser- 
vative Liberal, if you like . willing to live 
and let live, and all that. But none of your 
half-and-halfs . Liberal or advanced Conser- 
vative, and all that." 

All this time, too, Robert was looking on 
patiently . making good his ground, up be- 
times, and at nights coming to Gay Court to 
settle the papers in the study. He had an 



A CHANGE. 151 

object in this ; lie had begun to see the 
change in Diana ; he was determined to wind 
up his stewardship, finish honourably what 
he had undertaken, and then call to his aid 
all his old training and discipline, and with 
an effort tear that pleasant and delightful 
image from his heart. As he sat below in 
Mr. Gay's study, surrounded with papers, he 
felt dismal enough. 

'^ It was all her dream, poor soul," he said 
to himself, thinking of his mother ; " and a 
comfort to her, but a wild folly. I should 
never have listened to it a moment ; I said so, 
and thought so, all through. It will be a 
trial and suffering, but I must do it, and do it 
at once. I have no business with such luxu- 
ries as love, or with darlings like her. I always 
saw that manner in her to me. I was too 
sober and grave ; far too ivise. Girls have a 
contempt for the wise. And if I had read 
at all, or knew anything, I might have found 
that out." 

That night's post brought him as usual a 



152 DIANA GAT. 

mail of letters, one in a hand wliicli was 
familiar, and tlie sight of which agitated him 
a little. It was from Lord Bellman, and ran 
as follows : . 

" Deae Sir, . I shall find myself in Eng- 
land, after all, about the time of our election. 
I regret very much I shall not be able to 
give you the support I hoped. To speak 
frankly, I am disappointed in your platform, 
as the Americans say, of principles. From 
what I have heard, I could not give my vote 
to one who talks so mistily . forgive me for 
saying so . of the relations of landlord and 
tenant. I quit understand that you are 
more of the doctrinaire, and do not go the 
length of that fellow Prosser ; but still, when 
you are put forward by such people, and 
when we have a good thorough-going Con- 
servative candidate, conscience steps in. 
Mr. Eichard Lugard called on me yesterday, 
and did me the honour of explaining at 
length his political creed. I must say, after 
that, I could hesitate no longer. You will 



A CHANGE. 153 

recollect I gave no distinct promise ; tliougH I 
feel that I should like to show how much I am 
indebted for the useful legal advice you gave, 
which the event quite justified. But once 
principle or conscience interposes, the sense 
of private obligation must give way. . I am 
yours, &c. Bellman. 

This letter was a shock. He had always 
counted on Lord Bellman, who was indeed 
what is called a Liberal. He had some influ- 
ence in Calthorpe ; but his name and the 
credit of his support would go for a great 
deal. It was well known that his lordship 
was " building " on his new estate. " Middle- 
aged Jenkinson," his lordship's architect, 
had been down choosing a site. Here was 
the prospect of employment, orders to the 
shopkeepers, &c. The registered voters of 
Calthorpe were only two hundred and fifty or 
so. 

Mr. Bligh then laboured among the 
papers with a greater zeal now that he had 



154 DIANA GAY. 

finally come to this determination. The 
papers were in sad disorder. There were 
abundant law documents, for the Gay family 
had always been fond of litigation, even the 
late amiable owner. But his proceedings 
were always taken about favourite or public- 
spirited, subjects ; and Bligh smiled as he 
took up the papers. " Injunction in the case 
of the "Warrenhurst Watercourse," "Right 
of way through the Bashley Meadows, . Gay 
V, Wether." They were mostly for the public 
good . for the neighbours, or the hounds, or 
the hunt, or for sport. Here, too, were the 
letters of a century back . yellow, torn and 
in bundles, and mixed with old accounts and 
inventories. He had been careful to obtain 
from Diana the most precise instructions, 
and the fullest permission to read these 
papers . "those musty old things," the very 
air of which frightened her, and on which 
indeed she had gravely consulted him as to 
the propriety of a wholesale burning. But 
when he assured her gravely that this was a 



A CHANGE. 155 

duty, tliat every family took a pride in their 
papers, and tliat Mr. Gay had often talked to 
liim of '^ building a muniment-room," Diana 
grew quite eager. There were all sorts of 
letters . home and from abroad ; one little 
bundle from a " George Gay," who he knew 
was the young officer in the drawing-room, 
Mr. Gay's elder brother, who had rather dis- 
graced him. Here were all his letters, written 
when he was " under a cloud " at Boulogne . 
some penitent, some defiant and obdurate, 
some pleasant and in high spirits, describing 
life and manners. These were curious, and he 
put them aside. He stayed very late that 
night and walked home about midnight. 
Diana was then fast asleep. When he 
entered his own house, he found a light burn- 
ing, and his mother sitting up. 

** There are letters for you," she said. 
'' One from Lord Bellman to me. You have 
lost him. That is some more of that Lu- 
gard's intrigues." 

" He is working hard," said Eobert, 



156 DIANA GAY. 

gloomily. " But why are you sitting up 
in tliis way, mother ? '' 

'' I can't go to sleep so early/' she said. 
*'Do you know, Robert, I begin to be afraid. 
If anything should happen, I shall know to 
whose account to put it." 

" After all, mother, it is all fair competi- 
tion on his side." 

^' I am not talking of Jiim. But of that 
false, ivicJced girl . " 

" Who, mother ? " repeated Bligh, as- 
tonished ; '' not Diana, surely ? " 

''Who else? False, cruel, ungrateful 
girl ! Let her take care what she is about, 
and not trifle with me. A contemptible child 
like that to attempt . to dare to try a game 
of that sort against me ! " 

''My dear mother," said he, alarmed at 
her manner, " you must recollect she is a 
child." 

" You call her a child ; you don't think it. 
Is she such a child as you would take home ? 
. that you love, and have loved in your 



A CHANGE. 157 

heart of hearts since you were a boy ? No, 
Robert, you don't think her a child." 

'' Well, I do not. And I do love her . and 
did. But, my dear, I have found out long 
since that was all a dream, born of your 
good nature and interest in me. And only 
this very night I have come to the resolution 
of finally giving all up, and going back to 
my true and proper love . my old mouldy 
profession. It is all I am fit for. I have 
seen a great change in her, which perhaps 
you did not. She wants to look about, to be 
independent, to know her power, to see the 
young and the handsome, and I think she is 
right." 

" I have seen all this, too," she said, sadly. 
"0, my poor Eobert, yes. She has listened 
to our enemies, and ungratefully. But I say, 
Robert, I shall take care of you. I shall not 
let you be outraged and mortified by anyone 
like her. Tell me what kept you so late. 
Never mind," said Mrs. Bligh, growing more 
and more excited ; " she little dreams what 



158 DIANA GAT. 

slie owes to us, or wliat a helpless creature 
I could make her. Her head is turned by 
a position she is not fit for." 

'' She is so young," said Bligh. 

" That is nothing. And if she is base 
enough to be ungrateful, let her take care. 
I say no more." 

'* As usual," he said with alacrity, wishing 
to change the subject, " I was duly settling 
the papers ; . such strange documents, old 
letters, and some that seemed so interesting. 
To-night I came on a whole bundle from that 
George Gay . from abroad." 

''Yes," said Mrs. Bligh, starting, "she 
has no reason to be proud of that. I could 
tell some stories, if I chose . " 

*' Now, my dear mother," said Bligh, 
taking her hand kindly, '' I am sorry to see 
you so hostile. It is all quite premature. 
Poor Diana has done nothing as yet. When 
the. time comes she will do everything that is 
right and kind." 

'' Poor Robert!" said Mrs. Bligh, "always 



A CHANGE. 159 

hopeful, and too passive. You do not see 
wliat I see. However, let us do nothing in 
a hurry." 

Yet Robert went to his room that night 
not a little troubled and dispirited. 



( 160 ) 



CHAPTER V, 



THE ELECTION-DAT. 



The election -time liad at last come round, 
and the nomination-day. The Calthorpe 
court-house had been filled. There was 
infinite excitement, for few remembered a 
contest which promised to be so closely 
run. The corrupt Calthorpe voters roared 
and bellowed in the street. The rival mobs, 
well-filled with drink, meat, and money, 
proclaimed their favourite, and fought each 
other in the usual way. It was kuown that 
they were very evenly divided, each being 
sure of about a hundred and ten voters ; 
and it was known that there was a balance 
of some thirty or forty hesitating or con- 
scientious men, who could not, would not, 
decide until the last moment. 



THE ELECTIOX-DAY. 161 

There was a ladies' gallery in the court- 
house ; and there was seen the young 
mistress of Gay Court, sitting beside her 
friend Lady Margaret. She was in great 
excitement, and could hardly restrain herself, 
laughing or smiling when the speech making 
began; and if any one looked at her she 
smiled at them. It was indeed exciting. 
The two candidates excited much interest ; 
Bligh, so grave and thoughtful, with a 
bright clear brow, watching everything 
warily. But the good-looking, bold, defiant 
Lugard, with an air of triumphant good- 
humour in his eyes, was certainly the more 
popular of the two. Thought, wisdom, and 
" all that," is very well ; but under those 
gifts is a suggestion of selfishness. They 
are treasures for the owner's use and ad- 
vancement. Good looks, good humour, and 
cheerfulness we have all a direct interest in, 
and like rather better. Indeed, everything 
seemed to go well with Richard, for here was 
Lord Bellman rising to propose his friend. 
n. M 



162 DIA.NA GAY. 

C' I am no diplomatist," said Dick in Ms 
off-hand way, " and cannot do clever letters 
or demurrers, and that line of business ; but 
the ide^. just occurred to me one night, and 
off I set in the morning; was in town by 
the afternoon; called on his lordship, and 
asked him plump. Here he is now.") 

Lord Bellman made a very pleasant 
speech, in which there was a good deal 
about himself and about his son ("who 
he hoped, please God, would soon be able to 
come among them and take them by the 
hand"), and about the ladies. He dwelt a 
good deal on what he called the " old prin- 
ciples; " about his hoping to be allowed to 
transmit the lands he had received from 
Providence to his children ; . that in the 
times in which they lived it behoved every 
man to range himself on the side of order 
and loyalty. He knew both candidates ; 
and that placed him in rather an embar- 
rassing position : he could wish both success 
from his heart. Both were clever, both 



THE ELEOTIOX-DAY. 163 

good-looking ; hut the ladies icere judges of 
that : and it was only a sense of duty and 
conscience . he was old-fasliioned enough to 
keep that article still . that made him stand 
by his principles. 

Bligh was proposed by an influential 
Calthorpian, not nearly so distinguished as 
Lord Bellman, but an employer, and who 
commanded some twenty votes at least : no 
speaker, and who merely said a few words. 
He was heartily groaned at ; for Dick's mob 
were the noisiest, and had most drink. 

There was a lady sitting on the other side 
of Diana, whom Bligh remembered as the 
former gay and ''dashing" Kitty Crowder. 
She was now utterly changed ; silent, 
melancholy, and pensive, with an air of 
suffering. The Calthorpe gossips had 
noticed this at once, and drew the usual 
charitable conclusion. ''It had not turned 
out well ; poor soul, she had a sad life with 
him; they knew he would tame her awful 
temper." Tamed she certainly had been ; 

M 2 



164 . DIANA GAY. 

and having now been brought down for this 
exciting day, she had come to stay with her 
old friend Diana at Gay Court. There our 
heroine treated her with infinite sympathy 
and kindness ; not that she accepted the 
gossips' stories, but she saw, and had 
always seen, that her nature would never suit 
one like Richard's. Surely, too, there is 
always an interest in an affair of tliis 
sort, . to see what has been offered to 
you, how another deals with it. It is the 
foundation of a very dramatic sympathy. 
So Diana was really glad to have back her 
old friend, whose case she commiserated; 
and Kitty told her all her trials ; though 
Diana did not accept her over-coloured 
account, but made due allowance for poor 
Kitty's incompatibility. 

As a matter of course Eichard Lugard 
came over very often to see his wife, and was 
very sarcastic and satirical on her and her 
former life . sometimes rough aud rude, to 
Diana's great pain. Once or twice, indeed. 



THE ELECTION-DAY. 165 

the unliappy girl had turned on him, and 
there was a very unpleasant scene, which 
gave Diana quite a shock . took away all 
power of speech, especially as the husband 
and wife kept on attacking each other re- 
gardless of her presence, with fiery cheeks 
and no less fiery eyes. Poor Kitty, she had 
made a mistake indeed ! 

At last the two candidates had to make 
their speeches. Eichard first, which was 
quite characteristic of himself . ofi-hand, bold, 
cheerful, and a little sarcastic on Robert. 
He had, he knew, his own defects . no one 
better. As regarded his friend there, he 
could not hold a candle to him . whatever 
that meant ; but all he could say was, if he 
had one of his friend Hooker's . whom he 
saw on his right . good candles in his hand, 
he'd hold it to royalty itself, and cot be 
ashamed. Hooker's candles they might all 
be proud of, and their light would show the 
defects or merits of anyone. This capital 
local allusion got Eichard two votes on the 



165 DIANA GAY. 

spot. He himself was the hare, his friend 
Mr. Bligh the tortoise. He knew that, com- 
mercially, the tortoise was a more valuable 
animal ; but he always remembered that the 
hare had been beaten through its own fault. 
He had no notion of stopping on the road to 
take a nap, or commit any such folly. For 
the last fortnight he had had hardl}^ time to 
eat, drink, or sleep ; so, if not a fleet hare, 
he was at least a very industrious one. He 
then, with a little wonder, said he was sur- 
prised at his friend coming there at all. A 
man who was in such practice at the Bar, so 
engrossed with his briefs, could not spare 
time to canvass . certainly not to attend to 
the duties of his membership. "What interest 
could lie have in their concerns, unless to use 
them . which every lawyer did, and he did 
not blame them . as a stepping stone for 
promotion ? His friend had no stake in the 
county ; and he had told him, with the ut- 
most frankness and good will, for they were 
old friends and schoolfellows, that he had no 



THE ELECTION-DAT. 167 

business to come there. He (Lugard) owed 
liim a lesson, in return for a very old one 
wlien they liad been schoolboys, and when 
his friend gave him as good a thrashing in 
the Latin grammar as ever he got in his life. 
Now he intended to give him a good thrash- 
ing in return. A great shout. 

Then came Robert's turn. He was accus- 
tomed to speaking, but he felt anything but 
eloquent as he rose. The sympathies of the 
crowd he knew had gone with the last 
speaker ; and when they saw his thoughtful 
face and wise air, they seemed to anticipate 
they were in for a lecture and learned exposi- 
tion. They were not very far out ; for Bligh 
had felt it necessary to give an exposition of 
his loriiicijjles, which had been so cruelly 
vilified in that hireling print the Ohserver, 
and which should be carried on the wings of 
the Mercury over the length and breadth of 
the country. He wished to explain how far he 
would go. He spoke very well, very care- 
fully rounding his sentences, and with a 



168 DIANA GAY. 

certain legal eloquence ; but it sounded a 
little heavy after the rattling, off-hand periods 
of the soldier. He felt dry and uneloquent. 
He certainly did set out his principles, proved 
logically that he was no Radical, and made a 
sound, practical, and even, towards the end, 
a spirited speech. The applause was loud at 
the close, and the " show of hands " was 
declared to be for Richard Lugard. 

These were exciting days ; for the follow- 
ing one, Richard Lugard roused himself 
indeed, and spent them, as he said, " in 
the open air." His fresh, open face . and 
it never looked more handsome . was seen 
everywhere ; his gay voice was heard in 
every voter's house. The off-hand officer 
described pleasantly to Diana how many 
children, and old virgins sometimes, he had 
to kiss ; though he passed over some of 
these favours, which he had distributed to 
more suitable objects. 

Diana indeed caught the whole spirit 
and excitement of the situation. She felt 



THE ELECTION-DAY. 169 

an irresistible sympatliy for this gay, bold 
militaire, and not nearly so much for Robert 
Bligh, who, now gloomy, and a prey to a 
sort of depression, rarely showed himself, 
and then spoke little. With a careful avoid- 
ance, he never alluded to the subject of 
'' her influence,^^ which indeed she was not 
so sorry for. Lugard always said, '^ You 
know I have your solemn word and promise, 
Diana; " at which she laughed. 

At last here was the day itself. For the 
candidate, how unpleasant such excitement 
' . too prolonged, almost wearying. It is 
like the dice-box kept down for an hour 
before being raised . the cast on which a 
fortune has been staked. The weeks and 
months, the sums of money, the hosts of 
agents, the long days of '' dirty work," the 
degrading leek that has to be swallowed 
again and again, until the heart is sick . 
all is under the dice-box during that day. 
Now and again the corner is just raised, 
and he thinks he sees the glorious "sixes," 



170 DIANA GAY. 

as reports come in, always hopeful, invari- 
ably full of comfort. If lie is behindliand 
at tlie beginning, tlie adversary ''polls Ms 
best at first ; " and if lie is aliead himself, 
that speaks for itself, and is at least no dis- 
couragement. Think of the moment when 
the clock has struck, and the books are 
closed, and the last "totting" is going on. 
So it was with our two candidates at Cal- 
thorpe. They were ''neck and neck" all 
day. Wlien Lngard was 100, Bligh was 
102 ; when, towards three o'clock, Lugard 
was 120, Bligh was 118. It was hot . too 
hot to be pleasant. 

Diana was at home, in a perfect fever. 
She could not sit down, or work, or even 
go out. Now again came an express from 
one or other of her two friends, telling of 
their progress. Dick's were always in Ms 
oivn hand . full, and good-natured. He had 
great tact, after all, or knowledge of the 
world. Bligh, either from pride, or perhaps 
not thinking it of importance, let his agents 



THE ELECTION-DAY. 171 

do this little office. By sucli trifles, liow- 
ever, are tlie grand achievements of life 
carried out. 

Towards three she was at the window ; 
Kitty, far more indifferent, sitting at the 
fire, gazing into the coals. Suddenly they 
heard the sound of horse's hoofs. What 
was that . another express ? It seemed 
to betoken something; and in a moment 
the door was opened, and Eichard, flushed, 
eager, and handsome, rushed in. 

"0, Eichard, Eichard ! what news ? " 

" The worst," said Eichard, hurriedly. 
*' Unless you come to my aid, it is all over. 
"\Ye have polled our last fellow, and so has 
he also." 

''Well ? " said Diana, breathless. 

Kitty was looking round from the fire 
coldly. 

*'But what is to be done?" went on 
Diana eagerly. "How can I save you?" 

Poor Eobert ! she had forgotten him for 
the moment. 



172 DIANA GAY. 

'' What's to be done ? Ala ! you won't do 
it ; yon won't help me. And yet the pre- 
cious moments are flying." 

'' But what can we do ? Tell me, dear 
Richard." 

" This. There are three or four fellows 
there who say they know you want them 
to support Mr. Robert, and will be angry 
if they should not. This is only more of 
the precious stories he or his agents have 
sent about. 'Pon my word, they have elec- 
tioneered with your name well 1 " 

Diana looked haughtily round. This ivas 
indeed too much, after all she had suffered 
from reports. 

''To drag your sacred name into these 
wretched conflicts ! I would have scorned 
it. Mr. Bligh seems to think he will not 
only sit for Calthorpe, but for . " 

" 0, it is cruel, unkind, unmanly. What 
can I do, though ? I must put down these 
unkind reports." 

'' Well, it is only justice to yourself. 



THE ELECTION-DAY. 173 

heavens ! to think of the prize just within 
my grasp. All my money . which God 
knows how I shall ever pay back . all lost. 
I shall be ruined indeed now, and care little 
what becomes of me." 

Enter now Mr. Lugard senior . excited 
for him . and Lady Margaret, much excited. 
Mr. Lugard says, 

'^ Miss Diana, you can save the day yet 
for your poor old friend Dick. I have 
ridden out from Calthorpe, and spent an 
hour with those pigheaded rascals ; but it's 
no use." 

" Diana, darling, you must not really," said 
Lady Margaret. " I am told it is really 
shocking the way they are using your name. 
' Miss Gay wishes that ; Miss Gay wishes 
this.' A young girl like you ! it is very, 
very unfair." 

''Unfair!" said Mr. Lugard senior; ''it 
is scandalous. Mr. Bligli seems to reckon 
on being the master here ; ordering in the 
tenants, I suppose." 



174 DIANA GAT. 

Diana tliougtit for a moment of Robert's 
wistful face ; but the opinions of these artful 
people of the world . she, a young, inexpe- 
rienced girl . the sense of her wrongs, of her 
being so fatally compromised . the sense of 
the pressing danger, and necessity of doing 
something promptly to dispel these fatal 
reports . quite took away all reason. She 
was frightened . in their hands. The crowd 
in the room, all indignant ; the certain ruin 
to come on poor Dick . 

" What must be done ? " she asked. 

"Just a letter," said Dick; " a few lines 
which can be shown. Don't tell them they 
are not to vote for him. I don't want that. 
It wouldn't be fair; and let us be fair to 
him." 

'^ Yes ; simply write," said Lugard senior, 
" that you have no interest in either ; and 
you request, and order, so far as you have 
any influence, that they will vote for the 
candidate they like best. You owe this to 
yourself, Miss Diana. What could be fairer ? " 



THE ELECTION-DAY. 1 75 

Diana went over to her little desk and 
wrote. Poor Robert ! Dick and his father 
interchanged glances. It was written, and 
put into Dick's hand. In a moment he was 
on his horse. 

" This will do for you. Master Eobert," he 
said. 

At four o'clock, when the polling ceased, 
Eichard Lugard, Esq., was known in Cal- 
thorpe to be duly elected by a majority of 

SIX VOTES. 



( 176 



CHAPTER YL 



A WARNING. 



When Diana liad taken that step, and 
Richard had ridden away, a reaction came. 
The image of her other friend . the hard- 
working, honest, true Robert Bligh . rose 
before her. It scarcely seemed a hind re- 
turn for all that he had done. His steady, 
unwearying kindness; his simple, unobtrusive 
devotion ; his honest, generous heart, which 
she knew, though he had never told her, was 
all hers. She was a little indignant with 
herself. But he might win ; and then, ]3oor, 
handsome Richard, whose life had been so 
sacrificed, was he to lose in everything ? 
Robert, tortoise-like, was sure to get on 
eventually ; and really it was very provoking 
that they should be so free with her name. 



A WARNING. 177 

SucIl fluctuations were in the mind of our 
Diana. Slie was very young, it must be 
recollected. When Lady Margaret burst in 
joyfully with the news of Richard's victory, 
it was for Diana a sort of shock. But the 
noisy congratulations of the lady ; the excite- 
ment ; the details of the closeness of the 
contest; the unbounded happiness of Richard, 
who was now indeed saved, and actually 
posting along the high road to bear her the 
news himself and express his gratitude, took 
off all her thoughts. It was a festival. She 
was in agitation, and could not help being 
glad when the hero came in, and almost cast 
himself at her feet, in a tumult of joy, grati- 
tude, and triumph. 

'' I owe it all to you," he said, *' Diana. 
You have made me M.P., and I shall never 
forget it. A new life opens before me, . new 
hopes, new ideas, ambition, getting on, . 
something far above mere cantering and 
soldiering. Diana, you shall see what I can 
do. I am y(mr representative, and feel I 
IT. N 



178 DIANA GAY. 

have great responsibility. As for Eobert 
Bligh, lie will console himself, and I will do 
what I can for him. He will get on in some 
other way, never fear. He knows how to fall 
on his legs," 

Then that exciting, cunning Lady Mar- 
garet began to talk seriously of plans and 
prospects. 

'' N'ow that we have got over this odious 
election, dear," she said, '' we must think 
what is to be done. Xow you can not go on 
staying here in this way. See the little 
difficulty you were in tliis very morning, 
darling ; and you may be sure those odious 
papers will not stop here. After this business 
they will set to work afresh. I've a letter 
from Canning, who says this is going to be a 
great season. The Brenners, he says, arc 
to give two balls, with tableaux and charades. 
She, Christine Brenner, who admires Jurii, 

you know, to be Judith, and all that," 

added Lady Margaret, not being able to 
recollect the name of any new character. 



A WAENING. 179 

*' Town never was to be so gay. I have got 
Bowman at last to take a house in Port- 
man-square. We pay an aivful price for it, 
dear ; but still, dear, the Muley Moloch of 
fashion requires all this cost. Now, dear, you 
must come to us. Indeed, it is a duty. I 
assure you the dear darling that is gone often 
and often talked to me over this, and so 
anxiously. ' She has no one,' he would say, 
' unless you and Bowman, to look after her.' 
And of course I promised I would." 

Diana was greatly struck . almost, in fact, 
taken by storm . by the intrepid Lady Mar- 
garet, who had determined indeed to carry 
this little weak citadel at once and by 
escalade. Before she left, she got a promise 
from Diana that she would go. 

That night about eight o'clock Diana had 
another more serious interview. She saw a 
figure standing before her, a pale face. And 
she heard a voice that spoke to her calmly 
and without emotion. 

'' I have come to see you. Miss Gay, for 



180 DIANA GAi'. 



tlie last time. I am oroino: awav in the 



morning, 



5J 



'' Going away ! " said slie, the old feeling 
coming back in a torrent on her. '' 
Robert, ^vhat must you have thought of me ? 
But I did it for the best ; I mean, I was 
taken by surprise, and poor Richard . " 

'' I have not come to bring you to an 
account," he said. " You were quite 
entitled to do what you did. But it has been 
a great shock to me ; and you will forgive 
me if I say I think it was unkind and cruel." 
The cold Robert . that felt nothing, nothing 
. was speaking with great warmth and 
agitation now. '^ Cruel and ungenerous. 
What have I done to you ? All my life long, 
since I was a child, I looked to you, Diana . 
I confess it ; thought of no one else. All 
my life I have turned to you, worked for 
you, dreamed of you . Vilce a fool, as I was. 
This last step I should never have under- 
taken, but for you . Jilce a fool, as I ivas.^' 

" Eobert, indeed, ind-eed I did not mean 



A WARNING. 181 

it. But tliey all came round me, and 
crowded in here, and I forgot, and lost my 
foolish head; and it ivas ungrateful." 

" 'No, I do not say that ; I do not complain. 
But you deceived me ; or rather, indeed, 
my own old folly and infatuation. But now 
I shall see differently ; I shall live for some- 
thing else. I do not care to tell you that I 
loved you . loved you, 0, so much ! . loved 
you in spite of everything . of suspicions ; in 
spite of your behaviour to me, which at all 
times has been doubtful, and ought to have 
opened the eyes of any man with sense. But 
that is all over. I have sense enough left to 
have will and power to tear your image from 
my heart, where it has been so long." 

" Robert, you speak so unkindly. What 
shall I do, if you leave me in this way ? " 

''I do not complain ; nor have I any 
anger. And indeed, Diana," he added, more 
softly, " I acquit you. But I cannot afford 
to get any more of these rude lessons. They 
cost too much in suffering. I can now go 



182 DIANA GAY. 

back to tlie old routine, wliicli I sliould never 
liave abandoned, and never sball again. But 
I have discbarged my part. You will find 
everything in order, papers . all. That law- 
suit wbicli you were afraid of is happily 
settled. I had not time to tell you, I v^as so 
busy with this . and other things. And let 
me say that if ever the new friends begin to 
fail you, and you want real help, a letter will 
bring me to you, and I will do my best, as 
of old. There, good-bye, Diana, if I may 
call you so ; and good-bye also to an old and 
dear dream." 

Who would think that this was the dry, 
wise Eobert, so cold and sober? It was 
indeed a warm, passionate Robert. Diana . 
our foolish, irresolute Diana . was deeply 
touched, and even shocked, at her own 
behaviour. She could only utter faintly that 
she meant nothing, and that she indeed liked 
Eobert always, and that he was very unkind 
to go off in that way. 

"Good-bye, Diana," he said; "I go back 



A WAENiXG. 183 

to my trusty friends . those clear books, wlio 
never desert me or treat me unkindly . 
never, I4rust, to leave them again. Do not 
forget what I said ; if ^^ou are ever in a 
difficulty, call on, send for me. I can be of 
use still, and will do my best for tlie sake of 
some old happy days." 

Diana tried to make a faint protest. When 
she saw him going, she called out faintly, 

'* Eobert, you won't leave me in that 
way?" 

But he vv'as gone. 

Diana, left to herself, was at first not a 
little pettish at her commands being dis- 
obeyed, and her little amende not being 
accepted ; but soon a sense of her own 
behaviour came back npon her. She felt 
that she had behaved with some cruelty and 
ingratitude. She was inclined to cry, but 
then she thought she would w^rite a sweet, 
pretty little note, begging forgiveness, asking 
him to make it up. This child of nature 
did not see that this could hardly make up 



184 DIANA GAY. 

for tlie positive injury lier waywardness liad 
done her old friend. But her note was 
written, and sent over that night. 

There was no answer. The next day she 
drove over herself in her little carriage. She 
was told that Mr. Eobert had left. She 
wondered that Mrs. Bligh had not come to 
her. She went in, not without a little awe 
of that lady. 

Mrs. Bhgh was sitting at her desk, cold 
and stony. 

A fierce eye rested on Diana. 

" So Robert has gone away ? I am afraid 
he is angry with me ; and I sent a letter, 
and I wished to explain : for I am afraid I 
behaved very unkindly . at least, it seemed 
so. But I never meant . " 

And then tlie fluttering Diana stopped, 
and could say no more ; for the hard, stern, 
and hostile gaze with which the mother was 
measuring her, filled her with terror. 

"All this comes too late. Miss Gay; too 
late for hima and too late for me, No re- 



A WAENING. 185 

pentance can make up too him now for that 
injury.'' 

" But I was worked on ; people came iu 
and persuaded me," said Diana. 

"Yes; but you were not persuaded by 
him who had the first claim on you. No, 
you waited coldly and cruelly to the last 
moment to give him that stab. He may for- 
give you, and I dare say will ; but I give you 
fair notice, Diana Gay, I never can." 

" You never can ! " repeated Diana, step- 
ping back. 

" I never can," repeated Mrs. Bligh. 
" You have wrecked his happiness in every 
way. He had set his whole heart on this, 
his whole purse. For years, too, one thought 
had buoyed him up, which he had set his heart 
on . that you had some regard for him. 0, 
if you knew how that thought cheered and 
led him forward; how, in all his weary 
studies, he had that one thought before him 
. a dream, certainly, as he knew himself, 
but out of which it was heartless to awake 



186 DIANA GAY. 

Mm. His whole life will be coloured bj it. 
And do not think for a moment that I shall 
forget it. Expect nothing from me but 
hostility . nothing but imnishinenty 

Diana started and looked round frightened. 
" Punishment ! Mrs. Bhgh ! " 
'^Yes; retribution. You must bitterly 
atone for this. You made him suffer, and 
shall be made to suffer yourself. You little 
know the peril you stand in . you, you weak, 
cruel child . for you are no more. You 
should have kept the only two friends you 
had in the world, for you have no friends. 
At this moment you are helpless, for you 
have lost us. iSow you will go into the 
world, and you will be amused and dazzled 
for a time. But you will lind difficulties and 
embarrassments gathering about you, and 
you will have no one to call on. Richard 
Lugard, you will say ; Lady Margaret ; . fine 
friends indeed ! They will help you. You 
will call on him . on Eobert ; but he 
will not come to you. Even at this 



A WAENING. 187 

moment you know not wliat is prepar- 
ing . what is impending. There is no- 
thing more between you and us, Diana Gay ; 
and vou take it as a last act of s-race that I 
give you this final warning to prepare for 
what you should have had prudence . if not 
common gratitude . to avert. Now, on your 
own head be it ! " 

Diana, quite terror-struck at this ominous 
denunciation, could not answer. Never had 
such terrible words been spoken to her 
before. A chill came to her heart ; and 
before she could collect herself she was alone. 
It all came back on her very often, and she 
drove home very sad and grave and humi- 
liated ; for it then occurred to her that she 
actually had no friends . no one she could 
consult, that loved her, that she could fly to. 
And above all, there was that strange indis- 
tinct menace, which sent the chill to her 
heart. 

She arrived at home very serious. But 
there were Lady Margaret and '.' Mr. Richard 



188 DIANA GAY. 

Lugard, M.P.," waiting for her, Ml of hope 
and spirits and plans. Lady Margaret had 
come to absorb her . to fix a day. The 
house was ready. Eichard was going to 
town also, to take his seat. What fun they 
should have, what parties, what a new life 
for Diana ! Anticipation colours everything ; 
it lays on the gold and silver richly. In- 
sensibly Diana got into spirits again. Surely 
here were true friends, more cheerful 
certainly than that solemn and wicked 
woman who had so threatened her . her, 
poor little harmless Diana ! 

Gradually all the uncomfortable feeling was 
talked away in a most delightful and viva- 
cious night. Richard exalted himself; spoke 
even kindly and generously, as it seemed 
to Diana, of his old rival. A pity, he said, 
that Bligh was so morbid. He would never 
do in the House . a little too much of the 
schoolmaster. They wanted something there 
of a more rattling sort. He was very in- 
dulgent, Richard, and legislatorlike, and 



A WAENING. 189 

could be now above the mists and clouds 
which overhang the low marshes of dis- 
appointment. 

Before the night was over, the grave air 
had passed from Diana. No young girl can 
resist a gay panorama of the joys of youth 
thus spread out ; and a not unadroit remark 
of Richard's that this "terrorism," which 
" my old friend Bob " and his mamma had 
wished to set up, had been now abolished, 
had excellent effect. 

Such was the issue of the Calthorpe 
election, long talked of in the borough. Soon 
the Mercury made two very remarkable 
announcements : one that Robert Bligh 
had left Calthorpe for London, ^' to make 
arrangements for presenting a ijetition " 
against the newly-returned member ; and 
within a week more that '' Mr. and Lady 
Margaret Bowman, with Miss Gay and suite, 
had proceeded to town, for a lengthened 
sojourn at their mansion in Portman Square." 



( 190 ) 



CHAPTER YII. 



LADY MAEGAEET " EECEIVES." 



Messes. Ledbettee, tlie eminent Bond Street 
agents and valuators, had secured for Lady 
Margaret Bowman (notliing was ever done 
by, or ordered for, Mr. Bowman) that capital 
and desirable family mansion on the east side 
of the well-known square, " suited in every 
way for a nobleman or gentleman's family ; '* 
. an elastic capacity that would fit people of 
almost every degree. It had what the 
recherche " Wally Pepys," a gentleman whom 
we shall know better presently, called a " hall- 
chair " in front . one of those spider-legged 
porches projecting out forward, which yet 
impart an air of grandeur. It had belonged 
to the Penguin family, who had fitted it with 



LADY MARGARET ''RECEIVES.' 191 

2:reat mao^nificence. and then had been un- 
fortunately compelled to fly their country. 

Lady Margaret was now established there, 
and Lady Margaret's servants, tall and 
powdered, glided about the stairs, hung 
about the hall, their hands in their plush 
pockets. Lady Margaret's carriage . 

a full-bodied vehicle, rich, swaying, and 
rocking . a good deal enhonpoint like some 
of the dowagers at her ladyship's own 
parties (we again quote Mr. Pepys) . was 
always drawn up between two and three 
o'clock in front of the hall-chair. Enormous 
horse's drew that noble vehicle and its freight 
daily to the Park, where the great Lady 
Margaret herself and the delicate figure 
beside her . a smiling face of enjoyment, 
but already trained . were exhibited to the 
admiring crowd. When that great argosy, 
with its mariners of fashion was abroad, com- 
pelled to stop by reason of having got among 
shoals and breakers, many graceful spectators 
on the shore . at the rails . sent them signals 



192 DIANA GAY. 

of simpering recognitionj and many a hat 
was raised. Lady Margaret's protegee was 
now well known and admired. She was con- 
sidered charming, as indeed who would not 
be, who combined such extraordinary advan- 
tages . youth, beauty, simplicity, wealth, 
broad acres, and singleness ? Here was a 
prize for the youths of good address and suit- 
able connections, who indeed presently began 
to cluster thickly about the noble lady, who 
performed the duty of being Diana's mamma. 
She herself too . erst considered rather a 
good "Mother Hubbard" style of woman, 
but with nothing to recommend her . found 
herself of a sudden raised to a high social 
pinnacle, and treated with a respectful 
homage, an even tender solicitude . such as 
getting cloaks, taken out to carriage, &c. 
. ^which that good lady, who was no 
fool, set down to its proper motives. It 
made no difference to her ; she found her 
account. 

A new life, indeed, for our Diana. As we 



LADY MARGAEET *' RECEIVES.'* 193 

look at our Morning Flush . brief and ab- 
stract cbronicle of the fashionable world . 
we see their names recurring very often. At 
*' Lady Griggs' The Dansant " we read were 
*'Lady Margaret Bowman and Miss Gay." 
In the course of the night crowd up the 
young men of the period . the young and 
Hon. Mr. Longtail, Lord Monboddo's eldest; 
young Cublin, of the Eoyal Guards ; a Sir 
Charles, only twenty-one, a baronet, M.P., 
seven thousand a-year, and no mamma ; Mr. 
Talboys, the rising statesman, young also, 
who " had made a speech, my dear, and who. 
Bowman says, will be Under-Secretary one of 
these days" (a vast number of promotions 
are made at that undefined period) ; and 
also Canning Bowman, who was very assi- 
duous in his attendance. 

With such homage, it may be conceived 
our Diana began to see life very differently. 
She very soon picked up the true air, com- 
bining it, however, with a little faint rusticity 
which was very pleasing. Madame Cerise 
II. 



194 DIANA GAY. 

contributed and decked lier out ricUy and 
sumptuously. 

Among tlie crowd, too, tliat moved round 
her was an old friend, Mr. Richard Lugard, 
M.P., who was living in town, having pro- 
cured absence from his regiment to attend 
Parliament, which had just met. There were 
one or two other petitions of a heavy sort to 
be disposed of, and much business passing, 
so the Calthorpe Committee was not yet 
appointed. Eichard spoke contemptuously 
of it. " He'll fight shy of it at the last 
minute. It's a shabby, pettifogging business, 
and like our friend Bob. I met him fairly 
in open battle, and beat him fairly. I think 
it so characteristic of him to set the at- 
torneys to work and try and beat me that 
way." 

Often, however, did Diana think of the 
barrister, whom she had never seen since she 
left Calthorpe. But she had not time to re- 
flect. She was also often observed about 
twelve o'clock on a charming horse . not at 



LADY MAEGAEET '* RECEIVES." 195 

all like the fatal D' Or say . cantering along 
tlie soft course with the vulgar name . a 
name indeed worthy of the best Paris slang. 
This would be after some severe night's 
work; and by her side was the gentleman 
who chose the horse, and indeed presented 
it to her, Mr. Hichard Lugard, M.P., grown 
more handsome, and a little wilder in the 
eyes. Eichard was constantly at Portman 
Square, and indeed everywhere ; for with a 
young man, otherwise welcome, and under 
no disability, those two letters are about the 
best passports that can be conceived. He 
was indeed married, mais cela n^empeche jpas. 
JSTow, it is no signal for paying-off a ship's 
company, or retiring into a hospital ; rather, 
it is a fresh enlistment . an entry on a new 
campaign, with richer and more lavish 
resources. Mrs. Eichard Lugard was down 
somewhere in the country . no one, indeed, 
was curious where. Walpole Pepys . "Wally 
Pepys " . that curious meddling, ever-buzzing 
fly on society, who resented the slightest 

2 



196 DIANA GAY. 

merit in another man . even that of comings 
into a room better than he did . was soon 
telling about that Lugard's wife '' was an 
iron woman, born in a forge, under a boiler 
somewhere. She couldn't be shown in town, 
my dear fellow; she is all over rivets.'' This 
poor wit was laughed at immensely by the 
young ladies, with whom Mr. Pepys was a 
favourite ; but it only excited fresh interest 
in Eichard, an interest not unalloyed with 
pity, as for a gentleman sacrificed, thrown 
away, and what not. 

His kindness and attention to Diana was 
soon remarked, and her foolish little head 
was greatly flattered and delighted by these 
attentions. With a young married man there 
is all the security of a chaperon, none of the 
responsibihty of the bachelor. 

These were charming times for her : she 
lived in a whirl ; she delighted in everything 
. . the ball, the drive, the dance, the play, the 
opera. The valse was a new realm, opening 
slowly and displaying a thousand joys. Many 



LADY MAEGAKET "RECEIVES. 197 

eyes followed that fairy figure as it flew 
round at Lady Mountattic's rout, at Sir 
Thomas Longarter's, and many more. With 
Wally Pepys she was an especial favourite. 
After many a dinner . and Wally never 
dined at home . he was over by her side, 
doing a sort of elderly gallantry, talking 
some of that unmeaning and dilapidated 
French, which seems so inferior as a mode of 
expression to really good English. There are 
many of these veterans who thus delight in 
this needless airing of a foreign tongue, and 
think it a token of elegant accomplishment. 
Another of these pseudo-linguists who 
hobbled round Diana's chair, was old Parish, 
a retired colonel with money, and whom the 
amiable little lady could not find it m her 
heart to snub. Perhaps she looked on these 
old bits of wreck floating about drawing- 
rooms and ball-rooms, as having but a short 
time before them, when they would break up 
and sink to the bottom ; or that indeed they 
were socially under sentence of death, and 



198 DIANA GAY. 

sliould liave their last few hours of life made 
easy and comfortable. However that was, 
these ancient voices, when Diana would 
draw back her chair, would be heard utter- 
ing, '^ Redder pour sauter onieux, ha ? hey ? " 
or something equally pointless. 

We can see Diana better in her new life 
on a Thursday night, when Lady Margaret 
Bowman (and Mr. Bowman) has asked some 
twenty people to a "state-dinner;" and 
when the drawing-room is filling with a 
genteel crowd, the door opening every 
moment to allow some one to shout, and 
two or three people to enter at full speed, or 
with a rush, or in a faltering, nervous way, 
undecided, as it were, whether they should 
turn and fly. In the half light, very differ- 
ent from the glorious effulgence which will 
blaze out in a couple of hours hence, we see 
all the figures and faces, and Diana herself 
in a matchless robe, with great aplomh, 
acquired in her short training, grown a 
little fatter, which every one said was just 



LADY MARGARET "RECEIVES." 199 

what she wanted, going over at the right 
moment to take possession of a neglected 
dowager. 

Mr. Bowman has a card concealed in his 
hand, by which to assort his men and 
women ; for Lady Margaret said she '' would 
not trust Bowman the length of his nose." 
Yet with this assistance he is near making 
some sad mistakes. At the last even, he 
has not assorted all, and is looking a little 
wildly for some one. 

It is a great procession. The Bowmans 
have always good people : Brindley the 
Bishop, and Mrs. Brindley ; General M'Cur- 
die, of the northern district ; Hutton Knatch- 
bull, " the Financial Member," and Director 
of the Bank of England; Wally Pepys; 
Captain Hogg ; Captain Lugard, M.P. ; 
young Lord Patmore, and a few more rank 
and file ; the " young man of the period," 
the pawns of dinner-parties, who make a 
good show on the board. What a glistening, 
what a rustle as they go down ! What alacrity 



200 DIANA GAY. 

of conversation equals that on the stairs ? 
born clearly of a sudden elation after the 
long delay, the hope deferred. We may 
admire the human mind for the gift of what 
maybe called "stair-talk." Some men get 
afraid ; and the youth dragged hurriedly but 
a second before to a girl whom he never 
saw, whose arm is forced into his, may be 
pardoned if he find it a little difficult to 
invent what is appropriate to the balusters. 

Lady Margaret always looks glistening 
with pride and triumph as she sees her 
guests triumphantly seated about her^ . 
her table, her servants, her gold and silver, 
her state, her meats, her wines. The guests 
seem to feel no obligation, and disdain any 
worship. 

One of Wally Pepys' "good things," said 
over a cigar, and which, strange to say, did 
not offend any one, was this : " Very odd . I 
never feel the same to a man after I have 
dined with him." This ungracious philo- 
sophy was quite characteristic of Mr. Pepys, 



LADY MARGAEET "RECEIVES." 201 

yet whose life was indeed one long dinner- 
party. 

Diana had fallen to tlie bow and spear of 
the young Lord Patmore, a youth in the 
Royal Horse Guards, not more than two- 
and-twenty, endowed with every virtue and 
generous qualification which in the eyes ot 
a London matron could make him deserving 
of salvation here, or hereafter. The salva- 
tion here was through the saving grace of 
one of her daughters ; that more trifling one 
of hereafter would follow in due course, and 
indeed was scarcely her business. A lovely 
estate, two castles, fifteen thousand a year, a 
minority that began " seventeen years ago, 
my dear;" and no female relation in the 
way; whose control is so necessary for the 
direction of girls, but so absurd and ridi- 
culous in the instance of males. Could there 
be conceived a more engaging or gifted 
specimen of a young man; or one more 
suited to the pleasing fetters of the married 
state ? 



202 DIANA GAY. 

Such a treasure Lady Margaret was not 
long in marking down for her 'protegee ; and 
though she really intended that her son Can- 
ning should have the little prize, still the 
professional instinct of the matron, and the 
keener instinct of competition with rival 
matrons, made her strive hard to secure this 
young nobleman. Where imrtis find other 
partis at a house, it induces a sense of decent 
humility; whereas a single parti, according 
to the familiar phrase a "cock of the walk," is 
apt to become overset, arrogant, and worth- 
less for matronly purposes. Competition, in 
a word, is the life, not merely of trade, but 
of life itself. 

Thus it was that Lord Patmore took down 
our Diana. The diDlomatic Cannino: con- 
trived, however, to have all the benefit of 
that mysterious prandial connection without 
its responsibilities, through going down by 
himself, and in a sort of privateering way 
getting round to a place near her. The 
young lord was a very quaint specimen. 



LADY MARGARET "RECEIVES." 203 

Had he been in a plebeian marcliing regi- 
ment, lie would have furnislied diversion to 
tlie monotonous idleness of the corps. His 
glass was always screwed into bis eye ; and it 
was certainly unfortunate that so serious a 
physical defect should so often coexist with 
a no less embarrassing mental obtuseness. 
Thus the young lord was always " peering" 
and stooping forward to see his way with 
both mind and body; and though he was 
successful with the latter, he too often 
failed in the former. 

Diana was infinitely amused with him. 
She had no matronly ideas. The glorious 
golden gates of Hymen glittered afar off at 
the top of the mountain ; in sight, certainly, 
but with whole valleys and gardens between. 
She welcomed all, and never dreamed of 
" business." 

" Did you hear the news ? " he said, after 
a long silence, during which the diplomatic 
Canning had been chattering on privately to 
Diana, who had always the greatest respect 



204 DIANA GAY. 

for his gifts. '^ A detachment of us are or- 
dered down to Windsor ; all of a sudden, 
you know ! You never heard of such ex- 
citement. The Duke changed his mind ; and 
at the barracks we never dreamed of it." 

At this revelation Diana smiled. She had 
grown a little out of the old devotion with 
which she used to receive statements which 
those who made them thought all-important. 
It seemed droll. She had had some training, 
and was beginning to open her pretty eyes 
to the absurdities in the world around her. 
The youth admired her a good deal, and was 
nearly, what his military brethren called in 
their elegant dialect, " spooney upon her." 
There was then a pause. 

" Are you going to see .the new opera . 
the what's-his-name . at Covent Garden ? " 
he asked suddenly, as if inspired. 

" yes," said Diana, eagerly; " to-morrow 
night." 

'' I hope to go too," he said, '' only it's so 
hard to get a place. Docksey offered three 



LADY MARGARET "RECEIVES." 205 

guineas for a stall yesterday; lie did, in- 
deed." 

" And wlio is Docksey ?" Diana asked, not 
a little amused. 

" Lord ! don't you know Docksey ? 
He's captain in our troop. His father allows 
him two thousand a year ; and you never saw 
such a black charger as he has got. Gave 
five hundred for him ! " 

This impressed Diana, as indeed did any 
statement of great price, size, numbers, &c. 
Then Mr. Canning Bowman struck in on the 
other side, and the young Lord Patmore was 
left to screw his glass into his eye, and peer 
at any one round the table, as if it had 
grown dark of a sudden. 

How curious, how miscellaneous the 
chatter on occasions, save for those " left 
out in the cold," as it were; the men who 
had come down ignominiously by themselves, 
and with a loathing for each other. "We 
hear the bishop's mellifluous voice, never 
at rest ; a holy man, gifted with a surprising 



206 DIANA GAT. 

duality of nature ; able to keep a wary eye 
on the tenderest dislies, and to talk across 
tlie table, and carry on an uninterrupted 
monologue. Clatter, clatter ; bursts of 
laughter down at the end. Now we hear 
Mr. Manby, a well-known counsel, who is 
opposite the bishop, and who is very amus- 
ing; a mouldy, weak-eyed barrister, who 
lives in his chambers as in a family, and 
likes it ; but a man who has the odd notion 
that to be wearing out health, senses, enjoy- 
ment, life itself, to become something at 
sixty-five or seventy, when health, senses, 
enjoyment, and nearly life itself, are gone, 
is a foolish thing; which, indeed, it is no 
doubt discovered to be, about that time, by 
many then successful, though they do not 
own it. 

" Talking of that," said the bishop, 
ajQTOjQOS of something, " I was at an evening 
sitting, waiting for that Lord Dolby, who 
had something on about his hobby, you 
know . the marriage-service, which he wants 



LADY MAEGAEET " EECEIVES." 207 

to be altered . ^when I heard a speech from 
one of your people. Really, quite a sensa- 
tion it produced; the Chancellor told me, 
going out, he never heard a more exhaustive 
argument from so young a man." 

*' My dear lord, that was a great case ; 
it involves all the ' freemen ' question, and 
may affect many an election." 

" Exactly. Such eloquence, you know . 
as the Chancellor said, taken by surprise, 
for he called on him to go on." 

Tor these things Lady Margaret cared 
no more than she did for the quadrature 
of the circle, and perhaps understood them 
as much ; but qua lady of fashion, hostess, 
&c., she was bound to take oflScial notice. 
It was astonishing ; so curious. And who 
was this ? 

Mr. Manby said it was a rising junior, 
as sound a fellow as they had . Robert 
Bligh. 

Diana eagerly : ^^ 0, we know him well ! 
0, he is so clever ; and always was. 0, I 



208 DIANA GAY. 

am so glad ! You remember Robert ? " 
site added, turning to Lugard. 

" I should think so/' he said, smiling ; 
" he put a good deal of money out of my 
pocket, and, I must say, out of his own." 

''0 yes," said Mr. Manby; "he fought 
a very plucky battle down there. But he is 
sure to do, that man ; one of our safest 
juniors." 

Diana was quite excited by these public 
commendations, and asked Mr. Manby many 
eager questions about her friend, to that 
gentleman's amusement. 

"I know," he said, "Bligh could have 
had an Indian judgeship the other day, and 
a hint was given him to that effect. And 
his friends told me he was rather dejected," 
added Mr. Manby, dropping his voice, " about 
some love affair, I think. But of com'se 
that was absurd ; he was more likely to have 
a hopeless passion for a contingent remainder 
or an unexpired term. 'No, he was disgusted 
at missing his chance at that little borough."* 



LADY MAEGAEET " EECEIVES." 209 

" I know it," said Diana, eagerly ; "we 
were there at tlie time. It was so exciting : 
we were all in it. It was so amusing, and 
I was so sorry for poor Robert Bligli." 

'' 0, you were there. Miss Gay ? " said 
the lawyer, with an amused look. He saw 
a spectral witness-box round Diana's chair ; 
and had he been allowed to cross-examine 
on the spot, might have extracted somo 
curious admissions. Lugard, half suspicious, 
and only catching part of what was said, had 
assumed his scornful look. 

Lugard was eager to talk of that subject 
which is dearest to every man . himself. He 
was full of a great event that was coming 
on. He had been longing to begin his 
career as a Parliamentary combatant. His 
father, now a little gouty, had written to 
him testily, " For God's sake do something, 
after all the money that has been spent; " 
and he had determined to make a bold 
plunge, not in a modest speech on some 
subject, but in " a regular motion." He 
II. p 



210 DIANA GAY. 

had anxiously tliouglit of a subject ; a little 
different from the habit of mere practical 
men who speak because they have a subject ; 
whereas he was looking for a subject in 
order that he might speak. This idea had 
quite possessed him. The diflS.culty was to 
procure a dramatic one, where there would 
be a good ''part" for Mr. Lugard to play. 
He had at last found one. He poured it all 
out to Diana. 

" It's the soldiers' wives/' he said ; " it is 
shocking the way they are treated . no 
comforts, no anything. The soldiers are 
hindered from choosing good ones, and it's 
a tax on marriage, you know. I am going 
to move for a committee to inquire into the 
whole question." 

Diana listened with wonder and reve- 
rence. How awful, hpw wonderful this 
seemed ! 

" Yes," he went on ; " you know it comes 
from me quite properly . a soldier myself, 
and having hved all my life among soldiers. 



211 



These poor women ! you can have no idea 
how they suffer ; the discomforts, the squalor, 
their wretched children . and we not allowed 
to recognise them. 0, it is shocking." 

So it seemed to Diana, who was quite 
touched by this new-born sympathy and 
humanity in the brave Lugard, who had 
really warmed himself up, by dwelling on the 
condition of these unhappy camp-followers, 
rehearsing to himself " fine " passages on 
their state, with which he was to affect the 
House. Had some of his brethren been 
present, they would have been infinitely 
amused, and have " chaffed " him unmerci- 
fally ; for he had been the one in the regi- 
ment who was down on the " dirty sluttish 
creatures " who draggled after it, or who 
was in a rage if any of his men dared to 
form an alHance of the kind. Eichard never 
thought of this, but expounded to Diana 
how he would deal with the subject, and 
even recited choice passages to her. It was 
to come on the next night, and she must 

p 2 



212 DTAXA GAY. 

come to the ladies' gallery. "I will take 
you in myself." 

Diana was delighted ; anything like an ex- 
pedition was welcome always ; and it was 
presently settled that Mr. Lugard should 
come and call for them at a dinner-party 
where they were going on the following 
evening. 

When the ladies were gone up, the subject 
was renewed. Bligh was of the barrister's 
own profession, and the subject was interest- 
ing to him. 

" I assure you," Mr. Manby said, *'it was 
a most remarkable argument. Begbie, who 
was on the other side, and in every appeal 
before the House, said he was perfectly 
;astonished. You know we have our conven- 
tional and theatrical successes ; a young fel- 
low does fairly and the Bench compliments 
him, but this was another order of business 
altogether. A veteran could not have done 
it better." 

'.'0, I was struck by it myself," said the 



LADY MARGAEET '' EECEIVES." 213 

bishop, '' thougli I only lieard a bit, and I 
asked tlie Chancellor, whom I know, and lie 
told me." 

" I know him very well," said Lugard, wlio 
bad listened impatiently ; " have known liim 
from a boy. A very laborious working mind, 
and all that, but genius . 0, no ; dear, no ! 
Industry, yes. I don't want to depreciate 
him, of course, and I dare say he does his 
business very well." 

'' But nowadays, you see," said the bar- 
rister, '' work is genius. There are so many 
in the field, and so much false wit, Dutch, 
metal, and all that, and so few able to judge, 
that we must go back to the original element 
of value, which is labour." 

" 0, if you do that," said Lugard, with a- 
loud laugh, "better have in Hodge the- 
ploughman, or the paviour out of Fleet Street 
who works his dozen hours a day." 

The barrister answered quietly, 

" He is working like a navvy at this peti- 
tion ; it is only fair to warn you, Mr. Lugard. 



214 DIANA GAY. 

Sloper leads for Mm, and lie won't lake up 
anything that's not tolerably safe . or is sure 
to make it safe." 

The bishop had risen, growing rather tired 
*' of this sort of thing," and had glided up 
to what he called paradise. The gentlemen 
followed in a sort of skirmishing order, hang- 
ing behind each other, and very noisy. 
When they had got upstairs, they found that 
Lady Margaret was receiving. And indeed the 
dining party soon got "blocked" with the 
force that was advancing from the hall, scal- 
ing the glacis in good order, with neat and 
shining accoutrements, and excellent disci- 
pline. The contrast is strange between the 
flushed diners who are at the end of their 
service, and the calm and unruffled fresh 
soldiers who are hurrying on to the fray. 

Yes, Lady Margaret Bowman was " receiv- 
ing," as such of us as had not the good for- 
tune to know her ladyship might learn from 
that faithful and accurate chronicle, the 
Morning Pkish, in a list of company that must 



LADY MAEGAEET "RECEIVES." 215 

have read agonisingly to tlie parvenu, . tliose 
splendid ranks passing before liim, a Pro- 
mised Land into which he durst not enter. 
This golden river, however, made but " a 
loop," as it were, at Lady Margaret's house, 
and after ascending slowly to the high level 
of the drawing-room, trickled down as slowly 
and flowed on to various table-lands. 

It was surprising all the fine people Lady 
Margaret got together, and really without 
difficulty or exertion. A duke, marquises, all 
the " best " and the right people ; Foosha 
Pasha even, who seldom went anywhere; 
Baron Brenner and Madame Brenner, and 
that Christine Brenner of whom Diana had 
been hearing so much. The curious thing 
that surprised her not a little was the slight 
intimacy that, after all, appeared to exist 
between that foreign family and the diploma- 
tist ; which seemed a little strange after the 
rose-coloured picture of Lady Margaret, the 
exuberant intimacy, that " running in and 
out fifty times in the day," which seemed 



216 DIAXA GAT. 

to go on always. On the contrary, Diana 
saw Mr. Canning approach, a short little wiry 
man . diy as one of the queer esculents called 
"locusts" . who wore glasses, with evident 
trepidation and obsequiousness, by whom he 
was received with a polite but distant smile. 
To that Christine, whose slave he was, or who 
was reported by Lady Margaret as being his 
slave . a tall, full-faced, far-haired, German- 
looking girl, who indeed scarcely seemed the 
daughter of the wiry little man . he was even 
more obsequious, that young lady receiving 
him with curt, off-hand manner, being busily 
engaged with the handsome Colonel Good- 
fellow, Lord Bunham's brother, in the Guards, 
on the staff, Victoria- crossed. Legion- of-hon- 
oured, hung all over with labels and ribbons, 
as Wally Pepys said, '* like a prize-ox at a 
show." 

Diana's spirits always rose on these nights. 
She was dehghted with anything hke a pro- 
cession or a raree-shovN', with the flitting co- 
lours, the dazzhng lights, the pleasant voices. 



LADY :iIAEGAET *' KECEIYES." 



If you looked at her across tlie room, she 
would smile at you from mere enjoyment. 
Here was Lord Patmore again beside her, 
"taking her up and down," whispering his 
fadaises, . ''that goose Patmore,'' as various 
gentlemen rather pettishly described him. 

This Youncr nobleman's admiration was 
indeed getting rather marked, though he 
could not find any way of showing it. His 
stock of reserved and delicate compliments 
failing him very soon, her dress was a happy 
resource ; and with an earnest and marked 
air he repeated the same praises very often. 

The one who said " that goose Patmore " 
oftenest was Eichard Lugard, who was very 
scornfril to his friends. 

'.' Just look at that donkey," he said ; 
" the way he sticks to that poor girl ! She 
can't get rid of him. I wonder who he got 
to trim his ears close ? It's most imfair to 
a young creature like that, in her own house 
. not able to attend to her oruests or amuse 
herself without a public idiot going with her 



218 DIANA GAT. 

like lier shadow. I sliut liim up at dinner, 
and you never saw any one so scared as lie 
was." 

We should also have heard other gentle- 
men speaking of Mr. Lugard. " Ill-condi- 
tioned fellow ; overbearing ; wants taking 
down a peg. Always bragging about the 
House and his rubbishy little M.P.-ship. 
The best of the joke is, they say, there's a 
petition against him, and that he hasn't a 
chance ; and how will he look then ? " 

Such is the world; so everybody " tears " 
everybody. But the comfort is, that with 
all this scandal little harm is done; these 
are the "bills" with which the pleasant 
credit of society is kept floating, and luckily 
no one requires them to be taken up. 

So that evening finished, and we read the 
whole list the next morning. It seemed to 
glitter like a harlequin's suit in the light. 
Lady Margaret would receive again the 
following week. 

Indeed, Diana's life was now a busy 



LADY MAEGARET " EECEIVES." 219 

one, for on tlie following night slie was 
abroad again, and also on almost every 
evening of the week. She had fallen into 
the round of what is called pleasure, but 
which indeed has its fatigues and monotony. 
A young lady in the season goes through a 
discipline severer and more useful than 
would be imagined. That drill and drudgery 
of fashion quite fills in her time, and causes 
a strict economy of every moment to get 
through the work. What with the invita- 
tions to give and to answer, the visits to 
pay and to receive, the rides to take, the 
drives to make . necessary, indeed, to freshen 
up the delicate soldier for the long night's 
work before her . the concerts, the operas, 
the drums, the balls, the dinners at home, 
the dinners abroad, the choosing of dresses 
at Madame Cerise's, the pictures, the hun- 
dred and one things to be got through, . 
this was a very busy time for Diana. "Not 
that she was without assistance; and the 
business mind of Lady Margaret did much 



220 DIANA GAY. 

in the way of organisation. But under the 
process, our Diana's little soul was growing 
steady, calmer, more self-reliant and inde- 
pendent. She began to know, to feel her 
responsibilities, and to have that fitting 
sense of her own importance as a young 
and pretty heiress, and the duties and bear- 
ing which such a character involved. 

Thus it was that on the following evening, 
at eight o'clock, Lady Margaret's great 
Indiaman of a coach stood at the door, 
closed on this occasion, and rocking heavily 
with every motion of the great horses, to 
take the three away to the routine dinner. 
Indeed, the party dined at home about 
twice in the week, and we may be sure 
that the '' auditing " of the invitation ac- 
counts . the '' keeping the books," as it 
might be called . was a very serious and 
troublesome business. Lady Margaret, who 
had indeed the soul of a general, the prompt- 
ness of a Wellington, settled the thing in 
a second. As the invitations were opened : 



LADY MARGAEET " EECEIVES. 221 

" Lady Pender again ! What on earth is 
the woman at ? Third time we have re- 
fused them. Nothing but mouldy married 
barristers all round you." 

Or it might be . "Mr. and Mrs. Arthur 
Malcolm request the honour," &c. 

"0, we must go to them . charming 
things ; a little bit of a house, pet, and five 
hundred a year ; but just a dozen of the 
nicest people you could pick out. Every- 
thing in best style. Write, dear, at once." 

" But we are engaged that day . " 

" To old Sir Richard, one of his foozle 
parties, an old friend of Bowman's. I'll 
send to him this evening at the club, and 
tell him it was a mistake." 

Diana was not at all shocked at this little 
bit of morality. She believed Lady Margaret 
knew all about these things so much better 
then slie did ; and these things are dwelt on 
here, perhaps, more minutely than they de- 
serve, with a view of illustrating this young 
lady's character, and showing the very na- 



222 DIANA GAY. 

tural cliange wliicli was taking place in lier 
nature. 

A way rolled tlie lieavj argosy . a good 
solid casket for the ricL. and delicate little 
piece of jewelry within. 

It stopped at " The Fanshawes' " (Major- 
General), people whom Lady Margaret did 
not care much for, but she had ascertained 
that young Lord Patmore was to be there. 
Indeed, she had found that little or nothing 
could be done for Canning, that gentleman 
having diplomatic tact enough to see that 
he was not, as it is called, making way 
with the young lady. And Diana herself, 
when Lady Margaret's hints had at last 
grown unmistakable, all but told her, with 
pleasant frankness, that she considered Mr. 
Canning as her brother or father. So Lady 
Margaret determined to leave all to that 
wonderful necromancer . time. In the mean- 
while she found her account in this patron- 
age of the young girl ; as what elderly lady 
fond of position and of gaiety, without 



LADY MAEGAEET " EECEIVES. 223 

daughters of her own, does not ? A sensible 
person, not foolish enough to think the 
homage is directed to herself, she improves the 
shining hour, takes everything as it comes, 
and enjoys the various fashionable bless- 
ings thrown in her way. Indeed, there seems 
nothing more pleasant than an office of this 
sort, which is more agreeable than the weary 
responsibility of the mamma. The mamma 
is unavoidable, she cannot help herself ; but 
the patroness is the object of innumerable 
little attentions, a dehcate and kindly con- 
sideration, of a wrapping-up that is almost 
tender on the part of the young cavaliers 
of her train. And while Diana was taken 
down to the carriage and wrapped in her 
gipsy cloak by one young spark of position 
and quality, another was no less kindly en- 
shawling the greater proportions of Lady 
Margaret . a business of more difficulty, and 
taking longer time. A third was gone to 
see about the carriage ; and when all was 
ready, and the great vehicle was moored 



224 DIANA GAY. 

alongside, tlien emerged tlie procession. 
Ladj Margaret, wrapped close, assisted 
down tlie steps by two obsequious youtbs, 
guiding ber steps witb ''lean on me, Lady- 
Margaret ; " Diana coming bebind witb a 
wbole cobort about ber. It migbt be rain- 
ing, but tbe politeness of tbese young 
Adonises was proof against that. Your 
true gentleman, in tbe service of tbe helle 
dame . wben does be care for rain, wind, 
or even sleet? 



( 225 ) 



CHAPTER YIII. 



A ROUND or GAIETIES. 



Here then was the Fansliawes' house, a 
modest mansion in a rather shabby street, 
where the great carriage came rolHng -ap, 
and its horses were checked suddenly with 
a plunge, a banging of steps let down, and 
the two ladies had passed into the house 
between a lane of passers-by, Mr. Bowman 
following as though he were a little ashamed 
of himself. The company here again was of 
the usual pattern, but what Lady Margaret 
called " nice " . a Mrs. Childers, who " led,'"' 
Lady Mary Vivian, and the duke her father, 
whom she had often wished to know ; some 
" nice " young men, young Lord Patmore, a 
distinguished colonel of good family, and 
II. Q 



226 DIANA GAY. 

some more. When the new-comers were 
settled, and the young lord had "poked 
and peered" his way over to Diana, and had 
begun conversation with the remark, *^ I saw 
yon to-day in Eegent Street ; I was at the 
door of my bootmaker's," a gentleman, a 
good deal in shadow, and who had been 
talking to another gentleman, stooped down, 
and said gravely, 

^' How do you do. Miss Gay ? " 
Diana half started from her seat with 
delight. 

" What ! 0, Eobert, I am so glad ! Wliere 
Tiave you been ? " 

He answered in the same grave way, 
" Here in town, in the old chambers." 
" But you have never come to us, though 
we have asked you again and again. We 
thought it so unkind." 

" I am really so busy now," he said ; "be- 
sides, I have given up all that sort of thing. ^^ 
ISTow came dinner. The General, an old 
man with a young wife, knew how to 



A EOUND OF GAIETIES. 227 

^' assort Ids company ; " and tliougli tlie 
young Lord Patmore had, by the inflexible 
law, taken down Mrs. Fansliawe, that lady 
had discovered in herself an overpowering 
afiection for Diana, who must sit near her; 
and having brought her and the young lord 
into conjunction, at once abandoned that 
nobleman, and devoted herself to a gentle- 
man on the other side, who was another 
lady's property. 

Taking a glance round her, Diana saw 
that Eobert Bhgh was beside a young lady 
whose face was familiar to her, whom she 
had seen during the election days walking 
about Calthorpe. She remembered Miss 
BuUer. Mrs. Fanshawe had also judi- 
ciously cast this pair together. To her, as 
Diana noticed, Eobert was earnestly telling 
his story. His eyes scarcely ever turned to 
her. She knew him well enough to be sure 
that he would not take the trouble of acting, 
and sometimes when his eyes met hers, she 
saw that it was with a placid indifference. 

q2 



228 DIANA GAY. 

The well-trained Eobert, so practical in all 
things, had no doubt carried out strictly 
what he had told her he would do, and had 
succeeded in so doing. The old fires had 
gone out for ever. When the lovers in 
dramas and romances passionately protest 
that " they have torn her image from their 
heart " with a demeanour and protestation 
that seem like insanity, no one knows so 
well as the image herself that nothing of the 
kind has been done, and that, on the con- 
trary, the image has been more deeply 
rooted than ever. It is the indifference 
quite removed from resentment that brings 
conviction of the most fatal sort. Diana 
was deeply pained at this, perhaps from a 
little pride, to say nothing of other feel- 
ings. But at present the noble lord found 
his account in this change, and to his sur- 
prise discovered that his sallies were being 
received with a zest and devotion really 
unusual. Compliments even repaid his exer- 
tions, and the young lord, who had always a 



A TtOUXD OF GAIETIES. 229 

half-suspicion that Diana was laughing at 
him, now, on that night, came to the reso- 
lution that he would no longer delay in 
brinmer matters to a crisis. 

By-and-by Bhgh began to speak, not for 
his neighbour, but for the company, and 
Diana wondered at the new pleasantry and 
sense which came from his lips. He ''led" 
the conversation ; he had got rid of the '' old 
Bligh" indeed, and had turned into a man 
of the world. Diana was amazed. The 
retiring manner was all gone. He was of 
the world, worldly, and could talk fashion 
and frivolity with an airy grace. 

When the dinner was over, and '' the 
gentlemen had come up," he went over to 
Diana and spoke to her kindly and easily. 
He was so glad to hear she was quite taking 
a leading part in the pleasant world. He 
saw her name in the Morning Plush regu- 
larly. He admired the wisdom of Lady 
Margaret, he said, who he always thought 
had good sense. 



230 DIANA GAY. 

" If we do live in tlie world at all, wliy, it 
is as well to follow the stream. And how is 
my friend, or enemy, Eichard Lugard ? " 

Diana was greatly piqued at liis tone, even 
hurt. Still, she made an advance, and said 
again, 

" You have never called on us . never 
have come to see us." 

" 0, you know I am so busy," said Bligh, 
gravely. " I just get out now and again to 
a dinner, in this sort of way. It helps one 
on, too, so much, which is the great aim. 

But I certainly shall . I suppose I 

sha'n't meet Lugard, who was never in the 
best temper towards me, and I fear won't be 
in a week or two." 

" Why ? " 

*' 0, this election petition ; they tell me he 
must go. But it doesn't do to reckon on 
anything too surely. I myself thought I 
was quite secure of winning, and if I was a 
betting person, would have laid twenty to 
one." 



A EOUND OP GAIETIES. 231 

" Indeed, indeed, I often wished to speak 
to yon abont tliat, and tell yon how grieved I 
was, how bitterly I have regretted what I 
did ; for I know it seemed nnkind." 

" My dear Miss Gay, unkind ! No, nothing 
of the sort; and do you suppose I think 
so ? Pray don't. I own, in the annoyance 
f disappointment, I did speak a little ex- 
citedly, and I often thought of coming to 
you to explain that. But the idea that you 
should have had a moment's uneasiness, or 
even thought, about that ! J^o, you must 
think that if things turn out fairly, all will 
be the better for me in the end, because I 
shall be established without lying under 
any very heavy obligation to any one." 

Diana did not answer for a moment, then 
said abruptly, 

''How is Mrs. Bligh?" 

" She is away in France . at Boulogne ; 
she has been there some weeks. By the 
way," added Bligh, his manner suddenly 
changing, " I want to give you a little hint 



232 DIANA GAY. 

. advice even. May I ? It is for your 
good, recollect." 

^' Do anything," said Diana, warmly. 

'' I fear," lie went on, " that my mother 
lias taken a dislike . a prejudice, at least . 
against you. It is very excusable in he7\ 
She thinks I am the finest and cleverest of 
men. There are plenty of such delusions in 
the world ; they are very pardonable. But 
still I fear that this idea has taken hold of 
her mind ; so you must not mind if you 
should hear that she has not spoken kindly 
of you." 

'' Yes," said Diana, timorously, '' I know 
it ; and she told me as much. But," added 
she, with dignity, ''Mrs. Bligh cannot harm 
me, I think." 

'' I am sure she would harm no one," he 
said ; '' and not you, certainly. By the way, 
about Lugard. I am told he is to make a 
motion in the House ; at least, he has been 
telling it to every one." 

" 0, yes ! " said Diana. '' And, by 



A BOUND OF GAIETIES. 233 

tte way, I had forgotten . he is to call for 
us." 

But just at that moment a servant entered 
and whispered Lady Margaret, who rose to 
go with infinite regret and sorrow. 

*' Di, dear," she said later, '' between you 
and me. I was not at all sorrv to o-et off. 
I think their parties are going off a little. 
Well, dear, how did Patmore do to-night?" 

Lugard was below, not a little excited. 
The great, awful, and sepulchral carriage, 
with its lamps flashing, was drawn up. 
Again it swung and rocked as the ladies 
ascended. The gigantic footman stood mute- 
like at the door, then shut up his steps, and 
closed his door with a hollow thud, which it 
was scarcely fanciful to liken to the falling 
of clods of earth on the cofiin. No wonder 
Diana said that she reposed more on ^the 
cushions of that luxurious vehicle than on 
her other bed at home. 

Kichard was in a perfect flutter. He 
spoke little as they went along. 



234 DIANA GAY. 

'' Why did you not bring Kitty ? " asked 
Diana, suddenly. " Slie would liave so liked 
it." 

"Not ske/' said Eickard, bluntly; " ske 
takes little interest in wkat concerns me." 

'' 0, Eickard, indeed ske does ! I know 
it." 

"Well, I mean," ke added kastily, "ske 
would sooner be at kome over tke fire. 
Wkat does ske care about my speecking ! 
My goodness, it is getting very nervous, and 
it seems as if it was all going out of my kead. 
Here we are." 

Tkere tkey were at Westminster Hall, 
witk tke crowds kurrying in, tke lamps 
blazing. Diana took kis arm, and witk a 
fluttering keart, as tkougk ske was going to 
speak kerself, followed kim up to tke gal- 
lery. Tken came tke glittering ckamber, 
tke great arena below, witk tke flitting 
figures, tke tranquil solemnity, tke dreamy 
air, tke buzz of voices, and tke little figure 
under tke skadow of tke gallery, wko witk a 



A EOUND OF GAIETIES. 235 

faint, wiry voice seemed to be speaking, but 
to wliom no one was attending. It seemed 
an awful, a majestic spectacle to Diana . so 
grand, so imposing. 'Now she saw wliere 
was tlie dignity, tlie wisdom tliat made 
England so great. How grand, how noble 
it must be '' to be in the House of Com- 
mons ! " Lugard was infinitely pleased with 
this unconcealed admiration. Lady Margaret, 
not very comfortable in her seat, and already 
a little tired, saw only "a lot of men, my 
dear," whom, had their lot been at all cast 
in relation to her, she could have dealt with 
in the same practical way she did with her 
Bowman. 

Lugard pointed out to Diana the various 
notable chiefs. "You see that old gentle- 
man with the wiry whiskers and his arms 
folded?" 

Diana knevv^ Mm perfectly, and was de- 
lighted at seeing the veteran leader, whom 
she had often noticed riding a steady animal. 
In these days the old and skilful warrior was 



23 G DIANA GAY. 

still alive, in the flush of his popularity . the 
prophet of the " let- well- alone " system and 
*' after-me-the-deluge " policy . one of the 
most comfortable and convenient for the pro- 
fessor himself. 

Lugard, too, showed her others of no less 
note, and certainly less personal in their 
views; a cold, classical face, close in text, 
sharp, Eoman almost in outline, with much 
scorn about the mouth, an interrogative eye, 
and a restless manner . a figure, however, 
that was never very popular in the ladies' 
gallery, as being too bloodless, with too 
much of the '' dry bones " about him. They 
always turned with far more interest to what 
young Hartley called the " incorruptible sea- 
green," the strange figure of mystery, who 
sat impassive, in a torpor, like a great snake 
coiled up, but about whom there was a fas- 
cination almost as of warm blood, and a 
promise of secret power which would display 
itself presently. In this creature there was 
more of the man ; and when he spoke, there 



A EOUND OF GAIETIES. 237 

came life, and a wicked sarcasm, and an 
innocent manner, and this with a pleasant 
air of middle-aged dandyism . the eye-glass, 
the curls, the colours about his clothes, which 
were so many links between him and a draw- 
ing-room. 

But there was the tall, half-stooped j&gure, 
with the swinging arms, the large bright 
face, the lurking humour about the mouthy 
the sly glance of fun in the eye, with the 
amazing fluency, the joke . now free and 
easy, now sarcastic, and now, as it were, 
stripping off the gauzes and light trappings 
of jesting, gets into buff and harness, 
becomes sober, weighty, impressive, splen- 
didly oratorical, vehement, massive, and 
overpowering. There is an interest about 
him in the ladies' gallery, as they know 
there how his name has become identified 
with an injured one of their own order ; and 
they hang on his lips. 

Then they listen to that stout, burly, ro- 
tund gentleman, who, in fine round voice 



238 DIANA GAY. 

raised a little into a cliaunt, pours out 
weighty sentences, and denounces in good 
Englisli . scarcely eloquent, but sonorous and 
fluent . the monopolies of the rich and 
powerful. He is a little uninteresting. 

Suddenly there comes a lull . a motion has 
been withdrawn, the debate has collapsed, 
and Lugard, turning a little pale, hurriedly 
goes away. 

Diana sees him enter, looking quite a little 
figure . hears other motions called . hears 
other little figures pop up and sit down with 
excuse or withdrawal . and finally, and with 
great nervousness, hears a faint voice below 
her, and perceives that Lugard is beginning 
to move his motion. 

^'0 Lady Margaret, listen . listen . ^it's 
Eichard!" she cried out, not a little to the 
amusement of some great political ladies near 
her. 

Eichard was considered to do it " very 
fairly." A number of his friends put in " hear, 
hear," at encouraging moments, which he 



A EOUND OF GAIETIES. 239 

was too agitated not to think were tlie signal 
of universal approbation. 

Diana was not a little indignant to see tlie 
Eoman-looking gentleman talking over his 
shoulder to his friends, afterwards writing a 
letter, and then, in one of Dick's " best bits," 
get up suddenly and, putting on a broad- 
leafed hat, hurry out as if he had an appoint- 
ment. The wiry-whiskered was asleep, his 
hat well down over his eyes. The sea-green 
had an air of insensibihty, too ; but somehow 
Diana had a conviction he was not asleep, 
but was pretending to be insensible. He had 
the air that he would suddenly uncoil, and 
startle every one with a spring. A low hum 
was going on, like a taum-taum accompani- 
ment ; people darted across, flew back again, 
sat down beside others, and pulled papers out 
of their breast-pockets to show. The class 
with whom Diana was most scornfully indig- 
nant was that of various good-looking young 
men with beards, who would come up into 
the galleries, running round, as Diana 



240 DIANA GAY. 

tliouglit, to secure a better 'vantage-point for 
listening to her friend ; but wlio, as it turned 
out, would choose a retired sofa, and lying 
down at full length would go off into balmy 
slumbers. 

Richard really did his work very fairly 
indeed, with a spirit and dash which carried 
off a good many shortcomings. He set the 
case of the soldiers' wives in the best view ; 
he did all he could for them. Did those ladies 
read, they would be amazed at the tender 
feelings with which their patron regarded 
them ; and whose behaviour, as already said, 
might have led them to suppose he was not 
a little hostilely inclined to them. He dwelt 
on their hardships . " on their little children." 
He told stories '* drawn from his own expe- 
rience," he said modestly, though not with 
strict truth, but what he had picked up from 
the intelligent sergeants of his corps. 

He presently saw, to his great delight, that 
the Eight Hon. Harding Hanaper, Under- 
Secretary-ai-War . or for war . was busy 



A liOUXD OF GAIETIES. 241 

taking notes. At tliat moment, as lie told 
Diana, " he knew he had the house with him. 
The fellow was going to tackle my facts." 
In short, we might borrow the description of 
one of the clever gentlemen of the gallery, 
who furnished to an illustrated weekly jour- 
nal what were called " Thumbnail Sketches 
in the House," in one of which Richard was 
thus "etched" :. 

"But soft ! there is a sudden lull ; the 
Speaker's clear voice is heard. Mr. Magru- 
ders motion for the Disinfection of Towns 
has gone off. What next ? The Clerk gives 
out the orders of the day. Something about 
soldiers' wives . Heaven help them ! . and a 
young man, good-looking, yet modest withal, 
in clear voice begins. The cry is ' New mem- 
ber ! ' This, reader, is Captain Richard 
Lugard, of Her Majesty's land forces, mem- 
ber for Calthorpe ; and a very promising 
young fellow he is. He is listened to with 
marked attention ; and a strange case he 
does make out. Those poor drudges . recog- 
II. E 



242 DIANA GAY. 

nized, yet not known . whom the hooting 
War Office oivls pretend not to see, yet whom 
they peck and claw and tear over all the 
same. 

^ Lay Iier out tenderly, 
Home she has none.' 

save on the rude timbers of the baggage cart. 
As he went on he warmed with the subject, 
and was heartily cheered. A young man of 
mark and mettle, and that will be heard of 
again . of ripe abilities, that may, with judi- 
cious training, land him in the seat of the 
right hon. gentleman who now administers 
the War Office with such skill." 

He sat down flushed and triumphant, 
moving for a committee. The Eight Hon. 
Harding Hanaper then rose, and in a dry, 
thin voice was understood not so much to 
oppose it, which it seemed too much trouble 
to do, but to throw cold water on the matter, 
in the usual way. It was not opportune. 
The whole matter would presently be reopen- 
ed. There was the commission on barrack 



A BOUND OF GAIETIES. 243 

accommodation, of wliicli a noble member 
of the otlier House had given notice. He 
thought it would appear to this House quite 
undesirable to go into the matter now ; and 
he was afraid he could not give his consent 
to the proposal of the hon. member. 

Then Mr. Hanaper sat down, crossed the 
House to speak to another member who had 
papers to show him dealing with quite a 
different matter. Captain Lagard, greatly 
excited by some private comphments that 
had been paid him, was prepared to divide 
the House; but Bodnam, the "manager" of 
their party, came to him mysteriously, and 
whispering, " Well done ! and a great suc- 
cess ! " advised him (behind the back of his 
hand) to yield : " The House is quite with 
you ; you have gained your point virtually : 
so better leave it, as Hanaper says. It's a 
great concession for him." 

Richard was persuaded. A military friend 
told him "he'd have been nowhere if he'd 
gone on, and not got five men to walk out of 

B 2 



244 DIAXA GAY. 

the House with him. He flew up to the 
ladies' gallery. Lady Margaret was very 
weary indeed. The seats were " dreadful, 
my dear . not fit for Christian ladies." But 
Diana was delighted. She was furious with 
the dry schoolmaster of a creature who had 
dared to oppose her friend. As it seemed to 
her, a splendid victory had been gained. The 
fort had been carried by assault. 

''It was virtually a defeat for ihem,^^ he 
said, repeating Mr. Bodnam's formula. " The 
House was with me from the first." 

Diana saw in him already a splendid legis- 
lator . a minister, sitting, as was the coiled 
leader, impassive, with his hat down on his 
eyes." 

" I will come and ask you for places," she 
said. 

" And I shall not refuse you one, whatever 
it be," he said with effusion. 

Alas, poor Dick ! the handwriting was 
already on the wall. Within two days the 
committee to try the Oalthorpe election was 
struck. 



A EOUND OF GAIETIES. 245 

Next morning lie and Diana also flew to 
the papers to read the speech. The mean, 
jealous creatures, who had no humanity for 
the poor soldiers' wives, had set down some- 
thing of this sort : 

"the condition of soldiers' wives. 

" Captain Lugard moved for a committee 
to inquire into the condition of the wives of 
privates and non-commissions. He said their 
status was unsatisfactory, as being virtually 
ignored by the authorities, who were yet 
obliged to recognize them unofficially. He- 
dwelt on the anomaly of this state of thingSy 
and mentioned several instances of hardship* 
He trusted the House would take the matter 
into consideration. 

" Mr. Hanaper opposed the motion, on the 
ground that the whole subject would be con- 
sidered under the Army Accommodation Bill, 
of which notice had been g^iven in the other 
House. 

" The motion was then withdrawn." 



246 DIANA GAY. 

After this triumpli Lugard had indeed the 
usual hope that Bligh would not go on . at 
the last moment he'd think better of it. To 
Diana he would come often, explaining his 
hopes and vexation of this. 

'' He does it on purpose to worry and 
harass me ; it's a very poor and unworthy 
satisfaction. I suppose he can't contain 
himself at the spectacle of my little success, 
and thinks that this will be the best way to 
show his spite. What can be the use ? He 
hnotvs he can't win ; it's a hopeless game. 
They tell me the House is always with any 
one that seems to make a hit . they don't 
like losing him ; and it has an influence on 
the committee. Why should he throw away 
his money and mine ? If he had some real 
friend who would set all this before him ! It 
was for Bligh' s own sake he said this. Of 
course it would not suit my dignity, you 
know ; and it's no affair of mine." 

" I tell you, Ei chard," Diana said, seized 
with a brilliant idea, " leave it to me. I met 



A TvOUXD OF GAIETIES. 247 

Iiim tlie other evening at dinner, and I'll just 
write liim a little note to tell liim to come 
here. I thinh I have some little influence 
over him, though indeed " . and Diana re- 
called his manner . '' he was very cold to me." 

" Just like him," said Lugard ; " he'd like 
to punish you as well as me. But with all 
that, you could turn him round your finger, 
if you cJiose to do it, Miss Diana." 

Diana knew the utter uno;overnableness of 
those little muscles about her pretty mouth, 
and what a business it was to look grave. She 
could only weigh an opinion, or speak, when 
she was alone, and bent her mind to it 
seriously, which was a dreadful business. At 
all events, a compliment of this kind always 
made her smile. 

When Lugard had gone she put in execu- 
tion her plan, which was to write a charming 
little letter to Robert Bligh. Indeed, she 
yearned to make up with that hero. He had 
been very indifferent to her, which was the 
same as being unkind. After all, as Richard 



248 DIANA GAY. 

Lugard had said again and again with great 
force, what had she done to him ? 'Now that 
it was all past and gone, they must make it up. 

*'Portman Square. 

" Dear Egbert," she wrote, " I want you 
to come and see me, most particularly, I 
want to talk over something very privately 
and confidentially, and Lady Margaret is 
gone out. Poor Eichard is very uneasy and 
unhappy, and thinks you have a spite to him, 
which I assured him you had not. 0, how I 
wish you two were friends ! I have set my 
heart on it. And he thinks . but I told him 
he was unjust in that . that you are trying to 
put him out of his seat, merely to punish 
him. Every one is talking of his speech, and 
says he will be so successful there. And he has 
set his heart on redeeming all, as he calls it, 
by this new life. I know it is very hard for 
you, who have had so much expense and 
trouhle ; but he says he is quite secure, and 
that it is such a pity you should waste your 



A EOUXD or GAIETIES. 249 

hard-earned money in sucli a thing. I know 
nothing about these things, but I thought I 
would write you a little note about it. For 
I assure you I feel very much the way you 
have given me up . you, who I thought 
was such a friend, and who was a friend in 
the old, old happy days. Forgive me, dear 
Eobert, and believe me yours always, 

''Diana Gay." 

That night she got a prompt answer : . 

" Chambers. 

"My deae Miss G-ay, . I am so grieved 
you should think me neglectful. But I am 
very busy indeed. As I told you down at 
Calthorpe, I was then really neglecting 
business. Now I am gone back to school, 
and have hardly a moment. When you 
really want me for advice or assistance, you 
may be sure I shall sacrifice every other 
thing to attend to your interests. I often do 
think of those old, old happy days . more 



250 DIANA GAY. 

indeed tlian you would credit. But tliey are 
old days, and belong to tlie past; and there- 
fore it is a very harmless pleasure. As for 
Lugard, the thing is beyond recall. It must 
go on now. It does not rest with me at all ; 
for if I withdrew, there are the electors to be 
considered. As for Lugard himself, I have 
no feeling of any kind against him. I wish 
him w^ell, but I think you will admit he 
was never so kindly disposed to me as to 
warrant my making a sacrifice of that sort. 
It would be quite Quixotic; and he will 
understand it so himself. You see I have 
gone back to the world again, and have 
become its obedient, humble servant, and am 
driven to get what I can out of it. I have 
not found it so ^ hollow ' hitherto as it has 
been painted. There is nothing very genial 
or overflowing ; but it is fair. Forgive me 
for not being able to comply with your 
wishes. Very likely I shall be punished by 
defeat, and then you will say I richly deserve 
it. . ^Yours sincerely, '' Egbert Bligh." 



A ROUND OP GAIETIES. 251 

Diana was very grave as slie read. 

" My dear cliild, don't pucker yonr little 
forehead that way," said Lady Margaret, 
^' with that horrid paper." 

It left a great impression on her, and she 
was very silent. There was an under-current 
of earnestness in Robert's letter ; and for the 
first time she saw clearly that what she had 
done w^as more important than she had sup- 
posed . ^was more ughj, even more serious. 
She began to think of herself as cruel and 
ungenerous. 

'. I hope to Heaven," said Richard, im- 
petuously, when he heard of this result, "he 
didn't think I had anything to do with it 1 
If I was starving, I wouldn't ask him for a 
penny. My goodness ! he will go about say- 
ing that I wanted him to compromise. Yes, 
he will ; I know him well. It's just what he 
would do." 



( 252 ) 



CHAP TEE IX. 



THE PETITION. 



The long galleries tliat stretcb. down by the 
committee-rooms of tlie House of Commons, 
and which are indeed vast ante-rooms, were 
filled with loungers and talkers, with men 
rushing backwards and forwards. There is 
perhaps more business there, and more 
depending on that business, than anywhere 
else in the world. A paradise, too, for law- 
yers and barristers. In their own hierarchy, 
they there rise many steps, . there is no 
great power, like judges, to control them or 
to require homage. How precious every- 
thing becomes once that portal is crossed : 
time, talent, name . everything except the 
suitor's money, which comes showering 
heavily into the laps of these legal Danaes. 



THE PETITION. 253 

At this period there were many petitions 
*'on," and many committees sitting. Every 
little door that opened and shut down that 
endless series opened and shut on a terrible 
game of hazard going on within, on which 
many, many thousands were staked . a game 
indeed where there was inattention, some- 
times sleep, oftener absence, oftener still 
stupidity, on the part of the .croupiers who 
dealt. The only chances were in clever 
"cogging " . adroit management on the part 
of the players. 

One of these rooms was labelled '' Cal- 
thorpe Election Committee; " and outside it 
was a busy group . witnesses, attorneys, and 
a barrister or two. Richard Lugard, the 
sitting member, was very confident ; some- 
times he grew a little nervous, and frequently 
much fretted and provoked, by being 
harassed in this way. So amazing, too, after 
all his success, and with so many talking of 
it and congratulating him. 

Here now it was beginning ; and Begbie, 



254 DIANA GAY. 

Bligii's counsel, was '' stating liis case to the 
committee." That committee was composed 
of Sir Wellbore Craven (chairman), Mr. 
Slater, Mr. Eobins Gore, Mr. Bond, and Mr. 
W. C. M'Culloch, who were behind a horse- 
shoe fence. From behind that fence they 
looked out at a strange raffish crowd . the 
Calthorpians brought up from their district 
fom" days before (Sir "Wellbore had been ill), 
and maintained at frightful cost in town. 
There was Page, Mr. Lugard's London 
solicitor, who found him money when he 
wanted it, and his Calthorpe solicitor, and 
his Calthorpe voters. And there were Bligh's 
solicitors and his voters, and, as we have 
said, Begbie, Q.C., stating his case. Begbie 
was a dry, thin-voiced little man, but who 
was known to be exquisitely artful. He 
was in a great deal of business,' but generally 
contrived to give apparently a deal of time 
to each case. With him were others, . 
Sloper, an admirable junior . Oliver, who 
was spoken of as "rising," '^promising," 



THE PETITION. 255 

'' safe," and who was " getting into leading 
business." The old committee-chairman 
always used to say when the leader had " to 
fly," and an apology was made by the junior 
for taking the matter up, '' The case will 
suffer nothing in your hands, Mr. Oliver ; we 
always hear you with pleasure and instruc- 
tion." 

Mr. Lugard had not been so fortunate. 
By desperate exertion they had got hold of 
Legge, Q.C., who was wholly in parliamen- 
tary practice, and really spent his time and 
professional service in flying down the cor- 
ridor from one room to another, his gown 
spread like a mainsail, and clerks hanging on 
to the rigging. By the aid of such '.' main- 
sheets " he was dragged into a hot and 
steaming room, packed with his fellow-crea- 
tures . all whose faces were turned on Jiim 
to hear what he would say to get them out 
of the knot they were waiting for him to 
untie; a knot requiring teeth and nails to 
open at any time, but which he must pick 



256 DIANA GAY. 

open im])romjptUy as it were, or make a pre- 
tence of opening : an eager mouth being at 
each ear pouring in various recipes. Some- 
times the point has '' gone off," or been 
solved, during the absence of the agitated 
express ; and when the great dehverer arrives 
it is over. Then his face grows distrait . 
he whispers, he takes a note, but he is out 
of Ids element. He can do nothing except 
under high pressure. He is looking to the 
door ; and in moment a wild attorney is tear- 
ing in . rushing, tumbling over every one. 
Legge, to his relief, knows he is wanted. 
Behind the back of his hand he tells the 
panic- struck junior to "get out" something, 
and "press him on the mesne rates," . then 
spreads the mainsail ; and he is away before 
the gale to the room Avhere the Gas Question 
is being brought out. Lugard sees with 
infinite impatience that he is not there, and 
that he will not hear a syllable of Begbie's 
damaging speech, which trails on for three 
quarters of an hour, and at last concludes. 



THE PETITION. 257 

It is scandalous ; and yet "that felloTv" has 
been retained at some frightful sum, and will 
have to be " refreshed " on a scale which it is 
only etiquette should correspond to the mag- 
nitude of the retainer. 

Here are the witnesses being examined by 
Sloper ; and certainly Lugard now begins 
to be amazed and frightened by some of 
their revelations. Why was this concealed 
from him ? There could be no mistaking the 
stolid faces of the corrupt Calthorpe voters, 
their provincial dialect, and their confession 

candidly made '' how Mr. had come to 

their wives, when they themselves were out, 
and had promised this and that ; and with a 

smiling, pleasant face Mr. had shown 

the greatest interest in the family and the 
children;" and ivlien he had gone away, the 
strange and amazing phenomenon was dis- 
covered of a bank-note for fifty pounds being- 
discovered on the chimneypiece. The cross- 
examination of this witness by Legge was 
admirable. '* Was it such a wonderful sight ? 
II. s 



258 DIANA GAY. 

Had lie never seen such a natural curiosity 
as a fifty-pound bank-note ?" . a supposition 
that was indignantly rejected. 

Sometimes the two leaders got into a 
quarrel, and seemed to regard the efforts of 
the chairman to compose their differences 
with contempt; Lugard hovering about, 
bursting out into the gallery for air, scarcely 
able to contain himself, as some new witness 
came up. '' They've paid those fellows 
themselves," he said; "it's a conspiracy." 
Bligh did not appear. " He pretends to be 
indifferent . it's not worth his while." But 
Bligh was really busy ; engaged in a heavy 
case which he could not leave. 

Begbie, Q.C., 'Hhat little wasp," as some 
of his brethren called him, made a most 
characteristic and damaging speech, which 
turned Lugard pale. But towards the end 
of the day his own counsel had his turn, and 
with masterly skill " showed up " the '' con- 
spiracy," as he persisted in calling it. He 
''shattered" the case of the other side . 



THE PETITION. 259 

pounding it into fragments, as witli blows of 
a sledge-liammer. Lugard's spirits rose 
with every change : his eager face, now ex- 
hibiting triumph, now scorn, emphazised 
every turn of the speaker. What provoked 
him was the behaviour of the members of 
the committee. One was writing letters, 
one was reading letters; a third would get 
up to go out, and had been away now nearly 
half an hour. Sometimes there was whisper- 
ing and ** jokes." It was scandalous, he 
thought . such interests being at stake. 

At last, however, the evidence, speeches, 
all came to an end, and the order was oiven 
to clear the room. The committee were to 
consider their decision. Lugard, flushed, 
excited, half-frantic, hung about the corridor, 
talked to his solicitor, could scarcely, as he 
said, '' keep his soul in his body," waiting to 
hear the verdict. 



s 2 



260 



CHAPTER X. 



A PROPOSAL. 



Again we return to the little heroine of 
this story . to her happy clays and pleasant 
nights, as she carried on this fashionable 
and seductive campaign. With her youth 
and spirits . though she was not robust . 
it was not so difficult : and there is many a 
frail, and perhaps consumptive, factory- 
girl who goes through double the work, 
has less sleep, and less food. But for 
Lady Margaret it was more wonderful. 
Her secret was having no anxieties ; she 
had no daughters to " put out ;" she was 
not ''gaming," so to speak . playing des- 
perately high stakes, for a few seasons, in 
the hope of the matrimonial dice turning 



A PROrOSAL. 261 

up sixes for lier and liers. She was full 
of the agreeable juices of nature : if she 
dined out, she dined well, and enjoyed the 
meal; if she went to the ball, there were 
the vouno: men . their own little lesrion . 
who were more affectionately solicitous 
about her supper than if they had been 
her sons. Indeed she found " going out " 
very pleasant ; and as she knew that she 
would have Diana but a short time under 
lier care, she had already pitched on 
another young lady, equally friendless, 
and nearly equally desirable in every way, 
with whom she designed to remplacer her 
present client. So have noble ladies looked 
out, we are told, for a suitable orphan to 
adopt. 

Hers was a very sensible mind, and, for 
a woman of fashion, fall of fair principles 
and inclined to fair dealing. As we have 
mentioned, she had long since seen and 
candidly owned to herself "that nothing 
was to be done with Canning." Diana, 



262 DIANxi GAY. 

indeed, as we have said, had all but told 
her what her private feelings were to that 
gentleman. 

Next to winning a battle for herself, the 
true enti^epreneuse in these matters loves 
the glory of victory for itself. There is 
great glory in clambering up the breach 
and carrying off the coronet. Such success 
wins reputation, if not substantial personal 
profit. With this view, from the very 
beginning she had marked young Lord 
Pat more, and had even fixed a time for 
the escalade. That noble youth was indeed 
in a sad way. He dearly adored Diana; 
and he would have liked nothing better 
than to have gone on in this delightful 
elysium . as who would not ? . for years. 
He would have liked, too, to have laid his 
coronet at her feet, according to the old- 
fashioned phrase ; for so engaging, so 
charming a young creature he thought 
he had never seen yet. But then he was 
afraid of "makins^ a fool of himself;" and 



A PROPOSAL. 263 

there were familiars in the regiment, and 
especially Major Bellamy, whose knowledge 
of the world and sarcastic good common- 
sense remarks he quite dreaded. 

Major Bellamy was very severe on him, 
and at balls and such places always '* had 
his eye on him." 

** Why, Pat," he would say, " you are as 
fresh and green as a new oyster off the 
beds ! You should have a niu'se after vou, 
and a go-cart." 

" Pat " would screw his glass into his 
eye, and foolishly ask, "Wh . why so?" 

'' Because the whole town sees it ; be- 
cause you are regularly caught by that girl 
and her scheming chaperone." 

" No, I'm not ; nothing of the kind." 

"They give it out, then. They know 
who they are dealing with, my friend. 
Why, usedn't you to tell us, child, when 
you first came, you were fifteenth baron, 
nnd had fifty years' minority, and could 
pick and choose where you liked ? " 



264 DIANA GAY. 

'* Well, and it's the truth ; you know it 
is . now." 

" I know it is ! D'ye hear Pat talking 
like a Solomon ! Why the whole town is 
looking at you ; and after being put into 
the Cuckoo . " 

On this allusion Patmore turned verv 
red indeed. The Cuckoo w^as the new 
paper supposed to be maintained by witty 
gentlemen in the public offices, who fur- 
nished fun, and jokes, and private informa- 
tion merely as an amusement. So far '' it 
had paid " very well ; but the novelty was 
wearing off, and the information about 
naming marriages, political changes, &c., 
growing very meagre indeed; so much so 
that they were driven to speculation, and 
less reliable sources of information. 

It was a fact that some such notice of 
Patmore's coming alliance was actually 
figuring in the current number of the week. 
He was at once shown . on the first page, 
under a little sketch of a cuckoo dressed 



A PROPOSAL. 265 

for a ball, with an opera-glass and crush 
hat . an announcement that brought the 
colour to his cheeks : . 

'-'We are authorized to announce that 
Lord Bagnio will be the new Steward 
of the Household. 

" Sir John Chaunter has resio^ned the 
Mastership of the Purzeby Hounds. 

"A marriage is arranged between 
A^iscount Patmore and Miss Diana Gay, 
of Gay Court." 

The frisrht, the annoyance of the noble 
youth Avas incredible. Por the first time 
in his life he seemed to know what trouble 
and anxiety were. Worse again was " the 
persecution " he had to endure, everybody 
" bothering ''* and congratulating fifty times 
in the day. Worse again was the afiected 
compassion of his older friends and 
brethren, who said, '' Poor Pat ! I 
w^arned you, recollect." 

One would have thought that a young 



266 DIANA GAY. 

girl, pretty and engaging, with so hand- 
some a fortune, would have suited this 
young gentleman. But he had really 
come to think that the most splendid 
heiress in England, with a title and great 
ducal connection, would he what he must 
eventually look for. 

Diana soon heard of this announcement, 
and was greatly diverted. She looked for- 
.ward to that night when she would meet 
the young lord at a hall ; for these young 
people met somewhere every day, just as if 
they were stopping in the same house, and 
'' they would have such a laugh over it." 
The young lord came to the hall ; hut she 
soon noticed he had a shv and scared look. 
Indeed he came up and went through a 
sort of "duty dance," but was "short" in his 
answers and eager to get away. The faintest 
change of this sort is perceptible, and Diana 
understood it all in a second, as much as 
though he had come up and told her. 

The quick eye of General Lady Margaret 



A PROPOSAL. 267 

also saw how things were. " He is fright- 
ened/' she said to herself, ''mean little 
cub ! She's far too good for him." 

Diana was a little annoyed and vexed; 
but she had great pride, and tossed her 
pretty head when she saw " Pat " positively 
gazing at her from a coign of vantage. But 
there were plenty to fill the gap, who rushed 
in chivalrously . notably another young lord, 
Lord Mountabor . handsome, manly, sen- 
sible, sure to do in the world, and worth a 
dozen of the "empty-headed" Patmore. 
This gentleman really admired Diana, but 
had kept away in consideration of the 
ground being preoccupied. 

One of the curious features in human 
character was expressed by a character in 
the Beggar^s Operciy in certainly a coarse 
turn, but which is still broadly true. There 
a rude observer hinted paradoxically that 
one of the secrets for ''keeping the men 
on " was, strange to say, keeping them off. 
In other words, indifference is one of the 



'^68 DIANA GAY. 

spurs to regard. A too great welcome, 
a devotion that approaches homage, 
only elevates the conceit of the soul 
thus worshipped. What is cheap, in 
short, is scarcely so valued. This is 
speaking now within the circle of worldly 
morality. 

Before the night was over young Patmore 
was full of rage and repentance, was calling 
himself fool, ''beast" even; and at the 
<Bnd, when his rival was leading out Lady 
Margaret and her charge, could hardly 
<?ontain himself, and made his way up to 
form part of the cortege. He was just in 
time to hear Lady Margaret inviting his 
rival : 

*' Come up to us to lunch to-morrow, and 
we'll settle about the Opera." 

"Pat's" eyes were on Diana, full of a 
bitter, killing, sulky reproach. She nodded 
to him gaily. " Plirt ! " '' coquette ! " was 
in his mind. 

That night, when he went home, he had 



A PEOrOSAL. -69 

made up his mind. He believed himself 
deeply in love with her, though in truth 
he was not. It was the toy denied to the 
child, and for which he is inclined to cry. 
But he had made up his mind. What 
others so valued must surely he valuahie. 
Besides, she was really '' a good match."" 
There was credit in ra.arrying '^ so fine a 
fortune," and. even some in cutting out the 
other fellows, especially *'that conceited 
ass" Mountahor, who had actually pushed 
in front of him w^hen they were competing 
for Diana's cloaks, &c. 

Diana and her matron talked over 
the night as they always did, and as 

we are told ladies alwavs do. Such 

/ 

gossip is enjoyed with an exquisite relish. 
The battles of the nic^ht are fou!?ht over 
aiiain in a sort of luxurious ease and de- 
lightful retrospect. Good spirits, the par- 
donable elation of triumph, give all the 
brilliancy of a photograph. There is an 
incisive truth, a vigorous touching and 



270 DIANA GAY. 

^^dasliing off" which Constance and Helen 
know not at other hours of the day. 

" I don't know what is over that cub/' 
Lady Margaret said in a ruminative way ; 
"he is in some frump or other." 

" 0, it is only the Cuchoo^^ said Diana 
gaily ; " it has frightened him, the foolish 
creature. And yet he is a good creature 
too. He is so young," added she, with 
quite the air of an old person. 

Lady Margaret was projecting herself 
into the future. " He is a very good match, 
dear," she said. "The dowagers are all 
polling for him. Lady Penwillion, that old 
schemer, would give her eyes for him, for 
that long daughter of hers. Now listen, 
Diana," added Lady Margaret seriously ; 
** you must really make up your mind." 

" To what ? " said Diana. 

" To take Pat. You will never do better, 
dear. He is a good creature, and all that ; 
and really it is my duty now to speak to 
you seriously." (Lady Margaret had got 



A PEOPOSAL. 271 

on what I believe is called a peignoir, 
and had set off her armour and incum- 
brances, her wreath, combs, &c., and was 
folding herself up comfortably in an arm- 
chair, with her feet on the fender.) " You 
see, my dear, your position is a very 
serious one. You are quite helpless; and 
if anything happened to me . ^which may 
at any moment . and you know what Sir 
Duncan told me the other day . " 

That eminent physician had told her she 
was of ''too full a habit of body;" and 
that she must take plain fare, or '^ fatty 
degeneration" might '^ supervene," . a cau- 
tion the worthy lady was amused at ; such 
destiny never affecting persons of condition, 
or at least only at some remote and distant 
period. And so she dined out, and dined 
out; and the ''habit of body" became 
slowly fuller and fuller. 

"Now," she went on, "you know I con- 
sider myself in place of a mother, and have 
your interest at heart just as much. You 



272 DIANA GAY, 



know we cannot carrv this on very Ions:. 
Bowman is dying to be back at his place, 
and his trees, and his ploughboys. Then 
there is the new wins;. So I tell you, 
dearest, it is all-important we should make 
the hay when we have the sun. And I tell 
you, if we were to wait till the Calends 
come back, we shouldn't get one as good.'' 

''As who, dear?" asked Diana, laughing. 
'.' Do you mean Pat ? " 

'' Yes. If I were choosing, I could not 
select a better." 

''But," said Diana, laughing again, ''this 
is so funny. Surely you saw him to-night, 
dear ? We are two for ever." 

"Ah, you child," said Lady Margaret 
^ood-humouredly, '' leave these thin2:s to 
me. You imderstand nothing of them. 
The man's over head in love, and will 
propose before the week is out . and you 
must take him." 

Diana tossed her head. 

" What ! give up my liberty when I am 



A PKOPOSAL. 273 

only just beginning to see what this pretty 
world is?" 

Lady Margaret stood up, and became 
grave. 

" I am quite serious, Diana. You must 
do it. You don't know the perils that are 
round. You have no one but Bowman and 
me ; and as for poor Bowman . well ! You 
will be surrounded with schemers and ad- 
venturers, all desiring to prey on you ; and 
your little head will be no match for them, 
my poor child." 

Diana had never heard Lady Margaret 
speak so affectionately and so earnestly. 
She was quite touched; and going up to 
her, gave her a kiss. 

" Good child," said Lady Margaret. 
" Now, think it over well to-night, for it 
is very, very serious ; you might as well be 
left on a desert island to find yourself 
clothes and food, and your own dinner." 

Diana went to bed thinking very seriously 
of this disastrous position. The '' desert 

II. T 



274 DIANA GAY. 

island " brought it home to her very for- 
cibly. She saw how utterly helpless Avas 
her condition; and any one who took up the 
air of monitor or preacher had always an 
awful iofluence on her, and she went to bed 
that morning in a very sober state of mind. 
The next day was more than filled in by 
the usual round; and in the programme 
there was a vast amount of what Lady 
Margaret would call '* business " to be got 
through : appointments, visits, possibly a ' 
flower-show; the inevitable ^' Park " . which 
Wally Pepys said she would have been 
less disinclined to omit than her morning 
prayers. It was just after lunch when 
Diana was in the drawing-room, having 
snatched a hurried moment to water some 
plants, when an eager figure entered with a 
very flushed face and voice of trepidation. 
Diana coloured as she saw him. It was li^r 
young lord. 

'' 1 have called to see you," he said in the 
same nervous tone ; " and . I have called to 



A PEOPOSAL. 275 

see you," he could only repeat. '^ I wanted 
to speak about last night . I am afraid . I 
know I behaved like a savage." 

Diana laughed genuinely. 

'* How ? when ? I never noticed it." 

There was no danger evidently, so she 
could have her little " fun." 

"No," he said, "I know you did not; 
because you are too gentle . too good . too 
angelic . too . " 

Diana was a little alarmed now. This 
did look danger, and she half rose. 

''Don't go," he said; *' I came expressly 
to tell you how unhappy I am. What a 
miserable night I have had of it.tossing, 
I assm^e you . not closing my eyes . at 
least, until very early . " 

Again Diana could not help smiling. 

"Well," she said, "Lord Patmore, I for- 
give you for whatever it is, for you do seem 
so penitent ; and now I think I must go to 
see if Lady Margaret . " 

" No, no ; not yet. I have something to 

T 2 



276 DIANA GAY. 

tell you . something very important to pro- 
pose. I mean . " lie added, fretted at 
having used this awkward word. '^ But if 
I only knew that you had some liking for 
me . and did not hate me . " 

" Hate you ! " repeated Diana with 
amused wonder. 

(" Minx ! " some of her friends would 
have called lier.) 

'^ 0, dear, why should you think that ? 
Have I ever done anything ? " 

'' You know," he went on, '* what I am . 
at least. Lady Margaret does . and what 
they all think of me . and last year I could 
not tell you . it wouldn't be fair, you know 
. all the great matches they proposed to 
me : Lady this and that . connections that 
would have strengthened the family, and all 
that. And this year they went on with the 
same game, I assure you. But I didn't 
care for any of 'em, because . and I must 
tell you the reason . and I was thinking it 
all over last night . because there is no one 



A PROPOSAL. 277 

like you ; and if you would have me . now 
take time/' lie added desperately, *' and 
think . think it well over ; and with Lady 
Maro:aret too. She understands it better . " 

" O," said Diana, now in a flutter, "what 
is all this ? O, I am so sorry." 

" You must think it over. I can wait . 
wait any time, you know . to the end of the 
season." 

What could Diana say ? She could not 
bring herself to be blunt, and hurt one who 
had paid her such a compliment. She was 
quite unequal to the situation. But happily 
at that moment the door was opened, and 
General Lady Margaret spurred in briskly 
to take the command of the situation. 

"I think, dear," she said, "Madam 
Cerise or some of them are waiting for you 
below. Go down to them, darling." 

Diana obeyed orders at once, and her 
guardian took possession of the guest. 
Diana did not wish to disturb them ; 
though half an hour and more passed 



278 DIANA GAY. 

away, she did not venture to return. Then 
she heard him bounding down the stairs, 
and departing in great elation. Then the 
General summoned her. 

" What did I tell you, dear, last night ? '' 
she said with pardonable triumph, and 
indeed it seemed to Diana something like 
divination ; " he has settled it all with me." 

*'0, but I can't," said Diana, excited, 
" I was going to tell him so when he said 
he would wait." 

" Now, dear, leave it to the old head. 
Exactly what I told him. He is to wait . 
there is the sensible footing . to the end of 
the season. The poor child says as long as 
you like; and tlieti, if you have learned t^ 
like him . which of course you will . " 

Diana looked very grave. 

''O, indeed, I can do no such thing, 
dear. I should be miserable ; you know I 
should. I must speak to him plainly. I 
can give him no hopes ; and shall be the 
same then as I shall bb now." 



A PEOPOSAL. 279 

" You can't' tell liim that, dear ; and 
if you do, then send him about his 
business. Now really, Diana, sit down 
there. This is too serious a thing to be 
light or childish about. It is not fair to- the 
man ; not honourable . indeed it is not. 
Not fair, dear. Coming here day after 
day ; dining with him ; the talk of every 
one ; leading him on ; making yourself so 
conspicuous. I assure you the most heart- 
less flirt could not have done more. You 
should have told me . even last night, 
Diana." 

Our heroine was silent. Eor this in- 
genious way of putting on her what she 
had really no part in she had no answer 
ready. In presence of this greater mind 
she was helpless. She could not argue or 
reason; and she almost felt that she had 
not behaved handsomely. 

Lady Margaret saw all this, and judi- 
ciously struck it with the " point " she 
had mentioned before. 



280 DIANA GAY. 

"You know there is no hurry; at the 
end of the season you can do what you 
like with him ; and when I am discharging 
the servants, you can do the same with 
him. And in fact, dear, I told him as 
much ; and it's all settled ; so there it 
stands ; and don't be unkind to the poor 
wretch, or make him miserable and shoot 
himself, or do something equally dreadful." 

This artful arrangement was thus con- 
cluded. " A dreadful business," perhaps 
a scene, which Diana shrunk from always, 
and which pained that little head always, 
was thus averted. E/Csponsibility was 
staved off. She still could not but wonder 
at and admire the amazing instinct of 
her guardian, who thus knew, and even 
foretold, what was going to happen. It 
was a triumph . and not unpleasing; for 
the agitated transports of the young lord 
had moved her. 

But still it was a mere pleasant dream. 
She did not seriously think a moment of 



A PEOPOSAL. 281 

a solemn alliance. There was time . 
years before her, and this was a d'^dasse- 
ment. 

The drive, too long delayed, had to be 
postponed, giving place to this important 
event. It was about four o'clock; Lady 
Margaret and \iqv jprotegee were still "talk- 
ing it over" . the former dwelling on 
the prestige which would follow when this 
conquest became known. Then there was 
duty . the arrear of visits, &c., to be at- 
tended ; then came evening and night ; 
and Lady Margaret went up to get on her 
harness once more. 



( 282 ) 



CHAPTER XI 



DEFEAT. 



Diana was already dressed; fresh as tlie 
iDOuquet she had in her hand . the choicest 
and most costly flowers, sent by the young 
lord. She was always ready to the mo- 
ment ; her protectress Vas infinitely more 
laborious and careful in her preparations. 
In her choice flowers and rich dress . a 
triumph of Madam Cerise's art . she seemed 
the last choice bit of nature's Sevres. She 
was in good spirits, and not a little elated 
with the events of the day. Suddenly she 
heard a step on the stairs, and Lugard 
strode in. She had forgotten him ; the 
great petition . all that was depending on 
it . was to be decided that very evening. 



DEFEAT. ' 283 

The fluslied face, the wild and excited eye, 
the dark weight of gloom and despair on 
his face, told her the event. She ran to him. 

"0, my poor Eichard, I am so, so 
sorry ! " 

He flung himself on the sofa. 

" Xo, I don't want pity, or anything 
of that sort. It's all over at last. This 
finishes me." 

" Indeed no, Eichard ; you must not give 
way. Don't think of it now." 

" It is easy to say that to a ruined 
man ! It is all over at last. I may give 
up now ; I shall never survive the morti- 
fication." 

"O, you will; you will," Diana said, 
at her wit's end to know what shape of 
comfort to offer ; her gentle face, too, filled 
with the deepest compassion. " You will 
find something else ; I know you will. 
And we will all help you." 

" I want no help from any one. I have 
nothing now to live for ! What is to 



284 DIANA GAY. 

become of me ? But it was all planned 
from the beginning by liim . that mean, 
scheming fellow. This was part of his 
devilish scheme ; just to let me seem to 
win at first, to give me a greater mortifi- 
cation. But if I live only for that one 
thing, it will be to pay him back. By 
Heaven I will ! " 

Lady Margaret entered, a great expanse 
of silk and laces ; she was on pleasure bent. 
She had no thought for the serious prose 
of life at that hour. 

" Captain Lugard here ? " she said care- 
lessly. -' Are you coming with us ? " 

'' No, no ; he is not," said Diana ; *' and 
I am so sorry for him." 

" Good heavens ! what has happened ? " 

" I am no longer Member of Parliament. 
They have turned me out." 

''0, I am sure we are so sorry," said 
Lady Margaret, in about the tone she would 
have declined an invitation; ''but you 
will try again. There was young Ventnor, 



DEFEAT. 285 

he got in for some other place, after he was 
unseated. That's what is done always. 
Diana dear, I am afraid . " 

'.And pray where am I to get money 
to do that ? Where am I to get money 
to pay the frightful sums all this has cost 
me ? Where am I to get enough to keep 
a house over my head ? " 

" Good gracious ! " said Lady Margaret, 
scared, " is it so had as that ? Your father 
surely . " 

*' We will all help," said Diana eagerly; 
'^ we are such old friends." 

'' Now, I don't want any of this," said 
Lugard, pacing about ; " if I can keep my 
senses, it is enough . if I can keep on until 
I have time and opportunity to be even 
with him.'' 

" Now, Diana dear, I 7'ealli/ think we 
must . we promised, you know. Good 
night, Mr. Lugard; don't be cast down; 
it's the commonest thing in the world." 

She went downstairs with a stately 



286 DIANA GAY. 

rustling. Diana was following, but stole 
back. He was sitting with his face buried 
in his hands. 

" Dear Ptichard, don't. You know I am 
your old friend ; and you shall get over 
this, and we shall help you through it." 

It was hard to resist the engaging 
manner in which this comfort was offered. 
He looked up. 

'' You are always kind. But the best 
thing for me is to sink at once, and make 
no struggle. Go to your party." 

^^ Come early in the morning, and we will 
talk it over," said Diana confidentially, and 
tripped away. 

It had gone ill indeed with the hapless 
Lugard. Money, time, prestige, everything 
was gone. The motion for the soldiers' 
wives . how absurd that seemed now ! So 
brief an enjoyment of honour is no better 
than a short dream. 

Not an hour before the new member had 
been introduced by the Solicitor-General 



DEFEAT. 287 

Storks, and the Eight Hon. W. Bodmin, 
Patronage Secretary. A happy and tri- 
umphant moment for the young barrister. 
It would have been far more so had Mrs. 
Bligh been there; but she was away in 
Prance, for her health, it was said. He 
sat for a time to enjoy the new scene ; and 
then a barrister-member and friend came 
to him and said, " Mind, you are coming 
with me to Williamson's to-night. You 
promised him to bring your blushing 
honours to his house." 

Bligh agreed, and the two gentlemen 
went away. Williamson . the Et. Hon. 
Sir John Horsely Williamson . was the 
Attorney-General ; and Lady Jane Wil- 
liamson was Lord Malpas's daughter. Not 
often do the mouldy men of law, who 
burrow their way up to the Chancellorship 
from regions below, make such alliances ; 
and Lady Margaret and other persons of 
condition were quite willing to welcome 
their sister and her connections. 



288 DIANA GAY. 

''We shall see all sorts of queer Yalioos, 
my dear," she said, " and their odd wives. 
But I know Lady Jane's people are coming 
to her in good force." 

Sir John Williamson, though he could 
give one of the hest opinions at the bar 
'^ on title," scarcely enjoyed, as Mr. Pepys 
said, an honourable reciprocity . for title 
had not so handsome an opinion of liim. 
He moved among Lady Jane's noble friends 
a small, dry, clerk-like, old-fashioned little 
man, of no more account there than his 
cwn footman, and delighted to meet some 
of his own profession, who with infinite 
difficulty had been admitted. 

It was past twelve o'clock when our hero 
. or one of our heroes . Robert Bligh, came 
in, and did him a homage which every bar- 
rister feels for so august a person as the 
Attorney-General. 

Sir John, who had been cast away, 
as it were, on a dry spit of land, el- 
bowed by guardsmen in the most uncon- 



DEFEAT. 289 

cerned way, now lighted up when he saw 
Bligh. 

" Come from taking your seat ? " he said. 
"New member; very glad to see you. I 
must introduce you to Lady Jane." 

Not a few among the men looked with 
interest after Bligh. Victory of any kind 
is always received favourably. If you can- 
not be the shape of a rose, it is something 
to know the rose, or be in the same room 
with it. He was not a mouldy, worn-out 
young barrister, weak-eyed and unwhole- 
some, but handsome and sociable. 

Lady Jane snatched a moment from 
Major Hancock of the Life Guards to 
say. 

" Mr. Bligh, do you know many people ? 
You must let me introduce you. There is 
Miss Gay, our great heiress . but she is 
going to be married." 

Bligh gave a genuine start. "Going to 
be married ! " 

Diana was taking her usual nightly exer- 

II. u 



290 ' DIANA GAY. 

cise, flying round in the valse she so loved ; 
besieged with offers, and entering her en- 
gagements as though she were a little fairy 
bookmaker on a racecourse. In these re- 
lations she was as honest as the sun, and 
was never known to " throw over " even the 
most persevering and adhesive '* scrub" of 
a creature, of whom every young beauty 
has one at least who is her plague. Diana 
when she saw him started, and broke from 
her partner, who did not relish her em- 
pressement, 

" 0, Eobert," she said, " so you are suc- 
cessful; and I am so glad. Yet poor 
Eichard. " 

" I feel for him as much," he said ; " but 
what can I do? He would enter on this 
foolish course. But what is this they tell 
me ? I have to congratulate you, it seems." 

He was grave, and seemed sincere. 

" O, on this report," she said impatiently. 
" O, there is no truth . that is, I am to do 
as I please. But every one is worrying me." 



DEFEAT. 291 

*'Patmore is a good fellow, and will turn 
out well when he gets older; and I hioiv 
he has a great regard for you. You know 
I am still a sort of guardian, so it is my 
duty to advise; and I would think seri- 
ously. I had some of his papers before 
me, and I assure you he will be enormously 
rich." 

" So yoic advise me ? " said Diana, tossing 
her head ; " I can settle all that myself, 
thank you, Mr. Eobert Bligh, M.P. I sup- 
pose now you are to be quite a great man 
. above all our little trifling. I wonder 
you don't feel more for poor Richard, on 
whose ruins you have risen." 

" O, as for that," said he calmly, " I have 
given up sentiment a good deal. I found it 
so heavy . so annoying to carry about. No 
one cared for it ; and it was no good to 
mvself; so . " 

" So you got rid of it altogether ? " 

"Yes, Miss Diana, and in every way. 
Now I am going to live selfishly, and a 

u 2 



292 DIANA GAY. 

good deal for myself. The great point, they 
tell us, is to get on, and to get on with 
enjoyment to yourself. I have thought a 
great deal over these things lately, and have 
begun to think more of the world in which 
we all live, and of its enjoyments. You 
see I am here at a ball, and mean to 
dance too. I am engaged to some young 
lady, for whose name Lady Jane William- 
son is responsible ; but I shall know her 
by her face. She said she was one of 
the prettiest here." 

"And have you forgotten Miss Buller?" 
said Diana, with infinite scorn. " Upon my 
word you are coming out. Who has been 
teaching you this?" 

"Well," said Bligh, smiling, "you gave 
me a lesson or two . do you recollect ? so 
did poor Lugard ; so did the world. Among 
all these instructors I have picked up some- 
thing. Now with the House, and this new 
career, and all my new friends . and you 
can't imao^ine the number I have found 



DEFEAT. 293 

since four o'clock to-day . I am likely to 
do very Avell. Ab, there is my young lady ! 
Is she not pretty ? " 

The next thing Diana saw was Mr. 
E>obert Bligh, according to the hackneyed 
phrase, in '.' the mazes of the dance." On 
many sides she heard his name. " Clever 
young man . unseated the man who was 
member for Calthorpe." 

Diana was a little fretful and provoked . 
she was no actress . and she felt a sort of 
pang as she saw now that her old friend 
and favourite, whose success she had ad- 
mired, had in reality grown indifferent to 
her. Success had spoiled him, she thought. 
This indifference, she was sure, was not put 
on, for he was so goodnatured with it- . a 
sure test ; for acted indifference is always 
overdone, and is attended with a certain 
brusqueness and savagery. Yes, she 
thought, he will now be so courted 
and admired, and perhaps flattered, he 
will cease to think of his old friends. 



294 DIANA GAY. 

Pleasant little natures like those of 
Diana expect all, but are unreasonable 
enough to think that nothing is to be 
expected from them. Again she heard 
the praise, like a chime . "so clever . 
brilliant fellow . will make a show in the 
House . upset a man called Lugard." Poor 
Lugard ! Even with her, who was so com- 
passionate for all his troubles and mis- 
fortunes, the feeling was tinged with the 
pity which is disguised contempt, though 
she was unconscious of it. Bright young 
girls, fine creatures with flashing eyes 
and rich dresses . some of our English 
"meeses" which Erenchmen so admire . 
these seemed to be floating round the 
enchanted Bligh, like the fairies in a pan- 
tomime round a hero who has been lost 
in a wood. Something passed through 
Diana's mind in this shape . that she 
should be one of these wood-fairies, and 
she would lay herself to bring back this 
deserter to her little camp and tiny colours. 



DEFEAT. 295 

Eligh was indeed enjoying himself. Ho 
was at that moment, according to the 
American phrase, being " buttonholed " by 
Sir John Williamson, and Diana heard 
some of the conversation even. "Of 
course, if you press for it, we should be 
very glad indeed. The Attorney-General- 
ship of the Southern Palatine is now worth 
a good deal; there is so much 'manu- 
facturing ' crime about there." 

Diana asked Bligh about this, and he 
told her how Mr. Gardiner, the "Q.C.," 
had just died, and this office of provincial 
prosecutor was now vacant, and had been 
offered to him. It was worth about a 
thousand, and no trouble. 

"A thousand a year and no trouble," 
said Diana, with expanding eyes. *'How 
charming ! " 

"Yes," he said, smiling, "no trouble; 
that is the great point. I hope you 
recollect an old promise you made me long 
ago; but you won't keep to it, I know." 



296 DIANA GAT. 

"What!" said Diana, pleased; "indeed 
I will, if I did promise ; or I will promise 
now, if you like." 

" The settlements, I mean. Lady Mar- 
garet, I think, was present. You said I 
was to have the drawing of them. I shall 
take care of your interests, never fear, and 
' tie him up ' properly." 

Diana did not relish this goodnature at 
all. " 0, I don't know," she said. "Why 
do you suppose such a thing ? " 

In short, this was one night, of which 
there were many patterns, in Diana's life . 
it was part of the regular round; yet she 
did not enjoy this night so much. Lord 
Patmore was gloomy and morose. He was 
thinking of the splendid " sacrifices " he 
had made . the nohle offers. Was this the 
treatment ? . this sort of indifference. The 
usual procession was then formed towards 
three o'clock, and Lady Margaret was es- 
corted out with the usual tenderness and 
delicacy by her young men. They rolled 
home in the great chariot. 



DEFEAT. 297 

"Ton my word," said Lady Margaret, 
" our friend Eobert has got up. After all, 
poor Eicliard was not fit for that sort of 
thing, as they say he wanted ballast. Do 
you know what Williamson said to me ? 
That Ptobert was just the fellow that would 
hang on firm until he fastened on the 
Chancellorship one of these days. Of 
course; wonderful young man he is, if 
he don't get airs." 

'* He is a little altered," Diana said 
thoughtfully. 

'' I dare say. Well, dear, what did you 
think of poor Pat to-night ? Old Lady 
Vortigern, I assure you, she wouldn't 
speak to him. I felt as proud to-night as 
if I had won a battle, dear. The Cuckoo 
will have something to announce in real 
earnest now." 

Somehow, Diana did not respond to this 
triumphant view. Was it a turning back 
to the past, or the shadow of a presenti- 
ment ? Yet she was very happy on this 
night. 



298 DIANA GAY. 

When they got into their hall, there were 
some letters and papers, which usually 
waited for them. Lady Margaret gathered 
them up. When they were in their room 
before the fire, and she had got her harness 
off, the General looked at them com- 
placently. There was one *' big blue letter 
with a seal,'* addressed to Diana . that im- 
portant young lady always got a whole 
mail . the considering of which caused the 
little pale forehead to contract. The an- 
swering was not so difficult, as she re- 
cognized the value of that capital rule of 
leaving by letters for a certain time to 
settle, and then a portion answered itself. 

"One of their usual worryings," she 
said ; " don't mind it to-night." 

" My God 1 " cried Lady Margaret, her 
eyes fixed on the paper, " what is all 
this ?" 

Diana, pale, looked over Lady Margaret's 
shoulder, and read with her : 



DEFEAT. 299 

" Gay V, Gay. 

" 2Qy New Buildings, Queen Street. 

''Madam, . ^We beg to inform you that 
we have been instructed by our client, 
Miss Eugenie Gay, of Boulogne, to com- 
mence proceedings against you in ejectment 
for the lands and tenements of Gay Court. 
We shall feel obliged if you will refer us 
to your solicitor, who will accept service 
of the writ in this matter, at your earliest 
convenience. 

" We remain. Madam, 

" Griffiths, Bakee, & Co." 



( 300 ) 



CHAPTER XII. 



CHANGE. 



'Fob, long after might Diana look back to 
that dreadful night with a sort of horror ; 
all seemed to have ended then. The lights 
were rudely extinguished ; everything \Yas 
cold and dismal. The palace had changed 
to a gaol : instead of colours and hangings 
and rich decorations, the soft path, the 
sweet scents, the effulgence of light . all 
had gone . there were rough, rude, cruel 
stone flags and bars. It was over indeed. 
The sweet little play of life, which she 
found so delicious, was finished . the curtain 
was down . the stage, the theatre gone. 

She could hardly understand or realize 
it, and sat in her chair before the fire 



CHANGE. 301 

looking at the fatal document. "Not much 
comfort was got from Lady Margaret. 

'' It may turn out nothing, my dear 
child; or they may have to he bought 
ofiP. Eut, you know, I must tell you, 
poor Gay always said there was something 
of this sort hanging over him; and there 
ivas a story of that wild fellow your uncle 
getting picked up by some creature in 
Trance. God knows. We must only hope 
for the best, my poor child. You see, if 
you had listened to me about Patmore, it 
might have been all done and settled long 
ago. Now, of course, hell take fright." 

"That," said Diana, "I do not care 
about. Of course he must know every- 
thing. 0, to think of this coming on me ! 
And will they leave me nothing ? If they 
are entitled to it, of course they must have 
it. Poor dear papa would not have kept 
it from them, if he had known it." 

"O, folly, dear; you must send and get 
the best advice, and the best counsel." 



302 DIANA GAY. 

"Yes," said Diana eagerly, "to Eobert 
. lie will do everything for me. And 
yet, 0-" 

" Of course he must ; but in the regular 
way. We'll send to him the first thing in 
the morning. Now don't let it weigh on 
your spirits. All will come right, I am 
sure. By the way, though, that woman," 
said Lady Margaret with a sudden start . 
^^ she couldn't have something to do with 
this?" 

" O dear, no," said Diana, absently ; 
" though she did not like me. 0, this is very, 
very cruel ! What is to become of me ? " 

The reader will perhaps have noted that 
there was already a sort of faint change 
in Lady Margaret, She was a perfect 
woman of business . a woman of the world 
. and at her age felt that every hour was 
in value equal to three or four at another 
period of life. Hence, here was nearly a 
whole season wasted. Here, too, was a 
loss of prestige, of credit, in being the 



CHANGE. 303 

patroness of, and voucher for, this poor 
little craft, which had turned out so un- 
fortunately. She had an affection for Diana ; 
but was put out by this " crossness " of 
things. She slept well that night. Poor 
Diana tossed and tossed; fancied she was 
already degraded, sentenced, deposed, and 
turned out, a pauper on the world. 

Early she sent off a note to Eobert . in 
faltering characters, and in a style that 
seemed to falter . begging of him to come 
to her at once, as she had something most 
serious to ask him about ; and she knew 
that he would help her. 

When this was gone, she sat earnestly wait- 
ing with a load at her young heart. Eobert 
would fly to her, would help and stand 
by her, and forgive her treatment of him ; 
she knew that. Here he was . no, it was 
Eichard Lugard, excited still, and come at 
that early hour selfishly, to dwell upon 
his wrongs, and talk over vengeance upon 
the head of the man he hated. 



304 DIANA GAY. 

'* Such a night,'* he said, '' as I have 
had ; such a miserable, frightful night I But 
I shall know the worst soon. Why, what's 
the matter, Diana ? You look ill too." 

Diana told him. " I cannot help you 
now as I hoped, E^ichard," she said. 

His eyes sparkled. 

'' But don't you understand," he said ; 
" don't you see all this, who's work this 
is ? Why, it's a conspiracy ! I know it . 
he and his mother. Don't you recollect 
how she threatened that day ? She said 
she would make you repent it. And, 
Diana," he added, with flashing eyes, " he 
is in it too ! I know it ; because, do you 
remember when he was searching all those 
nights among the papers, and I warned 
you? There's the whole of it. That 
woman would do anything; I know her 
well." 

Diana listened, wondering; and could 
only faintly say, " 0, impossible ! They 
could not be so base . so wicked." 



CHANGE. 305 

" Ask Lady Margaret what she thinks. 
The only thing now is to beat them . to 
baffle them. You must get some clever 
fellow that's up to all this dirty work to 
meet them on their own ground." 

"0," said Diana, distractedly, "I know 
no such people. I give up at once. I don't 
know what to do, or whom to trust. I 
have no friend, it seems to me." 

'^ Yes, you have," said Eichard ; ** and a 
real one, too. Ah, if you had only listened 
to me ! But that's all over now. I know 
such a man . the very one for such cases . 
so clever and knowing ; he has managed 
such things before. If I had only taken 
his advice in this business of mine, I should 
have been in a different way. But he will 
dispose of him, never fear." 

They heard a step on the stair. Eobert 
Bligh entered hastily. He coloured when 
he saw Eichard; but went up to him 
frankly. 

" I wish it had been any one else but you, 
n. X 



306 DIANA GAY. 

Lugard," he said. "That is all I will 
venture to say, as I know you do not like 
compliments of condolence." 

" 0, you may stop there. I want 
nothing approaching it from you. We are 
at arms'-length, recollect ; and I don't look 
on the account between us as in any way 
closed. Understand that, to begin with, 
Mr. Eobert Bligh, M.P." 

" It is only what I expected," said the 
other calmly ; " and you are the same as you 
always were. With all my heart, then." 

He turned to Diana with an inquiring 
look. He was too delicate to say, " What 
is it you wrote to see me about ? " 

"And there are others understand you, 
too," went on Lugard in growing excite- 
ment. " You are being found out gradually. 
That long and slow game won't pay with 
every one, I can tell you. She knows your 
unworthy scheme . your conspiracy . " 

" Hush, Eichard," she faltered ; " we 
knoio nothing." 



CHANGE. 307 

" Diana . Miss Gay," said Eobert, turn- 
ing to her ; " what is this ? " 

"Let me speak for her," said Lugard. 
"This pretence won't answer. It is all 
new to you. You know nothing . no, of 
course, nothing of this action ? " And he 
tossed over the attorney's letter to him. 

Eobert calmly read it ; then bit his lip. 
His face contracted with an expression of 
pain. 

" Now look at him. Let him dare say he 
knows nothing." 

Diana did look. 

" I do know nothing," he said ; " and 
this news has shocked me more than I can 
say; but . " 

"And have you no suspicion, then?" 
Lugard went on. " You would not wish to 
name absent persons. No, sir; your ser- 
vices and advice are not wanted here. She 
wants no double-dealing, no double-handed 
treacherous assistance." 

Bligh turned on him. " This is not the 

X 2 



308 DIANA GAY. 

place for this sort of language ; I shall give 
you other opportunities, if you desire them. 
I do not volunteer assistance here, though 
I would be glad to aid. Miss Diana Gay 
knows me long enough to suppose that I 
would help her with every power of my 
heart, soul, and strength. I may ask her 
thatr 

Diana paused ; then raised her eyes. 

" Indeed you have always been good to 
me. But still, in this cruel blow that has 
come upon me, it is so strange that Mrs. 
Bligh should have threatened me, and . " 

Bligh's face fell ; he did not answer, but 
covered his face, and gave a half- groan. 

" By Heaven," said Lugard, starting up 
and striking the table, " I am right ! 
Answer ; you owe it to her, you owe it to 
that justice and honour which is always in 
your mouth, to say distinctly, here and 
before us, what is at the bottom of this. 
Do you know, do you suspect even that 
Mrs, Bligh has anything to do with it ? " 



CHANGE. 309 

Still Eobert did not answer. 

'^0, Robert Bligh, don't let me think 
that." 

At length Bligh spoke, and very slov. iy. 
He was very pale. 

'' I have not seen her for many weeks." 

" Ah, there's a fencing witness for you ! " 
said Lugard. 

" I know nothing of her proceedings. 
What I know or suspect is nothing to you,'* 
Eobert said, turning fiercely to Lugard. 

'' A bullying witness too." 

"But this much I will say," added Bligh, 
turning to Diana: "I dare not help you 
now, after such suspicion, or such a charge. 
But still, let me implore you, be on your 
guard. Mind me in this, at least. Take 
care whom you trust, and do not be led by 
those who affect to be in your interest. I 
shall do what I can, though at a distance, 
to befriend you . that you may count on." 

He was gone. To Diana, Lugard said with 
exultation, "After all, there is compensa- 



310 DIANA GAY. 

tion. His victory is not so great. I shall 
match him in this yet, though he may he 
M.F, O5 Diana, I feel no disappointment, 
and have something to look forward to 
now." 

Lady Margaret came. She wisely and 
authoritatively indorsed all that Lugard 
said. There could he no doubt the Blighs 
were at the bottom of the whole. She had 
always a sort of regard for the " dashing " 
character of Eichard Lugard. He described 
his agent . the man he recommended for 
the situation . Page; he inspired Diana 
with hope. It would ''blow over" under 
the skilful hands of Page, who would find 
perhaps there was nothing in it at all. 
They were two women. Once Diana faintly 
pleaded for her old friend; but Bligh's 
refusal to contradict the charge was con- 
clusive. 



( 311 ) 



CHAPTEE XIIL 

A SORE TRIAL. 

It was a rueful business for poor Diana, 
going through the regular routine . ^the 
heavy coach swinging along, the drive, 
the visit, the thousand and one antics and 
fadasies of fashion, with this sword swing- 
ing over her head as they rolled along. 
The worst was, that omniscient evening 
paper, the lively Hegent Street Chronicle, 
which always had some fresh titbit of social 
news, and a number of which was like a 
five-minutes' chat with a clever clubman, 
had a short paragraph on the matter in the 
agreeable page devoted to faifs divers : . 

'* The class of persons that seem to be 
known to penny-a-liners only as ' gentlemen 



312 DIANA GAY. 

of the long robe' are to have good work 
cut out for them, in a substantial cause 
celehre which will affect the whole estates 
of a beautiful young heiress whose name 
must be very familiar to the Court-news- 
man. In the common language of ordinary 
Englishmen, a suit in ejectment has been 
commenced to recover possession of the 
estates of Gay Court, the plaintiff claiming 
as child of an elder brother of the late 
owner. There is said to be a Prench 
marriage, . secret, of course, . an heir 
hidden away by an unnatural grand- 
mother, and details of the most thrilling 
sort. When we add that Mr. Hawker has 
been retained to lead for the plaintiff and 
state her case (she is a young girl, and 
called Eugenie), we have said enough to 
whet, and at the same time to stay, the 
stomach of the most voracious admirer of 
what is called the romance of real life. 
The famous correspondent of a certain 
daily paper even now must be sharpening 



A SOEE TRIAL. 313 

his pen. We hope in a few days to be 
able to present our readers with an outline 
of this case from a special and exclusive 
source." 

Mr. Page, the solicitor, was a young 
man of not more than thirty, who dressed 
exceedingly well, and was not by any means 
of the mouldy, ascetic class to which law- 
agents are supposed to belong. He had 
a bright face, got his clothes from the 
best tailors, and went to balls and parties. 
This brought him in contact with " officers 
and gentlemen" who asked him to dine at 
mess, and went to him when they got into 
any scrape. What riveted this connection, 
and quite brought him into leading military 
business, was a little affair down at Rich- 
mond on one of the Derby-days, when a 
party of gentlemen belonging to a Guards 
regiment, and crowded on a drag, were 
coming home filled with wine and spirits 
(of an animal sort), and passing through 
that pretty townlet, discharged a whole 



314 DIANA GAY. 

volley of oranges at an honest householder 
standing at his door, and looking at the 
procession going by. Much damage was 
done to him, and, one of the horses grow- 
ing restive at the turn, the police had time 
to come up, and arrest two of the gentlemen 
identified by the burgess. Being released 
on bail, they appeared next morning, ac- 
companied by Mr. Page, who had been with 
them, and actually dined with them that 
night; and he took so many points, and 
managed the whole so cleverly, that the two 
ojficers were discharged in triumph, and the 
burgess went home rather damaged in 
character with his neighbours. On this 
success, it seemed that nothing legal could 
be done in the army ^^ithout Page's aid. 
That gentleman was always being invited 
to dine, which he delighted in ; was intro- 
duced to generals, colonels, &c., and saw 
before him a prospect indeed of getting 
into high life at last. He was found very 
useful in arranging with creditors, ad- 



A SOEE TEIAL. 315 

vancing himself also, and was never a 
pressing creditor. He used indeed to say, 
in a gentlemanly fashion, just as one 
brother-officer might say to another, that 
he must have that money back, if conve- 
nient, or, indeed, whether it was convenient 
or not, as he was in a terrible way himself ; 
and though he would not like to press, still 
he could not be expected to suffer himself. 
It was this virtue that recommended him 
to Lugard, who threw himself entirely into 
his hands, or arms even. It was Page who 
arranged everything for the petition, who 
had furnished the money "to fee" vora- 
cious counsel ; but it was Page who spoke 
to Lugard in a very altered tone on the 
morning after. 

" This is a very blue look-out," he said 
gloomily. " I counted on this. I have 
had to raise the money, and was sure of 
success. I can't afford to lose it, or even to 
wait. I am quite run out among them all. 
What do you propose ? " 



316 DIANA GAY. 

*^ Nothing," said Lugard, colouring. 
" You don't mean to say you're going to 
turn on me in this way, are you? By 
Heaven, that's too sharp practice altogether. 
I haven't a halfpenny. You must wait, as 
other fellows do, and give me time." 

" I can not^^ said Mr. Page bluntly. 
'^ The money must be made out. You 
must sell." 

Lugard started. '' Sell ! " he cried : *^ is 
tliat it ? Is that what you are at ? So 
now we are coming out in our true colours, 
it seems . the regular Shylock." 

'' I don't mind all this," said the other, 
smiling. " You know it must be done if I 
say it or wish it. I know I am under great 
obligations to you for various services, but 
that would be paying too high. Seriously, 
very seriously, what do you propose ? " 

" I was going to propose a capital good 
thing," said Lugard savagely; "but you 
may do your worst now, and you shall never 
have it. A great lawsuit for a young girl 



A SORE TEIAL. 317 

of the Lest family, and in the highest 
society. I'll find plenty that will help me, 
and help her too." 

This charming opening had a deep effect 
on Mr. Page. They were the elements 
that could tempt him most. '^ I could tell 
you something myself," he said. " I know 
what you allude to ; it is this suit of Miss 
Diana Gay. Well," he continued slowly, 
"I do not wish to be harsh or pressing, 
though there are others who will be harsh 
and pressing enough with me. If I see my 
way in this matter, and the thing looks at 
all feasible . But you said the same of 
the election." 

" So we thought . so we all thought," 
said Eichard, impetuously. 

" I must see her . see her at once," said 
Mr. Page ; " for no time is to be lost." 

Eichard hesitated. " She knows no more 
than we do, nothing more than was in that 
writ. It's all a mere imposture." 

" Just as you please ; but if I am to 



318 DIANA GAT. 

move in it, I must see her, and have her 
own instructions." 

That evening Mr. Lugard brought his 
solicitor, Mr. Page, with him to Diana. 
The current of her life had indeed changed. 
Even this interview had the air of part of 
the great responsibility that had so sud- 
denly come upon her. "When the two 
gentlemen arrived, and saw Diana alone, 
"on business," Lugard even noticed the 
anxious worn look in her eyes, the strained 
expression in her face. Lady Margaret 
was out on her business ; for with this true 
lady of the world, as the hours of life 
shortened, they became more precious, in 
a ratio that seemed like the mysterious 
expanding power of the horseshoe pro- 
blem. She could not afford to waste these 
diamond moments in looking back. There 
was a charming girl she had just come to 
know, Miss Pollexfen. with only a father 
sure to inherit the Pollexfen estates, and 
no female relative to speak of. She was 



A SOEE TEIAL. 319 

not a heartless or an unfeeling petson, Lady 
Margaret ; but the world was with her, life. 
She must move on, and she could not help 
going to call on this young lady. Her 
sensitive worldly mind already was dis- 
turbed at the change she experienced. 
Perhaps she thought the world, her friend, 
had begun to look coldly on her as being 
unsuccessful, or associated with a failing 
cause. 

Poor Diana had nothing to tell, nothing 
to show, but that awful and fatal paper 
which had been the first notice of the blow. 
Mr. Page, very deferential, and with his 
eyes fixed on her, put some questions with 
due apologies. Had she ever heard her 
father allude to the possibility of such a 
thing . had there ever been even the ques- 
tion asked . had this Gay left any children ? 
Diana could not say ; she was bewildered ; 
she could not lay her mind to think. 

" It's all a trumped-up business," said 
Lugard impetuously. " We'll expose them ! " 



320 DIANA GAY. 

" We I ^' said Mr. Page, turning on him 
slowly. " How, pray ? "Will you let us 
hear your plan, then ; what can you know, 
pray ? " He paused a moment. " No, no ; 
we must have no talking or boasting ; this 
is too serious a matter." 

" You think so ? " said Diana, looking at 
him wistfully. "O, then, what is to be 
done?" 

" I am sorry, truly sorry, to speak in this 
way," said Mr. Page gently ; " but it is for 
the best that you should know the truth : 
I think so indeed. I have experience of 
these sort of eases; and they would not 
dare to come forward unless there was 
something substantial to go upon. But 
are you willing to trust in me . in my 
labour, skill, and devotion to your interest ? 
for I am always devoted to every client 
whose case I take up." 

'.Yes, I suppose so," said Diana help- 
lessly. 

" Suppose so ! " repeated Mr. Page, 



A SOEE ITxIAL. 321 

smiling. " All, 1 see ; that will scarcely 
do. I have no wish to force myself on you. 
I was brought here, recollect." 

''Of course, Diana," said Lugard, "you 
mean to give Page every authority ? I did 
so." 

" That has no connection with this 
matter," said the solicitor coldly. " Re- 
collect this is not a business for mere legal 
duty . instructing counsel, drawing out a 
brief, as Lady Margaret's respectable firm 
would do. There must be plot and coun- 
terplot, prying and probing ; mean, nasty, 
ungrateful, dirty work. Excuse me saying 
so. Miss Gay : I mean ungrateful to me.'' 

Lugard walked impatiently over to the 
window, smiling scornfully. 

"Listen," went on Mr. Page. '^ Already 
I have my own theory about all this. I 
must see at once whether there is anvthino- 
to support it; I shall look about it this 
very night. There is no hurry for a week 
or so, at least. I shall go at once, and 

II. Y 



322 DIANA GAY. 

shall see vou a^ain in a few days : and in 
the meantime, having heard what I shall 
report, you can then decide, Miss Gay." 

" O yes," said Diana, '.' that is very fair." 

"Further, we shall j)repare a case, and 
have it laid before some eminent counsel- 
friend, or some one that Lady Margaret 
Bowman's solicitors shall approve of." 

''Eut where are vou ^oinsr to?" said 
Diana. 

He shook his head. " Excuse me, we 
shall see all that by-and-by ; because I may 
be wrong, and it will end in nothing. But 
that is all settled. It is quite understood, 
I hope. Miss Gay, the footing on which I 
come here and take up this business." 



EXD OF VOL II. 
DIANA GAY. 



BOOK III. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE OLD ROUND. 

Lady Makgaret returned a little heated 
and put out. She had seen some people, 
and had come a little suddenly on a large 
tea-party, where she had met some odious 
people whom she disliked, and who she 
knew were enjoying the business. These, 
with a malicious interest, and a more 
malicious sympathy, condoled with her on 
this trial, and were malignantly curious 
about details. She thought, too, she was 
neglected, and postponed to a new and 
in. B 



^Z > DIANA GAY. 

wealthy lady who was rising on the horizon^ 
The Pollexfen heiress, too, had not shown 
the interest she had counted on. Yet when 
she returned, and found Diana poorly, and 
with the troubled '* scared " look on her 
face, she was touched, and ran to infold 
her in an embrace of rustling silk and 
lace. 

'' Poor child,'' she said, '' now it will all 
come right ; I know it will ! " 

On that night they were to go on the 
invariable and never-failing '' parade," as 
one of the old officer-friends called it ; and 
the young Lord Patmore was to attend 
them. 

"The boy is always late," said Lady 
Margaret ; " and we shall be half an hour on 
the stairs." 

She was right. They had to wait some 
ten or twelve minutes or so after the hour. 
She had made the great argosy w^ait at the 
door ; and then a note was brought in to 
Diana. It ran : . 



THE OLD ROUND. 3 

'' Dear Miss Gat, . I am obliged to go 
to the country to-night on business, and 
cannot go with you to the ball. Pray 
excuse me to Lady Margaret Bowman. I 
am not well. " Patmore." 

Lady Margaret gave a sort of snort. 
'' Not well : fiddle-de-dee ! This is some 
of his wretched acting and clever little 
trickery, as he thinks it." 

Diana, dressed for the sacrifice, coloured, 
but tossed her head scornfully. " We don't 
want him at all," she said; '^and, thank 
Heaven, I never did. I understand . " 

" Nonsense, dear," said Lady Margaret ; 
.^'you do not. Keep up your heart, you 
know, before those people ; for they'll be 
watching you, dear, and making out all 
sorts of things. I know that wretched 
Wally Pepys has been inventing all sorts 
of lies, just to give himself importance, and 
get a dinner in return for his information ; 
so, dear, don't be looking dejected, but 
dance away merrily." 

B 2 



4 DIANA GAY. 

With this judicious encouragement they 
entered the arena ; but Diana's attempt at 
looking indifferent only produced a scornful 
expression on her pretty mouth. She 
fancied every one was looking at her. In 
reality the world does not care so much for 
us, and our concerns, as to let even the 
enjoyment of our coming misfortune in- 
terfere with their regular sports. The story 
was whispered about, "That's the young 
girl spoken of in the Regent-street Ckro- 
nicle. It's all coming on next month." 

Several of her and Lady Margaret's 
friends and male retainers, as thev mis^ht 
be called, were away, or obliged to go to 
some other party, which accidentally made 
the night scarcely so triumphant as had 
been some others. It looked like neglect ; 
and Diana said to herself bitterly, " 0, how 
like this cruel world ! " 

Lady Margaret was out of humour. There 
had been also some mal-entendu about her 
midnio^ht meal. 



THE OLD EOTJND. 5 

As we have said, there was no conspiracy, 
nothing cruel ; hut Diana's gentle sensitive- 
ness seemed to detect a change. Still, here 
was a good-natured face, a little spare 
figure, in front of Diana, who had just come 
back from a rather dismal dance. It was 
Sir John Williamson, the Attorney-General. 
Yonder was Lady Jane " instructing coun- 
sel," that is, surrounded with admiring 
gentlemen. Sir John had to go out now 
and again, just as the carriage and servants 
would be ordered at eleven o'clock. He 
bore it very well, and indeed was rather 
proud of his showy lady. 

He took Diana's hand cordially. 
'' Dancing away," he said. '' I wonder 
what dancing is like. I would give the 
world to know the feeling, the enjoyment. 
Will you come down and have an ice ? 
No, I am not ornamental enough ? " 

" Delighted," said Diana, with alacrity ; 
** what an unkind speech ! " 

" So we are going to have a little law- 



b DIANA GAY. 

suit," he went on as they descended. '' My 
poor child, to pick you out to be worried 
in this way ! Well, I am not going to worry 
you either ; but you know this is all in my 
trade. Now tell me about it," he added 
seriously. " I want to know ; for I have 
great interest in you, my dear child, and 
we must do our best for vou." 

"0, how kind of you. Sir John!" said 
Diana. ''But it is so sudden, and it has 
frightened me, you know." I am alone, I 
may say, and have so few to turn to, since 
. since my poor darling left me." 

" Nonsense ; you have plenty. Tell me, 
would you be afraid to pay a busy man a 
visit in his own study to-morrow morning, 
and we'll talk it over seriously ? " 

Diana's eyes brightened. 

'' You are so good. Sir John. Indeed I 
will. That is, though, I have nothing to tell 
as yet ; but they are going to make it all out." 

''"Very well," he said ; " we can put it off 
until they do make it out. Just tell your 



THE OLD KOUND. / 

solicitor, when he has his case pretty well 
ready, to send the papers, and I'll give you 
a good opinion . at least as good as is going. 
Don't think of it a moment. Those things 
are very likely made up to extort money. 
There, there's Welbore coming to claim 
you." 

This comfort put Diana quite in spirits 
again, and the kindness of the great law- 
officer's manner quite comforted her. "I 
will come, indeed," she said ; " and it is so 
good of you." Then they went home. 

Sir Duncan Denison, physican-in-ordinary 
to the Queen, had been calling in occasion- 
ally at Lady Margaret's, and in his playful 
fashionable way, so as not to give alarm to 
anybody, had warned her . his finger up . 
about the "fulness," and those "danger- 
ous dinner-parties." 

" A year in one of those ascetic monastic 
orders, my dear Lady Margaret," he said, 
" would do us all a world of good." 

Lady Margaret, indeed, thought poorly of 



8 DIANA GAY. 

the faculty ; they were " all fiddle-de-dee> 
my dear;" and she only tolerated her friend 
Sir Duncan for the gossip he brought ''from 
those little dark dens at St. James's/' and 
above all, from Hampton Court, where 
he had a large clientele among the ho- 
nourable spinsters, and lean and slippered 
pantaloons of quality, who were there en 
pension. 

He was '' the most agreeable creature, my 

dear." He had always some bit of sweet- 

*/ 

bread in his pocket . that is, a succulent 
morsel of scandal . that was sinsrularlv 
toothsome. The doctor himself relished it 
quite as much ; was, indeed, as his friends 
said, a true old woman of the Court ; and 
after the first minute or two forgot his pro- 
fession, and was in an easy-chair, pouring 
out his stores of news. 

Lady Margaret, laughing at his warning, 
had this season made one of her most 
vigorous campaigns in the dinner-party way. 
Having *' got Bowman " to take the house. 



THE OLD EOUx\D. 1> 

she enjoyed the novelty, and, as it were, 
made up for past and lost time. Very soon 
she had forgotten Diana's trouble, that spec- 
tral sword which was hanging over the 
young girl's head, and gave that worn and 
troubled look to those bright eyes. 

" My dear," said Lady Margaret, *' I sup- 
pose it will all come right. These are some 
low creatures, depend upon it ; and this i& 
their story." 

She had been Avorried herself a good deal 
of late. Bowman was talking about the 
expense, and the bills were coming in ; that 
for the argosy and the great horses had '' on 
job " was frightful. But there was a great 
business approaching . a select and royal 
ball, given in honoiu' of the Prince of Bum- 
penbottel, who, it was supposed, wished for 
one of the junior English princesses for his 
son, and it was thought was very likely to 
succeed. He had brought his son . Pritz . 
a long, yellow, hulking young German, and 
everything was going on prosperously, the 



10 DIANA GAY. 

ground being indeed smooth, laid out in 
velvet grass, from the known partiality of 
the English nation for these sort of alliances. 

There was one ball given at the palace to 
the regular crowd, the genteel rank-and-file, 
when the grand staircase and the " splendid 
suites of rooms," &c., were thrown open, 
" and the place really swarmed, my dear, 
with members," and the commoner sorts of 
lords. But there was to follow a far choicer 
and more restricted business . the line to be 
drawn, the gilt cord stretched across ; and 
to get inside, under, or even stride over this 
barrier, if it could be done with decency, 
was the struggle now going on. It was, 
according to Lady Margaret's favourite 
phrase, to be '' all the elect and select, my 
dear." 

In nearly every '^ set," circle, or commu- 
nity, each person has certainly a fellow, or 
family, with a particular and odious relation 
to him or her . the rock ahead, as the gen- 
tlemen of tragedy would call it . a sort of 



THE OLD EOUND. 11 

Grundy, which rises, Jack-in-the-box-like, 
at every moment the other wishes to rise, 
and thus gets in the way of the light or the 
warmth, or any advantage that may be 
coming. In short, these are really the 
persons "made for each other;" and every 
one of us has this mysterious relation to 
some obstructive. Do we wish to quaff the 
cup of bliss, they must go near to snatching 
it from us, or at least put their detestable 
lips to it at the same moment, when it 
becomes as good as poisoned. When the 
bliss has not yet come, but coming, we see 
their shadow on the ground gradually 
enlarging. It is an eternal struggle ; some- 
times we vanquish them, but oftener they 
us. They are a sort of monster we cannot 
get rid of. We are fastened to each other 
according to the rule of the Danish punish- 
ment, and can only hew each other to death. 
Lady Margaret Bowman and Lady Man- 
tower were in precisely this relation. 

This ''Mantower woman," as Lady Mar- 



12 DIANA GAY, 



garet called lier, '' had of late grown to a 
pitch that was becoming unbearable." Lady 
Margaret would swell and turn pink, and 
flush up hotly, as she spoke of her. She 
confronted Lady Margaret everywhere. She 
had more tlian her usual success, and Lady 
Margaret more than usual ill-luck. And 
here was this German ducal ball, which 
Lady Margaret Bowman " was moving hea- 
ven and earth" to get to, as the phrase 
runs, and for which that tremendous form 
of exertion had not helped in her the least. 
Prom Mr. Penguin, '' who was about the 
Court," had come one morning a fatal reply 
. as it might be from the Home Secretary 
announcing that the law must take its 
course . and all hope had fled. She was 
deeply mortified. It was just like Bowman 
. good for nothing always . a man with all 
his county interest, and yet Avhom they no 
more regarded than if he was an old hunt- 
ing-whip. The mortification seemed to take 
hold of her mind; and while poor little Diana 



THE OLD ROUND. 13 

needed all the comfort of talk and sympathy 
in her trouble, Lady Margaret would wander 
off to what she called this insult. 

There was one of the usual dinner-parties 
coming on . cast in a mould, all in one piece, 
as it were : figures, company, table, attend- 
ants en hloc . so little variation was there . 
at the Mark Antrobus's. The same typical 
men and women ; the same dresses, '' low 
necks," and what she would have called 
" tow-row" headdresses. The argosy came 
rolling and swinging up as usual, opened its 
porthole, and banged off its heavy steps, and 
groaned and reeled as its portly captain 
descended heavily; then righted with a 
spring of relief when she was on shore. 
Diana, duly attendant, stepped out lightly, 
and seemed to fly to the landing-place. It 
was the old form of entrance, the old sim- 
pering and welcome, the eternal pattern. 
When these veterans of society are in hon- 
ourable retraite, how confused must be the 
retrospect . the past seeming to go round 



14 DIANA GAY. 

before their eyes, like that toy called the 
zoetrope, and showing confused dinner after 
dinner, that seem to '^run into each other " 
with bewildering monotony. 

It was a very stately dinner, the Antro- 
buses being wealthy and important people, 
. highly fashionable too. Diana was very 
silent, yet never so interesting, as the young 
gentleman who took her down thought, and 
who did his utmost to cheer her, and per- 
haps to make himself agreeable. Alas, she 
had not seen the evening number of the 
Regent-street Chronicle, the lively gentle- 
man's paper, which seemed to keep its eye, 
as it were, on the case, and which gave now 
and again some mysterious bit of informa- 
tion about it, acquired no one knew how\ 
Nearly every one in the company had seen 
it save Lady Margaret and her protegee, the 
former being about as likely to look at a 
newspaper as at a law-book : except in- 
deed that Diana had to read out that one 
column in the Morning Plush, where the 



THE OLD EOUND. 15 

list of company, &c. was given. This little 
paragraph ran thus : 

" It seems the affaire Gay progresses. 
We understand that within the last week 
a new and important link in the chain of 
evidence has been discovered. Those who 
have seen the plaintiff say that the likeness 
to the late Mr. Gay is something striking. 
The defendant's solicitor is on the Continent 
looking for facts ; for the sake of the fair 
tenant in possession, it is hoped he will find 
none of the proverbially stubborn ones." 



( 16 ) 



CHAPTER 11. 

LADY MAHaAKET RETIRES. 

Had anyone told of or shown this state- 
ment to Lady Margaret, it would have had 
little effect on her. Her mind was full of 
one subject . her rock ahead was there, 
sitting opposite, though she, Lady Margaret, 
had at least the satisfaction of being taken 
down before her. The '^ odious Mantower " 
was in great spirits, cordial even to her 
enemy, who little divined the reason of this 
hilarity. The former was quite cowed by 
this persecution. Diana noticed the grow- 
ing colour in her cheeks, and that she did 
not speak much, but seemed quite to forget 
the wholesome caution of the Court Doctor. 
The " odious Mantower " was a tall, angular (^ 



LADY MARGARET RETIRES. 17 

woman, whose daughters, long like herself, 
were dispersed round and about the table, 
"jerking their necks like storks," so had 
their enemy thus unkindly described them. 
This elation disturbed Lady Margaret. 

Presently, when the ladies had removed 
to the drawing-room, and were resolved in 
that committee of the whole house, and had 
commenced their mysterious Eleusinian 
mysteries of which the writer dare not 
speak, and hath no knowledge, suspecting 
that if mortal man were to intrude he would 
be justly sacrificed, again Lady Mantower 
broke out. The subject was the ducal ball, 
introduced ])v the ladv of the house. 

'' We are not fine enough, it seems," she 
said, " for these German people. As they 
did not think of us, it was not worth taking 
trouble about." 

Xearly every one joined in this judicious 
way of viewing the matter. Lady Mar- 
garet spoke of the whole with a sort of 
scorn. 

III. 



18 DIATs^A GAY. 

" Your girls like this sort of thing," said 
the hostess to Lady Mantower ; '' and it will 
amuse them." 

" Yes," said Lady Mantower ; " they sent 
us an invitation. I am sure Rose and Mary 
will enjoy seeing the young prince. It was 
so nice of them, so kind, was it not ? . I 
thought you were going," she added, turning 
to Lady Margaret. '' But they tell me it is 
very difficult to get there." 

It was notoriously hard to make that lady 
stagger under any blow; but she did on 
this occasion. It was the last straw ; her 
presence of mind had all but given way, and 
she had nearly said, " What ! you asked ! 
it's false ! " But the gentlemen were 
coming up, clustering each to some lady's 
feet with the old fatuous smile, as who 
should say, '' How droll I am ! what funny 
creatures we are ! " 

Diana noticed that Lady Margaret had a 
wild and confounded look, and seemed more 
flushed than she had perceived before. She 



LADY MAEGARET RETIRES. 19 

had even observed with disquiet that too 
hearty meal, and determined that when 
they got home she would really get on some 
of her little coaxing ways . as it were, 
ornaments . and speak seriously, and im- 
plore her for her own sake to mind what 
Sir Duncan had said. Lady Margaret was 
so very full in person ; that large figure was 
stored with all sorts of unwholesome juices. 

In due time they were going out to the 
argosy, shining and glittering in the lamp- 
light. Lady Margaret leaning heavily on 
Antrobus. Down went the steps, "thud, 
thud," like clods on a coffin. 

" Such a pleasant evening ! " said Lady 
Margaret, according to her old mechanical 
formula . and which she would have said 
still, had she been sitting the whole night 
long on St. Lawrence's gridiron^ . " really 
charming ! " 

"So ^lad vou liked it," said Antrobus. 
"And I hope, Miss Gay.-" Diana was 
tolerably well trained also : 

c 2 



20 DIANA GAY. 

" I liked it so much ! " 

Then they rolled away home. Then Lady 
Margaret burst out in a fury. 

'^ Who is she ? What does she mean ? 
You heard all that ? Nice pass things are 
coming to. Eut I'll expose her ; I know 
things about her . things if they were 
known, she daren't set her foot in the 
palace. They'd turn her out." 

Diana had never heard her speak so 
excitedly. 

'' Don't think of it, dear," she said ; '^ it's 
not worth . " 

" Not worth, child ! " said Lady Margaret. 
'* How can ^ou know? Though, indeed 
it's getting not to be worth, when creatures 
of that sort . " Here she became silent. 

Diana wondered at the excitement, at 
the trembling voice, and at this way . un- 
usual with Lady Margaret . of looking at 
such a thing as a calamity. 

On rolled the argosy, swinging round 
corners, flashing a blaze into some pedes- 



LADY 3IAEGARET EETIRES. 21 

trian's eyes like a mammoth policeman, 
and finally drew up at their house in Port- 
man-square. Instantly the hall-door flew 
open, the steps were down, and Diana had 
fluttered out " like a bird," as her admirers 
would say. Lady Margaret's descent was 
always a more laborious and tedious busi- 
ness. '' Jeames " or Thomas was ready, 
standing in all his height and majesty, his 
strong arm bent foru'ard, which her lady- 
ship used to clutch and grasp almost con- 
vulsively as she came out, a process against 
which *' Jeames " made many a ''servants'- 
'all " protest, as being " houtreegious, 
reely ; " protesting that " a man's harm 
hain't quite a balluster." But on this 
night Jeames' s arm remained bent for 
some seconds, and her ladyship never 
stirred. Diana's little white figure was 
seen in the hall, waiting to receive her. 

The great menial had come up the steps 
with a scared stride, to fetch a lamp, for 
the large figure within the argosy was quite 



22 DIANA GAY. 

at rest, and never stirred. Down fluttered 
her ladyship's maid, and figures from below 
came rushing up ; and some people in the 
street stopped and lingered curiously as 
they saw the lamp brought out, and the 
young girl in a cloak on the steps, and 
then the figure carried in. 

Sir Duncan was roused up from his bed, 
and came in a surprisingly short time. In 
a moment he was at work, and in a moment 
had comfort for the agitated girl. 

'^ A stroke," he said; "but a desperate 
hard one. I told her of this again and 
again. You see she breathes. We may 
do something yet." And with the usual 
fiery remedies he laboured hard ; and before 
morning Lady Margaret was alive again. 

Bowman had been telegraphed for. "With 
the day other physicians came and gathered 
round her. Diana . infinitely relieved when 
they told her that all danger was gone, but 
that " we must be most careful " . saw now 
quite another Lady Margaret sitting up 



LADY MAEGABET EETIEES. 23 

there before her ; one who seemed as though 
some ruins had fallen on and crushed her. 
There was another face, bloodless, and 
altered in shape ; and she was almost scared 
to see how the mouth hung down at one 
corner, and what a dull, stony stare came 
into the eyes at times. 

Under such a trial there was but one 
course. Sir Duncan said, . to go abroad and 
*' drink waters," and at once, without a 
second's delay. So had ended what might 
be called the fourth act of Lady Margaret's 
life : the next would languish through, 
without interest or business. Indeed, it 
was full time that the curtain should come 
down. She could now only speak in strange 
indistinctness ; her images of '^ the odious 
Mantower " and her rivalry had passed 
away ; the great ducal ball, where that 
enemy had flourished, was over, and was 
as nothing ; all was changed. The mansion 
was being given up hurriedly ; great trunks 
were in the hall : '' Jeames " had received 



24 DIANA GAY. 

notice ; the argosy and tall liorses had gone 
home. Diana, sitting np half the nights, 
the most tender and sohcitous of nurses, 
would have gone anywhere with her to 
continue those offices of devotion. But 
that could not he ; she could not he away 
from her suit. A hired nurse had come 
into office ; this trained service was indis- 
pensable. As many friends said, '' God 
help poor Bowman ! " who never did a 
thing for himself in his life. 

There, however, Avas to he left our Diana, 
without a substantial female friend to turn 
to. To whom could she go ? There she 
was to be, in that hired house, which she 
had taken, a dismal prospect before her, 
with comins: dano-ers and a new world. 
Trials and troubles seemed to be crowding 
on her. At last it was the night of the 
departure of the Bowmans, and it had 
grown nearly dark. She was sitting with 
the helpless lady upstairs, when word 
was brought that Captain Lugard was 



LADY MARGARET RETIRES. 25 

below. He had been away with his regi- 
ment. 

" Diana," he said eagerly, '' I only heard 
two days ago ; but they would not let me 
go. I have come the moment I could get 
free. What are these people going to do 
with you ? Surely not leaving you here ? " 

" They must go," said Diana. " Poor 
Lady Margaret dare not stay." 

" But w^hat is to become of you ? My 
God ! have thev not thou2:ht of that ? Do 
they mean to cast you off, now that they 
have no more use for you ? Have you 
thought of yourself, dear Diana ? " 

Diana looked at him, a little scared. 
She had not thought of this ; she was not 
selfish. 

'^ I must stay here, of course," she said. 

" You ! a young girl ; impossible ! No ; 
I have thought of it . very anxiously too. 
You must come to me . to us . your old 
friend, that has your interest at heart." 

'^ O no ! " said she, '' that could not be." 



26 DIANA GAY, 

" Couid not be ! " said he ; " perhaps so. 
But where will you go, Diana ? What is 
to become of you ? Think of your enemies ; 
think of the net that is gathering about 
you, a young girl, alone, without any 
friends. Ah, you must think of this. With 
us you will have your old Kitty . Kitty 
Crowder." 

This struck Diana. 

" Indeed, I am very unfortunate," she 
said, a little helplessly ; '' and I don't know 
what to do. But you said enemies. I have 
done nothing to any one that I know of." 

" Think ; just think, then. Is there no 
one that hates me, and hates you ? " 

" Robert Bligh ? O, he would not harm 
me. I am sure at this moment if he knew . " 

'' Will nothino^ convince vou ? " said 
Lugard, impatiently. " But, thank heaven ! 
we have the proofs at last. Page came back 
last night, and has traced all. He will be 
here in a few minutes, and you shall know 
from his own lips. There ! " 



LADY MARGARET RETIRES. 27 

There was a step on tlie stair, and Mr. 
Page entered. He greeted Diana with his 
old air of lowly subservience. 

" Now, Page," said Lugard impatiently, 
'' you are just in time. Tell what you have 
found out, and speak plainly." 

" I always do," said the other, coldly, 
" on business matters. I shall not trouble 
Miss Gay with details unless she wishes it ; 
but if she will allow me to summarise the 
matter in a sentence or two . " 

" Yes ; tell me quick, is it good or bad ? " 

''It is satisfactory, as far as it is certain 
and can be depended on. I have all the 
papers here, chapter and verse, page and 
line; and it comes to this . to what I 
thought." 

"And to what I thought, and what I 
said all along," said Lugard. ''Allow me, 
please. It comes to this, I say ; whether 
it be a conspiracy, whether there is any case 
or not, the whole has been got up by the 
Bligh family." 



28 DIANA GAY. 

'^What ? " said Diana, timidly. '' O no ! 
Surely not. But have you proof ? " 

'' As I live, yes ; indeed, it is notorious at 
Boulogne. It was not difficult to find. 
Mrs. Bligh has been there months, hunting 
up this, hunting up that. She has suc- 
ceeded so far. Her son . " 

" Ko ; not Robert ? " 

'' Yes ; I met him in the packet coming 
back. I suppose, after having arranged his 
work. The mother and he had been set- 
tling their plans together. It was she who 
found out this girl in a convent ; indeed, 
she makes no secret of it. But I have all 
the proofs." 

" O, how cruel, how wicked ! " cried 
Diana; " and I never injured them." 

That night, as Diana was watching beside 
Lady Margaret, the picture of herself in her 
desertion and desolation came back upon 
her very forcibly. She shrank from it with 
a sort of terror. Above all, she was now 
filled with a warm resentment and indigna- 



LADY MAEGAEET EETIKES. 29 

tion against the mother and son who could 
be thus vindictive. She felt her spirit rise, 
and was ready to meet their attacks as 
hoklly. Before the next evening she had 
agreed to accept the asylum which her old, 
kind, and true friends had offered to her ; 
for she saw at last how sensible was Lugard, 
and how truly he had divined what she had 
never seen herself. 

It did look suspicious, all but convincing. 
Mr. Page, returning home from Boulogne, 
had actually met Robert Bligh on the deck 
of the packet, and recognised at once so 
well-known and " rising " a junior. 



( 30 ) 



. CHAPTER III. 

A BONE OF A FAMILY SKELETON. 

After Robert's last interview witli Diana, 
lie had gone home to a great brief, which 
was ready waiting to absorb, and even to 
devour him. But he could not shut out 
what loould come between his eyes and his 
papers . the strange discovery he had made 
that day. All through the fluttering leaves 
of Cox and Malagrida (he was for the re- 
spondents, and would have to open their 
case before the Vice-Chancellor the follow- 
ing day), he was pursued by this disturbing 
notion. Pity,, sorrow . and perhaps the old 
love, which he could not extinguish so 
readily as he imagined . that terrible and 



A BONE OF A FAMILY SKELETON. 31 

sudden reverse for one so young, so inno- 
cent, SO full of hope and beauty, and enjoy- 
ment of all the pleasant things of the world 
. quite took hold of him, and kept him in a 
reverie, thrusting out the obtrusive "re- 
spondent " Malagrida, and by midnight 
scarcely '' a single fact " had been taken in. 
All that he had heard came floating between 
his mind and it, and distracted his atten- 
tion. He had a strange and secret convic- 
tion that what had been charged was quite 
true . that Mrs Bligh had some part in this 
surprising turn. Her awful and mysterious 
allusions to punishment, her invocations of 
vengeance on Diana's head, now recurred to 
him. He knew how firm of purpose, how 
unrelenting even, she was ; and he recalled 
that, when he had asked about the object of 
her visit to Boulogne, she had answered 
bluntly and curtly, " that she had a good 
reason for going there." Then came a crush 
of business, increasing with him every day, 
and he had little time to think or speculate. 



32 DIANA GAY. 

He had a certain instinct . sucli as never 
failed him in doubtful cases . that there was 
something real and substantial at the bot- 
tom of this suit with which poor Diana was 
menaced. The skilled lawyer, at the first 
glance, often feels such an inspiration, 
which rarely misleads. But still it was 
only too likely that Mrs. Bligh would not be 
checked by any consideration which stood 
in the way of her purpose. He had clear 
and certain recollections of little passages 
in old days of his boyhood ; and though 
he loved and respected her, he knew her 
character and her iron purpose in such 
matters as well as though she were a wit- 
ness and in the box under his treatment. 

The evening mail had been just brought 
in to him, generally half-a-dozen letters 
strong. The morning one was by far the 
heavier. There was one letter on thin post- 
paper, and covered over with the parti- 
coloured blue and orange stamps and 
smirched marks which betray the foreign 



A EONE OF A FAMILY SKELETON". 33 

letter. It was from Mrs. Bligh : he opened 
it eagerly, for it came apropos, 

'' My dear Child," . it ran, . '^ you have 
heard by this time of what has overtaken 
her. "Was I a true prophet? I told you 
vengeance would overtake her, and it has. 
Nor do you imagine, nor let her and her 
friends persuade you, that it is a mere idle 
menace . a thing that will blow over, or 
that will be proved to be a low trumped-uj^ 
matter to extort money. She may tell her 
friends so, and they will tell her ; but it is 
nothing of the kind, as I knoio, and as the 
world will know by and by." 

Eobert Bligh did not read any more ; this 
convinced him. Within half an hour his 
resolution had been taken. He had sent 
Malagrida back to his solicitor, naming a 
friend who was ready to take it up ; and by 
the first continental train next morning was 
hurrying down to Polkestone. By the after- 
iir. D 



34 DIANA GAT. 

noon he was gliding into the bright and 
theatrical port of Boulogne, looking at its 
gay colours and unfamiliar faces. 

The gossiping exiles of that pleasant 
place of refuge, the lively natives and good- 
natured shopkeepers, had long noticed . the 
former with an exaggerated curiosity, the 
latter with the polite toleration of citizens 
of the world . the austere and ascetic-look- 
ing female who had come to live among 
them for a short while, and who was rest- 
lessly going about making some mysterious 
inquiries. The English expatriated at first 
could not make her out, and offered their 
usual advances; but when her hostile manner 
and cold accueil had firmly repelled them, 
became (also as usual) her determined foes. 
Many were the circumstantial stories sent 
round : she had fled from her creditors . her 
daughter had run away with a music-master, 
'* an awful business " . with more ingenious 
fables. The French, as we said, were utterly 
incurious ; but noticing that she was a good 



A BONE OP A FAMILY SKELETON. 35 

deal with a certain aged abbe, who lived en 
retraite^ as it were, in a modest lodging in 
the haute ville, quietly set her down as a 
devote enragee, who had been in youth and 
in middle age equally ''enraged" for plea- 
sure, and was now only taking the usual 
Erench course. 

Devotion at Boulogne was the amusement 
of old age, as pleasure had been of youth 
and maturity. Every day had its season 
according to this philosophic people, who 
were content with quiet solutions of things, 
and did not seek to penetrate deep for mys- 
terious secrets. It was presently known 
that the stranger had gone away to Amiens, 
and that she had returned ; but some 
(English) curiosity was deservedly excited 
when old Captain Eilby reported that he 
had seen Dubosc . the retired police- oflS.cer 
. pay her a visit. This state of observation 
continued for some weeks, until the hand- 
some Mrs. Eazakerly and her husband ar- 
rived and began ''to dash out," as it was 

D 2 



36 DIANA GAY. 

called, and all the broken down " pack " 
harked away on that scent, and to a new cry. 
Another month went by, and it was all for- 
gotten ; until the same Captain Eilby told 
one evening, at the Club, that he was sure 
old '' Bonaparte's " son had arrived . such 
was the disrespectful name he had given the 
lady, from her peculiar cast of features . as 
he had overheard him give that name to the 
passport-fellow in the oB.ce. 

Mrs. Bligli was sitting in one of the 
bright and cheerful rooms that give on the 
hill, which is called the Grande Hue, when 
a native maid entered with news that there 
w^as a gentleman below. 

Mrs. Bligh was never startled: she did 
not start when he entered, though a faint 
tinge of colour came into her grim cold 
cheeks. She welcomed him as though they 
had parted, not indeed the day before, but 
perhaps the week before ; there was that 
measure of warmth in her reception. But 
liobert fancied he saw a sort of distrust or 



A BONE OF A FAMILY SKELETON. 37 

inquiring challenge in her face, as who 
should say, " Why have you come ? what 
is it brings you ? " 

They sat down together, mother and son, 
and he talked of what he knew would please 
and interest her . his own prospects and 
success. The dinner came ; and when the 
maid had gone he came at once gravely to 
the subject he was full of. Almost at once, 
and even before he began, her manner 
changed: she composed herself to a stiff 
and hostile attitude. 

" This dreadful news," he said, " about 
poor Diana . " 

She interrupted him. '' Yes, got my 
letter ? Yes ! dreadful for her, if you will." 

" Dreadful for all who have an interest in 
a poor, helpless, friendless child. 

" I see . not cured yet. You have seen 
her, I suppose, since she learned this ? " 

" Yes, for a short time." 

" Of course. And I suppose she went 
through her old course of histrionic tricka 



38 DIANA GAY. 

. her tears and helplessness ? She can do 
all that business well." 

'' On the contrary, mother, I must tell 
you she gave me no such reception; but 
made the most cruel charges . which, Heaven 
knows, I do not deserve." 

Scorn and rage came into Mrs. Bligh's 
face. '' And she dares to keep this up still 
. the artful, designing, ill-conditioned crea- 
ture ! But she shall be brought down ; and 
brought low. I tell you so, Ftobert. Por 
these years of insult and insolence, which 
she thinks all sport and innocence, she shall 
soon atone ; and, if we wish it, we can make 
her come grovelling to our knees, Robert, 
to beg mercy. I promise you that, Robert 
. I, your mother . and I never yet promised 
what I did not perform ! " 

There was a silence. Robert made a 
motion to speak, but restrained himself. 
He looked at her doubtfully. 

'^This is what I have always deprecated," 
he said. " I want no vengeance and no 



A BONE OF A FAMILY SKELETON. 39 

pnnisliment ; besides, what can we do? 
This will turn out a mere vain menace ; 
one of those schemes to get money to which 
many families have been exposed." 

His heart misgave him later for thus 
trying diplomacy with ner ; but he wished 
to know more. She was so eager, that she 
thought the chance of failure was the only 
thing that stood in the way of his adhesion. 
She began at once. 

''Tell me first about her . what she said, 
what she dared to say. Were there no 
signs of repentance or grace . no promise 
of the old love ? " 

"My dear mother, we have done with 
that long ago." 

" Then I tell her she may have done with 
it, but not with the consequences. You and 
I shall live to see her begging yet ; coming 
to you a reduced girl, asking you to get 
her into some decent family as a governess, 
to earn her bread. She will think of the 
old love then: but it will do her no 



40 DIANA GAY. 

good. Never fear, Eobert ; She will rue 
that day yet." 

" How do you know all this ? " he said 
abruptly. 

" Ah, Ptobert, what have I come here for ? 
What have I been doing these six weeks 
past ? What have I been hunting up night 
and day . dreaming of? What have I des- 
paired of finding, but have found at last P 
I found it though." 

" What, mother ? " 

" Listen," she said, '' Robert. Draw io 
your chair close. You shall know the 
whole ; what it has cost me so much trouble 
day and night to make out." 

" No, mother, I do not want to know. 
I can have nothing to do with this ; and 
warned you that I could not." 

" Polly ! " she said, contemptuously. 
'' But you shall ; you must see what a net 
I have woven about her, and she shall 
never break through it." 

Eobert Bligh . faintly protesting . then 



A BOXE OF A FAMILY SKELETON. 41 

had to listen ; for he felt, or at least this 
seemed to be his excuse, that he must 
save her from herself. Curiosity also 
was at work. This was the story she 
told him. 



( 42 ) 



CHAPTEE lY. 

A PIECE OF EAMILY HISTORY. 

Some five-and-thirty years before, tlie 
colonists found among them a fair and 
good-looking young man, with a pleasant 
laugh and a hearty, careless manner, who, 
in a very short time, grew to be liked by 
a good maiiy. His name was Burgess ; and 
as he seemed to have some money, and 
spent it freely in entertaining friends, he 
was considered delightful. No one thought 
of asking who Mr. Burgess was, from 
whence he came, or why he stayed there, 
. questions tacitly avoided in the place, 
unless a man had become generally odious, 
and there was an object in putting him 
down. Then malignity stopped at nothing ; 



A PIECE OE FAMILY HISTORY. 43 

and when tlie truth could not be found, 
falsehood and invention did just as well. 

Young Captain Burgess soon came to be 
one of the '' leaders " of the society there, 
such as it was, and had soon commended 
himself to the young ladies of the place. 
His free, joyous manners were found 
delightful, and his forwardness not im- 
pudence or familiarity, as they would 
have appeared in some one less gifted. 
He presently became a very wild young 
man, and soon the rumour went abroad of 
scrapes and riots and foolish escapades, at 
which the English chaplain used to shake 
his head with pity. 

The little Boulogne theatre led a sort of 
stagnant dramatic existence, whose players 
held much the same relation to other places 
as the audience did to the town itself, and 
who were thus, as it were, exiled from 
their native dramatic country. The French 
found their way there, and were amused; 
but the English were very contemptuous 



44 DIANA GAY. 

in their estimation of the performances, 
and were perpetually and unfairly com- 
paring it witli " the King's Theatre " at 
home, or Covent Garden. Young Burgess 
sometimes strolled in, . once or twice '^ got 
up a row," and was dragged out ferociously 
by the gendarmes. 

At last it was known that the '* adminis- 
tration " had engaged a dancer, . tenth-rate, 
perhaps, but still with good looks, . "the 
Duval," as she was called; and this 
quickened the languid curiosity of the 
English. She was pronounced by those 
judges "very fair on the whole;" and was, 
indeed, bold enough in her generation. 
Mr. Burgess was soon found to be one of 
her most ardent admirers, going every 
night, applauding noisily, to the disgust of 
the Prench, throwing bouquets, and fairly 
getting into a fresh quarrel with some man 
who had shown signs of disapprobation. 
He was seen on the Port walking with 
this ballerina, and scandalised the not- 



A PIECE OF FAMILY HISTORY. 45 

easily-scandalised company of the place. 
She was a bold, painted, flaring creature ; 
but, whatever was the secret, she had made 
a conquest of the young Englishman ; and 
very soon, when her engagement was over, 
a most delicious morsel of news, more tooth- 
some than the siicre (Torge to be bought at 
the corner shop, was sucked and enjoyed 
for many days. Captain Eilby discovered 
that " the poor fool " had actually married 
the girl. The amazement may be con- 
ceived. The conventionally " happy pair " 
had gone away, her engagement having 
terminated, to some other town, and were 
3iot heard of again for a very long time. 

Now Mrs. Bligh takes up the story, and 
shall tell the rest herself. 

'^ I was at this time, E^obert, in London, 
not yet married, and my greatest friend in 
the world, though she was many fyears 
older, was Laura Gay, one of the most 
resolute, unflinching women in the world, 
with a will and purpose worth that of a 



46 DIANA GAY. 

dozen men. It was she who did all for 
those Gays, and but for that gallant 
working creature, who laid her whole soul 
and mind to this one end, of raising up 
the family from the difficulties in which 
they were steeped, that girl, who now 
behaves with all this pride and insolence 
to you, would have been a pauper. Laura's 
husband was a poor weak creature, with no 
more brains than a monkey, and she ruled 
him for his own advantage. Gradually the 
estate got cleared ; the old load of building- 
debt was paid oflP. She got him back 
to their old place in the country, and she 
actually had things in train to get an old 
baronetcy revived ; for she was the proudest 
creature, and looked to position as the first 
thing ; and though she was not young, had 
the most surprising influence over political 
men. 

" Often she talked to me over these 
schemes of hers. ' If I had only mate- 
rials ! ' she would say ; ' but what can I do 



A PIECE OF FAMILY HISTORY. 47 

with him ? ' Her eldest son, who was in 
the army, was a wild scapegrace, . very 
delicate in appearance, but in reality strong; 
she often talked with me over him, and I 
could see all her thoughts turned to her 
second sensible and steady son. ' He can- 
not live,' she would say ; . ' I know he will 
drink himself to death. Perhaps it will be 
the best for himself in the end ; for if he 
ever comes into the property, he will waste 
and ruin everything. He has no head, no 
wits ; he does not like me, and I do not 
like him ; and it would be a mercy.' 

" Suddenly, one day, news arrived from 
the colonel of the regiment of a serious 
scandal . that young Gay had ' broken out,' 
had behaved in the most outrageous way, 
had set his colonel at defiance, and finally 
had gone off, leaving regiment, connections, 
&c., without leave or notice. No one knew 
what had become of him. The news was 
in all the papers, to her rage and mortifica- 
tion ; the disgrace and publicity wrung her 



48 DIANA GAY. 

very heart. Yet I think she felt some com- 
fort when she heard he had gone to the 
colonies . to the hackwoods ; for she was 
sure he would never be heard of again. I 
know what you are thinking of, Robert . 
how like she was in some things to your 
mother ; and so she was : and that was one 
reason of our friendship. 

'Tor some years he never was heard of, 
and this girl's father was now being 
brought up as the heir. But one day she 
came rushing to me with a letter. ' I knew 
it . I knew it ! ' she said. ' It was too great 
a blessing for me. I have had none all 
through my weary life.' She showed me 
the letter. It was from Boulogne . from 
him . saying that he was ill and deserted, 
imploring her to come to him, and that he 
had not long to live. She begged of me, if 
I would do her a service, to go with her ; 
and I agreed. 

" It was a weary journey, and all along 
the road I was surprised at her agitation ; 



A PIECE OF FAMILY HISTORY. 49 

and she kept repeating the words of the 
letter : ' 111 and deserted . ill and deserted ! 
If he has done that-;-my God, if he should 
have done that ! But he could not he so 
hase and wicked ! ' 

''When we arrived, we found our way to 
a mean lodging, and asked for him, as he 
had told us, hy the name of Burgess. As 
we entered the room, the first ohject we 
saw was a sickly-looking little girl, of about 
five years old, playing about the floor. 
Then Mrs. Gay gave a cry. The doctor 
came in nearly at the same time, and told 
her that he had very little hope. 

" She went in and saw her son, and 
stayed nearly an hour. She told me 
scarcely anything, except she said that the 
little girl was the daughter of some unfor- 
tunate married lady whom this scapegrace 
had run off with. I said nothing ; hut I 
was as shrewd and far-seeing as she was, 
and I constructed my own theory. That 
theory I long thought over afterwards ; and 

III. E 



50 DIANA GAY. 

a few inquiries made it complete and 
perfect. In fact, I rather resented that she 
did not put confidence in me. 

"In a few days he died, and she was 
with him to the last. The very next morn- 
ing I missed the little girl; and when I 
asked Laura Gay ahout it, she said that 
they had found out the relations, who had 
at last sent and agreed to take charge of 
her. They were not wealthy, and she, ' as 
usual,' she said, had heen obliged to agree 
to make them some allowance. Again, I 
had my own theory and my own conclusion ; 
and I had also made my own inquiries, and 
learned that 'the married lady' was a 
dancer, and that she had gone off not long 
before with a French ofB.cer. 

" Thus we settled everything happily, 
and returned home; and that . that girl's 
father" . Mrs. Eligh never could call her 
Diana . '' became the heir of Gay Court. 
Prom that time everything prospered. 
Laura made a great match for him, getting 



A PIECE OP FAMILY HISTORY. 51 

liim sixty tliousand pounds and some inte- 
rest, cleared the estate, and, had she lived, 
would have recovered the old baronetcy . 
the darling object of all her hopes. These 
schemes became her very life itself ; but I 
noticed a great change in her, as she grew 
every hour more stern, and iron-bound, and 
pitiless. Something like me^ Robert, you will 
say ; and indeed, she taught me much ; and 
if I had not been with her, perhaps I had 
been a different character. I often asked her 
about that time, and the little girl; what 
had become of her : but Laura Gay always 
answered me with a contemptuous laugh. 
' The low impostors ! I am only sorry I 
paid them any money. I suppose she is 
keeping a cafe, or dancing at a franc 
a-night, like her wretched mother. Why 
do you want to know ? ' I did not tell her 
why I wanted to know, because I had sus- 
picions of my own. But when that girl was 
growing up, and Laura had died . ^just, too, 
as she was so near the baronetcy . my 

E 2 
UNIVERSITY Df 

ILLiNOiS ['[^'^'^RY 



52 DIAXA GAY. 

ambitious schemes for you, dear Robert, 
were ripening, and I kept it by me as a 
useful weapon. What gift is there, after all, 
like that of discreet silence . of not speak- 
ing until the proper moment has arrived ? " 

'' And you knew all this, mother," said 
he, with a shocked look, '' and said nothing ? 
Allowed this dreadful injustice to go on for 
years?" 

" Well, I repair it now," said she calmly, 
" late as it is. As you say, a frightful wrong. 
But the true heir is found at last, and shall 
be restored; the false intruder, whose 
pride nothing but adversity can bring 
down, shall be cast out ; that cold, cruel 
girl shall descend to her proper station 
. to beggary and pauperism, and . serve 
her right." 

Robert started. 

''I do not believe this. This looks like 
some scheme that has been contrived." 

" You are consistent indeed," she said 
coldly, *'for a lawyer. Eut no matter." 



A PIECE OF FAMILY HISTOEY. 58 

" I mean, mother, tliey have imposed on 
YOU, or Your anger against her has helped to 
imj)ose on you. Do not think I care for 
her ; but it is for yourself . to save you from 
a remorse that Avill embitter one part of 
your life." 

'.' Most considerate ! " said she, her face 
^very moment darkening. " You may spare 
me that conventional advice ; I have heard 
it before. Eut this all points to something ; 
speak out, and let me understand you. Do 
you mean to say that you will oppose me in 
this business ? is that your meaning ? " 

*^ Oppose you r no. But, as I said, Ave 
should inquire . see that there is no fraud. 
That is my duty. I must see to that, as I 
am bound . whatever you think. "Why did 
you meddle with it ! mother ! Diana 
was right, then, when she said that this 
blow came from us. And he . that Lugard 
. was only right too." 

Mrs. Bligh darted a look of scorn and 
ansrer at him. 



64 DIANA GAY. 

" What do you mean by these words to 
me ? I tell you I would loish her to know 
it came from us. I am proud of it ; and shall 
take care the world knows it comes from us. 
There!" 

" It shall not come from me, mother/' said 
E^obert, in a low voice. '' I could not lend 
myself to such a course. No, nor must you." 

Again her face contracted. 

'.' Nor must I ! What is this ? Is this the 
news you have come over to tell your mother ? 
What does it mean ? Speak out, or . O, I see ! 
you have paid this visit in her interest ? " 

''No," he said; "but I confess I sus- 
pected this, and I have come to save you 
from a terrible infatuation of which you 
would repent all your life." 

" My long life ! " she said bitterly ; '' and 
which you shall have the glory of shorten- 
ing, you cruel, ungrateful son, you 1 for 
whom I have given my heart's blood. But 
don't dare to come in my way, or give me 
lectures ; go back to your courts as you 



A PIECE OF FAMILY HISTOEY. 55 

came, and God forgive you your want of 
heart." 

" I have much to be forgiven," he said. 
''But it is for your sake I speak in this 
vray ; not for myself, indeed. I know all 
you have done for me . how you have sacri- 
ficed your life for me ; and as you have done 
this also in my interest, as you think it, 
surely I may ask you, in the name of Heaven 
and of all your love for me, to give it up." 

" Go away, then ; go back ! " she said in a 
trembling voice, and pointing to the door 
with a long and trembling finger; ''go 
back. At least leave my rooDi; I do not 
want you here . I have my own purposes. 
Bless the Being that made you that you do 
not take something worse with you, that 
will cleave to you all the days of your life." 

She drew herself up . tall, grim, an awful 
imasje of terror. Some such imas^e came 
back to him from his old childish days, 
when she had so appeared to him; some- 
thins: of the old terror even came back to 



b'o DIANA GAY. 

him, and mechanically he put out his hands 
imploringly to deprecate her wrath. She 
drew back as if she had trodden on some 
reptile. 

" It is too late ; nothing you can do will 
atone for this. Take your part, and let 
me take mine ; unless . unless you go on 
your knees there, and swear that you will 
go back to London at once, and not move 
a finger." 

"No. I could not," said Ptobert. 

" Why do you stay, then ? " she said fran- 
tically. ''Am I not to have the ordinary 
privilege of being alone when I wish it ? 
Leave me ! or must I ring ? " 

There was a hard steel edge in her voice 
that seemed to cut and gash as she spoke, a 
cold savage glare in her eye which seemed 
to pierce him. All his court readiness for- 
sook him ; he wished to speak, but could 
not. As he stood faltering, she said. ''Then 
J must go, I see ! " and she swept from the 
room. 



A PIECE or FAMILY HISTOEY. 07 

He often recalled her last look of scorn 
and concentrated hatred, as it seemed to 
him ; but he thought her old affection would 
triumph, and that he had only to return 
in the mornins: and he would find the old 
affection and gentleness still at his service. 

When he did come back, repentant cer- 
tainly, he was told that she was gone away 
. whither they could not tell him. He 
came away sadly, yet still saying to himself, 
" I could not do otherwise ; and she wiil 
thank me afterwards, I know, for saving 
her from a great sense of remorse." 

On board the packet for England was the 
usual crowd of tourists and business-men 
The day was fine. Ptobert Bligh walked 
about the deck scarcely noticing the strange 
faces. Someone attracted his attention by 
an obsequious bow. He recalled that face 
as a professional one, the face of one be- 
longing to the "lower branch" of the 
profession. He recollected that the name 
was Page. 



( 58 ) 



CHAPTEE Y. 

MOETIFICATIOK. 

Lady Makgaret Bowman had gone, as 
the Horning Flush had taken care to ad- 
vise the public, to a watering-place on the 
Continent. This simple piece of informa- 
tion, which, curious to say, did not interest 
any of Lady Margaret' s^ie^cZs, but did a great 
many who had never seen her, and Avho fol- 
lowed the movements of august people with 
the greatest zest, . this news became, under 
the naagic of J?lusli treatment, as impres- 
sive as a state-paper : '* "We regret to learn 
that, owing to the imperative advice of her 
family physician, Lady Margaret Bowman 
has been obliged to leave town, to repair to 
the waters of Badentaul. It is hoped that 
her ladyship will be restored to health and 



MOETIFICATIOX. 69 

strength by the sanitary agency of that cele- 
brated curative medium. Miss Gay, of Gay 
Court, is sojourning at Eolkestone." An 
extract also from the lively Regent-street 
Clironicle may be found interesting. That 
capital journal always had some sort of hot 
muffin ready every night, something fresh, 
good, and appetising. The other papers had 
to bake and re-bake. The evidence for the 
plaintiff, in the impending ejectment-case, 
had been printed for the convenience of 
counsel, and the omnipotent Chronicle had 
contrived to get hold of a copy. It gave a 
morsel or two. 

'* The elements are dramatic enough," 
said the Chronicle. '^ What could be more 
so than the story of the Soeur Madeleine, 
belonging to a convent of gray sisters, near 
Amiens? Her story was taken before a 
commission; Mr. Staveley, Q.C., and two 
of his brethren . finding themselves, we 
daresay for the first time, within the en- 
closure of a convent. We have no doubt 



.00 DIANA GAY. 

the learned gentlemen behaved with all the 
gravity becoming their profession. This 
lady, it seems, is nearly eighty, and tells 
us a little history that we would commend 
to Mr. Philip Wattson for the first act of 
his next Prench drama at the Adelphi. 
She remembers a winter evening, a vast 
number of years ago, and an English lady 
<3oming in a post-chaise, and speaking 
Erench not very intelligibly, or, as t^ie 
sister says naively, a VAnglaise. She 
brought a little girl, whom she wished 
the community to bring up, and if possible 
convert into a nun ; and said that a small 
capital, representing some thirty pounds a 
year interest, was already in Mr. Marx's 
hands, a local Amiens banker. She would 
return every year to see her charge. It 
was of course in accordance with the 
-canons of dramatic propriety that the 
mysterious English lady never should re- 
turn. The local banker, liowever, was a 
very satisfactory substitute. All this we 



MOETIFICATIOX. Gl 

commend to Mr. Philip Wattson aforesaid 
as a tolerable Prologue . as it is the fashion 
to style a first act . for his ' Lost Child,' or 
whatever else he may choose to call his 
I)iece. 

" But now steps in another lady, whose 
name for the present we shall do no more 
than indicate obscurely, after the fashion of 
our contemporaries, describing her as one 
intimately connected with a certain rising 
barrister of the outer bar, who lately un- 
seated on petition a gallant officer who 
represented the little borough of C . . This 
lady has a foreign story to tell also, but 
which we must hold over for the present." 

That story was held over altogether, for 
the solicitor for the plaintiff, in the twinkling 
of an eye, made an application for an in- 
junction to restrain further publication, and 
succeeded, and, to use his own expression, 
'' salted " the lively journal in costs. 

Still, as the depositions were so vo- 
luminous, Mr. Page found his account in 



62 DIANA GAY. 

applications for time, motions, and so forth. 
Parties in these great suits are like the 
old line-of-battle ships, which have to be 
slowly towed into their place before action 
begins . a long business of warping, haul- 
ing, and what not. It would take 
many months before all was ready for the 
first gun. 

Diana had not forgotten the hint of her 
kind friend Sir John. As soon as was 
practicable, she got a little sketch of her 
case and of its strong points from her 
solicitor, and tripped away quietly one 
morning to the great man's house. As 
the little face looked out from the cab, the 
mansion had itself an awful, attorney- 
general sort of air ; and as the little figure 
got out timorously. Lady Jane herself 
happened to look from the window, and 
was not a little scornful to her friends on 
the score of this visit. No lady likes such 
appointments. 

Sir John received Diana from behind a 



MOETinCATION. 63 

barricade of papers, piled up like sandbags 
in a battery; laid aside the tremendous 
papers in the case of the seizure of the 
William Simpson by the Argentine Ee- 
public, and on which he was to give the 
Government an opinion, and welcomed 
'^ his little client " with great warmth and 
good-nature. He made her sit down beside 
him in a large "consulting-chair," as though 
he were a doctor, and a legal one. It was 
almost a picture to see this grave gentle- 
man with Diana at his knee, her eyes on 
his as he read. 

When he had done, he said anxiously, 
*' You know, my dear child, things in our 
profession are very uncertain; and what 
with our pig-headed juries, . and lawyers 
also with pig-heads, . and our dull judges, 
and the mistakes of counsel, you see, every- 
thing is so uncertain. Therefore I am al- 
ways for arranging or compromising. What 
do you think?" 

"0, then you think that there is no 



64 . DIANA GAY. 

hope? " said Diana, piteously. *^ I see that 
is the meaning of all this." 

"Not at all," said he, " but it is the un- 
certainty ; and these sort of cases are more 
uncertain than any other. Send your so- 
licitor to me ; I have so much on my hands 
now in the House and elsewhere, that reallv 
. however, I shall see about that. Kow, 
ray dear, you must leave me ; you can't 
imagine all the work on this poor head." 

That evening she had a note from Mr. 
Page, saying he had seen the Attorney- 
General, and had given him a brief in the 
case. Diana knew what this meant, and 
wrote a deeply grateful letter to her kind 
good friend. But she was now to have 
other little trials and mortifications. As 
the time wore on, and wore on slowly, 
Diana was to learn a little about the true 
character of the world she had once thought 
so charming. 

The young Lord Pat more would come at 
first pretty often, visits she was inclined to 



MOETIFICATIOX. bo 

set down to a generous sympathy and inte- 
rest ; but presently it became apparent that 
curiosity had a great deal to do with his 
attention. He put many questions, and 
would sit restlessly and pettishly as she 
answered him ; and, not without skill, even 
cross-examined the unconscious little lady 
on the prospects of the case. She, with a 
sort of epancliement quite natural to her, 
told him the whole truth, rather over- 
colouring it in her wish for generous comfort. 
'^ Indeed, I am sure we can only expect 
the worst ; and indeed I wish it was all 
over, and the suspense ended. It is making 
me wretched." 

'' But, good gracious," said Lord Pat- 
more, fretfully, '' have you got no one ta 
tell you anything . none of those lawyer 
fellows ? that man that used to be w'ith you 
. what's his name . Bligh ? " 

" I would not ask him ! " said Diana, 
drawing herself up and overstating an 
imaginary slight with scorn. ''He is my 
III. F 



66 DIANA GAY. 

enemy. Bat they have takea the opinion 
of one of the best counsel, . and I don't 
understand things well, . but he seems to 
1)0 very doubtful." 

" Seems to be very doubtful ? " said he, 
starting up. '' God bless us ! I thought it 
was all plain sailing . an imposture, and all 
that ? " 

'^ I wish it were," said Diana, sadly; " or 
if it be not, why should I wish to keep the 
rightful people out of their own ? But it is 
very hard on me, brought up to all this, 
and who have not learned to do anything 
for myself." 

The young lord expressed no sympathy, 
but kept drumming with his foot on the 
ground. 

''I'm sure," he said, '^it's most unplea- 
sant and painful ; and really I don't know 
what to say. Everybody is talking of it, 
and asking me. I am sure I don't know 
what I can tell them." 

*' It is very dismal," said Diana, still 



MOKTIFICATIOX. Q7 

reflectively; ''but I have found everyone 
very kind ; much more than I expected. I 
can never say that the world is hollow 
again." 

.' O, that's all very well," he said impa- 
tiently, " in the novels and that sort of 
place ; but romance is one thing. I wasn't 
brought up to romance. My guardians and 
all that will be savage. I never even 
dreamt of this, and nobody did; and I am 
sure it is very strange altogether." 

Diana was now looking at him with 
wonder, and not a little scorn. Xow at 
last she understood. She was getting rough 
lessons every hour, under these unmeaning 
phrases and this pettish circumlocution. 
She was not ans^rv; but still she felt a 
pang, for she had thought that this foolish 
butterfly, with all his folly and nonsense, 
was redeemed bv his attachment to her. 
Indeed, this was the redeeming point of all 
the hollow world, their love and good- 
nature to her. Many others, in a position 

F 2 



68 DL\NA GAY. 

like hers, cannot bring themselves to be- 
lieve in anything: but i>:ood of a world which 
is kind to them. 

That night Lord Patmore received a 
letter from Diana, which cost her very little 
to write, though it seemed a tragic enough 
occasion ; a person of the world, too, would 
have called it clever in its way. 

*' Deah Lord Patmore," . it ran . '' after 
you went away to-day I thought over very 
seriously what you had said, and ako what 
your manner seemed to convey. I do feel 
that things liave changed a good deal since 
you first paid me the compliment of giving 
me your regard. I am not exactly in the 
same position now, and we do not know 
what may happen. You will recollect that 
when you first spoke to me, and honoured 
me with so flattering a proposal, it was 
agreed that the matter should stand over 
till the end of the season. That has now 
come, and I think you will say it would be 



]\10RTIFiCATI0X. (39 

for the best that we should remain as wc 
were a year ago. I am sure you think with 
me. In any case it might hardly have 
suited; and it is much better to find this 
out before it be too late. 1 hope you will 
be very happy in whatever course of life 
you may adopt, and with whomsoever you 
choose ; and believe me 

''Your well-wisher, &c., Diana Gay." 

The young lord read this document with 
infinite relief. 

'' She is so noble I " he said to his friend ; 
*' it all came from herself. Nothing could 
be more handsome. She has the head of a 
man, and sees the whole situation. Sucli 
delicacy I she saw that it could not be. I 
declare solemnly there isn't a girl in town 
I would prefer to her . that is, if it was 
open to me to do it. I wish to Heaven it 
was, and that there was no such thing as 
money . or I mean that there was money 
enough for everyone." 



70 DIANA GAY. 

However, he was much relieved, though 
presently the reaction came, and he began 
to think that after all she might win the 
suit. And then Diana herself, after the 
first little shock, was as pleased ; for the 
end of the season, when she was to give her 
decision, or rather announce her accept- 
ance, was always before her, like some 
heavy trial. Now she was free; yet still 
she was mortified. 

" I thought he liked me," she said bit- 
terly. '^ I suppose this is the whole secret 
of all their devotion ; I thought they were 
coming so much after me, for myself alone." 
A rueful discovery which so many have 
made long before Diana's time. 



( n ) 



CHAPTEB. VI. 



A NEW LIFE. 



Whex Diana now thought of her old friend 
Eobert Bligh, it was with a sense of regret 
and indignation. How could he be so un- 
kind, so cruel and unworthy ? As Richard 
said, who was never weary of inveighing 
against him with a savage and hitter 
earnestness, *' it was mean and petty ; 
it was like the spite of a school-girl. 
My dear Diana, that fellow hates you 
nearly as much as he hates me ; and 
depend on it, this is but the beginning of 
his enmity." 

She had, however, one friend left, who 
was in distress like herself; who had been 
cruelly persecuted by fortune, but who 



rA DIANA GAY. 

tlirougli all liad never clianged to her, and 
who had now come forward so nobly to 
offer her an asylum. 

When Diana's old friend, Kitty Crowder, 
now Mrs. Ptichard Lugard, was told of the 
new arrangement, she did not receive the 
news with any great enthusiasm. Her 
husband announced it with triumph. 

"Kitty," said her husband scornfully, 
*^is getting as insensible as some of those 
sea-plants. She will be a jelly-fish by-and- 
by. She cares for nothing, . is dead to the 
world, and all that; so you mustn't mind 
her. It's only lier manner to me and to 
everyone." 

Kitty laughed a little harshly. 

'' But what is your manner to me ? 
Something between yours to your horse 
and to your man-servant." 

'^ Polite always ! " cried Mr. Lugard ; 
^' even elegantly so." 

*' That is my way," replied Mrs. Lugard 
very promptly, and left the room. 



A XEW LIFE. 73 

Diana looked after her wondering. 
'' There, you see what you have to ex- 
pect," said Eichard. 

The Lugards' house was handsome and 
well furnished, though not very large, and 
situated in the hest quarter. B/ichard, 
with something of his old elation restored, 
went about busily, making many extra 
little purchases and decorations to set it 
off for their guest. He had put out of 
sight his recent mortification with the bit 
of comfort, "Never mind; there will bo 
a dissolution one of these days ; and if I 
sell the coat off my back, I'll fight him 
to the last." 

He was never weary of descanting to 
Diana on the way he had been treated, 
and the march that fellow had stolen upon 
him. But, as he said, all in good time. 
His friends meantime wondered how '* poor 
Dick" contrived to keep his head above 
water, or keep the Jews off. Some mys- 



74 DIANA GAT. 

terious arrangement had been made, and 
he had not been oblisred to sell his com- 
mission, which many an experienced seer 
had prophesied he must have been obliged 
to do. But there were rumours also that 
the regiment was going to India sooner 
than had been expected, . a piece of news 
which Lugard often dwelt on bitterly and 
contemptuously to Diana, as he walked up- 
and down his drawing-room. 

" Going to India I" he said ; " this is 
the fine way in which they manage things 
in this country of ours. A man with any- 
thing like genius or ordinary ability might 
as well go to the west coast of Africa ; I 
see no difference. It's scandalous to be 
treating English soldiers, and gentlemen 
of birth too, in such a way ; sending a man 
to certain death and ill-health and misery. 
ril not go if they do. They talk of fight- 
ing Beloochees and Sikhs ; I should hope 
we were born for better things than tliat'' 

Diana's old friend Kitty received the- 



A NEW LIFE. 75 

new guest with tliat strange manner which 
now seemed habitual . a passive indifference 
to all that was going on round her. It not 
a little disturbed and embarrassed Diana, 
who said, in her own affectionate way, '^ I 
know, dearest Kitty, this is fretting you, 
and I besrin to be afraid " 

Kitty interrupted her impatiently. 

'* Afraid of wliat ? Of me ? because I 
am not enthusiastic and full of rapture 
because you have come here ? I tell you I 
am not, because I have lost all taste for 
everything, and care for nothing now, I 
have forgotten to be excited about any- 
thing." 

'' But if I thought '' said Diana, who 

always had a sore difficulty in devising 
what she had to say that should be fitting 
and appropriate, . a lamentable deficiency, 
she thought, but common to many more 
Avith her. After a pause she said, not a 
little hurt, '^O, I am afraid, Kitty, that 
I should not have . I see vou do not wish it.'* 



76 DIAXA GAY. 

Kitty rose impatiently. 

" Why do you worry me ? " she said ; 
"you don't know Avhat I suffer, and I am 
not accountable for what I say. Go, then, 
if you wall ; and what a splendid scene aa e 
shall have here afterwards ! " And Mrs. 
Lugard laughed to herself very scornfully. 
" I have got very brusque and altered, 
Diana, my old friend, and have to bear, 
O so much ! you will see presently how 
much." 

To Diana, thinking over these curious 
.speeches, the truth at last presented itself. 

'' Poor, poor Kitty ! " she thought. 
*' Noiv I see what she means. I liiew 
they never would understand each other; 
but that cannot be helped now. I am 
sure I could manage it, . at least, I will 
try." 

What '' she sato now " was a splendid 
task set before her, as though she was 
called to a missionary work . to make these 
two old friends, whom she liked, understand 



A XEW LIFE. 77 

eacli other tlirougli her ! She would be the 
new link, Kitty, she saw, worshipped him ; 
and Kitty did not know how to take his 
bokl and too impetuous and impatient cha- 
racter, which required some skilh As Miss 
Gav thouErht of this very often, and some- 
times before her glass, the pretty face she 
saw 2:aziDo; seemed to sav, '" Ah, little 
wayward rogue ! you have a foolish, 
irresistible way with you, which gets for 
you anything you wish, or lay yourself 
out for." 

Of course she owned her defects ; she was 
not as wise as those clever, long-headed 
women " who knew the world," . as that 
poor dear Lady Margaret, about whom Dr. 
Spindler, of the German Bath, used to 
write to her in such awfully unintelligible 
English. But she had no humiliation in 
this deficiency ; and, like most beauties, 
thought the treasure these possessed far 
brighter and more valuable than those 
prosy commodities which are so much 



Ni. 



/6 DIANA GAY. 

vaunted. But from Dr. Spindler, that 
courtier physician of the watering-places, 
far off as he was, our Diana was to learn 
one of those rough lessons about that new 
science of " knowledge of the world ; " and 
it is certainly a little hard that to such 
tender scholars the instruction seems 
always to be conveyed in the most cruel 
fashion. But it is the penalty of late edu- 
cation. 

This foreign practitioner had soon found 
out that ''miladi" had a young and peer- 
less ward, entitled in her own right to vast 
estates and influence. Her coming would 
of course presently be looked for ; and witli 
every post he sent away a most solicitous 
bulletin of miladi's health. One morning-, 
bowever, Sir Joseph Masham, whose liver 
be was trying to get into something like 
order, had received his Begent Street 
Chronicle, and read him aloud the extract 
that has been already shown to the reader. 
Sir Joseph, whose liver had been trouble- 



A NEW LIFE. 79 

ome, was in ill-liumour that morning, and 
added liis own private convictions on 
Diana's affairs, which were coloured by 
his irritation. 

'' Don't tell me ; I know the place well 
. every acre of it. The thing has been 
brewing this long time, and I suppose that 
Gay did his best to stop their mouths dur- 
ing his lifetime. A foolish girl, with no 
wit in her head ; and will be left there a 
perfect pauper. All must go or nothing." 

On this intelligence the German phy- 
sician, in a very ill humour, at once ceased 
his correspondence, and even thought 
he had a claim for compensation for the 
way he had been taken in. Diana was 
deeply hurt. In her new life there was not 
much to cheer her. 

Mrs. Lugard was in bad health, " always 
suffering," as her husband said, impatiently. 

" No one could make out what was the 
matter with her. Can't you say what doc- 
tor you would wish to see ? . two, three. 



80 DIAXA GAY. 

four, if yoii like. Por God's sake do as 
other people do, and have done with this 
martyr-business." 

'*I want no doctor," said Mrs. Lugard, 
coldly ; '' I never said I did." 

These are merely the words of the scene ; 
hut spectators who have unhappily to sit in 
the stalls, and talk and look on, and see the 
faces, the action, and the byplay that ac- 
company them, could supply much more. 

By this time, however, what had been 
such a shock had begun to fade in the dis- 
tance. The coming trial, like all such great 
ventures, was to take a long time before 
getting fairly afloat on legal waters. There 
were so many applications '' in chambers " 
and elsewhere ; so much swearing of 
affidavits, with fresh applications, also 
''in- chambers," for additional time to 
reply to them, . a foreign witness or two 
to be examined, for which purpose a com- 
mission had " to be sped," . that at last 
it seemed to be some distant cloud, 



A NEW LIFE. SI 

wliicli might after all break and pass 
away with a change of wind. Diana herself 
began to think it might never come round, 
and gradually recovered her old enjoyment 
in the world before her. But all the while 
it was making slow and certain progress ; 
the case Avas getting into shape, and, alas, 
already the beginning, like a small snow- 
ball, was being rolled on laboriously by the 
joint efforts of the attorneys on both sides ; 
and when it presently got to the edge of the 
hill, would go bounding along of its own 
momentum. The " speeding " of the com- 
mission alone involved an agreeable tourist 
party, consisting of Mr. Staveley the bar- 
rister, a junior counsel from each side, a 
clerk from ditto, a shorthand- writer, and a 
sworn interpreter. The party travelled 
leisurely, received a handsome sum for ex- 
penses, and so many guineas a-day each. 

Prom this delay, the public began to 
rally about the young heiress. They seemed 
to have been a little hasty. The " mammas" 
III. (} 



82 DIANA GAY. 

and young men, not too nicely logical in 
their distinctions, assumed that "it had 
gone off," and began to embrace . that is 
the mammas . and cluster round Diana. 
Here was another worldly lesson. Even 
Lord Patmore, who, to do him all justice, had 
failed from a sense of what he thought was 
due to his position and high prospects, and 
had long since sorely repented, came in 
sackcloth to Diana. It was at a party, the 
usual scene for most dramatic incidents in 
Diana's life. Her two friends were beside 
her. But that was too much, thought 
Diana ; quite too much. 

When his lordship began with some 
apologies for not having called, adding he 
hoped she would be at home now, and he 
had had such a time of it, " and all that," 
Diana found her face colouring. She drew 
lierself up. 

" You need not say anything, Lord Pat- 
more," she said; "but I think you very 



A NEW LIFE. 83 

unkind ; and I cannot tell jou how much I 
suffered. It was cruel, O so cruel ! " 

The young lord glowed and coloured, and 
could only falter, " 0, I vow, Miss Gay, . 
that is, I couldn't help it at the time, . you 
know, when I heard all that . " 

" And if you had only waited ! " went on 
Diana ; " you knew me so little. But you 
would not have suffered. I knew our rela- 
tions Yvere altered. Eut you must not think 
I am angry now ; and I shall never think 
of it any more/' 

Diana swept away with not a little pride, 
and some tremhling in her voice. 

The culprit was confounded ; for he was 
prepared to condone the past graciously, 
leaving the future, as it were, open for him. 
Some of his friends caught a word or two ; 
others at a distance saw Diana's face and 
hearing, and could deciper all very satis- 
factorily. So everything being put together, 
it was understood that "that donkey Pat- 

G 2 



84 DIANA GAY. 

more had been trying to patch the tiling up 
and had been gloriously snubbed." 

It is surprising how accurate in the main 
is that shifting, hasty, indifferent, and even 
ignorant, body the public. Among some of 
the young men opinions were expressed a 
little strongly as to '' Patmore's behaviour." 



( 85 ) 



CHAPTEE VII. 

THE CLAIMANT. 

It was one of tliose shining bright festival 
days which are so pleasant on the deck of a 
vessel, when it is known that three-fourths 
of those about us are all servants of plea- 
sure, with faces full of smiles and of hope. 
Only a few scattered ones belong to the ranks 
of business, and have anxious or overcast 
looks. The blue sea is so smooth, the vessel 
glides on so gently, tLe air is so soft, the 
sky so bright, that steam-voyaging loses all 
its horrors. Pretty faces covered with 
smiles, full of spirits, are in rows, as if 
enjoying the sun in a garden. Who would 
tliink that all this should ever change to 
liorrible scenes . Pandemonium rather . the 



80 DIANA GAY. 

roar of wind and waves, the sweeping 
deluge, the swoop down into the abyss, the 
quivering, the creaking, the groans and cries 
of agony below ? 

E^obert was not one of these pleasure- 
seekers; he was listless and troubled, and 
sat himself down in a quiet corner, trying to 
read. The packet was very crowded, and 
there were not seats for all the passengers. 
Looking up, he noticed an interesting young 
girl who seemed to look wistfully for some 
place to sit down, and he at once offered her 
his seat. This little civility was received 
gratefully. She asked him some question 
about a London street, and then, with a 
kind of foreign accent, said she had never 
been in England before. Bligh told what 
she wished to know, looked after her lug- 
gage, &c., and received her warm thanks. 

Bligh had noticed on the deck of the 
vessel a tall gentleman, with very black 
locks, and very black moustache, curly 
hair, and a large hat with a broad tioicworn 



THE CLAIMANT. 87 

brim. This person walked up and down the 
deck very much as if he was in the Burling- 
ton Arcade, and, as he passed, stared coolly 
at each one of the lady-passengers. There 
was a steadiness in this proceeding that 
made some cot a little curious ; and many 
mammas made secret resolutions that when 
they came to the train they would avoid 
the carriage which this " odious man" would 
choose. Bligh had noticed him . he is a 
not uncommon character on our great lines 
. and had returned his glances with con- 
tempt and hostility ; a small indemnity. 
Such are indeed the vermin of our public 
society. When, too, Bligh found himself 
seated beside the young girl, he noticed the 
peculiar look of this oily dandy, whose com- 
placent confidence in his own attractions 
would have been amusing had they not been 
so odious. It seemed to Bligh that this 
stranger looked on him with resentment as 
an intruder. The young girl told Bligh that 
this man had been very forward in what he 



88 DIANA GAY. 

called '' attentions," but which were indeed 
familiarities, in the Trench railway-car- 
riage. 

" But I have no one with me ; and we, 
who are forced to travel by ourselves, are 
helpless." 

''Well, in this voyage at least," said 
Eligli promptly, *' I hope I may be found of 
some use." 

At the station the " odious man," as 
might have been anticipated, came pushing 
and thrustino: himself close on the vouns; 



'& 



girl. 



'' My dear," he said, '' I'll get your lug- 
gage for you. Leave it all to me." 

She only shrank away from him. Bligli 
meantime had taken the guard aside. 

"Put this lady," he said, "into a carriage 
that is pretty full; and don't let that gentle- 
man in. You see the class of man he is." 

The guard nodded. 

" I understand, sir. I saw him a miuuto 
ago. We have plenty of his sort." 



THE CLAIMANT. 89- 

The young girl was put in as directed. 
Bligh also found a place in the same car- 
riage, and the door was promptly locked. 

The '' cad, vermin, or reptile," came up in 
a moment, and was dragging at the handle. 

" Here, you ! " he cried, *' open this, d'ye 
hear?" 

'' Can't go in there, sir," said the guard ^ 
'.'this way, please." 

'' I wish to go in here ; you open the door 
at once." 

'' Can't do so . plenty of room down 
hear." 

The ''cad" saw Bligh's face looking out 
and smiling. He saw, too, the other face 
looking at him, and enjoying his discom- 
fiture. The s?uard was called away. One of 
tlie party in the carriage had to get out,, 
having forgotten something, and the oiled 
and oily gentleman came crushing in with 
his bags, and sat down opposite Bligh, and 
beside the young girl. 

" Xo one," he said, looking insolently at 



90 DIANA GAY. 

Bligh, " has a right . guard or any one else 
. to keep me out of a public carriage 
where there is a seat." 

Bligh was not a man to be baffled even in 
a trifle. He rose up quietly, and left the 
carriage. In his absence the oiled gentleman 
*' addressed the carriage/' but no person in 
particular. 

" We are coming to fine times in this free 
country ; that gent did well to retire, I can 
tell you." 

But Bligh's face was at the door again. 

" Will you come down ? " he said. '' There 
is a coupe in front, with some ladies." 

And with a light step the young girl had 
tripped down. 

'' You have forgotten your things, sir," 
called out one of the passengers to him. 

*' 0, I am coming back, thank you," lie 
said ; " and that is my place." 

The young lady was put into the coiij)(i^ 
and Bligh returned to his carriage, and sat 
down quietly in front of the black-haired 



THE CLAi:.IAXT. 91 

and oily gentleman, who glared at him and 
muttered, hut who had due awe of puhUc 
opinion expressed in the looks of the other 
passengers. Nowhere does that puhlic 
opinion exert such pressure as in that strict 
space ; any one who would transgress it is 
at its mercy. 

When the journey was over, the young 
girl found that Eobert had actually paid for 
this coupe himself, to secure her from incon- 
venience. To her girlish mind it seemed 
quite a chivalrous deliverance, and that she 
never could forget it. 

When he returned to London and found 
himself again in his chambers the usual 
legal arrears were waiting. The briefs sent, 
in their way the neatest specimen of work- 
manship known, were lying on his table, 
like little packages of pure glazed snowy 
Belfast linens. He looked at them all in 
succession, . a mere mechanical operation, . 
but with more curiosity at a vast plethoric 
bundle, so swelled as to be with difficulty 



92 DIANA GAY. 

confined within reasonable girth. To his 
astonishment he read on it, '* Gay v. Gay. 
Ejectment on the Title : Case for the Plain- 
tiffs. Tee, 50 guineas. The Solicitor-General ; 
Mr. Hawker, Q.C. ; with you." The names 
of the solicitors were very familiar to him ; 
a most respectable house, and firm patrons 
of his. He knew, therefore, it could be no 
*' speculative " case, and that there were 
'' merits." " That poor child," he thought, 
" it looks very dangerous. She will lose all." 
Indeed, events seemed to be growing too 
strong for her. He sent back his brief with 
a note, saying there were family reasons why 
he could not act in the business ; and then, 
his mind being in legal matters quite a 
mechanical engine, he was soon forgetful of 
all that had happened, and busily absorbed 
in his points, as though he had just come 
home from Court. 

In a few days he called at the solicitors', 
and sent in word that he wished to speak 
to one of them. Mr. Griffiths came out 



THE CLAIMA^s'T. 93 

very speedily, being, indeed, busily at work 
in his office on this very case. Bligh asked 
him all about it, and began by telling him 
it was out of the question for him to accept 
a brief in it. He explained that he always 
acted for the family, and '' advised " on 
a good deal of their law business. The 
solicitor quite understood, and took up his 
little tale. 

" In fact," said Bligh, '' I should wish to 
accommodate the matter in some way, if I 
.ould. She is a young girl with few friends, 
and quite helpless ; and if the case is at all 
doubtful, and there were grounds for com- 
promising . " 

The solicitor shook his head. ''It's all 
plain sailing ; we have everything in black 
and white. Besides, the people themselves 
will go through with it. The aunt or 
guardian is a very determined scheming 
Frenchwoman. But the young plaintiff 
seems nice enough. They are the greatest 
plagues and interrupters of business in the 



94 DIANA GAY. 

world, fussing here every day, merely to 
know this and that and t'other." 

A clerk here came and said, " Madam 
Saxe, sir." 

'* There," said the solicitor; '* I knew 
they were coming. Show them in here." 

Bligh rose to go away. 

'^ You may as well stay a moment and see 
what they are like; and I have another 
reason, which you will know the moment 
they come in," said the solicitor ; and not 
being able to resist liis curiosity, Bligh 
took up his hat and remained, a little 
irresolutely. 

A lady with a sharp nose and a very 
heightened colour, and in her dress of 
the more vulgar Erench type, came in. 
with a young girl following. He recalled 
his fellow traveller at once. As Bligh 
looked at her he saw, with something 
like a thrill, that, though taller, she had 
a curious, though rather secret likeness,, 
to Diana, more in her air and bearing 



THE CLAIMANT. 95 

than in features. He noted the sly sort of 
coquetry with which she glanced at the 
strange gentleman present, and which he 
thought was ''poor Diana all over." 

The bold Erench lady could speak English 
tolerably, and established herself comfort- 
ably on a chair, as for a long seance. She 
seemed to challenge Bligh haughtily ; and in 
truth the solicitor was not a little in awe of 
her. Bligh recollected her manner as being 
akin to the '' business women " of Paris, 
all smiles and sweetness, save when there is 
a dispute about half a franc, when sharp 
and venomous teeth are shown, and claws 
shoot out at the end of the fingers, and a 
hissing spitting cat has taken the place of 
the charming lady. 

''This," said the solicitor, " was one of 
our counsel, the Mr. Bligh I Avas speaking 
to you about. Unhappily, he is obliged to 
return the brief." 

Both ladies started and looked at Bligh,. 
the elder one with hostility. 



"96 DIANA GAY. 

'' And why ? " slie said suddenly. *' There 
is no discredit, I hope, in our cause." 

" O dear, no," said Bligh coldly ; ''there 
were private reasons." 

" He is a friend of the defendant's. It is 
the etiquette in this country." 

'' In ours too," said Madame Saxe rudelv. 
*' But you have seen our papers ; they have 
been in your possession." 

Bligh coloured. 

*' They lay on my table for a day or two ; 
but I have not seen a line beyond the 
address." 

''0, aunt," said the young girl, now 
speaking for the first time, "we should 
not think that. I do not suspect it ; and 
I am the person chiefly interested." 

The solicitor smiled, and, taking up the 
brief said, ''As madame wishes for proof, 
here it is. This is my own knot ; I know 
it as well as my own handwriting." 

More graciously, then, Madame Saxe 
made a sort of amende; then pulled a 



THE CLAIMANT . 97 

paper out of her pocket, and said in a 
low voice, ''I only got this to-day. I 
read it carefully." 

They went over into the window ; and 
Bligh, again about to go away, said with 
a smile to Eugenie . 

" I thank you for acquitting me ; though, 
indeed, we barristers are accustomed to 
charge each other with all sorts of sins 
and crimes ; that is, in court. I am sorry 
your first experience of our country should 
be experience of law." 

Eugenie sighed. She was really no more 
than eighteen; and that sigh recalled yet 
more again. 

" I do not wish it. I was very happy in 
my convent. But it is hard to refuse 
riches ; and they tell me it is charming 
to be rich." 

Bligh could not resist saying, in a low 
voice, " But are you so sure of being rich ? 
Do you know the terrible uncertainty of 
the law, and that it is not right that always 

III. H 



98 DIANA GAY. 

wins ? Cases like yours are full of dangers 
and difficulties. I have no right to say 
this, for I am interested for one you con- 
sider your enemy, or whom you wish to 
dispossess." 

"Indeed, no; a thousand times no. I 
would not injure her for the world. They 
tell me she is a charming, innocent girl ; 
hut I have my rights. It is she who is 
injuring me. Do you like her ; is she so 
charming ? " 

Bligh for a moment became a little en- 
thusiastic. 

'' Not a word too much could be said 
for her. She is full of grace and beauty, 
and I tremble when I think what is im- 
pending over her. If you only knew how 
she has been brought up . kept from any 
stroke of pain or sorrow save one . from 
every breath that could cause annoyance . 
surrounded with luxury, her own will her 
only law, . you could imagine what a ter- 
rible blow this will be for her." 



THE CLAlilA^T. 99 

"But," said the young girl," it will not 
be so bad as that for her. We shall let her 
have something. We Erench are not quite 
so cruel as you seem to think. "We shall 
leave her something . enough to live on.'* 

Bligh shook his head. 

" Enough to live on in your sense would 
be beggary for her ; enough to live on in 
her sense would mean the fortune she has 
now. She is very sensitive ; a mere flower, 
that would wither . " 

The young girl coloured. 

" HoAV romantic ! " she said. "Is she 
so great a friend of yours ? How long have 
you known her ? " 

" Since I was a boy," said he. 

" And I suppose she likes you. She 
ought certainly ; for you are a very warm 
ally. You will of course be her counsel ? " 

" No," he said, embarrassed ; " there are 
reasons against that, especially after what 
has occurred to-day." 

" How curious all this is ! " said Eugenie, , 

H 2 



100 DIANA GAY. 

reflecting ; '^ and what is this charming 
enemy of mine like ? " 

Bligh was about to say that Diana re- 
sembled her so strikingly when she inter- 
rupted him. 

" But I am quite friendless here. I have 
no one to look to or to turn to, and no one 
that is kind to me for myself. I wish they 
had left me to my dear convent ; and yet I 
could not go back now, for this has all un- 
settled me. Who can refuse to be rich 
when they tell you it is certain?'' 

" But who tells you ? " said Bligh gently. 
'* As I told you, there is nothing certain in 
law. How can that Prench lady know . " 

" It is not she. There is another ; that 
strange, fierce lady who knows all and who 
moves all, and whom I fear so, and whom 
even Madame Saxe dreads. You do not 
know what manner of woman she is, and 
what she can do." 

" Yes," said Bligh, " I do know her. 
You mean Mrs. Bligh . my mother." 



THE CLAIMAXT. 101 

" Your motlier ! " said the girl, rising up 
suddenly ; " Mrs. Bligli your mother ! " 

There was a pause. Eobert Bligh rose 
also. 

" isow you will understand," he said. 
'' There are others who have their troubles 
as well as you. She has her own views in 
this. She is on your side in this business ; 
I cannot be. Neither can I be your friend, 
nor sympathize with you, which I would 
wdsh to be, as I would for any stranger. So 
good-bye. You cannot ask me to wish you 
success, even though my mother is on your 
side." 

As he walked away he thought a great 
deal of this incident, taking a true bar- 
rister's view of it. 

*' If I had been inclined or so unprin- 
cipled as to encourage her," he said to him- 
self, "she would have told me anything I 
wanted to know.". But the strange air and 
likeness that was about her seemed fatal. 
" Poor, poor Diana ! " he thought, as he sat 



102 DIANA GAY. 

down to his table and listlessly opened out 
his briefs, '4t is all over for her." 

And though those heavy arrears, though 
the snowy bales of linen were waiting their 
turns, and time was very precious, it was 
long before he could concentrate his atten- 
tion. At times he would start up and 
walk ; but at last set himself desperately to 
work with this speech, " There could be no 
harm in that. Yes ; she might be brought 
to compromise it." 

There are plenty of jeremiads over the 
hard fate of " the man in full business," and 
who has to combine law and Parliament; 
yet there must be an excitement that re- 
deems all from sheer drudgery . the "showy" 
cases, the constant hurry and " panting and 
toiling" to keep up with time, the change 
of scene from the House to Court. The 
barrister who is not absolutely killing him- 
self, not ghastly pale or unwholesome yellow, 
may w^ell look back with pleasure to those 
stirring days. 



THE CLADIANT. 103 

Mr. Bligli, now pursued and wanted by 
every one, . ^videttes of clerks waiting for 
him at turns and corners, and very often 
pounced upon with a mysterious air by the 
" whip " and manager, . was now hopelessly 
committed to this absorbing life, and had to 
go round and round in the ring without 
being allowed to stop. He had long fought 
off this state of things; but events had 
proved too much for him. He saw he must 
be left behind altogether, or fly round head- 
long like the rest. 

He was one day sitting in the library of 
the House of Commons, with his head 
rather weary, having snatched a few mo- 
ments to consult some books of international 
law for a great parliamentary question now 
drawing on, and on which he had a dreamy 
notion of speaking, when a letter was 
brought to him. He laid down the 
Kent's " Commentaries," and read the 
following : . 



104 DIANA GAY. 

** Dear Sir, . Since the evening I saw 
you I have been thinking over what you 
said. I begin to feel more and more every 
hour how miserable it is being dragged into 
this business. There seems to be no like- 
lihood of its ending or of its beginning, and 
they tell me too much has been ventured 
for me now to withdraw ; but your words 
about the uncertainty of law seem to ring 
in my ears. Would I had never left my 
own dear countr^^ ! I know not what to 
do. Eut if yon would not think it a liberty 
in me, or asking too much, it would make 
me very happy if I could see you, and con- 
sult you again as to what I am to do ; still 
more if you would change your resolution 
about not appearing in my case. At all 
events, dear sir, would you let me see you 
and consult ; for I have no one to consult, 
and I would almost promise to be guided 
by you. I remain yours, &c. 

''Eugenie Gay." 



THE CLAIMANT. 105 

Bligh threw this down on the table, then 
tore it up leisurely in many small pieces, 
then wrote an answer. It covered but a 
page, and ran, . 

"Madam, . I regret it would be quite 
impossible for me to change my mind. I 
still think it would be advantageous for 
every suitor to settle his case, in preference 
to expensive and uncertain litigation; but 
I could not take upon myself to advise you 
in this instance. Indeed, you must excuse 
me if I tell you that my relation to all these 
matters is very delicate indeed. Por the 
future, therefore, I must decline to inter- 
fere. I am yours, 

" PlObeet Bligh." 

He was not a little unsettled by this 
communication, for it now seemed as if these 
were very much the tactics of an adven- 
turess. 



106 DIANA GAY. 

'' She has heard from the solicitor ahout 
me," he thought, " and would like to pick 
up all she could." He had seen specimens 
enough of that artful behaviour in the 
witness-box. 



( 107 ) 



CHAPTEE VIII. 

WHISPERS AND SCANDALS. 

Diana had her horses as usual, and the 
great argosj, which, after an interval, she 
had resumed. With Mr. Lugard she used 
to be seen on the great Prado in the Park, 
that gentleman appearing splendid and 
rayonnant in this new part of his, having 
become more gracious and soft of late ; as 
was indeed remarked by his club-acquain- 
tances, with a conscious and "knowing" 
air, which, in the language of men too 
intimate and too languid to spend words, 
signified quite a whole conversation. 
Among these familiars a shrug stood 
for an anecdote ; and thus was saved 
much precious time. It was indeed some- 



108 DIANA GAY. 

thing to see Diana fresli ancl glittering 
as thougli she had been taken out of a 
jewel-case; or upon her ''satin-coated" 
steed (as a '' Lounger in Eotten Eow " 
once wrote down to the Mercury), whose 
coat, glistening with a golden-brown, 
threw out the small delicate figure with 
surprising efPect. "With them used to 
ride a fashionable warder . Mrs. Wycherly, 
wife of Captain Wycherly . a pleasant, 
agreeable lady, whom Diana regarded with 
w^onder and secret admiration, and who 
carried on the profession of the handsome 
married lady . chartered free-lance . than 
w^hich none is more inviting, for the 
time. Lugard, in his way, represented 
the other branch of the profession. Thus 
the trio rode along ; now charging at full 
speed, their horses scattering the mould; 
now drawn up in the great group opposite 
the gates, as if waiting to receive cavalry. 
Anon Colonel Crozier or Lord Symperly 
would join, and the little party would 



WHSIPEES AND SCANDALS. 109 

break into twos, his lordship and Mrs. 
AYycherly in front. Captain Lugard and 
Miss Gay behind. Then Mr. Lugard 
would say, " Let them go on in front. I 
suppose that Symperly has his usual 
wallet of folly. Do go on. Teach me, as 
you were doing when he came up." 

Teach Captain Lugard ! We should like 
to have seen any other gentleman or lady 
make that speech! ''Teach me!" he 
would have answered, his lips curling, 
''what, pray? "What is this wonderful 
knowledge you are in possession of? 
Who taught you, pray? If it is not too 
curious a question, have you been taught 
at all? You had better be sure of that 
first," &c. Yet Diana was teaching this 
rather intractable scholar. Por the first 
time in her life she had been consulted, 
asked for advice, and for some of her 
rather slender worldly knowledge. " I 
know nothing," Mr. Lugard would say 
gloomily, " I, that have been about and 



110 DIANA GAY. 

mixed with every one. I am shipwrecked ; 
I know not how it will end. And yet I 
wish to do right. You have seen for 
yourself . all that I strive, all that I 
suffer, all that I am obliged to suffer. It 
may be my fault . most likely it is ; for 
I am not perfect," added Mr. Lugard 
handsomely. " Eat I leave it to you ; 
you have now for some time seen what 
our household is, and what fatal discord 
reigns in it. As I say, it may be my 
fault ; but still, if I knew what to do, if 
some one . if you only would tell me or 
teach me ! " 

This was not the first time our Diana 
had been so invited. A flush of real 
pleasure overspread her innocent cheek, 
and a sensation, which she did not know 
to be born of vanity, rose in her. She was 
not the child, after all, that Lady Margaret 
always seemed to hint she was, or that she 
herself thought she was. She was not to 
lead that sort of purposeless life, which her 



WHISPEES AND SCA>sDALS. Ill 

own conscience so often whispered to her 
was, besides profitless, devoted to toys and 
vanities, to the mere battledore-and-shuttle- 
cock of life, the soap-bubble blowing, which 
she had always a suspicion she could not 
rise beyond. O, here was the opportunity ! 
if she could only bring these two hapless 
souls to know and understand each other ! 
But it is oftener an accident that deter- 
mines a mind on a certain course than a 
mere studious and officious advice or re- 
monstrance. 

"VYally Pepys had come up to her in his 
specially confidential way . kept for young 
ladies exclusively . and had said, " Ah ! I 
see you have taken our friend in hand. I 
declare he is getting more human and less 
savage every hour. Will you put me down 
for the next vacancy?" 

" But you are human, and not savage," 
said Diana, smiling, " But indeed Captain 
Lugard is not savage; we were children 
together, and he is like a cousin." 



112 DIANA GAY. 

Mr. Lugard took great pleasure in this 
process of his own reformation, listening 
with great docility while our heroine 
advised and counselled ; then taking up the 
theme himself, dwelling on the point . a 
little worn now . of his having been manque 
from the beginning, of no one under- 
standing him, of his life being one suc- 
cession of crosses and misfortunes. '* And," 
added he one evening as they were alone 
in the drawing-room, "it is not so much 
my fault after all. I might have been now 
happy and prosperous, instead of having to 
look forward to years of misery from which 
there is no prospect of release." 

Diana really did not understand. 

'' But how ? " she asked. 

"What!" said he, turning on her with 
a half-wounded, half-indignant air, "you 
forget that? You don't wish to mortify 
me, I suppose, by reminding me of that 
humiliating day when . " 

" When," said Diana, beginning to be 



WHISPERS AND SCANDALS. 113 

fluttered, and looking round uneasily . 
'' when my poor father was taken from 
me?" 

'' Yes," he said ; " I know that. But for 
a great deal of all this you are accountable, 
Diana. Surely you remember how we were 
children together, and how as a boy I was 
always taught and encouraged to look to 
7/ou as the great object. Even your fa- 
ther." 

" Never, never ! " said Diana, a little ex- 
cited ; " not by me. Such a thing, as I 
live, never entered my mind. I always 
liked you, Richard, but I could not be so 
cruel as to hold out hopes which could not 
be realized." 

His lips showed that he had a sarcasm 
ready. .* What of Lord Patmore ? You 
loved him, I suppose ? 0, now, pray be a 
little consistent." 

Diana was much confused by this thrust, 
" I had not my own free will. I was forced 
into it." 

III. I 



114 DIANA GAT. 

" You ! a free agent, able to do what you 
please ! O, that is folly ! But I may speak 
out now, Diana, as all that is past and done 
with. I tell you plainly, I did look forward 
to marrying you; and you know that, 
Diana. And if I had done so mv life 
would have been different, and to me a 
blessing, inst . " 

This language, which was indeed the 
truth, quite scared her. 
. " O, Eichard, Richard, you must not talk 
of that ; indeed you must not. And if I 
had thought for a moment . " 

'' I don't want to talk of it," said he, im- 
patiently ; " Heaven knows it is no pleasant 
subject for me. But we must look those 
things in the face ; and you know, dear, 
it is the truth. I might have been a dif- 
ferent man now, happy and prosperous and 
successful. But that can't be helped. Only," 
he added with some bitterness, "I see you 
have lost even your old kindness. I sup- 
pose now that I have failed, and that I am 



WHISPEES AND SCANDALS. 115 

no longer snccessful, I deserve contempt. 
You are quite right . it is only the way of 
the world." 

Much hurt by this cruel insinuation, and 
at the same time full of sympathy^ our 
Diana quite forgot the little shock she had 
at first sustained when Lugard was dwelling 
on his old attachment, and at the end was 
only anxious to encourage and fortify him 
in the course from which he had now no 
retreat. When next they spoke, Lugard 
thanked her warmly, and said he felt much 
better and stronger ; and Diana was full of 
joy, and really began to think her profession 
and special " call" in life was this little art 
of making ill-suited married people live to- 
gether pleasantly. '* Such little ways as I 
have," she thought to herself, '^ trifling as 
they are, and which seem to please people, 
it may be Heaven's will I should turn to 
this use." There was a strain of very 
ardent piety through her nature, and on 
Sundays she followed rather fiery ministers 

I 2 



]16 DIANA GAY. 

of the Gospel, and trembled and grew tear- 
ful as they roared torments and tortures, 
and at less-troubled moments bent her eyes 
down over her book, and prayed with her 
whole little heart. 

But while the Eev. William Monkirons, 
hottest of gospellers (it was strange that 
this delicate creature should be drawn by 
these strong and raging pious curries), 
made his chapel (Lady Dulcimer's chapel- 
of-ease) resound with wild cries against 
ungodliness and worldly pleasures, our 
Diana was not at all conscious that she 
was innocently sitting enrolled in the 
band whom Mr. Monkirons had sternly sen- 
tenced to be " cast out." Those ridings on 
the bright bay, with the gallant Lugard and 
the admired Mrs. Wycherly, repeated so 
often; those expeditions in the same un- 
varying company to opera and ball; the 
friendly and trusting encouragement of the 
young lady, began to attract the attention 
of the idle and the scandalous. 



WHISPERS AND SCANDALS. 117 

Lady Poldoodie said with, a smile " that 
all parties had got rid of poor dear Lady- 
Margaret most conveniently;" and the 
faithless Wally Pepys asked, " wasn't there 
a wife put by in some maison de sante quite 
as conveniently?" Some one to whom 
Lugard had been specially brusque, or 
even rude, threw another little rag in, as 
the cliiffonier'' s basket passed to him. 
" Mrs. Monkton says she saw them both 
walking in E/ichmond Park alone '^ And 
what that lady had told was strictly true, 
'' for once in her life," as Mr. Pepys would 
have said, but she could not have seen 
Mrs. Wycherly and another friend who 
were sitting on a bench not very far 
away. In this way the buzz began, which 
gradually swelled into a loud drone. Mr. 
Lugard soon heard it, and with the com- 
placent vanity of his sex bent his ears to 
listen, and gave the foolish smile of dis- 
claimer which means admission. Indeed, 
this season of his rather tumultuous life 



118 DIANA GAY. 

was very pleasant to him to think on . a 
snatch of a dream^ though any moment 
he would he awakened. But neither drone 
nor buzz ever reached those little pink, 
smart, delicate shells that were Diana's 
charming ears. Meaning looks, indeed, she 
might translate, if she would ; but she was 
too unskilled in such matters. 

Sometimes on the great thoroughfare 
and crowded highway of fashionable life 
she would meet Eobert Eligh, now be- 
come the strange vara avis . a good-looking 
barrister in large practice in Parliament, 
yet not chained to his shelves like the 
books in the monks' libraries, but seen 
abroad at '* the dance, the dinner, and the 
drum" . the burden of a pleasant song, 
which he himself wrote, "knocked off" one 
evening, and which the good-looking young 
composer, Arthur Western, had set to 
music; "words by Eobert Eligh, Esq., 
M.P," 



WHISPERS AND SCANDALS. 119 

" The dance, the dinner, and the drum . 
Young and old we come . ^ye come. 
The drum, the dance, the dinner ; 
Charming saint, more charming sinner. 
The drum, the dinner, and the dance ; 
Many a fair and many a lance." 

His progress was wonderful. *' Sure to be 
next Solicitor." ""Wouldn't take a judge- 
ship," " On the high-road to the woolsack," 
were the agreeable prophecies made about 
him; though indeed there is no high-road 
to the woolsack, but rather a dark walk 
through a wood, or perhaps a jump across a 
crevasse with a successful landing on the 
other side. He had youth and good looks . 
the best ornaments and decorations in the 
world, and which, when combined with 
success, are irresistible. His table and 
chimneypiece were covered with cards and 
invitations, and made a curious mingle- 
mangle with briefs and parliamentary papers. 
Some friends and admirers wondered ex- 
ceedingly that he had not yet spoken in the 
House; but vre, who by this time know 



120 DIANA GAY. 

something of Mr. Eobert Bligli and his 
disciplined nature, may readily guess that 
this was only the old caution . the making 
sure of the ground, and waiting till the 
proper opportunity arose. Many also noticed 
. for the movements of any rising man are 
watched with an almost flattering obser- 
vance . that he was scarcely in good spirits. 
The same observers had " their eye on him " 
when he and Miss Gay met, and noticed her 
attempt at a haughty greeting, and his cold 
manner. And they also saw how her gaze 
followed him with a sort of wistful curiosity 
as he went away with the beautiful Miss 
Henniker on his arm . Lady Jane William- 
son's cousin, and most honourable daughter 
to Lord Mountermine. Indeed, Mr. Eligh 
was now constantly at Mr. Attorney-Gene- 
raPs, and Lady Jane . as the phrase runs . 
" could do nothing without him." Was it 
at all surprising that the meddling Cuckoo 
should presently flap its wings, give one of 
its shrill screams, and announce to all Lon- 



WHISPI:ES AXD SCA^'DALS. 121 

(Ion on its front page, " We understand that 
a marriage has been arranged between the 
Honourable Emily Henniker and Mr. Robert 
Bligh, M.P. for Calthorpe " ? And though 
'.'there was not a particle of truth, my 
dear," in the whole business, the matter 
was, strange to say, left uncontradicted. 
Tor Mr. Bligh was none of those sensitive 
and rather mean souls who would be dis- 
turbed at such a public afficJie ; nay, would 
rather feel it a hio^h honour to have his 
name coupled with any lady's ; and, on the 
other hand, Miss Henniker and '* her party," 
as the racing world w^ould say, very fondly 
wished that the statement could be made 
true. It was Captain Lugard who brought 
in that last number of the Cuckoo and 
tossed it down triumphantly. " There," 
he said, '*! knew he'd sell himself to 
the highest bidder. It's only what I 
expected." 

Diana read. Her lips curled a little. 

" And who is Miss Henniker ? " 



122 DIANA GAY. 

" Don't you see ? " went on Lugard with 
great scorn ; "a relation of the Williamsons, 
. Lady Jane, and all that. He wants to 
creep into something that way. Just 
the same as he ever was, even at school, 
when he was always toadying old 
Wheeler's nephew, Avho was among the 
boys." 

Diana read it over very often. 

" Is she pretty ? " was another woman's 
question. 

"And that poor Euller whom he has 
treated so scandalously," went on Lugard; 
" kept on and off for all these years. Isn't 
that like him ? He finds old Buller isn't 
worth much in the political way, and he 
throws the poor girl off. But the Ministry 
is shaky enough, and I hope to Heaven he 
will be overreached." 

Thus was our second hero engaged, scarcely 
fancying that he was quite giving the coup 
de grace to the demolition of the old image. 
Yet this gentleman knew very little of the 



WHISPERS AND SCANDALS. 123 

human heart, and of the female human 
heart especially. All this piqued and tan- 
talized the young lady sorely, and fretted 
and vexed her ; though, to say the truth, 
she did not helieve a syllable of the story 
about Miss Henniker, . albeit certified in 
print, and by the Cuckoo, Much as she 
resented his " cruel and unkind " behaviour, 
she still had a secret instinct and certitude 
that the old silver chain was not broken, 
and that though she might cast away her 
end, he had not strength to do the same 
with his. 

After Eichard Lugard had gone out, she 
read this announcement very often. Then 
her eye wandered down listlessly over the 
other oracular notices, as to persons " ac- 
cepting the Chiltern Hundreds," and the 
rumour that Lord Bulstock was likely to be 
" the new Lord Cofferer." 

'*Pancy," said some of the cynics of the 
day, " being a Lord Cofferer at all ; but 
what manner of man must that be whose 



124 DIANA GAY. 

hopes and fears are agitated by the chance of 
being lihely to be a Lord Cofferer ? " 

Her eye rested then on some paragraphs 
like this : "It is said that there is a rock 
ahead for the Ministry, of the danger of 
which the astute captain who commands is 
quite sensible; and that he has enrolled 
some amateur hands in the crew ; not in- 
deed ' rated ' on the ship's books, but who 
will be taken in according to the work they 
do. One of these ' dark ' auxiliaries is said 
to be the new member for Calthorpe, who 
brings a mysterious reputation, which defies 
time, place, or man's recollection. It is 
said he has been retained to do this duty on 
some evening in the following week, when 
Mr. Masham brings on his motion." 

Diana almost started as she read. The 
dull Lugard was only building up, instead 
of destroying. Her exclamation almost was 
her old one : " O, how wonderful he is ! 
how clever ! Indeed he is getting success." 
And she sat there for a long time, dreaming 



WHISPEES AND SCANDALS. 125 

over these great prospects, and determined 
to make out what was the meaning of these 
political riddles. Not so much pity is akin 
to love : it is more so to contempt. Admira- 
tion or puhlic success is the true quickener. 



( 126 ) 



CHAPTEE IX. 

THE PETRUCCI APFAIR. 

It came to pass about this time that news 
reached England, among other foreign 
items, that a certain half-Englishman and 
half-Italian called Petrucci, who was a kind 
of mongrel-agent out in Chili, had been 
seized by that Government and put in prison 
for smuggling. This piece of news did not 
affect the public mind, and was read at 
many a breakfast-table half-mechanically, 
. taking up a space no more than a 
single line. But in a week or so one of the 
light horse of Parliament . the stray, dis- 
engaged Cossacks, who scour about on little 
active animals of motions and "questions " 
. marked this speck warily in the horizon. 



THE PETEUCCI AFEAIE. 127 

and pricked down upon it. Mr. Derby 
Elagden was the lucky rider who pounced 
on the prey first, and he ** put a question to 
the noble lord at the head of the Govern- 
ment " . the tight, wiry, compact, elderly 
English country gentleman who then ad- 
ministered affairs with such success, in the 
very perfection of laissezfaire. There were 
some patriots of the Eoman sort who ob- 
jected to this principle ; and who, as one of 
them said, did not wish the politics of the 
country to be dealt with in the fashion the 
architect of their palace had treated the in- 
terior Gothic pillars and stonework . namely, 
by covering up the roughness and decay 
with a smooth and even coat of " nice " buff 
paint. Others were discontented at this 
successful " jockeyship," as they called it; 
others, again, were envious ; more were 
greedy. The old politician, however, held 
his way ; directing the country very much 
as he rode his cob down to the House . in a 
pleasant half-amble, half-walk. But when 



128 DIANA GAY. 

Blagden put his question, and received a 
jocular . perhaps saucy . answer, which 
caused a general laugh, some of the discon- 
tented hegan to "take the thing up;" the 
hostile newspapers saw that there was some- 
thing in it, and as the thing grew and began 
to be discussed, and it was asserted " that 
the honour of the country " had been 
touched, matters began to look diflPerent. 
Soon the heading was changed to " The 
Petrucci Outrage ; " and it was fairly started 
as a great question when it became known 
that Mr. Masham, a usual supporter of the 
Government, had given notice of a motion 
on the subject. This was indeed serious ; 
for it was before the era when the device of 
mere privates and sergeants in the regiment 
denouncing their colonel and officers was 
found to be a piquant way of acquiring 
reputation. 

Every one began to talk of the matter, in 
clubs and coteries ; the old Minister put on 
his jauntiest manner, but was disquieted ; 



THE PETKUCCl AFFAIR. 129 

laissez faire, his Mephistoplieles, seemed to 
have deserted him ; and people, by talking^ 
so much of the danger, made it appear more 
serious than it really was. It grew and 
grew ; another great and independent mem- 
ber put an amendment on the paper ; there 
was a mustering and drilling, and it had 
become a regular "party" question. That 
was the recall; the whips were already out, 
the patrols scouring the alleys and political 
public-houses for their stray men. 

What interest could this great question 
have for Diana, with that greater division 
which affected her case now impending ? 
She lived in a sort of trepidation and ex- 
citement as the day drew near. It was only 
three weeks away now. Very often she 
used to repair to her friend Sir John, the 
Attorney-General, who gave her such 
snatches of comfort as he could. 

" My poor child, I can tell you nothing ; 
I wish I could. You must train yourself to 
bear whatever may come . defeat or, as I 

III. K 



130 DIANA GAY. 

trust it will be, success. You see, if they 
make out their case as it stands . if they 
prove it . why, I am afraid. But, then, will 
a jury believe them ? will they believe that 
Mrs. Bligh, that half-mad, half-wicked 
woman, whom I shall have the pleasure of 
cross-examining ? And, my dear child, if we 
don't make an expose of her let us be defeated 
on this motion that is coming on. Now, you 
must run away. I have to defend Ministers 
on the law of the business ; get up the Chili 
view, and Kent and Story and Vattel, and 
all those rascals whom your little head has 
nothing to do with. It will be warm work. 
There is a clever fellow to follow me, 
though; you remember Bligh . my cross- 
examinee's son ? " 

" What, he is to speak ! " said Diana with 
interest. '' But he is no friend of mine ; he 
was once.'' 

 Why, you don't suppose he has anything 
to do with that ? Lord bless you, he has too 
much to do. That's one of that Page's 



THE PETRUOCI AFFAIR. 131 

stories, wlio is a little too much of the 
detective for me. Mind, I prophesy he'll 
make a name with this speech." 

'' Eut others say it," said Diana. " 0, he 
has been so unkind and cruel, so treacher- 
ous, they tell me." 

"Now, I must turn you out," said Sir 
John a little abruptly ; " you'll come to me 
again, and we'll talk of this." 

Diana went away in her cab with her 
maid. She liked these expeditions . the 
unofficial '^ explorings " in streets and 
shops. Eut she thought as she went along 
of what Sir John had- said, and for the first 
time it did occur to her that Mr. Page was 
scarcely of the proper sort as a legal adviser. 
She thought again and again of Bligh's old 
devotion, proved in a hundred ways, and 
that, after all, the chief evidence against 
him of dislike to her was the angry jealousy 
of "poor Lugard." Under all this feeling 
(but she was not conscious of its presence) 
. was the sense of curiosity and admiratioi], 

K 2 



132 DIANA GAY. 

. admiration at his power and cleverness and 
steady progress; and it was scarcely sur- 
prising that ''poor Lugard's" purposeless 
life . a series of failures . should seem to 
her not a little contemptible. With all this 
came a curious and restless desire which 
attended her as she went about, to see 
something of this coming success. She 
would give anything to know, to look on 
at, his triumph ; he was sure to be success- 
ful, as indeed she had a presentiment. 

This idea took possession of her, and 
before the evening was over she had written 
one of her "nice little notes" to her good 
friend the Attorney- General. 

" My dear Sir John, . I should so like 
to hear this wonderful debate that is 
coming on, and the great speeches that will 
be made. Could you get me into the ladies' 
gallery ? Would it be too much ? 

''Diana Gat." 



THE PETEUCCI AITAIII. 133 

" Curious girl," thought Sir John. " She 
will find mo very dry. Yattel will bore 
her." Even her Majesty's Attorney-General 
became stupid in the presence of his own 
complacency. He wrote back that he would 
manage it, and that Lady Williamson would 
call for her. Diana was delighted, as she 
always was at the success of any of her 
little schemes. 

When she saw Lugard again he was 
eager with a new arrangement. 

'' I have srot tickets for that concert vou 
wished to 2:0 to," he said. *' I know vou 
like music, and I moved heaven and earth 
to get them." 

Kitty was sitting in her favourite posi- 
tion, looking at the fire in a sort of 
half-reverie, and broke out harshly with 
*' How many things have you moved heaven 
and earth for ? Poor heaven and earth ! . 
and for a concert-ticket ! " 

Lugard turned on her impatiently. 
'' There is one thing," he began ; but 



134 DIANA GAY. 

Diana's imploring look . she was always 
wretclied when she saw these first guns 
fired . checked him. 

" Go on," said Mrs. Lugard, turning 
round full on him ; " finish, pray. I sup- 
pose to get rid of me you would move 
heaven and earth ? " 

" No, no ; indeed, Kitty, you mistake," 
said Diana eagerly ; '^ he meant no such 
thing. But I am so sorry ahout this 
concert, as I have promised to go to Lady 
Jane Williamson's." 

" It was arranged Ave were to go," said 
he, his brow contracting. " But it is no 
matter ; only if you knew the labour and 
work I had to go through to get them. 
But it is no matter ; and what is the enter- 
tainment you have preferred ? I thought 
you had ceased to care for going out." 

'^0, this is no party," said Diana, a 
little confused. " Lady Jane is to take 
me." 

Something interfered at this moment, 



THE PETKTJCCI AFFAIE. 135 

and Diana was called away. Meantime 
the days passed by rapidly. The news- 
papers, as usual, described the coming 
motion as *' fraught with perils to the 
stability of the Goyernment," and warned 
the old wiry Yiscount to set his house in 
order. The 'Regent-street Chronicle had 
pleasant speculations on the subject, and 
one article headed '' The Break-down of 
Laissez i^zV^." In short, this cloud, which, 
according to the well-worn measure of 
dimension, had been no bigger than the 
Viscount's own hand, grew steadily, and 
spread until it made the Government skies 
as dark as pitch. 

On the evenins^ of the debate Diana 
was in a sort of excitement and flutter, as 
indeed she usually was when there was a 
little expedition before her. Eor Lugard 
politics had now no attraction. He rarely 
looked at a newspaper ; and since hit; late 
experience he always turned away his eyes 
from the columns which had to do with 



136 ' DIANA GAr. 

anything in the House. If any gauche 
person dwelt long on that subject in his 
presence, he would rise up impatiently and 
leave the room abruptly. His friends re- 
marked good-naturedly that he was '' devilish 
sore " on the matter. He had therefore 
never noticed the '' crisis " that was drawing 
on. and if he had, would have turned away 
his eyes. On this evening down came 
Diana about fiYQ o'clock in her full regi- 
mentals, as they might be called, fluttering 
her plumage of burnous and flowers, and 
eager to be in time, llichard was out, but 
as Lady Jane's carriage came up he arrived 
at the door and met Diana in the hall. 

''Why, where on earth," he cried, . 
" where are you going at this hour ? " 

With a little guiltiness from the dis- 
covery, '' We are going down to the House 
to hear the debate," said Diana hurriedly. 
*' Only think ! Good-bye ; don't wait for 
me." As she looked back from the carriage, 
she saw him standing with a puzzled air. 



THE PETRUCCI AFFATE. 137 

"They are all alike/' he was saying to 
himself; '' she knew the mean things I had 
(lone to get her those tickets ; begged them 
from a fellow who will make me feel it 
to the end of my life, and yet she puts 
me aside for some whim that just strikes 
her. She has no steadiness ; she does not 
care what I have done, what I am doing 
for her." 

He went away moodily to his club, and 
dined there by himself. Mrs. Kitty had 
her solitary meal, which might have been 
a relief. Lusrard staved there the whole 
evening, not choosing to return, mechanically 
looking at newspapers which he did not 
care to read. Indeed, most of those who 
knew him now took care to give him a wide 
berth. It was so troublesome, they said, 
talking to him, and he was so abrupt and 
sudden you never knew where to have him. 

About ten the room began to fill and 
grow noisy as men came dropping in, 
dressed to go to amusement, or coming 



138 DIANA GAY. 

from it, and gathered in knots to talk. 
He could not lielp hearing what a new 
arrival was proclaiming : " Bligh, Bligh . 
that's the name ! " and the sound seemed 
to prick him like a lancet. ''That's the 
name ! As fine a thing as was ever heard. 
It'll set them on their legs. The old chief 
went up to him and shook him by the hand, 
and they say if they weather this he'll be 
the new Solicitor ! " E^ichard was drawing 
his breath hard, and tried to hear more 
manfully. A military member for some 
place now comes in : ''I wish I could talk 
like that fellow. Did you ever hear such 
tune as there was in his voice ? And, by 
Jove ! how they did listen ; you'd have 
heard a toothpick drop. But those lawyer- 
men can talk on end on anything. Were 
you in when he gave the picture of Benlevi ? 
such a cool touching-up ! Of course he had 
made it up before." 

Lugard started up. It all flashed upon 
him. She, Diana, had gone to hear this 



THE PETEUCCI AFFAIR. 139 

triumph ! A thousand curses on this evil 
genius facing him at every turn! It was 
done to mortify, to ruin him, to wear his 
very soul out with vexation. Had he met 
Eobert Eligh at that moment he might 
have called out to him, " Defend yourself! " 
and have struck him with his closed hand 
across the face. 



( 140 ) 



CHAPTER X. 



THE DEBATE. 



Diana and Lady Jane had reached the 
gloomy galleries and monastic halls of the 
House, and had made their way to the 
greater outside hall, where people were 
crowding and hurrying to and fro, and 
heing constantly put hack to that mysterious 
boundary-line of tiles within which members 
alone, . sacred birds of the Capitol . were 
allowed to stand and lounge. It seemed 
to Diana, greatly excited by the presence 
of these hereditary legislators, that in this 
function they took an especial pride, being 
glad to display themselves within this mystic 
ring, and exhibit their privilege. The At- 
torney-General had come out to them much 



THE DEBATE. 141 

worn and anxious, his hand fall of papers. 
'*"We must be quick," he said, "as I have 
to reply to this Dian. He is speaking 
now." 

Once more Diana was looking down into 
that rich chamber, crowded on this night 
as it had not been when the ill-omened 
'' motion on soldiers' wives " had been 
brought forward. Every seat was filled. 
There was no buzz, such as had attended 
the performance of the luckless E^ichard. 
The captains were in their places, wearing 
the conventional air of inattention, their 
beavers thrust down over their eyes. Diana 
knew where to look for her heroes, or at 
least their hats, and made out "the sea- 
green incorruptible ; " and the granite-hewn 
face of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, 
and the other great lawgivers crowded 
close, dressing up their ranks, rows of many 
faces looking mainly one way, to where a 
wiry gentleman, sharp and sour' faced, was 
speaking in a clear thin voice, and with 



142 DIANA GAY. 

many words. He was " denouncins: the 
Goyernment," fiercely drawing a glow- 
ing picture of the old days of English 
nautical ascendancy. " When, sir, as the 
British frigate hoye in sight, and the little 
strip of hunting fluttered aloft, the dungeon- 
doors opened of their own instinct, and the 
captiyes walked down to the heach free !" 
Or it might he that some blind mulish 
barbarians resisted, and then a white puff 
and a ball of British metal came crashing 
from an English gun among the roofs. 
That letter brought a speedy answer. Now 
it was all changed. Instead of their looking 
for wooden or iron walls, the captiyes had 
to wait the next mail, and on the deyoted 
town came showerino- a storm of official 
paper from the Eoreign Office. 

Diana was not a little moyed by this 
picture of the departed greatness of her 
country; and her pretty lips curled when 
she thought of the outrage offered to her 
flag. It was fine that . the British-built 



THE DEBATE. 143 

vessel quietly climbing the horizon, and 
extorting satisfaction as it were by a frown. 
The speaker was said to have made out a 
most damaging case; and sitting down, 
moved for the correspondence. 

The Attorney- General rose promptly, and 
in a dry chipping tone slided at once into 
cold legal details. 

" O, this is only John," said Lady Jane, 
with coolness. " My dear, we must make 
up our mind to a long sermon. He can 
talk the whole day if he likes." 

'* But where are they all going?" said 
Diana suddenly, and stretching forward as 
the legislators began to hurry out. 

Some of the political ladies smiled. 

'' To dine, I suppose, dear," said Lady 
Jane with perfect unconcern ; " the great 
speakers will be coming on presently."; 

There was indeed an indecent rout ; a 
mortification which Sir John, to Diana's 
surprise, did not seem to feel in the least. 

It was very dry, very dull and mono- 



144 DIANA GAY. 

tonous, though Diana did her "best to make 
up by special attention. Bat the arguments 
hurt her head, they were so very close. Yet 
next morning it read uncommonly lucid, 
and very simple, convincing, and unpro- 
fessional; and the great leading journal 
said that the first law-officer of the Crown 
had done a service to the House in clearing 
the ground ; and with a rare self-sacrifice, 
instead of spinning, had brushed away all 
cobwebs. 

Then some one else spoke, . young Lord 
Cordurois, wdio made a smart, rattling, 
'^ cocky " speech, in which he *' rattled" 
on for twenty minutes, using illustrations 
drawn from the slang of the day, and 
dotting the next morning's column with 
*'much laughter" and ''loud laughter;" 
as Avhen he said that the noble lord at the 
head of the Government reminded him of 
" the chicken-salad man " . a song then in 
high favour, . 



THE DEBATE. 145 

" If you toucli slie, 
Now pray let lier be ; 
But if you toucli me, 
"Why then we shall see." 

*' (Loud laughter, in which the noble Vis- 
count heartily joined.)" 

" How good ! " said some of the political 
ladies, who knew this lively and spirited 
lord very well, and saw him at their 
houses. 

When he had done, Diana remarked that 
a perfect Babel broke out, with cries of 
'* New member," "Spoke," and the like; 
which presently were lulled away as the 
portly gentleman under the canopy sono- 
rously pronounced a name. Then she 
heard a quiet, calm voice, but one that was 
clear and musical, below her ; and a little 
excitedly she recognized the small figure. 
The political ladies were a little interested 
too. 

"One of the new men," said one; '* they 
expect something from him." 

m. L 



146 DIANA GAY. 

It was indeed Eobert Eligh . gracious, 
conciliating, good-humoured, and deferential 
at first ; but now beginning to fire a stray 
bullet, now a small firework, which made 
people smile and grow attentive. Now the 
wiry old Viscount jogs his head oyer his 
jaunty folded arms in approbation ; now 
"the sea-green incorruptible " uncoils him- 
self slowly, raises his hooded head, and 
languidly turns his curious eye over, as 
asking, '* Is this food for me ? " 

The buzz gradually subsided as the new 
voice rose ; then came the laugh . genuine 
and hearty; then the applause of ^'Hear, 
hear " . overpowering and tumultuous. No 
one could have guessed what a fund of 
sarcasm had been as yet undeveloped in 
Robert Bligh. Of course Lugard, and men 
like Lugard, would have said that all this 
had been prepared; and so it was, in a 
certain degree. 

We quoted in Mr. Lugard's case what 
the intelligent author of " Thumbnail 



THE DEBATE. 147 

Sketches in the House " had said of that 
rising voung politician ; but we must now 
give from the agreeable Regent-street 
Chronicle what it thouij^ht of the new 
player who had joined in the game. 

''When the House met last night, it was 
easy to see that a warm night's work was 
expected. To use a homely and well-worn 
metaphor, there was to be many a main 
fought, and both Ministry and Opposition 
had their respective birds trimmed, dressed, 
and ready spurred. . . . But we must 
congratulate Mr. Merry, the Government 
whip, on the new and brilliant auxiliary 
which fluttered into the pit last night with 
fiery eye, undaunted spirit, and untiring 
vivacity. The feature of the niorht was 
certainly the debut of Mr. Eobert Bligh, a 
young barrister in leading practice, just 
risen from his briefs, and whose harmonious 
voice and winning manner would alone be 
a treasury in that diapason of croaks, 
growls, huskinesses, conversational ex- 

L 2 



148 DIAXA GAY. 

postulation, and sotto-voce unintelligibility, 
which constitute the diatonic scale of 
House-of-Commons eloquence. Eut this 
was the smallest feature ; for almost at 
once he grew epigrammatic and pleasantly 
sarcastic ; as when he described the authors 
of such motions as like a party of idle boys 
who have borrowed or stolen a gun, with 
which they go out to shoot sparrows, and 
who sometimes wound a human being 
thrdu2:h carelessness. This told well with 
tlie House. IS^othing, too, could be better 
than the illustration drawn from his own 
profession as to the interest expressed by 
'the Opposition for an obscure creature like 
Petrucci, which he likened to the interest 
.of the loW'Class solicitor who takes up what 
are called speculative actions, and looks out 
for paupers and such persons who may have 
some fancied cause of complaint against 
substantial people who may be ' good 
marks for costs.' 

*' His elaboration of this topic, and intro- 



THE DEBATE. 149 

duction on the scene of the right honour- 
able gentleman who leads the Opposition, as 
another solicitor of a ' more respectable 
complexion ' . who, when he sees the case is 
likely to assume unhoped-for proportions, 
prepares to intervene . was excellent. Good, 
too, as a piece of etching was his picture of 
the '' dirty foreigner" creatures, who, under 
this semi-British protection, scheme, pillage 
and oppress, in these far-off places, and 
when the richly-deserved, and too long- 
delayed, bastinado falls on their soles yelp 
and shriek for the aid of their protectors. 
' Then,' continued Mr. Bligh, ' do our 
Bucentaurs and Terribles and Thunderers 
weigh their mighty anchors, and spread 
their noble canvas, and prepare to make 
their hundred-and-twenty, or seventy- four, 
throats bellow. The great jaws open, the 
incipient roar is imminent, the Thunderer 
of England is about to echo, all because a 
mean clerk . analogous in position to some 
of our most doubtful commission-agents. 



150 DIANA GAY. 

whose stock-in-trade is a large brass plate, 
and office-desk and two chairs . has been 
taken by the shoulders and turned out 
roughly. But let him add to these valuable 
properties a small but precious pocket- 
handkerchief . aparti-coloured article, striped 
in various hues . and he has an amulet or 
talisman that will work wonders. He has 
but to seat himself on a corner of this tiny 
carpet, and, like the hero in the fairy-tale, 
it will carry him. wherever he vail. That 
handkerchief is the British -flag, and to use 
it for such purposes is indeed to make a 
clout of it.' 

" There were more plums in the new 
pudding the honourable member for Cal- 
thorpe set before the House in his maiden 
speech, which contrasted favourably with 
the scanty currants dotted through the 
hardbake of other lion, members. We place 
one or two of these at the service of the 
country gentlemen. His likening a certain 
discontented right hon. member who brings 



THD DELATE. 151 

on motions damaging to his own party, when 
he thinks himself neglected, to the Italian 
organ-grinders, ' whom you have to pay to 
go away,' was happy enough. His allusion 
to the late notorious escapade of the leader 
of the Opposition when he was head of the 
Government, and his sacrifice of a tried 
colleague to preserve his position, was quite 
'smart.' Mr. Bligh likened him to the 
skilful gentleman we see sometimes in the 
circus ' on a hare-hacked steed,' who, after 
much hesitation, leaps through a paper 
hoop, and lands on the insecure support of 
the flying . animal, with difiiculty preserving 
his balance. All this, if not of a verv his^h 
order of wit, was certainly lively, and will 
of course secure for the speech the distinc- 
tion of what gentlemen who supply ' Lon- 
don letters ' to the country papers call ' an 
absorbing topic of gossip at the clubs.' " 



( 1^^ ) 



CHAPTEE XL 

PLAINTIPr AND DEFENDANT. 

After tlie speech there was a flutter in the 
gallery: various members came up to see 
their '^ ladies/' and there was a rustle as of 
going. In a moment Diana had given a 
start. She saw a face at the door. Other 
faces were turned eagerly to it. He was com- 
ing to her . to get her congratulations . to 
share his triumph with her. ! she could 
forgive all that had passed; but to her sur- 
prise he went by with a bow. When he had 
passed her by with this stiffness, Diana felt 
a curious chill at her heart, something 
whispering her that she was now outside 
that circle. It then flashed upon her . 
what was till that moment a mere phantom, 



TLAIXTIFr AND DEFENDANT. 153 

and what slie could only smile at hitherto . 
that he had indeed succeeded in " curing 
himself." Then, with something like a 
pang, she found this was all but a convic- 
tion of the most fatal logical accuracy. Of 
course one so resolved to succeed . so 
firm of purpose . could have no difficulty 
in arriving at that. Then she saw him pass 
by and go on beyond to a lady whom she 
had never noticed before, and whom she 
was sure was the Miss Ilenniker of the 
Cuckoo, Shall it be said that the moment 
was a turning-point in the life of our Diana; 
that she saw now the vanity, the folly of 
that state of pleasant fitfulness, that agree- 
able ''not knowing her own mind," with 
liberty to change with every hour ; that 
claim to the privilege of holding every one 
subject to her little airs who were to know 
their mind with regard to her without there 
being any corresponding reciprocity on her 
side ? Por all this she now seemed to see 
that a penalty had swiftly overtaken her. 



154 DIANA GAY. 

Diana, during the lulls in the debate, 
AThich were weary enough, had noted two 
foreign-looking ladies, one old and the other 
young, who sat at some distance from her. 
Something in the younger girl attracted her, 
ayIio had rich brown hair, soft eyes, which 
now and again lit up with vivacity ; and, 
though tall, had a certain foreign elegance. 
She noticed the deep interest, the absorbed 
air, . at the most striking portions of the 
speech ; how she leant forward with clasped 
hands and eager eyes, and how her face 
reflected every emotion. What was her 
surprise when, after Bligh had passed, so 
coldly and so gravely, she saw this young 
lady run to meet him enthusiastically, and 
leave the gallery with him ! In older days 
the pretty lips of Diana would have curled; 
the prettier head would have been tossed 
back ; she would have been ineffably scorn- 
ful on '' Mr. Bligh's taste." Now she felt a 
sort of pang, and surprised herself looking 
after the two with a sad and wistful air, and 



PLAINTIFF AND DEFENDANT. 155 

with a blankness at her young heart she had 
never experienced before. 

"Yes," she thought bitterly, '' he is quite 
in earnest, as he always is. He has for- 
gotten and given me up for ever, and it was 
my own fault." 

Lady Jane roused her from this reverie. 

*' Come, dear, we shall go home," she 
said; ''we have had enough, I think; and 
though my poor dear Attorney is to reply, 
we must be spared that. We had him 
once. You shall come home vnth me. 
I asked in a few friends, and we can talk 
it over." 

They came out, ' down through the 
crowded, bustling lobbies, past the myste- 
rious cave-like doors which led into the 
sanctuary. Two eternal streams seemed to 
be crossing there . coming out, going in : 
the young, the handsome, the gay, the dull, 
the old and tottering ; not the seven ages, 
but half a hundred fully ; and then, as they 
fluttered across, an eager figure rushed up 



15G DIANA GAY. 

to Diana, and more eager eyes were looking 
into her face. 

" This is the amusement, is it ? " said his 
excited, angry voice. '^ "We have an inte- 
rest, it seems. So you stole off to hear our 
old friend ? Well, I never thought you 
could do that . Never ! " 

Lady Jane was listening haughtily. 

'' Hush, Eichard ! " said Diana. 

'' I don't understand these things," he 
went on in a loud voice. ''A man that has 
behaved so to you, that should be outside 
the pale of society . " 

''Who is this gentleman?" asked Lady 
Jane in a low voice. '' There is our servant, 
and the carriasre is waitins:." 

'' Come away now," said Lugard. '' Mrs. 
Lugard is here too, and will take you." 

But Diana was in the mood to resent 
this, and might have answered a little im- 
patiently, when she saw his face contract 
with almost a spasm, and his foot descend 
on the tiles with a fierce stamp. 



PLAIXTIFr AXD DEFEXDAXT. 157 

She looked round, and saw Eobert Eligli 
returning from the door. Every one that 
met him had a hurried greeting for him and 
congratulation. Even to their ears came 
the eager words, '' Capital ! " '* Never heard 
anything better ! " '* You have set them on 
their leo^s ao;ain." 

He stopped irresolute when he saw Diana 
and her party ; but at this moment one of 
the great men . a stooping, elderly gentle- 
man, whose back seemed composed of two 
shoulder-blades and nothing else . had him 
by the buttonhole. 

At the same moment Diana's sympa- 
thies all turned backwards, and she felt for 
the j)oor '' failure " beside her, in her tender 
heart. It was trying for Eichard, and on 
this ground. 

'' Eor God's sake come awav," he said in 
a low voice. '* Don't speak to him ; I can't 
bear it." 

Eobert was coming to them, and Lady 
Jane had beckoned to him; but with rare 



158 DIANA GAY. 

delicacy lie clieclved himself, raised bis hat, 
and passed into the House. 

Diana took Lugard's arm, spoke to him 
with all her best kindness and sympathy, 
but E-ichard freed himself; and when ho 
saw that Lady Jane was taking her home, 
made no remonstrance, and walked away 
slowly. 

" Who is he ? " said Lady Jane, as they 
got into the carriage; " seems rather good- 
looking,. in the wild-man-of-the-woodsway." 

Lady Jane was a very pleasant '* lady of 
the house;" small in figure, intelligent, 
and with a half-sarcastic, half-burlesque 
strain running through her conversation, 
which made it very agreeable and amusing. 
The little social theatre that she opened 
drew better than that of many other ladies. 
E;Ound her sofa was always a standing 
group, and a representative group too, . 
men of politics, men of wit, men of science, 
men of letters, and that newer stratifica- 
tion, the man of politics and letters com- 



PLAINTIFF AND DEFENDANT. 159 

binecl. You called in the afternoon, and 
found some tall gentleman with an Assyrian 
beard in an armchair, who withdrew with 
an aggrieved air when another of the same 
sex and on the same errand entered. Ladies 
only added to his appreciative audience, and 
there he had no objection. A few of this 
set were to be at Lady Jane's on this night 
. '' coming on from the House," or going 
on to Lady D.'s. 

To return a moment to our triumphant 
Eligh. When welcomed in the Ladies' Gal- 
lery with much effusion by the young 
foreign lady, he had scarcely shov/n signs of 
pleasure. His was rather a practical na- 
ture ; and " worship," " incense," &c., so 
grateful to the nostrils of his fellows, he 
never cared for. With a sort of impulsive- 
ness she poured out her praises and her 
delight : "It was so charming, so success- 
ful." Even her older relative thawed a 
little: "Eugenie insisted on coming; she 
was determined." 



IGO DIAKA GAY. 

'* You can have no interest in these 
things," said he absently, and looking 
towards the door by which Diana was de- 
parting. He was thinking too how curious 
it w^as that these two should be thus in 
sight of each other. '' What can you care 
about a speech of mine ? Will you excuse 
me now? " 

'' O, w^ill you not see us down ? " said the 
young girl in a grieved tone ; '^ w^e know 
no one . even don't know the way out of 
this strange place." 

Eligh, not over-pleased at this companion- 
ship, bowed, and gave her his arm. Again 
the young girl broke out into her praises. 

" 0, you must be so clever, so brilliant ; 
if you only heard all I heard ! But I was 
going to ask you," she continued, in a low 
voice, and looking round timorously, '' and 
I am sure you would assist me if you can." 
She now spoke very hurriedly, as if fearful 
of being overheard. '' I am a stranger, and 
begin to feel very frightened. They will 



PLAINTIFF AXD DEFENDANT. 161 

i30t let me do as I will; they will not tell 
me ^yhat is going forward, and I know will 
force me into what I cannot like. O, if you 
would only let me see you, let me go to 
you-" 

Bligh stopped her, and answered very 
coldly. "I am sorry," he said, *'but all 
this is quite out of the question. It is 
better for you to understand now. Any 
interest I can take in this matter must be 
on a side totally opposed to yours. Any 
assistance I can give must be to those 
whom vou are striving; to defeat. You 
must consider I have only had the pleasure 
of meeting you twice, whereas I am bound 
by long friendship to the family you are 
striving to eject." 

Eugenie looked a little pained at this 
speech. 

*' I am not striving at all; it is my right, 
is it not ? They tell me so. Ah, I see ; 
you like lier. You love her; you cannot 
deny it." 

III. M 



162 DIANA GAY. 

It was at this moment tliey passed Lady 
Jane and Diana in the lobby, as we have 
seen. 

The foreign young girl's eyes were on his 
face. She followed his look, and then said 
suddenly, ^'Ah, there, I knov/ noio ; there 
she is." 

Plaintiff and defendant now passed close, 
and were looking at each other steadily. 

As Bligli went down the steps to the 
carriage, he said firmly, but as graciously as 
he could, " Now I hope you have under- 
stood, and that if I should be obliged to 
take any step opposed to your interests you 
will see the reason." 

'*Eut listen," said she in an eager whis- 
per ; '' I will do what I can . what you like; 
only tell me." 

"What J like!" repeated Bligh in as- 
tonishment. " Do you mean that you 
will." 

Her companion was close behind, and 
here struck in sharply. At Bligh she 



PLAINTIFF AND DEFENDANT. 163 

looked with something like hostility. He 
looked after them mechanically as they 
drove away. 

"She means," he thought, "the thing 
could be settled. But it would be un- 
w^orthy and unfair on my side. No ; I shall 
not interfere." 

Then Harding Hanaper seized on him, 
and drew him away. 



M 2 



( 164 ) 



CHAPTEE XII. 



LADY jane's. 



At Lady Williamson's the usual scene . one 
of her pleasant evenings . was going for- 
ward. There were not more than twenty 
people : three or four members of Parlia- 
ment; a literary gentleman or two (semi- 
political also) ; an actor, who was '' by way 
of being a gentleman," said some of the ma- 
licious, but who was a very agreeable person 
and much admired ; and a few pretty wives 
and young ladies ; for Lady Jane made all 
these distinctions. Her '' pretty wives and 
maids " were almost proverbial. Diana had 
become the prey of one of the Nineveh- 
bearded gentlemen, who much approved of 
her, and whom Lady Jane had brought to 



LADY jane's. 165 

lier, savins: '' she wished her to like him . 
50 wished her to like him." That hero, 
much fancying Diana's ingenue air and 
appearance, and sure that there was ahout 
her a refreshing "bahhle o' green fields," 
liad laid down his little carpet, and, meta- 
phorically, stripping to his "fleshings," pre- 
pared to give all his most effective " low- 
rope" acts. But Diana was distraite. Her 
heart was far away ; she was still thinking 
of the brilliant feiix d' artifice she had just 
witnessed; the colours, the sound of those 
cascades of yellow and green and blue fire 
was in her ears. 

"The angel ended, and in Adam's ears, 
So charming left liis voice." 

She did not notice the feats of the agreeable 
pantomimist who was beside her, and who 
indeed was so engrossed with his private 
tumbling that for a short time he did not 
perceive her want of attention. It broke 
on him with an almost painful suddenness. 



166 DIANA GAY. 

He thought her ''a bad style" of young 
girl, with nothing in the world of the 
"green fields" about her; and rather 
hurriedly getting on his social greatcoat 
over his web suit, and biuidling up his 
carpet, he went away to another quarter. 
"He had not got a copper by his per- 
formance," said Mr. Wally Pepys, who took 
his place, and from whom we have indeed 
borrowed these rather forced histrionic me- 
taphors. To him Diana was generally more 
attentive. In truth, in her young heart 
had taken place the change that a certain 
class of religious experts tells us takes place 
in the devout. She had been as it were 
awakened; she saw things so differently; 
she had at last arrived at the beatific vision 
. on this earth at least. The habitual 
flightiness of her young soul seemed to be 
gone for ever. Quite another Eobert Bligh 
had taken the place of the plain, practical 
being of the old time. Instead of a homely 
creature of earth, here was a sort of bright 



LADY jane's. 167 

archangel. Again we say, rare, delicious, 
most exquisite success ! How it brightens, 
how it gilds ! It turns tlie ugly into 
beauties ; it changes contempt into respect 
and admiration. Those wonderful philo- 
sophers, the Prench, wise and worldly in 
their most trivial sayings, have summed it 
all up in a line . '' What succeeds like 
success ? " What indeed ? What fails like 
failure? Success means j;oi^(?r; and there- 
fore we admire and love. We can no more 
help it, nor could Diana, than we can force 
our eyes to dislike the soft greens of earth 
or the soft blues of heaven ; and now she is 
startled from this sort of reverie as the door 
opens, and the right honourable the 
Attorney - General enters from the 
House, bringing in the hero of the 



evenmg. 



"My dear," he says to Lady Jane, "I 
got hold of our friend here, and brought 
him off from our Government people." 

Lady Jane was delighted. To any one 



168 DIANA GAY. 

bringing in a new king of beasts to her 
little menagerie she was grateful. 

" You are to be the great man of the day, 
Mr. Bligh, they tell us. You were really 
charming to-night. Now, sit down here, 
and let me talk to you." 

Diana noticed a very animated conver- 
sation, that went on for many minutes (at 
little parties of this sort minutes must do 
for half-hom\s). Then Lady Jane called 
over Diana. 

*' We are turning this orator's head," she 
said; "but he is not spoiled yet, Eut, I 
say, who would conceive he had all this 
bitterness locked up ? " 

Thus establishing a connection as it were 
between two new - charged cylinders. 
Lady Jane, like an artful hostess, dis- 
connected herself, and went to another 
quarter. 

''I am so glad you liked it," said Bligh 
ironically, '^ though indeed they make too 
much fuss about it. By the way, I am glad 



LADY JAXe's. 169- 

I have met you ; and, inclecd, that was the 
reason I came in here to-night." 

'.' O," said Diana, glowing with pleasure, 
'' how 2rood you are ahvavs to me ! And I 
know I don't deserve it." 

^' O dear," said he, '^ there is no question 
about that at all ; it is merely a matter of 
duty ; and I had hesitation ; and . shall I 
say it?. a good deal of pride was in the 
way, for after the fashion it was considered 
I behaved ; I say considered . " 

A new conviction as well as a new ideal 
of Mr. Bligh had entered into Diana's 
heart. 

*' I never thought of that," she said 
passionately. '' At least I did," she added; 
'' but I was forced to think so ; and it 
seemed so strange, but now, I assure . " 

'.' And what, pray," said Mr. Bligh, with 
some colour mounting into his pale cheeks, 
*' what has caused this chancre? Has any 
new fact come before you ? Have I vindi 
cated myself ? ^o, I should say not. 



170 DIANA GAY. 

Miss Diana Gay, you did me cruel injustice, 
and I bad determined never to condescend 
to explain or excuse myself, for, give me 
leave to say, you might have known me far 
better." 

'' I deserve ail this," said Diana in the 
same earnest way ; " indeed I do." 

" But," said be in the same grave tone 
(Lugard would have said '' schoolmaster "), 
" I felt I should be above all such petty 
resentment. After all, your dear father 
was very good to me, and I loved him ; and 
therefore. Miss Gay, to-night I put my 
pride in my pocket. That expedition to 
Prance was not for what you . or I shall 
say ilie]j . supposed, but to see my mother 
. to find out if all I suspected were true. 
I grieve to say it was true. So far from 
conspiring against your interest, that in- 
terest has lost me the love of the best 
friend left to me in the world. My mother, 
as I know well, never goes back from what 
she says . never recalls speech or promise, 



LADY jane's. 171 

and never forgives when she says she will 
not. In this way I conspired against 
you." 

Now Lady Jane, not relishing a too- 
protracted confidence or isolation among 
her guests, comes up and says, '' Come with 
me, Mr. Bligh; there's Mrs. Penwilliams 
dying . you and I have often laughed at 
that word . dying to know you." But 
Diana saw Mr. Bligh smile off this proposal. 
'' I must," he said, '. let the poor lady 
expire, and, what I think w^orse of, disobey 
you. Beprieve me for ten minutes. Lady 
Jane." 

" So much for that," he said, turning to 
Diana, '' and I shall promise you never to 
refer to it again." 

'' 0, hut you must," said Diana ; '' I could 
go down here on my knees before you to 
ask your pardon. It was so unjust . so 
wicked . I can ^iiever forgive myself." 

She saw him look round in alarm lest she 
should be heard. 



172 DIANA GAY. 

" Do, please, never speak of it again. We 
both iinderstand now ; and I shall promise 
never to refer to it. Now I have some- 
thing else to deal with. I am sure you 
will believe I have a sincere interest in you, 
and w^ish only your welfare. Now this 
trial that is comino- on : I am afraid vour 
friends and advisers do not seriously con- 
sider the dangers. I do not wish to add to 
your troubles ; but I am afraid it looks very 
serious." 

'' I don't care," said Diana; "and if you 
would let me tell you what I wish, let me 
clear myself, and . " 

" It was agreed," he said, '' we should 
never allude to that. It is past. Now, if I 
might dare advise . and I know a little of 
the person. Miss Gay who is the plaintiff 
here." 

'' You do ? " said Diana. '' When ? What 
is she like ? " 

'' You saw her to-night ; she came up to 
me in the smaller v." 



LADY JAXE's. 173 

" That was she ? " said Diana, quite 
excited ; '^ and you know her ? " 

''I see," said he, ''you have not quite 
given up the old suspicions. No matter ; it 
is only human nature, and v/hat I must 
expect. Let me tell you, then, I met her 
on board the packet, and later at the solici- 
tor's, who had sent me a brief in her case, 
which I returned. You force me to tell 
you all these things." 

Diana still showed disquiet, it seemed to 
him suspicion. 

''And you know her?" she repeated. 
" She is certainly good-looking, and seems 
good and nice." 

'' She is both," he said gravely, "as far 
as I can judge, and, as far as I can judge, I 
should say a compromise was possible. She 
would be willing." 

" This she said to you to-night ? " asked 
Diana, with surprising quickness for her. 

"Yes." 

" I shall never compromise my rights," 



174 . DIANA GAY. 

said Diana with a trembling lip . " never ; 
and I authorize you to tell her so." 

'' I have no authority to say this to you, 
it is only what I gather. Therefore I can- 
not tell her anything." 

" Then we shall leave it so, and, like the 
other subject, not recur to it again." 

" I am certainly a little unfortunate in 
all my well-meant attempts for your in- 
terest." 

'' Well-meant ! " said Diana with a little 
effort at scorn. 

''Yes, well-meant," he repeated gravely. 
'' And now for a third and last bit of advice. 
I tremble to approach it ; but it is really all 
dutv." 

" Pray go on," said Diana, scarcely 
thinking of what she was saying. 

'^ I hardly know how to begin ; but as I 
(think of me as some old reverend friend, 
which indeed I am fast becoming, you 
know) hear things at clubs and other places, 
and so on, I must tell you I think it was a 



LADY jane's. 175 

heavy misfortune in many ways that poor 
Lady Margaret had to break up her esta- 
blishment." 

There was a pause. 

" I suppose," said Diana, " you mean a 
little more than that ; but I don't see it." 

" E^emember," went on Bligh, '' I am the 
old gentleman and friend, lecturing and 
giving advice. Once this is over, I promise 
not to trouble you again : indeed, politics 
bid fair now to become my Mephistopheles. 
But what I mean is, about your staying 
with your old friends the Lugards. I think 
it is injudicious. You are very young ; and, 
forgive me, he is not exactly the sort of 
person to be your companion and pro- 
tector." 

Diana gave one of her little scornful 
tosses of the head. 

" I understand. But you never liked 
Pvichard Lugard." 

Bobert Bligh rose hastily. 

" I have done my part," he said. ''I see 



176 DIANA GAY. 

I was wrong. I had no right to in- 
terfere. We must end our long, h)ng 
conversation; and I wonder what they 
could have thought of us. The ' dying ' 
Mrs. Penwilliams claims me, and I go. 
I promise you solemnly it is the last time 
I shall sin again as to advising." 

He nodded pleasantly to her. 

''O Eobert," she cried, "I did not 
mean . " 

But he shook his head in the same 
pleasant way, as though it were all a joke, 
and walked away to Mrs. Penwilliams. 



( 177 ) 



CHAPTER XIIL 

A NIGHT SCENE. 

Mrs. Eichard Lugard had long since 
begun to show signs of ill-health, and 
kept a good deal to her room. She had 
grown more excitable too, or rather '' more 
odd," as some of her friends called it. This 
view was at last forced upon Diana, who 
had been unwearied in her eForts to soothe 
her, and followed out her little charitable 
but foolish scheme of turning that home 
into a happy one. Having had her own 
share of troubles, our Diana thought she 
had begun to learn what the world was 
very tolerably, and was entitled to give 
sound advice. 

" You see, dear Kitty," she would say to 

III. N 



178 DIANA GAY. 

her friend, ''I don't think you go quite the 
right way with Richard ; he requires a 
certain little humouring and leading. 
You understand ? " 

Mrs. Lugard would look up at her 
quickly : 

"You know, then, it would seem ? You 
have found it successful ? " 

Diana, thinking this an earnest though 
ungracious request for information, would 
bend forward eagerly and explain her 
little tactics. When she had dwelt on 
them some time, and added that she knew 
E/ichard's character so well, having known 
him so long, and that he should be allowed 
his way in small things, and hinting that a 
cheerful smiling welcome was a wonderful 
reformer, Mrs. Lugard turned quietly to 
her, and coldly said . 

 Why should I take this trouble, when 
there is a friend ready to come into our 
house and do it all for me ? How good- 
natured of her, is it not?" 



A NIGHT SCENE. 179 

Diana was not a little taken back at this 
thrust. 

'. You know YOU begged of me to come 
to you," she said after a moment ; '' but if 
YOU wish . " 

''Yes," said Kitty impatiently, " now be 
sensitiYe, and say you will leave the house 
. leave me to his amiable mercies; that 
will be charming ; as if our house is not 
yet hell upon earth enough ! God knows 
what scandal will follow then. Yes, yes, 
you do some good here, even for decency's 
sake. But you know me, and you say 
have known me long, and you cannot make 
a little allowance for what I suffer, and I must 
carefully measure my words with you even." 

In such scenes, of which there were many 
patterns, what could Diana do but, with a 
heart filled with comnassion, commiserate 
her unhappy friend ? 

When Diana returned home from Lady 
Jane Williamson's it was past one o'clock. 

N 2 



180 DIANA GAT. 

She came up into the drawing-room bright, 
smiling, yet half dejected, and found the 
lamps lit in the drawing-room. Lugard 
was walking up and down. Diana was a 
little scared when she saw him, for there 
was an angry look in his eyes. 

'' You are very late, Miss Gay," he said, 

" I fear so," said Diana ; '' though I did 
not think it was so late. Eut, indeed, if I 
had known you were to wait up . " 

" Wait up ? " said he ; '' surely you know 
that is not so unusual with me. But will 
you pardon an abrupt question : why did 
you conceal all this from me?" 

" I never meant to conceal anything," 
said she, with some pride. 

" 0, I know," he said, with an ironical 
bow, '' I have no right to bring any young 
lady to account. But still I have, I think ; 
when you tell me that such a person is your 
enemy, and that he has behaved like an 
enemy, and that you mean to treat him as 
such, I think some little air of consistency 



A ^'JGllT SCEXE. 181 

should be kept up, or you should give me 
notice." 

Diana answered eagerly, " O, I am so 
o'lad to ovrn and discover that we all did him 
wrong ; he has explained everything ! " 

" 0, he has ? And you listened to his 
story ? But before he told it to you you 
went to hear him make his exhibition . iu 
my place, too I O, Diana, I did not think 
you would try such a deception on me." 

" I mean no deception, indeed," said 
Diana gently, for the allusion to '' my 
place " had touched her heart, and she 
felt it must have been a mortification; 
" only I felt so curious, and I thought at 
the same time that vou mi^ht not like to 
know of Ptobert's . " 

" Ptobert's ! " said he v/ith infinite bitter- 
ness ; '' Ptobert to the man that has plotted 
your ruin, that could be had up at this 
moment before any court, he and his wicked 
mother, for conspiracy ! Page says so ; and 
I tell vou Ave are not done with them yet." 



182 DIANA GAY. 

" O," said Diana eagerly, " this is what 
grieves me so. I tell you this is ail im- 
agination. He has explained everything. 
She has even east him off because he took 
my side. No, E^ichard, you must not be 
unjust ; and, indeed, we both owe Lim some 
amende for our treatment." 

E^ichard was growing more excited every 
moment, striding up and down the room. 
" Here are fresh and fresh surprises every 
minute. Now I begin to see. All this 
time, from ever so far back, you have been 
devoted to that . fellow, while I, poor fool 
that I have been, have let all my prospects, 
all my hopes in life, be destroyed running 
after a mere phantom." 

This language, which might have alarmed 
another lady, seemed to Diana merely a 
development of Lugard's usual intemperate 
strain, meaning nothing beyond general dis- 
content and anger. Yet she had not seen 
him so excited for long, and tried to soothe 
him. 



A NIGHT SCENE. 183 

" Don't talk in this way, you make me so 
unhappy ; and you know I have trouloles of 
my own." . 

"And what troubles have I had? . 
though no one thinks of that. Disap- 
pointed, mortified, deceived, and I can trace 
it all to one, one thing. li you had . " 

"Dear Hichard," said Diana, a little 
alarmed, "it is no use talking of that now; 
you know I have told you so again and 
again." 

"It is no use for you, of course. My 
career is ended; yours is beginning. It 
falls very light on you ; but I warn you, 
Diana, do not think of that, or let it near 
you, for there is a point beyond which I 
will not be trifled with ; so I warn him, or 
you may warn him if you like. I may bear 
what I have to bear as well as I can, and as 
I must ; but take care, Diana, for it would 
be the most fatal day for him since he was 
born, if you were to think of that. I tell 
you plainly I could not bear that J' 



184 DIANA GAY. 

He was so wild and strange that Diana 
shrank away; and yet she pitied him, he 
had been so harassed ; and she could not 
find it in her heart to take up that tone 
of dignity, or affect an air that " she ought 
not to listen." She had not the strength, 
in fact, to take up the bold or haughty part. 
But she attempted a faint protest : " We 
are old friends, I know, E^ichard ; we have 
known each other from children . you from 
a boy, I from a girl . so that . " 

'' So that I am quite harmless, and what 
I say is all folly and nonsense ? Then I tell 
you, Diana Gay, I take no such view, and I 
hold you responsible for all this wretched- 
ness. You made a sort of plaything of me . 
it was all your sport . and would carry on 
the sport now, and you do not care." 

" Hush, hush ! " said she, " you must not 
speak in this way. Indeed, it is time that 
I should leave this house, for I seem to have 
failed in doing what I hoped to do . to make 
you more happy and reconciled to your state." 



A NIGHT SCENE. 185 

He again gave a loud and bitter laugh. 
'^O, that was it? O, indeed ! " 

''But, now," said Diana, growing excited, 
''I see my folly and childishness, and that 
I ought not to remain here an hour longer ; 
and they were right." 

'^ They were right?" he repeated. ''I 
see at last. Then he has been advising you 
. he has dared to tell you this ? He will 
drive me mad, this fellow ! What business 
has he to interfere ? But, never fear, I'll 
make him account to me. And so he has 
persuaded you to leave us ? Well, do. Give 
him that triumph, you cruel, unsteady girl. 
Leave us, then, and I know what I shall do. 
I shall know with whom to reckon first of 
all, and then what to do with myself. Yes, 
Diana. This life is getting unendurable ; I 
am in that state of mind that I know not 
what I shall do ; harassed on all sides, miser- 
able, you know not what I suifer. It only 
wants that . your leaving us . and you shall 
see what will follow." 



186 DIANA GAY. 

"No matter now," said Diana, eager to 
end this interview ; " we will talk of this in 
the morning." 

" As you will, Diana ; but mind, if you 
leave us, I leave also.'' 

Diana started, and gave a cry. There was 
one else, also, who had started ; and in the 
doorway they saw the tall figure of Kitty 
wrapped in a shawl, her face pale and 
menacing. Diana, on whom the whole 
effect of this fatal situation now flashed, ran 
to her ; the other sternly waved her back. 

'' So you will leave," she said to him, ''if 
she leaves ? Thank God I have heard these 
words. Por long I have known that you 
wished me to leave . leave this world, if I 
could." 

" O, it was very cruel of him," said Diana 
passionately, '' and wicked to speak so ! And 
I appeal to you, Richard, to bear me out ; I 
never wished to listen to you, or to en- 
courage this in the least ; say so, speak, and 
do that justice." 



A NIGHT SCENE. 187 

It was curious to see the change now that 
she was in presence of this dramatic situa- 
tion. The danger . the crisis, as it seemed 
to her, so new and desperate . had given her 
an unwonted purpose and strength of mind. 
Her eyes flashed, she seemed to have grown 
of a sudden years older in heart and par- 
pose. The childish Diana had been trans- 
formed. 

Lugard looked at her gloomily, and did 
not reply for a moment. ''I do not care 
who knows it, and there is no need for any 
acting here. I have not patience for it ; and 
it is only carrying out a farce to pretend 
anything of the sort. She knows," he said, 
pointing to his wife, '' what I feel, and what 
I have felt all through." 

" Stop, stop I " said Diana passionately, 
to whom every moment brought a fresh 
revelation; "how can you be so cruel, so 
wicked?" 

These words seemed onlv to make Lugard 
more desperate. 



188 DIANA GAY. 

'' Ah, you say this now, Diana, after all the 
mischief is done. Who is it that has been 
most cruelly dealt with, I should ask ? Who 
has been sacrificed ? I say again, she knew 
all this ; and there is no injury done to her, 
because her eyes were open. I am sick of 
acting parts, and it is more honest to say 
the truth out boldly. She knows, and she 
knew then, that I wanted to marry '//ou, 
Diana, and that . " 

"And that," said the Kitty Crowder of 
old times, in a trembling, scornful voice, 
''and that, if one obstacle were out of the 
way, you would do. It is more honest to 
speak the truth, is it not ? " 

Diana again broke out in the most pas- 
sionate terms, ^^0,noio I see at last; now 
my eyes are opened ! Ptichard, to think you 
should have been so wicked ! O let me go ; 
let me fly from this dreadful house ; it will 
kill me to remain a moment longer here. 
Eut where shall I go ? What is to become 
of me ? " 



A NIGHT SCENE. 189' 

'' And what is to become of me ? " said 
he, advancing to the door. " If I am left 
here to this life . no, no, if you leave, take 
care, Diana ; I don't know what will follow. 
And if you leave in anger . I say, take care 
again . take care, for I cannot answer for 
myself." 

Here was something dramatic for the 
young heroine. The time was an hour past 
midnight . the actors, that excited wife and 
the wilder husband, as it seemed to Diana. 
She was so shocked, so confounded, at all 
these new discoveries, she did not know 
what to do, and could only murmur, '^ What 
is to become of me ? Where shall I go ? 
0, to whom shall I go ? " 

Not one of the party had perceived that 
the maid-servant had entered and had 
spoken. She said again, " This gentleman 
wishes . " Eut she was as confounded 
as any of the rest, for she had heard the 
last two speeches. 



190 DIANA GAY. 

Suddenly Lugard started forward furi- 
ously. " He come here ! O, this passes 
beyond all ! He is at the bottom of all, 
and . Heaven above ! . the time has come 
for me to punish him." 

It was Eobert who was standing in the 
doorway. He entered calmly and slowly. 

'' Pirst," he said, '^ to explain my pre- 
sence here at your house. It is for her . 
Miss Gay's . interest that I am here. A 
discovery I have just made is to her case of 
the greatest importance, and I thought a 
moment should not be lost . " 

'' And you have the insufferable effron- 
tery," said Lugard, really beside himself, 
and advancing on the other with fury, " to 
meddle in this business, though you have 
been warned ? I tell you, man, this is 
going too far, and I cannot control my- 
self. You will drive me to do you a 
mischief." 

" Polly ! " said Bligh, half contemptu- 
ously. " I also am tired of this hectoring, 



A NIGHT SCENE. 191 

which has gone on far too long. . Miss Gay, 
you asked where can you go to from this 
house ? I shall tell you. Mr. Bowman and 
Lady Margaret have returned this evening, 
and are at their hotel . Starridge's. You 
can go there at once ; I will leave you there 
myself if you wish." 

" Yes, yes, E-obert ; a thousand times 
yes ; " and she went over to him. 

Lugard strode forward, then checked 
himself, as he saw Diana cling to E^obert's 
arm, and actually ground his teeth with 
fury. "Do as you please, then," he said to 
her ; "I can't control you ; but as for 
Mm, if I live another hour he shall pay me 
the long debt he owes me . nearly twenty 
years now . and with interest, too, Mr. 
Bligh." 

Bligh was going, but he turned back, 
and said calmly, "And let me warn you, 
too, that the day for forbearance . which 
you in your wicked dulness set down to 
fear of you . has passed by. Take care, for 



192 DIANA GAY. 

I shall treat you now in quite a different 
manner. . Come, Miss Gay." 

They passed down, and entered his car- 
riage at the door. Neither spoke, but there 
was on their minds an impression of the 
dreadful situation. They left behind them 
that husband and wife, whose household 
gods were shattered about them, strewing 
the floor, a universal wreck of marriage, 
respect, love, happiness . everything . the 
verv frao'ments of which to-morrow mi^jht 
break up in yet further ruin. 

Eligh hurriedly told her how her friends 
had so opportunely returned. Lady Mar- 
garet something better in health. As for 
the matter concerning the business, he said 
he would see her in the morning. Indeed, 
Diana cared little : the scene she had 
passed through had changed her into a 
woman. Down had tumbled the thick 
walls of simplicity, unsophistication, plea- 
sant unconcern, that enclosed the rural 
garden in which she had been living; and 



A NIGHT SCENE. VJ6 

she saw about her, grown up as if by 
enchantment, the great streets and build- 
ings of life, the hum of traffic, the pass- 
ing faces, the bustling figures . and not 
only saw but understood them, like the 
Eastern in the fairy tale whose head was 
dipped into the tub of water. The whole 
scenery of a life seemed to pass through her 
young brain. She saw the dream in which 
she had been living . the height, depth, thick- 
ness, the philosophy, above all, the folly 
of that strange intimacy. She now even 
shrank from it with terror. In the carria^-e 
as they went along she poured out her 
faltering gratitude to ''her preserver and old 
friend," as she called him. Bligh was calm 
and grateful, but cold as usual. It was 
a mere accident his coming in at that 
moment. He, and he always hoped to prove 
that he would be a real friend, he had had 
a note that night from Hawker, Q.C., who 
led on the other side, and who told him 
in. 



194 DIANA GAT. 

that Judge Cosherer had fixed Wednesday 
for the case. 

" I don't care about the case," said Diana 
im2:)atiently ; " but you had something else 
to tell me." 

''It was about the case also/' he said. 
" When I got home and took up the evening 
paper, the Megent Street Chronicle, I saw 
a paragraph about this business, in which 
they said that some Eev. Mr. Potter who 
was chaplain there was to be examined. 
The name made me start, for it seemed 
quite familiar to me, and I tried to 
recollect for a long time. At last I 
recalled it. Do you remember my 
looking through your papers at Gay 
Court ? " 

" Indeed I do," said she. 

''Well it was there. There were some 
letters from abroad, some from my mother, 
some from others ; but the name I could 
swear to, and some passage not very favour- 
able to him. I did not read it, but I know 



A XiGHT SCE^'E. 195 

my eye fell on it. I would get those papers 
looked into at once. They ought to have 
been looked to before." 

Diana was not attending very much. 
She was thinking of the scene they just 
witnessed. iN'ow they were at the yellow 
front of Starridge's private and distinguished 
:hotel in Brook Street. Its lamps were 
shining out over the door. '' Lady Margaret 
Bowman and suite" were arrived, and her 
ladyship had just sent over to Mr. Lugard's 
a note for Miss Gay. She went in, and she 
said ''goodbye" to Bligh. She added 
softly, '' O how kind you have been ! I 
shall never forget." 

As he turned to go, he thought he would 
walk home. It was a moonliorht nisrht . 
the night of a most delightful and exciting 
day. '. He had conducted that case well " . 
the triumph in the House, the conversation 
with Diana, and that half-rescue with which 
all had closed. He was thinking as he 
lighted his cigar, " She will be a true woman 

2 



196 DIANA GAY. 

yet. It ^' will work itself out." He then 
repeated, half aloud, as he set off, 

'' Yes, better let her work it out for her- 
self, and I shall say and do nothing." 

At this moment a figure crossed the 
street hurriedly ; a hansom cab was driving 
away, from which it had descended. The 
figure was in front of him in a moment : 
a fierce face . wild eyes as of a madman. 

''Now, Mr. Bligh," it said; ''now there 
are no women to protect you." 

Bligh threw away his cigar and drew 
back. 

'' I told you before I am getting tired of 
this, and that I have passed the point when 
I can put up with it longer." 

" Who wishes you to put up with it ?" 
said the other in a low voice. " I would 
ask nothing better than that you should 
not. You have just hit the nice point, Mr. 
Special Pleader, clever as you are." 

Bligh spoke with great firmness. 

*' Go away," he said. " Leave me. I see 



A >;iGHT SCENE. 197 

YOU wisli to brino^ about some . I don't 
say quarrel . " 

'' Quite right, Mr. Bligh, the great 
barrister and member . quite so. I do msh 
to bring it to that, here, and in this 
street . a common vulgar quarrel . police 
and all that." 

Bligh looked round. The long decent 
street Avas almost deserted : on the other 
side the faint pattering of the steps of a 
passenger going home, and not concerned 
with the two gentlemen who were talking 
together opposite. 

Bligh suddenly got past him, and then, 
putting him back with his hands, said . 

" Once for all, understand this. Your 
conduct to me for so many years has been 
past endurance. Your insults, your un- 
worthy jealousies and sneers, your more 
unworthy slanders behind my back " . and 
Robert's voice trembled . " I tell you all 
that is past now ; so take and go your way. 
Let me go mine." 



198 DIANA GAY. 

"What talk is this!" said Lugarcl, now 
furious. " Take your hands off me. As if 
I had nothing to put up with from your 
mean, quiet sneaking ways all these . 
But I'll end it now. You shall meet me 
in Prance . anywhere you please . but meet 
me you shall. Do you hear ? " 

'^No/' said the other. "I shall do 
nothing of the kind. There is my answer." 

''And there's onine, you coward T said 
Lugard, and swiftly raising his arm, his 
hand descended as swiftly towards the 
cheek of Eohert Bligh. 

It was just the scene with which this 
little romance opened at Dr. Wheeler's, now 
so many years before ; but between, what 
an abyss of storm.y passions, in one breast 
at least, had filled up ! Before that angry 
hand had descended, another stout arm 
had been launched out in defence, and had 
struck it up Avith such violence that Bichard 
reeled again, and, staggering back, with 
difficulty kept his feet. Bligh stood, still 



A NIGHT SCENE. 199 



calm, his hands ready, and without speaking 
a Avord. 

" You struck me," said Lugard wildly. 
'' You shall pay for this . by God you 
shall!" 

'' Take care, I warn you," repeated 
Bligh, in a low voice. 

As Lugard was rushing on again, a 
policeman came out of an archway close 

by. 

^' Xow, gents, what's this about ? Here, 
I say-" 

" He struck me ! He did ! I swear it I 
I'll charge him before any magistrate ! I 
do it now." 

'*Hush, hush!" said Biigh. *'You are 
beside yourself." Then to the policeman, 
'' This gentleman and I were once friends, 
and he wishes now to draw me into a 
quarrel. He followed me here in a cab. I 
am Mr. Bligh, a member of Parliament . " 

This title was to Luo^ard like scarlet on a 
furious bull. 



200 DIANA GAY. 

*' I charge biin here, whatever he is, and 
you must do your duty. I shall appear 
against him at the police . " 

''Why, I see you strike him first," said 
the policeman, ''and see you get out of the 
cab and cross the street. I was a- watching 
you, ay and see the 'ansom come up. 
Come, go about your business. Now, see 
here, you won't come this way ; so you 
may as well now. I'll take care, sir," added 
the policeman, touching his hat, " he 
shan't trouble you. I see you myself in 
the Chancellor's Court ; so I know it's true 
what you says, sh\" 

Ko wonder that Bligh almost felt pity for 
his enemy's degraded situation. He stopped 
irresolutely and said . 

" Lugard, no one need know anything of 
tliis. But for your own sake I conjure you 
to give over this insane course of yours." 

" I shall reach you yet," said Lugard, 
grinding his teeth, " though you do require 
police and women to protect you." 



A NIGHT SCENE. 201 

" A hinformation in the morning before 
Mr. Bond '11 be your course, sir," said the 
policeman . '' bind liim over, you know." 

Bligh walked away slowly, and Lugard 
went off in the other direction, the police- 
man following him, and determined to ^' keep 
bis eye on him " till he got home. Some 
evil spirit seemed to have entered to this 
man, whom " the gods seemed determined 
to destroy." The furies of life were against 
him, and everything seemed bent on de- 
feating him. 



( 202 ) 



CHAPTEE XIY. 

GAY V. GAY. 

By tlie next morning tlie baffled E^ichard 
Lngard was almost in a state of phrenzy. 
Those who were in his house heard him 
walking about talking to himself, nearly the 
whole night. Had they been listening they 
would have heard him saying : . '' O ! show 
me some way. Let me live to destroy him ! 
It will drive me mad if I do not !" But 
the chief blow had come from Diana. 
''That she should have turned on ! . oh, to 
scold me so cruelly, all at the persuasion of 
this clerk . that lawyer's drudge ! I'll never 
forgive her . never ! " With the next 
morning came a letter, the writing of 
which he knew to be hers. She too had 



GAY V. GAY. 203 

been thinldng over that scene, not with- 
out trouble and alarm. They were her 
old friends, and to Eichard . with all his 
violence and ill-conditioned behaviour . she 
could not feel much resentment. She indeed 
regarded him as irresponsible. To that class 
of character, indeed, a girl's heart is uncon- 
sciously indulgent. Called on officially/ to 
sentence such a one, they are bound to be 
severe, but they think of the prisoner with 
interest. There were the dangers also with 
such a nature lest he should proceed to 
some violence ; and, after all, he had been 
kind to her, and had really liked her, and 
liked her long. So she sat down and wrote 
him a long letter setting out all these things, 
saying how grateful she was for his good- 
ness and the shelter he had given her ; that, 
as for what he had said, she knew he w^as 
hasty and thoughtless, and did not think 
what he was going to do. But if he ever 
did like her, she was going to ask him a 
favour. She had her own troubles drawins^ 



"'SK 



204 DIAXA GAY. 

on, and she knew lie would not wish to 
add to them, and this was that there should 
not be any quarrel between him and 
Eobert Bligh. When he came to this 
point he half crushed up the letter. 

'' She wishes to protect him/' he said, 
'^ but it will not do." 

Presently he read on. She must know 
what people would say, and how her name 
would be drawn into it. 

Almost as early, another letter reached 

him. He knew that hand also. His eves 

t, 

lighted up, and he saw with a sort of exul- 
tation. " No, surely ! But he has not 
spirit enough for that. He dare not. This 
is more of his wretched quibbling." It was 
from Robert Bligh. 

He said after the scene of last night it 
was quite necessary they should come to a 
clear understanding as to Lugard's future 
behaviour. They had been old friends and 
schoolfellows, and he appealed to Lugard 
himself, if for all these years past he had not 



GAY V. GAY. 205 

shown a temper and patience few other men 
would have exhibited. *' Yes," said Lugard, 
" because he could not help it . he hadn't 
the spirit." But they had now . since last 
night . passed the point of this endurance ; 
he would bear no more, and he was obliged 
to give Eichard Lugard this warning. Per- 
haps it would not be attended to on these 
grounds : but there was another reason 
which might have more effect . the name of 
one whom they both knew well would of 
certainty be drawn into it, if there was any 
scandal or any quarrel. On Lugard' s head 
would rest that responsibility ; and though 
he knew the motive that would be ascribed 
to this appeal, he was content to let such 
be ascribed to him, provided it had effect. 
Again, he said he was not hostile to Eich- 
ard Lugard, and could even try and forget 
his unprovoked behaviour of last night, and 
would be glad to serve him. But let them 
give over these childish bickerings and jea- 
lousies, which were really unworthy of 



206 DIANA GAY. 

grown men as they were. He made tliis 
last appeal, and did so in the name of one 
whom they both regarded. 

It may be imagined what the effect of 
this appeal was on Eichard, with what 
scorn and fury he read every word; yet 
somehow he felt himself entangled in the 
logic of it, and it forced itself disagreeably 
on him, that any esclandre would of course 
involve Diana's name. Prom this feeling he 
could not set himself free. The whole of 
that day he wandered about uncertain . 
now finding himself drawn to the House of 
Commons by a sort of fascination, to wait 
for his rival and enemy. But at last, and 
before the end of the day, he found a weary 
relief in thinking that as Diana's case was 
now coming on, he might at least wait for a 
few days. And so he determined to do. 
He would postpone all vengeance and con- 
flict until that was over. 

But now the great case was at last 
drawing on. The affidavits, and additional 



GAY V, GAT. 207 

affidavits, had been "filed;" all the usual 
excuses for delays, and the motions had been 
exhausted. It was "ripe" for trial; and 
though the venue would naturally have been 
laid upon the circuit to which Calthorpe 
belonged, still obvious reasons made both 
parties concur in selecting the little assize 
town of Bentham as the battle field. These 
arrangements the public learned from the 
Megent Street Chronicle, which one evening 
set before its readers the following little hot 
buttered roll : . 

"Lovers of what are called 'sensation 
trials' will be rejoiced to learn from us, that 
the great bath into which they have been 
longing to plunge is at last nearly ready. 
Their slumbers will be of the sweetest when 
they hear that the case goes down for trial to 
Bentham, that it will have all the impar- 
tiality and acumen . we believe these are 
the correct words of judicial compliment . of 
Mr. Justice Cosherer, and that of course a 
high-minded and intelligent jury will re- 



208 DIANA GAY. 

ceive his lordsliip's instructions. The Ben- 
tham Gazette will, of course, crowd its 
columns, and the evening penny papers 
will, as the phrase runs, drive a roaring 
trade, &c." 

The 'Regent Street Chronicle was right. 
At last, like a great ship, the case was ready 
for launching. With infinite pains the 
instructors had every rivet driven home, 
every bolt closed. Both parties were ready, 
witnesses, counsel, pleadings. The *' circuit'* 
was moving slowly down on Bentham. Mr. 
Justice Cosherer said very often at dinner, 
*' we have a very heavy ejectment at Ben- 
tham." Or in court, when '^ sitting," " you 
know. Brother Hawker, we have that 
Bentham case." 

At last, Diana's gentle breast was still 
more fluttered by a note from Mr. Page, 
saying that it would be taken on Monday, 
and that he was going down to-morrow, with 
all the papers. Then, indeed, she felt a 
chill. There had been many reprieves, and 



GAY V. GAY. 209 

the fatal day seemed a long way off; now it 
had come at last. It was actually the 
mornino: fixed. The witnesses were in town : 
the court was crowded, the gallery was filled 
with ladies, and the sheriff had been giving 
out tickets. It was quite a festival for Ben- 
tham, where, as the barristers who went 
that circuit remarked, "there was never 
anything heavier than a few wretched lar- 
cenies," the bystander naturally concluding 
it was some mean, wretched, semi-barba- 
rous spot. Our old friend, the Ccdtliorpe 
Mercury^ which had filled many a column 
with the glories of the House of Gay, had 
now sent a special reporter . " our own " . 
to chronicle its downfall. This faithless 
journal was always trimming its sails to the 
new and more favouring gales. " We under- 
stand," it said, " that the probable owner of 
Gay Court, that is, if we are to trust those 
who are best likely to form an opinion on 
the matter, is a young lady of gay French 
tastes, who will make a most desirable addi- 

ITT. P 



210 DIANA GAY. 

tion to the county. The new family . shoukl 
a jury of Eentham lieges so decree it . are 
determined to seize the opportunity to 
restore to Gay Court some of its old attrac- 
tions. As we have been told, it is the eye 
of the master makes the horse grow fat, 
and on the same principle, it is the residence 
of the owner that is the true source of the 
prosperity of this vast empire, on which the 
sun never sets." Some of the malicious crea- 
tures who ''adhere" to country towns and 
villages . a mortified doctor's wife, who had 
not been asked to Gay Court on some occa- 
sion, or a shopkeeper's daughter, who had not 
been recognized . cut this paragraph out 
and sent it to Diana. This mean behaviour 
on the part of the Mercury had the effect 
desired, and '* mortified " her more than 
any stroke had done as yet. Those people, 
whom her father had fed, and whom, indeed, 
he had once assisted when the presses, types, 
&c., were about to be seized for a debt to 
paper-makers, thus to turn on her ! But, 



GAY V, GAY. 211 

as we have seen, she was learning every 
hour the true character of the world, 
and these rough and rather cruel lessons 
were doing her a world of good. 

On the incidents of this rather remark- 
ahle action, which attracted a good deal of 
attention at the time, it is not proposed to 
dwell minutely. The Mercury had it all in 
quite dramatic shape . the dialogue, the 
question and answer, all '* textually " given. 
Telegrams, indeed, reached Calthorpe dur- 
ing the day, detailing its progress; the 
Mercury issued a special edition : they had 
even taken on another man, an addition, 
happily described as '' having specially in- 
creased our present large staffJ^ 

Hawker led for the plaintiff, and opened 
her case in a speech of remarkable ability. 
It lasted over an hour, and he took the jury 
during that space over the whole ground. 
Then came the witnesses. There were 
formal witnesses . people brought at great 
charges from Prance, bringing the books of 

p 2 



212. DIANA GAY. 

the consulate. Everything was clear. There 
was the marriage, on such a day, and in such 
a year, between the actress and the English 
officer, under his proper name . not Burgess, 
but Gay. Everything en regie . witnesses 
and all. Then there was the examination 
of the old Erench nun '' by commission," 
proving the reception of the young girl, 
Eugenie, the visit of the strange lady, and 
the payment of money. Then there was a 
sensation, as a pimpled, red-faced, elderly 
man, with a white cloth about his neck, 
came into the box. Every one knew this 
was the clergyman. The marriage was all 
regular . he remembered it perfectly. This, 
of course, had been already proved by the 
registry, but he had known young Gay, 
had been an intimate friend ; and he proved 
many other incidental matters. He remem- 
bered the birth of the girl. He was severely 
cross-examined " as to his antecedents " bv 
Diana's counsel, and certainly made a 
lamentable figure. He, however, candidly 



GAY V. GAY. 213 

owned that he had not strength to resist ; 
that he was fond of pleasures, and very 
poor, and had to get on as he could. Now, 
before his acquaintance with Mr. Gay how 
had he lived? Come now, out with it all . he 
might as well. The frankness of this man 
was, however, his defence. He kept nothing 
back. He had been chaplain of this place 
and that. "Well, he had, he confessed it, . he 
had been dismissed. They said the accounts 
of the English chapel were confused. Was 
there not some awkward imputation of . 
let us say stealing, or embezzlement ? He 
owned it, but he defied any man to say it 
has been proved. "Why ? Because they 
couldn't. Why again? Because there were 
people there who had made a party . 
against him. Why, the third time, hadn't it 
been proved ? Was it because he had fled 
the night before the investigation ? Well, he. 
owned it, because he knew he w^ould not get 
fair play. A vast deal of time was con- 
sumed in dealino; with this o^entleman, the 



214 DIANA GAY. 

process, as in many cases, being most 
amusing, and even dramatic, for the idle 
and unconcerned spectators, but, in truth, 
having little bearing on the case. 

Hawker sat down, after a " masterly cross- 
examination," and even to applause which 
was " with difficulty suppressed by the 
Court." Then the Court went to lunch, and 
it was known that a veiled lady, whom they 
saw under the Bench, was Mrs. Bligh, who 
was to be the next witness. 

In the box she put up her veil, and 
looked round the court from Justice 
Cosherer to the ladies' gallery, regarding 
them all with a cold, hard look, that did 
not gain her much sympathy. She was 
defiant and haughty, but those from about 
Calthorpe who were present noticed a start- 
ling change in her. How worn she w^as, 
and how her eves flashed and burned with a 
glowing fire ! Her story was simple and 
unexaggerated, and, in the main, a repetition 
of what she had told her son. She told it 



GAY V, GAY. 215 

all witli infinite clearness, and fasliioned it 
herself into a most full and dramatic narra- 
tive. Then counsel rose to cross-examine . 
an operation it was expected would he per- 
formed with more than usual ferocity . so 
dangerous a witness must he broken down 
at all hazards ; and when the barrister rose, 
drawing his gown up on his shoulders, as it 
were to free his arms for the struggle, a 
flutter and rustle of expectancy ran round. 
She, too, seemed to count on this, for her 
lips were compressed together firmly, and 
she seemed to wait the first blow with a 
cokl and hard defiance. Eut, to the universal 
surprise, there was no ^' hostile " cross- 
examination . mere explanation was asked 
for. Why had she kept these matters 
back so lonii;? Had she not known the 
Gays . had they not been friends in fail ? 
She turned full to the judge and to the 
whole Court, and said, ''I am glad I have 
been asked that question. We tcere the 
greatest friends. But I conceive, whether 



216 . DIANA GAY. 

rightly or wrongly, that I have been deeply 
injured by one of them, and then I felt 
mvself dischara'ed. I felt . and I own it 
candidly here . I wished that some punish- 
ment could be found for such behaviour." 

Richard Lugard, who had been in Court 
all the day, now stooped over, and, pulling 
the barrister by his gown, whispered to him. 
The barrister shrugged his shoulders im- 
patiently, and waved him off. Mrs. Bligli 
went on, '' I want no concealment in the 
matter. The Court is welcome to know my 
motives and reason. The world is quite 
welcome to them." 

''You must reserve your reasons, ma- 
dam," said the judge ; '.' we shall not trouble 
you." 

Again Lugard touched the barrister, who 
said aloud, angrily, '' I must beg you, sir, to 
sit down, and not interrupt me. No one 
wishes to have your motives, Mrs. Bligh . 
as for the Christianity or morality of such 
conduct, I thought . " 



GAY V. GAY. 217 

"Por that I am not accountable to yon," 
said she, quickly. '' I have offered to justify 
myself, and you will not listen. Is it yottr 
legal morality to make an insinuation 
then ? " 

The judge smiled. 

'* It is open to you to comment on it in 
your speech, but the witness is right in Avhat 
she says . " 

'' Ask me, and I shall keep back nothing, 
I promise you that." 

The barrister, somewhat nettled, replied, 
''That's all melodramatic enough, madam. 
I ask what I am instructed to ask, and no 
more." 

There were one or two other witnesses, 
and this simple case closed. As the counsel 
said in his speech, "they had" the fact that 
Mr. Gay had an elder brother; that that 
elder brother had married, and had children, 
and there was the child, the plaintiff. The 
case of the defendant was merely a speech . 
they called no witnesses . he could only 



218 DIANA GAY. 

comment on the "shady" character of the 
witnesses, and then made a rather remark- 
able statement as to Mrs. Bligh. They had 
that lady's evidence, he said, but as men of 
the world they would see there was more 
behind it than they were allowed to 
examine into. Tor liimself, he would merely 
say that no doubt they had been surprised 
at the temperate and forbearing tone of his 
cross-examination. But there were reasons 
for all these matters, and he would merely 
add that he had been left to his own dis- 
cretion . 

Here Hawker " must interpose." They 
had nothing whatever to do with his learned 
friend's discretion, granting there was such 
a thing. (Here loud laughter in Court.) 
They were not to go speculating as to 
evidence that had not been given. 

The learned friend said he was perfectly 
entitled to comment on the strange exhi- 
bition of open malignity they had seen that 
day, shocking and unchristian as it appeared 



GAY V. GAY. 219 

to them all. He had a right to ask the 
jury to apply their minds in finding a solu- 
tion for that hostility. 

'^ I think not," said Mr. Justice Cosherer ; 
" you had not the opportunity, and you did 
not avail yourself of it." 

The barrister said, very well ; it was of no 
consequence, and had very little hearing 
on the case, a common declaration with 
gentlemen of the long robe when defeated 
on a vital point. He then warmed himself 
up for the usual circuit platitudes, got on 
an effective picture of " the dismantled 
mansion . the deserted hearth, and the 
ejected young mistress, turned out on 
the world, full of her youth and beauty." 
After about an hour's galloping across this 
sort of country, he at last drew reins, 
and got off his oratorical nag very heated 
and exhausted. Then came the reply, 
which, following out the same meta- 
phor, was a mere cool amble in the shade, 
and on a cob. It was, in short, in a tone of 



220 DIA^A GAT. 

quiet good sense, practical and plain, the 
best, in short, after some such impassioned 
display . as it were, making us all feel 
ashamed of having been led away by our 
feelings. Of course it was all very well to 
talk of a dismantled mansion and a blighted 
hearth. And then this common sense, 
which his learned friend had brought down 
with him in his bag, like his Archbold's 
Nisi Prius . and he must do him that 
justice, no one used them better, as his lord- 
ship and they all knew, who came that 
circuit. But thev were all men. of common 
sense. He knew his learned friend had an 
article called ?^/^common sense {laughter), 
for which he had the exclusive patent {re- 
newed laughter), so exclusive that he would 
not allow him, or the jury there, or even his 
lordship, to use this valuable invention {loud 
laughter, in ichich the Court joined), 

Mr, Justice Cosher er : '^And he has also 
patented his discretion" {roars of laughter^ 
sustained for many minutes). 



GAY V, GAY. 221 

After order had been restored, the learned 
gentleman asked, *' What was the fact now ? 
They all knew something of the world. Now, 
who was going to dismantle Gay Court ? . 
who was going to smash up the hearth- 
stones and ranges in the way depicted by 
his friend ? Why, the fact was, his client 
was going down there to live . if the jury 
would give her leave, wdiich he was con- 
fident they would . and he could reassure 
his learned friend, who seemed so nervously 
anxious about the kitchen fire [loud laugh' 
ter) . that, if he might use the expression, 
high jinks would forthwith set in there. 
He might promise him his little interest 
to secure him an invitation. {Roars of 
laughter^ Wliy, what talk was this 1 If 
he was informed rightly, the place had been 
deserted already by the defendant, who, it 
seems, w^as a young lady of high fashion, 
and went to balls and parties in London . 
things about which, he, thank God, found 
nothing in his law books, thous^h his learned 



222 DIANA GAY. 

friend might. {Laughter.) He frankly 
confessed he wouldn't know a polka from 
a poker. {Laughter.) His learned friend 
was well up in these matters ; and, he was 
told, could waltz like an angel . {^^oars of 
laughter) . an odd sort of angel he must 
have looked, with his wig bobbing about . 
(laughter) . to the music, and his gown 
flapping out behind him . [laughter), . or 
mixed up with the ladies . (laughter), . while 
his legs joined in the demurrer, and would 
be set aside with costs. (Boat's of laughter, 
the learned judge being literally convulsed,) 
'^ No one," said the Mercury, " seemed to 
enjoy the fun more than the learned coun- 
sel who was the subject of this diverting 
picture.") At last he concluded, and then 
Mr. Justice Cosherer, pulling in his chair, 
and arranging his papers, proceeded to 
charge the jury in a voice which, after the 
learned counsel's rolling tones, seemed to 
be in the next street. 



( 223 ) 



CHAPTER XV. 



VERDICT. 



Robert Bligh was busily engaged all that 
day. There was a delicate Puisne Juds^e 
anxious to retire, and it was said that the 
Solicitor-General was anxious for the post. 
It was understood that if the arranorement 
could be carried out, the vouns^ member who 
had made the brilliant speech was very likely 
to get the vacant Law Officership ; the wish, 
too, of Sir John Williamson was already 
known. He was in '* heavy" cases this 
day, and had had an interview with various 
spaniels, carrier-pigeons, turnspits, whips, 
and other functionaries who are so useful 
to a party ; yet his thoughts were all on 
the trial then going on down at the little 



224 DIANA GAY. 

circuit town. But lie got a telegram, as 
was arranged between liim and Mr. Page. 

'^ We have made no case . judge charging 
dead against ns . ^jury seemed made up."' 

As soon as he got leisure, he wrote a 
hasty note to Diana : . 

'' My dear Diana, . The case is going 
on ; but you must, as I told you before, not 
buoy yourself up with much hope. Be 
prepared for the worst, and then you will 
be prepared for the best. The result will 
be known in about an hour, w^hen I shall 
come and tell it to you. Yours, 

"R. B." 

She was sitting at Starridge's, with Lady 
Margaret, who was still quite helpless, 
and never again to force her way through 
the fashionable ranks. When Diana re- 
ceived this, she was quick-witted enough 
to understand . " He is preparing me for the 
worst," she thought. "Well, God's will be 



VEEDICT. 225 

done. Before night I suppose I shall be a 
beggar ! " 

She got up quietly. Lady Margaret had 
lost her old restless curiosity, which made 
her ask about every letter that came to 
the house *' "Who is that from ? what is 
it ? " . and she made no remark. Diana 
went down to the room below, and sat 
there to read the letter again. Now it had 
all come home to her at last: now she 
understood : this was the sentence, and it 
seemed to her a sentence. '* I suppose it 
is a fair punishment," she said ; '* I was so 
frivolous and fitful, and going through life 
like a mere child. That could not go on ; 
and my selfishness was to be punished. 
"Well, heaven's will be done." Mr. Bow- 
man came in, and she showed him the 
letter. He read it, and shook his head. 
'' I know what that means," he said. 
" When my poor sister was taken off, 
that's the way the doctor wrote to me. 
You poor, poor little woman, my heart 

III. Q 



226 DIANA GAY. 

bleeds for yon. Eut you know as well as 
I do, where your home is to be now : with 
old Bowman, that loves you like his child. 
My pet, we'll make it up to you ; and, 
please God, I can do something in the way 
of settlement too ; and with your own child's 
portion . two thousand pounds . we'll make 
out something snug." 

Diana was deeply touched, and went up 
to him, and silently kissed him ; but she 
had her own resolution formed. 

" I must go up," he said, " and sit a bit 
with poor Maggie, and invent some news 
for her. Look here, I've got all the back 
numbers of the Court Journal, Why, 
there's a month's reading here." 

Diana sat there for nearly an hour 
longer. It grew dark. She was trying to 
look her situation straight in the face. But 
it was very hard. " I must try and bear 
it," she said aloud; "and perhaps I shall 
find strength to bear it." 

*' Yes, dear Diana," said a low voice close 



VEEDICT. 227 

beside her, " you will want all your little 
strength. Just think : riches are not every- 
thing in this world." 

She took Eobert's hand, and held it; 
"Then it is over?" she asked, faltering; 
" and against me ? " 

" Yes ! " he said : "I knew how it would 
be. I was afraid from the very beginning. 
It is very, very hard . such heavy blows 
falling on one so young and so weak ! " 

His sympathy and compassion in these 
words touched her ; or w^as rather the occa- 
sion that set free all her secret emotion; 
she burst into tears, and wept silently for 
some moments. 

" JSTow, you must not," said he, in an 
expressive, soft, and kindly tone. "Sit 
down here, and let me talk. I must tell 
you about this miserable business . better 
to know it all at once. Yes, it is over ; the 
jury found against us . the judge charged 
against us ; and, from what I understand of 
it, I fear there is no hope for any future 

Q 2 



228 DIAXA GAY. 

proceeding. It is at an end. This is cruel 
speaking ; is it not ? " 

*' I know you mean it for the best, and it 
is the kindest course. O dear, dear Gay 
Court, so I have now lost you for ever ! O, 
dear, darling papa; thank God for one 
blessing! that you are not alive for this 
stroke ! " 

" Yes," he repeated, slowly, " Gay Court 
is theirs. And, ! that I should have to say 
it to you, Diana . you have no home ! You 
must think now what you will do for the 
present. Will you accept Mr. Bowman's 
offer? You should. There is no compli- 
ment in it. You have done much for 
them." 

" No, no, E^ohert," said Diana, drying 
her eyes, and standing; ''I shall he inde- 
pendent to the last. I shall go away to 
Erance . to some distant country, far away 
from this dreadful place. I shall have a 
hundred a year, they tell me. It ought to 
do . many poor creatures have less." 



VERDICT. 229 

" Not for you, Diana," he said. " Impos- 
sible ! you have been brought up to luxury, 
recollect." 

"Then I shall learn to work . work for 
my bread; which I should have learned 
long ago." 

Again he looked down. " One like you 
would earn little. You are too slight to 
work." 

" Then I shall die," said Diana, vehe- 
mently; '' the dearest thing that can happen. 
You do not encourage me ; but I know you 
mean well." 

" Yes," he said, calmly ; " and I wish, at 
this moment, you should know all that is 
before you, so that you can choose fairly. 
There is one other thing I heard to-day, 
which ought to be mentioned to you." 

''More misery," said Diana; ''I don't 
care, indeed . " 

"!N"ot at all," he said; "you remember 
that Lord Patmore. I have reason to know 
that he lias been in an unsettled way, and 



230 DIANA GAT. 

that lie heartily repents having displeased 
you. I always said there was good in him, 
and that he had an honest heart, only 
overlaid with a weight of fashionable con- 
ceits and selfishness which prevented it 
working. A word would bring him here 
again. At least I'm confident . " 

" IS'ot if I starved or died ! " said she, 
proudly. " And you propose this to me . 
you, Eobert. " 

" Then there is only one thing more for 
me to suggest. I have exhausted every- 
thing else. Yet you will receive it in the 
same way?" 

'' No, indeed," said she, putting out her 
hand. 

'* But you must hear to the end. I was 
thinking last night how long it is since we 
began to know each other; how far ofp it 
now seems since the time you used to come 
to Doctor Wheeler's; and how much has 
taken place since. My life has been toler- 
ably monotonous, except during the last few 



VEEDICT. 231 

months ; but still you would be surprised, 
Diana, if you knew how much you have 
coloured it . directly and indirectly." 

She hesitated. "Well, I dare say that 
was what used to be in those old pleasant 
days; but latterly, during the last few 
years, you have changed a good deal to me, 
Eobert." 

'* No ! " he said, smiling ; " I have always 
been the same . " 

" But," said she, " I mean you have 
changed, and I know the reason. You had 
an ideal of me. You thought as I grew up 
I would get steady. I have a purpose in 
life. But you were disappointed, and I 
seemed to you to be a child still. Ah 1 I 
found that out, Eobert ; though I was too 
proud to let you know that I felt it a little." 

" I was always the same," he repeated ; 
*^ always liked and admired you." 

'' Not for this year or two, or you would 
not have neglected us so . given us up for 
these new friends and fashionable young 



232 DIANA GAY. 

ladies, to whom the world gives you out. 
And since you have become successful, too, 
and since the time when the first rumours 
of this fatal suit . " 

" You do me some little injustice," he 
said ; " though it is since the time of this 
fatal suit that I began to change in a 
certain sense. Yes, Diana, cold as I have 
appeared . selfish, too, perhaps . I have 
always secretly thought of you, and of you 
only. But you were far above me in every 
way . far. In wealth, in mind . every- 
thing." 

"0, Robert!" 

'' Por this hour, shall I confess it, I have 
been waiting. Now I can speak. Now, at 
least, I may have the happiness of oftering 
to share all I have, and all I shall have, 
with you. I own I have latterly been 
acting a part. Por a time . that was long 
ago . I had some hope that you had a 
regard for me. Then I thought this mere 
folly, and that of such a thing you never 



YEEDICT. 233 

even dreamed. Later, again, I saw that I 
liad indeed done you injustice . cruel in- 
justice. Now, Diana, let me offer myself 
and all I have, and you will think no more 
of this misfortune." 

Her face lit up with pleasure and delight. 

** 0, Robert ! How shall I ever thank 
you ? How generous, kind, and forgiving ! 
And to wait for this moment ! Never, 
never shall I forget this ! Indeed you are 
far above me. I am still a foolish, childish 
creature, though I hope to mend one of 
these days ; and they tell me I am im- 
proving a little. But . but this can never 
be, Eobert . never ! " 

'' Never be ! 0, Diana ! " 

" Impossible ! Never ! I am deter- 
mined. Call it pride . anything, Eobert. 
No; I have fixed no my new course of 
life already. And I tell you this, too, 
Eobert : you must not think it is because 
I do not like you. No ; if you had asked 
me the same question some time ago, I 



234 DIANA GAY. 

should have answered very differently. You 
I always liked, Eobert, and liked better 
than any one else, even so far back as Doctor 
Wheeler's days. But now it cannot be. 
Goodbye, Eobert; come and see me and 
advise me." 

He was silent for a moment. 

"I think I understand now. I shall 
not say a word ; but I did not expect this. 
If you would think it over a little ; as I 
have waited so long, I can wait some time 
longer." 

"It would be no use, Eobert," said 
Diana, firmly. " I am determined on this 
course. My path is taken ; and I shall do 
as I know my own dear darling would wish 
me to do. I must suffer my share and pay 
the penalty. So promise me, dear Robert, 
never to mention this as^ain." 

"Well," said Robert, sadly, "when in 
court I see the judge against me, they say 
I never push the matter, and so I shall 
leave it now." 

With an assumed cheerfulness, which, 



VEEDICT. 235 

however, seemed genuine to Diana, he rose, 
and withdrew slowly. 

Then Diana felt a complete blankness 
and desolation, with nothing to sustain her 
but the rather desperate sacrifice she had 
made. Such little pride as there is in such 
proceedings lasts but a short time, and 
begins to grow weaker. To have any 
satisfaction, these efforts require the pre- 
sence of spectators, the lights, the scenery : 
then there is some indemnity. 

There she sat, on that fatal night of the 
most fatal day in her little day, in one of 
the grand drawing-rooms at Starridge's ; a 
home, indeed, far above her means, as she 
felt now. Poor, beggared, ruined little 
Diana ! It was a cruel fate, and some of 
the old people said " enough to make her 
father leap out of his grave." 

Everything was lost to her . wealth, love, 
hope . to name them in their proper worldly 
order. What had been life to her was 
fading out, for to those born and brought 
up if not in the purple, at least in the 



236 DIANA GAY. 

" fine linen " and silks and velvets of life, 
all these decorations and this magnificence 
is as conventional as a fine landscape for 
background to a lady of fashion. 

Diana cared little for gorgeous raiment, or 
for the rich dishes, the wines, the plays and 
shows, the castles and pictures . about as 
little .as the most insipid fine lady going ; 
yet, take these away, and lohat was left ? 
Life was a jail . a prison-yard ; it was indeed 
consigning this little heroine to the spin- 
house . cutting off her pretty hair, and 
putting her into the rough regulation dress 
of the establishment. How would she en- 
dure it ? What was to become of her ? 
She could not struggle or fight . she did 
not know how. She could not earn her 
bread. She had no friends . no one to call 
to for help. But though she sat there long 
with this dismal panorama spreading out 
before her, she was determined " to die 
first " rather than change about Kobert 
Bligh. " I shall bear that punishment," 
she thought, " and deserve it also." 



( 237 ) 



CHAPTEE XYI. 



MOTHER AND SON. 



No less heavy was the blow that had fallen 
on Eobert High. He walked away list- 
lessly . his mind now, for the first time, far 
away from the dreams of ambition which 
had so recently filled it. Calm and dis- 
ciplined as was his nature, this rejection 
had come on him with a sort of surprise- 
like blow, as it were. He had never ex- 
pected it, and something seemed to tell him 
there would be no recall of those words. 
As he wandered round rather listlessly, he 
heard the gamins^ with placards pinned on 
to their chests, crying the 'Regent Street 
Chronicle; and in the orange - coloured 
notices, fixed down to the pavement with 



238 DIANA GAY. 

stones, he read the announcement . " Ver- 
dict in the great Gay Case ! " He bought 
a copy, and read, 

"SECOND EDITION. 

"Our correspondent at Bentham tele- 
graphs that Mr. Justice Cosherer charged 
the jury in this case strongly for the 
plaintiff. He, in fact, hinted to them that 
there was little for them to do but to find 
for the plaintiff. He commented on the 
curious fact of their principal witness, Mrs. 
Bligh, not being submitted to a searching 
cross-examination, for it was extraordinary 
how she came to find herself in such an 
attitude. However, the defendant's counsel 
had not chosen to avail themselves of this 
right ; why, it was not for him to say. 

" Here counsel interposed, and said they 
were acting under instructions. 

" His lordship continued to say that had 
been his opinion all through, and that the 
case had not lost anything in the able hands 



MOTHEE AND SON. 239 

of the learned counsel ; still, it was a mys- 
tery to him. 

" The jury then retired, and after an 
absence of a quarter of an hour returned 
into court with a verdict for the plaintiff.'' 

Bligh read this as he walked along. His 
eyes settled on the passage about his 
mother's examination. It was a mystery 
to him. What could they mean ? he 
thought, for he knew Mr. Page was tole- 
rably unscrupulous, and would not let the 
case suffer. He got home to his own rooms, 
mechanically turned over some newspapers 
that had come in, lit his lamp, and, through 
sheer force of habit, set to his dull evening's 
work. 

Just as he had unfolded and smoothed 
out the first stiff page of a brief, looking 
up wearily, he became conscious of a 
tall figure standing before him . grim, pale, 
weird-like. He started, and half rose ; then 
said, sadly, . 



240 DIANA GAY. 

" 0, mother ! " 

She said as slowly, and as sadly, "Well, 
E/obert, the work is done. What I told 
you has been accomplished." 

"Eut what a work ! " he said, rising and 
advancing to her. *' What a wicked, cruel 
work! How can you lay it to your con- 
scicDce to have thus ruined an innocent 
trusting girl? God forgive you, mother!" 

"That is not between you and me, Pto- 
bert," she said; " your wish or prayer will not 
afPect the matter. What I said I would do, 
I have done. Confess that you doubted it. 
My arm was strong enough to overtake her. 
I said she would rue the day that she trifled 
with me and mine, and she has rued it." 

" She never trifled with you or yours," 
said he, warmly; "never. If she had, it 
was no excuse for such cruelty. What 
crime had she done ? What was her sin ? 
Don't ask me to approve, or to forgive . " 

"What!" she said, with infinite scorn; 
" has your head been so overset with these 



MOTHER, AND SON. 241 

little successes. these empty, worldly ho- 
nours ? I see. Or have you so little spirit 
. the same old tame endurance which will 
let you still put up with any treatment 
from her ? Or be a shuttlecock . wait 
patiently on her whims and humours. Or, 
perhaps you are still tamed . still hankering 
after her. I dare say, if you were to try 
now, you would have a fair chance. To a 
beggar like her, you and your property 
might now be an object." 

E;obert answered again, warmly. " This 
animosity is terrible. But you are right." 

She started. 

"Yes, I have just come from that un- 
happy victim, and tried to make her the 
only reparation for the wrong our family 
has done her. It was you, mother, who 
made this a sacred duty." She started 
back with a sort of horror ; her face seemed 
to work in a convulsion ; her long arm and 
hand beat oflP, as it were, something from 
her face. 

III. R 



242 DIANA GAY. 

" You did this ; you dared to do . to undo 
what I have done ! What ! you driving me 
into what I would not wish to do. Take 
care, Eohert Bligh ! if I haves acrificed so 
much for this aim . I shall not stop there ! 
And you have dared to do this ? " 

" Yes ; but do you know with what re- 
sult ? She has refused." 

" Refused ! All some trick, some co- 
quettishness." 

" No ; finally, and for ever. She is gone 
away, and I shall see her no more. And 
do you know what I discover now, after 
all this elaborate vengeance? that I was 
right, mother . right in what I said long 
ago. That if we had only waited . waited 
patiently . she would have agreed to accept 
me. Yes, mother, this is the end of your 
pulling down and plotting . you have de- 
stroyed us both." 

" No, no ! " she said, passionately ; " I 
do not believe it. This is some more of 
her arts." 



MOTHEIi AXD SON. 24'3 

" It is true, true before heaven ; slie has 
told me so solemnly, and I believe her. 
Yes, she has told me that she liked, even 
loved me, all through, but that she thought 
I did not care for her. And that, as I 
stand here, I believe to be the truth. Had 
you waited a little longer, all might have 
been well ; but it is finished, and finished 
for ever. One of these days she will change, 
I trust ; I shall live in the hope of marry- 
ing her yet, stripped of everything, as she 
is; but that is not the ambitious end- 
ing to w^hich you looked. But that, I find, 
is far off. O, mother, mother! why have you 
done this? Is this the end of all your 
planning . wretchedness for 7ne, for her, 
and for yourself?" 

Who would suppose that this was the old, 
unsympathetic Bligh we have been follow- 
ing through the course of this narrative; 
the man, as he may have reasonably been 
set down, so phlegmatic, so indifferent? 
There was colour in his cheeks, there vras 

E 2 



244 DIANA GAY. 

a trembling fervour in his voice, an agita- 
tion in his manner and gesture, everything 
that might have belonged to the warmest 
and most passionate of men. 

Mrs. Bligh stood silent, gazing at him 
with wonder, overpowered, scarcely know- 
ing him for her own son. As his cogent 
reasoningi had so often convinced judges, 
so it seemed now to have the same force 
with her. She knew not what to say. She 
was overwhelmed. The lines of her cold 
hard face quivered as this castle came 
tumbling down in ruins about her. But 
hers was not a sort of nature to own that 
she had done wrong, or that could make 
atonement. She could not bow or bend, 
though she could break and suffer. As she 
stood there, before the lamp, she would 
have seemed to any other than her son a 
sort of baffled fury ; and, when he looked 
up again, there was a blank void where she 
stood, and with a cry he rose up to follow 
her. 



MOTHEE AND SON. 245 

It was loDg before he could settle himself 
to his papers again. His mind was straying 
back to tlie great event of that day. Yet 
they were not over as yet ; the drama of the 
day was not concluded. Before another 
hour had passed, a letter was brought in to 
him, directed in a little " pinched " foreign 
hand, like the edge of a fine saw. It was 
very neatly and closely written, and he read 
it carefully through, smiling thoughtfully 
to himself as he closed it up. Of this letter 
the following is a copy : . 

''Deah Mr. Eligh, 

"You will, of course, have heard 
the great news of our success, and that I 
am now rich beyond all my hopes. I cannot 
bring myself to believe it, but they tell me 
it is no dream, and that there is no danger 
of my losing again what has been given to 
me in so wonderful a way; and yet, as I 
have often told you, I am not in such ex- 
cessive spirits, nor am I overwhelmed with 



246 DIANA GAY. 

happiness. I know I ought to be glad, as 
they tell me . yet my eyes look fondly back 
to our charming garden, my Amiens, and 
our dear Prench skies, and those good 
people who were so kind to me. These 
great streets, and gloomy walls, and crowds 
of houses, and greater crowds still of strange 
faces, chill me and make me miserable. 
Above all, Madame Saxe, who is my rela- 
tion . of her I have a dread ; I know not 
why, for she tries to be kind to me in her 
way. Now, of course, with these changes and 
responsibilities, I know not what will become 
of me. In this world, somehow, I feel very 
much alone, and strange, as it were. But 
what is worst of all . shall I own it ? . I have 
misgivings, a weight hangs over me, and 
something whispers me that all this may 
be some juggling, and that at the end of 
some bright day, I may have to give up all 
again. Who can tell ? 

'' How shall I come to what I wish to say ! 
How shall I tell it to you . ^how shall I find 



MOTHER AXD SOX. 247 

words ! You well remember that day when 
we first met on board the packet, when I 
was very low-spirited and wretched. Then 
I saw a face, whose calm, quiet air arrested 
me at once. It seemed to me to be one of 
a friend, and full of a gentle sympathy. 
From that moment something was whisper- 
ing to me, ' These are not all strangers.' 
And I was right. Por you came so gene- 
rously, so friendly, to my aid, and saved me. 
I knew you would. I had a presentiment 
that you would. And from that moment, 
there seemed to be to some relation be- 
tween us. Your kindness, your reassuring 
goodnature, which always seemed to say to 
me that I had one friend at least in this 
dismal country, and I was not wholly a 
stranger, and wholly cast out from sympathy. 
Since then, through all these hopes and 
fears, I have thought of that one face ever 
since. In my lonely room it has been be- 
fore me always. 

'* May I come to you to-morrow early, or 



248 DIANA GAY. 

will you come to me ? Say wliieli you prefer. 
I have something to tell you . to offer to 
you. You can guess, if you care to guess." 

Eobert Bligh laid down this strange letter 
. not without some impatience . " "What 
folly, what absurdity." Yet he was not put 
out of his course in the least. It was no 
more than if some curious '' bit " had turned 
up in the middle of a brief sent to him. 
He read it over again, thoughtfully. Then, 
after some reflections, he began to write a 
letter. 

'' You quite overrate the slight services 
I have rendered to you. They were such as 
any English gentleman would have done. 
So, if you could do me a favour, you will 
not mention small trifles again. 

'' As for your suit, I am afraid it is not for 
me to congratulate you. As you will know, 
your success must necessarily have brought 
proportionate misery into another house, 
and all the happiness it has brought to you it 
lias taken from another. That, however, is 



MOTHER AND SOX. 249 

not your fault, and it only belongs to an 
action at la^Y. She will bear her trouble 
with fortitude, and the bitterness is now 
almost past. The whole has been so sadden 
that I can hardly believe it, and I almost 
begin to believe what you yourself have 
hinted, that there must be something 
underneath all this, and out of the usual 
course. 

"I do not see, therefore, why I should 
see you again, as I say I could not bring 
congratulations. You will now have plenty 
crowding to do that. I shall have to be 
busy comforting the fallen, who have need 
of it. Besides, my sympathies have been 
all through with that side. What you can 
have to say to me, I do not pretend to 
guess. So I thank you most heartily 
for your generous acknowledgment of very 
trifling services, and your kind sympathy for 
myself, who at this moment want a great 
deal of it . all, in fact, that I can get. And 
believe me I shall always feel deeply grate- 



250 DIANA GAY. 

fui for the interest you have had in me, and 
will be glad if you will let me show it at 
any time." 

Eobert Bligh sent this letter away at 
once. He was not quite a stoic, it will be 
seen, and did not write with the philosophic 
severity which men of his character might 
be supposed to assume. He really felt 
grateful to this most foolish Prench girl, and 
could not be ungracious. After that, he 
dismissed it from his mind as he would a 
case, and went to bed. But he did not 
sleep much on that night. 



( 251 ) 



CHAPTEE XVII. 

A NEW PROPOSAL. 

In the morning papers the name of 
Gay figured a good deal. One or two 
had leaders ; and the Semaphore gave 
one of its characteristic commentaries . a 
" mingle-mangle " of classic quotations, and 
fine '' word painting." 

'^ Uxpende Hannibalem,^^ it began ; " or, 
rather, expende the career of the fashion- 
able young lady of our period, whose day 
and night is one delicious flutter, and whose 
golden pinions bear her from ball to ball . 
from ride to flower-show. She does not 
sow, of course ; neither does she spin, save 
when encircled by the nervous arm of some 
" svelte " warrior. Who shall blame her. 



252 DIANA GAY. 

though whether of such should be the 
kingdom of Heaven, we leave to diviners 
to inquire. Yet it seems too heavy a judg- 
ment . quite too sore a penalty for the 
young and beautiful to be cast down, pau- 
perized, stripped of all in a breath, and 
reduced to a privation which to her must 
be severer than the common privations of 
ordinary poverty. This moral is illustrated 
in the surprising romance of the Gay Court 
suit, and which shows us for the thousandth 
and first time that truth is stranger than 
fiction." 

This public painting of a moral was not 
the least serious trial for poor Diana. 
Indeed she had not seen the article in 
the Sema])1iore, though there were 
Samaritans enough of her acquaintance 
willing enough to direct her attention to 
it in some artful way. At the clubs, on 
the morning of which she has been one of 
the glories, it was talked of eagerly. The 
fade young ladies, her contemporaries, sim- 



A NEW PEOPOSAL. 253 

pered over it, and said, '' It was dreadful, 
wasn't it ? And so she had no right to the 
place after all ! '* As though these young 
patrician dames had heen despoiled, under 
false pretences, of their smiles and nods, 
and insipid few sentences of greeting, 
wdiich indeed was all that Diana was in 
their debt. Many a young spark canter- 
ing along by the side of his dame made 
himself more acceptable, as he thought, or 
perhaps less ennugante^ by some details 
fresh from the club, and overlaid too with 
his own private varnish. "Wally Pepys 
even . her old soi-disant admirer, '' her 
slave" . as the battered, heartless old cam- 
paigner used to call himself . now sneered 
and jeered, and told his little stories about 
that poor fallen girl. Her poverty, in his 
eyes, was the most awkward, inconvenient, 
and contemptible thing in the world; and 
he had never met a poor person who 
was either handsome or refined, or worth 
talking to, which was his standard of 



254 DIANA GAY. 

virtue, although they might have been 
amiable, vktuous, sweet, and gentle . 
things which, when combined with that 
deficiency, were of no concern to him. 
"A very free and easy young piece of 
goods," he said, '' and took wonderful airs 
when we come to think of it. I suppose 
she will be coming to us all round to 
recommend her as a governess or a matron 
to some place, or will have the old story of 
the private committee, and be pestered for 
our names. 'A most sad case, my dear 
sh\ We really must do something, or 
they'll starve.' I know the style of thing." 

"Well, hang it," said a young man, 
warmly, '' tliey had you often enough at 
their house. They were worth a dinner 
now and then." 

Some of the dowagers and matrons were 
secretly pleased. In this great battle of 
their life, their fashionable prayers and 
fastings, and working out this salvation for 
themselves, the best and most charitable 



A XEW PEOPOSAL. 255 

could only look on this struggle as one 
wliere there were so many prizes, fixed in 
numlDer, so that it was eminently desirable 
that competitors shonld be diminished. One 
or two were deeply sorry. 

Young Patmore was plunged into the 
sorest gloom and depression. He bewailed 
his fate and her condition. He had behaved 
like a brute. But what could a fellow do . 
a fellow situated as he was ? He went to 
walk in lonely places, and solaced himself 
planning schemes for her deliverance. He 
even settled the amount . he thought a 
thousand pounds . which could be offered 
" delicately, you know." But after much 
debating, like most of Viscount Patmore's 
schemes, it came to nothing ; and he thought 
it would be better to leave it as it was. 

Bligh, for whom a load of business was 
always waiting, had to keep appointments, 
and '' see people " on business. As he was 
hurrying along, after a hasty breakfast, 
he met Mr. Bowman. 



256 DIANA GAY. 

'^ I was just going to you," said he ; 
'* and am so glad I met you. I wanted 
to talk to you about our poor little Diana. 
My God Almighty ! was there ever such 
a business ? What will tliey think of it 
down there ? Why, you might as well 
have thought of pulling down the Bank of 
England as of laying a finger on Gay Court. 
I thought it would have gone on to the 
day of judgment." 

Mr. Bowman was a true squire, as he 
often boasted, and firmly believed that, 
though squires and old families might sicken 
and even die, that old places were above the 
incidents of change. 

''My poor little girl ! " he went on, with 
deep feeling. '' I love her like my own 
child, and since Maggie's troubles, she has 
been like an angel. The worst is, there is 
no doing anything with her. She has taken 
up a stiff, self-sacrificing tone, and talks of 
going away, and living and dying abroad by 
herself. Now, my dear friend, you must talk 



A XEW PEOPOSAL. 257 

to her, for you are a rock of sense, and know 
how to speak, and all that, which I don't." 

'' I have tried, indeed," said Bligh, " but 
without the least success." 

Mr. Bowman, now dwelling piteously on 
tlie case, at last brought him away to their 
hotel, begging of him to say something 
and use his influence with '^ the poor girl." 
Bligh scorned to let any conventional 
delicacy stand in the way. 

He found Diana just a little changed . 
very pale, and with a light and fire in her 
eve which seemed to have come of lons^ 
watching. There was a firmness and re- 
solve in her air and manner which seemed 
to speak of some suffering or horrid 
suspense. She told Bligh that she knew all 
now, that she had heard from her lawyer, 
and that she had not spirit enough to stay 
here and face the mortifications of her new 
position. 

'' I will go," said poor Diana, " to Bel- 
gium, where it is, I think, they have those 

III. s 



258 DIANA GAY. 

ladies who live together, and try to do good 
out of the world." 

" Yes," said Mr. Bowman ; *' that's it . a 
Beguine . you know, my dear child, it's 
absurd, and couldn't be." 

" I am determined on going, Mr. Bow- 
man, and shall go next week. All I ask 
is to get away from this place." 

" I know not what to say," said Bligh, 
deeply commiserating her. ''You will not 
be persuaded by me." 

I^ow entered Mr. Page, with papers . 
come to talk business. He was glad to see 
Bligh, and he began eagerly to talk over 
the case. Mr. Bowman went away. But 
Diana grew not a little restless, and seemed 
eager to change the subject of their talk 
from that. Mr. Page spoke dismally. 
'' Most unfortunate business," he said ; 
" but we were fighting with one hand tied 
behind us. If we could have cross-examined 
that witness . though she was your relation, 
Mr. Bligh." 



A NEW PROPOSAL. 259 

*' Allowed to cross-examine ! " repeated 
Bligli, in astonishment . and seizing the 
point of the allusion . '' wliy, was that the 
reason, O Diana ! " 

" No, indeed," she said, " that is . but 
how could I ? No, that had nothing to do 
with it." 

" But it had," said Mr. Page, impa- 
tiently ; ''the judge said so. However, it 
is all at an end now." 

This disclosure quite confounded Bligh . 
such a sacrifice for him. from this poor, 
generous girl. 

*' I don't quite give the thing up yet. 
See, Mr. Bligh ; persuade her." 

"Give me those papers I mentioned to 
you. I am convinced the name Potter 
was there. O, that should have been 
been looked to ! I was busy and hurried, 
and had not time." 

Diana answered indifferently that it was 
no matter. But Robert Bligh, growing 
surprisingly excited for one of his tempera- 

s 2 



260 DIANA GAY. 

merit, pressed the matter so eagerly and 
warmly that he at last wrung a reluctant 
consent from her that she would let him 
take the papers away, and allow him to 
look over them. 

Then followed the husy day . the Court, 
the house, the committee-room . the weari- 
ness, mingled with an excitement which 
alleviated so much of the weariness. He 
hurried home, snatched a morsel of dinner ; 
he then set to work at his hodman's labour. 
He sat on, using his legal shovel rapidly 
and with energy ; throwing up the mould 
about him, and getting through his work 
with great energy ; and was about to rise 
to hurrv down to the House, when word 
was brought to him that a lady wished to 
see him. The next moment Miss Eugenie 
was before him. 

" I have come to you," she said, '' after 
your letter . your cold letter. At least, so 
far as I can understand it." 

Eobert Bligh, a little embarrassed, and 



A NEW PROPOSAL. 261 

seeing perhaps what was before him, was 
not ''scared" into an impatience, nor did 
he forget his invariable gentleness and 
gentlemanliness. 

" Perhaps I did not understand," he said, 
" or assumed more than was meant." 

" Yes, you did," she answered sadly, " and 
I can see that you never cared for me . ever 
So little even . and that noio you despise 
me." 

" You must not think of such a thing," 
said Blio^h, kindlv. " I both admire vou 
and feel grateful for the great honour you 
have done me, and of which I am most 
undeserving . " 

" I know . I know all that," said she, 
with a little impatience. " I understand 
these compliments. And you can be so 
cruel . even this mortification you might 
have spared me." 

" Would to Heaven I could," said he, " or 
rather there is no mortification in the world. 
You have offered something which any 



262 DIANA GAY. 

man would accept, and I among the number 
. that is, could I do so. But now, will 
YOU bear with me a few moments while 
I speak to you as a friend that likes, and 
has a sincere interest in you r Kow, you 
will remember at tlie Ycry outset, I told 
you you could not reckon on me to take 
up your side of this business, and that such 
inflaence and sympathy as I possessed must 
be with your opponent. She deserves in- 
finitely more, you will confess, now that she 
has been defeated and has lost all." 

'* Ah, yes ; and your heart is with her . 
she loves you, and had she prevailed, would 
have done what I did." 

Bligh shook his head and smiled. 

" No, no ; far from it. She is away . out 
in the world . leaving us for ever. No; I 
fear she does not care for me." 

She fixed a penetrating look on him. 

''Answer me, then, this one question. 
Promise me, only one, and I shall never 
trouble you again . never." 



A NEW PEOPOSAL. 263 

Bligh had the true barristerial instinct, 
and guessing what this w^as, did not answer 
for a moment. 

'' Ah, you refuse me everything," she said, 
bitterly. 

"Tell me, have you offered yourself to 
her ? I have no right to ask, I know . " 

 Well," said he, '' it is better to tell the 
truth . I have. But from my childhood I 
have always looked to her, since I was a 
mere schoolboy ; for her have I worked all 
my life. to her have I looked . for her has 
been my success . and for her, should she 
persist in this fatal resolution, shall be my 
fall, I fear. Por I can take no more in- 
terest in the successes or honours of this 
life. There is the whole truth." 

Who could suppose that this was the old 
E;obert Bligh, supposed to be so cold and 
self-interested ? 

"Can you be surprised, then," he went 
on, '' if even, after what has passed, I find 
myself wishing her success, and working 



264 DIANA GAY. 

for her interest ? Porgive me if I tell you 
that this victory of yours seems to me too 
sudden . too abrupt, to be substantial. I 
have a presentiment that something yet 
will come to light . and even this night I 
am going to devote to some new investi- 
gation of the matter, which I must wish 
may bring a change. It is only fair and 
candid to tell you all this, though I know 
it seems ungracious on my side." 

She remained silent for a few moments. 

" They told me all this," she said, '' and I 
ought to have guessed it. Now I under- 
stand at last." 

There was another tap at the door, and 
his servant came and whispered to Bligh : 
'*Alady, sir." 

She caught the words. 

''A lady ! " she repeated, eagerly. 

"Who?" said Bligh. 

" She has brought a box of papers, and 
is coming upstairs." 

"It is what I was speaking of," said 



A NEW PEOPOSAL. 265 

Bligh; *' this is the business. I must give 
myself to-night . " 

'' And it is she ? " said Eugenie. 

''Yes," said Bligh, hurriedly; "the one, 
recollect, whom you have vanquished, 
despoiled." 

It was Diana who now entered, and 
started as she saw the other. She remem- 
bered her at once. She knew not what to 
do, and stood on the threshold, hesitating . 
in her old fluttering way . not knowing 
whether to go back or come forward. It 
might seem a situation that Bligh should 
have prevented at all hazards, and could 
have done ; but he had a faint notion that 
something might come of this meeting after 
. at least, nothing worse for Diana could 
happen than what had occurred. 

Eugenie, looking long and earnestly at 
Diana from head to foot, said at last . 

" Ah ! so w^e meet. So you are Diana 
Gay ? I am sorry for you, but they tell me 
it is only my right." 



266 DIANA GAY. 

" If it be so/' said Diana, gently, "I da 
not grudge it to you ; and it is bard tbat 
you bave been kept from your inberitance 
so long." 

'' You can be generous," said tbe otber, 
looking at ber steadily. '' Eut wbo knows ? 
He says it is not over yet; and I may still 
bave to make tbe same speecb to you. He 
tells me plainly, bis wisbes and bis work, 
and bis sympatby cannot be with me. 
They belong to you, icliom lie loves. 
Yes, be told me so . whom he has 
loved, and for whom be has lived . for 
whom be has won all these honours since 
be was a child. Why do you not like 
Mm ? " 

"Everything has ended for me in ilih 
life, and I go to begin another. I have 
brought tbe papers," she said to Bligli. 
"Don't be alarmed," she added, turning to 
Eugenie ; " they will do you no mischief. 
That I am confident of. Good-bye. Don't 
think I feel the least anger to you. You 



A NEW PEOPOSAL. 267 

have only obtained what is your right. . 
It is not for me to stand in the way." 

The other took her hand, clasped it 
warmly . and, with a sudden impulse, 
pressed a kiss upon it. Then, with an 
impulse as sudden, abruptly cast it from 
her. and stood hau2;4itilv lookino^ at Diana 
from head to foot. 

'^ And I too stand upon my rights. I ask 
no compliment from any one. What has 
been given to me, I have won fairly and by 
the laws of the land." 

She then turned and slowly left the room. 
Diana now, as it seemed to Eligh, grown 
strangely grave and serious, said hurriedly, 
*' I have brought you these, not that I believe 
there can be anything found, but lest you 
should think I should not wish to do 
what you ask me to do. And now, dear 
E-obert, I must go. A million of thanks 
for all vour i^oodness and devotion, which 
I have been quite unworthy of, and which I 
ought to have acknowledi^ed long, long ago ; 



268 DIANA GAY. 

but I was a child then, up to a few weeks 



ago." 



'' But why do you speak in this way, 
Diana ? I shall see you again, often ; I 
have so much to say to you." 

" Because I may go at any time, the 
sooner the better. I am longing to get away 
from this scene. For now, Robert, I begin 
to find the mortification very bitter . the 
people I meet, and their looks . " 

''But what is to become of vou?" said 
Robert, actually passionately; ''you cannot 
go out in this world by yourself; you must 
not, you will suffer and perish. O, Diana, 
think, think a moment of what I said. 
Consider it again ; you are leaving me to 
misery . though tlfcit I do not care about . 
but also a misery and Avretchedness that is 
all concerned for you. You may refuse again 
as plainly as you like, but I do conjure you, 
think again, reflect, have pity on yourself 
and on me. Surely there is no necessity 
for this miserable self-sacrifice ; in your in- 



A NVW PEOrOSAL. 269 

nocent life, there is nothing to atone. Stay, 
Diana, stay with me and share my pros- 
perity and success, such as it is." 

Diana listened with wonder to this new 
strain. She seemed irresolute, and he saw 
the old smile of delight on her face ; hut 
she had recalled her old resolutions, wished 
him good-night hurriedly, and had joined 
her maid who Avas waiting in the hall. 

As Bligh turned hack ahstractedly into 
his study, a letter was brought in to him. 
It was from the House, and from the 
" whipper-in " of their party . to use the 
familiar designation drawn from the country 
field, and adopted of its own motion by that 
august body. It was labelled ''most pres- 
sing and immediate," and he had to jump 
into a cab and fly express down to the 
House, where he remained two dull hours. 

The division was over by midnight, and 
he got away at last. 

In half an hour his lamp was drawn close, 
his great tin box open beside him, and he 



"270 DIAXA GAY. 

was thouo^litfullv and earnestly lookinc^ 
through letter after letter. Many of the 
bundles were quite new to him . accounts, 
dockets, agricultural letters, bills even . for 
the Gay family seemed to have been scru- 
pulous in preserving every paper. It was a 
long and tedious search, and more than an 
hour passed over before he came on the 
"lode" which he had discovered when 
down at Gay Court. So the time went. 
Just as the clock struck one, he started up 
with a cry, and his servant, who slept 
below, heard a sound as of a trampling and 
excited pushing back of a chair, and heartily 
" cussed " the interrupter of his slumbers. 



( 271 ) 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

DIANA ON THE WORLD. 

TViTH tlie morning . and bright and hope- 
ful as the morning itself . Ptobert Bligh was 
at the door of Starridge's fashionable pri- 
Tate hotel. Its pure plate-glass, speckless, 
seemed each like an entrance to dark and 
unfathomable caves of fashionable life. 
There was a general glistening air, and the 
genteelest of private gentlemen received 
Eligh's application in the hall, with a soft 
deprecation as who should say, "Do speak 
low, please ; for you can't imagine the num- 
ber of titled persons there are upstairs." 

** Miss Gay, sir ? and Lady Margaret, sir ? 
and Mr. Bowman, sir ? Yes, sir. yes, 
sir. So sorry : they all left this morning." 



272 DIANA GAY. 

'' All gone ! " repeated Bligli, " and Miss 
Gay ! and where . " 

"Yes, sir. O slie went to the Cawnt- 
nent hy the Ilorsetend boat . " 

'' Gone to the Continent ! " Bligh was 
aghast. '^ But you have her address ? " he 
said. 

The private gentleman shook his head 
sadly, and smiled sweetly. Bligli then 
hurried away to her solicitor, and found 
Mr. Page in. That gentleman was in his 
usual airy spirits. He said, " Mr. Bligh, a 
really melancholy business. Yes, she's 
gone, wished to go privately and without 
taking leave, and all that. She was here 
last evening, and insisted on the costs and 
charges being made out, roughly of course, 
and paid everything." 

The scene now changes to the dull 
Bel2:ian line of railwav, on which 
the trains amble along, and come 
jogging into monotonous stations where 



DIANA OX THE WORLD. 273 

there are no platforms, but where honest 
rustics with baskets, and traders, come 
running from the roadside in a yast hurry, 
and cluster at the steps of the carriages as 
though they were about to crowd into an 
omnibus, and there would not be room. 
These vehicles come so comfortably and 
depart so quietly, as though drawn by safe 
and steady old horses. 

Beyond the station rise strong, tall 
houses, of a yellow or pinkish complexion . 
sallowand unhealthy looking . with "Estami- 
net de Station," or ' 'Hotel duChemin-de-Eer" 
in faint letters, whose colours have become 
smeared and have run, from the trickling of 
the rain. These pale-complexioned houses 
straggle off, we know, to a town, and 
most likely that town is either Ghent or 
Bruges. 

On that threshold the feeling is sure to be 

one of depression, even for the practised 

traveller; but for the timid stranger, to 

whom a foreign country is new . women, 

in. T 



274 DIANA GAY. 

o'irls who are friendless, and are cut off 
from their own friends, and are cast adrift . 
that first dehiit in loneliness, under such 
conditions, is the most dismal thing in the 
whole, and wide, world. 

In a slumbering Bruges street, where the 
houses were of the prevailing dark yellow, 
lived an elderly, single English lady. Miss 
Eobinson, who had been there for many 
years, and who let lodgings to the English, 
and to the English only. She, herself, with 
all her long residence . and she was a tall, 
stiff, wiry, prim woman, with a considerable 
power of mind . declined to receive natives 
on any terms, having a true contempt for 
all foreigners, which grew with every fresh 
year's residence. She kept herself apart, 
always talked of England, compared every 
article . needles particularly . with imagin- 
ary English standards of old years. This 
lady, some twenty years before, had been a 
governess to some relation of Lady Mar- 
garet Bowman's, had lost her "savings" in 



DIANA OX THE WORLD. 275 

some decent and very ''pious" country 
bank, who almost made it a favour to take 
deposits, and liad been driven over to 
Bruges. 

To lier one evenini? arrived a very timid 
young girl, seated in the railway omnibus 
with her maid, whom she had been ex- 
pecting. She received them very austerely, 
saying she was always happy to do anything 
for Lady Margaret, or for Lady Margaret's 
family, making a concession, as it were, of 
thus letting her apartments. She said she 
expected to find Miss Gay . for it was that 
young lady . much older, and hinted at a 
possible wanfc of steadiness. 

She showed Diana into the apartments, 
clean, bright, shining, without a speck, 
garnished with some purely English orna- 
ments, a fire screen, a small vase of English 
china, an English table-cloth, rather faded, 
and which had formerly adorned rooms let 
for lodgings in the mother country. 

Miss Eobinson had not the whole house, 

T 2 



276 DIANA GAY. 

but other guests lived in it, while a bon- 
net maker lived in the shoj) below. 

Diana's window " gave " on the street, 
and she saw from them the white row of 
houses opposite, with their yellow ** jea- 
lousies " all blank, many stories high, the 
muslin blinds drawn close ; and a great tall 
closed o/'te-cochere,'wit\i a huge oaken double 
door. 

Yerv few passed down this quiet thorough- 
fare, and at a butcher's shop, where there 
were two or three tiny morsels of meat 
within glazed windows, the owner sat at 
the door alone and read his newspaper all 
day long. There she would be able 
finally to shut out that dreadful night of 
England, and the passing friends and ac- 
quaintances, the very sight of whom was a 
jar. As she passed in her cab through 
London, a glass went to the eye of a gen- 
tleman ridinsr, who started and thought 
how reduced she seemed to have grown. 
*' Going about in a cab," he told his friends, 



DIANA ON THE WORLD. 277 

" I declare, yes." She had at last got free, 
at last got away, severed every tie, was at 
last engulfed in the great waters of obscu- 
rity; and here she was now, on the first 
evening, sitting in her room trying to read, 
sitting at the window as dismal and miser- 
able as girl's heart ever was in this world. 

What was the course she was looking to ? 
what had she planned ? Perhaps she had a 
faint hope that she might soon wither away, 
and fade out altogether in the struggle. 
She thought that might be the happier 
issue after all. But in the meantime she had 
determined to supplement her little pittance 
by the aid of her own honest labour. 

The poor child had, of course, determined 
to seize on that plank that always comes 
drifting by, in family shipwreck. No matter 
how ignorant, how unsuited; the reduced 
lady always thinks herself equal to teaching 
children or girls, brings herself to it with 
reluctance and agony, and thinks that mere 
consent sufficient to ensure success. 



278 DIANA GAY. 

Yes, Diana Gay, the former heiress of 
Gay Court . the light and airy butterfly of 
fashion . whose life seemed to lookers-on, 
as indeed it did to herself, like the 
gorgeous existence of the Queen of 
Crystal Delights in a pantomime to chil- 
dren in the boxes, had actually brought her 
young mind to the stern resolve of going 
out as A GOVERNESS ! Ycs, in this foreign 
city she would teach English to the Erench 
children, such little music as she knew, 
drawing also she thought . taking stock 
of her not very powerful accomplishments. 
A wild dream, that poor pretty child . that 
stood herself in need of a governess . going 
round to the houses to give lessons ! 

Yes, this poor child had come to begin 
life at Bruges . a kind of penal servitude, 
indeed. She had often heard of families 
being suddenly reduced, and having asked 
about them long after, had been told, with 
a shaking of the head, " 0, they are gone, 
you know, to live at Bruges." Hence it 



DIANA ON THE WORLD. 279 

seemed to her that residence there should 
follow almost as a matter of course, and that 
the new life she had fixed upon must begin 
at that settlement. Her reformation, she 
thought, could not be worked out properly 
unless it commenced at this of&cial seat. To 
it her little heart tended ; she longed to get 
there. Yet she little fancied, like a pretty 
maid servant applying to a severe ma- 
tron, with '' gentlemen in the family," 
how austerely would her proposals be 
repulsed. Yet she was longing, eager to 
begin, dying for the occupation which 
would enable her to kill the past. 

Her first day, then another, dragged Ly. 
A faithful maid . a little girl from Gaj 
Court, who had refused to desert her like 
the rest of the world, had gone with her. 
This was her only support in her struggle, 
for struggle it was to be, and her only arms. 
She wept a great deal. Her pale, delicate 
cheek was orrowinsr flushed and fevered. 
"With her austere landladv she did not find 



280 DIANA GAY. 

mucli comfort. She was Scotch . gnmly 
Calvinistic, yet not without a good heart, 
over which, however, had grown a thick, 
hard shell of pride and spirituality . a 
sort of moral ossification, in fact, which 
hindered its proper motion. When this 
state of things had gone on for some time, 
she therefore came and gave Diana some 
sound advice, bidding her ''lean upon the 
Lord," . consolation which only frightened 
instead of encouraging the poor girl. 

A couple of days, and she went out dreamily 
and hopelessly. As she was beginning this 
new shape of life, she might go through 
all due forms. Outside or inside was 
equally indifferent to her. Her faithful 
maid was with her . that Polly from sweet 
Gay Court. Polly had Avarmly described 
some of the wonders of the old city, its 
amazing churches and town halls, whose 
magnificence, whose sacred and crusted 
Gothic elaboration had appealed mistily 
even to her rustic heart. She saw what 



DIAXA OX THE WOELD. 281 

there was at least of vast labour and mar- 
vellous stone cuttings, and the reverent air 
of age always impressive. The old belfry 
had struck her most. " It beat," she said, 
" the Tower of London." She took her 
mistress to see these various shows, 
who surveyed them listlessly. Por those 
under a trouble . the recent death of one 
much loved, or of heavy anxiety . beauty 
loses all its charm. These things were 
so many masses of hewn stone. As they 
passed away from the belfry, they came 
near seats that were under some shady 
trees, and Avhere a few people were sitting. 
Polly, whose eyes were ranging about, 
seeing something to admire in every 
direction, gave a start, and called out, 

" O, miss ! if that be not , no ! but 

it can't . or else he be very altered." 

Diana looked and saw an elderly gentle- 
man, much bent, and leaning on a stick, 
and looking about listlessly. She remem- 
bered Mr. Lusrard, the father, at once. 



282 . DIANA GAY. 

and ran forward. The sight of a familiar 
face in that desert was like warm sun- 
shine. As she came up, her small hand 
out, her voice faltered with excitement, 
and uttered the words, ** O, 0, Mr. 
Lugard ! " 

Dark lustre eyes were turned dully 
towards her, with a curious look. It was 
only after a sort of start he seemed to 
recollect, and uttered, with a little diffi- 
culty, " O, Diana, Miss Gay ! So you are 
here, in this place ! What on earth . " 

" O, I am so glad to see some one," said 
poor Diana, '' some one that I know, in 
this lonely place." 

'' An infernal hole. Miss Gay, hut we 
must put up with it. My health has been 
very bad, and I have suff'ered a great deal 
this last winter. They have absolutely 
nothing here, no attraction, no decent 
people . a few broken down English. Ah, 
my dear child, to one who has lived in 
London, and in a fine country, with the 



DIANA OS THE WOELD. 283 

liunting, and the good old stock, it is an 
awful, awful change." 

Diana on another occasion would 
have said, " But why come here ? " Some- 
thing, however, whispered her the reason. 
Indeed she was indifferent and incurious 
enough. Something of the old colour was 
coming hack to his cheek. " Mrs. Lugard, 
you know, is here. I believe you never 
met her yet. She is an invalid, like myself. 
We are not, in fact, as rich as we used to 
be." Then Diana remembered having 
heard from Richard Lugard, that " the 
rich widow "his father had married had 
been, in the story of the clubs, " a take- 
in." He had merely married a long 
schedule of debts. 

"But it was not that,'' he continued, 
answering what he justly fancied was in 
Diana's thoughts. ''Do you know what 
has driven me here, to this infernal hole ? 
That fellow, my son. Nothing else, under 
God ! The blackguard has ruined me . 



284 DIANA GAY. 

went and married a creature whose father 
has become bankrupt. That was his own 
concern. But what right had he to drag 
me in, putting my name on his bills ? I 
ought to have let the matter be exposed 
before a police court, only I knew those 
wretched people wouldn't take the trouble 
to distinguish between my name and his. 
It was Lugard . that was enough. God 
help me ! To think of my coming to a 
wretched hole through an infernal scoundrel 
who had neither wit nor sense nor brains . 
a fool whom I got into Parliament, and who 
couldn't keep in . an ass who has made a 
botch of everything in life I It sickens me 
even to think of it, and to think of myself 
being kept in prison . in a hole not fit for 
an English gentleman to live in. When I 
think of the old days at Gay Court . I was 
thinking of them as you came up then, and 
of that morning when we gave Mm the 
picture, and I made him the speech . " 
There was a pause, when suddenly he 



DIAXA OX THE WORLD. 285 

turned to lier. " You, I suppose, are 
travelling . going on in state to Hamburgh, 
or Paris, or to some of those places. ' Miss 
Gay and suite ' in GaUgnani. And poor 
old Margaret . she was hit hard, poor 
woman ! How is Gay Court ? Ah, Miss 
Diana ! you are well off ; but mind whom 
you marry. I wished you to have that 
fellow, but it is the best for you as you 
are." 

"0," said Diana, "then you have not 
heard. The case went against me, and I 
have lost all . " 

'* WJwt I " said he. '. O, there was to be a 
trial . I remember now. And do you mean 
to say that you have lost ? What ! Gay 
Court gone ? " 

Diana's face was turned to the ground, 
and she did not answer. 

'' My goodness ! what are we coming to ? 
Turned out of Gay Court ! And what are 
you doing here ? Have you come to live 
here ? " 



286 DIANA GAY. 

*' I am obliged to, Mr. Lugard," she said. 
'.' I have but little left . and there is no dis- 
grace, if I could only see the wav, in trvins: 
to earn one's bread." 

^^ Earn one's bread ! " he said, rising with 
difficulty, and leanins; on his stick. " Earn 
one's bread ! What do you mean . you . " 

There was so much conyiction in this 
tone . so much contempt, also, as the truth 
seemed to dawn upon him . that Diana felt 
quite timorous and humiliated. But she 
answered steadily, . 

^* There is no discredit in honest labour, 
and I hope to find some way." 

'' I suppose as a goyerness. God help us 
all ! Then I conjure you, reflect a moment. 
Think of an old family like yours, and don't 
bring it into discredit. I could do nothing 
for you, I tell you plainly ; I can't go beg- 
ging and interceding. Why really, only 
yesterday eyening I was telling the Consul 
here about Gay Court, and how the thing 
was kept up ; and now I must tell liim the 



4 



DIANA ON THE WORLD. 287 

owner wants to be a governess ! It's too 
absurd." 

" I am not asking you for anything," 
said Diana, with dignity. '' God forbid I 
should have occasion." 

'' O, I don't mean that," he said, " but I 
tell you plainly this place won't suit you. 
There is no money for teaching, and no one 
wants to be taught ; so I would change the 
scene if I were you." 

This heartlessness gave Diana a very chill 
in her heart, and she withdrew without a 
word, and without hearing Mr. Lugard's 
muttered complaint "that they were now 
to be overrun with paupers, it seemed." 



( 288 ) 



CHAPTEE XIX. 

THE FETE DAY. 

About this time there was to be high 
festival held iu Bruges, on the occasion of 
the opening of some great institution by the 
King . the late excellent Leopold . who was 
to come from Brussels, and in whose honour 
there were to be fetes, and a competition of 
the Concordia^ and other singing societies, 
illuminations, and other shapes of rejoicing. 
The whole town was astir . workmen were 
busy ; and Diana's own Polly had caught a 
little of the excitement. She had an ad- 
mirer already in the person of the traiteiir 
from whom she got their slender provisions, 
and she eagerly brought in word of the 
great preparations that were being made. 



THE FETE DAY. 28D; 

She was not more than seventeen oi* 
eighteen. There was an English " gentle- 
man's gentleman" at the Hotel, who had 
seen her, who told her that "the affair 
would be very creditable on the 'ole," and 
announced that he himself meant to par- 
ticipate therein. He mentioned a little 
'' feat " in some gardens, where there was. 
to be dancing and feasting, as especially 
worthy of approval. 

This in no way concerned Diana, who 
was listlessly and morbidly thinking of that 
one aim . how she was to work, and thus. 
begin to forget the past. This inaction 
would be but the very threshold of despair. 

The morning was now come ; it was only 
the fourth day since her arrival. It was a 
Sunday, which gave a ready-made text to 
Miss E^obinson to enlarge on the '^sinful 
doings of those pious benighted ' Bel- 
gums,' " as she called them, " who had no 
care for their poor miserable souls ! " This 
frightful depravity did not awaken Diana ^ 

III. u 



290 DIANA CxAY. 

who was utterly indifferent to all that was 
going on. Por now the delighted Polly had 
flown down with news " that they were 
coming ! " and the strains of bands, and the 
hum of voices in the streets, with the 
marching of feet, was still more significant 
warning. On it came . a brilliant pro- 
cession, set off by the scarlet hanging from 
the windows, and the more effective, full, 
healthy faces of the honest Burgher women. 
Pirst the riflemen, in jager hats and green 
plumes, their breasts hung over with 
medals, their banners carried within punts, 
so large and heavy were they; then the 
singing societies, their banners literally 
studded all over with medals, and looking 
almost like a coat of brilliant mail ; then 
music, distant and coming near ; then 
soldiers, and more banners, bishops, clergy, 
and the Burgomaster and his citizens. So 
they went by, in this state, on one of the 
loveliest and sunny days conceivable. And 
it made Diana . who was stopped at a street 



THE FETE DAT. 291 

corner by the passing pageant . yet more 
dismal ; for it seemed like one of the 
delicious old Gay Court hunting mornings. 

They passed on to the institution, where 
they formed in a hollow square, and the 
King and all his court came and went 
through their programme . whatever this 
was . so thought Diana, indifiPerently enough. 

As she came away listlessly, and gallant 
officers clattered by, she heard a voice of 
astonishment before her ; and some one 
who had passed her hurriedly had looked 
back and stopped. '' Good gracious. Miss 
Gay! you here?" It was Mr. Canning 
Bowman in a vast hurry, and full of im- 
portance. 

"Why, what on earth," he added . then 
stopped. '' I heard it all, you know. that 
is, my father wrote to me . so sorry, I am 
sm'c." 

There was a restlessness in his manner, 
and his face was looking anxiously forward. 
Poor Diana was rejoiced to meet this 

u 2 



292 DIANA GAY. 

friendly face, though under such mortifying' 
circumstances. With her old confidential 
way, she drew close to him . the Bow- 
mans were such friends always. " Yes," 
said she, '* there have been changes since 
we met. I will tell you why I am here, 
Mr. Canning." 

He was still looking out restlessly. 
" Pact is," he said, '' I came over here 
from Brussels for these fetes, to meet the 
Brenners. You remember Mdlle. Brenner, 
They are to be at the ball to-night, and I am 
going to meet them at their hotel. I am sure 
they will be sorry. I shall certainly come 
and see you at the first opportunity." And 
very restless still, he shook her hand, and, 
without asking her address, hurried away. 
Surely mortifications were being crowded 
on this poor little head of Diana's. 

The day drew on. To her it was like a 
dream. Then there were prizes to be con- 
ferred . more medals to be hung on the 
banners ; and the day stole by very quickly. 



THE FETE DAY. 293 

The enthusiasm of the little maid Polly- 
was extreme ; and in the evening she had 
news of a yet greater fHe . illuminated 
grounds, a dance, and a serenade of His 
Majesty in the pretty gardens under the 
"windows. In the same passive way Diana 
agreed to go ; and indeed she had already 
besrun to shrink from the rather errim 
m.onotony of the austere lodgings to which 
she had bound herself. 

It w^as a lovely cool evening, and the 
lights were twinkling in all directions. 
The air was soft and balmy. All the crowd 
was hurrying in one direction . to the 
illuminated gardens, on which the great 
rows of windows, wiiere the feasting was 
going on, were blazing with a rich soft 
li2:ht. Thousands of faces w^ere turned to 
these glorified windows. Prom below them 
was wafted the softest strains of music from 
the wonderful throats which were accom- 
panying delicious voices with marvellous 
simulation of orchestral instruments. Close 



294 DIANA GAY. ' 

by were the trees; and through the trees 
were twinkling lights; and here was the 
great platform where the town was dancing ; 
and round were the bowers, and the little 
tables where so many were feasting happily. 
So do foreign nations enjoy themselves with 
tolerable innocence. 

The night thus passed on. By-and-by 
the upturned faces were gratified, and the 
gorgeous effulgence of the great bow win- 
dow became of a sudden crowded with dark 
figures; and Diana heard great guttural 
shouts of delight as the lieges saw their 
king. She stood under the dark trees, 
watching the bright figures glistening in 
fitful motion. Presently came up the 
English "gentleman's gentleman." Having 
found out Polly, and respectfully got on 
equal terms, he asked . for his " hinstink " 
told him that Diana was "redoosed" . for 
one short dance. 

When Polly was gone, Diana looked on 
without moving, and had noticed a figure 



THE lETE DAY. 295 

posting to and fro quickly, looking at this 
and that group, and passing on and coming 
back. After a long interval, it came by 
near her ; and something in the shape and 
outline seemed to be familiar to her. Sud- 
denly his face came full into the light . a wild, 
questioning face. Diana knew it. At the 
same moment hers was revealed to him, 
and he had rushed to join her. 

In this wilderness, the joy, the happiness 
of meeting one who felt for her, made Diana 
forget all that had passed between them; 
and with a cry of delight, she flew to 
E-ichard Lu2;ard. 

He was in a sort of rapture. " My dear, 
dear Diana," he said, " I have found you at 
last. I could not stay longer. Some Pro- 
vidence directed me to you. What are you 
doing in this place ? Why have you come 
here ? What is the meaning of all this ? 
Sit down here and tell me." 

But now Diana recalled her last inter- 
view, and she drew herself away. 



296 DIANA GAY. 

^' 0, you should not have done this ; for 
I cannot listen to you now." 

'" But you must listen to me first, Diana," 
^.e went on, in growing excitement. ''You 
know what has happened since you left. 
Had you only put confidence in me I " 

'* But what do you do here?" said 
Diana, now alarmed at his wild eye and 
excited manner. " Why should you have 
.onie here ? " 

*' Because I could not stay . after you. 

Because I heard that you meant to work 

and labour for your bread . as they say. 

You ! Those dear delicate fingers ! Never, 

Diana ! I could not endure that notion." 

She was touched by his interest in spite 
of lierself. 

'.' O, Bichard," she said, '' I know you 
iViCan well ; but . " 

''But listen to me," he went on, "just 
for one moment. I implore you, for the 
sake of old days, when you were kind, and 
indeed were yourself. Look at the state you 



THE FETE DAY. 297 

are in, Diana. Look at what is before you. 
The misery, the struggle, the certain ruin ; 
for you cannot fight the battle. You have 
not strength, nor have you been accus- 
tomed to it, and will be overwhelmed. I 
have foreseen all this, Diana, and my heart 
bled for you ; and to save you from such a 
fate I Avould ruin myself . before heaven I 
would ! " 

''Yes, I would," he went on, in growing 
excitement ; " and here is the proof. When 
I thought you were leaving us, I sat down 
and wrote to you . what I felt, Diana, and 
what I wished to do. It was a desperate 
letter, and it had been better you had not 
seen it." 

Diana, quite terrified by his manner, 
2:rowin^ wilder everv moment, looked round 
for escape ; but his hand was on her arm. 

"You must let me finish now," he said. 
" Yes, Diana ; you must know all that I 
have been content to lose for you, and 
would lose again. Yes, she found it, and 



298 DIANA GAY. 

that evening went away to lier family. I 
am glad of it; for it was a life of hell 
itself." 

Diana could not say a word. 

'' I rushed to the agents ; my commission 
is for sale or sold, and I have come to you. 
We shall begin life again, Diana, as we 
ought to have begun it long ago. But it is 
not too late. I have given up all for you . 
you can give up a little for me . who have 
had only one thought during all my life, and 
that one, you ! My carriage is in the court- 
yard at the hotel, ready . the horses put to 
. ^the world before us." 

At last she could speak. 

" O, let me go ! Some one save me ! " 
she said, faintly. " O, this is the worst of 
all; and you can insult me this way again ! " 

"Insult you!" he said, setting her free 
in his wild astonishment. " I that have 
ruined myself for you ! " 

" Let me away ; I shall die if you stay 
near me." 



THE PETE DAY. 299 

" And you say this to me ? Ah ! if you 
could but have seen him. No; he dared 
not have come to you." 

"What!" cried Diana; "then he is 
here. O, where is he ? O, tell me quick. 
Bring me to him ; he is my only . my true 
friend." 

" You say this ! Take care, Diana. If 
I thought for a moment that you cared for 
him . Ton my life I begin to think you 
always did. But that, as I stand here, I 
could not, I dare not trust myself to see." 

" Do leave me," said she, fluttering bird- 
like in his grasp. " Do go away." 

" No, Diana ; I cannot give you up. I 
have sacrificed too much for you. Come ! " 

It seemed to her that she must go ; and 
that she dare not disobey. Again she 
faltered, 

" What is to become of me ? " 



< ( 300 ) 



CHAPTEE XX. 



THE EESCUE. 



" Pear nothing, Diana ; I am here to pro- 
tect you. Take my arm. There." 

A strong calm voice said these words. 
Diana's little hand was on that arm in a 
moment. 

Luscard almost foamed at the mouth. 

" I saw you at the packet, though you 
did try and hide and wrap yourself up. 
How dare you spy after me ? " 

Blisrh did not answer him, 

"Come away," he said to her. '^Eear 
nothing with me ; I shall take care of you. 
And you," he said to Lugard, ''do not dare 
to follow. I heard what you proposed ; and 
after that your presence would he contami- 



THE EESCUE. 301 

nation. Speak yourself, Diana ; it is neces- 
sary." 

'' 0, let me not see him ! Let us go, 
Robert." 

Lugard gave a sort of frantic cry, 
and, putting Ms hand to his breast, half 
drew out something. He checked himself. 
Then, with an effort at calmness, said, 
'' Just two words, Eobert Bligh, in private. 
Don't be afraid." 

Bligh went to him without hesitation. 

"Por the present I pass all this by, as 
she is present. But you must swear to 
meet me in the morning. In this country 
these things can be managed." 

Bligh seemed to hesitate. 

" It will be worse for you if you do not. 
I owe you much since that day at Wheeler's 
. ^how long ago now ? By heaven ; you 
shall pay here, and before twelve hours are 
over ; or else, there are ways in this country 
to." 

"I promise you," said Bligh, excitedly. 



S02 DIANA GAY. 

" You may depend on me. It is time this 
should end." 

" O, I am so glad, Eobert," Diana 
whispered, " so glad you have come back. 
I should have died, I think, if this had 
gone on longer. I find I have no mind . 
no resolution, after all." 
. They were walking round the illuminated 
gardens. The dancing, the music, was 
going on. 

" No," he said ; " I was afraid that would 
never do. You are not called on to enter 
on such a life. I was thinking all these 
few days how you must have suffered." 

*' But I have deserved it all . I have in- 
deed," said Diana. She felt that her tears 
were coming. 

''But there was no need," he went on 
gently, '* of such haste, was there ? I 
wished to have time to look through those 
papers." 
. " No matter," said she. " Do not let us 



THE EESCUE. 303 

talk of the past. 0, it is so deliglitful to 
me to meet a friendly face . " 

" I did," lie went on, in the same reflective 
tone, " find time to go through that case of 
papers. There was such a quantity of them 
to look through, and my eyes are not of 
the hest ; hut I succeeded in finishing the 
task." 

"Indeed you have always been kind to 
me. And how long are you going to stay ? 
or are you going on to travel ? " 

"But you do not ask me," he said, "was 
my trouble successful ? did I find any- 
thing ? You should have trusted me . ^be- 
lieved in me. I did find some very im- 
portant letters in that box . " 

" I dare say," said she absently. 

"Letters which, if they had been pro- 
duced at the trial, would have set the case 
in quite a difi^erent light." 

" Well, it is over and done with," said 
she, " and for ever ; and we shall not talk of 
it any more." 



304 DIANxV GAY. 

He stopped in front of her . looked into 
her face. 

"No, my dear Diana ; it is not done vriili 
for ever. Thank God ! no. Providence 
has taken care that one so gentle, so charm- 
ing, so good as you are should not suffer 
so cruel a punishment. Can you bear to 
listen to some surprisingly good news." 

" O, Robert ! " 

" That, having found these precious 
papers, they completely establish your 
case ? Can you bear to hear more, Diana ? 
That, thus armed, I sought those who 
have turned you out, and their advisers; 
put them in possession of what I knew ; 
showed them our hands, as it were, and . " 

" O, E-obert ! Is all this a dream ? Am 
I to be a little happy again ? " 

''Yes, Diana. What you were before. 
Just the same ; with something less, in- 
deed; but. " 

'' O, Eobert ! Robert ! " she exclaimed, 
in a perfect flutter, " there is no mistake ? 



THE EESCUE. 305 

for I could not bear another change . a 
fresh casting down . " 

'' No ! no ! It is fixed. I have their 
writing signed and sealed. I saw her. I 
saw her solicitors. I showed them that 
with these papers we could begin again, 
and with a perfect certainty of success. 
The young girl behaved nobly, and most 
generously. The woman with her was 
furious ; but the young girl persisted. 
They have indeed no case; but in youi* 
name I ventured to propose a compromise, 
allowing her a small annuity, and which 
will indeed be a cheap release from further 
law and vexation." 

Diana could only utter, " O, Robert ! 
O, Eobert ! This must be all a dream. 
After all this wretchedness and desolation 
of these few days, I was ready to have sunk 
down and died." 

" That is all at an end now. Perhaps 
you wall enjoy these blessings now the more 
on account of that suffering." 

III. X 



306 DIANA GAY. 

So the hours passed on. They heard 
the sweet music at a distance, and saw the 
lights glittering. It seemed to her the 
most delicious music . the lights like those 
of fairyland . the faces the kindliest and 
sweetest of the world. Such is the halo 
delightful news and sudden happiness cast 
round everything. Years after she looked 
back to that night as the happiest in her 
life. 

They walked about still talking. 
"You must come back at once," he said, 
"away from this, and begin the old life 
once more. I must leave in the morn- 
ing at daybreak. I have got into this 
weary slavery of 'getting on in the 
world,' and dare not stop. Politics now 
shall be everything to me. Eor that I must 
live, and lose everything. That excitement 
is delicious, and once fairly enthralled you 
forget much . everything you wish to forget. 
So they tell me. That is to be the one aim 
of my life now. And I have a tolerably 



THE RESCUE. 307 

strong purpose, and shall carry it out. 
Others tell me it is all Dead Sea apples, full 
of dust and husks. I suppose I shall find 
out at the end, when perhaps it is too late . 
who knows ? " 

During this speech Diana's face had heen 
glowing, and her little heart fluttering, and 
the words, hurrying to her lips, stopped at 
that delicate threshold and crowded back 
again. Xov.^ the people were rushing past 
them, for the roar of fireworks that were to 
end the night had set in. Already the glow of 
red sulphuric fire was lighting up twenty 
thousand faces all turned in one direction. 
He felt her arm trembling in his. He 
looked down to that gentle face glowing 
in the light. 

'' Kobert," he heard her whisper, " when 
I saw you last I know I gave you much 
pain. I did not mean to do it, but was 
obliged . and . and . I felt as much myself, 
Noio, I could not refuse loliat you tlieiv 
proposedJ^ 

X 2 



( 308 ) 



CHAPTEE XXI. 

HAPPINESS. 

Xovv' the iirevrorks were over. The last 
set piece, with its gold and silyer fires, its 
inscription in a blaze of gloiy, '. Vive 
Leopold ! " had sputtered and cascaded, and 
Tinallv smouldered out. The liesres had 
gome home ; the riflemen were heavy with 
drink; the glorious night was over. 
Diana, with her heart like a bird's, now 
laughing, now crving, was busy with her 
little maid putting her things together. 
She was so happy, poor little thing . never 
ndeed to be so happy through the whole of 
her long life that was to follow. If among 
the dispositions of life some such privation 
could bo contrived, temporarily, analogous 



HAPPINESS. 309 

to putting a hearty voluptuary on bread and 
water for a week, we might thus negatively 
learn to appreciate blessings we are now a 
little indifferent to. The little maid, Polly, 
was as happy as herself. The grim servi- 
tude of the governess was gone for ever ; 
nothing but happiness was coming. And to 
Polly she can confide another secret whicli 
the night had brought. 

Not less happy the '' cold " Pi^obert had 
returned to his hotel, thinking over these 
wonderful changes. Nothing was more ex- 
quisite than the contrast of the poor lone, 
exiled girl, wasting out of life almost, and 
the alteration which his news had wrought. 
It might seem almost too melodramatic, this 
sudden alternation of fortune ; but there had 
been no exaggeration. The vivacious and 
almost omniscient 'Regent Street Chronicle 
let the public into the secret almost as soon 
as Bligh had told Diana. That very even- 
ing's impression of the agreeable journal 
had a paragraph like this : . 



310 DIANA GAY. 

^^ It seems we lia^e not yet done with the 
existing cause celebre of Gay v. Gay. 
Trusting Britons who believe in the 
verdicts of juries as final things . as sacred 
a thing in its way as a text . will receive a 
rude shock by learning that the whole is 
likely to be reopened. Justice, in short, 
has not been done. New evidence has 
been discovered . there will be application 
to 'the full court,' . not after dinner, of 
course . a new commission 'sped,' fresh 
fees, new briefs, new consultations, in short 
the old process of legal oyster-opening, and, 
it must be added, of legal oyster-eating. It 
seems that a very distinguished barrister, 
who is also a member of Parliament, took a 
fancy for looking through some of the 
family papers, and came on an old corre- 
spondence which clearly sets out another 
marriage . a previous one, and under equally 
disreputable circumstances. A marriage in 
every port, like that of the British tar, 
seems to have been a weakness in this 



HAPPINESS. 311 

gentleman. Only for persons in liis class 
there is hardly such extenuation. It is said 
to be inscribed under his own hand, which 
makes everything charmingly satisfactory." 

The journal had certainly hit on the truth. 
It almost seemed as though it had mys- 
terious familiars engaged, who had been 
present in Bligh's study on that recent night 
when he had been busy searching through 
Diana's papers. 

It was a weary task, and seemed a hope- 
less one ; but he gave to it nearly his whole 
night. Nothing is so wearing as this 
searching and deciphering of crowded small 
female handwriting. It even pained his 
eyes. It was not until the grey of the 
morning that he came upon a hand that 
he seemed, to know . some half a dozen 
letters tied up in the middle of another. 
He turned to the signature of the very first 
he opened, and found it was his mother's 
name. There was the name '' Potter," the 
English chaplain's, which he had seen before, 



312 DIANA GAY. 

dotted over the page ; and here too were 
other letters, and one or two in a foreign 
female hand, and one very long one in 
feeble handwriting, signed " Walter Gay." 
He bent forward to the lamp and read first 
his mother's. If the Regent Street Chronicle 
could have been looking over his shoulders ! 
It was a short letter too. It was addressed 
to '' Mrs. Gay, of Gay Court," and was 
dated from Boulogne. '' We are still nearer," 
she wrote, " and before I write as^ain we 
shall know something. Walter is ill and 
nervous about himself, though not in any 
danger. Since that creature left him he 
begins to see what she is . God knows, 
late enough ! It was wonderful my falling 
in with that fellow Potter ; but the moment 
he passed Walter in the street I saw that 
they had known each other. The moment, 
too, I felt a napoleon in tlie letter Walter 
gave the maid for him I suspected more. I 
have had my eye on them both, and I can 
see they feel a dread. O, I do feel we are 



HAPPINESS. 313 

working in the cause of decency and 
honour, so outraged by this scandalous 
business. If it had been my own child I 
would have cheerfully sacrificed . if I died 
for it . one who had so little regard for the 
decency and honour of his family. 

" P.S. . I shall not spare money, you may 
depend on it. That Potter is to be bought." 

He took up another letter. No. 2 ran 
(it was also from her) : . 

'' ' That Potter is to be bought,' I wrote 
to you last. He is bought, and not very 
dearly. Just what we suspected. He was 
chaplain at Aix-la-Chapelle. I can see the 
dread of him in Walter's face, as he lies 
there ill, and I can hear his imploring. This 
man suspected me when I first saw him. He 
had heard that Walter had married an 
heiress with enormous wealth. That had 
drawn him from the mean slums in which 
he v^as burrowing. Depend upon it, we 
shall discover something, and, after all your 
sufi'erings and mortifications, your good old 



314 DIANA GAY. 

family will be rescued from the disgrace 
this unfortunate creature has heaped upon 
it." 

Piobert Bligh leant back in his chair, and 
looked thoughtfully upwards. He never 
started or showed outward surprise or as- 
tonishment at any event. He took No. 3, 
and read on. It was the usual common 
form of breaking bad news, though it was 
done in a businesslike way : . 

'*Poor Walter died last night, with all 
his disgraces and troubles upon his head. 
In the morning he had taken it into 
his head I was going away, and he wrote 
me the letter I ^nclose, in which he all but 
confesses what we suspected. There can 
be no explaining this matter on any other 
construction. With his death I knew we 
should have all from Potter. The other 
icoman ivas alive when he married this 
wretched Prench creature. A little more 
money, and Potter will get us certificate . 
everything." 



HAPPINESS. 315 

There were many other letters, chiefly 
from Mrs. Bligh, but all detailing the 
advancing stages of the business. Pinally 
he came on the certificates, one of mar- 
riage, one of a death, and on a last letter 
from Mrs. Bligh : . 

' As for his child in the convent, 
she must be left there. She has no- 
thing to do with us now. They will be 
glad to keep her: they have had more 
than ever was paid for such a worthless 
bastard ; and if they like, they can turn 
her into a lay sister, and make her drudge. 
In this country the thing is so common 
that that is the regular way for dealing 
with cases of this kind. At any rate, you 
are done with her for ever, and dear old 
Gay will not be desecrated. 

'^ Now ^ what I advise is this: all to he 
he])t a profound secret ; let the ichole die 
out gradually. We cannot suppress this 
story, hut now poor soul himself is gone. 
But, thank God, it is no marriage . a vile 



313 DIANA GAY. 

connection, and so you can give out : and 
if the busy gossips want particulars, and 
say, ' Why, we thought it was given out 
and acknowledged,' just contradict them at 
once, and give no explanations. If they 
have any doubts, let them move in the 
matter. Then it will be time to prove all. 
But thank Heaven all has ended so hap- 
pily. Eor safety's sake destroy all I have 
written to you. But put by the certificates, 
which are more precious than gold. Now 
you can look out for an heiress for ' steady 
John,' the heir and hope of Gay Court." 

Bligh thought he almost heard his mother 
speaking ; yet she was young then. As he 
finished, his hands covered his face, and it 
was long before he recovered this cruel shock. 
His mother, that he thus loved, being so 
transported with hatred as to descend to 
this fearful vindictiveness and injustice ! 

With the morning he was with the 
solicitors on the other side, and had told 



HAPPINESS. 317 

them what he had discovered, and that the 
whole matter would have to be reopened. He 
did not, of course, " show his hand," as the 
phrase is, hut he told them, calmly and 
plainly, that the chances of their holding 
their verdict were very slight, a statement 
that made a deep impression on the partners, 
for they knew Mr. Bligh . that he " spoke by 
the card," and had no ''bounce" in him. 
They were fair, open, honourable men, stand- 
ing high in the profession as family solici- 
tors, and not inclined to " make costs." 

''If it be as you say, Mr. Bligh," one 
said, " of course there might be ground for 
a compromise." 

He was then tempted by this tone to 
let tliem know a little of the grounds. He 
sketched out the outline of what he had 
discovered. 

"Better speak to her," they said; and 
he hurried off to the plaintiff in the now 
famous case. 

When Eobert Bligh reached the house 



318 DIANA GAT. 

where Madame Saxe was staying, he found 
it lit up, with sounds of music inside. It 
had the air of a party. 'No douht she was 
celebrating the victory. As he entered he 
heard the noisy, monkey -like chatter of 
foreign voices within. He wrote something 
on a card, and sent it to Miss Eugenie Gay, 
telling the servant to give it to her pri- 
vately. In a moment Eugenie had come 
out to him. 

" Come in here," she said, and led him 
into a parlour. " She has asked people 
here to-night, and I must appear to be gay 
and merry. She has brought in all these 
strange people . and, Mr. Bligh, I wish 
we had never come here. They say to me, 
'You are now mistress of this place, and 
of vast wealth ;' but I shall be miserable, 
I know. She and they will do what they 
please with it." 

" I came to speak to you about that," 
said Eligh gently. 

She started. 



HAPPINESS, 319 

"What, you have thought over what I 
so foolishly said ? O, if you knew the 
shame I felt, what must you have thought 
of me!" 

" Thought of you ? " he repeated. '' That 
you did me an honour I was totally un- 
worthy of, and which, had it come at 
another time, I should have heen proud 
and happy to have acknowledged. But 
now shall I tell you what I have come 
to you for? It is again ahout this law- 
suit." 

" I am tired of it," she said impatiently. 

" Then I have less scruple in telling you 
what I am about to say." 

He then began and told her all that has 
been so lately told to the reader . his dis- 
covery ; the new chances in Diana's favour ; 
and, finally, delicately hinted at what he 
had hinted to the solicitors. She listened 
with a flush rising in her cheek. 

'* You are still in her interest, and now 
would take from me, for her sake, what 



o20 DIANA GAY. 

the law has given me. You are a warm 
friend and ally, Mr. Bligh. But don't 
you think this is expecting a little too 
much from me ? " 

"I know and feel how it looks," said 
Bligh, " but it is as much . or nearly as 
much . in your interest as in hers. I know 
pretty well what litigation is, and how 
miserably it Mill end if it once sets in. All 
I say is, consult your friends, get the 
advice of the best lawyers, and I shall 
let them see what has been discovered. If 
you do not, I must tell you plainly you 
are sure to lose all again." 

*' What is this counsel?" said a sharp, 
shrill voice, and madame was standing before 
them. " Lose all again ! Who will make 
us lose, pray ? 0, Mr. Bligh ! is this the 
game ? " 

He was not a little embarrassed. The 
look of his embassy loas a little awkward. 
Yet he felt he must explain now, and he 
did so, as he had done to the young girl. 



HAPPINESS. 321 

The Prenchwoman listened with undisguised 
scorn and contempt. 

'' This is your story, is it ? Very clever 
and very well contrived. Then you may 
return, and tell her from me it will not do 
. that no trick of the kind shall take from 
us what the English law has given to us. 
There, Monsieur Bligh, I say. Why do you 
intrude into our concerns ? What title 
have you ? What are these plots ? Come, 
Eugenie," and she took her arm, and half 
drew her charge away from the room. 

Now, this position was certainly disagree- 
able for Mr. Bligh ; and these servants of 
duty and principle are often thus miscon- 
strued. No one had latterly begun to feel 
this so much as he himself, and at that 
moment the reflection occurred to him, as 
his mind stretched back to the ball at Gay 
Court, in the old, old days, when every one 
was saying to him that " he was so wise " 
and ''knowing," and that ''Mr. Bob would 
always fall on his feet." It seemed to him 

III. Y 



322 DIAXA GAY. 

that somehow speeches of this sort were the 
only return he received for these " Quixotic" 
good offices. 

Suddenly the door was opened softly, and 
Eugenie stole back. 

'' Never mind her," she said ; '* I shall 
do what vou wish. In the morning' I shall 
write to you. After all, it will help me to 
get away from this wretched land." 

Before the next day had passed over a 
basis for a compromise had been sketched 
out. It was agreed it should be left to 
the arbitration of Mr. Bligh, who would 
provide well for the plaintiff in the case, 
subject of course to the consent of the 
defendant. With this agreement in his 
pocket he started at once for the Continent, 
and, arriving at Ostend the night of the fete, 
had seen and raised from death to life the 
poor little outcast Diana, and was now 
returning home to his hotel . so happy ! . 
in a delightful dream. What was he think- 



HAPPINESS. 323 

ing of? "Was it that, after all, the "game," 
as some would call it, of good sense, honour, 
and, above all, restraint, is not such a losing 
one, whereas that of impatience, "high 
spirits," arrogance, and hurried gratifica- 
tion of every whim and wish is perhaps 
a stupid "'game" . often an unsuccessful 
one ? Then he suddenly recollected his 
promise to Lugard. It had been given in 
a moment of irritation, and he felt there 
was no withdrawing from it. Coming in 
on his pleasant dream, it seemed like 
the horn winding out in Mmaui, just after 
the marriage. 

He was at the porte-cochere, and he 
stopped irresolutely. In the mood in which 
Lugard was then . disappointed, bafQ.ed, 
full of rage, hatred, and fury . he was not 
likely to listen to reason or modera- 
tion. As he entered under the white and 
glittering arch (it was the Pountain 
Hotel) the "patron" came up to him 
hastily. 

' Y 2 



324 DIANA GAY. 

''There was a gentleman here . M. Lu- 
garde . who arrived from England this 
evenino^. We heard him mention vour 
name very often." 

"Yes," said Bligh impatiently; "I know. 
I suppose he was looking for me. AVhere 
is he?" 

"0, I am so glad, M. Bligh. We did 
not know what to do, and it is most awk- 
ward and painful; and really in the interest 
of our hotel . " 

"But what do you mean?" said Bligh. 
" Has anything happened ? " 

The host looked round confidentially, and 
dropped his voice. 

"He is of good family, I believe, and is 
well connected. So we thought it better, 
as he was a friend of yours, to have no 
noise or confusion until we saw you. But 
it came on so sudden. I assure you at first 
the language he addressed to me . I was 
sending out for the police . seized me by 
the collar . when madame mv wife called. 



HAPPINESS. 325 

' JIoii JDleit ! Don't you see . he Is mad ! ' 
He is out here in the pavilion with two 
men. Go now, monsieur, as you are his 
friend. I must request you will see to it. 
I have behaved with all delicacy, but I 
cannot have my house compromised." 

Without a word Eobert Bligh followed 
him to the pavilion, and there saw the 
unhappy and unlucky Richard. These 
storms of rage and disappointment and 
uncpoverned furv, which he had induls^ed in 
through life, had, at last, rushed into this 
new and more fatal channel. The old race 
and struggle between the two rivals, which 
had dated from the old school-days at 
Wheeler's, had been thus finally ended. 
Our hero misrht now have it all his own 
way, and finish as he pleased. It was hard 
for poor Lugard, who had some fine and 
redeeming qualities; and it may be said 
in extenuation that much of this frantic 
temper was but an anticipation of this final 
visitation . a disease, as it were, and there- 
fore excusable. 



( 326 ) 



CHAPTEE XXTI. 

DISPOSITION OF THE CHAEACTEES AT THE 
FALL OF THE CUETAIN. 

Now it is time to close this history of a 
young girl, which set out with sunshine and 
golden clouds. Those bright, warm days 
did not last, as we have seen . nay, could 
not. The rude weather set in, and the 
young girl found she must take her turn 
with the rest of the world on the rude 
highway. Eew of her age could have had 
so many troubles crowded into a small 
space. They had nearly overwhelmed her, 
but they proved a wholesome discipline and 
probation. She was '' fixed " and steadied, 
and that agreeable pastime of making toys 
and things to play with of other people's 



FALL OF THE CUETAIX 327 

love, devotion, honour, suffering, fidelity, 
as though they were mere " stage-play " 
virtues, put on to last no longer than the 
ball or party . the very earnestness of the 
whole adding so much to the '^ excitement " 
. had been driven away and never returned. 
It was all lightness and want of thought ; 
but it was, for all that, a dangerous sport. 

What follows is almost conventional. A 
very handsome arrangement was made with 
the daughter of Walter Gay . some seven 
or eight hundred a year settled Avith all 
form on her . and she went back to her dear 
Erance again. Then it became known . 
through the Cuckoo^ we believe . that a 
certain marriage had been -'arranged" be- 
tween E^obert Bligh, Esq., M.P., and Miss 
Diana Gay, of Gay Court. 

Diana herself, a perfect heroine of ro- 
mance, was seen again in the Row, and it was 
wonderful how the faithless gathered again 
about her. She was the "most charming 
girl ; " the dowagers thought her " so in- 



328 DIANA GAY. 

teresting ! " After all, '' What a story ! It 
ought to be written, my dear." (So it has 
been, as the patient reader has seen.) After 
all, a little adversity is welcome ; it makes 
everything so precious. How dear, how 
sweet seemed life and its charming blessings 
to Diana now ! Repulse before victory makes 
victory doubly splendid. She had her own 
engaging manner, which she shall always 
keep, gracious to all. Only one little act 
of spirit she felt it a duty to perform : she 
"cut" Viscount Pat more . ''cut him dead." 
She had heard, too, certain things about 
the pleasant Wally Pepys : some of his ill- 
natured speeches had been reported to her; 
. and when that fashionable time-server 
came up in his smug, confidential way, with 
his scrap of Prench and his tame jokes, 
meaning to have many a week down at Gay 
Court, the young girl coloured, and told 
him, half jesting, half serious, " that he was 
never more to be officer of hers." In vain 
he tried to smooth matters ; our Diana was 



EALL OF THE CUETAIX. 329 

inflexible . polite, but indifferent ; and now, 
as you meet the old sneerer and growler 
shambling up from the dinner-party, and 
unguardedly mention her name, he will 
begin to snap out, '' The little intriguante ! 
My good sir, I believe the real heiress of 
Gay Court is in Erance at this moment. 
She contrived to jockey the judges and 
lawyers. It isn't so bad a role, my friend, to 
stick to the Attorney-General and Solicitor- 
General." 

What presents came pouring in ! for she 
had plenty of real friends who rejoiced in 
her fortune . friends who loved and re- 
garded her. The list thereof reads tempt- 
ingly in the fashionable journal, in the 
column devoted to such inventories. The 
gorgeous things, the jewellery, the superb 
laces, the ingenious bits of uselessness de- 
signed cunningly out of the most costly 
matters; the "blotters," which it would 
be a crime to "blot" with; dainty candle- 
sticks, dotted and crusted over with bright 



330 DIANA GAY. 

stones and tracery, and which it would he 
*' worse than a crime " to light ; little 
caskets . " things to lie on your houdoir 
table;" '^ Theieres'' china, dressing-cases^ 
dressing-bags, articles of Paris, chairs, 
tables, desks, "services" . in short, stores 
sufficient to stock a tempting Palais E/Oyal 
shop. 

Diana was delighted with these testi- 
monials, as being, in most instances, pledges 
and tokens of regard. In some, of course, 
they were merely the homage which fashion 
exacts from the donor . a tribute to his own 
credit and magnificence. 

The treacherous tergiversating Mercury, 
down at Calthorpe, thorough Vicar of Bray 
of journals, was in raptures at all these 
things. Its files give fatal testimony to its 
fickleness. Such a paragraph as this 
reached to effrontery : . 

" Every well-minded person will rejoice 
in his heart of hearts that this noble old 
place still remains with the brave old fa- 



PALL OF THE CURTAIN. 331 

mily, through the gallant and peerless young 
lady who has fought her fight so gallantly, 
and defeated the schemes of a parcel of 
foreiorners. 



111 fares the land, to hastening ills a prey, 
Where wealth accumulates, but men decay.' 



This was inappropriate, as well as dis- 
honest. But Diana only laughed at the 
Ilercury, and was a faithful patron, and when 
its reporter came up to London to '' inspect 
the presents " (four columns are devoted to 
an accurate '' limning " of those articles) 
the officer was received with all honour, 
and entertained at "a sumptuous repast " 
in the parlour. He came once more, on the 
great day when he and the higher func- 
tionary who attended for the fashionable 
London Chronicler met together. What a 
list of grand names ! each succulent as a 
Preach hon-hon : lords and their ladies, 
ceremony by the Bishop of Irnston, the 



332 DIANA GAY. 

Rev. Doctor Brindley, the Attorney-General 
and Lady Jane Williamson, the Solicitor- 
.General, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord 
Bellman, Viscount Chimeleigh, and Lady 
Margaret Bowman, the Premier (who made 
a speech), Serjeant Bullock . hut it would 
he wearisome to give the catalogue. Away 
drives tlie new carriage ; the *^ old shoe," 
launched hy a facetious friend, describes 
the usual parabola behind them; the bright 
face of our Diana is seen at the window, and 
Mr. and Mrs. Robert Bligh, of Gay Court, 
are on their way down to Gay Court. 

Soon it will be Sir Bobert and Lady Bligh, 
for he is to be Solicitor-General and knighted 
in a few weeks ; and the Mercury tells us 
'' steps are being taken to revive the old 
Gay baronetcy." One of these days . but 
they are a long track of years av^ay . he 
will become Lord High Chancellor, and 
a peer of England, by the style, perhaps, of 
"Baron Gay of Gay Court;" but then 
Diana will be more thoughtful and fuller in 



FALL OF THE CURTAIN. 333 

face and presence . a lady of fashion, with. 
daughters coming up about her, and Sir 
llobert rather worn and dusty, with a hundred 
Parliamentary battles fairly won, and a few 
lost, . as when he was opposed and defeated 
at Calthorpe, and was out of Parliament a 
whole . two years ; when he and Lady Bligh 
travelled on the Continent, and saw the 
great cities, and went up mountains, and 
sat out in the evening, and forgot there 
were such things as elections and politics. 
Long after, when he was restored to the old 
'^ ring," they looked back wistfully to happy 
evenings. Sometimes they talk of the past^ 
and Liana . who always keeps and will keep 
to the end that pretty manner of hers, only 
shaded off a little . talks of '' poor Dick," 
now, it is feared, utterly incurable, though 
he has been under treatment for years. 

Xow they talk of Mrs. Bligh, and on 
Ptobert's face comes a shade of trouble. 
Since that breakdown she has not been 
seen. Proud as ever, she disdained to vield,. 



334 DIANA GAY. 

to own she had done wrong, to forgive or 
ask forgiveness, or to see the faces of those 
she had once loved and once hated. In 
some remote county, in some lonely town, 
she grows old, and grows harder and more 
grim every day, and nurses that old resent- 
ment . the resentment of defeat . until she 
thinks the end will come, the rude hell 
clang out, and she will die as she has lived. 
Her son, her daughter-in-law, have made 
humble attempts at conciliation . pilgrim- 
ages even . but all in vain. She keeps her- 
self inclosed, and will not look in their 
faces. 

So Diana moves on in her old beauty, her 
old gentleness and liveliness, with a little 
ambition at her heart; but because he is 
ambitious, and waiting for the grander 
honours to come which shall reward his 
battles and labours. 

The fiery scarlet of Squire Gay's great 
hunting picture is mellowing down. Often 
as she flutters through the room, she moves 



FALL OF THE CURTAIN. 335 

more slowly, looks at it wistfully, and as 
she goes off kisses a small hand to it, with a 
sigh as she does so. The room seems to fill 
again with the old images and figures . 
the hunting morning, Richard and his 
rival ; the horses are seen in front, on the 
lawn; D'Orsay is being walked up and 
down, and the cheery voice of the squire 
rings out. She is not much changed after 
all ; for as she garners up these old scenes 
faithfully and jealously, she garners up un- 
consciously the image of her old self, and 
remains in the eyes and hearts of dear 
friends the old Diana Gay. 



THE END. 
