ONE OF TWO. 

2 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



Both windows and doors were shut : the windows by shutters, 
which were, of course, fastened on the inside. Had knocked 
at all the shutters. 

The tall boy had peeped through the keyhole, and even 
offered to climb up on the roof, and to get down the chimney. 
It was a low house, not low in a bad meaning, on the contrary, 
very genteel j but of one story, so it would have been easy 
to have carried out the tall boy's proposal; but he, Jasper 
Snape, had told them that it was " agen the law," and they 
had come up all that way for a search warrant. 

" Perhaps," said the Inspector, " the woman 's gone out on a 
visit." 

Mr Jasper Snape here smoothed his hair, and pulled at his 
waistcoat, as if he were about to take a new thread ofif his neck, 
and thread his needle again. He recommenced : . 

You should understand him, Snape, no ; decidedly, no I He 
knew the value of law, and did not want to trouble it. Madame 
. that is, the widow . had been seen to go m, but not to come 
out. She had been seen, that is to say, on Michaelmas Day. 
Her rent was paid : she was a particular person in paying rent. 
She and Snape inhabited houses belonging to the same land- 
lord ; in fact, he paid her rent two or three days before it was 
due. She then shut her door . after being last seen on Tues- 
day evening, at about six . and said she should go to bed. He 
had heard her close her shutters. 

The woman had seen those shutters closed; the tall boy 
could corroborate all that had been said. 

The Inspector rubbed his chin, flicked his pen, and looked 
at the charge sheet. 

** Why did you come up here 1 Was there not the proper 
head-constable up at that place ? " 

'* It was not very far," said Snape ; " and the new Act . 
Bobby Peel's New Police Act . had commenced. The Charleys, 
very, useful men in their time, had gone out, and we wanted 
new brooms." 

Snape . who, being a tailor and keeping pigeons, must needs 
be a politician and an admirer of Major Cartwright . ^intimated 
that, upon the whole, he approved of the Act. 

" There was," he said, " a blessed deal too much of Tom and 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 



Jerry larking with the old Charleys. An old friend of his, a 
Charley, had been put into the canal close by, box . i,e,, watch- 
box . and all ; and as near as could be drownded . dead /" 

" You won't have no more of them larks now," said the 
Inspector, sternly, to Snape. 

He was angry that the majesty of the law should be so dealt 
with ; and he was puzzled what to do with the case which 
Snape and Company had brought him. 

Presently, while the tall boy was vainly looking through the 
rails of the Inspector's de^k, a gentlemanly man, about thirty, 
came in, and passed through to the court. The Inspector, 
struck with a sudden thought, jumped off his stool and fol- 
lowed him. 

""Mr Boom sits to-day, sir," he said. 

'* Umph ! " said Mr George Horton, stipendiary magistrate. 
.' I know that, Stevenson ; but .1 want to refer to some cases. 
Anything new . it all works smoothly 1 " 

" Ye . es," said the Inspector ; " very smoothly, sir. But 
here 's a curious case I want to know about, sir." 

And he followed the magistrate into the private room, and 
read over Mr Jasper Snape's communication. After a while, 
the young magistrate said that he would not only grant the 
warrant, but go with Stevenson, if he could put another 
inspector on duty. Yes, he would go with the Inspector, and 
a plain-clothesman . whom, indeed, we should now call a 
detective . and see about the matter. 

" Something strikes me that it is a serious matter, Steven- 



son." 



"Yes, sir," said that officer, sharply enough. When the 
chance of a " case " turned up, most " officers " were on the 
alert, for the honour of the new corps was dear to them. 
" Here are these people, sir. What am I to do with them 1 " 

" How many ? " asked the magistrate. 

Stevenson went to the door and counted. 

" One, two, three . five, sir," he said. 

" Get a cab to the door for you and me, and a hackney 
coach for the witnesses and the plain-clothesman." 

" Yes, sir." 

And away the Inspector creaked. 



ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



«' ^itevcnson ! " shouted Mr Horton. 

« Yes, sir." 

" They have come all the way from Kensal-Qreen. Give 
them some beer ; here 's the money." 

He threw the Inspector half-a-crown, and the latter caught 
it, murmuring, " My eye and Betty Martin ! " . a favourite 
oath of the period . "recently appointed, arn't he? New to 
the business ! " 

Kensal-Green was a pretty little village, made all the prettier 
by the new canal which ran through it and through hundreds 
of acres of hay-fields round it. It was quiet, perfectly countri- 
fied or rural, more so than many a village now-a-days which 
lies near a railway, and celebrated as a health-resort. Very 
small people, who had made very small sums of money, came 
and lived there, cultivating small patches of ground and humble 
memories, and living in a Btate of perfect and Paradisaical 
innocence, but for the swearing of the bargees who navigated the 
canal. These fellows were more lively than ever they are now, 
doing, indeed, a brisker trade as carriers, and quite frighten- 
ing some of the people out of their tenements; so that it 
resulted that all the better houses were built at some distance 
from the canaL Otherwise, the neighbourhood was bright and 
pretty enough. At a short distance lay the Edgware Koad ; 
and along that the coaches from the North used to run several 
times a-day into the Oxford Road, and thence to Holborn. 

The yellow-bodied cab, with the police magistrate and the 
Inspector seated side by side under a huge black leather hood, 
and driven by a driver with a sleeve-waistcoat and a black eye, 
who sat by their side in a separate box or compartment, soon 
got to the cross-roads on the Green ; for the bay mare with the 
cock-tail in the shafts was a good one, and had been a racer. 
Upon the Green the cab awaited the hackney coach, which 
came up with smoking horses ; for the yellow-bodied cab, with 
its tall wheels and light fare, had " cut along pretty sharply," 
as the Inspector said. 

"Now, then, old slow coach!" said the driver with the 
black eye. 

" D'yer want me to break their wind ? " said the coachman, 
angrily. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 



" You couldn't, if so be you tried ; it 's done already/' re- 
turned the other. 

During this passage of arms, Snape and Company descended. 
The tailor, leading the way, and followed by the stipendiary 
magistrate and police, the tall boy, the women, and a few 
children, also by the cabman with the black eye, turned to the 
right hand of the Green, to a little side road, and in a few 
ininutes gained a pretty little box of a villa, which, with all its 
fehutters shut in the broad daylight, looked as if it had gone to 
sleep. A light ornamental railing ran in front of the house, 
and dwarf walls divided it from others, one only of which, and 
that uninhabited, stood beyond it. The little villa had a 
ground floor and a first floor, and altogether did not number 
more than six small rooms and a wash-house. . Somehow, as 
the people approached it, they shuddered and felt dull, the 
house looked so deserted and so tightly closed. 

" Yes," said Jasper Snape ; " that 's the place . look at it ! " 

The magistrate, placing a policeman at the little fore-garden 
gate, and taking the Inspector and Snape with him, knocked 
with his silver-headed cane at both door and shutters. There 
was no answer. 

" Ay, you may knock," said one of the women to the other. 
" You won't get no answer ; she HI never open that door agin." 

Mr Horton turned round, and said to the policeman at the 
door . who was regarded in that rural district almost with awe, 
as a powerful and antagonistic novelty . 

" Send for a locksmith." 

A young fellow with a rush basket on his shoulders hereon 
stepped forward. Carefully dusting the stone doorstep with 
his white apron, he knelt down, took his rush basket off his 
shoulders, shook the door, tried to look through the keyhole, 
and then selecting a fine picklock of much power, placed it in 
the lock. The door opened easily, and the little party entered. 
There was an eager movement from the crowd without ; the 
women pressed closer together, the children even dared to push 
the policeman in their eagerness to get in at the gate, 

Mr Jasper Suape's worst anticipations were too well founded. 
The very passage, which was small enough, exhibited to the 
excited senses of the searchers something indicative of the 



ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



coming revelation. The mat had been kicked up ; the kitchen 
candle, which had burned itself out in its tin candlestick, had 
, flared and guttered down with a brown-red grease that looked 
almost like blood. On the left-hand side was the " drawing- 
room" of the little villa. In it was a desk, broken open, and 
the drawer wrenched out, bending the thin brass pin which 
fastened it. Papers were scattered about; and an Indian 
shawl of some little value, thin and filmy, which had lain in 
the bottom of a work-box, was thrown on the sofa, the work- 
box upset on the top of it, and the pocket of the work-box was 
torn open. 

" Whoever he was/' said the plain-clothesman, " this cracks- 
man was in a hurry." 

In the next room, the door of which faced the other, the same 
hurry was observed. Some cold meat and an egg were put for 
some one to eat ; a bottle, with the cork out, of brandy stood 
near it : the brandy waS of that dark, mahogany colour, then 
fashionable; but by its side there was something not then 
found in small houses, a bottle of claret. The cloth, laid care- 
fully, very white and good, was pulled on one side towards the 
door, as if some person had suddenly risen. A napkin and a 
napkin ring, unused, but with some stains upon it, lay upon 
the floor. The stains were of blood. The little sideboard had 
been forced open ; but the thief had forgotten to take two or 
three silver tea-spoons, the only plate there. 

" He 's a rum cracksman," said the detective, " and not a 
very old hand." 

Mr Brownjohn, who ventured that opinion, was an old hand 
himself, drafted from Bow Street into the New Police, and was 
celebrated in his way. 

Neither Mr Horton nor the Inspector . ^both men of more 
reflection than Brownjohn, who owed his reputation to instinct, 
or to happy guesses . said anything. Either the owner had 
been very careless, which might have been the case, or the 
guilty person had, in an eager search, moved nearly every 
article. 

Through the dining-room a door led into the neat little 
kitchen, which was merely sufficient to prepare food for an old, 
or a very young couple in their honejrmoon ; and, indeed, the 



A LEFT-SANDED BRmE. 



little Cockney village was much resorted to by humble young 
people who had just married. 

After looking round the dining-room, the magistrate, closely 
followed by Jasper Snape, entered the kitchen. The latter no 
sooner had put his head in the little room, than he gave a cry, 
and rushed forward. 

" There she is ! . there I there ! Poor Mrs Martin 1 Poor 
Madame ! " 

The old pigeon-fancier knelt down by the side of the corpse ; 
and there, sure enough, the head lying in the cinders, was 
the body of the Widow Martin. Part of the cap and part of 
the hair were burnt. . Curiously, the water of the kettle had 
been spilt in the struggle or attack, and had flowed over the 
body and extinguished the flames. It was probable that the 
murderer would have been well pleased had the body been 
burnt, and all evidence of the crime thus destroyed. 

" Where has the poor woman been wounded 1 " said the 
magistrate. 

"In* the back, between the shoulders, twice," said the In- 
spector, turning back the shawL " A small hole enough the 
weapon left, but 'tis enough." 

" She is quite cold," said Snape, in a whisper, as if he dared 
not speak aloud. 

" Been dead at least three days," said the Inspector. "What 
blood there is, is dry. She must have bled inwardly. One 
blow went through the heart. I should think she had not 
time to cry out * Oh ! ' " 

" Poor creature ! " ejaculated Mr Horton, in deep pity and 
disgust. " Could not the villains have robbed the house with- 
out murdering her ? Pass the word for a doctor. Stevenson, 
take an inventory of the matters here. Mr Snape, come with 
me into the next, room ; and, while we wait here, tell me who 
was this woman 1 " 

Mr Snape followed the magistrate, who sat down in the 
deserted drawing-room. The Inspector passed the word for a 
doctor ; and, in some mysterious way, all the people outside 
seemed to have been made acquainted with the facts inside. 
The constable of the village came up and took the place of the 
policeman at the gate ; and that functionary in blue was sent 



8 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



back in the yellow-bodied cab to Homer Street, New Road, for 
a more efficient aid ; for the Inspector looked with a jealous, 
as well as a supercilious eye upon the plain-clothesman, Brown- 

john. 

" There *s no time to lose," said he. " Brownjohn is flum- 
moxed quite. We shall want Old Daylight here." 

And so having detennined, the cabman in the sleeve-jacket, 
and with a black eye, haviug seen his blue-coated fare in his 
swing cabriolet, was despatched to Homer Street at a fast trot. 

«< Why do you send for Old Daylight ? " said the policeman, 
sulkily. " It 's plain enough this ain't no professional cracks- 
man. It *s some fellow as has been suddenly took. He 's got 
a good start, but I '11 have him." 

" There 's more in it than you think for, Brownjohn," said 
the Inspector, severely. " Tom Forster 's the only man for 
delicate work like this." 

Tom Forster was the proper name of Old Daylight. 

The plain-clothesman stood rebuked and sulky ; and, in the 
little kitchen, such was the silence that they heard the clear 
voice of Mr Horton ask Snape the question . 

*.' Who wfts this woman ? " 



CHAPTER II. 

MX TOM PORSTER PUTS HIMSELF ON THE QUI VIVE, 

What Mr Jasper Snape, tailor and bird-faneier, could not 
tell the magistrate, Mr Horton contrived to gather from the 
neighbours, while the yellow-bodied cab went literally at a 
swinging trot for Old Daylight ; and Inspector Stevenson was 
at once pleased and delighted with the clear, concise, and 
efficient way in which the magistrate went through his examina- 
tions. Indeed, it was not to be wondered at. Mr George 
Horton was a rising barrister of great promise, and many of 
his friends thought that he was unwise to accept the thousand , 

a-year of the stipendiary magistrateship. But his reason will 
have to be explained. In the meantime, let us tell the reader 
who Mrs Martin was. '' 



A LEFT-HANDED BRmE. 



In 1827, about two years before this, Madame Martin had 
arrived at the little village in a hackney coach, full of linen 
and crockery, had driven right up to Acacia Villa . both the 
acacia, from which it took its name, and the villa were very 
small . had produced a key, and had entered the house, which 
had been previously very neatly furnished with the contents 
of one van. She was a yearly tenant . the landlords at Kensal- 
Green, for their own reasons, preferring their rents paid 
quarterly, and in advance. 

Mrs Martin was what is called a bony woman, and in youth 
was certainly bonny too. She was upwards of fifty years old, 
strong, vigorous, and in full health. She spoke English with 
a very slight accent, for she was a native of Trouville, near 
Boulogne, and had been brought up in an English family ; but 
she was altogether French in look, manner, and feeling. She 
had lived much in the world, and was of that age when a lone 
woman takes upon herself much of the independence and 
roughness of man. She walked about the Green, made her 
purchases, hired her little servant . who came for two days in 
the week, and never slept in the house . and was beholden to 
nobody, except to Jasper Snape, who went and paid her rent 
for her, and whose pigeons she admired. She herself had kept 
pigeons at a small chateau in the little valley of Trouville. 

With those whom she met she was very free spoken. She 
had been a voyage or two, and even farther than from Bou- 
logne to Dover ; and she knew something about the sea. In 
her drawing-room was a handsome Japanese cabinet, a great 
deal too good for so small a house, but one of those things 
which seafaring people get hold of, and present to those whom 
they love. She said that her husband, a Boulognese, was dead 
. he had been lost at sea . and a good job too ! It was a pity 
some people ever married. When two young people, who were 
very fond of each other, settled not far from her, and were 
seen walking fondly together, she had been heard to say . 

"Ah! all very well . new brooms! new brooms! Fresh 
and fair, no doubt. He '11 care for her about a year, that 's 
all." 

From which he, Jasper Snape, believed that she was not 
happily married. 



10 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



Mrs Martin, called Madame, was looked upon as a rich 
woman . for the Green. She always paid her rent, was gene- 
rous to her little servant, ate well, slept well, and drank well. 
It came out that her female neighbours knew how many bottles 
of brandy she got from the Stanley Arms, on the Green ; and 
the Eilbum carrier had driven out of his way to deliver a 
wooden box full of wine . probably, thought Mr Horton, a 
case of claret. Once even the canal men had brought some- 
thing to her ; and one of them had been admitted, and treated 
to some brandy and water, which he said was " prime." 

" Put that down, Inspector . it 's important." 

The plain-clothesman pricked his ears. 

Mrs Martin had, it would seem, the best of everything ; and, 
as a rule, was evidently not liked in the neighbourhood by any, 
save by Jasper Snape. She had said several rude things to 
the women. To one young girl she hinted that, " With her 
beautiful face, she would make her fortune in Paris or London ; " 
and women do not love such phrases. Moreover, Mrs Martin 
lived, as Dr Johnson said a gentleman did, ** with no visible 
means of gaining an honest existence ; " and she lived better 
than her neighbours. They were, consequently, jealous ; and 
even her terrible death did not seem to evoke any pity, except 
in the breasts of Mr Horton and Jasper Snape. Yet, there 
she lay, killed in full health and vigour, still as straight and 
vigorous as a young woman. That keen eye "was closed ; that 
bold hawk-look for ever blank ; that quick, determined step 
would never march out of that door again. Besides the matter 
of offence which the immense vigour and aplomb of Madame 
gave, there were many other reasons why she was disliked. 
She was always sneering at virtue, at romance, at the English, 
and at the Protestant religion. The parson could make nothing 
of her. She went, it is supposed, once or twice . on festival 
days, Easter Sunday and Christmas Day . ^to Spanish Place to 
mass j but that was all . if that. Her daily habit was to eat 
and drink a good deal, although she was spare of body, and 
very far from fat ; and to retire early, shutting herself closely 
up, and bolting all her doors and windows. Ill-natured people 
said that before she went to bed she had taken enough of 
brown brandy. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 1 1 

At this stage of the evidence . gathered from various people 
painfully, by question and answer, and bit by bit . the constable 
at the gate signified that the yellow-bodied cab was in sight ; 
and presently it dashed up, and from it descended the police- 
man in blue, and a quiet little man in brown. 
. Mr Thomas Forster . ^for it was he . stepped down carefully 
from the cab, and walked circumspectly into the garden. He 
had been found at home, of course ; and found, as he would 
have been at any time, neatly dressed in the fashion of 
perhaps twenty years previous. A brown spencer covered a 
brown coat ; but both were open, and showed a neat black 
kerseymere waistcoat, double-breasted, and with flaps ; under 
this, brown pantaloons, tight-fitting to the knee, were termi- 
nated by Hessian boots, fashionably made, but with leather 
tassels tightly sewn to the top, like a bunch of fringe. A 
thick white cravat, neatly tied round the old gentleman's neck, 
completed his costume, if you except a rakish and smart-look- 
ing beaver hat, curled at the sides. From his fob, under his 
waistcoat, hung a gold watch chain, of a copper colour, and a 
heavy flat link, almost as broad as a riband ; at the end of this 
was a somewhat round but excellent silver watch of the best 
London make, and upon this our friend placed implicit reliance. 
His hands were covered with good Woodstock gloves, and in 
them he held an old favourite blackthorn, very polished and 
nobby at the top. Mr Tom Forster, in spite of his littleness, 
looked a substantial person. He was not exactly a gentleman ; 
he looked more like a well-to-do innkeeper or householder. 
He was utterly unlike a tradesman of the period, and stood 
stoutly in his shoes. He was well known to Sir Kichard 
Bimie, and the officers of Bow Street ; for in many a celebrated 
raid had he helped them. Latterly, he had separated himself 
from the office, having had money left him ; but when any 
great case offered itself, Old Daylight . as they called him, 
because he was supposed to let daylight into the darkest cases 
. ^was perfectly ready. 

He bowed with much respect to the magistrate . for Tom 
Forster loved and honoured forensic genius, and Mr George 
Horton was well known to him as one of the keenest cross- 
examiners that ever said " My lud " . and then, taking off his 



12 ONE OF TWO; OR, 



gloves, he sat down, the plain-clothesman looking at him with 
jealousy. 

For Mr Brownjohn . afterwards so celebrated in the annals 
of our detective police,. and who, indeed, died from a wound 
got in a fray with some desperadoes . had been cruelly hurt by 
the Inspector. He knew his weight, and had with good cause 
been highly recommended when "turned over" from the chief 
office to Marylebone. Give him a clue, and he would follow it 
out to the last. He had not that clue yet. He would soon 
have it. Why, he argued, call in Old Daylight ? But never 
mind, it would be a race between them yet ; and he would bet 
twenty to twenty that he was even with Daylight. 

Old Daylight's method was altogether different from that of 
Brownjohn. He was a natural philosopher ; and, naturally so, 
on the inductive principle. He put together piece after piece 
of evidence ; and, when he had amassed a huge heap, he gave 
a sudden jump. " Great wits jump " was a quotation that he 
had never heard, but which he had often proved trua. Little 
by little the light given by each fact accumulated, until he saw 
his way clear, and then nothing could shake him. Many a 
time he had persisted in the truth of his deduction, though 
everybody was against him; and many a time he had been 
right. Hence his great reputation. For delicate cases, neither 
the celebrated Leadbetter, nor the more celebrated Forrester, 
who were the heroes of a hundred stories, could compare with 
Tom Forster. 

The Inspector himself was no fool. He had been a constable 
when the New Police were only dreamt of, and he meant to be 
an honour to the New Police. He had a prodigious memory 
for faces. Whenever he looked upon a man for two or three 
minutes . and he looked upoa many . he never forgot him. 
Something, he said, in the play of the eye was different in 
every man, and upon the eye he depended ; hence he never 
pretended to recognise or recall dead people more than another 
man ; but a living man he was down on. He, too, hoped to 
pick something out of this case ; but his method was, he saw, 
scarcely wanted here, and he had made up his mind that the 
job was for Tom Forster. 

Mr Forster, saluting the magistrate, took off his hat, and 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 13 



showed a bald head, covered at the back and sides with thick 
iron-grey hair. His eyes were dark hazel, twinkling and merry 
enough, and very sharp. His back was bent, and his head held 
forward eagerly. H e produced a gold eyeglass, put it to one eye, 
and perused the magistrate's notes. He did not take a minute 
to run over them ; then he rose, went into the kitchen, and 
came back again, saying . 

" Very good . very good." 

What he said was not applied to the murder, but to the notes. 
Then, turning to Mr Horton, he said . 

" Your worship has not designated the time when the woman 
Martin was last seen." 

Mr Horton placed his hand on the paper, and with his finger 
pointed out that which Old Daylight had overlooked. At the 
side . covered by his thumb, probably, when he read it . were 
the figures, " twenty minutes past six in the evening." 

" On Michaelmas Day. She must have gone to rest early." 

" Her habit," said Mr Horton. 

" You are sure of the time 1 " 

" Exactly. Here is the witness. Smith, who had bought a 
goose for her dinner, and who went to fetch a little gin from 
the public-house for her husband's digestion. The Stanley Arms 
is about five minutes* slow walk from this little Acacia Villa. 
Smith, coming home, saw Mrs Martin standing at her door, 
who told her that French brandy . cognac . ^was better to drink 
than English gin." 

"That depends," said Old Daylight; "both good in their 
way. Felix Booth can give you . gin not to be sneered at. How- 
ever, that settles the time." 

"Mrs Smith," continued the magistrate, "saw her go in, 
and heard her lock her door, and then open her windows to 
pull-to her shutters." 

" Did she say anything else . Mrs Smith ? " said Old Day- 
light. 

" That she had a headache, and would go to bed." 

" Was there any one seen with her at any time 1 " asked the 
magistrate. 

The woman recollected that, two days before, a sea-faring 
man, who had appeared to be very much amused by the canal 



1 1 ONE OF TWO j OR, 



boats, had come up there, and had gone in, and stayed some 
time. He was grey, very like an Englishman, but might have 
been a foreigner : he had ear-rings. 

Here Mr Brownjohn, who was listening, let his eyes gleam 
a little bit. He saw the kind of man, and had his clue. 

" That 's the rascal 1 " thought he. 

" Does any one else recollect this man 1 " asked Mr Horton. 

Here the tall boy was hustled forward. He did. He was a 
very nice old fellow . quite a foreigner. Perhaps a Dutchman. 
He had read that Dutchmen were -short and stout. Had 
heard him speak. Asked for the house of '^ Meestress Mar- 
ton ;" and when he, the tall boy, had shown it him, had given 
him threepence. The boy had thanked him, and given the 
money to his mother. 

Mr Horton noticed this in his neat abbreviations. Old Day- 
light rubbed his chin, dissatisfied, and then scratched his eye- 
brow. The Inspector asked what kind of eyes the man had. 

" Fair blue eyes . very good-natured," said the tall boy. 

The Inspector turned over all fhe rogues that he knew with 
fair blue eyes. 

" It 's a case," he said, " for the Thames constables." 

Mr Brownjohn came forward and fixed an awful gaze upon 
the tall boy. 

" Now, you know," said he, with a deferential bow to the 
magistrate . " you know, my young friend, that we shall get it 
all out of you." 

The boy turned very red. 

The policeman went on. 

" We shall get it all out of you. We know that something 
more must have passed. Freshen your memory a bit, Jacob, 
and speak up to the magistrate." 

The boy paused, felt awful, and then looked at Mr Horton. 

** Tell all, my boy," said the gentleman, kindly. " We must 
know. Did he use any threatening words 1 Was that all ho 
said and did V* 

It was not all. The boy confessed the sea-faring man had 
given him sixpence in halfpence or coppers, not threepence. 
He had spent half of it in sweetstuff and marbles j and then, 
cowering like a guilty thing, the tall boy was silent. 



A LEFT-HAKDED BRIDE. 15 



All the men, as well as Mr Horton, saw that the clue broke 
there. 

"It's that sailor chap, for a quid," said Brownjohn to him- 
self. 

" Marbles and sweetstuflf ! " muttered Tom Forster. " Poor 
human natur* ! " 

Then he rose, and walked into the kitchen. He had learned 
all he could. Now he would begin to work for himself. 

" 'Tisn't that sailor man ! " he muttered, as he looked at the 
body. " Sailors use knives or ropes ! "Well, well . these things 
must happen. How to find who did it, and why they . or he 
.did it? Was it a he?" 

All he could be certain of, at present, was that it was one of 
two. 



CHAPTER III. 

cabinet-work; ORy PIECING TOGETHER, 

Mr Samuel Brownjohn, who had so hurt the tall boy's feel- 
ings by eliciting the fact that he had secreted threepence, and 
expended the same in sweetstuff, still cast an eye of desire 
after the evidence of that boy. 

** He 's an innocent young chuff," said he to himself ; " but 
I warrant he 's seen more of that Dutch sailor. Boys like him 
don't let a seafarin' man alone for nothin'." 

So saying, while Mr Horton was covering his handsome face 
and forehead with his hands, and thinking how crime could 
have entered that peaceful little village, Brownjohn stole out, 
and followed the boy. All that he got from him, after a long 
time, and the promise of another sixpence, was that the Dutch- 
man had got upon one of the barges ; but he did not know 
whether it . the barge . went northward or southward. 

" To London, may be," said Brownjohn ; " that way " . and 
he pointed in that direction. 

The tall boy couldn't say. ^He knew the stem from the 
stem, but didn't know which way the barge Went. No, he 
wasn't a fool, and he knew how to read. There were two 



16 ONE OF TWO j OR, 

barges : one lay with her. head to London, t'other with her 
head up the canaL There was a slight bulge in the canal 
thereabouts, and they lay on the opposite side to the towing- 
path. The Dutchman seemed very friendly with the barge- 
man, and was laughing when his head disappeared in the little 
cabin. Thereon the clue, which Brownjohn held so tightly^ 
again broke. He was more and more certain about that 
Dutchman ; but he did not want to go to Birmingham if his 
prey were hiding in London. Such a fellow as he was would 
of course go southward, and Brownjohn would have gone 
southward too, if his wit had "jumped." But no, he never 
did that ; he held fast by the clue, and he never found it to 
fail. Away, therefore, he trotted to the Stanley Arms, and, 
disguising his purpose, had a long talk with the landlord. He 
learnt from that gentleman a good deal about Mrs Martin, who, 
the landlord thought, had killed herself, and had " tumbled 
about the things " on purpose, to put it upon the Green. The 
Green would now be in all the London papers. It would be 
as bad as Mr Weare's murder by Thurtell, out at Edgware 
there, near Mill Hill Farm. Mrs Martin was a good customer 
to him, but he did not care for that. She was a designing 
woman. 

" Poor creetur ! " said Mr Brownjohn. " She couldn't have 
no design in her own death." 

Landlord didn't know about that. Women were so artful^ . 
devilish artful ; deep, very deep. 

Brownjohn said they were. There was no " understanding 
of 'em." 

Like foxes run to earth in a loamy country, with lots of 
old banks, there was no digging them out. Hadn't he neat 
wines, he should like to know 1 What did Mrs Martin want 
to set an example to the neighbourhood by having cases of « 
wine by the carrier ? A bad example was what he couldn't 
abide ; leastways, when it was set by a furriner. 

" I 'd ha' thought," said Mr Brownjohn, " that she would 
have used the canal now." 

He was on to his clue again. Brownjohn was a rare fellow 
to stick to it, he was. He was not unsuccessful this time, for 
by little and little he wormed out of the landlord what he 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 17 



wanted; and with his head up, away went the New Police 
ofl&cer towards Acacia Villa. 

In the meantime, Old Daylight had been to work in his own 
way. Down on his knees in the little kitchen, searching in 
the grate, raking over the ashes, out in the garden measuring 
the footsteps found in the little bed tmder the window, up 
in the dead woman's bed-room, tasting the brandy, scruti- 
nising the claret, and taking notes of everything . ^the busy 
little man worked away like some of the new invented steam- 
engines people were then wondering at. 

Mr Horton, during all this time, had several fits of im- 
patience. The day was wearing away; the yellow-bodied 
cab would claim a vast amount of money for waiting ; and, 
absorbed as he was in the case, he (Mr Horton) wanted to put 
himself in communication with the Home Secretary about this 
mysterious crime. 

However, just as Mr Brownjohn came in, and was telling 
the magistrate that he held the clue tighter than ever. Old 
Daylight entered, looking twenty years younger, and bearing 
in his hands a little thin drawer, carefully covered with a white 
pocket handkerchief. 

" I 'm after him," said Brownjohn. " I 'm off now to the 
Thames Police Court. I think they have some of the old water 
dogs about there yet. You shall hear from me in two or three 
days, sir ; it may be from Dover, or from Eochester, or there- 
away down the river." 

" You 're pretty sure, then, Brownjohn ? " said the magis- 
trate. 

" Sure ! . no," answered the detective. " / never holler till 
/'m out of the wood ; other people may. But 1 11 do my 
best; and man, woman, or child can't do more. Good-bye. 
Going to take the cab back, sir 1 " 

" Yes," said Mr Horton. 

" All right, then ; I '11 foot it across the fields. No time to 
be lost, I can tell you. Hallo, there ! " 

Here he ran to the door, and shouted to a carrier's cart, and 
was seen in a minute to climb up, and seat himself by the 
driver. 

" He 's ofi*," said Inspector Stevenson ; and here he deter- 

B 



1 8 ONE OF TWO j OR, 



mined to be generous to an absent friend. ^< A better man 
than Sam Brownjohn^ in certain points, don't serve his 
Majesty." i 

Mr Tom Forster next, dusting his dirty hands, and rubbing 
his bald head with a bandana of fine colours . red, yellow, 
and green . artfully mixed by the Easterns for the English 
market. 

" Now, Mr Forster," said the magistrate, " get on with this. 
We must not waste time." 

'^Not a moment has been lost," said Mr Forster, with a 
certain pride in his voice. " The more haste the less speed. 
A very pretty case . a very pretty case, indeed ! Poor human 
natur' I I often wonder at her, sir. She *s wonderful . won- 
derful, indeed ! But we grow up to her dodges. Poor human 
natur' I " 

As he said the last words, he twitched the handkerchief off 
the drawer in a very careful manner, as if there were bank 
notes underneath, and he 'did not want to flirt them away. 
There were things that to him, at the moment, were more 
precious than bank notes . ay, if there were fifty of them, 
each of fifty pounds value. The little old man loved his pro- 
fession, and his heart and soul were in it. 

" Crime," said he, sententiously, " crime is puzzling ; yet 
we find the ends of the puzzle. It is not motiveless. How- 
ever silly the motive may appear, still, at the bottom of that 
folly, some faint reason may be found. Poor human natur' ! 
I sometimes doubt whether any single action in life is without 
a motive ! " 

The magistrate looked up at the queer little old man, who 
spoke so wisely, so sadly, and so selfishly, and with a very 
different intonation from that ordinarily employed by him. 
Old Daylight, as he said this, had an educated voice. Voices 
are " educated," if you please, my masters. It was not the 
Bow Street runner, it was the philosopher who was speaking. 

"And what was the motive of this crime?" asked the 
magistrate. 

"Not money," said Tom Forster, "to a dead certainty; 
though that 's at the bottom of most crimes. Here are a few 
details : . This murder was committed at about half-past nine 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 19 

o'clock on the evening of Tuesday, the 29th September . that 
is, last month." 

« Why so?" 

'' Because candles were lighted, and supper was spread. It 
was dark, and yet not too dark, because the man who stepped 
in the garden ground outside had carefully avoided the 
flowers." 

" It was a man, then," said Mr Horton. 

" Certainly, and a gentleman." 

The magistrate started. 

" Here," continued Old Daylight, " is the exact size of his 
shoe or boot. It is the left boot. Here is that of his right 
bpot. You see, they are lefts and rights, not the old-fashioned 
straights, as I wear mine." 

Mr Torster was quite right. Rights, and lefts, well known 
at the time of the Crusaders, and down to George II. 's time, 
had somehow disappeared from English shoes until some ten 
years previously, and old-fashioned people wore old-fashioned 
shoes. 

" Why exactly half-past nine 1 " 

" Because it rained a little at that hour ; and yet the shoes 
of the man were dusty, as we see by the carpet in the dining- 
room. The poor woman knew the man very well, for she was 
not quite dressed ; or, rather, had begun to undress when she 
heard his knock, first at the door, and then at both shutters." 

" How '8 that 1 " asked Mr Horton. 

" I have proofs," said the old man quietly, but severely. 
" She had pulled an old shawl over her shoulders, and had left 
off suddenly when winding-up her old French alarum; for 
somehow the pendulum was stopped, and it points to the hour. 
Her stays are unlaced " 

The Inspector looked with triumph at the magistrate, as 
much as to say, " You see how Old Daylight can work." 

Mr Horton looked up with a very satisfied glance. 

" But although in this hurry, she was glad to welcome this 
young gentleman." 

" Was he her lover % " 

" I don't know. She got him her best to welcome him . 
brandy and claret. Common people don't drink claret. She 



20 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



let him smoke in her parlour, and a very fine Havannah the 
man smoked.'' 

Here Old Daylight took up the butt-end of a cigar, and 
shook a few more grains of dust from it. 

"You see," said he, "that the young man . ^active, and 
strong, and well made, I take it . ^was possibly in the army, 
certainly of a high class. He wore moustaches, which no one 
under an officer or a baronet indulges in ; because" 

" Because why ? *' said the Inspector, hurriedly. " Ain't you 
going too fast. Daddy Daylight ?" 

Tom Forster looked at the police officer with inefifable scorn, 
and continued . 

" Because the cigar is not bitten nor wetted by the lips, bijt 
has been cut in a transverse way, and has been pressed into 
probably a silver pipe or tube, such as they use in Spain. The 
young gentleman has, therefore, probably travelled on the 
Continent. He 's young and active, for he fences ; thus he has 
been able to commit this crime with a broken foil. He is most 
likely a pupil of Jackson, and boxes ; for round one end of the 
foil has been wrapped the wash leather, and some little . very 
little . remains of horsehair of an old boxing glove." 

" By jingo ! " cried the Inspector. 

" Your circumstantial evidence looks well at present," said 
Mr Horton. " "Wait till a barrister pulls it to pieces." 

" Oh ! that 's not all," said Daddy Daylight, very quietly. 
" He was young and active, as I said ; for, without opening 
the gate, he leapt the garden wall, and clearing four feet of 
grass on the other side, came down in the centre bed. The 
footmarks correspond with the others, but are more deeply 
impressed. He had been abroad, since the Widow Martin had 
hurried to cook him an omelet . a dish for which here we don't 
much care. There are the broken eggs, the pan, and the 
beaten-up yolks on the dresser. As she bent over the pan, he 
sprang hurriedly from the dining-room through the door, and 
stabbed her in the back. She fell, but not without some 
struggle. Half turning round, she caught him by the glove, 
but caught short at him. He wore thin gloves . opera gloves 
. ^probably put on to prevent his hands being soiled by blood ; 
for here, caught by her long nail, is a fragment of grey, thin 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 21 

kid leather, scratched and torn oflF the glove. This also proves 
that the murderer was no common man.'' 

The magistrate was delighted with the business-like manner 
of Old Daylight. 

" Pray go on," he said. 

" There is little more. Now comes the motive ; and this, 
too, points to our previous assertion, that the assassin was well 
born and bred." 

"His breeding has come to a bad end," said Inspector 
Stevenson. 

" Alas ! " murmured Old Daylight, " what can we say 1 Do 
what we will, our best laid schemes, as Bobby Bums has said, 
* gang aft a-gey.' The motive, I have said, is not money. We 
might guess that from the fact of the young man being a 
gentleman ; but here is proof. Mrs Martin's pocket was un- 
rifled. Here is her purse ; here are also some notes found in 
her drawers, although, from counting the spoons and forks, 
some are gone. But that 's a mere blind : they will be found 
near here, I fancy. But there is yet more proof. The grate 
is full of ashes of papers. Some of these are letters, and are 
written on thicker paper than others ; and may, perhaps, be 
legal documents. But here is a proof. Look upon that frag- 
ment. In a little whiter line than the surrounding paper, you 
will find the words, * dear Lord ! ' " 

Mr Horton started. 

" Can we find any more evidence like this ? " he asked. 

'.Unfortunately, no," answered the Bow Street ruiiner. 
" That stupid fellow, who is so fond of a personal clue, had no 
mind for intricacies, and has put the kettle on the fireplace, 
and crushed all the ashes of the letters. However, we have 
enough. Let me sum up. The murder was committed by a 
young, active man, dressed in a top coat, light town boots, a 
beaver hat . if the round mark where the dust is removed 
from the top of the Japanese cabinet is to be trusted . flight 
dress kid gloves, as if he had come from a theatre. This man 
is a gentleman who has travelled abroad . probably in Spain . 
is a good fencer, and belongs to some good family. Now, 
then, for our search. We have the basis of it already. The 
Inspector, whom we will leave here with the constable, knows 



22 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



my ways, and will bring me word to-morrow as to whether 
such a man was seen. Coach, waggon, carter, even barge 
might have brought him." 

As he said this, the detective packed up his shreds of 
evidence very carefully, and gave them into the hands of Mr 
Horton. 

** You will call for me to-morrow, Mr Stevenson." 

" At Homer Street ] " asked the Inspector. 

" No, at Queen Anne Street, if you please. You will find 
me there with an old friend, whose advice is worth something." 

"Are you going back to town, Mr Forster?" asked Mr 
Horton. "Will you share my cab? I want to have a few 
words with you." 

" At your service, sir," said Old Daylight, with deferential 
respect. " Allow me a moment or so to refresh myself." 

He pointed to his dirty hands, and hurried away. A half- 
dozen moments passed, and the old detective walked out into 
the garden, quite ready to join Mr Horton. 

In a few minutes the yellow-bodied cab and its black-eyed 
driver were swinging back to town at a sharp trot, the driver 
sitting in his little separate seat next to Mr Forster, and pop- 
ping his head round every minute, with an ardent desire to 
talk to him. But Old Daylight was in close confab with 
the magistrate, and the driver was disappointed. 

" Well, they've got down two bloodhounds of the law agin 
that job already. I wonder whether they '11 scent him out. 
Brownjohn 's off one way, Old Daylight is on another. Woa-a, 
mare I " here he flicked his horse, which shied a little in the 
glare of the setting sun. "Country air and a good feed 
has given her no end of pluck. If they wasn't so busy, 
they'd be half afraid of a wheel coming off; but there they 
are . talk, talk, talk." A gentleman can't get a word in edge- 
ways." 

And so Sam Smiles, the black-eyed, sleeve-waistooated 
driver as he was, went on with his grumble. Soon he 
deposited the magistrate at his door in Wimpole Street, and 
was paid ; for Mr Tom Forster got down as well, and trotted 
off to his home. And there, out in the country, in the quiet 
little cockney Acacia Villa, with the cold starlight twipfeling 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 23 

down through the uncurtained .window, lay the dead body of 
Madame Martin, under the eternal heavens. 

But murder will speak out, " with most miraculous organ," 
even though it has no tongue. Two good men and true were 
after the murderer. One held a clue; the other had an 
inductive process of his own. Were either of them on the 
track 1 

Let us bury the woman, and hide the crime. Why haunt 
the bodies of the dead with' prying curiosity? Inspector 
Stevenson, let us add, took the proper steps. The coroner for 
Middlesex sat upon the body next day, with a sapient jury, 
and returned a verdict of " Wilful murder against some person 
or persons unknown ; " for, in spite of the evidence of the 
Inspector and others, the foreman would insist that more than 
one was engaged in the perpetration of the dark deed. 



CHAPTER IV. 

liYTRODUCES MR EDGAR IVADE. 

When the cock-tailed mare was rattling the magistrate and Mr 
Tom Forster up to London at the rate of ten miles an hour, 
although the cabman could get no word of our old friend, Mr 
Horton had him all to himself; and was not sorry for it. 

" You 've had some curious experiences," said the magistrate ; 
" and," he added, with real admiration, " you must know some- 
thing of mankind, and of literature too." 

" You are very good to say so," said Old Daylight. " Mine 
is a varied experience, and a bitter one. I was once a silver- 
smith and watchmaker, and had a capital business ; but some- 
how or other I was not happy. I wanted to marry, but I 
could not,, for my old father and mother came and quartered 
themselves on me, and totally prevented that I couldn't 
marry when they were with me, and I couldn't have the heart 
to send them away. Well, the consequence was, I and my 
pretty one waited and waited, till she died. I wished the old 
couple anywhere . in heaven, for what I cared." 

Mr Horton was astonished at the old man's heartlessness. 



24 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



" Poor old people ! " lie said. " I dare say they were not 
very well oflf." 

** That 's the plague of it/' said Old Daylight. " The old 
woman died first, and the old man died soon afterwards ; and, 
to my utter astonishment, I, who had starved myself to keep 
them and make them comfortable, found that the old dad had 
left me about five hundred a-year . an old brute ! " 

" What ! for leaving you his fortune] You are eccentric." 

" Not for that only," said the old man, sadly, " but for wast- 
ing my youth. When he died, I was thirty-eight or so. My 
love was dead. I had lost all generous enthusiasm, all hope. 
I gave up business, funded my money, and should have died of 
melancholy, save that I took to a hobby, and that was thief- 
catching and crime-watching. When I was a silversmith, I 
never had a week pass but some constable was inquiring at my 
shop after a thief, or bringing me a stolen spoon to identify 
through its engraved crest ; or else some thief or another would 
make a plant on me to rob me. I saw how clumsily the matter 
was done, and I began to read about crime. I found that 
almost all thief-takers, from Jonathan Wild downwards, were 
fools." 

" He had a great reputation," said Mr Horton. 

"Yes, he had; but he got it by a dodge," said Old Daylight. 
" He used to put some poor wretch up to commit a robbery, 
and others to watch him. He was then down upon them, and 
people wondered. Ah ! you don't know how little cleverness 
there is in the world. It 's beat out thin, like gold leaf, sir, . 
a very little goes a far way. In the course of my reading . 
criminal trials, the State trials, loads of law books, and other 
matters . I got interested in crime ; and reading in the news- 
papers one day of a very puzzling one, I put myself on the 
scent, by the aid of a friendly runner . I can see his red waist- 
coat and blue coat now . and brought the criminal before Sir 
Richard Birnie, while some fellows in the constabulary were 
dreaming about the matter. That gained me a good deal of 
applause, and gave me a new lease of life. Old Foxey . that 
was the celebrated Leadbetter, sir . ^was nearly dead with 
jealousy ; but I must do him the justice to say that he was the 
first to own that it was a very neat job . very neat indeed. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 25 

Afterwards I got attached to the office in certain cases. I was 
a'privileged person. I never take money for my work, and 
spend a good deal on it j but then it gives me occupation and 
life, sir . life." 

" You live in a fashionable quarter, Mr Forster. Did I not 
hear you say Queen Anne Street 1 " 

" Yes, I bought a house cheap there, sir ; and I was lucky 
enough to find a very pearl of a lodger . or, rather, two. Mr 
Edgar Wade will, sir, I hope, some day be King's Counsel, sir, 
and write K.C. after his name. He 's rising, sir . rising ; and 
he 's a mere baby . only thirty, sir ; and that, as you know, is 
a baby at law." 

" Ours is, indeed, a very slow profession," said the magistrate, 
" slow to rise in ; but it offers great rewards." 

" Very great, indeed. It 's one that I could have loved," 
said the old man. " To have been a limb of the law would have 
been my delight. Poor human nature, she must have some- 
thing to tickle her fancy." 

** Are we on the right track, now, about this Madame Mar- 
tin ? " asked Mr Horton, after a pause. 

" I don't know. Why, here we are at Vere Street ; we shall 
soon be at your door. There may be something in that Dutch 
sailor. He may have been the pilot-fish to the shark ; but we 
will see to-morrow. I will go home, and sleep upon it." 

And away the old boy trotted, when the cab stopped, after 
Mr Horton assuring him that he would be at his (Mr Forster's) 
disposal at any hour of the day or night, in reference to this 
case. 

Mr Horton paid the cab, and went home, thinking of the 
dead woman, Mr Sam Smiles, the cabman, drove to a public- 
house, where he met with a reporter of some newspaper, and a 
few choice spirits, to whom he retailed his adventures ; and 
told them, moreover, that the magistrate and all the police 
officers had taken him (Sam Smiles) into their confidence, and 
that he had put them on to the scent, which, however, he was 
wise enough to decline to point out. 

" I gave Muster Barnett, the literary gent here, the office as 
I drove up this morning," said Sam, triumphantly ; " and I 
dare say he 's known what to do with it," 



2G ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



** Pretty well/' said Bamett SlammerSy a dissipated-looking 
man. '^ The Evening Meal, sir, will tell you the tale ; and a 
very pretty little story I have made of it. Here it is." 

" And as nice a paragraph as I have ever seen turned out, 
Slammy, my boy," hiccupped another reporter. " Your health, 
Bamett." 

Here one of the choice spirits of the parlour read out. - 

'^ ' Horrible murder ! This morning, the peaceful and rural 
neighbourhood of Eensal-Green was thrown into the utmost 
state of consternation and alarm by the heart-rending discovery 
of the successful perpetration of a cruel and diabolical murder 
on the body of a beautiful female in the meridian rays of exist- 
ence. Awakened to the utmost vigilance by a watchful though 
unpaid guardian of the public peace ' " 

" That 's you, Sammy," interpolated Mr Slammers. 

" * The active and intelligent members ' " 

"That's a happy com . com . combination, Bamett," hic- 
cupped the other reporter. " That '11 live, Slammers. ' Active 
and intelligent.! ' Dash my buttons ! Shakespeare could not 
have done better." 

" ' Active and intelligent members of the New Police Force,' " 
continued the reader, " ' were immediately on the spot. In- 
spector Stevenson proceeded thither, to peaceful and rural 
Kensal-Green, with his mjrrmidons ' " . r- 

" What 's that 1 " said Sam the cabman. " Gaiters, or some- 
thing to eat 1 " 

" Classics, by Jingo ! " cried the admirer of Mr Slammers. 

'* Dash it ! what a neat way he has. Byronic, sir . ^by Gad, 
sir, quite Byronic ! " 

" * And there found the victim of this unparalleled and out- 
rageous brutality lying in her dismpted home, soaking in her 
gore. Acacia Villa, the name of the house, will henceforth 
become celebrated in that ghastly and crimson-stained record, 
the annals of crime. It was ascertained that the name of the 
victim is Estelle Martin, a lady of modest but of sufficient 
means, and of French extraction, if not of French birth. We 
have despatched an efficient and highly intelligent reporter to 
the spot, notwithstanding the" distance; and we hope to- 
morrow to put our readers in full possession of the latest par- 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 27 



ticulars of this extraordinary crime, which promises to equal 
in interest that of the Eed Bam. The victims, it is curioi.3 
to observe, have both the same surname. Estelle Martin, how- 
ever, was of mature age, though still in fullest vigour, while 
Maria was but young. The present victim had her head nearly 
severed from her body.' " 

" Come, now, that 's wonderful," said Sam ; " and all out of 
about .five words as I told him ; but, as far as I hears, she was 
stabbed in the back.'' 

** What matters, Barnett . what matters ? The woman was 
dead . ^that 's enough." 

" Quite enough," said the literary gentleman. 

And taking out his duplicating paper, now and then called 
flimsy, he headed the paper, ** The Kensal-Green Tragedy.. 
Further and astounding particulars ! " And having called for 
brandy and water for Samuel Smiles, and a glassful of the same 
mahogany-coloured fluid for himself, he sat down to listen to 
particulars from the driver of the yellow-bodied cab. 

In the meantime. Daylight had reached his home ; and 
entered, after knocking a peculiar and well-known knock. He 
was answered by his cook and housekeeper, a portly and 
inquisitive person, who received him with, " Where have you 
been, sir, all day long 1 " in a tone which plainly proved that 
she was not in the best of tempers ; for dinner had been spoiled, 
and that was not an unusual thing with Mr Tom Forster ; for 
in his own house, and in that alone, he had a very bad name. 
A secret is a secret, whether good or bad, anci breeds suspicion; 
and the owner and landlord oUNo. 73 Queen Anne Street, not 
choosing to let his pec^le know his peculiar profession, bad 
the most dire rumours afloat as to his doings. Why was he so 
mysteriously absent, sometimes for days together 1 What took 
him on those sudden journeys ? Why did he sometimes pack 
up a mysterious portmanteau, and disappear? The reader 
may, perhaps, guess; but the housekeeper had very grave 
suspicions, and would not have stayed in the house but for the 
very excellent wages which the old gentleman paid. 

" Is Mr Edgar Wade come home from chambers 1 " asked 
Forster, suddenly. '* I was detained in the country, and could 
not get home. Get me some tea, and be quick," 



28 ONE OF TWO j OR, 



There was that about his tone that rendered the woman 
silent and respectful. 

" Yes, sir ; Mr Wade has come home, and was asking for 
you. Mrs Wade is but middling, sir . not very well." 

" God bless me ! I 'm sorry for that. Bring tea at once." 

The old gentleman was as hungry as a hunter. 

" If you have any cold meat, bring it too," he said. 

And he entered the back dining-room . a handsome apart- 
ment, with a capital fire, and surrounded by books. There, 
sinking into a chair, the old gentleman divested himself of his 
Hessian boots, and fell musing over the events of the day. 
The tea and cold meat came, and were despatched ; and then, 
with his head still full of the complicated inductions of the 
case, Old Daylight sent his compliments to Mr Edgar Wade . 
and said that he would wait on him. With the housekeeper, 
that gentleman, who was the only person Mr Forster much 
cared for in the world . save, indeed, his mother, Mrs Wade . 
entered, and, having shaken the old gentleman's hand warmly, 
he sat down. He had in his hand the evening paper . the 
Meal . and a packet of letters, neatly tied with red tape. 

Mr Edgar Wade was a handsome, aristocratic-looking man, 
well dressed, with a black coat, a roll collar of velvet, a deep 
black satin stock, and his hair worn d, la Brutus . that is, cut 
short over his well-formed head . showing, however, a fine 
white forehead, massive, broad, and high. The rest of the face 
was in keeping : the eyes brilliant and rather deep-set, which 
gave them a penetrating glance ; the mouth very fine, and 
closely shut ; the lips somewhat thin, but of good colour ; the 
chin full ofsfirmness. He was compactly built, and about the 
middle height; but looked tall, being spare and muscular. 
His face bore lines of study, and his whole manner was that 
of a self-possessed gentleman of a noble profession, in which he 
had already made a mark. Mr Forster, who knew him for a 
most industrious and hard worker, and an excellent soif, had, 
indeed, left him all his property in his will, and had long looked 
upon him as his own. He was, however, too occupied with 
his new case to see how poorly and how pale the barrister 
looked ; but when he sat down, and the light fell upon his 
face, he noticed it, 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 29 

"Good gracious, Edgar!" he said; "what is the matter] 
You have been working too hard of late." 

" Perhaps so, sir," said Edgar ; " however, I have enough to 
make me. Here is my dear mother fallen suddenly into a 
most terrible and distressing iUness, from which, I fear, she 
will never recover." 

Mr Tom Forster, who had nourished, as we have said, a 
secret passion for the lady, jumped up from his seat with a 
bound. 

" Nothing so serious as that, my dear boy, I hope." 

Edgar shook his head sadly, and passed his white hand over 
his forehead. 

" Yes, indeed," he said, with a sad smile, which touched the 
old man to the heart ; " she is my only relation . is the only 
one whom I have ever known ; the only one who ever loved 
me, at least." 

"Tour father, then, is dead, long ago % " said Old Daylight, 
interrogatively ; . and the word brought back the dead woman 
he had seen. " Dead ! " he murmured. " Dead enough ! Will 
anything bring back the dead." 

" Would to God something could ! " said the barrister, with 
an earnestness that brought Tom Forster back from his wander- 
ings. " No j he is not dead, and she nearly is. Look here ! 
you see this paper 1 " 

Here he held out the Evening Meal, with his finger on a 
marked paragraph. 

" My mother was quite well till this evening. As she was 
reading the paper I always bring home for her, her eye fell 
upon that paragraph." 

And sure enough, Mr Edgar Wade's finger pointed out the 
very paragraph which had been received with such warm 
applause in the little circle ornamented by Mr Samuel Smiles, 
cabman ! 

Much as Mr Forster admired the press, he had been seldom 
so much astonished at its quickness as he was then. How 
men could get the type together and printed, let alone putting 
it into such wonderful English, was to him a matter of mystery. 
But all his wonder was absorbed in the more wonderful fact 
that the murder at Kensal-Green should have an effect, and 



ONE OF TWO ; 0^________. . - 

,a.i.t u.d nspef ^- , ,,. ...e home, a"* «'" ^. 
"Yes, Bir i Mi ***" '"^ «?" .ir-oot vctj «* , . 

.. God Ues. me ! I m "'^ "" . a tauter. 

^e, Old D.yl.ght ».t l-r^^e Wi't '%r.» »S 
.,d .aid that h. T.o«ld ""' "^ Tperioo Mr r." ^._ 
tot gentlen.1., who WM '""."S his mother M»^»^, 

»rf^or i« the wM-r%ta ddVtl'"""'' ""ire^th; 
entered, uid, having .h >ke» the oM | _^,^..g paper 
he eat ao»B. He had m h» hmd ^^^ tape. 

Jf»i_aad a p.eh.t of »"=,»«* S.tooratle-l"»l.\»S5 
Mr Edgar Wad. . . l""*;""";!! collar of «^«^, i, cut 
..il j...d. with . Waoli coi4, a rou __ ...w,--th»t le, ;«_ 



- he never 

-r hugged 

IS much 

-.'..at if bia 

: xould at 

1 For3ter, 

...'.. The 
'.am liter, 
.anything 
..i, or tho 
i ^yiiiti-.'l 
- ;, inilfcf.fl ! 

.'. tU Jnw« 

-. ' F>l-ar, in 

.^':,'s'l,hit tt'ilt W3M 

-..-.'V-n, xtal tjti'-, 'It 

- '/T'UiiAry ti.U.'i, hi 

.. La/1 tu:fi-:.l hiz^.t. 

.: liij:iiry uul i/f^f-.y 

.rfeW fid'! UiiriS^ytiijte "/f 

rvrta ; but th>:iH w^h 
rili-ftic ^u'/MiiUrn, ur 
;», or evfeii 'it (Jai»titi(i 
; nor even Uwiwci^I'i"^ 
icli have dvtfxwi*^ t^ 



30 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



SO sad an effect^ upon the peaceful house of Mr Thomas 
Forster, who^ with his brain full of his own inductive process, 
was about nnravelling the mystery. Mrs Wade must, of course, 
have known something about that woman. Here, then, was a 
clue that Mr Brownjohn would have given his ears for ! 

The old man's eyes wandered over the paragraph, and his 
mind noted, in its own quiet way, the error at the end ; but 
all that the philosophic detective could ask was, " Did your 
mother know her, then ] " 

" Know her I know the Widow Martin ! of course she did. 
She was intimately connected with her; and she no sooner 
read of her dreadful death, than, with a scream, she fell in a 
fit. I rushed to her, and found her hand convulsively clasped 
upon that paragraph. Then I knew the cause.'' 

''Knew the cause?'' stammered Old Daylight, more and 
more puzzled ; " knew the cause ? " 

'' Of course I did. Madame Martin was my nurse 1 '' 



CHAPTER V. 

EDGAR WADE SEEKS AN ADVISER. 

A SECRET, as was sagely said in the last chapter, is a secret ; 
and, whether it be good or bad, is often a trouble to the 
owner, even if he wishes to conceal it for honourable purposes. 
So it was with Old Forster. Events had succeeded themselves 
at such a rate during that eventful day, that, as he followed 
Edga-r Wade up his own handsome stone staircase, he had need 
of undergoing a process . not unknown to him . of mentally 
shaking and pulling himself together. 

" Hallo ! " said he to himself, " I had nearly let the cat out of 
the bag ! * Why is this old fellow so interested in this particular 
murder?' my boy will ask ; for, although he is as innocent as 
a lamb, he is a barrister, and sharp . dev'lish sharp ! " 

All persons have a belief, which you shall not tear from them 
with red-hot pincers, that their own barrister, and particular 
lawyer or physician, know a great deal more than any one 
else's barrister, lawyer, or physician. It is a portion of our 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 31 

conceit. Let us borrow Old Daylight's expression as we for a 
moment pause over it, and exclaim, " Poor human nature ! " 

But, sharp as Mr Edgar Wade was, he was so absorbed in 
his own misfortune, and his mother's sickness, that he never 
gave one thought to Daylight's agitation, and it is therefore to 
be presumed that he did not notice it. Old Forster hugged 
himself for his lucky escape, for he loved his hobby as much 
as he loved his secretly adopted son ; and he feared that if his 
occupation as detective were found out, Edgar Wade would at 
once cut him. 

"A high-spirited young chap like that," said Forster, 
" wouldn't go to consort with an old thief-taking, crime-track- 
ing, murder-marking individual like myself ! Not a bit. The 
wonder is he 's never found it out. But he 's a tip-top barrister, 
he is . none of your Old Bailey prowlers. If he has anything 
to do with crime, it's the forging of a duke's will, or the 
running away of a baronet's wife with a young and spirited 
marquis . ^that 's the game for him ! High game, indeed ! 
None of your low, vulgar murders." 

But, after all, crime is a vulgar matter j and so the more 
reflective Daylight thought as he sat down in Edgar Wade's 
easy chair, and glanced round the barrister's room, Edgar, in 
the meantime, let down the flap of an antique cabinet, and, 
placing the light near him, arranged his letters properly, and 
then prepared to speak. 

The room was well and substantially furnished, but still was 
the room of a student j although vases of flowers, and one or 
two feminine knick-nacks seemed, to the ordinary mind, to 
betray a woman's hand. But no woman had helped Edgar. 
His mind was feminine, delicate, fond of luxury and pretty 
adornments; while it was, on the other hand, vigorous and 
full of life. But there was more of the student than the man 
of the world in the room. Two or three fine mezzotints of 
judges were framed, and adorned the room ; but there were 
none of Messrs Fores' * celebrated pugilistic encounters, or 
portraits of celebrated fighters or wrestlers, or even of Captain 
Barclay walking his world-femed match ; nor even those capital 
caricatures of the beaux of the day, which have descended to 
our time ; nor of the spirited hunting or stage-coach adventures 



32 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



then published by H. Aiken. Nor were there any boxing- 
gloves, single-sticks, and crossed foils in that room, as the 
observant eye of the old detective did not fail to note. Near 
one window was Edgar's standing desk, which he had brought 
from Cambridge with him ; and above it a copper-plate of his 
old college, St Blazius ; and on the side-shelf of the desk were 
recent editions of Coke and Blackstone, and the celebrated law- 
book, " Sugden on Vendors," from which it is to be presumed 
Mr Edgar had been taking notes. 

Mr Tom Forster sat down with some degree of relief, and 
looked round him. Suddenly he called out . 

" But Mrs Wade, Edgar . if she is ill or worse " 

" If Mrs Wade rings," said Edgar, in a cold, dry tone, " she 
will be attended to. The nurse will go and see her." 

Nurse ! Had he left her to a nurse, and he such an affec- 
tionate fellow ? Well, trouble had turned his head, strong as 
it was, and young as he was. Poor human nature ! 

" Now, look here," said Old Forster, bursting all over with 
suppressed filial affection . for whatever irritation he felt for 
the deceased Forster p^re, who, instead of enjoying himself like 
a rational being, had kept his money a 'secret, and made his 
son work like a slave, Daylight had a tender heart, full of 
real reverence for old people, and none the less because he was 
old and grey-headed himself . 'f Now, look here, Edgar, you 're 
put out, you know you are. Keep your temper, my boy. 
Why call your dear mother . and a better lady never trod 
neat's leather . Mrs Wade ? Why not, as always, mother 1 " 

" Why 1 " answered Edgar, still coldly. " Why ? " 

** Look here " 

Mr Forster was again about to reply, but the barrister 
stopped him. 

" Why, my dear old friend . and here, I confess, I am com- 
pelled to plead to you as my old friend . becaiise Mrs Wade is 
not my mother I " 

" Poor human 1 " 

The old Bow Street officer did not finish his phrase ; as he 
felt a fly might have knocked him down with an extension of 
one of its hind legs ! He recovered himself, however. 

«<Now, look here," he began again; " you 're a clever fellow, 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 33 

Edgar . a devlish clever fellow; but you work too hard, as 
they say in the slang dictionary" . (Forster was about to 
apologise for his too frequent use of the vulgar tongue, which 
he picked up in his work, and he put his fault on the slang 
dictionary) . " you 're off your head, you are ; you don't know 
what you say. Not your mother ! " 

Old Daylight rubbed his hands as if he had said something 
utterly impossible to refute . as that the earth goes round the 
sun, or two and two make four. 

" It's impossible," he added. 

The barrister merely looked at him with a quiet, sad, pity- 
ing expression. 

**It seems impossible," he said; "but, nevertheless, it is 
true." 

After this a fly might, after knocking Old Daylight down, 
have trampled him to pieces. Here were the two people he 
most admired in the world rejecting each other. Here was a 
pattern son throwing his mother to the winds. As for Forster, 
he could not believe it. His inductive process might have 
failed . the British constitution have broken up . ^the world 
itself have come to an end sooner. For Old Forster loved 
strongly where he did love, and never loved without respect. 

But somehow, beyond this terrible new revelation, inextric- 
ably connected with it, arose the ghastly phantom of Estelle 
Martin, with its gaunt, thin figure, and its clasped hands. 

" Go on, Edgar, go on. I must only listen," was all he could 
say. 

" Was there anybody ever so troubled as I am ? " said the 
barrister, fiercely. " Heaven seems to have a spite against me 
. against ME only." 

He said this fiercely, as if he were very angry with heaven. 

"Against me more than against any one else," he repeated. 

" Heaven knows how I loved that woman . how, from the first 

time I could work, I sacrificed for her my energy, my talent, 

and my youth. I knew there was some dark story of wrong 

. ^that I could never see my father ; and so I loved her more. 

I constituted myself my unknown father's judge ; . I blamed 

him for his desertion, his cruelty j in everything I was on my 

mother's side ; and she . she from my very babyhood betrayed 





34 ONE OF TWO ; OB, 



me ; she covered me with kisses, like those of Judas ; her very 
love for me was hypocrisy ; her seeming devotion to me was a 
cunning lie." 

The young man walked up and down his room, and fanned 
his forehead with the papers he held, as if burning with heat. 

Old Daylight looked at him with astonishment. But it is 
worth whUe noting, in the study of the man, that his inductive 
process had already commenced, and that he was already in 
some way connecting all this with Madame Martin. 

" And why was this 1 " continued Edgar Wade ; " why was 
a poor little baby, a child at its most defenceless time, thus a 
prey to the cunning of that most cunning of all things . a 
wicked woman who is a mother ? " 

"He knows the world, he does," whispered Tom Forster to 
himself. 

"Because" . ^here the barrister checked himself, and spoke 
deliberately, as if pleading before a jury ; while, as if to mark 
every word he said with a due weight, he paused where most 
emphatic*.*^ because, by that overloading me with so much care 
and love, making me the object of so much seeming fondness, 
she could sooner rob me and deceive others . deceive others 
for her own sake . rob me for the sake of her child of shame 
.rob me, me of a noble name, of well-descended ancestors, of 
an inmiense fortune." 

"'Tis she," muttered Old Daylight. "I see' it now; the 
links draw closer and closer." 

The barrister had reached his climax, and sat down over- 
whelmed by being the victim of so much treachery, of so deep 
a plot. 

Then Old Daylight, after due reflection, began to speak. 

" My dear Edgar, look here . I can see pretty clearly what 
you mean." Then he checked hiniself, thinking, no doubt, that 
he must not say too much. "But are you sure of this ? The 
charge is a grave one, the accusation most terrible ; but to 
have carried this scheme out is to suppose Mrs Wade the 
heroine of a villainous romance . to presume that she had a 
coolness and an audacity we rarely find in women. She must 
have been helped in her wickedness . ^had accomplices, friends, 
perhaps her husband." 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 35 



**Her husbaudl" said Edgar, bitterly. "No; I took all 
for granted as it was. I did not suppose her a widow, if you 
did." 

Edgar Wade knew very well the meaning of a bar sinister/ 

The barrister's face turned almost scarlet with shame, and 
then grew livid and pale. 

" Heaven help you, Edgar," said Old Daylight, calmly, " if 
you were the victim of such a plot ! Your youth embittered 
thus I " 

" But it is no longer so," said the barrister. " Retribution 
begins to work. We will instal ourselves in our true seat. 
We will be no longer the victims of these miserable plot- 
ters." 

The old philosopher sat and reflected ; and his eye, micro- 
scopic in its observations, ran over the apartment, mechanically 
taking an inventory. He could not help that. There, for 
instance, thrown down on the drawing-room table, with the 
black kid gloves tossed by its side, was the barrister's well- 
worn hat ; there. but the hat was enough. That, somehow, 
put Forster in mind of out-door work, and his own business^ 
He knew he was the very man to help Edgar at this moment; 
but how to do it without revealing his precious hobby ? 

" My dear boy," he began, " it seems to me that we are 
wasting time. You asked me up here, it seems, to consult 
with me. Well, I perhaps can advise you as well as any man; 
at any rate, I am entirely devoted to you. Now, look here. 
You have told me a wonderful story. A woman whom I 
thought an angel has turned out just the reverse. Poor human 
nature ! But let that pass. You are a lawyer, and know what 
law is. How have you learnt all this? Where are your 
proofs 1 " 

The decided, business-like tone of the old man rather startled 
the barrister, who, till then, had thought him a pre-ocoupied, 
pottering old boy, with no very great amount of mind ; and 
who had only consulted him because he had no one else to 
consult. But he was ready with his answer. 

" I know what law is. I have known this secret for three 
weeks. I don't act suddenly. I have moral and important 
proofs . ^proofs so strong, so undeniable, that, with one or two 



'M\ ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



\\\\\\U (Viiiu H living witness, no jury in the world would heai- 
l.ilii H luniutint But that word she wiU never speak. The 
\\ iildw Murtia has been sacrificed to keep me still where I 

.. I Hm it all," muttered Old Daylight. 
** I know that she would have spoken that word. I have 
kim\ lior when she left her chapel. She promised me that she 
wcniUl tell all ; but now I am at the mercy of the world. My 
lather will deny me. Mrs Wade will disown her deeds : she 
would even with the rope round her neck." 

Old Forster shuddered. That neck, which he could have 
thought fit to wear a chain of the purest gold, a carcanet of 
rubies, to be touched by the vile fingers of the hangman ! And 
she was his mother, Edgar's mother . at least, he thought her 
so. 

" She would deny all," continued the barrister, " I am quite 
sure. I have proofs ; but this unhappy crime has struck me 
down, and turned those proofs into unrealities. One stroke of 
a razor across a woman's throat, and farewell all my hopes." 
" It wasn't a razor ! " said Old Daylight, hastily. 
Luckily, the barrister did not notice him, or his secret was 
very nigh out. Then hurrying to cover up the little hole from 
which it might have escaped, he cried . 

"Explain to me, my dear Edgar, this terrible mystery." 
("I see it all," thought the old fox.) "Sometimes, you know, 
old heads are better than young ones. Perhaps I can advise 
you." 

Mr Edgar "Wade cast a look upon Old Daylight, which, but 
for its utter vacuity and helplessness, would have been some- 
what rude ; for it certainly had in it no particular warmth of 
trust or confidence. Then he walked up and down the room 
as if uncertain ; then he went to his cabinet, and sitting down, 
fell into a brown study. 

Forster fidgeted terribly, for he was on thorns to begin his 
inductive process in aid of the young fellow whom he loved 
bc»t in all the world, lie rubbed one worsted stocking against 
the other ; pulled up one slipper after the other ; looked at 
h\n never-failing watch ; counted his huge bunch of seals ; and, 
fltmlly, commenced . 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 37 



" My dear Edgar, you were about to say "- 



The barrister held up his hand as if for silence. 

" Yes," he said, " I will tell you all j . any confidant, in a 
matter like this, is better than none." 

" Complimentary," thought Forster ; " but oh ! if he could 
but tell what I know about it ! " 

" You see," said Edgar, " that, as a gentleman and a man of 
honour, I was at first somewhat to blame in my method of 
finding this out. Three weeks ago I came home and found 
Mrs Wade, whom I then thought my mother, out on a visit. 
I wanted some title-deeds in which were narrated certain in- 
cidents which, to amuse my dear mother, as I then thought 
her, I had shown her. I could not find them, and I went into 
the room Mrs Wade occupies, and to her desk, thinking that 
she had referred to them. The desk was open, and there I 
found these papers ; and my eye fell upon the words, * My 
darling Eugenie.' The name was my mother's ; the writing, I 
felt sure, was my father's. I determined to read them." 

" You did wrong, young man," said Old Forster, severely. 

**I know I did, and I have been severely punished. Even 
in my trouble and shame I was happy till then ; but now . 
but now, it seems as if the firm earth was sinking under me, 
and I had no foothold and no helping hand to be stretched out 
to help me." 

The young man . so bold, so brave, so cold, so hard and 
manly . covered his face with his thin, white hands ; and 
Forster thought he saw tears trickling through the fingers. 
He himself was moved ; he forgot his inductive philosophy, 
and blew his nose violently with his red bandana : it was not 
to conceal his emotion, it was his manner of weeping. The 
awful sound brought Edgar Wade to himself. Taking up a 
bundle of papers, duly arranged, he threw them to Old Day- 
light, saying. 

**Here are the letters . read them." 



38 ONB OF TWO ; OR, 

CHAPTER VI. 

LOVE LETTERS WRIT FOR OTHER EYES THAN THINE / 

Old Forster took the letters, but with a delicate repugnance. 
Tradesman as he had been, and crime-tracker as he was, he had, 
at the bottom of his heart, a fund of goodness and delicacy 
which many gentlemen want. 

" You had better read them to me, Edgar, my boy,'* he said. 
** My eyes are not very good. But, pardon me, let me look at 
the writing." 

The letters were well preserved, and docketed j written on 
large quarto letter-paper, in a delicate, cultivated hand. The 
ink was faded, and the paper yellow with age. 

"You are quite right, Mr Forster," said Edgar, touched 
with his delicacy. " I will read them. You see how they 
commence : they are always pretty nearly the same. Some- 
times ' dear ' gives place to * beloved ; ' but these are minutiae, 
which do. not concern the case in point. 

^^' My dear Eugenie, . How I wish I were again in France 
with you, my sweet one ! But, alas ! it will never be.' " 

" Mrs Wade was Eugenie. Was she French ? " asked Old 
Daylight. " I had never observed that." 

"No," answered Edgar, "her accent was perfect. Most 
Frenchmen never learn English, but some French ladies speak 
it as well as we do. Eugenie Antra was the daughter of a 
good family, which had been reduced, and kept a ;pmsion in 
Paris, at which English young ladies of the highest families 
were brought up. The wars with England scattered these 
boarders, and reduced the families from riches almost to 
poverty, so I have since found ; but not before my father, an 
English nobleman, visiting his little sister, had seen and fallen 
in love with Eugenie." 

" Good," murmured Old Daylight. " That will account for 
something." 

Everything, indeed, accounted for something in the old 
philosopher's inductive process. 

Edgar continued reading. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 39 

" ' Your letter made my sad heart joyful. So you forgive 
me all ! Alas ! I am more unhappy than you ; but mhlesse 
oblige. You do not know my entourage . ^my father, my family 
. they are people to be known and to be dreaded. I am 
married indeed, and against my will. The vows I registered in 
Heaven were for you, my Eugenie ; and these we solemnised, 
in those happy days in Prussia, by a marriage ceremony 
made for nobles and kings. But this my tyrant father, and 
more tyrant social laws in England, of that society that I so 
much despise, will not acknowledge. I have been, as you 
know, forced into marriage. I could almost hate the pale-faced 
girl-the English miss-iwlio, with a large fortune tied to 
her unfortunate self, has been only too glad to bear my name. 
She is my wife, according to English law; but you, Eugenie, 
are my wife before Heaven . my Left-handed Bride . ^and the 
left hand is nearest the heart.' " 

** That may be French reasoning, but it won't satisfy English 
law," said Forster, wiping his eye-glass. 

" It is enough that it was written to a Frenchwoman who 
believed its sophistry," said Edgar, dryly. " Here is another 
letter. I will only read the portions which concern us, and 
you will see that the plot unfolds." 

*^ ' And am I a father, dearest Eugenie ? Have I a son by 
the woman, the wife ' . ^the word is underlined . ' I love best of 
all the world . ^her living image ? Oh, that I had wings to fly 
to her and kiss her, and embrace her in her sorrow. Oh, my 
darling . ^my darling ! Alas I to overwhelm me with misfor- 
tune, with sorrow, with regret, my English lady has also 
brought me a son. How I turn with repugnance from this, 
my lawful heir, to the child of my soul-wife, of my Eugenie ! 
How I shudder with anxiety, with regret, with remorse, with 
sorrow, when I look forward to the future of those two poor 
children ! Ah, Eugenie . if I dared ' " 

*' Poor helpless babes ! By St George, by St Bridget, by the 
very pump at Aldgate ! " cried Old Daylight, " the plot begins 
to unfold. Poor human nature ! . forced into a comer, she does 
anything and ever3rthing ! What is the date of that letter ? " 

"Upon my word, Mr Forster, you are singularly acute," 
said the barrister, turning on the old fellow a searching look. 



40 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



" You see, I . ^I am particular about dates," said the inductive 
philosopher, with an awkward excuse. 

But the younger man seemed at once to have forgotten what 
he said, for he turned to the postmark, and said . 

"This is from Mayence, December 1798. You see," said 
he to Old Daylight, in an explanatory way, "the importance 
of this letter. My father is forced to marry when he has 
already given away his heart to Mdllel Eugenie Antra. He 
adores this woman. It is the old, old story, which arises from 
our restless passions and follies. The man adores his mistress, 
and detests his wife. They both become mothers at about the 
same time, and the love that he bears severally to the mothers 
he carries to the account of the children. He is madly fond of 
my brother . he hates me." 

*'Yes, he hates you," said the inductive philosopher, with 
a pleased look. The story was being fitted together before 
his old eyes, like a puzzle-map by which they teach children 
geography. 

" He hates me," said the barrister, touching himself on the 
chest with his white finger, and speaking bitterly. " He hates 
me, against all laws, both human and divine." 

*^How curious it is," thought Old Daylight. "Here's a 
man of thirty quite indignant at the wrongs of an infant^ 
which, as an infant, he neither knew nor felt. But there . 
what shall we say 1 . poor human nature ! " 

" The last letter," continued the barrister, " which I read 
ends with a dash, as if it gave vent to a half-interrupted 
thought. Upon that thought lies half my troubles . or let us 
say all. To that thought, the Widow Martin " 

" I see . I see," said the old man, impatiently. " Come, let 
us have some more extracts, if they do not pain you." 

He was anxious to unravel the mystery. He knew the end 
but yet he wanted confirmation of his suspicions. 

Edgar continued. 

" All the immediately subsequent letters bear traces of the 
intense fondness of my father for this child. my half-brother 
_this " 

" Hush 1 " said Old Daylight ; " at least, the poor child was 
guiltless." 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 41 

** Poor fellow ! my heart bleeds for him," returned the bar- 
rister ; " but not less for my helpless self. Here isjone dated 
about three months afterwards. 

" * I am always thinking, my Eugenie, of the future of my 
son . of our son. He is my only care. Ah, how I wish that 
the power of the nobility was as strong as it was of old in this 
country.' 

" This is dated from Normandy. It would seem that my 
mother was of delicate health ; and being detained abroad by 
the war, she expected to be confined abroad." 

" I quite see it. Capitally conceived," said Old Daylight, 
cracking his fingers in delight. . " Very prettily done." Then 
he checked himself, and called himself ** an old fool " behind 
his sUk bandana. 

" ^ This son, my Eugenie,' " Edgar continued, " ' will be like 
us both. From his mother he will inherit those heaux yevx, so 
full of vivacity . that fine complexion, that wit, that cleverness. 
From his father, ancient blood, pride, valour, and indepen- 
dence ; the sentiment of grand old races, which descends, with 
good lineage^ as the coldness of the mountain stream runs 
down into the valleys.' " 

As he read this, the young man held himself up boldly, as 
if he, too, and from a more legitimate source, could claim those 
qualities. 

Forster was delighted to think that his secretly adopted son 
and heir was the lawful descendant of such a nobleman. 

" ' But what will be his future ? God, my Eugenie, must 
give to this poor child all that can deck the offspring of so 
pure, so strong a love as ours ; while the protected little one . 
he who is bom to the purple, and is safely nourished under the 
segis of our English law, may be, is indeed to me, a monster.'" 

" / am that monster 1 " cried the barrister, with the hard 
voice of suppressed anger. Then he continued. 

"'Eugenie . ^Eugenie . will you not have mercy on your 
child and his father ? Will you not ? I conjure you by your 
faith, in which you will do no sin that is not pardonable, enter 
into my little arrangements. All is ready. My lady is now 
at Eouen, and has a Norman nurse ; my valet, a Swiss fellow, is 
as faithful as a dog . as dumb, too . and as secret as the grave.' " 



42 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



" * My lady ! " muttered the old philosopher. " Pray go on, 
sir. Go on, Edgar, my boy ; it is interesting 1 '' 

*^ This passionate appeal,'' said the barrister, ^'seems to have 
been the final one. Eugenie. -or Mrs Wade, as she called her- 
self in England . ^seems to have yielded to the entreaties of my 
father ; for the next letter, dated a week later, is very explicit. 

" ' My vfdet, Gustavo, of whom I have spoken, will give you 
this. He is a Swiss, and speaks German, French, and English 
equally badly; but you can understand him, and, what is 
more, you can trust him. He will bring with him a yoimg 
Boulognese girl, a fisher wife, and her baby, who is about the 
age of your own. This young woman will be a ready imple- 
ment to all we want ; and only requires to be paid well, to be 
fed well, and to dress well, and she will do anything, as most 
of the lower class women will.' " 

'< Dash his aristocratic impudence ! " said Old Daylight. 
" Poor human nature ! " 

"*Your child will come to Normandy, where so many 
children are brought up, where his rival is peacefully sucking 
his Norman milk ; and then an accident, or a storm, or some- 
thing of that sort . for fortune helps the bold . will make the two 
nurses take shelter in the same auberge . in the same room. 

*' ' There will be a quarrel among the people. there always 
is when people drink well, and Gustave shall manage that . 
and in that quarrel and fright the children will be changed.' " 

" A good plot ! a very neat plot, my lord," said Forster, 
cracking his fingers. 

Edgar continued . 

" ' Gustave and the young woman, whose name is Estello 
Martin, and who is the lawful wife, dear soul, of an intelligent 
animal who provides us with fish on this coast ' " 

" Ah ! my faith ! that fellow Brownjohn has something in 
his clue," said Old Daylight to himself, with a feeling of 
chagrin. Then he comforted himself with the rem^embrance . 
**No ; it is broken, for Madame Martin was a widow." 

These thoughts did not interrupt Edgar, who read on . 

" * Gustave and the nurse will furnish you with clothes 
exactly the same in material and pattern as those worn by 
Monsieur. They purchase these things at warehouses ; and 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 43 

every rag, every stitch will be the same, and marked the same, 
each alike with the coronet which, one day, your boy. owr 
boy . ^will wear with such pride. That, my Eugenie, will be 
your reward for acting so nobly ! ' " 

** Nobly ! " thought Forster. "Well, there are two ways of 
looking at everything." 

" ' And you will console yourself with the thought that your 
offspring . ^the dearest part of you . will be often in my arms, 
always in my heart, and covered with my kisses. As to the 
other^ I know your truth and goodness. You will cherish him 
as your own. You will again and again, every day, my 
Eugenie, prove to me how you love me. Do not think of the 
guilt of tliis : it deceives no one, it can hurt no one. The heir 
to the estates and name I bear is my child, of my dearest and 
best blood . and yow blood is better than the puddle of a shop- 
keeper, although he has enriched himself, as did my respected 
English fither-in-law. The Autras were Knights of Aquitaine. 
The two nations so often at war will be joined in our issue, 
who shall, one day, sit in the English House of Peers. Heaven, 
if we succeed in so many difficult paths, and in such unforeseen 
circumstances, will smile on our endeavour and bless our 
deed.' '' 

" He knows how to plead with a woman, that fellow there," 
said Daylight, pointing to the letter. " By St Bridget, St 
Botolph, and the Bank of England, he is clever.'' 

Then, with a revulsion of feeling, he said . 

"Unhappy man, he makes Heaven an accomplice of his 
crime." 

Edgar shuddered, as if cold. 

" You see," he continued, " the woman seems to have re- 
jected the idea at first ; and then, miserable creature, to have 
yielded." 

" Softly, softly ! " said Old Forster. " It appears to me that 
your father was much more to blame than your mother . beg 
pardon, than Madame Wade." 

" Yes," said Edgar, with a violent gesture. " Yes ; men are, 
in the incipient circumstances of crime, more guilty than 
women. It is for men to propose, for women to reject. He, 
the Earl of Chesterton ". 



44 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



'' The Earl of Chesterton 1 " cried Forster. « What ! that 
tip-top swell who holds his head so high 1 " 

" The very same," said the young man, with a certain pride. 

" The Earl of Chesterton has thought out and laid the lines 
of all this plot. But, then, he has something to excuse him ; 
and it is curious that I feel no hatred towards him. He has 
his excuse . intense love for this woman, intense love for hia 
child, a passion which he could not control. All the love that 
he felt he has shown ; and, at least, he has not, like this miser- 
able creature, deceived me for thirty years. Moreover, he has 
been cruelly punished." 

" Punished ! How so ? " said Old Daylight. " I saw him. 
at Ascot with the royal party; he looked at a distance as 
well as you . young and well-looking . ^with his son, Lord - 
Wimpole." 

" I am Lord Wimpole," said Edgar, proudly. " You, at least, 
should believe so." 

" I do," returned Old Daylight, hastily. " But how has the 
Earl been punished 1 " 

" I will tell you. Here are one or two more extracts : . 

" * Dearest Eugenie,. All went well. The nurses met. 
There was a storm, or a threatened one ; they took refuge in 
a cabaret. Your nurse's husband was there, and pretended to 
be . or, egad, I think the fellow ivas . ^jealous of Gustave. At 
any rate, there was a desperate quarrel, and in the row the 
babies were successfully changed. Our nurse went into hys- 
terics, and knew nothing about the matter ; neither knows the 
fisherman Martin anything, for he was very fairly drunk. The 
secret rests, then, with Gustave, Estelle Martin, and our 
two selves. Providence has aided us ; let us thank God for 
His goodness. Now, dearest, I shall be happy . as happy as 
I can be without you. From time to time you shall have news 
of your . of our son.' 

" Now, what do you say 1 " asked Edgar Wade, triumphantly. 

" Upon my soul, upon my affidavit," cried Old Daylight, in 
triumph, " you are not the son of Mrs Wade ! " 

Edgar grasped his hand warmly. 

" Now," said he, " listen. Now comes the punishment. The 
letters continue for years, and from the Earl always as fondly. 



A LEFT-HAKDED BRiDE. 45 



There is much news of my rival, who is growing, we are told, 
a fine fellowi He hunts, he fishes, he shoots ; while I am for 
ever at eternal books. But at last the letters are interrupted. 
Then come some of reproach. 

" * Alas ! Eugenie, alas ! at last I know all. I herewith 
send you a deed of settlement, which will make you rich : 
would that it would make you happy ! A friend of your own 
nation . cruel as friends are . ^has told me all. You have been 
watched ; the visits of the officer / ' . underlined . * have been 
noted ; and, alas ! / have seen him enter your house. I have 
now no more doubts. You, for whom I have pawned my very 
soul . you, whose faith I could have sworn to. you, whom I 
loved above all . you have deceived me. I have been guilty 
for nothing. I am assured that you have deceived me for 
nothing. We part for ever. I will receive no letters from 
you. The grave has, as it were, closed over our love, leaving 
me with the poisoned arrow of this doubt . Is this child, for 
whom I have sacrificed so much, my own ? ' " 



CHAPTER VII. 

^^ BROTHERS IN BLOOD^ BUT WIDE-DIVORCED IN SOU L,^^ 

Old Forster, called Daylight . who, being an inductive philo- 
sopher, understood complications as well as most men . laid 
his head upon his two hands, and rocked backwards and for- 
wards, muttering to himself his favourite phrase, "Poor human 
nature," several times. Then he began to think that, con- 
sidering all things, man was an unhappy animal ; that when 
he meddled with he generally muddled matters ; and that no 
more proper or more intense punishment to Philip Stanfield, 
the proud Earl of Chesterton, could have been found than that 
which, after all his plots and deceptions, left him uncertain of 
his son . nay, uncertain if, indeed, the ancestral blood that he 
so much talked of flowed in the veins of him who would wear 
the coronet of Chesterton. 






46 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



<'0h," said Mr Tom Foreter, as he thought over all 
this . 

" ' Oh, what a tangled web we weave, 
When first we praotige to deceive.' " 

But he was not making rhymes : he was merely quoting the 
literary baronet, Sir Walter Scott's poem of " Marmion," which 
was at the time very popular. 

The more Old Daylight thought over the matter, the more 
sure he felt of his inductive process. Poor Edgar Wade, over- 
come with conflicting emotions, was silent. Old Forster put 
his hand kindly on his shoulder, and said to him . 

"Edgar, my boy, if every one else in the world should 
desert you, I never will. I have no doubt of your story. I 
will do all that patient research can do to prove it true. There 
are means to do so you little think of. But now we had better 
go to bed. I will wait on you to-morrow morning, and we will 
then consult how to proceed. 

" I am not tired,'' said Edgar, yet saying the words most 
wearily. " I am at the end of my tether. What am I to do 1 
Estelle Martin is dead . dead ; and her secret is with her, and 
will be buried with her in the grave. Poor woman ! . it was 
too heavy for her, and she would have confessed. It tormented 
her. But there ! " cried the barrister, impatiently, " what can 
ydu do against luck? Some common, money-seeking ruffian, 
for the sake of a few pounds, breaks into the house and mur- 
ders my chief witness. Fortune is against me.'' 

" Money-seeking scoundrel," repeated Forster, emphasising 
the word " money." " Are you sure of that, Edgar 1 " 

The question made the barrister start. His eyes glared for 
a moment, with a meaning look, upon the old man. 

" Do you mean " he cried. " But no, the suggestion is too 

horrible. No, that cannot be, as I well know. Perhaps," he 
said, suddenly, " I may yet have hopes. Estelle must have 
had some letters and papers . perhaps some .deeds even, 
executed by my father. We must search the house. 

Alas ! Old Forster too well knew that the poor woman had 
not left a scrap of paper. All her writings had disappeared 
as entirely as those of Mr William Shakespeare, poet and drama- 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 47 



tist, of glorious memory, whose works he, the amateur detective, 
was very fond of reading. 

"Papers,'' he muttered to himself. "No, there is not a 
drawer that I have not ransacked, nor a cupboard that I have 
not looked into. I even ripped up the cover of a capital 
horsehair mattress. That is what th& murderer of Madame 
Martin was after. He found the papers, and burnt them in 
the kitchen grate over the head of the dead woman. I am 
right as a trivet. That is the way when one takes to the pro- 
fession scientifically. There is no guess-work with me." 

"There may be some hope there," added he, aloud, like an 
old hypocrite as he was, when he well knew there was none. 
" Have you no other hopes ] " 

" Except in appealing to the Earl himself, none. After all, 
he was not so bad. He settled on me, it would seem, a hand- 
some income. I was well educated, as you know. Mdlle. 
Eugenie Antra would come over to England. She settled at 
Richmond, near London; and I was sent to Rugby. I re- 
member a fine, noble-looking man, to whom the head master 
paid great deference »'. . 

" Clergymen, as a rule, are tuft-hunting fellows," interpolated 
Daylight 

" This gentleman said he was a friend of my father's. He 
was, indeed, his best friend and worst enemy : he was himself." 

" I should just like to see some of his writing, to compare it 
with that of the Earl. I have no doubt it is the same." 

"You shall see," said Edgar. "I have ascertained that. 
The Earl is a gentleman of the old school, and with him noblesse 
oblige. Like the great Duke of Wellington, our present Prime 
Minister . ^long may he live I . ^he answers every letter sent to 
him. Here is one received in answer to a scientific friend of 
mine, Dr Richards, upon some trifling question. The Earl,' 
you know, is President of the Antiquarian Society." 

Here Edgar produced a courteous reply, commencing, " The 
Earl of Chesterton presents his compts. to Dr Richards and 
. . . ." It was written in the stiff, formal, and complimentary 
manner required by ordinary politeness ; but there was quite 
sufficient in it to identify the handwriting. But, somehow, 
Daylight did not seem to recognise that fact. 



48 ONE OP TWO I OR, 



"I wish you would let me take these two writings and 
compare them down-stairs. I have a magnifier down there, 
and my eyes are bad/' urged the cunning old fellow. 

" Very good, only return them to me," said the barrister, 
carelessly tossing over the papers to Old Forster. ** They may 
be of no use now." 

But old Tom Forster, who knew better, carefully selected one 
of the least important letters, and put it, with that of the 
EarPs, in a vast black leather pocket-book, which he always 
carried with him. He had hardly done so, when a light knock 
at the door was heard, and a nurse entering softly, as if she 
still trod the sick chamber, told Edgar Wade that his mother 
was somewhat better, and wished to speak to him. 

** Ask her," said Tom Forster, in a whisper, " what was the 
actual message of the sick person ? " 

Edgar did so. 

"The words were," said the nurse, who was young and 
intelligent, and who wore a rosary hanging from the band of 
her dress, being probably a Roman Catholic . "the words 
were, * Tell my son, Edgar "Wade, that his mother wishes to see 
him. He must not disobey her commands.' " 

" You see," whispered Edgar, with a mournful smile, " that 
what I said was true. She will keep the game up to the last. 
She has a lucid interval after her shock, and the first thing 
she does is to send for me with such a message. Well, I *11 go. 
We must carry on the comedy, or tragedy . which is it, Mr 
Forster ? . for some time longer. Would it were ended ! " 

And the young barrister, with the air of a martyr, rose and 
left the room. 

Left to himself. Old Daylight indulged in extraordinary 
gestures. He cracked all his finger- joints, one after the other ; 
he gave a low whistle from the popular opera of " Masaniello;" 
he looked at his documents; and, finally, he ran down-stairs 
and ordered his housekeeper to bring up brandy and water to 
Mr Wade's rooms ; and produced, for her to take up, some 
admirable eau de vie de Cognac, which had not that dark 
mahogany colour which was then generally to be observed. 

" All goes well," said he, as he walked noiselessly up-stairs. 
" If that barrister-magistrate be what I think he is, he will 



A LEFT-HANBED BRIDE. 49 

have somebody lodged safely in one of his Majesty's gaols 
before the week 's out. Give me the inductive process, and a 
little luck, such as I have here, and a fig for getting on the 
scent, as Old Brownjohn does. Scent ! What is the scent ? 
It as often fails a man as it does a dog. Moreover, a man is 
not a dog ; he is a superior animal.'' 

As he said this he entered the room, and presently the 
brandy was brought, and he took the liberty to brew himself 
a very stiff glass, and mix one for Edgar. He had need of 
alcohol to refresh and give a stimulus to his somewhat tired 
faculties. It soon had its effect, and Forster was ready to 
work away for his adopted son tiU daylight. That gentleman 
soon entered. 

" I have taken the liberty, my boy," said Forster, " to order 
up my brandy and some hot water. Take this and a biscuit. 
It will do us both good." 

Mr Wade's answer was, to his intense astonishment, to 
empty the tumbler at a draught. 

"You are right," said he. "I feel better now. I wanted 
that:' 

" How is Mrs Wade 1 " asked Foster. 

" As bad and as mad as ever. If she be not mad, she will 
become so. She overwhelmed me with reproaches. She called 
me ' an atrocious ruffian,' and treated me as if I were positively 
a murderer." 

" You should send for the doctor at once." 

" I have done so. My friend, Dr Eichards, will be here 
presently." 

There was silence for some time. Then Old DayUght 
broke it. 

" The more I think of your affairs, my dear boy, the more 
I am puzzled " . ^the old rogue was not puzzled at all . '* the 
more I am in doubt, were I in your place, what measures I 
should take." 

"My poor old friend," said Edgar, with a compassionate 
patronage, " you are quite right. There is such a combination 
of circumstances, so terrible a conspiracy, that it would puzzle 
wiser heads than yours, and utterly confound men of greater 
experience." - 



62 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



" A covered portico runs up on each side to the house, and 
in these porticoes are, I presume, the offices. The house, built 
by Kent or Chambers in old times, is a good specimen of bas- 
tard Grecian or Palladian architecture. A paved way runs from 
the lodge gate to the door, which is reached by a noble flight 
of steps. The porter, pulling a bell which communicated with 
the house, directed me to the chief entrance, which was opened 
as I approached." 

" Chut ! these aristocrats ; what care they take lest the 
vulgar crew should intrude on them!" cried Old Daylight. 
" Well, when you are a gentleman, there 's nothing like letting 
the world know that you are so.'* 

" The footman who opened the door told me superciliously 
that my lord was engaged, and had left one or two names 
only on the slate, to the owners of which he was to be at home. 

" ' You know,' said the fellow, with a drawl imitated from 
his betters, * you know he isn't at home to everybody.' And 
the fellow looked at me as if he would take my measure. 

" * He will be at home to me,' said I. 

" Ah ! if I could have told him all, how the rascal would 
have started. The proud tone in which I spoke seemed to 
settle my friend. He took my card, read over the address, 
* Mr Edgar Wade, Garden Court, Middle Temple,' and, as if 
satisfied, creaked up-stairs till met by a groom of the chambers, 
who, looking down at me, ordered me to be shown up-stairs, 
and then went his way. The room into which I was shown 
was adorned with portraits of the race of Stanfield. It was 
a proud and a distinguished race, distinguished not only for its 
mere bravery, but for its wit, its knowledge, its boldness in 
withstanding kings, or in aiding them. More than once it 
had intermarried with the royal race, than which it, in- 
deed, proudly claimed to be better born. Oh ! I know well 
what my ancestry is. I have studied Dodd and Edmondson 
since I found out this grand secret." 

The young man rose, and strode almost fiercely and im- 
patiently up and down his room. 

" Well," said Daylight to himself, " pride is a plant of un- 
common quick growth in the bosom of man. Poor human 
nature!" 



.^ 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 53 



" My black dress and fashionable costume seemed to have 
some effect upon this last valet, for he was very attentive." 

" My lord, he said, would see me at once. Would I walk 
into his moming-room ? but my lord begged that I would not 
detain him long, as he had an appointment of some moment. 
' And,' said the fellow, as I thought, with an easy lie, * I know 
that the carriage will be waiting for him in ten minutes.' 

"All, indeed, was done like clockword . so I afterwards 
heard . ^in the house of Chesterton. The horses were kept 
harnessed, the carriages ready, the dinners, the breakfasts, the 
first appearance of my Lord Viscount, or the Earl himself, was 
to the minute. Great noblemen, the Earl was wont to repeat, 
must submit to little details. I meditated on the slavery of 
such a state as I followed the fellow into the armoury." 

"And yet he would so gladly submit to it himself," thought 
Old Daylight. " Poor hum " but he checked himself, fan- 
ning his forehead, in his excitement, with his bandana. 

" I never saw so many arms in my life. The Viscount was 
curious in swords, and they were arranged in the different 
centuries to which they belonged. Indian, Chinese, Hin'800 
tulwars, and Japanese swords, sharp as a razor, and ready to 
cut a Christian in two, hung with the weapons of the Crusaders, 
the long rapier of Elizabeth's days, or the rough cavalry sabre 
of Cromwell's Ironsides, marked with the genuine * O. C 
The young fellow seemed to have a passion for steel. Here, 
on a rack, were some curious daggers ; here some German foils 
with the true Solingen blades " 

"Foils!" said Old DayHght, with a start. "You said 
foils ? " 

" Yes. Why did you start ? " 

" Oh, it 's only this corn, confound it . " said the old man, 
stooping down and pressing his slipper. 

"There were pistols, too . ^beauties! Indeed, everything 
was good. In the midst was a genealogical tree, where, from 
the loins of Eanuldus de Castraville, in the days of the Hep- 
tarchy, the proud race of the Chestertons sprang . a race of 
nobles when the Conqueror was but a successful freebooter. I 
was looking at this when my other self, the Viscount, entered. 
He looked wonderfully well that day. He was dressed in a 



6i ONE OF TWO ; OB, 



velvet morning coat, light, well-made shoes, and loose trousers 
. not the very tight pantaloons, tight as we now wear. He 
was dressed for ease, and it well became him« I think I see 
him now. beautiful, radiant with health, good-nature, sweet- 
ness, looking ten years younger than I did. He had not 
thought, and read, and written, and felt as I did. His heart 
had never throbbed with shame, with pride, with ambition, as 
mine had ; nor had beaten so wildly that I have put my hand 
upon it, as a musician does upon his harp, to deaden and to 
stop its vibrations. He had a grand and noble air, was about 
my height, very lightly built, and very smooth, supple, and 
joyous. Why, indeed, should he not be so ? He had neither 
worked, suffered, nor struggled. 

" ' You 're looking at our tree,' he said. * That is a piece of 
my father's work. I am always obliged to apologise for it to 
strangers, and you are one, Mr Edgar Wade. By the way, I 
think I remember your name at the bar.' 

" His soft, kind voice disarmed me. I had turned to him 
fiercely, as if I could have said, * Out ! base-bom, out ! Give 
m?my rights, and strip away those fine feathers you have 
stolen.' But his courteous well-bred looks, his address as to an 
equal, his kindness and honest intention, as he professed that 
if he could he would serve me, though I know 'tis but a 
fashion of their courtly breed, disarmed me, and I repented of 
my purpose. My head fell on my chest, my arms were up- 
lifted as if to embrace him, my lips moved, and my heart 
spoke : ' Would that this trial would pass away, would that 
I could clasp you to my heart, Philip ! O my brother!'" 



CHAPTER Vni. 

" IN CAMPS OPPOSED^ FALSE SHAME AND CONSCIENCE STAI/d" 

"Philip Desvceux Stanfield, Esq., commonly, and by 

courtesy styled the Viscount Wimpole" continued the 

barrister. 

^* Stop ! " cried the old man, blowing his nose with violence, 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 55 

and thereby indulging his method of crying ; " stop a bit. 
I'll mix again, and a little for you." 

Then he muttered to himself, " What a noble heart thia 
young man has ! I was right when I put his name in my will. 
And those people to keep him out of his rights, and by such 
means, too I There it is, my boy. A pailful of this would not 
hurt you ; it 's your brown sugar bedevilments that kill the 
brandy." 

Mr Wade was nothing loath. He refreshed himself, and 014 
Daylight did so as well ; then, nestling down in his chair, fre 
prepared to listen comfortably. 

" Philip," resumed the barrister, dropping for a minute his 
bitter tone, " seemed touched at my movements. They were 
but dumb motions, so they must have been eloquent with grief; 
for he said . 

" * You have something to communicate to me, sir. What 
isitr 

" * Something so serious,' I answered, * that I will not tell 
it here. You have several doors. Somebody might listen.' 

" * Will it take long,' asked he. 

" Here I at once told the Viscount that I must, at least, have 
the whole of an hour to speak to him. * And,' I added, ' what 
I have to say is of the utmost importance both to you and to 
your father, the Earl. These letters,' said I, *are of his 
writing.' 

" The young fellow looked at the important bundle of letters 
with some anxiety ; and, after pausing as if in thought, rang 
the bell, and ordered the carriage to wait for an hour. Then, 
leading the way into his own little study, he carefully closed 
the door ; and placing an easy chair near the fire . for we were 
nearing October, and it was cold . he motioned me to sit 
down. 

" The room, which was comfort itself. or, indeed, I may call 
it luxury . looked out on the ancient garden of Chesterton 
House ; and, although suffering from the smoke of London, the 
garden was well kept up, and it was a pretty place. I noticed 
that if I fell . ^for I was about to play the bold game " 

" Brave boy I " cried Old Forster. 

" And he might throw me out of window . I should assuredly 



66 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



break my neck ; for, although we were on the first floor, the 
ground round the basement had been deeply removed ; and, to 
say the truth, the state rooms at Chesterton House are lofty. 
Lord Wimpole was somewhat about my height, as I said, and 
very active ; and, truly, what I was about to say to him was 
enough to stir any one's choler. I sat but a moment, and then 
I arose . 

" * I hope, my lord,' said I, giving him his courtesy title, 
* that you will not proceed to any eictremes upon what I am 
about to say to you.' 

"He looked at me with extreme surprise, somewhat 
puzzled. 

" ' My mission,' I continued,. * is a very painful one . very 
painful indeed. Nothing that you can do or say now can 
affect it. It has passed into the regions of history. Therefore, 
let not what I shall say move you to ' 

" * My dear sir,' interrupted lie, with a good-natured and 
somewhat proud look upon his manly, upturned face . for his 
surprise had given way and his feelings had rallied . ' what can 
you or any one say to my father's son that ' 

" ' Exactly. You have cut the difficulty. Learn, sir, that 
you are not the legitimate son of the Earl of Chesterton.' I 
kept my eyes fixed upon his as I said this, and saw a gleam of 
fury shoot from them, and expected him to spring at my throat. 
Then the gleam died down, and a pallor gradually crept up on 
his face, as I continued : * And these letters that I have here 
will prove what I say. The real heir still lives ; and sent by 
him, I come here. In these writings you will ' 

" * Give them to me,' said he, in a voice short, sharp, and 
painfully altered by emotion. 

" I did so at once." 

" Phew ! and a fire burning in his room, right before him ! " 
cried the old criminal philosopher. 

" Ah ! " said his companion, " Lord Wimpole is a gentleman; 
besides " . and this the wicked Old Daylight thought was much 
more to the purpose . " I stood between him and the grate, and 
my eye was fixed on his. 

"* Before you begin,' I cried, *let me save you unnecessary 
pain.' 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 57 

" * You are too good, sir,' said he, with a bow, and with 
bitter irony. 

" ' At any rate,' I said, ' I have some right to be an execu- 
tioner . ^no right to be a butcher. These hundred and twenty 
letters would simply kill you, without doing you any good. 
Please read only those passages that I have marked in blue ink.' 
For," said Edgar, " I took the same trouble for him that I did 
for you. I shortened his punishment by letting him read only 
those that were of importance. Oh ! I can assure you, my old 
friend, that was enough. My eyes, fixed upon his face, watched 
his smallest movements. I told you how well he looked when 
I first saw him. In less than ten minutes you would have 
fancied him a convalescent from a fever hospital. Taking his 
white silk pocket-handkerchief, he put it first to his mouth, 
then in it, biting the thick folds of silk in his agony ; but he 
let no word escape him. Thick drops of sweat, drops of agony, 
gathered on his forehead ; his hands trembled ; his lips turned 
white ; his very hair, which was crisp and curled when he came 
to welcome me, seemed to grow weak and lank before me." 

" Poor devil ! " said the old man. 

" Yes," cried Edgar, as if to forestall his pity, ** I pitied him 
. I, even I, who had been so much injured. But he showed 
marvellous pluck . a bitter and a costly bravery. Had he 
uttered one word, I should have flung my arms round his neck 
and cried, ' Philip, are you not my brother ? Let us forget all. 
Kemain where you are. I have been inured to toil and strife. 
I can endure difficulty and privation. Let us only recognise, 
know, and love each other ! ' " 

Worn by his emotions, the barrister walked up and doAvn his 
room, taking the stage much as Mr Kean, the great tragedian 
of the day, did, when he cried out, in " Eichard the Third" . 

** Shadows to-night 

Have wrought more terror on the soul of Bichard." 

Old Daylight watched his adopted son with delight. 

" Go on, go on, my boy," he murmured. And then, to him- 
self, he said, " But his wonderful generosity will make a fool 
of him." 

" But then," continued Edgar, '^ a very black and guilty 
reflection . so I take it . made me pause. I have been edu- 



58 ONE OP TWO ; OK, 



cated into caution ; and as I was about to play the generous 
fool, and burn the letters myself, something whispered, * Those 
letters, once burnt, what becomes of your evidence? Lord 
Wimpole might turn round and laugh at you.' '' 

" Ah," said Forster, drawing a long breath, and somewhat 
relieved, " there is that reflection to be made. The boy is all 
right," he cogitated. " Now this is what I call a man . a brain 
to reflect, a heart to feel, a hand to execute. Dash my old 
wig !" said he to himself, in a state of great triumph, <Hhis is 
the man for my money j just like myself when I was a boy. 
But where are your young men now?" (Here the old gentle- 
man gave a vacant look round the apartment, as much as to 
say, that the young men at present did not exist, and that 
nature had been remiss in furnishing that article.) " Why, 
dash my wig ! they are all Tom and Jerrying, knocking down 
old Charleys, and chevying the New Police when they see 'ein. 
Oh, they can chaff a cabman, fight a ticket-porter, or get into 
Fleet Prison. But for young men . ^bah ! " 

Edgar had paused while the old man's rapid thoughts were 
regretting the good old times of his youth ; and the barrister 
had fixed his eyes on dreamy vacancy, as if debating whether 
the generous pathway he had pointed out would not have been 
the best to have trodden. Then he suddenly went on, speak- 
ing more rapidly than before. 

"At last the reading of those letters was finished, and 
Philip Stanfield, with haughty determination and an immense 
struggle, which, in spite of his pride, I could see, arose and put 
the letters in my hand. He did this frankly, even with a 
certain boldness. 

" * If,' he said, and he emphasised the word, ' if these letters 
were written by my father, then, sir, your suggestion is just : 
I am not the son of the Countess of Chesterton. Have you 
any other proofs V . 

"I was startled at his asking for more. ' I have compared 
the writing,' I answered, * and it is that of your father. Proofs 
are in this house. You have the valet Gustave . a confidential 
servant, no doubt . he has not left you.' 

" * Gustave,' said the young nobleman, ' died two or three 
years ago. Your sneer is quite right, sir, he was a confidential 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 59 

servant to the end. My father was with him when he died. 
What secrets he had he carried with him, even beyond the 
grave/ " 

" Just what you said," interrupted Old Forster. " Ah, if we 
could only get on the other side of that, what secrets we should 
know I " 

" * Then,' said I, ' the only other witness is the old nurse, 
Estelle Martin. I have ascertained from the papers of Madame 
Wade that she lives at Kensal-Green/ " 

" Eh I " cried the old Bow Street amateur, opening his eyes 
somewhat wider, and rising as he looked at Edgar. " What 
said he to that ? " 

"Not much," repUed the barrister, carelessly, while Old 
Forster, playing with his red 'bandana, watched him with 
interest. "Not much. His face fell a little, and he owned 
freely that he knew the name. 

" ^ It is a woman whom I have seen,' he said, ' She lives at 
a Uttle house called Acacia Villa. I have been there with my 
father,' he continued, slowly, as if the words were wrung from 
him ; * and I have seen him pay money to her. He told me 
that her husband had done him good service.' 

"* There, then,' I cried, triumphantly; 'there, then, is a 
coincidence which you must, at least, say is strange. I claim 
that woman as my witness.' " 

" ' Phew ! " whistled Forster ; " and what did my lord say 
to that ? You had him in a cleft stick there" 

"He did not answer for some time," continued Edgar; 
"and then, after patting the ground for some time with his 
foot, he looked up suddenly into my face, and. rising, stood 
opposite me. 

" ' Tell me,' he said . ^looking on me as does an artist who 
takes your portrait . ' tell me this one thing : do you, Mr Edgar 
Wade ' . ^the name he emphasised . ' do you know the true and 
lawful son of the Earl of Chesterton % ' 

" * I do,' I answered, too much moved to conceal anything; ' I 
do know him, and /.am A« / ' 

" The young man's head fell upon his breast, and he trembled ; 
but it was only for a moment. 

" * I do not doubt it,' he said ; 'I have had a presentiment 



60 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



of something of the sort for some moments.' Then he took my 
hand, and, in an almost inarticulate voice, murmured, ' Mj 
brother, I am satisfied that it should be so.' " 

" Noble words," ejaculated Old Daylight . "noble words, no 
doubt. But what of words ? What were his actions ? " 

<^ Spare him," said Edgar, in a tone of reproach ; " he was 
and is to be pitied. He has fallen from his high estate. The 
little things that he despised have become dear to him ; those 
which he thought luxuries have grown into necessities. Brought 
up amidst delicacies, which his soft soul has yet to be weaned 
from, the prospect before him is dreadful. He knows the 
truth. Comprehend, Mr Forster, the poor man's struggle . 
who cannot keep his position but with a guilty knowledge. The 
Nemesis had, indeed, come upon the house of Chesterton. And 
he, Philip, my brother, is more to be pitied than I." 

'* My dear Edgar. my lord, I shall call you, for you are a 
lord," babbled Old Forster, full of feeling, and delighted with 
the goodness the barrister had exhibited . "/quite compre- 
hend it all. I know the struggle. I, you see . I have read a 
good deal . Dash my wig ! I shall let it all out " (this was 
said aside) . " and I know how a man's soul is shaken when 
he is suddenly brought face to face with a strong temptation." 

"Temptation]" asked the barrister, as if Old Forster was 
wandering from the point. 

" Yes, temptation. You see, he might wish to get you off 
your guard and to bum those letters." 

"Oh, no! He behaved like one of a noble house, poor 
fellow, although on the wrong side. You see, he has as much 
blood of the Chestertons in his veins as I have." 

"How blindly this generous young man excuses him!" 
thought Forster. " But there, that was to have been foreseen 
by the true inductive process. Given a fellow of such gener- 
ous, noble ideas 



)i 



" At last," continued Edgar, " for I must end my story, and 
we must get to bed . at last, after a long, long silence . ^in which 
I was torn by different emotions, and in which I watched the 
autumn leaves fall in the London garden outside : they fall 
only here . the young lord arose^ and drawing himself up, 
said . 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDR 61 

" * Mr Edgar Wade . ^for so you are called at present ' . the 
words stuck in his throat a bit . *you must excuse me if I ask 
time to consider what to do. Ten years, or even five years 
ago, I should have at once admitted your rights, and should 
have retired to some far-off settlement, or to the New World, 
there to have built up a name for myself, and in that New World 
to have forgotten the sorrows of the Old. But now I am of 
mature age; and age, if it makes us wiser, makes us less 
generous. And even though I be like one struck with a 
thunderbolt from a clear sky, but yet by some miracle alive, 
1 must reflect, and I must consult the Earl, my father. Give 
m© leave to say that I feel my position deeply ; but also that 
I feel for you. The Earl will come from the Continent in 
eight or nine days. I will tell him all. You shall see him. 
And if all this is . as I suspect it is . ^true, then justice shall 
be done you. Pray, sir, make no mistake. My word has been 
as good as my bond hitherto, and shall be yet. Here are your 
letters ; keep them carefully. They have cost me all, but . 
pray, sir, leave me. I will send for you in eight or ten days. 
I can say no more. I wish to be alone.' " 

" And that was all ? " asked Forster. 

"All!" cried the barrister. "Could any one have said 
more ? Was it not noble ? " 

" My dear boy," said old Tom Forster, rising, and taking 
his brandy bottle, previous to saying good night, "it was 
more than noble, it was superhuman ; but take care of those 
letters." 

And with another yawn and a caution, he hobbled off, 
muttering to himself, " Yes, he was right ; justice shall be done 
him, justice. justice to both." 



CHAPTER IX. 

zadvsark's prot£g£e, and how she came bv her. 

The inductive philosopher went to bed very much pleased 
with himself : all the more so because, having upon some pre- 
tence returned to Edgar's room, and by delicate processes of 



62 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



investigation found that the young man wanted money, he 
had boldly almost forced upon him some five hundred pounds 
as a loan, pretending that he did not care to have so much 
loose money in the house. The success of this little venture 
tickled him immensely ; and the clever way in which he over- 
came the delicate scruples of Edgar was, in Old Forster's opinion, 
a perfect triumph of tact. 

" You see," he said to himself, " barristers are always poor 
till they begin to rise. Egad, they are as thin and lank as a 
bagpipe before it is inflated. But once blow them up . once 
let them make a noise in the world, and hey ! presto ! every- 
thing is open to them. And what a wonderful fellow it is ! 
I always thought there was something noble about him. Dash 
my wig, blood will out ! And then as to the other" 

Here Old Daylight, as he tucked himself up in bed, with 
his silk bandana tied neatly round his head, with a formidable 
knot on his forehead, chuckled and crowed over his inductive 
process ; and, muttering something very contemptuous about 
Brownjohn and his clue, tried to sleep. 

It was several hours, however, before he fell asleep ; and 
then, even then, the dreams of the old man haunted and dis- 
turbed him, chased him all the night, and made him start and 
cry, as if he were struggling with the real murderer, whom 
they were bringing to condign punishment. For in those 
happy days, when London was not the big wen it is now, and 
Queen Anne Street, in the haying time, smelt of the hay from 
Regent's Park . then but a wilderness of fields . ^there was not 
the slightest doubt about hanging a murderer. The innocent 
Old Daylight, alias Tom Forster, absolutely thought that he 
was doing man and God service in tracking crime, and in 
bringing the villain to justice. 

Let Tom Forster sleep in his comfortable bed, struggling 
with uncomfortable dreams, in which Mr Samuel Brownjohn, 
police officer, always gets the victory over him, and laughs him 
to scorn, while we visit Mr George Horton, barrister and police 
magistrate. He, too, is at rest, in his house in Wimpole 
Street ; he, too, is dreaming, and curiously, not of the crime of 
the day, but of love. 

Crime he well knew, having studied it more deeply even 



A LEFT-HANDm> BREDE. 63 

than Tom Forster^ and having, at a certain period of his life, 
felt impelled to commit some great and daring villany, and 
then to destroy himself. That temptation and its result . a 
result full of honour to him . ^made him more lenient in his 
judgments, a sadder and a wiser man, and one well fitted, indeed, 
for the post he held. 

Mr Horton's colleague, Mr Boom, was one of those rough 
and ready barristers, who are more like country justices than 
town magistrates ; one who was not very learned in the law, 
but acute, sharp, full of knowledge of life, and a certain sort of 
good nature. 

At the St Marylebone Police Court, therefore, people got 
two difTerent sorts of law " turned on," as the excellent In- 
spector Stevenson said, but both good in their way. For 
chaffing a saucy cabman, dealing with a beau who was found 
drunk and disorderly, or a gallant young officer or medical 
student, who had been out Tom and Jerry fashion, no one 
so clever as Mr Boom. His days were observed and reported 
in the Morning Chronicle^ and were almost as amusing as the 
fictitious " Mornings at Bow Street," a popular series of 
sketches which were founded, perhaps, upon them. But 
having humiliated the prisoner, and punished him in court, 
Mr Boom did not punish him in prison. If he gave the 
culprits " talkee, talkee," as the nigger said, he did not ^ve 
them " floggee, floggee," too ; and, on the whole, they were 
well satisfied, and public justice done. Mr Boom did not care 
for a great or an abstruse case. When such came up, he 
would, by remand or otherwise, shift them to his more intel- 
lectual colleague, and enjoy his ease and dignity at his com- 
fortable little box near Epsom. 

Mr Boom, it need not be said, was a popular man about 
Marylebone. Even the i*ogues, with that innate respect for 
justice and English law which they have, rather liked the 
good-humoured magistrate. He talked to them in their own 
language . ^in his leisure hours he was editing and adding to 
an edition of " Grove's Slang Dictionary " . and gave them 
the exact term they guessed. Sometimes they would set their 
wits against his, and hope, by letting him gain an easy victory, 
to flatter his " wutchup." But he was quite up to that dodge. 



G4 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



lie was very good-natured. He looked upon crime as an 
eccentricity incidental to ** poor human nature," and was very 
lenient with it in the young. 

Mr Horton, on the other hand, took a very much higher 
view of his duties, and was very severe with the young, and 
much more lenient with those who had previously fallen. He 
knew what a terrihle net sin spreads ; how easily one was 
entangled ; how hard it was for one who had fallen to stand 
upright. And yet the acute brain of this good man was not 
employed upon law, nor upon the study of his life . crime, but 
upon love. Shakespeare, so wise, so sound, so true to nature, 
is not always right : the lawyer does not always dream of fees, 
nor the soldier of cutting throats, " of carbonadoes and big 
Spanish oaths;" but the Queen Mab of dreams sometimes 
leads one into the Court of Venus and her loves. 

And yet the magistrate's dreams were very sad, and re- 
hearsed only a past history, which was shortly as follows, and 
intimately connected with this true narration. He had been, 
he was, deeply, almost inextricably, in love with a young lady 
most people of good taste would fall in love with too. 

A barrister of good family, and although only thirty . mar- 
vellous to relate . in a remarkably good practice, Mr Horton, a 
scion of the Hortons of Shropshire, who were baronets in 
King James's time, and had furnished a long list of knights in 
the times of the Plantagenets, went, of course, into excellent 
society. Amongst the houses he visited was one in Green 
Street, Park Lane, which willingly he never would have entered 
but for one thing, and that one thing took him there every 
night. And that was Winifred Vaughan. 

The house was a pinched-up, pretty little house . quite a 
town box ; but large enough for a " female bachelor," as old 
Lady Sark called herself. She was, in fact, the dowager 
Countess of a happily deceased and poor earl, of a Scotch 
family, though not a Scotch title, who was as proud as the 
Countess herself, and almost as disagreeable. His wife, how- 
ever, in power, in temper, and in selfish and odious qualities, 
surpassed him; and being conquered, the poor man very wisely 
died. As the Countess was by no means rich, only fairly good- 
looking, and very unfairly disagreeable, she did not marry 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 65 

again. of which she made a great virtue . and, in consequence, 
remained Marguerite, Countess of Sark. Sweet and excellent 
Voman 1 from how much suffering did she free at least one 
poor man by her enforced resolution ! 

Unhappily for the world, as she thought, there was no off- 
spring; and the childless woman sank into a dowager, and 
had all the bitter feelings dowagers have. Friends passed her 
by, and welcomed the much prettier, nicer, and younger Coun- 
tess . the real Countess, as the tradesmen called her . the wife 
of a younger and altogether better brother, who had the 
audacity not only to succeed to the title, but to give the cold 
shoulder, in that thoroughly efl&cient way which your true 
aristocrat can give, to his sister-in-law. Henceforth there was 
a deadly feud ; and as the present descendant of the M*Ivors 
who wore the coronet was wise enough to repair his poor estate 
by marrying a very pretty, gentle, and rich English girl, with 
nearly half a million of money, and generous enough to love 
and honour his wife as his greatest benefactress, it need not 
be said that the feud amounted to a vendetta. The young 
Lady Sark, whose name was seen in the lists of so many 
assemblies . and also, let it be said, of so many charities . was 
generally spoken of in Green Street as " that woman," the 
** upstart,'' the " haymaker's daughter." The last title, an in- 
genious invention of the Countess Marguerite's, was derived 
from the fact that Mr Evelyn, the father of the heiress, an 
old English gentleman and farmer, had his head screwed on 
the right way, as the Surrey Evelyns, as a rule, have ; and 
during the wars with Napoleon undertook the contract of sup- 
plying the troops with hay. Having money at command, he 
bought hay largely in the south of England ; stored, shipped, 
and delivered it j and not only had a very useful and healthy 
occupation, but made a very large fortune, which his daughter 
inherited, along with his handsome English face, shrewd sense, 
and straightforward manner. 

The haymaker's daughter was a great favourite with Wini- 
fred Vaughan . " Who was no relation at all to her, thank 
God ! " said the Dowager . but who had the inestimable benefit 
of having the blood of the Stuarts, Tudors, and Plantagenets 
flowing in her veins. She, too, lived in Green Street, near the 

E 



CO ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



Park; she, too, enjoyed . ^no, haxdly enjoyed, gentle as she 
iiYas . ^the society of Margaerite, Countess of Sark, and the high 
society she invited ; for she, Winifred Yaughan, was the niece 
of Lady Sark. 

Tor Mrs Vanghan . or, more respectfully, to give her her 
courtesy title, the Lady Letitia Vaughan . who had married a 
poor clergyman out of pure love, was a duke's daughter, and 
own sister to the proud Countess. They were just as different 
as sisters can be. Mrs Lettice Vaughan, as she preferred to be 
called, had somehow scraped up all the modesty, retirement, 
and humility of the Duke*s family, and was fool enough to be 
wonderfully contented and happy in a littie parsonage . ^the 
very smallest of the poor Duke's many livings ; for he sold his 
presentations and his game, and really could not afford- to give 
them away, even to his silly daughter. Yes, wonderfully happy 
there in the north of England, among mountains and lakes, a 
simple population, one or two poor poets, some very old simple 
gentry, and poor women who soon learned to love her very 
dearly . Mrs Yaughan passed her peaceful life. It was not a 
very long one. She was faithful over her one talent, the delight 
and sole sustaining power of her husband . a deep student, but 
a man weak of health and overwoiked in brain . and was so 
good on earth that she was early called away ; and in this 
way. 

Mrs Yaughan had one or two children, but they did not 
live, and then one which did ; and this baby, which was 
christened Winifred . "an honoured Saxon name," said Mr 
Yaughan . was the delight of both mother and father. 
But the mother was stricken with a fell disease and died, 
when her daughter was six years old. The loss was too 
much for the poor parson. He grew silent^ feeble, and even 
wandered at the funeral, and talked about " the light of his 
life ; " when, as everybody proved to demonstration, a parson 
ought to have another light. And, indeed, Parson Yaughan 
had ; but after that cruel blow he grew more fearful of Provi- 
dence, less hopeful, and less trustful. And, indeed, in six 
years . after he had taught Winifred Yaughan Latin, some 
Greek and Italian, and a great deal of fine theological English 
-*-he died outright ; having been half dead ever since his wife 



A LEFT-HANl)ED BRIDK 6 7 



changed this life for a better. And when the parson and his 
wife lay side by side in the little Cumberland churchyard, their 
closed eyes turned to the eternal heavens, the orphan girl . 
straight, tall, and stalwart ; reserved, yet gay j full of life, yet 
staid; siijiple, yet wise; a mountain ash in strength, grace, 
and sugpleness, and beauty . was adopted by "that cranky old 
girl," as one of the circle called her, the Countess of Sark. 

" What an excellent thing for Winifred Vaughan ! " said the 
world ; and of course the world was in the right. 



CHAPTER X. 

DEALINGS WITH THE ^^ ARGUS^^ NEWSPAPER* 

Lady Sark gained a good deal of applause amopgst her im- 
mediate friends by her adoption of Winifred Vaughan ; and 
it is not improbable that this kind of recompense was not 
unpleasant to her ladyship. She was a thorough old worldling, 
and discounted the reward charitable people look for in the 
next world by taking as much comfort, applause, glory, and 
credit to herself fes she could in this. If we were not charit- 
able, we might hint that there are others not unlike her. 

At the time we write of . in the March previous to the 
murder of Estelle Martin, which, as the reader will remember, 
took place on the 29th of September 1829 . Mr George Hor- 
ton, who was not then appointed magistrate for Marylebone, 
was a frequent visitor to Green Street, and came there osten- 
sibly with the purpose of playing a rubber of whist with the 
dowager Countess. 

But it happened that Winifred Vaughan was the usual com- 
panion of that excellent woman. She was cheaper than one 
of those hired ladies, who seem somehow to be always in the 
way and out of place, however, amiable they may be. She 
was more willing and more clever ; and though so observant 
that she saw pretty well through Lady Sark's motives, yet 
she was so generous that she -pieced out with sweet charity 
what that old lady wanted . ^which was a good deal. 



68 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



Miss Winifred Vaughan was very beautiful, very accom- 
plished . ^which really count for nothing in her circle . very 
well born, and very poor, which count for a good deal. She 
had many admirers, but none entirely fitted to her. They 
who were eager to marry were a great deal too poor; and 
they who were excellently well fitted with estates, titles, 
and money, were inclined to look around them before they 
selected their . partners for life. And even then they looked 
for money. 

" Egad I " said the richest duke in the kingdom, " egad ! 
those millowner fellows are getting so powerful, that we must 
put money to money to be equal to them." 

And the young fellows were evidently impregnated with this 
idea, and moved about in splendid selfishness, leaving Winifred 
Yaughan, and a dozen other such amiable creatures, waiting in 
the sickness of hope deferred. 

That is, the world supposed that they were so kept ; and 
the world composed of dowagers did not hesitate to blame the 
selfishness of the young men. But as the young men cared 
nothing about the dowagers, the effect was by no means 
astounding. 

One young nobleman, indeed . and the very pick of all the 
" matches " upon which the voracious dowagers were, by the 
verdict of the veracious world, supposed to have set their 
hearts . set his heart upon Winifred Vaughan, and would have 
offered her his hand; but it was whispered . and it is astonishing 
how thoroughly in high life everybody understands everybody 
else's motives . that Lord Chesterton had told Lord Wimpole 
that if he married the niece of old Sark, " he would cut off the 
entail, or go on the turf." Certain it was that, at the time we 
write of, Winifred Vaughan was nearly twenty yearg old, and 
unmarried. 

» 

Lady Sark, whose house was not very crowded by the aris- 
tocracy . that class having a natural preference to those places 
whereat something is to be seen, or some gaiety is going on . fell 
to opening her house to the gentry . an iniGerior -class, but glad 
to go where there was a title, and sometifiies exhibiting an 
independent, a learned, and a pleasant member 6i their own 
set. One of these was Mr George Horton* , . . , . 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 69 

. - - . . . . . . ---- - .-._ . - _ 

This quiet, silent, studious, and observant man was not 
usually a " party " man, but he was always to be found at the 
Countess's assemblies. He was attentive . ^respectful even . 
to the old lady, and a gentleman. It is true that the poor 
fellow actually did something for his living ; but Lady Sark 
forgave him that . he could play at whist. 

He was, too, quite aware . for the gossip of one circle had 
Bunk down to a lower . that Lord Wimpole had proposed and 
failed. For did he not read the Morning Pillar, in which a 
superior kind of Bamett Slammers did the fashionable re- 
porting, and from whose pen the report had dropped . 
gracefully and even poetically garnished, but yet unniistakably 
given ] 

No one could accuse Mr Coaster . ^the reporter alluded to . 
of indelicacy. He threw always a veil over the sins and follies 
of the aristocracy. . But the veil was of gauze, everything was 
seen through it. It hid nothing; but rather, like the veils 
which cover the beauties of the harem, it gave a grace to that 
which it never even pretended to conceal It ia well known 
that other and inferior penmen were jealous of this gentleman, 
and declared that he waited at the tables of the great in livery, 
with silver shoulder-knots and red plush inexpressibles ; but 
that we know was untrue. Mr Coaster might have been at 
their feasts in spirit, but he was never there in person. How 
he managed to pick up so many reports was, indeed, a wonder. 
The head of a family was first apprised of matters going on 
in his own household through the columns of the Morning 
Pillar. 

But, besides the Pillar, there wore at the time in full vigour 
two newspapers which dealt exclusively in matters interesting 
to the aristocracy. " And were, by consequence," said Bamett 
Slammers, who was an out-and-out Eadical, " nasty and black- 
guard." 'These were the Satirist and the Argus. But it was 
unfair of Bamett to connect these things with the House of 
Lords. All the connection that they and. their proprietors 
had with that august assembly was simply of that temporary 
kind which a highyvayman has with the person whose nioney 
he demands. . The demand made in that simple time, only 
forty years ago, was this . " Please, your lordship, we have 



70 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



discovered a hole in the cloak in which your virtue is wrapped ; 
and if you do not plaster it, we will point out to the ridicule- 
loving world where that hole is." In nine cases out of ten, 
this method was found to be efficacious. 

To the office of one of these satirical journals . ^now happily 
extinct . Lord Wimpole one morning widked, and asked for the 
editor. 

The little boy who served the office as clerk, folder, and 
general dispenser of a free. very free. newspaper, with the 
precocious intellect natural to newsboys, at once divined the 
cause. Lord Wimpole was unmistakably a gentleman; but 
the very soft voice in which he asked for the editor did not 
conceal an amount of irritation which the young gentleman 
did all he could to repress. 

" Editor never comes 'ere, sir," said the boy. " He 's at *is 
country 'ouse." 

"Then, doubtless, the publisher's at home. I have called 
on a matter connected with the paper. I have met Dr M*Phie, 
who, I believe, writes for it." 

This threw the boy off his guard. 

" My eyes ! " he said to himself, " why he 's an author may 
be. Wot a swell ! " 

Then, after a little more scrutiny . during which he directed 
some wrappers, for the paper had a country circulation. he 
asked . 

'* Wot name, sir 1 PYaps Mr Eolt is at home. I '11 go and 
see." 

Lord Whnpole did not give Hs card. 

" You can say," he said, carelessly, while his heart beat a 
little more quickly, "that I am a person who knows the 
Doctor." 

Now the Doctor, a clever fellow . a Trinity College man of 
Dublin . wrote for his bread ; and, being at that time in the 
Fleet . did not care very much. nor did he care much even 
when out of that place of durance. to whom he sold his 
articles, full of scholarship, and with a certain verve and 
"swing" about them that made them very readable. The 
Doctor, it must be owned, had no more to do with the 
"spicy" little articles which sold the paper than had Lord 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 71 

Wimpole himself; but he If ad an easy conscience, and did 
not think that he was by any means guilty of the miserable 
scandal which produced the black-mail by which the Doctor 
was paid. 

" Mr Kolt," said the boy, " 'ere 's a regular swell asking for 
you. He 's an author, I think, for he knows, and is a friend 
of, Dr MThie." 

Mr Eolt had a severe headache. He was a handsome, fair, 
somewhat bald, and fashionably-dressed man. He had been 
dining out with some theatrical people and the proprietor of 
the newspaper, and had made an eloquent speech, in^ which he 
called the press the "palladium of British liberty, and the 
protector of the purity of the nation." All this Mr T. Lilbum 
Kolt firmly believed it to be. He had said it so many times 
before, that the sentence rolled out of his mouth like a familiar 
truth. 

Lord Wimpole was duly ushered in. Mr Eolt . who de- 
voutly wished that his aching head was under a pump, and 
that the little dinner at Thames Ditton had never taken place 
. saw, in spite of his headache, that Lord Wimpole was no 
gentleman of the press ; but he still carried the idea suggested 
by the office-boy, that the stranger, who did not give his 
name, had come to ask for money for the imprisoned genius, 
MThie. 

Motioning Lord Wimpole to a chair, and passing his hand 
over his heavy eyes, he said . 

" I can divine your mission, sir ; but I must explain to you 
beforehand that our eccentric and very clever friend has no 
claim upon this paper. He has, in fact, overdrawn his salary. 
He has been paid beforehand for three leaders. Let me see ! 
One on the * Bishops ' ". . 

Lord Wimpole held up his hand. 

" Pray, sir," he said, " tell me no more. I have no desire 
and no right to know the secrets of your paper. I do not call 
upon Dr MThie's business ; indeed, I only used his name as a 
passport to reach you. I do not pretend to be in his secrets, 
as I have only met him once." 

Mr Eolt saw that he was caught. His headache made him rude 
and ill-natured. He rose at once and put his hand on the bell. 



72 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



" Then, sir," he answered, in a loud tone, " then why ". 



"No rudeness, sir," said Lord Wimpole. "Here is my 
business. .1 wanted to see the editor. I wanted him to answer 
for that paragraph." 

And he threw down a paper in which, surrounded by a line 
of red ink, and sent to Chesterton House . by some good- 
natured friend of the family, no doubt . there was a notice to 
the effect that the " Delectable Dowager of Sark had at last 
caught a young nobleman. "We believe we may tell Mrs 
Grundy and the pubUc that the name of the rash young man 

is Lord What will the proud Earl of Ch . t . n say to the 

heir of his house being united to the daughter of a penniless 
curate, Miss ? We shall say more about this." 

As Mr Kolt gazed in a somewhat dazed fashion at this para- 
graph . every word of which he well knew. the young gentle- 
man drew himself up and said 

" I am Lord Wimpole. I demand that the paragraph be 
contradicted. What has the world to do with the private con- 
cerns of my family 1 " 

" Then the paragraph is not true 1 " asked Mr Eolt, eva- 
sively, to gain time. 

" True or not true, it concerns not the public, and is no 
business of yours." 

" But truth, my lord," said his interlocutor, with a greasy 
smile, " is the especial business of the British press. That 
palladium of liberty lives but to disseminate the truth. We 
received that paragraph from a member of one of the first 
families." 

" Give me the name of ybur informant." 

" Well, not exactly, my lord. We do not do things that 
way." . 

"Then apologise and retracf 

"Assure us that it is not true, and we will at once do so . 
for a consideration." 

" What consideration can be more weiglity with you than 
your honour . than your desire not to circulate a scandal 1 " 

" Well," said Mr Kolt, after a pause, in which he measured 
his opponent . a well-built young man, firmly set upon his legs, 
and an officer." well ".here his smile became more seductive, 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 73 

not to say greasy . " well, the British press cannot well live 
upon honour." 

" It cannot exist without it, or will not for any time, sir," 
said the young lord, fiercely. " But I see you trifle. What 
consideration do you desire 1 " 

There was a lofty scorn in his tone that irritated Mr Bolt 
even more than the throbbing headache, which the excite- 
ment of the conversation increased. Duelling was not quite 
out of fashion ; and Mr Bolt, who was a gentleman . of a sort 
. and of the press, did not want courage, and had more than 
once smelt powder at Chalk Farm ; and he was in such a tem- 
per that he would have braved another encounter, especially 
with a lord. But discretion was his best part to play, and so 
he answered, after a pause . 

*' Well, the paper wants advertising ; and if your lordship 
will take two thousand copies at full price . ^for we shall have 
them stamped . and distribute them gratis, all that you com- 
plain of shall be unsaid." 

"Fifty pounds," said his lordship, in a tone of uncon- 
cern. 

**Yes, fifty pounds," returned Mr Eolt, in a more bland 
voice. *'Very little, very little; and we give you the full 
Talue . quite the full value. Copies of the paper, sixpence 
each, stamped sevenpence. Beally, we can hardly do it at that 
price ! " 

- Mr Eolt put his fingers in the arm-holes of his white waist- 
coat, and sat down in his chair with the air of one who had 
conferred a favour on his new acquaintance. 

Then it was that the contempt of Lord Wimpole reached its 
highest point. He drew out his cheque-book, and wrote the 
order for the money, handed it over to Mr Eolt, and, whirling 
round his glove, gave him the cheque. 

" Now, sir," said he, " as you have shown yourself the 
responsible person of this atrocious paper, let me tell you what 
I think of you. You are worse than a highwayman 1 You a 
gentleman of the press ! You are a common scoundrel that 
levies black-mail ! I give you this money " (here he flung the 
cheque on the table) " to save a dear young lady, whom I 
respect, from annoyance ; but I tell you that you are a robber 



74 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



and a tittle-tattle slanderer 1 And, if you ever come across my 
path" 

'* What 1 " shouted Eolt, in a voice of thunder, getting up 
from his easy cane chair, which was upon castors, and pushing 
it behind him. " Do you want to fight, my lord?'' 

" Oh, no," said Lord Wimpole, with a sneer and a laugh ; 
" by no means. I will not fight you, I will thrash you." 

And he threw his glove with some force in his face. The 
newspaper hero, with an oath, struck wildly out ; but Lord 
Wimpole, with a well-planted blow in Mr Eolt's left eye, sent 
him spinning back upon his easy chair, and the deceptive 
castors gUding away, Mr Eolt fell heavily as Lord Wimpole 
left the room. Mr Eolt's account for his black eye, a few days 
afterwards. he left for. his home at Turnham-Green in ten 
minutes in a hackney coach, and was tenderly nursed by his 
wife . was that, after that confounded dinner at Thames Ditton, 
he had knocked his head against a post. But the boy, who 
had his ears about him, told an exaggerated story of the battle 
to a select circle of friends. Let it be said, to Mr Eolt's hon- 
our, that, while the cheque was duly cashed and the eye was 
black, the retractation appeared, carefully and even politely 
worded. But, as the Earl of Chestertion told his son, with 
whom he remonstrated, " his violent behaviour would only 
cause the scandal to spread ; '' and more people would hear, of 
the matter than he thought, or than would have heard had he 
been quiet. And surely enough, Lady Sark herself communi- 
cated the first news to Mr Horton, and showed him the care- 
fully worded retractation in the Argus, 

Mr Horton read the words with a beating heart, and took 
the paragraph in one of the meanings into which it was capable 
of construction. 

" Lord Wimpole, then," he said, " withdraws from any in- 
tention as regards your niece.'' 

" So the paper says," tittered Lady Stark. " I am sure I 
don't know. These people will write and talk of nous autres" 

She was quite proud of the esclandre, and bought some copies 
of the paper to send to her friends ; for she by no means 
desired that her niece should make a grand match. 

" Then I have hopes 1 " said Mr Horton. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 75 



'* Hopes ! Of course, all you men have ! What hopes, you 
gilly creature 1 " 

" Why, Lady Sark, you cannot have been so unobservant 
as not to see that I love your niece. Miss Winifred Vaughan ! " 

Mr Horton said this so fiercely and earnestly, that Lady 
Sark was quite startled. She had even thought that Mr 
Horton's visits were intended for her. How do we know 
why people come to our houses ? Sometimes to see the host, of 
course . sometimes the hostess. Sometimes the pretty visitor 
at Smith's house causes so many to call and drink his wine, 
and send Mrs Smith boxes for the theatre, to which she will 
carry the pretty visitor. Lady Sark was deeply hurt. 

" So you love Winifred Vaughan, do you ? Umph I Well, 
I am sure ! " (This was a favourite exclamation of her lady- 
ship's.) "Of course I did not expect her to marry all the 
Chesterton property and estates ; but, Mr Horton, she is my 
niece, and I think she might look higher than a poor bar- 
rister ! " 



CHAPTER XL 

'*S0 HATE TREADS CLOSELY ON THE HEELS OF LOVE^ 

Lady Sark was one of those who, having said a very nasty 
and spiteful thing, suddenly remember that they may find the 
person insulted of some use, and therefore withdraw, and do 
what they can to plaster the wound. Mr Horton was useful 
to her, procured for her boxes for the opera and bouquets of 
flowers, and she- could not, therefore, well afford to quarrel 
with him. 

Seeing his face turn very pale afc the insult, the dowager put 
out her hand, and conceded everything with . 

** Well, I 'm sure, I ought not to talk of poverty, seeing how 
poor I am for a peeress. You are a gentleman, and one of 
ancient blood ; so I don't know that it is so very bad. And 
you lawyera, too, do rise. I recollect that. Lord Bubbington's 
father was a barber, and he himself an attorney's clerk ; but 
when he became Lord Chancellor, why a duke's daughter 



76 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



wasn't too high for him. Yes, you have my consent, Mr 
Horton. You may go and speak to her now ; you will find 
her in the music-room.'' 

The barrister, forgiving all this rude and senseless chatter, 
which her ladyship took for wit, ran upon the wings of love, 
as she afterwards said, to the music-room, and there found the 
room . but it was empty. Two or three airs from a favourite 
opera were on the piano ; on the table, the gloves and collar 
of Winifred Yaughan. Mr Horton could have taken them up 
and kissed them ; but he never permitted himself scenes, even 
in private. He stood looking at them, in painful supense, and 
yet in joyful hope, for his heart dilated and closed again with 
the frequent recurrence of such feelings; when Winifred 
entered, in a large flop Leghorn hat, with blue side ribands, 
and bows large enough to make at least fifty modern bonnets. 
The young lady wore a muslin dress, with blue sprigs, cut 
strai^t to a high waist, where it was fastened by a broad blue 
silk sash ; very pretty shoes and sandals ; half-sleeves, puffed ; 
and long, very light blue silk gloves, which came up her arms 
to the elbow. 

Mr Horton thought he had never seen so elegant a dress nor 
so pretty a girl. 

He stood so still, that she hardly noticed him ; and taking 
off the Leghorn hat, swung it in her hands, while a shower of 
dark brown curls, with a warm tinge of red in them, fell upon 
her white, full shoulders and neck. Then, turning round, 
upright and straight as a fawn, she darted upon Mr Horton, 
and placing both her hands in his, seemed to dance with joy 
to see him. 

" Oh, I am so glad, so very glad ! I thought we were going 
to be quite dull ; but now we sha'n't be." 

A flush of deep pleasure spread over the barrister^s cheek. 
' ** So glad are you, Miss Winifred 1 I am happy that I see 
you are I" 

" Miss Winifred ! Call me Winny, or Winifred, not Miss. 
It does not seem as if we were the dear master and pupil that 
we are. Why have you come so early ? Can't you come as 
early every day in the week? Did you see aunty i " 

" I have something to tell you, Winifred," said the barrister, 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 77 

drawing a chair. " That is number one. Then number two 
is No. I can only come so early on especial business. I have 
a great deal of work, and I mean to work harder and harder. 
Number three is soon disposed of. I did see your aunt.*' 

He had sat down opposite Winifred ; and somehow^ as she 
drew a long silk glove from one of the whitest, softest, and 
prettiest arms in the world, she had stretched out her hand to 
him, which he had caught and retained. She allowed him to 
do so with perfect innocence, and looked up into his earnest 
eyes with pride and pleasure that so good, so clever a man 
should be her friend. 

" You see," said the barrister, " that I am come to you for 
help. I am much older than you . ever so much older. I am 
an old man.'' 

Winifred, who, with the sweet honour of youth, only saw 
in age something to love and respect, <lid not gainsay the 
barrister's words ; and this little reticence of hers somehow 
hurt him not a little . so vain, so sensitive is a man when he 
is in love. He went on with his speech. 

** I am thirty ; you are nineteen. There is a vast difference 
between us, and yet I come to consult you. Do you know why ] " 

" Because you love and trust me, I hope," said Winifred, in 
the purest innocence. 

"Because I love and trust you," answered Mr Horton. 
" Because I can live no longer alone, and am determined . for 
the future stretches bright before me . to work tvith a wife, 
rather than for a wife in the future ; to make her my com- 
panion in my schemes, my plans, and my ambition. And we 
barristers, Winifred, may indulge in such. It is fourteen years 
ago since the war closed, and the folly of ambition was fitly 
checked upon a bloody field. Since then we have had an era 
of peace and progress ; but how little has been done for man- 
kind! With how great follies and anomalies our laws yet 
bristle 1 How great would he be who made Equity " 

"What is Equity, Mr Horton?" said stupid Winifred, 
drinking in every word of his speech, and looking at him with 
fond admiring eyes. 

. " Equity, Winifred," said the barrister, rising and standing 
before her, " is law recoxi^trued by the dictates of Justice." 



78 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



''And is not law justice, then}" said the wondering yonng 
lady. 

''Not always. Law is a science, and must be construed 
according to precedent. But". Here he paused] the 
conversation was not taking the precise course he could have 
wished. "Winifred," he said, solemnly, after a time, as if 
collecting himself for an effort, "there is a glorious future 
before that man who, rising from the ranks of the law, will 
remedy the abuses of the law. And what cannot a man do 
when aided by her he loves ! Her approval will outweigh the 
voice of fame . the empty huzzas of the mob ; and, having 
struggled and succeeded, he may, in my noble profession . for 
indeed it is noble . lay a coronet at the feet of her whom he 
loves ! Help me, "Winifred ! Be the companion of my toil, 
the reward of my labour. Winifred, I love you ! " 

He knelt at her fedt as he said this. He seized her hand, 
and covered it with kiss6s. She drew it away hurriedly, 
covered her face with her hands, and, standing before him, 
cried out . 

" Mr Horton ! don*t . don't say that you love me ! You 
are a good honourable man, and I love you ; but I love you 
as an elder brother 1 Though you are older, and I look up with 
reverence to and honour you, I might have loved you as a wife, 
and have aided you with all a good man needs . his wife's 
loving admiration ; but I am promised to another, and with 
the promise of my hand, I gave away my heart." 

Here she stopped. It was inconceivably painful to her ; for 
her perception, acute and vigorous as a woman's, and as deli- 
cate as that of the most honourable of men, told her that her 
gentleness and open frankness had been in fault. It was 
inconceivably painful to her to find that this man had been 
betrayed by herself into loving her. She almost hated herself^ 
and felt that she owed him some apology. 

The blow was a sudden and heavy one to Mr Horton. Pew 
men, if any, make up their minds to propose without feeling a 
certainty of being accepted ; and Mr Horton was one of those 
who, had he fancied any one would have forestalled him, would 
have repressed his affections with heroic force rather than have 
spoken. The answer Winifred gave took him completely by 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 79 

surprise. He had been led away by the gossip of Mr B. 
Coaster and the Morning Pillar^ or Bamett Slanuners of the 
Argus, which had infiltrated society, and made the veracious 
body of people represent Miss Vaughan as a deserted maiden^ 
whose prettiness had been an attraction indeed, but who had 
been quite thrown over by the young aristocrat whose name 
had been connected with hers. Society, when it talks of these 
affairs of the heart, always leaves out the feelings, and makes 
them affairs of Art ! 

No wonder, then, that, drawing himself up, Mr Horton 
apologised, and asked . 

" And to whom, Miss Vaughan, are you affianced ? " 

" I will tell you," said Winifred, laying her hand upon his 
shoulder, and looking up to him with an innocent truth, that 
made him love her all the more. "I will tell you. ^ I am to 
marry Lord Wimpole ; but it is a secret." 

"Lord Wimpole!" stammered Horton, with amazement. 
" But they said . at least it was asserted that ". . 

" It was that very idle talk that made Lord Wimpole, who 
is as delicate and honourable as yourself" 

Horton muttered a curse upon his rival. Good as he was, 
he loved too deeply not to hate the man who had deprived 
him of so much happiness ; and would have turned away. 

" You would love him," said Winifred, in a pleading tone, 
." almost as much as I do . not quite ! . no one can ever do 
that; but when you know him, as you will " 

*' Never, Wintfred, never ! " cried Horton, taking her hand, 
and wringing it in agony. " Don't ask me too much I Do 
not send me mad 1 I love you I . ^love you ! . love you ! That 
love will never cease, never diminish. You do not know my 
nature if you think it would.". 

" Dear friend ! " said Winifred, coming closer to him. the 
little sly boots ! . and putting up her forehead, with its rich 
dowry of flowing hair, to be kissed, " dear Mr Horton, how I 
thank you for that love ! " Her eyes were full of tears as she 
looked up at him, and two big bright drops rolled down and 
fell upon the gauzy muslin that covered her neck. " I am full 
of pain that one so unworthy as I should have been the cause 
of your distress. And yet I am proud of the love of a good 



80 ONE or TWO ; or, 



wise man. Let us be friends ; and let time, that heals the 
deepest woundsi turn your pure love into that of a brother. 
All will be welly I know; and when you come to know 
him" 

But here an impatient stamp of Mr Horton's foot betrayed 
his emotion. He took the pretty earnest young face between 
his hands, and kissing the forehead reverently, promised that 
he would always be her friend ; and she, smiling through her 
tears, told him that, in her heart, if she could not give him all, 
he would ever be a dear friend, a nearer than a brother . ^and 
. and^. 

Here, happily, was heard Lady Sark's voice, who summoned 
the two to a game of whist. Whist is no doubt delightful to 
elderly gentlemen, but to a ihan who had just been rejected, it 
was torture ; and to Winifred Yaughan, who watched him, it 
was little else. 

But Mr Horton was game to the backbone. He played 
dummy without revoking, and went through the ordeid with 
as much bravery as if he were leading a forlorn hope. At last 
the time came when even the dowager began to nod. She 
had not noticed the constrained behaviour of the two ; and, 
intent upon her tricks, had failed to observe one of the pitying 
loving looks which Winifred had showered in great plenty 
on the heroic barrister, She^ at least, quite appreciated his 
goodness, and rewarded him in such a way that her looks 
poured, not oil, but vitriol upon his open wounds. 

When he reached home, he was in a fever of excitement. 
He blamed himself for his folly, for his age, for not being a 
born lord, for a dozen other matters. He walked about his 
room like a caged lion. His forbearance during the game of 
cards had only intensified his feelings. He hated Lord Wim- 
pole thoroughly. For this man was of a strong nature, and in 
the fresh agonies of the greatest sorrow and defeat he had ever 
felt. It was not in his nature to show his feelings. It would 
Imve been better for him if he had done so ; but, finding him- 
self the dupe of this reticence, he raged against himself. 

^* She will love me like a brother ! " he said, bitterly; "and 
I will hato him like a brother ! " 

Then he sat down and tried to read; but the lines ran 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 81 

~ . - - . ' . 

before his eyes as th^ hedges nm, or seem to run, by the side 
of one whirled onwards by a fast coach. He tried to pray, but 
it was useless. Then he thought of his old college plan of 
opening a book and finding a text, by a kind of sories, to com- 
fort him. 

" I hate him ! " he said to himself. " Has he not all the 
world to choose from, and does he not come between me and 
my love . my love . ^my love ! " 

As he repeated these words, he took up the Bible . his 
mother's gift . and opened it. His eyes fell upon the text : 
" Whoso hateth his brother is a murderer" 

The words struck him with a thrill of horror. He hastily 
extinguished the light, as if to hide himself. Then he tried 
to pray. He clasped his hands above his forehead, and rose 
in agony. 

" Spare me, oh, spare me, good Lord ! " he cried. " This 
blow is too bitter I " 

He stretched forth his hands in the darkness. His prayer 
was not answered, for his hand fell upon a pistol, one of a 
pair he carried with him on circuit. He felt the cold steel of 
the barrel like an electric shock. He grasped the weapon, 
cocked it, and cried . 

" Ay, Lord Wimpole, with your wealth, your position, and 
your coronet, this shall make us equal Blessings be upon it ; 
this weapon levels all ranks! If I met you now, I would 
insult you, taunt you to some act of defiance, and shoot you 
like a dog ! " 

Then, throwing the pistol from him, he sank upon his knees, 
and cried like a child. 

Within six months from that terrible trial, Mr George 
Horton, the most rising young barrister on his circuit, threw 
up the beginnings of a most promising practice, and accepted 
the post of a stipendiary police magistrate. Some said he was 
a fool, others said he was lazy, almost everybody put down to 
a mean motive this act. But he himself said . 

" I have no motive to rise now. I will study crime, for 
am I not a criminal myself?^* 



82 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



CHAPTER XII. 

MR FORSTER AND MR EDGAR WADE ENTER THE LAND OF 

DREAMS, 

While Mr Tom Forster, with his red bandana neatly wrapped 
about his head, was pursuing his profession in the land of 
dreams, Edgar Wade, carefully dressing himself, pulling on 
clean boots, washing his face, and arranging his hair, was 
preparing for a midnight visit. As he looked in the glass, the 
mirror reflected a handsome, very intellectual face, but with 
the traces of passion, hard work, and study by far too apparent 
on it. A good rough huckaback towel . the Turkish appliances 
not being yet introduced . produced a momentary irritation 
and colour ; and the young lawyer seemed apparently satisfied 
with his scrutiny. Locking up Old Forster's cheque, he took 
out four fifty pound notes from another drawer, and looking 
for an instant into the sick room, prepared himself for his 
journey. 

Madame Wade was still in the same unconscious state. The 
night-light in the fireplace . a tall tallow rushlight, in a tin 
cylinder pierced with many holes . threw its chequered shade 
on the floor of the room, lighting the ceiling with a dim un- 
earthly light, and falling upon the nodding head of a French 
Sister of Charity, who was half asleep when the door opened, 
but whose hands fell mechanically to counting her beads 
when she was aware of the presence of another. Mrs Wade 
was of the old faith . that of her country . and the Sister of 
Charity, a strange sight in any English sick-room, gave a 
foreign tone to the apartment, which the white hangings of the 
bed, and the Parisian, heavy, but scanty furniture carried 
out. 

Edgar's lips moved mechanically, as he said . 

" Any change, Sister Agatha 1 " 

" No, monsieur." (This was said in a pure French accent.) 
** If the good God would permit, madame would bo better in 
the morning." 

Sister Agatha devoutly crossed herself at the holy name. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 83 

J 

" Good night. At six o'clock, then, I will look in again. 
My poor mother ! " 

Edgar seemed to ring the words from his heart, they were 
spoken so slowly and so softly. 

He was away in an instant. Softly down the stone stairs, 
softly past the closed door of the dreaming old man, softly to 
the bolted door which led into the stables belonging to the 
house. Once in these, to light a lamp, dipping a phosphor- 
ous match in a little bottle for the purpose, and to saddle a 
stout and shapely cob, which whinnied as he approached it, 
was to Edgar Wade . ^who was quite used to that sort of work, 
and whose only luxury, to all appearance at least, was this 
horse, and rare and far between gallops in the park . but the 
work of a few moments. Putting on the bridle deftly, pulling 
tight the girths, and arranging the stirrups so that they should 
not click and ring, Edgar led his horse out of the stable into 
the mews, shut the door softly, and was soon far away with a 
stretching gallop to St John's Wood. 

St John's Wood and Park Village East, London, have still a 
rural and secluded look, as if built for innocent and Paradisaic 
inhabitants who knew nothing of the trouble of this world, and 
who preferred the sweet simplicity of a semi-rural and suburban 
life to the bustle and noisy security of the towns. The houses 
are detached . ^very much detached, indeed . each, for the most 
part, standing within its own grounds, which are about a 
quarter of an acre to half an acre in extent. A ground floor 
and a first floor are all that they boast ; and a cozy little hall 
in close, too close, proximity with the kitchen, leads to a 
drawing-room with folding doors on one side, and a pretty 
little, dining-room on the other. Eccentric artists as the 
architects of these villages . happy villages . have been, they 
were not more eccentric than the owners who have baptized 
the houses. Whether they went through that solemn opera- 
tion by throwing a paint brush at the pillars, and then dipping 
by hazard into the dictionary or "Court Guide" for names, is not 
known ; but certain it is that Gloucester Lodges, Raby Villas, 
Sussex Houses, and Montmorency Places are to be there 
found. As Marvell says of King Charles I., when executed, 
"He nothing common did,"* so the builders gave no common 



84 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



names to these pretty, secluded little villas, fit only for young 
brides in the very earliest and sweetest hours of the honey- 
moon. When baby makes his appearance, and the nurse and 
her companions march in . ^at which time wicked people always 
declare that the happiness of a married man marches out . then 
Eaby Villa grows too small for its occupant. The humble 
Smith who inhabits it finds that he can hear too much and see 
too little of his wife ; and he ends by taking a bigger house 
somewhat nearer town. Of late years, although the town has 
grown up to these rural retreats, and the noise of the morning 
omnibus is heard, as well as the shriek of the underground 
railway, where the blackbird whistled and the robin sang, 
these places have lost less of their rurality than any other part 
of London. The apple trees are grown somewhat older and 
bear less, the green is somewhat smokier, and the brides and 
babies have alike left the neighbourhoods for other habita- 
tions. 

The hoofs of Edgar's horse soon ceased to ring on the granite 
road, and he trotted much more pleasantly over gravel and 
powdered flints for some quarter of an hour ; when, up at the 
farthest end of a grove, that was then a grove, and trotting over 
a bridge of the very canal that at a distance ran by poor 
Madame Martin's deserted home, he stopped at a little house 
in its courtyard, and, opening the gate, led his horse in. The 
servant who took the horse and tethered him under an arbour, 
giving him some pieces of bread rather than corn, seemed to be 
quite familiar with the barrister. 

" Your mistress is within 1 " was Edgar's question, put almost 
dogmatically, as if no chance in the world could permit her to 
be out. 

" Oh yes, sir . has returned from the opera about half an 
hour." 

So saying, the door was gently opened, and Edgar Wade 
ushered into the drawing-room. When there, the soft light of 
some wax candles and a French lamp fell upon him, the soft 
strain of a melodious voice, the delicious perfume of flowers, 
and even of wines, and the whole aroma of that atmosphere 
which surrounds one whom we love . love deeply, and with all 
the intensity of a strong nature. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 85 

As he stood looking at the beautiful creature from whom the 
song came, Edgar Wade stretched out his arms, more like 
a Frenchman than an Englishman, and cried . 

" Natalie ! my heart's love ! how I do love you ! " 

Upon which, Mdlle. Natalie, of the King's Theatre in the 
Haymarket, known as the Opera House, twirled round on her 
music stool, and said coolly . 

" Est-ce-que vous avez fait tout le chemin k pied ? " 

" No ! I rode . rode as fast as a good horse could carry me.*' 

" Then why were you not here before, sir ? You must not 
run two hares at the time. Do you love some one else, like 
your other rich milords English ? " 

" Natalie," said Edgar, " you know I love you and you alone. 
Come with me, my bird, to a softer clime. I will marry you 
to-morrow, Natalie, if you will accept me. You have only to 
say the word." 

" Which I do not say," replied Natalie, adjusting her loose 
Indian wrapper, and sinking down on a luxurious couch covered 
with a tiger skin. " Where is my maid ? She shall comb my 
hair while you talk. She knows not the English.'* 

With a subtle knowledge of the young man who bent before 
her without any return for his love ; with one or two mechanical 
little moties which she made at him instead of giving him kisses 
. this young Delilah threw herself upon the couch in beautiful 
and artistic positions, now revealing the beauty of an arm, now 
of her neck or hair, in a way at once theatrical and provoking, 
but which made the honest English heart of Edgar Wade 
dilate and throb with love. Oh ! if he could but have seen 
how cold the little heart in that fair form was, how the brain 
calculated every word the mouth uttered, and how the " glori- 
ous abandon of the French artiste," as the enthusiastic re- 
porters of the opera said, were but motions of a puppet, 
mechanically taught and as mechanically remembered ! Oh ! 
if he could but have seen this, he would have hated himself 
for his love. 

When the maid came in, and prepared . also in an artistic 
way, for she was used to such scenes . to smooth the glossy 
black tresses of her mistress, Edgar, with the same respect for 
the little lady that he would have shown to a duchess, drew a 



86 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



chair near, and taking one little hand in his own, said 
softly . 

" And has my little bird grown tired of her nest 1 " 

" England is very triste,^' said Mdlle. Natalie, with a sigh. 

Indeed, she found it so, for Natalie Fifine had come from 
Paris, where she, by her united accomplishments, charmed that 
gay and volatile people. And she missed her little reunions of 
singers, dancers, actors, authors, and artistes, which she held 
on Sundays and high days and holidays, which were plentiful 
enough to people of her profession. 

" We are indeed tristes" said Edgar. "We are a melancholy 
and sombre people. Natalie, I would go anywhere with 
you, were I rich enough ! " 

" English milords are always rich,'' said the operatic artiste, 
with a Jiungry look towards him, " but not always generous 
or gracious. Now, our countrymen know our value." 

A little hypocrite ! Here was a young fellow who had 
thrown his fortune at her feet, who had furnished the little 
nest which held her whom he loved, " regardless of expense," as 
the upholsterer in Wigmore Street, who had fitted it up under 
his directions, well said. Gilding and mirrors, soft carpets, easy 
couches and chairs filled the house, and if the space had been 
larger, would have swallowed up a fortune. All that Edgar 
had, he had lavished on his love. He might as well have 
thrown his money into the sea. Always exigeanfe and p-eten- 
sieuse, Natalie Fifine had marched into the country of her 
natural enemies, the English, with the virtuous determination 
of accepting everything and giving nothing. 

" Did you bring me that bracelet, monsieur, which I admired 1 
I want something handsome for my new part. I have nothing 
to adorn me." 

" Except your beauty, Natalie." 

"You cold English! You do not understand beauty, 
nor art, nor anything. The director of your opera gives 
me but very small parts. I have a trouble to distinguish 
myself." 

" Your grace, your voice, my Natalie, distinguish you any- 
where, if you were in the greatest court in the world." 

" I should very much like to be an English miladi.Si, coun- 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 87 



tess . they are accepted everywhere. Empty compliments do 
not please me." 

" I am a poor man," said Edgar, " an avocat. I can only 
offer you my name and my heart. Yet " 

And the young fellow thought of the events of the last few 
days, and the splendid vista of ambition opened up to him. 
But he was wise enough not to tell this to Natalie. He was 
hungry for her love ; and blinded as he was by his fondness, 
he yet waited quietly till he should win, as he hoped to win, 
her heart. In his romantic dream of love . that deep and 
fervent love which had made him stake his whole fortune, his 
whole being, on this quiet, selfish, mechanical little beauty . 
he had forecast a delicious reality of winning her wholly to him 
in his poverty and obscurity; and then, when fortune came, offer- 
ing to her his greatness and his glory as a crown to her beauty. 

Miss Natalie, looking up into his handsome face, thought 
that, like his cold countrymen, he was calculating the cost of 
that which might win her; and as she made a great deal of 
money by her art, and was able to absorb any amount of the 
precious metal, and spend it again upon her luxuries and her 
whims, she determined not to part with her precious self but 
at a very high price indeed. Mr Edgar Wade judged her by 
himself, and deemed her reticence virtue ; she judged him by 
herself, and thought his silence calculation. 

Thus, these two young people were as far from understand- 
ing each other as two young people well could be. Miss 
Natalie Fifine, had she known all, would have found that she 
had very nearly exhausted Edgar Wade's purse; while his 
love was boundless, noble, and virtuous. Had he known her 
and her antecedents, her cold heart . calculating, precise, 
unmoved . ^under that very artistically fond and voluptuous 
exterior, he would have rather married, as many a lawyer has 
married, his cook, maid, or the laundress of his chambers, than 
that graceful little creature whom he thought superior to any 
Englishwoman who ever lived. 

" So monsieur has not bought Natalie that pretty bagatelle 1" 

She had a way, which was very pleasant to him, of speaking 
of herself as an innocent third person . quite a child, indeed . 
when making any demand upon his purse. 



88 ONE OF TWO ; OB, 



Poets ma J weU saj that lore is blind. Mr Edgar Wade 
did not even dream of Natalie's yenality, but stretched his 
anns again to her, and taking ber prettj bead in bis bands, 
kissed her on the forehead. He was all pnritj, all devotion 
and respect to this little Bobemienne, who was more than 
astonished at this English wa j of making love. 

'' Natalie," be said, as if making her the confidant of some* 
thing very surprising, .* if I have des bonnes fortumSf I may 
become a milord ! " 

" Ah ! yes," returned th« young lady, whose education as to 

the English peerage was limited. Then she made a pretty 

little mouth, and closed bar large liquid eyes. ^' Ah ! y-arars.'' 

Luckily she said no more. As monsieur is an advocate, 

such was her reasoning, he may some day be Lord Mayor. 

Now, to be Lord Mayor was a very great thing in Natalie's 

eyes. The Lord Mayor was the embodiment to this Parisian 

of riches and dignity ; but with all the supreme ignorance of a 

conceited, pretty, and spoilt Frenchwoman about anything else 

but fwus autres, she knew that the dignity of. Lord Mayor was 

too far off to be of much good to her. She therefore received 

this announcement very calmly. 

'* You will love me more then" said Edgar, mindful that, if 
he were acknowledged as the heir to the Earl of Chesterton, 
half the London matches . ay, and the pick of the country 
ones, too ! . would be at his feet. ** You would love me more 
then, my dove ! " This with a slight bitterness . ^that is^ the 
barrister was as bitter as he could be to one whom he loved 
so deeply. 

'' Ah, non ! " said Natalie, for once noticing his tone, and 
speaking truly. For she would not have cared for the most 
magnificent milord maire that ever sat upon a civic throne, 
since she only cared for herself. Then, with a very artistic 
lapse into a stage-like utter softness and abandon, she put 
forward her little hands plaintively, and murmured, " Ah, we 
poor women, how little do you men understand our hearts ! 
Mon Dieu ! is it not for you to move onward and to undertake 
action, to be immersed in the love of wealth and of glory? 
That suffices you. But for us, it is to remain at home, to prey 
npon our desolate hearts, and to weep ! '' 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 89 

. 
> . .' I 

And with very good French, charming inflection, and perfect 
emphasis she said this. Every word seemed an epigram. Her 
lover felt the reproof cut him like a knife, for the quotation 
was a happy one ; and Natalie knew its effect well, having 
tried it »at a little theatre near the Porte St Martin for over a 
hundred nights. 

" O Natalie ! " cried he, bending his head over the couch, 
and nestling in her arms. " my souFs love ! how noble, 
how generous you are ! My future, my life itself is yours ! 
Sleep, then, my bird, and await a happy future for us both ! " 
and he pressed into her hand a packet of notes for current 
expenses. 

"Peut^tre," lisped Natalie, as she touched his forehead 
with a kiss as light and as cold as the fall of a snow-flake. 

The horse's hoofs were soon heard near Queen Anne Street ; 
and anon Edgar Wade was asleep like the magistrate, dream- 
ing of love ; while Natalie, having counted her gains, slept too, 
in her little nest, in which she had previously indulged in a 
cigarette and a jpetU verre of absinthe. Poor little thing ! She, 
too, was doing her best in the great game of life. She had 
endured hunger and cold in the streets of Paris ; had sung at 
cabarets and guingeites; had been beaten by papa when he was 
drunk, and mamma when she was hungry and savage ; had 
risen through her grace and her beauty ; had established P6re 
Bouvier as seller of old books and curiosities ; and had rescued 
the mamma from the sad role of a rag-picker, to place her in com- 
fort near the store of the old soldier, her father. To take these 
worthy people into the country in some desolate white French 
cottage, where they could quietly sink into the grave, consoled 
by the cur^, and respected by nos bon villageois, was Natalie's 
ambition. Did not the end justify the means ? 

And oh ! what cross purposes do' we not play in love ! 
Here was the great heart of Edgar Wade blindfolding itself 
with the idea that cunning reserve was purity . mechanical 
action the ideal of grace . tho movements of a puppet the 
intense and rapturous bound of a living love. And while the 
Bouviers, pere and m^e, were watching their daughter, and 
counting every ounce of gold she gained, complaining that 
she had made no more, or talking of her cruelty, she was 



90 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



watching their rheumy, hungry eyes with the only true love 
she ever gave to any human being. Ah i what a boon to our 
poor human hearts is true love ! What misery is it to awaken 
from that sweet illusion, and find our idol worse than of clay, 
our soul's sweetest passion a delusion and a snare ! 



CHAPTER XIII. 

THE EDITOR OF THE " ARGUS " PICKS UP MA TTER. 

When Mr Tom Forster had perfectly escaped from the land 
of dreams, which he did with various starts and tremors, as 
becomes a man well on in life, he awoke all of a sudden ; and, 
acting mechanically, upon a vigorous impulse, jumped out of 
bed like one of those wooden frogs which itinerant vendors 
exhibit upon tea trays. It was this springy activity which 
gave Old Daylight his place in the world. He was always 
ready and on the alert ; and this he attributed to the fact that, 
when awake, he was out of bed in an instant. Had he carried 
his philosophy further, he might have placed it to the iron 
will behind this activity. 

The philosopher was copious in his ablutions . it being, let 
us add, somewhat of an error to suppose that the present 
generation first discovered the virtues of cold water and yellow 
soap. 

After that, he was ready for breakfast and the battle of life. 

The housekeeper . a boisterous, familiar woman . looked 
upon Mr Forster, who was always considerate and kind, as 
her natural prey. As she came into the parlour with the 
breakfast, she remarked . 

" Well, we are looking well this morning, considering how 
late we were out last night ; leastways, it was not to be called 
night. Small hours it was, and very small hours." 

Mr Forster, who was busy with his own thoughts, looked up, 
and said nothing. 

For her part, continued the housekeeper, she did not like 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 91 

midnight wanderings. After they were a certain age, middle- 
aged gentlemen, not to say old men, were best a>bed. 

The talkative Mrs Spiller had, in fact, heard the exodus of 
Edgar Wade ; and. being utterly puzzled by her master, had 
charitably supposed him to be engaged in some nocturnal 
wickedness, too hkse to be made public. It was with a feeling 
very much akin to bitter disappointment that made her cry 
out, " Well, we do look well ; " for, in Mrs Spiller's private 
opinion. Old Forster ought to have had the heavy eyes and 
weary look of a stage murderer after he had " done the deed." 
Mr Cooke, after being busily engaged on his own account in 
Duncan's diamber . and professionally in whitening his cheeks, 
reddening his eyelids, and dishevelling his stage wig . presented 
some such type, when he staggered in from the murder of the 
king, as Mr Tom Forster ought to have filled in Mrs Spiller's 
eyes. 

Meanwhile, the dreamy philosopher was laying down a little 
plan of proceedings for the day's work, aU of which he care- 
fully carried out, and heard no more of Mrs Spiller's chatter 
than he did of the cry of milk and the rattle of the early carts 
in Queen Anne Street. As Mrs Spiller was too officious in 
laying the breakfast, and put down the mutton chop with a 
dash . Mr Forster always ate a hearty breakfast, and did not 
dawdle with his tea . her master rose with great politeness, 
and, opening the door, motioned her out, saying . 

" Convey my compliments to Mr Wade, and ask him how 
his mother slept last night." 

Mrs Wade was just the same, neither better nor worse, said 
Mrs Spiller . who knew all about it ; and who, as is the case 
with cruel and selfish people, hardly believed in an illness 
which was so quiet, so uniform, and yet so dangerous. She 
also resented the interest that Mr Forster took in the family 
up-stairs, as opposed to her own. 

" That will do, then ; I shall not require you, and I shall 
not dine at home, Mrs Spiller ; " and, with a hand held up to 
forbid further parley, he closed the door. 

In pursuance of his plan, after breakfast, Old Daylight, 
taking one of the letters he had obtained from Edgar, proceeded 
to a gentleman who dealt in manuscripts and autographs in 



92 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



Bond Street, and purchased, for a few shillings, one or two 
franks of the present Earl of Chesterton when he was Lord 
Wimpole and a member for Bedford. The old man started as 
he compared the MSS. There was no mistake. Edgar Wade 
was quite right. 

From New Bond Street . then a very fashionable lounge, 
and ornamented with other Hessian boots than those of Old 
Forster . he struck across Covent Garden, newly built, and iiie 
wonder of the London world ; as it is now, but from another 
cause. They wondered that it was so large and fine ; we that 
it is so mean, dirty, shabby, and ill-appointed. But Old 
Daylight snuffed the fresh air, and saw the fruit and flowers 
with delight ; and was amazed that, in a world so beautiful, 
such a being as he, with such a business as he had, could be 
needed. 

In the centre avenue, Mr Forster, who intended to have 
reached Catherine Street, Strand . then, as now, known for its 
newspaper oflSces, but boasting (?) of a most objectionable pri- 
vate theatre . was stopped by the very person of whom he was 
in search . Mr Rolt, the editor of the far-famed Argus news- 
paper, 

" Ah, ha ! Mr Forster," said that worthy . ^who had long 
ago, of course, recovered from his black eye . "ah, ha ! and so 
we meet you here on your way to Bow Street ! Now, I sup- 
pose," said Mr Rolt, putting his thumbs in his white waistcoat 
armholes, and striking an attitude . for Mr Rolt was well 
kno^vn about his own quarter . " that you presume that I am 
about my business, picking up character. There 's plenty of it 
lost here ! Ha ! ha ! " 

" I suppose so," replied Mr Forster, dreamily ; for although 
Rolt was the man he wanted, he was somewhat caught up . as 
one is when he reaches the top of a staircase, and makes a false 
step under the idea that there is yet another stair. 

" You suppose so . you sly dog, you 1 " said Mr Rolt, in a 
bantering way, and thinking over a paragraph. " Now, you 
know, that if I have my business, you have yours. What is 
it that Hamlet says about business? You are a Shakes- 
pearian, Mr Forster . a Shakespearian. The passage runs 
thus ; . 



J 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 93 

" * Ton, as your business and desire shall point you . 
Por every man hath business and desire, 
Such as it is ; * " 

spouted the literary man. 



" * And for my own poor part, 

Look you, I will go pray,' " 



continued Forster, with much better emphasis than Mr Rolt, 
who mouthed too much after the fashion of those days. 

"Pray ! . no, no, you won't," said Mr Rolt, falling into Old 
Daylight's trap, " Pray ! . a deal of prayers you say ! '' con- 
tinued the editor, with the flattering suggestion . and he in- 
tended it to be complimentary . that his friend never said a 
prayer in his life. " Now, look you, Mr Forster, I will spend 
a half-hour with you," looking at his watch. " Half-past ten. 
Yes, exactly at eleven I have an appointment with young Lord 
Sparerib and Dr Portly about . but there, you know, I 'm 



sure." 



Old Daylight did not know, but he looked as if he did, which 
was about as good, sjnce the appointment did not exist ; only 
Mr Rolt knew that, to make his company gracious, he had 
better assume that his time was precious. As there was 
nothing better that Forster desired at that moment than half 
an hour's interview with the editor, the two, upon Forster's 
proposition, marched off to the then flourishing Hummums ; 
and, sitting down, called for some German waters and a pint of 
Champagne, as a modest morning refreshment. 

" You will be, of course, engaged in this curious affair out 
of town a little way ? Really, Mr Forster, if it were not for 
men of your peculiar calibre, the public would not be protected. 
Mr Peel's bill was needed. Conservative as I am, I must con- 
fess that the government of the town needed looking to. Will 
these brooms, being new, have the usual effect of new brooms ? " 

" Well, they have made a clean sweep of the old oflBicers," 
said Forster, with a reference to Brownjohn, " except one or 
two in the city and at Bow Street. I dare say they will do 
very well." 

Mr Rolt here took the tall stone bottle of German water 
from the waiter, and gave him the Champagne to open, to pour 
in equal divisions into two tall glasses. 



94 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



" Let us see," said he ; " Lord B}toii, in his last poem, says, 
* hock and soda-water ' is the thing. Well, it might have beem 
so for him. His lordship was a poet ; I am a plain prose man. 
He loved gin ; I take very kindly to brandy. No, give me 
Seltzer and Champagne ! Your health, sir." 

Mr Eolt's draught was palatable, and he put himself more 
easily in his chair, as a censor morum and arbiter elegantiarum 
rolled into one. 

" A common vulgar crime . for love, jealousy, or money . 
this is, I suppose, Mr Forster 1 '* 

"All crime is vulgar," returned the philosopher. " It is the 
worst possible way to get a thing, and nobody but a fool takes 
it." 

" Egad, there are a great many fools, then," said Rolt, gaily. 

He then opened his budget of wants, which Daylight well 
knew he would. Vulgar as the crime was, he thought that a 
good sensational leader upon it would serve the Argus ; and 
he determined to pump Mr Forster as far as he could. But 
the well was exceedingly dry, or the sucker did not act ; for 
it was astonishing how far a-field, without downright lying, 
Mr Forster led the editor of the Argus, He had a purpose to 
serve, too ; and, after he had told or hinted at as much as he 
chose, he ceased from answering oracularly, and became a ques- 
tioner. 

" Your paper must have a large circulation, Mr Eolt ? " said 
he. 

" Immense," said the editor, with great emphasis on the last 
syllable. 

f* Goes into a great many families of the nobility?" 

" The tip-top, my dear sir, the very tip-top. Why, it was 
only the other day that the Duke of Cadcaster . ^you know 
him by reputation, quite a young man and a charming fellow ; 
Used to be the Marquis of Oldborough, courtesy title . well, the 
Duke said to me, * Rolt, dash my wig, I do wonder how you 
fellows know all about us fellows.' . ' Your Grace,' said I, with 
a smile, ' I 'm not going to permit even you to peep behind 
the scenes. The British press is the palladium of British 
liberty.' . * She ought to be something,' said the Duke ; * she 
takes a confounded lot of liberjbies.* . ' Perhaps so, your Grace,* 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 95 



said I ; * but I cannot lift the skirt of her sacred robe. How 
we obtain news we only can tell. There are modes.' " 

Old Forster*s next question puzzled him. 

" Do you know the Earl of Chesterton at all, or his family ? 
I allude more particularly to his son." 

Rolt buried his good-looking, frank face in the glass. 

" I cannot say I do . muck I have never been to Chester- 
ton House. The Earl is an old swell, and does not like the 
press. As to the son, I have exchanged words with him. I 
don't like him," said the ingenious and ingenuous editor, 
coming very near the truth. " When we exchanged words, 
they very nearly came to blows." 

" What, is he so irascible, then 1 " asked OldForster, making 
a mental note. " I heard that he was a fine young man at 
Oxford . one of the athletes, but as mild as a lamb." 

'* A very savage lamb, then," said the editor, who had not 
forgiven Lord Wimpole's striking appeal. "Why, he is a 
pupil of Jackson's . a regular bruiser . a. patron of the ring . a 
lover of thjB noble art. He is up to all that sort of thing . 
quite a sporting nobleman. 



(C ( 



A dunce at Horace, but a dab at taw.' 



You know what the poet says, Mr Forster. Of course, such a 
man as that does not care about literary men. Let arms yield 
to the gown, say I. I won't give you the original ; although, 
egad, it 's quite the thing to quote Latin to the House . quite 
the tip-top thing, I assure you ; but it must be a very familiar 
line, one that has done duty before, to please our legislators. 
You see, they recognise an old friend," said Kolt, with a grin. 

"Just so," said Forster, quietly sticking to his point. " And 
so this young man is an athletic fellow, is he 1 What sort of 
man is he 1 " 

" Oh, to do him justice, the dog 's well built enough. About 
as tall as I am, and well made about the hips. Can ride well 
across country, I should think. A light-footed, nimble, quick 
fellow, from what I Ve seen." He might have added, " and 
felt," but he stopped. " You seem rather particular. Getting 
up a case, Mr Forster? You don't do the debt business . 
nothing in the way of the Fleet ? " 



96 ONE OF TWO ; OK, 



Here he tapped Forster on the shoulder, as a bailiff might 
have done ; and with his gloved right hand tossed over his 
other shoulder, pointed with his extended thumb towards Fleet 
Street 

" Making inquiries for a friend in that way," grunted Old 
Forster. "Has he expensive habits 1 Any vices] Does he 
fence ? " 

" Habits ! Vices I Egad, Is hould like to know the man 
without 'em. Yes, plenty, I suppose . of a sort . of a gentle- 
manly sort, of course. But why do you put fencing among 
them?" Here the editor, opening his chest, threw himself 
into an attitude, and made a pass with his walking-stick. " If 
fencing is a vice, then poor Tom Lilbum Eolt is a monster. 
Ha ! your tierce, carte . upper and lower . ^that 's your game, 
Mr Forster ! " And the literary gentleman, in his ecstasies, 
nearly knocked down one of the tall glasses. "Fence," he 
continued, coming up red in the face. " Well, yes, I suppose 
he does; . indeed, I know he does. I met Captain Chouser, 
who keeps a room down in the Haymarket thereaway, and is 
a celebrated master. Poor Chouser ! He fought at Waterloo 
. married an heiress . spent all his and her money on fine 
company . sold out of the Dragoons. best fencer in Europe. 
Yes, I recollect he told me, when he thanked me for a brilliant 
little paragraph, that Wimpole was one of the best hands he 
had ever crossed foils with. Quick, dev'lish quick . lik-e a 
flash of lightning . and with an iron wrist." 

Mr Tom Forster hereupon rose, looking at his never-failing 
watch, and found that the half-hour had long passed. Then, 
to do the gentlemanly thing, he offered Mr Eolt a repetition of 
his morning draught, which was declined on the most friendly 
terms ; and the editor insisting upon paying, he did no more 
than button up his spencer, and declare that he must be off. 

" I shall keep my eye on you," thought the editor. " Sly 
dog . very sly dog. I believe that you Ve got. more out of me 
than I have out of you ; but I Ve taken notes, mental notes . 
begad I have ; and you will find your name mentioned, Mr 
Forster, without -any disparagement, in our next issue of the 
ArgusJ* 

Here, having reached the door of the Hummums, the editor 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 97 

made a very polite bow; and swinging his tasselled cane* 
departed round the corner of Tavistock Court, bowing in a 
grand and condescending way to an old bootmaker, who exhi- 
bited at the corner shop some capital Wellingtons and Hessians, 
of a perfectly Bond Street shape. 

" Humph ! " said Old Forster, looking after him with inter- 
est. " He is a clever fellow, and does his work well ; but he 
will have to spin a long story to make anything from what I 
have said. But they are clever fellows. I wonder that more 
of them don't take to my profession. It 's more useful, and 
quite as respectable. But wait awhile." 

Feigning to return for something, the old gentleman re- 
entered the hotel, and, sitting down in the coffee-room, made 
notes of that which he had gathered from Mr Eolt. Then 
issuing from Covent Garden, he went forward at a double 
quick rate across Soho Square into Oxford Street, and made 
for Marylebone Lane. 

Mr Boom was the sitting magistrate; but in the private 
room, tapping the oilcloth with his impatient feet, and clasp- 
ing his hands, as he thought of his lost love, Mr George 
Horton was found. 

"Well," he said, as Mr Forster entered, "have you any 
news of this culprit, or culprits?" 

" I have. I am on the track. A word and a deed from 
you, and then I have the murderer of Madame Martin," said 
Old Daylight, trembling. 

"And," cried the magistrate, rising and leaning forward, 
as one who was hunting some noxious animal, " who is this 
wretch 1" * 

" We touch high game here,*' said Forster. " Tis no one 
less than Lord Wimpole ! " 

. The magistrate fell suddenly in his chair, and clasped his 
hands tightly, as in prayer. Had his rival fallen so suddenly, 
and so far ? Had she whom he loved escaped this terrible, this 
deadly fate, of being united to a murderer ? At this thought, 
his own love again sprang up, and urged him forward, 

" Look here, Mr Forster," cried he, with an angry energy. 
" Look here ! be sure you make no mistake ! This is a matter 
of life and death ! Great heavens ! . can it be true 1 " 



98 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



CHAPTER XIV. 

MR NORTON SIGNS THE WARRANT, 

The magistrate had covered his face with his hands, and was 
breathing a mental prayer for guidance and support at this 
terrible juncture ; while Old Daylight wiped his forehead with 
his red bandana, took his spectacles from his brow and rubbed 
the glasses, and systematically got together his notes. He 
could not understand Mr Horton's sudden emotion. His view 
of a magistrate was that, as a rule, he was an impartial, solid, 
stony-hearted lawyer, with as much blood and feeling in him 
as a lignum viioe bowl which lies baking in the sun, or wet with 
the dew on the grass plot. 

Moreover, this lignum vitce bowl was to be utterly without 
bias . except a little, just in favour of the prisoner, so as to 
give him the benefit of the doubt. Such was English justice ! 

But, in contradistinction to the theory, here was the fact. 
01(1 Daylight himself was interested as much as his kind, good 
old heart could be in favour of anything that could advance 
Edgar Wade's interests. He had built up his theory, and did 
not wish to see tliat demolished. And, on the other hand, Mr 
Horton was biased in a way which he could not prevent against 
the accused ; and although he strove against himself in every 
way, he could not help a predisposition to believe his rival 
guilty. He was a just man ; but he could not be impartial. 

The brave fellow took the next best step to being so. Find- 
ing that his prejudice set one way, he determined that his 
voice should sot the other. Recovering himself, therefore, he 
looked with sadly fixed eyes, and somewhat sternly, upon the 
inductive philosopher, and said . 

" I need not caution you, Mr Forster. Your experience .is 
greater than minej but it is my duty to recall to you the 
enormity of the charge, and " . this he said more painfully . 
" against whom it is preferred." 

"What does that matter, sir?" asked Old Daylight. 
*' Crime and death are two great levellers. They enter every 
nmn's house ; the cottage of the mere hind, or the palace of 
the emperor.'' 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 99 



The magistrate, who had been so sorely tempted himself, 
looked up at the old man, and wondered at him. 

" I hope," he said, faintly, " I hope there are some amongst 
us free from so general a charga" ' 

" Not one," said Daylight. " Every man, woman, or child 
is a possible criminal. In the cradle in the East, near to the 
happy Paradise their parents had lost, nestling on the soft 
skins, and playing with flowers, lay once two children, Cain 
and Abel. Who then could forecast the future, and foretell 
the murderer from the martyr ? " 

" Too true, too true," said Horton, too much occupied with 
his own thoughts to notice the elevated thought and language 
of Tom Forster . ^Mr Forster, it will be remembered, was a 
reader of Milton, and of good English literature. " But pray, 
think what you are doing. Lord Wimpole is a member of one 
of the first families of England. Think of the pain ! " 

" Sir ! " cried the old detective, " first families of England ! 
.what of that, whether the criminals be first or worst ! If 
the poor beetle that you tread upon feels a pang as great as 
when a giant dies . beg pardon, Shakespeare again, sir ! . do 
you think, as a magistrate and 9. man, that a poor and virtuous 
family feels the stain of crime less than my lord duke, or, for 
the matter of that, my Lord Mayor ? " 

The possibility of my Lord Mayor being brought up in 
custody of his own City Marshal, to be tried before his own 
Kecorder, was so refreshing, that Forster came up. smiling to 
the top of the argument, and said, with great joviality, "After 
that, I think I will proceed with the proofs, sir." 

" You are quite right, quite right, Mr Forster," said George 
Horton, dreamily. 

He saw he could do nothing else than listen to what Mr 
Forster said. But during the greater part of this exordium 
the magistrate was dreaming of the fair young face and inno- 
cent eyes of Winifred Vaughan, eyes too soon to be blinded 
with tears. 

" Now," said Old Forster, taking out his note-book, " I shall 
want of you, sir, a search-warrant, two officers, and a warrant 

to arrest the person of Chesterton, Esq. . we can find out 

his Christian names from the peerage . commonly called Lord 



100 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



Wiinpole. I think they ought to abolish those sort of titles ; 
don't you, sir 1 " 

"We will not talk politics at present, Mr Forster. Will 
you just run over your proofs, for this is a very important 
proceeding?" 

He said this coolly 3 but all the while he felt that Mr Forster 
was in the right. 

" Well, then," returned Old Daylight, testily . for all things 
were so clear to him that he was in a hurry to arrive at his 
end . *'well, then, I will give them you. I fancy, though, 
that the ancients were not such fools after all. They painted 
justice blind. She is blind ; because she shuts her eyes upon 
plain proof, and will not see the criminal." 

" Very possibly that is the case ; but remember the maxim, 

* better that ten guilty men should escape than that one inno- 
cent man should suffer.* " 

'^ That 's one of the stupid maxims I mean to demolish some 
day. But there, bless us, we shall never get on with this busi- 
ness. Now, sir, please attend. I proved pretty well to you, 
at Acacia Villa, that the murder was not perpetrated for money 
. that it was done for the possession or destruction of papers ; 
one of which papers, being in ashes, yet revealed the words, 

* my lord,' That is point one ; and a very strong point too, is 
it not 1 Point two" continued Forster, pointing with a blunt 
finger to his note-book : " The murderer, I demonstrated, was 
young, very active . a man, of course . knew something about 
fencing and boxing, smoked cigars, and wore a moustache. 
All these points tally with the person I have named. He is a 
fencer, also a boxer, is very light and active, a pupil of Jack- 
son the pugilist, and Captain Chouser the fencing master." 

"You have ascertained all that, and upon good autho-- 
rity ? " 

" Upon the best, sir. Are not these two strong points 1 " 

" Very," said the magistrate, coldly ; " but they might be 
true of twenty young men of fashion, as well as of the one 
whom you wish to arrest" 

" The man who did this deed wore fashionable boots. Poiiit 
three : Here is a tracing." 

Mr Forster took out a piece of silver paper, technically 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 101 

termed flimsy, of a left foot boot, from Mr Hoby's, the boot- 
maker to his lordship. 

"Here is the measure of the footmarks upon the little 
garden of Acacia Villa. They tally to the sixteenth part of 
an inch. What do you say to that V 

** Other men may have the same bootmaker, and he may 
employ the same last," said the inflexible magistrate. " All 
these proofs are fallible in the highest degree. The whole 
amount of them is merely circumstantial evidence." 

** The best of evidence," retorted the old gentleman, stoutly, 
" I tried Latin once. Let me see . circum, around ; and stare, 
to stand . eh 1 circumstans, standing around. Well, if you will 
not be convinced, I will put my circumstances so thickly that 
he will never be able to jump over them. Point four : On the 
very day before the murder, my lodger, Mr Edgar Wade, 
sought an interview with Lord Wimpole, and brought him 
these letters . at least, these amongst others. They are from 
Lord Chesterton himself to one who called herself Mrs Wade, 
and my young friend's mother. Now, as it happens, Lord 
Chesterton is the father both of Edgar Wade and Lord Wim- 
pole. Moreover, the murdered woman was the nurse of the 
former, and a sole guardian of a secret of the highest import- ' 
ance to him . to my dear, good, noble boy . I beg pardon, to 
Mr Wade . and this perishes with her." 

" Great heaven 1 what do you say 1 I am confused. I know 
not what to think. What . where . how have you learned all 
this ? " 

" That, Mr Horton, you will excuse me for saying, is my 
business. I have been at work . my process has not failed. 
1^ ow to point five. Five points, each referring to and resting 
on each other; and, altogether, making about the strongest 
chain of evidence I ever met with. The young gentleman . I 
pray you, mark me" . Mr Tom Forster had studied Shakespeare 
and the Elizabethan writers so thoroughly that his language, 
when earnest, had a dramatic turn and grace . " I pray you, 
mark me," he repeated . for the magistrate had closed his eyes, 
and, with his hands grasping the arms of his chair, sat gazing, 
as it were, inwardly, just as some religionists do when they 
engage in mental prayer . "the young gentleman" . as this 



102 ONE OF TWO ; OK, 



was the point to be marked, Mr Tom Forster spoke very 
slowly . " the yoimg gentleman was not at Chesterton House 
during the time when we presume that this desperate deed 
took place ; nor do any of his servants know where he was." 

"Gracious Heaven! sir," said Mr Hoi-ton, rising; "the 
young gentleman might have been anywhere . with his friends, 
in the country. Why should his servants know of his where- 
abouts ? Why, if we were to spy and pry into your actions or 
mine, how should we stand the ordeal 1 " 

" Very well, sir, I hope," returned Forster, with dignity. 
" I do not spy nor pry into men's actions. But this I do : I 
follow a noble profession, which tracks out the murderer, and 
strikes down the villain. If a soldier is to be bestarred and 
called a hero, why may not one who holds his life at the mercy 
of every rascal who carries a pistol, and every footpad who can 
wield a bludgeon 1 " . 

Had Old Daylight known the struggle going on in Mr Hor- 
ton's mind, he would have spared him any reproof. As it 
was, he was sorry for his burst of dignity. Self-assertion is, 
after all, a poor thing ; and Mr Tom Forster, as he looked at 
the magistrate, who trembled and turned pale between many 
emotions, was sorry he had spoken. Horton hunself saw no 
escape for the unhappy young man, and hesitated to put upon 
his track the bloodhounds of the law. In his wish not to be 
biased against him, he turned the balance the other way. 

Forster was the first to speak. 

" You do not see things as I do, sir. You are quite right. 
A judicial mind should be slow to believe in the guilt of any 
one ; but I have yet one point more to which I think you must 
yield." 

" Pray pardon my hesitation, Mr Forster," said the magis- 
trate, courteously. " I do not know, however, that it is a fault 
in an English magistrate to be on the side of mercy, and on 
that of the accused." 

"But those five points taken together are very strong, sir." 

" Yes ; but there is at present no motive, Mr Forster. If 
the woman Martin held certain secrets which were known to 
Lord Wimpole, why was she not disposed of . since that was 
the cruel end in view . a long time since ? Why not despatched 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 103 



or got rid of in France or Italy 1 Why reserved to be mur- 
dered in a little English village so close to London that the 
whole place must ring of it j and, reaching to this huge city 
vulgar people call the metropolis, the story makes the whole 
country debate it as a nine days' wonder ? " 

" Crime," said the amateur thief-taker, " is not very wise. 
It fancies it is, but it is not. It puts its head in a hole, and 
thinks no one sees it. A criminal has always his foolish side 
in the midst of his double cunning. I 'm blessed " . here Old 
Daylight permitted himself to use one of his colloquialisms . 
"I'm blessed if I don't think that a criminal is a fool on all sides." 

" He is, he is," returned Mr Horton, thinking what a fool 
he had been, " unless he resists the temptation." 

" Then he is a hero. By the way, amidst the many books 
you Ve read, sir, did you ever come across an old play . ^Ben 
Jonson's, I think . * The Devil is an Ass 1 ' A good name, is 
it not r' 

Mr Horton assented. 

"And his servants," continued Old Daylight, with great 
sententiousness, " are double-refined, super-essential and extra- 
distilled asses. Here 's a mess this young fool has got the 
noble family of Chesterton into ! Who will get it out, except 
the rightful heir ? Now, sir, please listen. You ask why this 
murder was done at this particular time . at half-past nine on 
Michaelmas Day . ^that was the time, sir. Why, because the 
day before, the 28th of September last. Lord Wimpole had a 
very serious discovery made to him, of which I will teU you." 

Here Daylight sat down, and gave Mr Horton the leading 
particulars of Edgar Wade*s story. 

The magistrate had no longer any doubt. Piece by piece, 
following out the simile of the puzzle map, the inductive philo- 
sopher fitted together the evidence. Where time was wanted, 
time was had; where motive seemed to be weak, Mr For- 
ster's links in the chain of evidence made it stronger ; proof 
after proof was accumulated; and, at last, Daylight grew 
radiant and triumphant, like one who, for a long and close run, 
at fault almost at every field, at last sees the fox in a sixty-acre 
lot, and comes upon him with a full burst and a knowledge 
that he cannot escape. 



104 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



" Upon my word," said Mr Horton, looking up with admira- 
tion, " you are a wonderful man ! I quite beg pardon for 
and retract any slur I laid upon your work. It is as interest- 
ing as a chancery suit'' 

"And a great deal more ennobling" said Old Daylight. 
" And, though I say it, it requires nous, sir . plenty of nous. 
But then, in this case, which is a pretty one, I am very much 
indebted to chance. It will not do to let the public think 
that ; but so it is, you know. Any laying bare the secrets of 
justice is hurtful to justice. That should move on silently, 
surely, and quickly." 

" Indeed it should," said Horton, musing over what he had 
heard. 

" Any weakness or misprision of justice is equally bad. It 
is better to be perfectly blind to a crime, than to try a man 
for an apparent villainy . of which the public sees at once, with 
its quick perception, that he is guilty . and to fail to bring it 
home. That, sir, hurts English justice ! The dulness of the 
judges and jury, and the extra sharpness of the opposing 
counsel, harm it also. Once make punishment a toss up, and 
then, sir, you not only damage law and justice, but even 
Heaven itself. Now, sir, so far as I am concerned, you see 
how ready I am." 

And surely enough, before the wondering eyes of Mr Horton, 
Old Daylight drew a chair to the table, and, producing a blank 
form, opened the blotting book, dipped a new and official 
goose-quill in ink, and proceeded to fill it up. Here is the 
form : . 



Metropolitan 

Police District 

to vit. 



Ein ^ 
ict, V 




" To all and every the Constables of the Metropolitan 

Police Force. 

'' JKajereaa __of. 



hath this day been charged on oath before one of the under- 
signed, one of the Magistrates of the Police Courts of the 
Metropolis, sitting at the " 

" Mary-le-bone, St Mary the Good ! " said Old Daylight, 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 105 

reflectively, as he filled up that part of the form. " Curious 
to join the name to a police court ! " 

" in the county of 

and within the Metropolitan Police District. For that h 
the said " 

" Ah, it 's a ^ this time, and yet a she is at the bottom of 
it. One sex is as bad as the other. There 's no one of two 
there. We won't quarrel for the pre-eminence in vice as we do 
for that of virtue," sneered the old cynic. Then he went on 
with his writing, filling in the crime or indictable offence, going 
over every word of the printed matter, possibly with an idea 
of discovering any error made by the King's printers. 

. " These are therefore to command you, and everyone 
of you, the Constables of the Metropolitan Police Force, in his 
Majesty's name, forthwith to apprehend the said 



yy 



" What an aristocratic name he has got," said Old Daylight. 
" Why, it looks as well in a police warrant as a jewel on a 
dunghill." 

."'And to bring him before Me, at the Police Court afore- 
said, or before such other Magistrate of the said Police Court 
as may be there, to answer the same charge, and to be further 
dealt with according to law." 

" Further dealt with ! " sighed Mr Horton, as he prepared 
to sign the warrant. 

" * Given,' " said Old Forster . still reading as Mr Horton 
wrote . " ' under my hand and seal, this day of Octo- 
ber, in the year of Our Lord One Thousand Eight Hundred 
and Twenty-nine, at the Police Court aforesaid ' . and may the 
Lord have mercy on his soul ! " 

These words, pronounced very solemnly, were not in the 
warrant ; but Old Forster had, by a jump, anticipated the 
concluding words of the judge to the condemned criminal at 
the bar. 

Mr George Horton turned pale as he heard them. 



106 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



CHAPTER XV. 

" AND THESE DEAR THINGS SHALL BUT A MEMORY SE^ 

No sooner had Mr Tom Forster his warrant, with which 
Inspector Stevenson and one other constable . with our old 
acquaintance as searcher . were to ai'rest Lord Wimpole, than 
a sharp knock at the door made Mr Horton start like a guilty- 
thing ; so absorbed had he been in his conference with Old 
Daylight. Mr Forster had himself to cry out, in an authori- 
tative voice, " Come in ! " 

It came in, carried by the messenger of the court. A jnan 
driving by in a fast gig . a bagman or travelling agent to s6me 
merchant, who much affected very fast horses and fast gigs with 
big wheels . had left it for George Horton, Esq. It was dated 
from Dover, and was from Mr Brownjohn, and to this eflfect : . 

" Your Honour, . You may make yourself quite easy about 
the Acacia Villa crinle. I am on the tracks of the murderer, 
and I have some of the spoons ! The little boy was quite 
right. From all I can hear, he is some sort of a Dutchman. 
When I am a man's tracks, I never leaves him go. 

** Make my compliments to the Inspector, and tell him that 
I says that he an' his old Amatoor may go a-hunting for a 
needle in a pottle of hay. 

" I shall have the man, and produce him before your honour's 
sc5lf, or before some other worthy magistrate learned in the 
law. I 've got my eye on him now, but I generally prefers to 
lot my fish play a bit. 

" Your honour's hble. servt. 

" To command, 
" Samuel Brownjohn, St. P.C." 

Mr Tom Forster's convictions were somewhat shaken up by 
tin's confident letter ; but he never swerved. Drawing himself 
up, ho said, with dignity . 

** May I inquire what this person means by those initials 
after his name, « St. P.C " 

" I suppose," said the magistrate, wearily, '* the poor man is 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 107 

proud of his rank. He has lately been made a sergeant, and 
of course he is a police constable/' 

** Well, then," returned Daylight, "I hope that the foreign 
seaman will be able to obtain from the police constable sergeant 
a considerable compensation for false imprisonment. I 've no 
doubt the sergeant is enjoying himself by the seaside and will be 
better for his trip. I only hope that the foreign seaman has 
plenty of time on his hands, and will not mind being uselessly, 
vexatiously, and falsely brought up to London at his Majesty's 
expense. I hope, on his return, that Mr Brownjolm, with his 
.prisoner, may find plenty of entertainment for man and beast . 
man," and he repeated, with a marked inflection on the last 
word, " man and beast" 

And with this he departed to arrange matters with Steven- 
son, and left the magistrate to his reflections. 

" I will spare him every dishonour, for her sake," said Mr 
George Horton to himself. "The busy, curious world, thirsting 
for news, and all agape for scandal, shall hear nothing of this 
till his guilt or his innocence is determined." 

While the good magistrate is taking his measures in the matter, 
and Mr Tom Forster is quietly taking his, the story must run 
back a short space, to the third day after Mr Edgar Wade had 
made his important announcement to Lord Wimpole. . That 
young nobleman had been greatly exercised by the announce- 
ment and discovery made by his half-brother. He recognised 
his father's handwriting ; and the truth of the revelation of the 
barrister was gradually but surely borne in on him. As he 
listened to it, he was torn and divided by separate emotions. 
Had he consulted his own honourable feelings, he would at 
once have conceded Edgar Waders right to his place and title ; 
as it was, he only temporised with him, for the purpose of 
consulting his father. 

Lord Chesterton was one of those parents who, in the minds 
of their children, inspire at once love and awe ; but the former 
feeling bears very little comparison with the latter. His son 
looked upon him with a distant respect, in which love had 
certainly a share, but not a very large nor even a proportionate 
share. The Earl of Chesterton was of the world, worldly ; but 
it was of the great world, not of the small, mean world . of 



108 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



the old high school, not of the modem, mean, and little school. 
Even in his faults and vices he was manly and chivalric. His 
pride was too great for him ever to utter a mean and low- 
thing ; although almost all that he said was certainly selfish. 
He took part in the great world, and that part pleased him. 
He pretended to despise the world ; and yet, in his heart of 
hearts, he bowed down to it. He would never act against it. 
He did what that did, but he did it all en grand seigneur. He 
was, at the time of Mr Wade's curious revelation, spending 
his leisure time at Brighton, a fashionable watering-place, 
frequented by some of the remnants of the old beaux of the 
regency, who walked upon its cliifs, and trotted over its 
breezy downs, and regretted the brilliant days that were past. 
The fast Brighton- coaches . one of them driven by a baronet. 
Sir George Vincent . were looked upon as innovations by 
gentlemen and noblemen who posted down in their own 
chariots, and who did not condescend to rub shoulders with 
even the genteel population which flocked at certain seasons 
from London to the seaside. 

A letter from Lord Wimpole, wliich he would hardly have 
dared to have sent had he not known that his father was ready 
to quit this pretty and yet rural watering-place, determined 
the Earl to post to town some two or three days earlier than 
he would have done. He wrote by return . for he was a 
precisian in his politeness . a very affectionate note, in which 
he begged his son to meet him at Hyde Park Comer, whence 
they could send on the post-chaise to Chesterton House, and 
the Earl could have an opportunity of stretching his legs by a 
gentle walk home. 

On the evening of the day, therefore, before that on which 
Mr Forster had obtained his legal document, the chaise duly 
rattled up to Apsley House, and the Earl descended and met 
his son. 

Lord Chesterton was not a man to show hifi( emotions, but 
he was astonished and hurt at the changed appearance of Lord 
Wimpole. Dark rings surrounded those bright, honest eyes, 
which used to beam with a pleased loyalty on the father. The 
eyes themselves were heavy and cast down, as if the owner 
meditated upon some hidden grief and shame. The step had 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 109 



lost its elasticity, and the very carriage of the figure had 
become slouching and weary. The voice was no longer ring- 
ing and cheery, but muffled and sad. All this change the 
Earl noted in a few moments ; but if he felt it, he made no 
comment upon it. That was his pride. The son . for he 
knew that he was still the Earl's son . felt this silence as 
somewhat of a blow ; when, had he known his father better, 
he would have rejoiced in the tender delicacy of the old 
nobleman. 

After a respectful greeting . ^more than ever respectful and 
tender, but with a mournful manner which he could not sub- 
due . the son offered his arm to his father as a support. It 
used to be one of the sights of Bond Street, of which Lord 
Chesterton was much more proud than he ever confessed, to 
see those two gentlemen, the elder and the younger, walking 
arm-in-arm, and receiving the acknowledgments of their friends, 
and the bows of the passing tradesmen, which my lord ac- 
knowledged as readily, and with even greater coui'tesy than he 
did the greetings of his equals. Perhaps there is not a nobler 
sight than to see a sire thus supported by his son ; both of 
them men, one in the vigour of youth, the other possessing all 
that makes the early autumn of life admirable and respectable. 
" As a man grows old," said a lady of great observation, " he 
grows, if he leads a happy and a good life, mwe handsome, 
and much more worthy to be looked at." Lord Chesterton 
had mellowed into an easy dignity, and was unmistakably an 
English gentleman ; and good-looking as was Lord Wimpole 
. ^well built, fit in face and figure to compare with most people 
. there were few who did not think the Earl the handsomer 
gentleman. 

But now it was very different ; tanned with the sea breezes, 
upright as a dart, the elder of the two seemed to tower above 
the other. 

When, therefore. Lord Wimpole offered his arm with a 
certain timidity and shame, instead of that conscious pride 
with which formerly he lent his support to the light touch of 
his father's hand, the earl said, almost with pity . 

'* No, Philip, no, my poor boy ; you are not well, and I am 
as strong as a reck. You had better lean on me." 



110 ONE OF TWO; OR, 



The arm of the son fell within that of the father, and 
trembled and shook with emotion as it rested on its support. 

"My dear boy . ^my dear Philip!" said the Earl, as they 
passed from the high road to the quiet streets which led to 
Chesterton House, " your letter has quite puzzled me. What 
can be the matter? They play high at Arthur's, I know ; but 
you have a very large sum of money of your own, and surely 
that cannot " 

" Oh, pray sir, spare me ! I never gamble ; and the little 
money I might lose at cards would never trouble me. No, it 
is something weightier than that." Then, after a pause, he 
added, "So weighty that I cannot" . here 'he paused again . 
"I cannot speak to you about it until after dinner. That, 
perhaps, will give me strength." 

" I am convinced, Philip, of your honour and integrity. I 
am convinced that you would never do anything that might 
hurt me or our family." 

" Thank you, sir, for those kind words," said poor Philip ; 
and his hand trembled as he said it. 

" I am also convinced," continued the father, ^^ that young 
men see things in a very different, often in a more serious, 
light than we do. Therefore, I only tell you this . don't look 
too seriously upon anything. Nothing can hurt us. We 
stand, nous autres, too high for the canaille yet, with all their 
whispers and their slanders in print, to cause any serious pain 
or trouble between us. But, as you wisely said, we will dis- 
miss the subject. You are quite right to discuss anything 
which promises to be troublesome after dinner." 

The Earl had the fact somehow borne in upon him that 
Philip was troubled with some love affair, and possibly with 
another esdandre in that palladium of British liberty, the 
Argus, tie, therefore, without directly referring to the matter, 
talked about the press of the day, which, to say the truth, was 
not very distinguished for its insight or for its integrity. 
He blamed the public writers in the most severe way, and 
talked as if the presence of an author in a family was a stain 
hardly to be survived. 

" There 's Lord Culdesac," he said, " is a poet, and has been 
to the Holy Land . which, to be sure, is a great undertaking. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. Ill 

and renders his lordship eligible for the Travellers' Club ; but 
what need has he to sell his book to Mr Centley, and have it 
produced and read at all the circulating libraries at Brighton, 
Bath, and Cheltenham 1 I heard some people actually talking 
about securing early mail copies, as they used to do when the 
Waverley Novels came out. Dear me ! how a man of family 
can consent to be so talked about I cannot conceive." 

The highly born old Philistine arrived at his aristocratic 
gates by this time, carefully shut up in- the heart of London, 
and as jealously guarded as if Lord Chesterton had been a 
Grand Turk. In the wide gardens of Chesterton House rabbits 
might have burrowed, and deer been comfortably housed in 
clumps of overshadowing fern. Nobody ever walked in those 
solitary gardens except the men who periodically repaired and 
kept them in order, and the suburban sparrow which fled from 
his town house in Burlington Gardens to this semi-rural retreat 
in Mayfair with the utmost delight. These sparrows had evi- 
dently a great deal to say about various matters, for they were 
holding a parliament almost as noisy as that which used to 
sit on College Green in the days when Ireland was not down- 
trodden by the base, bloody, and brutal Saxon. 

As the Earl and his son approached, the outer gates of 
Chesterton House flew open as if by magic, and the obsequious 
porter greeted both his masters with a low bow. The Earl 
asked him how he was, with the interest one takes in an old 
servant ; and the very inquiry seemed to do the man good. 
Then Lord Chesterton continued his tirade against the press 
and authors in genera]. 

" There was old Mrs Magnify," he said ; " bless me, how 
that old woman did rave about Shakespeare ! What did she 
know about Shakespeare 1 Why, her brain was not bigger than 
a bird's. And the lies the poor old creature told were enor- 
mous. No, my boy, you need not fear anything those fellows 
can say; and your best answer to them is silence. Of all 
things I most dread, I think it is a paper war. You do not 
get hurt by it ; but you lose caste so much by dipping your 
fingers in ink. In America, now, I am told " 

Lord Wimpole started suddenly. His father's pleasant voice 
and even talk had fallen upon the dull, drowsy ear of a man 



112 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



sick of life and sick at heart And, cnrionsly, as his father 
said the words " in America," his thoughts had formed the 
very words coincidentally ; so that it seemed as if a far-off 
voice had counselled him to flee, and to hide his shame in that 
distant land. 

" Why did you start and tremble so 1 " asked Lord Chester- 
ton. " Philip, you must, indeed, be very ilL" 

" It was nothing . a fancy," said Philip, nervously ; and his 
father was wisely silent They approached the house. The 
doors were again opened, and the ranged servants welcomed 
their master, headed by the steward. 

" Ah, Mr Eoskell," said the Earl to him, " how do you dol 
Quite well, I see. You have nothing to say, I hope ? " 

"Nothing," said the faithful steward, to whom the Earl's 
manner was always deferential and courteous. "All is as 
usual, your lordship." 

" Come here, Eoskell," said the Earl, treating him like an 
old friend, and not as a servant " You may attend me up- 
stairs, I think." 

He leaned upon the man's arm as he ascended, a little in 
advance of his son, who, upon reaching the first floor, branched 
off towards his own room. 

"Now," said the Earl, looking after the young man, "there's 
something the matter there, Eoskell. What is it ? Wimpole's 
not right . not at all right" 

"Not that I know of, your lordship," said Eoskell, looking 
back; then to himself, "As right as a trivet We are very 
lucky, very lucky to have such a young nobleman.' There' s 
nothing the matter with him. Why, just look at Lord Quan- 
dary's two sons . ^both married . dash*d if they aint no better 
than they should be." 

. " Tut, tut, Eoskell 1 You shouldn't talk of Lord Quandary. 
He 's quite a different sort of fish." 

Here they reached his lordship's room, talking as familiarly 
as friends. They had been boys together . Lord Chesterton 
being some few years older . and Mr Eoskell had risen from 
post to post, until he was the steward of the Earl, and his 
second sdf. He was not only honest, but thoroughly capable; 
«nd had a head for figures which was the pride and wonder- 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 113 



ment of Chesterton House. He knew the cost of everything, 
from the new ornamental trees in the plateau of the old castle 
in Warwickshire to the blocks of salt in the kitchen in London. 
He was making his own fortune quietly ; but was saving more 
than a fortune . such as would content his modest desire. for 
his master. 

" He has been so valuable and so long with me/' said his 
lordship, " that he is my master. I do what he tells me. He 
is no longer my servant, but my friend." ^ 

Mr Eoskell took his lordship's room, therefore, under his 
care, and with a look sent away the valet, who had laid out 
the Earl's dress suit and a change of clothes in the nicest 
order. 

" So you think that Philip's all right, eh 1 '' asked the father. 
" Don't say that he is," returned the steward. " I know 
precious well that he was. He showed me a new foil, three 
or four days ago, and made a lunge at me in his fun, and broke 
the blade. 'Twas a mercy it didn't go through me. But it 
was worth the scare to see his lordship's fondness and atten- 
tion. He turned as pale as a ghost; and then the bright 
colour came back again, and he wrung my hand with gladness, 
so heartily that he nearly brought the blood out of my finger- 
nails. * I am so glad I did not hurt you, Mr Roskell,' he 
said." 

" I am glad, too," said his lordship, graciously, as he took 
his waistcoat. 

He was dressing with great care, and he looked so well and 
so noble, that the steward's honest eye looked pleased as it 
rested on his master. 

" Well, and what then ? " said the Earl. 
"Oh, nothing! only always full of his fun, and yet as true 
a gentleman as ever stepped. He says to me, * Mr Eoskell,' 
he says, * just do me the favour to feel my biceps ' . that 's 
what he called it . and he raised up the muscle of his arm till 
it set up like a tea-cup. * Lord ! ' says I, * your lordship has 
been practising.' ' Mr Eoskell,' says he, I 'm going to have 
the gloves on with the Knightsbridge Lurcher, and I mean to 
send liim fljdng.' And he would, too, that he would." 

" Ah I " said his father, with a sigh, taking his white band- 

H 



lU ONE OF two; or, 



korchief and t3dng it carefully round his neck. " Ah ! he 
ilidn't talk like that to me ! " 

** Of course he wouldn't, through fear, your lordship ; on'y 
ho knows what an old friend I am. And such a man, or a 
better man, a better heir to a nobler father or estate, we 
haven't got in all England. What oats he had to sow were 
not wild,*' 

** And yet," sighed the Earl ; " and yet . ^by the way, let us 
have some of that very fine Chambertin . he does not drink as 
we use to do. And yet I feel as if something wajs going to 
happen." 

" What can ? " asked Eoskell. 

** Ah 1 what can ? " asked the unhappy Lord Wimpole, as 
ready dressed, pale as the white waistcoat he wore . ^then en 
rhgle . he paced the room. 

Somehow, the order, love, respect, the riches, the lu3niry 
around him seemed inexpressibly dear. 

"And shall I leave all these, all these for ever . and for 
ever % " 

A murmur seemed to echo through the silent halls. /ar 
ever t 



CHAPTEE XVI. 

" For aU our good we hold of Heaven by lease, 
"With many forfeits and conditions bound." 

Philip Stanfield felt, during the dinner he sat down to, 
stranger emotions than he had ever felt in his life. Mr Eoskell, 
upon whom everything in Chestei^on House depended, had 
provided one of those exquisitely-arranged repasts of which 
Brillat Savarin speaks, when he says that, " after having com- 
menced to eat, it is only a philosopher who dares to leave off." 
The chef at Chesterton House was a great personage, whose 
gemus rose upon the occasion; and who, sympathising with 
his master in his simple but elegant taste, never worked better 
than when he knew his own two chiefs would eat of his 
dishes. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 1 1 5 

" To cook for a crowd, look you, Monsieur Eascall^" he would 
say, " is, in effect, not the glory I seek. The ambition of your 
Milton, to whose great name you have wisely assigned your 
best oyster . ^why^ is the name of Shak-es-peirr not yet appro- 
priated to . some great dish 1 oh, you dull islanders ! . ^your 
Milton, I say, wished that his dished should be pronounced 
upon by * fit audience, though few/ I was told so by a man 
on your Times . a Dr Bobertson . ^who loved a good dish. I 
agree with Milton/' 

As the chef had also the best market in the world to draw 
from, and was really a cook of great talent, no wonder that the 
Earl and his son both frequently conveyed the fact, in a courtly 
way, to Mr Eoskell, that they ate such dishes nowhere but in 
their own house; and that, in fact, there was a thorough 
understanding between the chef, the steward, his lordship, and 
all concerned, that, when anything was wanted which could 
stir an appetite under the ribs of death, M. Le Noir was the 
person to provide it. 

The soups were two . clear turtle, followed by green pea ; a 
turbot and lobster sauce, served in a picturesque way ; entrees 
of oysters cooked in three different ways ; a delicate saddle of 
mutton, which M. Le Noir rightly proclaimed as equal to 
venison ; a salmi of partridges ; and a single but magnificent 
roast cock pheasant, cooked with chemical perfection, served 
like a picture, in the glory of his tail feathers, and displaying, 
like Nelson with all his orders, the magnificent proportions of 
his breast to the enemy, completed the dishes. The dessert 
was an English pine and one fine bunch of English hot-house 
grapes ; and with it some coffee-ice, then a novelty. 

Philip, in spite of hia deep depression, and to his own great 
wonder, fed like a hungry man feeds ; but ate as if he were in 
a dream To him it seemed so. The wonderful quietude and 
order of the place ; the Earl, like some representative nobleman 
doing the honours gracefully ; Mr Koskell, a little behind his 
chair, approaching only with the wines . or rather wine, for 
throughout they drank but one . and quietly beckoning with 
finger, or merely raised eyelid, to the under-butler and a servant 
out of livery, who were in attendance. 

There was, moreover, a little quiet conversation going on 



116 ONE OF TWO; OR, 



between the Earl and Mr Boskell, which added to the dreamy 
unreality of the last grand feast that Philip was to enjoy in 
Chesterton Housa The Earl would turn round to his old 
servant, and say . 

" Le Noir has excelled himself. That salmi was delicious." 

*' He knew your lordships would dine by yourselves, and then 
he always puts on a spurt" 

" Uncommonly fine turbot, Eoskell." 

" Well, since your lordship says so, it 's the finest of the size 
I Ve seen ; and Mr Groves says no less. Ay, and he is a judge 
of fish, the old gentleman." 

"A capital tradesman," said the Earl. "A very worthy 
man. Let me see, how is his gout ) " 

" Well, he would go to the Leger, your lordship, and that 
made it worse. But for all that, he would hop out of his shop 
to pick out a fish for you. * Tell the Earl that turbot 's worth 
eighteenpence a mouthful,' said he." 

" Egad, he 's right. I will look at him as I pass : it will do 
him good Mutton comes from Wimpole, I suppose 1 " 

" No, from the farm at Banstead. Six years old. A pre- 
sent from the tenant." 

" Send him some venison. He '11 lose by the exchange ; but 
they think so much of a little attention." 

Such bald, disjointed chat. for it is impossible, in print, to 
convey Mr Koskell's deferential whispers, or the courteous, 
friendly, homely tone and manner of Lord Chesterton . hardly 
broke in upon the thoughts of Philip more than the distant 
murmur of the sea. There is something very soothing in a 
well-bred tone ; just as there is . something very irritating in 
the strident, harsh chatter of the roughs of society. 

Striking upon his ears like conversation from the shores of 
Acheron, there came questions from his father about such and 
such a tenant, and kindly answers from the steward to such 
questions. Philip seemed to himself to have lost all interest in 
these good people. He was not of them now; and tlie kind 
garrulity of old Eoskell and the Earl no mora concerned him 
then did the history of twenty years back. 

His father, who noticed his silence, and was himself, there- 
fore, the more talkative, comforted himself with a meaning 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 1 1 7 

look at the steward to note the young fellow's appetite. At 
length, the coffee-ices were brought in ; and Mr Koskell and 
his aids, with careful and searching glances at the table, to see 
that not a spoon strayed beyond its appointed place, withdrew. 

The good old fashion of drinking toasts was not then done 
away with ; and the Earl, filling his son's glass with Cham- 
bertin, nodded to him and said . 

" We will have jufet one toast, Philip . ' Our house, may it 
flourish as long as the land ! ' " 

This was a polite way of drinking his son's health, and Philip 
felt it to be so; but he only lifted his wine, saying . "Your 
lordship's toast;" and, tasting it merely, put it down. 

" Well," said his father, " that ought to have had a bumper 
at least ; but you young fellows are gradually losing the habit 
of drinking. I suppose, in a generation or two, toasts will be 
banished, and generous wine pronounced a delusion and a 
snare." 

To comfort himself under such a dreadful future. Lord 
Chesterton filled his glass, and drank solemnly and to himself. 

" Now," said he, " now, Philip, my boy, is the time for that 
discussion we promised ourselves. I hope what we have to 
debate is nothing serious." 

Phil^ started, as from a reverie. 

" So serious, my lord,'* he said, " that we cannot discuss it 
here." 

"Why not?" 

" There are doors," said the young man, pale and frightened. 
'. Your servants perhaps might hear." 

And he led the way to his own room, holding above his 
head a lighted taper, and looking forward as if he were afraid 
of some danger. 

A fire was burning in the grate, and wax candles stood 
ready to be lighted ; but Philip lighted them not. 

The Earl, impressed by his manner, said nothing ; but sub- 
mitted passively, and sat down in the chair Philip placed for 
him as if he had been a child. 

" You don't seem inclined," said Lord Chesterton, with a 
feeble attempt at an after-dinner joke, '' to allow much light 
to be thrown upon our discussion, Philip." 



118 ONE OF TWO; OR, 



*' It is best/' answered his son, ^' that this should be told in 
the darkness." 

Then he, standing with his back to the light, and before his 
father, so that the Earl could not see his face, spoke, as it were^ 
out of the darkness, and in agony cried . 

" My lord, the Earl of Chesterton, am I your son f " 

The tone, the cry almost, smote the Earl in the very joints 
of his armour ; but he answered boldly and quickly . 

" Before God you are, Philip, my dear and honoured son." 

" There is yet another question, '^ returned Philip. " Would 
that you could answer it so well ! Am I your lordship's legi- 
mate son, heir to your name and estates ? '' 

The answer came not forth so readily now. The Earl saw 
that, at a moment, the fabric he had endeavoured to build up 
for thirty years had crumbled to the ground. Henceforward, 
if kept at all, his secret must be kept by the connivance of his 
son Philip ; who, although the chief person concerned in the 
matter, was by far too upright, in his father's opiniqn, to allow 
interest to influence him in a matter of honour. 

And it is to be noted that Lord Chesterton had not only 
implanted this honourable feeling, but delighted in it. 

" Bless the boy," he said to himself many a time, "he has 
the true chivalry of his race. He would not do a base action 
to save his life." 

It had been the Earl's aim through life to keep the guilt of 
the transaction entirely to himself, and the knowledge of it 
also, so far as it could be kept. He had so well succeeded 
that, after the death of the valet Gustavo, he had dismissed 
from his mind the bare possibUity of the history, which the 
reader is already aware of, ever coming to his son's knowledge. 
The question put to him by his son came upon him like a 
thunderclap. Some time elapsed before he could recover himself. 

" Shall I repeat the question, my lord ] " asked Philip's voice 
out of the darkness. 

" Unless you would break my heart, no I I will swear, 
Philip, that " 

" Oh, spare your oaths, my lord. This but confirms me. 
That you would have me to be your heir and son, I know too 
wdL" 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 119 



*' What villain, Philip," said the Earl, rising and mastering 
his emotion as well as he could, " has dared to sow any such 
doubts in your mind 1 " 

" No villain, but a noble man,** returned his son, with a sneer 
that was hardly perceptible. *' What do you say, my lord, to 
its being no less a person than Philip Stanfield, commonly 
called Lord Wimpole, himself?" 

"If, Philip, you have made some pretended discovery your- 
self," returned his father . a faint glimmer of hope coming into 
his mind that all might not be so bad after all . ** you have only 
to tell me, and I will set all right." 

"No doubt, my lord, you would. But the time I have had 
to reflect upon this has been sufficient to convince me that 
your ejfforts would be in vain. You seem to forget that the 
person now speaking to you has some right to doubt his own 
identity. He is not in reality Lord Wimpole, but Edgar 
Wade/" 

With a start-, and a bound, and an oath, the Earl sprang to 
his feet. The mine had been sprung ; and the carefully raised 
fabric, which had shown so fair a front for thirty years, had 
been blown to atoms. Had the battle been fought with regu- 
lar approaches, the Earl would have still held out. As it was, 
his army had disappeared, his defences were nowhere. He 
had nothing to do but to capitulate. He made one more 
ejQfort. 

" O my son ! my son ! " he cried, " what madness possesses 
you 1 Speak no more to me . tell me no more. Let us blot 
out this fearful night. I will not listen. I forbid" 

" It is too late, my lord," said his son, " when I demand." 
Then, taking his father's hand, he said, " Listen till I tell all. 
Sit downJ' 

A sad shrift it was. Burnt in upon the young man's brain 
were the letters which Edgar Wade had shown him With- 
out any eflfort, he repeated, word for word, the story of the 
wrongs of the Countess, whose portrait hung above them. 
The boy had been very fond of his mother . his mother, as he 
said, with amazing bitterness . ^that quiet, subdued, selfish, and 
most proper lady, who was never put out, and who might have 
had as much, but certainly not more, external feeling than a 



120 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



mummy, or than one of the waxwork figures in the novel ex- 
hibition by Madame Tussaud, the ingenious old lady who had 
set up her tabernacle in the fashionable quarter of Baker 
Street. The wrongs of the Countess, Philip dwelt upon much 
more eagerly than his own ; and here, indeed. Lord Chesterton 
seemed to glean some faint hope of comfort. 

.* Speak no more of her," he said. " She knows all now, 
and is beyond our mortal feeling. At any rate, Philip, cruel 
as I have been in my misguided policy, I have only done to 
you that which I thought at least was kind and good." 

" Oh, my lord," returned Philip, " how foolish and short- 
sighted we are ! You tell me that you tried to benefit me, 
and to do good. What good can now remain to me 1 I seem 
even to have lost myself; and hardly, indeed, my identity 
remains. Seneca makes lys heroine, when all melts from her, 
comfort herself with the proud saying, ^ Medea superest ;' but 
what is there that is mine ! I am not even what I thought I 
was." 

Chesterton had bent down his proud head, and the tears 
which were now silently running through his thin fingers 
showed how much he felt his son's grief. 

" Come, come," he said, rising and placing his hand on hia 
son's shoulder, " all is surely not lost. If we concede that this 
barrister makes good what he avows, which I by no means 
say that he will," continued the Earl, " sjplendide mendax ;. 
which, mind you, I can promise." 

*'0h, my lord, you have others to convince besides that 
gentleman who was lately called Edgar Wade. The enemy 
you have to conquer is not on the outposts, but in the city 
itself You have to convince ourselves. We cannot act as if 
truth were untruth." 

These sentences brought Lord Chesterton down oahis chair 
again. 

"0 Philip! my son!" he sobbed, "you indeed teach 
me how I ought to have felt ! Wh^t remains for you, my 
boy ] You asked me that just now. My deeper, holier love 
. ^your own education, knowledge, and goodness . your un- 
broken honour, your uncontaminated faith " 



" Alas . ala9 ! " sobbed the young man . fpi: the father had 



A LB3?T^HAimED BRIDE. 1 21 

broken down as he spoke, and could not finish his sentence . 
"alas! my father, your very kindness has proved poison to 
me. The education you have given me has made me appre- 
ciate the luxuries with which I was surrounded, and it has 
added another and more bitter sting to the sorrow with which 
I part from them. I seemed not proud ; but I loved, with a 
deeper pride because it was concealed, the marks of riches, of 
place, of power, around me. I loved the decent order of your 
house, your well-tutored servants, and the respectful, even 
tender, deference they showed me. I was the heir of all your 
inherited honours, of the goodness of the Countess, of the 
ancient lineage and noble blood of my father. And all this 
time I was an unconscious impostor . a cuckoo in the nest of the 
hedge-sparrow ; no true man, no real son of yours, but a" 

''Stop, Philip!" said the Earl. "Press not upon me so 
hardly for my sin. In spite of all you may say, listen to what 
I say. I will not neglect nor leave you. You are this day 
ten times my son." 

He put his arms round the younger man, as if to shield him 
from any harm. His words and action touched the heart of 
Philip, who, taking his father's hands in his, kissed them ten- 
derly, and then put them away. 

" No, my lord," he said, " you can do nothing." 

" I will go with you to America. We can live together, 
Philip." 

" Too late ! This is too late, my lord. You cannot take 
property which belongs to him. You are, no doubt, very 
strong and powerful as Earl of Chesterton j but there is some- 
thing infinitely stronger . the laws of England. What they 
pronounce, that we must abide by ; and their voice must be 
on the side upon which both our consciences are ranged. 
Every benefit that you have heaped upon me has been but a 
trial. The tender education makes me feel more deeply my 
position ; the love of power and position you have inculcated 
has made me cling more deeply than you can think to the 
false position I innocently found myself in. Oh, my lord! 
you have tried me too much. There are crimes which angels 
seem to lead to . crimes made venial by the temptation ; and 
temptations too strong to put fairly before weak human nature. 



122 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



How do you know but, as the result of your crime, my brain 
has not been taxed to save my seat . that my hands have not 
been dyed in human blood 1 " 

The Earl trembled as these words fell upon his ear. 

** Philip I " he cried, ^^ I can bear no more. Let me go at 
once. Let me sleep over the events of this day. To-morrow 
we may meet with and temporise with this young man. Good 
night ! good night 1 " 

The Earl hastily unfastened the door, and hurried across the 
corridor ; and Philip watched his retreating form. 

" Good night, my father," he murmured; "good night. To- 
morrow we may temporise ! Alas ! what new difficulties may 
not to-morrow bring forth ? " 



CHAPTER XVn. 

SAMUEL BROWNJOHifS QUEST AND GUEST, 

C^AR Negretti stood in a rather desponding attitude in the 
front salon of the H6tel des Etrang^res, in Eupert Street, Soho. 
And, to say the truth, the Strangers' Hotel, though it was 
frequented, according to its prospectus, by gentlemen of every 
rank, from the diplomatist to the crowned head, who came to 
worm secrets out of the mysterious man, did not look very 
inviting . at least, not to a British eye. 

There were no comfortable boxes and snowy white cloths, 
no steaming potatoes and smoking chops in the salon of this 
hotel ; but merely four round tables, painted, and very cheaply 
painted too, in imitation of marble. A cruet-stand, with some 
dark mustard, some pepper and salt mixed, and a little vase of 
oil adorned each table ; and on each table, also, was a dirty 
carte, which had upon its face the price of various dishes, and 
upon its back a list of wines. Common Burgundy and Vin de 
Grave, a thin white wine, seemed to be all in the cellar ; while 
the 'pieces de resistance were haricot, bouilly, and fried potatoes, 
with an omelette, sweet, or with chopped herbs. Biftek was 
to be had, but it was curiously unHke the dish in England 
or France ; and the small slices of mutton served up always 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 123 

puzzled the stranger with their feeble struggle to remain as far 
from being like a mutton chop as they were a French cutlet. 
To tell the truth, the Haymarket and Soho Square not being 
in 60 advanced a state of civilisation as they are' at present, 
the Strangers' Hotel saw kings and diplomatists very seldom ; 
and had fkllen into being a mere house of call for gentlemen's 
servants, valets, couriers, and the lower rank of hangers-on of 
great families. Hence, C6sar Negretti, who stood between the 
four tables, lightly attired as garden, in neat black jean jacket 
and white apron, might well yawn. 

He was as handsome, this man, as the Greek faun ; and 
had as merry and as wicked a grin upon his countenance when 
he laughed, which he did when, by a cautious and clever flap 
of his napkin, he killed two or three flies which, all of a row, 
were the only guests who were feasting at the hotel. Every 
attitude he fell into had grace and elegance in it. His waiter's 
jacket seemed to be the fitting uniform of a king. His apron, 
tied lightly round his waist, seemed to have been put there out 
of coxcombry, so well it looked ; and his old waiter's pumps 
fitted as if they had been elegantly made for the most supreme 
dandy of Bond Street. 

Cesar's face was a puzzle. He looked any age between 
fifteen and fifty. He was one moment a radiant, joyous youth 
. ^and certainly he was young ; another, he fell to pieces, and 
became old. Just now, he looked miserably thin and worn ; 
but as he was wonderfully successful inkilling flies, he brightened 
up a bit, and said . 

" Paste ! this won't do for me. This hotel will yield nothing. 
I shall go back to Malta, whence my j^atron drew me." 

Here he cleverly sprinkled a little pepper and salt upon the 
nose and into the eyes of a kitten that was playing at his feet, 
and burst into a most radiant smile as he watched the agony 
of the little creature, and listened to its sneezes. Happily, 
with kittens, as with all young things, pain and troubles soon 
pass. The kitten licked its nose, and washed out its eyes, in 
some wonderful way, with the ball of its foot. Its tail grew 
smaller, its sputterings less ; and C6sar's smile died down. 

But, melancholy or merry, this handsome face still peered 
towards the door, as if awaiting guests. The thick, crisp hair 



124 ONE OF TWO; OR, 



curled over a high and narrow forehead ; the face, shaped into 
a sharp angle, ended in a somewhat round chin, which was 
adorned with a little peaked beard. The face was otherwise 
clean shaven. The ears were quick, large, and animal, and 
seemed almost motive ; and the scalp was loose on the fore- 
head ; so that, when C^sar shrugged his foreign shoulders, or 
frowned with his brown, foreign forehead, the hair went up or 
came down, and played a not unimportant part in the dialogue. 
The tint of the face was a rich brown ; the cheeks just reddened 
rather more deeply. The eyes were black, lustrous, full of 
laughter and merriment, or of gloomy, wild sadness, as the 
case may be. C^sar looked like a man who had played many 
parts ; and he had. He was, it was understood, a protege of 
Lord Chesterton, and had been brought by that nobleman from 
Malta ; but it was supposed, from his name, that he was the 
son of an Italian. However, from being the protege and valet 
of the great Lord Chesterton, C^sar had fallen to be the waiter 
at this foreign hotel, and was apparently regretting the change ; 
for the kitten, having recovered from the pepper, and playing 
with the shoe-tie of the pensive Italian, was incautious enough 
to prick its claws through the thin stocking, and was rewarded 
by being sent flying, by a vigorous kick, right into the red 
waistcoat of a portly customer who entered at the moment. 

" Hallo ! " said that gentleman, with a good-natured English 
voice, catching the frightened animal and fondling it, **is that 
how you furriners treat kittens 1 " 

" I beg pardon, m'sieu," answered the waiter, in very good 
English, " the cat has been scratching me, the brute ! Why, if 

it isn't Mr Brownjohn !'' cried C^sar, turning pale,, and his 

eyes falling before the honest outlook of the Bow Street 
runner. 

" C6sar Negretti ! " said that person. " So you Ve come 
down to this ! Well, after being so well tiled in as you were, 
you deserve it. That little trick you had of borrowing his 
lordship's diamond buttons " 

" Hush 1 " said the waiter, putting his hand before the Bow 
Street runner's mouth. " Please be as silent as you can. That 
was a mistake." 

«For which many a better man has danced on nothing 



A LEFT-HANDED BRmE. 125 

. m ___ 

befdte nine o'clock A.M.," said Brownjohn, still fondling the 
kitten. ^'I don't like people who ill-use dumb animals. If 
she had not nine lives, you would have killed her. You 've 
knocked half a one out of her." 

*'But you would not mind hanging a man,'* said C^sar, 
spitefully. 

" In the way of business, no," returned Brownjohn. " I 'm 
after one now. That's why I came here Bring me some soup, 
and some fried 'taties . fritj as they call them . and then a 
word with you." 

Brownjohn, whom we Jleft proceeding to London, had when 
there changed his plain dress for his official costume . a red 
waistcoat, frock coat, and top-boots ; had taken his little brass 
staff with a crown on it, a warrant, a pistol, and other neces- 
saries ; and had spent some time about the docks, among the 
foreign sailors. He had been thoroughly foiled. On his 
mind's eye was painted clearly enough the figure of the foreign 
sailor described by the boy. But such a figure came not before 
his retina ; nor could he, on account of imperfect scholarship, 
hold converse with the men. He had, therefore, come back to 
Soho, with the purpose of employing foreign aid ; and here, 
ready to his hand, he very unexpectedly found it. He never 
lost his clue ; but held on like grim death, as he said. It is 
true that his search was something like looking for a needle in 
a bottle, or pottle, of hay ; but patient industry, even under 
such adverse circumstances, had, as Brownjohn well knew, 
been often rewarded. 

C^sar soon made his appearance with the soup, whisked 
away the dust from the table with quite a professional air, and 
stood before the officer, looking as if he had been a waiter all 
his life. 

" You foreign fellows," said Samuel, swallowing his soup in 
full spoonfuls, "soon pick up a trade. You seem a natural 
bom waiter, Negretti." 

Brownjohn never forgot the name of one of his customers, 
and remembered every motion of the lithe Maltese. He in- 
tended his little speech as a compliment. 

" A natural bom fool, I think," said Cdsar, his dark eyes 
flashing with an ugly look, *' to oome here, and to meet you/' 



126 ONE OP TWO; OR, 



" Poor thing," said Brownjohn, taking the kitten out of his 
pocket as tenderly as if it were a china ornament. " Why, she's 
a happy little beast. I 'm blowed tight if she is not purring!" 

He set her down on his knee, and stroked her fur . the right 
way, too . ^with a strong, brown, but tender hand. 

"Now, young fellow, I'd no more kick a kitten than I'd 
strike a woman." 

'Cesar's contemptuous look, as he took away the soup, and 
put the pommes de terre frites before Brownjohn, said plainly, 
" And I *d do both if it suited me j " but he said nothing. 

" I don't know," continued Brownjohn, "as you are such a 
fool, Negretti. I sha'n't hurt you. His lordship's kindness 
put you quite out of my jurisdiction. When we had that little 
business together, I did you some service. Now you can help 



me." 



"Howl" said Cdsar, quickly, his eyes sparkling, and his 
hair moving with his ears, backwards and upwards. " Can I 
get away from here . abroad, perhaps 1 " 

" Well, you 've about guessed it. You are sharp. Can you 
be trusted ? " 

"By you?" asked C^sar, his whole face changing into an 
expression of engaging innocence, and his white teeth glitter- 
ing as he smiled. " By ym, of course, Mr Brownjohn. Did 
you not show me the error of my ways, and that to be honest 
was the lest policy, I am an altered man. I am religious. 
Here is my prayer-book ! " 

C^sar fumbled in his pocket, but finding nothing but a pack 
of cards wrapped in the comer of his handkerchief, he con- 
tented himself with tapping his coat, as if it were his heart. 
. "You talk," said Brownjohn, "as if you were the chaplain 
of the House of Correction, or the ordinary of Newgate." 

And then he contented himself with silence, broken only by 
crunching the crisp flakes of the potatoes. 

C6sar, looking at him, gave a little shudder . of expectation, 
perhaps . for he was as sensitive as a tightly strung instrument. 
Then, with a sigh, he said. 

" You find those very dry work 1 Have some Burgundy." 

" Von ordinary," grunted Brownjohn, " and very ordinary, 
too. No ; British for me. You don't sell it here. You can 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. > 127 



fetch it. Good Old Tom. Booth's best, if you please ; and a 
glass for yourself 

The lithe Maltese, catching up the half-crown, and receiving 
a nod to the word "hot," flew out of the salon; and, before 
Brownjohn had finished his dish, returned with a tumbler of 
Old Tom, and one of rum. He always drank rum, he said, 
haying been taught to do so by his Majesty's sea forces at . 
Malta. 

" Now, sir," he asked, standing respectfully before the Bow 
Street runner, "what do you want your humble servant fori 
Can I help you 1 " 

"That's what I want to know," returned the ruminating 
Brownjohn. " Do you speak Dutch ] " 

" German . that will do. I can make out any thing that 's 
said. Or French, or Italian, or Spanish. The job's over 
there, then 1 " 

" May be," returned Brownjohn. " Look at this. You Ve 
heard of this murder, no doubt 1 " 

And he brought from his pocket a copy of Mr Barnett Slam- 
mer's graphic account of what that personage had called the 
« Kensal-Green Tragedy," and the " Deed of Blood." 

"No. We do not take English papers here," said C6sar, 
coolly. 

Then quietly turning his back to the officer, with a hand 
eager to serve, an eye greedy for such unpleasant excitement, 
Negretti, standing gracefully upright, so that the light could 
fall well upon the paper, read the true history through^ and 
returned the journal, neatly folded, with aT)olite bow to the 
officer. 

" And so you are after the. miscreant ? " 

" That 's wot you call him," said Brownjohn. " / call him a 
murderer, and I mean to hang him." 

" If you catch him," interpolated C6sar, in a blithe, humorous 
way, sitting down familiarly before Brownjohn. " That 's your 
business." 

"^I '11 do my duty " . here Brownjohn took a huge pull at the 
Old Tom, which seemed to give him a greater zest for his 
business ; so that, taking hold of one arm of the Maltese . 
who, perhaps from delicacy, objected to it, and therefore quietiy 



128 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



removed the fingers of the police ofScer . ^he drew him towards 
him, and began unfolding his plans. 

" You see," said Samuel, confidently, " I 'm stumped up here. 
I don't know what to do. I 'm gravelled completely. My 
parents did not send me to a university, or else they would 
have taught me all the farrin langwidges there. Of course 
they would, if I could have picked them up. And I 'm no 
fool on the march, I *m not There 's an old fellow on this lay, 
too, as is no fool neither ; not that / tell him so. oh, no ! I 
flatters no one. But he is on the wrong scent this time ; and 
it 's a race between us. It 's a matter of reputation to me. 
Wrong he is ; but he has a way of working matters out Arith- 
metically, and he won't be wrong long. Now, I'm on the 
right lay ; and, as luck will have it, Providence " 

" Directed your steps," continued C6sar, with an unction that 
almost might be called extreme unction. 

" You are going in for a parson, you are. Well, directed my 
steps . I s'pose Providence and luck are the same . ^to this little 
crib and to you. And, perhaps, there is not a man in all 
London " 

.* More fitted to help you," added C6sar, as Mr Brownjohn 
had buried his face in his glass. 

After this expression of the fitness of things, Mr Negretti 
buried his face in his glass ; and then the two allies took a 
long breath, and looked at each other. Of the two, the ex- 
perienced Bow Street runner . who would have described 
himself, in the language of Mr Boom's Slang Dictionary, as a 
" downy card," " up to a move or two," and not " wanting in 
change" . was by far the more simple character. Negretti, 
with that natural genius for bargaining which distinguishes the 
natives of his happy island, was considering how he could 
make the best bargain; and Brownjohn was dreaming of 
having, by Cesar's help, already attained the supreme felicity 
of bringing the murderer to justice. 

*' Well," continued Cesar, " I believe, Mr Brownjohn, that 
no one could help you better than I could. But how ? You 
see this place of mine, I must give notice, and I don't like 
to" 

" Give it leg bail," paid Brownjohn. " I 'U warrant they 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 129 

owe you something. They'll soon pick up another fumner, 
and they don't do much business." 

" But for a consideration . ^think of the padrone, good sir," 
said J^egretti, feeling all the while that an hour ago he would 
have given his ears for the chance. 

" Well, I suppose a couple' of sovereigns will square that. 
Go and tell the padrone, as you call him . ^pack up your kit 
and come along." 

" Well," said C^sar, after a pause, " I will be generous with 
you, and leave my countryman." Then with a spiteful look at 
the table, he flung off his apron and muttered, " And he can 
do the fetching and carrying himself, the beast ! Have you 
the gelt, Mr Brownjohn 1 Don't you see, we must talk Dutch." 

" Who said Dutch," asked Samuel^ with a start, waking up 
from his reverie. " How sharp you are I " 

" I mean to be. We want to be sharp in your profession. 
I recollect every word you said. Those two guineas, my 
friend." It was astonishing how eager the young man was to 
touch the gold. *^ The two guineas, and the money for the 
soup, my friend ; and I will take leave of the padrone." 

Mr Brownjohn, still in a brown study, produced the money, 
and sat caressing the purring kitten j while C^sar, blithe as a 
bee, went backwards to find the padrone, and to pack up his 
box, taking with him but a small parcel, of which he was jeal- 
ously careful. When he came back, the Bow Street runner 
was still contemplative. But C^sar, who was joyous and beam- 
ing, having polished his clear brown face, and made his short 
black hair shine, awoke him with . 

" Come, my friend, you are now the padrone, I will treat 
you. Here are two glasses of Curagoa. Don't look at them as 
if they were poison." 

"I'm rather tender with foreign stuff," said Brownjohn; 
" and I have not told you all I have to tell." 

"Pshal We shall drink together. It is not drugged, 
Brownjohn. Take whicb you like." 

"Wait a minute, my boy. Business first," returned the 
officer. 

And then, with his hand on Cesar's shoulder . Cesar's eye 
running into the corner, and looking with a wicked disdain 



132 ONE OF two; OB, 



They will be sure to smell out our plot. Wty don't you keep 
it dark) There's nothing like doing a business thing in a 
business way, and on the quiet." 

The restless eyes of Negretti, which watched Brownjohn 
quite as much as Brownjohn watched any other body, flared 
up into a kind of bonfire of contempt. C^ar was one of those 
geniuses who felt contempt for everybody except himself, and 
.who looked down upon all his employers . as he would, indeed, 
have looked down upon an archangel, had one asked him to 
go upon a message for him. Perhaps, if the archangel was 
one from the lowest depths, the Maltese might have accorded 
him some slight recognition, but not unless he had been so. 

" You shall see. Your quiet way would set all the foreign 
sailors in a fright. Now, I am your nephew; you are my 
uncle. We look for a brother of yours, and another uncle of 
mine. You understand, Signer Padrone 1 " 

"Well, it's one way," sighed Brownjohn; "and I suppose, 
as I can't go mine, we may as well go youm. It's a queer 
way, anyhow. Come outside the crib, and let's begin our 
journey." 

Out of the crib they came, C^sar still bearing his bundle, 
and looking round with a feeling of relief as he went on his 
way. Brownjohn was right enough. In his neighbourhood 
the nautical dress of Negretti attracted many a gazer, one of 
whom was so amused as .to follow the pair. 

This was no less than Patsy Quelch. 

Patsy's curiosity was of a longer date than the transformation 
of C^sar ; and Patsy is himself a character that must be intro- 
duced to the reader. 

In the lower regions of the Strangers' Hotel . ^which was 
supposed to be brimming over with choice dishes, heads of 
game, haunches of venison, curious patties, and all sorts of 
foreign delicacies ; but which only held one simmering stock 
soup, converted as occasion demanded into the soups asked 
for, and which brimmed over with no other game than cock- 
roaches . ^lived the cook, the padrone, and Mr Quelch, named 
Patsy. 

Patsy, the son of an Irish gentleman, a native of the Holy 
Land^ as St Giles's was then profanely called, and of a Scotch 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 133 

lady who had tramped up to London from one of ^e least 
salubrious wynds of Glasgow, was a London sparrow, or gutter 
bird of a weU-known type. He had been so knocked about by 
father and mother . the father, who ill-used the mother, taking 
some pleasure in seeing her pass on the rude blows to their 
son, to whom he generously now and then dealt a spare blow 
himself . ^that when he came to years of discretion . that is to 
say, when Patsy was about ten . he one fine morning gave 
them leg-bail; that is, he ran away from the ancestral cellar. 

When his mother summoned him, with an affectionate oath, 
to fetch the milk in the morning, there was no answer ; and 
although the paternal voice was heard to address him in a fond 
way as the " thafe of the wer'rld,'* and to beg him " to come 
out o' dat, or else ivry single bone" in his skin would be collec- 
tively broken, Patsy never responded. He had followed a 
Punch and Judy firm to its West-end pitch ; had got lost near 
Shepherd's Bush ; was taken up by the watch ; declared he 
was an orphan ; he was treated as such, by being affectionately 
sent, to a workhouse, and in due time apprenticed to a shoe- 
maker. The shoemaker was not a bad master, but a severe 
one ; and in a short time it occurred to Patsy that he might 
escape hard and confining work, with now and then some 
strap oil, by running eastwards into town. Being decently 
clothed, and asking civilly for employment from door to door, 
Patsy was soon engaged as waiter at the Hotel des Etranglres, 
in Rupert Street. Here the boy, who had blossomed into a 
good-looking " gossoon " of fifteen, found he was in his ele- 
ment. He had very little to do, had plenty to eat, and now 
and then picked up some halfpence from the couriers and 
valets who frequented the hotel. He even learnt something 
of foreign languages ; and was in the height of success and 
happiness, when the superior attraction of C^sar Negretti nipped 
his hopes in the bud. Patsy was banished to the kitchen, to 
help the very clever but uncertain genius who cooked for the 
hotel ; to bring up dishes to the top of the stairs ; to be seen, 
but not heard ; and to meditate within his warm and impul- 
sive heart a deadly hatred to C^sar. 

As for that foreign gentleman, he looked upon Patsy as a 
grub, a mere reptile. He would have put his foot upon him 



134 ONE OF TWO; OB, 



with as little companction as a woniL With a quick ear to 
inflection, he soon discovered Patsy's country, and called him 
Irish; not as if it were an honour . ^as it is . to belong to that 
beautiful and fertile land, but as if the rery &ct carried with 
it a disgrace. Patsy burnt for revenge, and set his quick wits 
to work to find out a way to accomplish it. 

Cesar's presence brought no luck to the Strangers' HoteL 
With a volubility not at all confined or bound down by any 
conscientious adherence to truth. Signer Negretti had assured 
the padrone that his presence would not only be an attraction 
to the hotel, but that he had many friends . ^let us say princes 
in disguise, or dukes wandering in search of the picturesque . 
who would be quite delighted to come and honour the mUm; 
nay, who might, perhaps, give dinners thereat to the members 
of the English aristocracy, whose names Cesar so volubly 
rattled out. Perhaps the padrone was sanguine ; perhaps he 
was desperate ; mayhap he was convinced. At any rate, he 
closed with Cesar's proposition, and installed him as chief 
waiter, in which responsible station Brownjohn had found 
hiuL 

It happened that on the very day that C^sar kicked the 
kitten into Brownjohn's stomach, he had commenced the 
morning by kicking Mr Quelch, whom he called an Irish 
cochon. 

Patsy knew enough of foreign languages to appreciate the 
insult ; and the warmth of his feelings towards his Maltese 
superior and guide gained somewhat in intensity. A courier 
who breakfasted at the hotel . ^upon Parmesan cheese, stewed 
with tripe, onions, pieces of ox cheek, and small circles of 
carrot, washed down with a pint of vin ordinaire . was so 
pleased with his breakfast, that Patsy saw, with a pang of 
bitter regret, that Negretti pocketed a shilling as a douceur. 
Perhaps the courier had himself been paid extra wages ; per- 
haps he regarded the voluble C^ar as his friend and country- 
man ; certain it was that Patsy saw him finger and pocket a 
coin which he looked upon as his own. The wild spirit of 
revenge which inspires Patsy's ejected countrymen took pos- 
session of him. Was he not ejected too 1 

The interview between Brownjohn and C^sar, the passage 



A LEFT-HAMD£D BSIDE. 135 

of gold between them, the whispered talk^ the fact that C^sar 
treated the half«filumbeiing padrone, who was consoling him- 
self in the kitchen by drinking and playing dominoes with the 
cook, while he bewailed his want of custom, and his heavy 
rent ; and the harried manner in which the waiter packed his 
bandle--*about which he was naturally careful . awakened a 
dozen suspicions in Patsy's bosom. 

" Here, you Irish cochan . ^you pig, you," said the triumphant 
C^sar ; " I am going to leave your sty to yourself. Here is a 
drink-money for you." 

And he threw at Patsy a newly-coined fourpenny-piece, as 
the smallest bit of silver he could give, which had the bad luck 
to miss Patsy's hand and to roll down a crack in the kitchen 
floor. 

'^ Yah I butter-fingers," said the polyglot valet, in the purest 
slang. " Can't hold anything. "Well, good-bye, cochon. I will 
leave you all the wash I " 

Insult was added to injury. Patsy could have flown at the 
throat of the Maltese. He contented himself with a watchful 
look and a silent curse ; and rose from his seat to follow and 
to watch Negretti. 

He saw Brownjohn drink his liquor with a wry face and a 
cough, and knew well enough what he was. Patsy was on the 
qui vioe at once, and determined to follow his enemy; and, 
with the step of a cat or a wild Indian, flew to the door of the 
Hdtel des Eirang^res, and watched the retreating figure of Mr 
Samuel Brownjohn and his new ally. 

When they, going northward, turned towards the east, and 
were about to cross the mazy and by no means salubrious 
purlieus of the Holy Land . poor Patsy^s birthplace . that 
young gentleman, pulling his cap out of his pocket, and hastily 
seizing a French roll from one of the tables as provender, gave 
a short, low, wild cry, as does a cat when it springs on a wall; 
and with little definite idea of what he was about to do, dis- 
appeared after them on his self-instituted watch. 

So, following Negretti, step by step . outside cellars and 
drinking-shops, down by the docks or Eatcliflf Highway, 
where crimps and Jews kept watch for Jack. slunk Mr 
Patsy Quelch, 



136 ONE OP TWO; Oft, 



Crowds of citizens ventured down in those purlieus . ^where, 
in the streets near tbe docks, a perpetual fair went on day and 
night . to buy bargains from abroad. Sailors with strange 
birds, sailors with Japanese boxes and Chinese wares, were to 
be met and dealt with ; sailors who were real, with China silks 
and India muslins; also sailors who were unreal, but who 
looked much more natural than the true ones, who had painted 
birds, Manchester silks, and Birmingham imitations of foreign 
goods. 

In the crowd and the atmosphere of cheatery, C^sar was in 
his element. He crossed himself, said his prayers, talked the 
wildest blasphemy a moment afterwards, quarrelled with the 
passengers, and offered to put a knife into half a dozen all at 
once ; grinned, showed his teeth, made his hair and his ears 
move, and surprised the stolid Brownjohn by his cleverness. 
His costume, curious in the City or Soho, fitted well into the 
landscape at the seaport of London. His volubility and good- 
nature gained them friends. To every man he told a different 
lie ; but his cross-examination was masterly. 

Soon he had discovered traces of the Dutch sailor. 

" My Brownjohn," he said, after triumphantly drinking as 
much rum as would have staggered the strong head of the 
Bow Street runner, " we are on the point of victory. Our 
man is as good as caught. We must, however, be towards the 
country. Our friend is en province." 

" Which way ? " asked Brownjohn. 

" They tell me by Stroud or Kochester. I am, you under-* 
stand, very fond of him. He is my long-lost uncle." 

" Is he ? " grunted Samuel. " I wish I had him up at Bow 
Street. I am glad Old Daylight has not got the start of me." 

" Great events," said C^sar, sententiously, " require proper 
time, my Brownjohn. And now, since we have been so far 
successful, let us eat." 

Brownjohn being himself hungry, some smoking hot boiled 
beef soon was set before them, and with an excellent appetite, 
C^sar fell to. He was full of his fun. He made the most 
atrocious propositions to Brownjohn as to some new method 
of making money by accepting bribes from prisoners ; laughed 
when the honest runner looked aghast at him ; sang snatches 



A LEST-HANDED BBIDE. 137 

of song while waitmg for his plate to be renewed ; and showed 
how thoroughly he enjoyed his new occapation. 

"Look, my Brownjohn," said he, suddenly, as a slinking 
figure passed the cook-shop, and gazed hongiily at the inside ; 
"how those gutter Irish resemble each other. There is a 
figure like that cochon l^atsy. Ah ! I forgot^ yon do not know 
the little wretch at the cabaret. AUonSy let us diink^ if we 
can find a public-house where the rhum is not new." 

The guests left the eating-house, and went forward on the 
Dover Eoad ; nor had they lefb it many moments before a 
footsore figure limped into the shop, and hastily buying four- 
penny worth of beef, stuffed it deftly into the bowels of a 
penny roll that he had with him, and then limped onwards 
after those whom he tracked. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

THE SLOW BUT CERTAIN LAW MARKS DOWN ITS PREY. 

Chesterton House is situated close to the most fashionable 
square in London, and it stands in a ring-fence of stone and 
brick wall ; so that no one could well leave it unobserved, 
while every one who approached could be well marked and - 
watched. 

Old Daylight, accompanied by Inspector Stevenson, kept 
close watch . ^for his own good reason . for some time, in the 
immediate vicinity. 

When Mr Roskell creaked forth, wearing the Scotch cap 
which the valets and stewards of the aristocracy much affect, 
he was conned and noted by a curious old gentleman who, in 
Hessian boots and a spencer, seemed to be vastly interested in 
the upper windows of a house in the dull and aristocratic 
neighbourhood opposite. Mr Eoskell took no notice of him ; 
but Mr Tom Forster, whose time had come, was not sorry to 
see the steward stroll off for his morning's walk in the park. 

It was the day after the dinner, and conversation following 
it, which Philip had had with his father. 



138 ONK OP TWO ; OB, 



Thd young man had slept but little, and was pacing the 
room in which hong the protraits of his ancestors, the genea- 
logical tree of the Stanfields, and the arms which Edgar Wade 
bad so much admired Philip was awaiting his father's appear- 
ance ; but the old lord, who had slept as little during the night, 
had, towards morning, fallen into a profound but uneasy sleep, 
in which the events of thirty years before. events seldom out 
of his mind . came back to him in dreams. 

Suddenly, as Philip was abstractedly gazing at the polished 
swords hanging in their rack, the door opened, and the valet, 
with a face of wonder . or, rather, of blank and unpleasant 
surprise-^ushered in two gentlemen, who trod so closely on 
his heels that they seemed rather unwilling to let him get out 
of their sight. 

" Lord Wimpole is at home," said the servant. 

" That will do," said the shorter of the two strangers, with 
an extraordinary and precise rudeness, as the valet thought. 
'* Now you can go. We shall not want anything. We have a 
coach outside." 

''A coach, gentlemen ! " said his lordship, with an uneasy 
surprise, as if he dreaded some new misfortune. " What is the 
matter 1 Are any of my friends ilH " 

" Pray, don't alarm yourself, my lord," exclaimed the taller of 
the two, Mr Inspector Stevenson ; while Old Forster, carefully 
putting the servant outside, shut the door. '^ I presume you 
are" 



"Philip Desvoeux Stanfield, commonly called Lord Wim- 
pole ? " ejaculated Old Daylight. 

"I am he, sir," returned Philip, proudly ; forgetting, in the 
suddenness of the attack, the recent terrible disclosures. 

" Then you are our prisoner." 

** Upon what charge, gentlemen 1 " 

** Only murder, my lord ; that's all," said Inspector Steven- 
son, with imperturbable coolness. " Don't be alarmed. Do 
not say anything to criminate yourself. We are police officers, 
and shall report every word. Take things coolly and come 
along with us ; and we shall use no violence. We are always 
polite to gentlemen, when they behave as such." 

And the cool Inspector held out the warrant signed by George 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. I'SS 

Horton, one of his Majesty's magistrates for the county of 
Middlesex, for Philip's inspection. 

Philip read the warrant, and his heart sank within him. 

" How can I clear myself," he muttered, " from this evil 
thing?'' Then lifting his head, he asked, ''Will you let me 
call my father?" 

"Well, you had better not. Take what things you want 
with you, and come along with us. Lord bless you, it 's no- 
thing, if you can prove an alibi; and a nobleman like you can 
always do that. I should quietly resign myself to our hands, 
day nothing, come and hear the charge, and send for my 
solicitor. That 's the cleverest way out of a nasty job, that I 
know of," said the Inspector, in a kindly way. 

Philip thought so, too ; and walked into his own room, closely 
followed by the Inspector. 

" Can I not be here in private ? " he asked, as the strong 
hand of the policeman prevented the door from being shut 
in his face. 

" Well, nob exactly," returned Stevenson. '* I don't want to 
intrude, my lord, nor to be rude . not I. It 's not our way of 
doing things. You see, when once I have my eye on you . ^you 
are my charge, you see ; and I never let my eye off my charge, 
sleeping nor waking, until I have put the charge in somebody 
else's charge. That 's the law, and very sensible law, too." 

As Lord Wimpole said not a word, but merely dressed him- 
self . ^he was deadly pale . Mr Stevenson still continued his 
pleasing conversation, out of a good-natured wish to prevent 
his lordship being under any restraint. For the same reason 
he looked out of the window, and admired the portrait of the 
Countess of Chesterton, which he afterwards pronounced, with 
the air of a connoisseur, to be a " first-rate bit of painting." 

Mr Stevenson's harmless prattle fell into dull ears. Philip 
was as much beside himself as if he had been an innocent girl 
of sixteen. The Inspector . who, to do him justice, would 
have behaved as coolly and as considerately if he had been 
arresting a clerk for a vulgar forgery . every now and then 
threw in a remark, looking delicately out of the windows as 
Philip attired himself. 

'' Yes, we are very sensible in criminal cases, except in the 



140 ONE OF TWO; OR, 



way of barristers. As a rale, I don't much admire barristers ; 
they make a deal too much fuss, and often upset a case- 
especially family barristers. Don't you employ one, my lord/' 

Philip started at this vulgar, friendly advice. 

" If chancery and equity, and all kinds o* law, were done 
down to, or rather up to, the criminal standard, this country 
would be all the better for it," said the Inspector, glancing at 
his prisoner, and seeing that his hand trembled as he tied his 
cravat, and that he was not quite ready. 

Then, after a pause . 

"There's no need to hurry, my lord. We never hurry 
people. Time goes fast enough with our customers. Yes^ 
family barristers are troublesome. They don't know the prac- 
tice of our courts, and they take liberties with the officers and 
magistrates, to the prejudice of the prisoners. Then they say 
too much. Now, the best Old Bailey man that I know . Mr 
Serjeant Jawkins . can talk when he likes, and he can be 
silent when he likes. Bless you, he had a rare case the other 
day. An old woman poisoned a hinfant, as plain as if I 'd done 
it myself. (1 11 just see what you take jfrom that drawer, if 
you please. Oh ! studs, is it 1 Beg pardon ; all right !) He 
assumed that his client was quite innocent, o' course; and 
after he had made us very merry, says he . 'And for my 
unfortunate client . ^for she is unfortunate, to be innocently 
in such a position. what shall I say? Nothin', absolutely 
nothin'. I leave her case, gentlemen o' the jury, to your common 
sense.' Thereon he throws down his papers, puts his hands 
in his weskit holes, and smiles beneficently at the jury. They 
turn round in the box, and bring her in not guilty, of course. 
Ah I Jawkins is your man, my lord." 

It was, perhaps, lucky for the good-natured Inspector that 
at that moment Old Forster knocked at the door. 

" All right outside 1 " asked Stevenson. " We 're nice and 
ready now." 

And as the two walked out. Old Daylight, who had the blue 
serge bag of a lawyer under his arm, walked in. 

" Got what you want 1 " asked Stevenson. 

Old Daylight nodded, with a knowing look. 

** My friend would just like to look round the apartment,*' 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 141 



Baid the Inspector, with much politeness, " We will step out- 
side. He 's a very gentlemanly man, and won't toss over the 
things. He 's getting up the case." 

" What case ? " asked Philip, wearily. 

" Why, your case, o* course. He's got it in hand. I'm only 
a supernumerary. Bless you, he 's very clever, and as harmless 
as a dove ; on'y I 'd much rather have Old Daylight on my side 
than against me. That's my opinion. And now, my lord, 
we will go out. Mr Forster will follow." 

" Stay one moment," cried Philip, with a sudden pang, as 
he pressed his hand to his side. ** You will let me write a 
letter ] " 

** Provided I see it, my lord, and knows to whom it is 
going." 

Philip looked up, flushed at the insult. 

" It is a private letter to a young lady," he answered. " It 
cannot concern you." 

" That depends, my lord. I shall only look at it profession- 
aUy." ^ 

Philip saw that- there was only one thing to do, and that 
was to suhmit. He sat down mechanically, and wrote a few 
words to Winifred Vaughan, stating that he was accused of 
some dreadful crime, and showed the note to the police officer, 
who glanced over it and the address, and let his prisoner seal 
it and give it to a valet. Then . as Mr Tom Forster was quite 
ready, and trotted out of the room with a few small ohjects in 
his lawyer's blue moreen bag . the three walked coolly down- 
stairs, where the valet was waiting, and ready to offer Lord 
Wimpole his hat and gloves, and then out into the courtyard, 
where a hackney coach, the panels of which blazed with the 
arms of some rich dowager in a gorgeous heraldic mantle, was 
waiting for them. 

How quietly the whole thing was done ! In the dramas of 
the period, the curtain would fall in the midst of a scene, the 
villain protesting his innocence, while a beautiful young lady, 
in a charming attitude and in a fainting fit, fell into the arms 
of the friend of the hero. It was curious that Philip thought 
of this, with a smile ; and felt very thankful to Mr Tom 
Forster and the Inspector for their kindness. As for those 



142 OSE OF TWO ; OB, 

tiro estimable persons, they behared to Lord Wimpole irith 
much the same gentleness that thej would have shown to the 
poorest culprit they ever arrested. The few words they 
exchanged as they were driren along bore no reference to the 
case in hand Englishmen are not very demonstrative, and 
official Englishmen are wise in their determined silence. 
What they hare is to do, not to talk. 

The mmbling coach creaked and rattled on in so qoick a 
transit, that Philip had not recovered from his dazed dismay 
before he had descended from the crazy conveyance, and had 
passed into the private room, awaiting Mr Horton. 

That gentleman was consulting his colleague, Mr Boom, who 
had been seized with an industrious fit, and good-naturedly 
offered to r^eve his colleague for several weeks. He had been 
philanthropically trying to persuade Mr Horton that half the 
crimes of the poor were owing to their bad lodgings and worse 
surroundings, and half apologising for the easy way in which 
he dismissed those who were brought before him. 

"My dear Horton," he said, "if you and I were to live 
down one of those terrible alleys in Drury Lane, with squalling 
children, and an untidy, unkempt, and fractious wife, don't 
you think that we should be glad to escape from them into a 
public-house t I know that / should. I like my glass of wine 
now . ^I should be fond of my glass of gin then." 

"It is very possible," said Horton; "but poverty, which 
brings its triaLs, should bring its lessons. To a working man, 
a momentary debauch is not an escape from misery : it rather 
binds him to it The grog he drinks, which excites him for 
the moment, does not really exhilarate him. He ought to 
know this as well as I do. It maddens and poisons." 

" Quite right," returned his colleague. " All that is as plain 
as A, B, C. Adulterated gin maddens and excites : the man is a 
fool, a madman, under its influence. That 's why I am lenient." 

"That's why I should be severe," said the other. 

"Bad dwellings are the foundation of this miserable busi- 
ness," continued Mr Boom. " Bad wives and bad food the 
second step. Creneral ignorance, ill health, and discontent the 
next. And the whole is crowned by crime. Poor people ! 
who can condemn them ? " 



A LSFT-HANBED BRIDE. 143 

And here the magistrate took a gilt toothpick from his 
pockety and, after meditatively using it, turned to speak to the 
clerk, who was making out certain depositions in some Case 
which does not concern us here. 

Mr Horton, still unconvinced, was about to answer, when 
the door which led from the court to the magistrates' room 
opened, and the square, intellectual head of Inspector Steven- 
son, tightly fixed on to his broad shoulders and deep chest by 
a military collar of a blue frock coat, which made him look 
like a staff officer, in undre$s, appeared at the door, and his 
lips were seen to articulate the name of Mr Horton. 

That gentleman at once rose and went to his summoner. 

" We Ve got him, sir," said the Inspector, " and all right. 
He is in the private room, and it is wonderful what a cool 
hand he is. Old Daylight *s right, for a sovereign. His lord- 
ship made no more of being arrested than I should of going 
out to breakfast." 

This . said in a whispered tone, between the two doors of 
the short passage which led from the court to the private 
room . was intended to prepare the magistrate for his new 
charge. But it was not sufficient to prevent the good gentle- 
man from experiencing a curious revulsion of feeling. Some- 
how or another, conscience seemed to whisper, " Do not try 
that man ; give over this business to your colleague. You are 
not unbiased." Then, again, old scraps of plays and poems 
would occur to him : '^ Murder most foul, as in the best it is^ 
but this most foul ; " and then his own conscience would make 
common cause with Lord Wimpole. 

Nothing of this struggle was seen on the magistrate's face. 
He walked quietly into the room, and was about to sit down 
at his table . ^his eyes were cast down upon the ground . 
when Lord Wimpole gladly, almost joyously, sprang up to 
shake hands with him. 

"0 Mr Horton!" he said, "I am so glad to meet you! 
In this trouble, it is quite refreshing to meet an old friend." 

The young man had stretched out his hand in the frankest 
and mosb jovial way. All his troubles seemed for the moment 
forgotten. Mr Horton suddenly faced round, crossed his arms, 
and looked at Philip with the cold, meaningless stare that 



144 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



EngliBhmen can so well put on when they wish to be cruelly 
rude. 

« My lord ! " he said. 

And his voice, often so soft and musical, grated with a hard 
resonancy as he spoke. 

Lord Wimpole first turned red and then pale. Then, turn- 
ing haughtily on his heel, he said . 

" I forgot, Mr Horton, or I would not have insulted you. I 
said we were old friends. I did not at once realise our altered 
stations. I am the prisoner, and you are my judge." 



CHAPTEE XX. 

** / DO CONyi/RE YOUj PLEAD; SPEAJC, BE NOT DUMB,^* 

The words of Philip Stanfield cut the magistrate to the heart. 
He^ was one of those unhappy men, whose name is legion, who, 
always watching over their feelings, and intending to do the 
"right thing," somehow let their passions slip out of their 
hands just when they chiefly desire to hold them. Mr Horton 
would have given the world to have received Lord Wimpole 
coolly, and even generously ; and yet, at his first interview, 
he by some ideans managed to insult him. 

His next step was to motion Philip to a chair, and then to 
look in a meaning way at Old Daylight and the Inspector, 
who forthwith disappeared. After this, the way being cleared, 
he spoke. 

" Eeally, my lord," the harsh, dry voice of the magistrate 
was heard to say, " I must apologisa I forgot myself. We 
cannot be said to have estabUshed those relations you spoke of 
between us yet A man is not guilty, in English law, at least, 
until he is i^ed and condemned." 

The apology was as bad as the insult. Lord Wimpole winced 
under it, but answered . 

" Oh, sir, pray do not spare the feelings of so poor a thing 
as I am, I have fallen, indeed, in my own opinion, and, as I 
perceive, in those of others, since . since a few short days. I 



A LKFT-HANDED BRBDE. 145 

begin to perceive the full meaning of the Hebrew curse, 
when destruction cometh unawares upon a man^ and his 
friends privily and secretly hide themselves out of his 
path." 

These words were so simply and so pathetically said, that 
Mr Horton felt somewhat uncomfortable under them. And 
yet Philip did not intend them as a reproach. He merely 
repeated what was to him a very bitter truth, and the force 
of which he felt very intensely. How it was that Mr Horton 
felt the reproach the reader knows. That gentleman now 
thought that the best way to put an end to the embarrassment 
that was growing upon hinx and the prisoner, was to proceed 
at once to action. 

" We will not, if you please, my lord," said the magistrate, 
" talk of friends or of enemies. Justice can regard none of 
either. All that we have now to ascertain is the truth of the 
charge against you." 

" Exactly," returned Philip, in a dazed state. 

This dreamy dulness, occasioned, no doubt, by th6 force of 
the blow, and that force itself being intensified from the con- 
trast afforded by the uninterrupted prosperity and happiness 
that he had hitherto enjoyed, now and then came over the 
young nobleman like a cloud, and its presence was construed 
variously. Inspector Stevenson thought that it was an ex- 
cellent specimen of what was known as " shamming Abraham," 
a slang expression which, according to Mr Boom, was as old 
as the time of Shakespeare, and perhaps older than that ; as, 
indeed, all or most of our slang is. Mr Horton, a much 
deeper student of humanity, construed this half-intelligent 
expression as a combination of nervous dread and of innocence. 
Mr Tom Forster, who was admirably clear in his own way, 
but not always in others, had settled it in his mind as an 
aristocratic method of exhibiting an impudent sang-froid. He 
had read how gaily the French noblemen went to execution, 
and with what pains some of them sought to show their 
captors and persecutors how well they could bear misfortune ; 
and while he admired Lord Wimpole's behaviour, he con- 
founded his impudence right royally. Thus a great part of 
the world, perpetually seeking for motives, look far into tho 



146 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



field, while the most natural explanation of mental phenomena 
lies at their feet. 

Philip's next exclamation would have been deemed the very 
height of impudence by Old Daylight, had he heard it. 

" You are, of course, aware upon what charge you are brought 
here," said Mr Horton. 

" I really," said Lord Wimpole. 

*' Pray don't speak yet," interrupted the magistrate. " This 
is quite a preliminary business. Nevertheless, every word you 
may say I shall take a note of, and it may be used against you. 
I should, were I in your place, at once send for my legal 
adviser. Unfortunately, in this country, we none of us study 
that which is so essential for us to know . the laws which affect 
us in every transaction of life. Pray permit me to read over 
the charge against you, and pray listen attentively. If you 
are innocent, a gentleman in your position, all whose move- 
ments are known . ^in fact, a person in any position . can, 
unless under a most unlikely and unforeseen combination of 
circumstances, clear himself at once." 

Philip began, while the magistrate was speaking in his clear 
and impressive manner, to look round the room, and to awaken 
to the realities of his position. He noticed the pattern of the 
oilcloth, by the clear October sun, which threw a liglrt into the 
room through a large but strongly-barred window ; the bare, 
official look of the apartment; the strong Windsor chair in 
which he sat; the calm, pale face of his companion sitting 
before his desk opposite him ; and the stiff rattle of the blue 
official paper he held in his hand. Then the events of the last 
few days came back to him ; the dinner and conversation of 
yesterday ; the grief and trouble he had suffered ; the misery 
painted upon the face of his father when he left him ; the loss 
of all that was dear to* him. As these came back . the more 
bitterly because of their short absence . the young man covered 
his face with his hands, and listened. 

The cool, calm voice, no longer harsh, of Mr Horton, fell 
upon his ears now clear and distinctly ; and Philip heard the 
charge which he at first, however strange it may seem, had 
absolutely not comprehended. That he was taken into cus- 
tody upon some dire and dreadful accusation, that those who 



A LEFT-HANDED BRmE. U7 

arrested him were officers of the police, and that the warrant 
was duly signed by some magistrate^ was all that he clearly 
knew. For the first time, in that bare and cold room, as bare 
to him as the walls of a prison, he felt wholly his position. ' 

At the charge of murder, he started and rose up. At the 
name of Estelle Martin, the young man uttered a cry of despair 
so pitiable, so pathetic^ so clear, and yet so low, that the police- 
officers in the inner room, who were waiting to be summoned, 
heard it, and were ready at once to enter . but that they heard 
the clear tones of the magistrate continue the interrogation. 

" Surely, you knew all this, my lord," the magistrate was 
heard to say, " else why are you here 1 " 

Philip explained in broken tones to Mr Horton what he felt ; 
and that until the present moment he knew hardly anything 
of the charge. The magistrate looked at him in a searching, 
curious way. Gould he believe this young man? he asked 
himself. Was it possible that a man could be arrested with- 
out strictly comprehending the reason 1 Then he paused ; and, 
remembering the history which Tom Forster had told him, no 
longer wondered, but looked at Philip with pity. 

*' You knew this woman, Estelle Martin 1 " he asked. 

" I have seen her," said Philip, simply. 

" You were acquainted with her neighbourhood, and with 
her little house ? " 

" Acacia Villa 1 Yes . I have heard of it. This murder, of 
which I now comprehend the full significance, is of terrible 
import to me." 

" Indeed it is," said Horton, severely, looking at PhiUp, and 
beginning to waver in his opinion. 

" I can assure you, upon my honour, upon my oath if need 
be, that I am entirely innocent of it," said the accused. 

" Alas ! my lord," returned Horton, "in such a case as this 
neither your tonour nor your oath is of any avail. You do 
not belong to the House of Peers yet ; and we do not try even 
the heir-apparent to an earldom before his peers; nor do the 
jurors, especially the accused, pronounce or plead upon his 
honour." 

Philip's head fell. He thought how little claim he had to 
any title now. 



148 ONE OF TWO; OE, 



" All that you have to do is to show me, by witnesses and 
by irrefragable proof, that you were not at Acacia Villa on 
the night of the murder. It took place between six and nine 
on the night of September the twenty-ninth. It is not so far 
distant, that date, but that your lordship can tell me where 
you were then." 

Lord Wimpole let his head sink into his hands, and appeared 
lost in thought. 

" I am perfectly innocent of this crime," he murmured. 

" Where, then, were you on that night ? " 

The young man was silent. 

" Eemember," continued Horton, " that it is by favour that 
this preliminary examination is thus continued : the wish to 
spare your father and your family. It is quite possible, of 
course " . here Mr Horton so inflected his voice as to convey 
the assurance, which was gathering upon him, that the matter 
to him was beyond doubt . " it is quite possible that you are 
entirely innocent." 

" I am quite so," reiterated Lord Wimpole ; " but " 

"But what? Matters are too serious for 'buts.' If you 
have anything to say to me, you can tell me privately." 

Just then the proposal of marriage made by Horton to Wini- 
fred Vaughan occurred to Philip in a singularly forcible man- 
ner, and he answered nothing. The magistrate iinagined that 
his prisoner was reflecting, and affected to mend his pen, 
glancing now and again at him. So long a time elapsed that 
it was he who first spoke. 

" I may help your memory. Lord Wimpole," he said. " On 
the twenty-ninth of September, in the morning, about eleven 
o'clock, as I imagine, Mr Edgar Wade, barrister, of the Temple, 
called upon you upon important business." 

The young lord turned pale. Upon important business 
indeed! . upon business that had changed his whole life to 
bitterness ! 

** You must recall what you did upon that day. You can- 
not have so much forgotten what you have done." 

Lord Wimpole was still silent. At last, and with an effort, 
he raised his head, looked at his questioner, and said faintly . . 

" I have not forgotten." 



^- 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 149 

" Then," returned Horton with a hopeful manner . for his 
generosity now got the better of him, and he began to plead 
for the young man so entangled and so terribly tried . " then, 
my lord, you can surely say where you were. You may tell 
me, and I will advise you . as, indeed, I would do any one so 
unhappily situated as your are . for the best." 

" Pardon me," returned Philip, still faintly, but resolutely, 
** I cannot say." 

"What you have said is quite sufficient," said Horton, 
curtly . for he had a lingering belief in Philip's innocence, and 
was annoyed at his obstinacy . " would be quite sufficient to 
cause me to commit you ; but I must certainly remand you, 
and keep, you closely confined in the meantime. Let me beg 
of you, if you have been . as other young men in your station 
too often have been . in improper company, and have any 
punctilio " 

" Then you imagine something so utterly foreign to my 
habit and nature . ^indeed, to what is demanded of me by my 
tonscience," said Philip, proudly . " that I can only say you 
do not know me. I should have no punctilio in answering for 
a shameful companion, had I one. But I have not, and still I 
elect to remain silent." 

Mr Horton heard his prisoner with a kind of pity. Some- 
thing within him whispered that the accused was innocent of 
the crime ; and yet before the magistrate there was but one 
course. 

" If," he said to Philip, " you are determined that the whole 
world shall know of this disgrace upon a noble family, you are 
taking the right course. I ask you again, and for the last 
time . ^Where were you on the evening in question 1 " 

Philip remained obstinately silent. 

Thereon the magistrate rang a bell, and Mr Tom Forster, 
alias Old Daylight, came in with a brisk step, followed by 
Inspector Stevenson. Still silent. Lord Wimpole watched the 
movements of these officer^ with a curious interest. 

" I have interrogated this gentleman," said the magistrate to 
Forster, " and I cannot learn from him how he was occupied on 
the night of the twenty-ninth of September." 

" Commonly called Michaelmas Day," said Mr Forster, look- 



Vf -:?z-o«rTir^: .m^ 



l^/y/^' r.titA.^ r i^r^ ntt«ft ?v»i^ iw* -irrnux : ^iit cij k 

^^IVj'r;':"* f/'Jja T*rr \.:.\^ Ttjait to be a«ij»:;mad &r,* he 

^'/..,'r,;? *.?-^*. tL*: er** <,i \\ji «/.'^%*i fluji wa:d:i«ed Lis hackds 
I* ,*.;> i:-iwr..% \u*Jit*fiiK. "TL^r^'9 olIj- a reiy lirije lone to 
>/^: si/'/,o ,:.>A f'/T, Iir;iiA^'9jt« c*«i t© «s^ tLu te kist or von 
;a;i Ki« t/&*/.>rJb . voa I tl-liJt u wat; fcr he onlr kes some 
y^iry gr^at of>^, aft^r ali . bjr a short quarter of an Imkie. I 
4'/frt ti'/'/t\'j'/X Kuft FrettC'h, or I d gnrc it yoar wcM'^iipL Wdl, 
th^r^ liu!<; jor/)$ tiot we are asking abo:it don't take long. 
lV^>babJr, much fcLorU?r ti^n a qaart<eT of an Lour . so firail is 
hurrjan life. IV/pk; don't do Treating, and cutting, and hade-. 
iiijf^ ; an arjgiy blow, or a fetab, your worship " . here the oM 
fimiUsmAn affcc't^d to find tl^e knot of his bag a difficolt one . 
** or a stab, your worship,'' he reiterated, ^ generally finishes 
the tpaticf/' 

During this little speech . ^in making which Mr Forster felt 
tlixit he was taking a great liberty . Old Daylight kept his eyes 
on the prisoner, Philip certainly started when he said " stab/' 
hacmuQ Forster jerked out the word in a spiteful and sudden 
manner ; but beyond that, he still watched the old fellow as if 
all the world were on its trial rather than himself, and he were 
a quiet and unconcerned witness. 

hy this time the bag was undone, and Old Daylight had 
plunged one brawny, brown arm and hand in it. At the 
(hior Miood the Inspector, quiet, impassible, and like a statue, 
^ave that hi« eyes moved and glittered. It was plain to Philip 
that the interest of all three was fixed intensely upon him, but 
»tlll ha said nothing. 

Mr II or ton arranged and rearranged his notes. 

*' Thay generally do this kind of work abroad with a stab. 
JlcH'o they knock you down, and beat out your brains; which, 
in n)y opinion, after a good deal of experience, is much the 
uloer and more British fashion," 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 151 

, _^ . X 

*^ There 's a fashion in murders, then/' thought the silent 
Philip to himself; ''and this rude old gentleman seems to be 
a connoisseur of the proprieties of the trade." 

In spite of himself, he could not help allowing a smile to 
slightly curl his lip : a smile not unmarked by the magistrate 
. ^nor, indeed, by either of the three. 

" Well, he is a cool hand ! " thought Inspector Stevenson. " He 
Imows how to carry it with a high feather in his bonnet.'* 

On the other hand, Old Daylight was puzzled. 

" He is as cool as if he had committed a dozen murders,'^ 
he muttered to himself. ^ 

" The time to be accounted for," said the magistrate . making 
his own deductions from the behaviour of the accused . " is, let 
us say" . here he consulted his notes . **from half-past six of 
the evening until nine o'clock P.M. : two hours and a half. The 
AVidow Estelle Martin was seen alive at half-pa^st six on that 
day." 

"And spoken to," ejaculated Mr Forster. "At half-past 
nine, or something about that time, she was struck down by 
some person unknown, and stabbed in the back with a sharp, 
narrow instrument . such as this." 

Here the old gentleman quietly took out of his bag the 
broken end of a foil. 

Even Mr Horton started. Philip seemed to regard the foil 
without curiosity, and without emotion. 

" That is my property," he said, coolly. 

" It 's the property of the Crown now," returned Daylight, 
curtly. " Also, here is a light pair of gloves, the presence of 
which Mr Horton will understand. Also a boxing or fencing 
glove, the thumb of which is torn ; some cigars, a cigar-holder, 
and a pair of boots, soiled, but scarcely, I think, with London 
mud." 

" All of which you took from Chesterton House this very 
morning," said Philip, coolly. " They belong to me. Of what 
use is their presence here 1 " 

" Will you tell me," again asked the magistrate, " what you 
were doing during that short time on the twenty-ninth." 

Philip said, shortly, without waiting to consider . ; 

" I cannot." 



152 ONE OF TWO ; OBy 



" Mj dutj/' said the magistrate^ '^ is then to remand jou 
on the chaz^ of murder. These matters here are very im* 
portant in the chain of .evidence ; but I vill, out of considersr 
tion to yourself and family, give yoa time for thought, and 
also for consulting your solicitor. You must, of course, remain 
here in custody. Inspector Stevenson will take chaige of you. 
Have you no one with whom you wish to communicate 1 " 

The unhappy young man rose and looked around him, but 
said nothing for a moment Then, remembering the advice 
of the Inspector, and glancing at his honest face as that of a 
friend, he said . 

'^ The solicitors of my family would be of little use in such 
a case, I presume. I know of no one to whom I could apply. 
I will think over this in the seclusion you send me to. But^ 
perhaps, Mr Horton, as you may know Mr Edgar Wade, you 
will kindly ask him if he will defend me ] And now, sir, I 
am ready." 

So saying, Lord Wimpole quietly followed Inspector SUbven- 
son to the lock-up. 

" Phew ! " whistled Old Daylight. And then he whispered 
to the magistrate, ^'WeU, that is cool! He wants Edgar 
Wade to defend him ! If I were " 

'^ Mr Edgar Wade wiU act as an English barrister always 
does," said Mr Horton, sternly. '* If he accepts his retainer, 
he will do his best for him. I will see that he is communicated 
with." 

" What will the world come to % " asked Old Daylight of 
himself, as he packed up his blue bag and prepared to go home. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

AT CHESTERTON HOUSE* 



The magistrate had remained alone in his room, revolving, 
like the pious -^neas, many things in his mind, while Philip 
Stanfield was led quietly across the yard, upon each side of 
which stood a series of small closets, that looked as much like 
the tool-houses of a country house as anything else, Inspector 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDK ^ 153 

f . - . . . 

Stevenson was much struck with his prisoner's behaviour. 
Here was to him a great question. Was this swell a rogue or 
fool ? As regarded Old Forster, it was certain he could not 
make a mistake. Mr Forster was too clever to be taken in ; 
he had got the right man, he had. Well, then, what on earth 
did this swell mean by not having an alibi ready, and not 
pressing for bail, and having his old governor up 1 

His old governor ! Poor man ! the bitterest feeling, which 
came every now and then with recurrent force, was that which 
told Philip that his father would soon find out the new dis- 
grace that had befallen him. 

In the meantime, the whole basement of Chesterton House 
was revolutionised by the news. We, who live in the parlours, 
think that our servants know nothing about our private affairs; 
and that we can do this or that without being observed. How 
loftily we say, " Oh, those people take no interest in us. We 
can discuss these matters before them quite easily ; they are 
beyond their comprehension." And all the while Jenny knows 
more than her. mistress; and Joseph, the page boy, with his 
smooth face, is in possession of one or two secrets which, if 
you knew that he knew, your ears would tingle. 

Chesterton House was as well ordered as any house in the 
three kingdoms, especially below stairs. The servants, who 
reflect the habits of their superiors, as, indeed, most of us do, 
if we be not superior ourselves, were thoroughly orderly and 
good ; indeed, the steward's room was a pattern to many a 
gentleman's house. 

Mr Eoskell, when he creaked back again, in his pumps and 
Scotch cap, after his morning's walk, quietly read the Morning 
Pillar and Mr R. Coaster's " News of the Aristocracy." 

"Let me see," he would say, "what is doing. Is Lord 
Splinterbar going to sell his stud yet i Is young Lord Boohoo 
coming of age ? . ^because we are going down there when he 
does do so, to assist at those festivities. Bother festivities ! 
say /, from my point of view. What 's old Mother Sark going 
to do] The dansant! is she . a mean old wretch. Whenever 
Lord Wimpole goes to one of them thes dansantSy he comes 
home as hungry as a hunter." 

In the steward's room, the company, duly waited upon by 



154 ONE OP two; or, 



the lower servants, consisted of the Earl's valet, out of livery ; 
Mr Eoskell ; Mr Gurgles, the butler ; and young Mr Ghecketts^ 
Lord Wimpole's valet, also out of livery. These gentlemen 
were honest, honourable, good servants ; quite content to do 
their duty, and doing it, too, very much better, and with very 
much less noise and fuss, than some upper members of society. 

Mr Gurgles, the butler, had good wages and certain perqui- 
sites. These he strictly adhered to. Out of these perquisites, 
he furnished his friends with a very good bottle of wine now 
and then ; and he and Mr Eoskell drank as good wine as did 
the Earl. Mr Gurgles did his duty thoroughly. His master? 
he took care, never had a bad bottle of wine at his table ; and, 
indeed, never bought a bad bottle of wine . which is more than 
many a nobleman, or many a king, can say j nor did any one 
take away or waste a bottle. Mr Gurgles was severely honest, 
read the *' Gospel Magazine" . which he called the " Gorspel 
Mag'' . quoted it upon occasion, and tried to improve the 
morals of the servants below him. 

The Earl's man, Mr Slates, was a good, quiet, solemn man, 
with no observation, no penetration, no smile nor laugh nor 
fun about him at all . one who did his work well, was always 
at his work ;. who was thoroughly absorbent of jokes, talk, or 
anything else. Whatever he heard never came out. He was, 
however, a capital man to listen; and, next to the Earl, he 
loved and admired . in the quiet manner that an orderly old 
cow or a wabus might love and admire . ^Mr Eoskell. 

We have said that he was absorbent ; he was so, in more 
ways than one. Now and then, when he was left at home, 
and when the Earl went out, as he often did, attended only by 
Mr Eoskell, or when he had asked permission to go to the 
theatre, Mr Slates would get quietly and thoroughly drunk ; 
and theti, with a headache, a pale face, and a languid gait, 
would go on with his work next morning as well as ever. 
Upon these occasions, Mr Gurgles would quote the " Gorspel 
Mag " to him, with the weight and authority of the Bible it- 
self. Indeed, it must be said that Gurgles, who apparently 
read the Scriptures very seldom, usually quoted St Paul, or 
David, or St John himself, as the editor's own words. 

"Now, my dear friend Slates," he would say, "why do you 



A LEFT-HANDED BBIDB. 155 

do these things ? The editor of the ' Gorspel Mag ' says ex- 
pressly, ' Be sober, be temperate,' and he urges with great force 
that 'strong drink is as a raging Hon.''' 

" 'Twasn't at the Lion," said Slates. " They give you good 
stuflF there. We had a little dinner of our society, and . ^in 
short, it 's the mixed stuff they give you." 

"The ' Gorspel Mag' says," urged Gurgles, "that 'men are 
deceitful upon the scales,' and ' above measure.' And he says 
this with force, although I think he might have said below 
measure ; for they give you too little when they can." 

Here Mr Checketts broke in with a song. Mr Checketts 
had risen in life. He had been a groom ; but being as good 
a fellow as ever lived, and having risked his life to save Lord 
Wimpole's with as much sang-froid as he would have cleaned 
his boots, he had been considered worthy of promotion. 

'* Bom in a kitchen, in a garret bred, 
Promoted thence to deck her mistress' head" . 

was, as we know, a terrible offence in Lord Byron's eyes. Mr 
Checketts had not been born in a kitchen, for his father was 
a respectable publican; and his mother's first floor, where 
Checketts first saw light, was as nice a bed-room as one might 
well desire. But Checketts had been promoted ; and he was 
full of fun, good humour, slang, and poetry ; so that he exer- 
cised the soul of Gurgles greatly. But, for all that, he was a 
great favourite of all the inhabitants of the steward's room. 
Mr Eoskell, Gurgles, and even the dull Slates, whose eyes 
wereasbrilUant as those of a codfish, missed him when he 
was absent. When Gurgles quoted the "Gorspel Mag" as 
having accused men of being deceivers, Mr Checketts broke 
out with the convivial and Shakespearean song- 

" * Men were deceivers ever ; * 

The J water your gin and they salts your beer, 
And they says, oh, aint it clever ! *' 

Checketts had this peculiarity about him, that he recollected 
only the first line of any quotation ; and, having a good ear 
for rhyme, filled it up in his own fashion. 

"Really, Mr Checketts, you must not show unbecoming 
levity. Mr Slates's little fault, which we will not mention". 



156 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



** * Oh no, we never mention him/ 
I will not say a word ; 
A friend of mine got out last night, 
As chirpy as a hird. 

Well, you was chirpy, wasn't you, Mr Slates? I like to see 
you gettin' on that way now and then . ^not always. It 
brightens you up j it does, indeed. Well, you need not look 
so glum, Mr Gurgles." 

" Mr Checketts," replied that venerable man, " the prophet, 
as the '(rorspel Mag' remarks, going down to Jericho, met 

with a lion in his path ". .- 

" * We met, 'twas in a crowd,' 

And I thought he would shun me ; 
He bolted down a court. 
And I knew that he*d done me. 

Yes, he had indeed, Mr Gurgles " . all these gentlemen were 
very careful to put " Mr *' before the surname of their fellows 
when they addressed them . "he had indeed. It was only 
half a crown, but I call it mean to rob a poor man of his 
browns." 

Upon this, bursting out like a lark in full song, Checketts 
whistled an operatic air like an angeL He was a dab at 
whistling. He had acquired that accomplishment when col- 
lecting or polishing the paternal pots ; and many a time had 
the artless young fellow enlivened the steward's room with his 
whistle. 

The conversation was but a slow one between Slates and 
Gurgles ; partly because Slates was a languid fellow at any 
time to talk to, and partly because Gurgles had very little to 
say which he had not urged before. The two men listened to 
Mx Checketts' whistle, and he gave them the " Bay of Biscay" 
in fine style. In the midst of the da capo, he broke out with . 

"Why, them's my lord's boots outside. Dash my brass 
buttons I does that boy caU them cleaned ? Day and Martin 
is all hookey, if they won't polish no better. The cat as is 
looking into the back of a gentleman*s Hessian boot, previous 
to shaving off his own whiskers, would fly at 'em. I'll give 
'em a turn myself." 

And away went Mr Checketts, to the surprise of the scan- 
dalised Gurgles, who, though he quoted the " Gorspel Mag," 






A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 157 



did not seem to have found in that excellent, and even then 
venerable, publication any text which bade him do his fellow- 
servants' work. As he remarked to Mr Slates . 

" As the editor justly observed, a * merry heart doeth good 
like a medicine.* Our young friend here is very impulsive; 
but he bemeans himself too much." 

At this time Mr Slates was summoned by Lord Wimpole*s 
bell, since he was good-natured enough to answer for his fel- 
low-servant. He returned very soon. Paler than usual, his 
stolid reticence seemed to be melted out of him by fright. 
His fish-like eyes were wider open, his jaw had fallen. 

" Why, good gracious, Mr Slates ! what is the matter with 
you 1 Are you going to have a fit T' 

Mr Slates sat down, wiped his forehead, and pointed up-^ 

wards. 

"Your master," said he to Checketts, who had returned, 
« is '» 



"What, man?" cried the ci-devani groom. "Is he ill . is 
he in a fit?" 

He dashed down the boots, and prepared to run up-stairs. 

" Don't go ! " cried the startled Slates. " It 's of no use, I 
know them before where I lived. It 's officers ! " 

He laid his hand upon the sleeve of Checketts. 

" If it was the devil," said that young enthusiast, " I 'd slip 
into him." 

" Stop 1 " said Mr Eoskell, very authoritatively, " Don't 
stir. This is some awful mistake, and the fellows will get into 
no end of a row. Are you sure of what you say, Slates ? Who 
is it?" 

" On'y Stevenson, that was of Bow Street. In the new 
uniform, but I know him. There the door opens. They are 
going to take him off, so help me Davy ! " 

Even Mr Eoskell was no proof against this new and terrible 
news. Leading the van, he crept and creaked up-stairs, and 
hearithe door close ; and then, peering through the side win- 
dows at the hall door, they saw Lord Wimpole quietly ascend 
the hackney coach with the heraldic panels, followed first by 
Inspector Stevenson, and then by Mr Tom Forster. 

**'Tis Stevenson. I kn'ow him before," said Checketts, 



/ 



158 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 

tttrning very red. ''What has he to do with our house. 






" Don%" said Ourglea, putting his hand on the young man*s 
mouth, and stopping the word cleverly. " ' Be angry and sin 
not/ as the ' Gorspel Mag ' says. At the same time, I'm free 
to own that you might knock me down with a feather.'' 

" Is my lord awake ? *' asked Mr Roskell. '^ There 's some 
horrid mistake here." 

'' He 's not the man to make a mistake/' said poor Checketts, 
as if he knew all about it. '' That man Stevenson knows his 
business too well, I am afraid. My poor master, what has he 
been at ? I'll lay my life he 's innocent." 

"That was the man," said Eoskell . "the man with the 
boots and the curled hat . ^that I saw this morning prowling 
about this neighbourhood. What right has he about a hoise 
like this t " 

There these men stood, in the hall, utterly dumbfounded, 
and knowing not what to do, when a rustling was heard, and 
the hdusekeeper stood before them. It was Mrs Preen, stiff 
and rustling in her silks . prim, pretty, and precise. She, 
even, who was never caught napping, was astonished at the 
different attitudes of grief and astonishment of the men. 

" Gentlemen," said she, " pray tell me what is the matter." 

Mrs Preen dropped her keys, and was really ready to drop 
herself. 

" What ! do you mean to say that the Earl of Chester- 
ton " 

"No, 'tisn't him," said Checketfcs. "Wish it was, almost. 
He'd make it all right with the House of Lords. No, mum, 
they 've been and nabbed my master." 

" 'Tis some matter of debt. a quarrel . probably a mistake," 
urged the housekeeper. " Does the Earl know of this 1 " 

" No ; and he 's not to know just yet/' returned Slates. " A 
sudden trouble has fallen upon us. But it is no use waiting 
here. Come down-stairs, and let us say nothing about this. 
Lord Wimpole evidently did not mean any one to know of it 
. at any rate, down below." 

At tMs speech, Mr Gurgles went to console himself with his 
favourite magazine. Mr Boskell, like a man demented, betook 



A liEFT-HAKDiX) BRIDE. 159 



himself up-stairs to see that Lord Chesterton's dressing-room 
was in order ; and Checketts, rushing up-stairs, saw the door of 
the study and bedroom open, and looked round with dismay. 
There was the morning coat, there the cravat of his lordship. 
With an eye to everything, and knowing every article in the 
house, Checketts soon discovered that some strange hand had 
been at the drawers. 

" There 's a pair of trousers gone, and a pair of boots, some 
gloves, and a cigar-tube his lordship smokes. I put it on that 
mantelshelf myself. Now, what is this? Let me think 
back." 

Checketts did think back. What had Lord Wimpole been 
doing 1 He had been out several times very late, very late in- 
deed. That was nothing unusual. If he had been like any 
other of the young fellows, fond of twisting off knockers ; if, 
like a certain Marquis, he had carried a prizefighter about 
with him for the express purpose of beating the New Police ; 
if he had delighted in painting the inn signs of a brilliant 
scarlet colour, and had taken pleasure in using his "bunch 
of fives," like Corinthian Tom and his elegant friends in the 
" Life in London " . Mr Checketts could have easily fathomed 
the matter. In that case, in fact, he would have been used to 
such little episodes in the life of a young nobleman. But, as 
Mr Eoskell had said, Lord Wimpole was a pattern. He had 
been out late during the past three or four weeks ; and, con- 
trary to all custom, Mr Checketts had not been with him. 

"Let me think again," muttered the servant to himself 
" Why, he was out precious late on the twenty-ninth as was . 
Michaelmas Day. I won a goose at a raffle, and sent it to 
grandmother ; and it turned out a rum 'un, I hear. If he 
wasn't in love now . 

' She 'g all my fancy painted her ; 
She 's lovely, she *s divine ! ' 

But what he is arrested for . well, I 'm blowed if I can guess ! 
I wonder what that lawyer called for, and what he has to do 
with it 1 He has something, I'll swear. His father not to 
know just yet ! Well, * just yet ' has passed. He shall know, 
by jingo ! '' 



160 ONE OF TWO; OR, 



With this oath of mickle might on his lips, Mr Checketts 
jumped suddenly on his feet, like one who has taken a hasty 
resolution. He hurried to the door to open it ; but a hand was 
on the outside. It opened inwards. Slowly and feebly it 
opened, and Lord Chesterton stood before him . ^not the erect, 
stalwart nobleman of yesterday, but an older man, with stoop- 
ing shoulders and hesitating gait, his feet hastily thrust into 
his slippers, his dressing-gown pulled closely over his thin 
shoulders, his hair unkempt, his cheeks fallen and thin. 

" Philip," he murmured, " I have sought you " 

*' My lord," said Checketts, humbly, ** I beg pardon. I have 
come to see whether my lord's room is all right." 

"Well, Checketts, well*; and his lordship, Lord Wimpole" 
.the Earl seemed to hesitate and search for a word . " is he 
well 1 Perhaps not so. Where is he ? *' 

" Why, please your lordship, his word was given not to tell 
you. He is gone out." 

" Gone ! Where . when 1 You hesitate . ^you gasp, man ! 
Are you afraid ? What is it 1 " 

" He *s gone out with two . gentlemen," stammered Chec- 
ketts. " Not the kind of gentlemen he usually knows . with 
two officers.'' 
" Two officers ! " gasped the miserable father. "What officers 1 " 

Then, with a sad, silent stupor, he looked straight before 
him ; and the words that his son said about trials that it was 
impossible to endure, came back to him. The room swam 
before him, and he caught hold of the arms of the chair to 
support himself. 

" Great heavens I " he thought, */ my dream has come true ! 
My unhappy son is arrested, and for the murder of his own 
brother I " 

^ Mr Checketts opened his eyes with even greater wonder as 
he saw the grand old nobleman, whom he thought as firm as 
a rock, or the Bank of England, fall quickly, but very gently, 
back in a swoon. 

" By all that 's good, I Ve been and killed the Earl," cried 
Checketts to himself, as he knelt, in a confused and helpless 
manner, at his master's feet, after nearly " pulling the bell out 
by the roots/' as he afterwards described his action. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 161 



CHAPTER XXII. 

VISITORS TO MR NORTON. 

It followed, from this escapade of Mr Checketts, that Mrs 
Preen and Mr Eoskell soon attended to Lord Chesterton j and 
that his lordship, under the feeling that his servants were 
gazing upon him in his grief, regained something of his com- 
posure, and, after the space of half an hour or so, walked out 
from Chesterton House almost as composed, at any rate to out- 
ward appearance, as when he entered on the previous evening 
with his son. 

Notwithstanding the urgent request of Mr Eoskell, the 
brave old gentleman would not have one of his carriages 
brought for him j but hiring a hackney coach, he was driven 
up to the poKce court, where he found Mr Horton, who had 
not long parted with his prisoner, and still sat debating with 
himself the question of Philip's guilt. 

Lord Chesterton had left his house with a wavering idea of 
endeavouring to get his son restored to him ; and with a con- 
fused but terrible certainty upon his mind that, in the horror 
of the discovery, Philip had either dyed his hands, or en- 
deavoured to dye them, in the blood of his rival For although 
the denizens of the servants' hall were very well up in the 
criminal proceedings of the day, and were as anxious as most 
persons to penetrate the Kensal-Green mystery, it had not 
occurred to them that Philip was, or could be, connected with 
so vulgar a crime. A terrific duel, a death in a gambling- 
house, the murder of a rival in the affections of some beautiful 
and enchanting young woman, such, rather, were their notions 
of a crime perpetrated by their young master ; and, indeed, 
before knowing who the victim was, the partisans of Lord 
Wimpole were very willing to believe that the murderer, if he 
were a murderer, was in some manner justified. It is astonish- 
ing how lenient we are when we know the criminal. Why 
does the murdered party get in his way 1 we naturally inquire. 
And, indeed, this feeling spreads not only amongst the friends 



162 ONE OP two; or, 



of the murderer, but amongst the public ; and, after a certain 
time, the victim is forgotten, and the crime condoned. 

Whilst the servants at Chesterton House were still in ignor- 
ance of the cause of the arrest, and were allowing their ima- 
ginations to run riot upon various surmises, the Earl was shown 
into the private room of the magistrate, and received by that 
gentleman with the tenderest and most respectful regard. 

Mr Horton had known Lord Chesterton as most middle-class 
gentlemen know noblemen . at a distance only. We are not 
allowed to approach to a near familiarity with those above us. 
We move in circles, we Englishmen ; and forty years ago, these 
circles were more sharply defined than they are even now. Mr 
Horton, therefore, was more than respectful in his greeting, 
when he saw this old nobleman, or rather his shadow, move 
into his room, with his grief upon him like a burden, with 
his voice hesitating, and his proud, direct look lowered and 
abashed. 

Ho rose at once, and motioned him to a chair. 

" You can guess, Mr Horton," said his lordship, " why I 
call. An officer has arrested my" 

He would have said " son," but his voice faltered, and re- 
fused to say the word, 

" You are unwell, my lord," said the magistrate. " Shall I 
summon any one . a medical man . to attend to you 1 " 

" No," said his lordship, quietly, yet very decisively. " I 
have merely an old attack. I am not so young as I was, and 
these .little things touch me." 

Little things I There was something of the old patrician 
pride in this. 

*^ And, besides," said his lordship, " we cannot conceal from 
each other . we, who are men . that this humiliation is, indeed, 
dreadful. Where is my son ? Can I see him ? " 

'* It would not be well at present," returned Mr Horton, 
pouring out a glass of water. " Everything goes well. There 
is only a little mystery which must be cleared up, my lord." 

Here Mr Horton spoke as cheerfully as he could, very much 
against his own conviction. 

" In this murder, my lord, there are certain circumstances 
which press heavily against your son," 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 163 

*' Unhappy boy ! " said Lord Chesterton, looking back, no 
doubt, for years upon the image which his mind formed of his 
Philip, when he was but a boy, and when he was once the 
curled darling of his father's heart. " I am afraid it is too 
true I Horrible as it is, it is but natural. He has fought 
with him, and killed him." 

He uttered these words aloud; but they were addressed 
more to himself than to Mr Horton. Then he seemed to 
recover himself, and said . 

" But I assure you, sir, that Lord Wimpole had great and 
immense provocation." 

. *^ Provocation, my lord]" ejaculated the magistrate with 
astonishment. " He could have had none. This unfor- 
tunate " 

"Pardon me, sir," returned Lord Chesterton. "I know 
something of this j indeed, I am the more guilty 'of the two." 
This confession, which astonished the magistrate not a Uttle, 
seemed to take a weight oflF Lord Chesterton's mind. He 
lifted up his head, and sat erect upon his chair. 

Mr George Horton looked at him. " Well ! " he thought 
to himself, in the short pause that occurred, "here is another 
mystery. Old Daylight will have to be set to work again; 
and here, again, I may find him a clue." 

"Yes," continued the nobleman, more freely, "I am the 
more guilty of the two. I prepared the train which has ex- 
ploded, and will bury my house in the ruins." 

George Horton, one of his Majesty's stipendiary magistrates 
for the county of Middlesex, was utterly amazed, and thought, 
very properly, that his best way was to keep silence. He ima- 
gined that misfortune had turned Lord Chesterton's brain, and 
that he had better let him talk on until a lucid interval occurred. 
" As I am not at present accused of any participation in this 
crime," said the Earl, " I may tell you, sir, as a gentleman of 
the law in whom I have the utmost confidence, some of my 
unhappy history." 

Misfortune makes old gentlemen garrulous. How willing 
they are to talk of their ailments ; how glad they are, when 
lowered in their pride and helpless in their trouble, to tell of 
their sorrows ! So thought Mr Horton. 



164 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



He sat still in his chair, in a good-natured, pitying way, 
ready to let the nobleman, whose pride had been so cruelly 
wounded, tell his tale. 

" You must indeed pity me, sir," said Lord Chesterton, in 
answer to the looks of the magistrate. '' I^can quite under- 
stand the courteous sorrow which you express in your looks. 
Consider, sir, the heir to the house of Chesterton accused of 
murder ; and, it may be " . ^here the Earl looked round, and 
spoke in a low tone, as if no one should hear him . " it may- 
be, tried at the Old Bailey, like any common felon, and con- 
demned. It cannot be allowed to be, sir. You must help me." 

" My lord, it is impossible," said Mr Horton. '* I have really 
personal reasons why I should rejoice if this young gentleman 
were innocent ; but it is not in my province.'* 

"It is in your province," said the Earl, eagerly, "to feel like 
a gentleman, and to feel with a gentleman. I only want you 
to help me with your knowledge of the law. This . what 
shall we call it ? . ^this homicide cannot have been a murder : 
it must have been a duel.'' 

" A duel 1 " asked Mr Horton, in astonishment. " Is your 
lordship aware that the victim was a woman 1 " 

" Thank God ! " cried the Earl, with a ^igh of relief. '^I 
was afraid . for I will conceal nothing from you . that one of my 
sons had stained his hands with the blood of the other. Now, 
however, there is hope. Philip cannot have been guilty of 
this crime. Who, pray, is the unhappy person 1 " 

" Estelle Martin. Your lordship may have seen the " 



But Lord Chesterton did not give Horton time to finish the 
sentence. 

*' Estelle Martini" cried he. "Why, she was a servant of 
the family . ^a pensioner of mine, whom I brought from Nor- 
mandy. Why should Philip murder her 1 He has visited her 
with me." 

- Some hope began to dawn in the father's breast of the in- 
nocence of his son ; but it was soon to be extinguished. Mr 
Horton begged him to be composed ; and, in a dry, calm way 
.as calm, indeed, as he well could be . he told him the story. 
Lord Chesterton read the debates in the House, or now and 
then he might read the leading articles in the vigorous Morn- 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 1 65 

»..... I . I III 

ing Chronicle^ or its rising and powerful rival, the Times; or, 
indeed, he might have amused himself T^ith the sparkling 
vigour of that young giant of literature, the New Times, which 
met with so early a death ; but he left the criminal records 
to the canaille. He had not read the report of a murder since 
his college days, in the last century. 

Not having been enlightened by the lucubrations of Mr 
Barnett Slammers . to whom a good murder, especially if a 
mystery, was a small silver mine, and who started a new theory 
concerning it every evening . the old nobleman listened with 
eagerness. As he listened, his hopes in his son's innocence 
fell. Old Daylight's chain of evidence was so strong that Lord 
Chesterton, in spite of his love for Philip, was almost as strongly 
convinced as Daylight himself. 

When Mr Horton had concluded. Lord Chesterton remained 
silent for a long time. Then, speaking as if he were partly 
talking to himself, and partly to a clergyman in a strange 
shrift, he said. 

" You must know, sir, that although the person of the victim 
is different, the crime is the same, ^.nd the cause is the same. 
All the antecedents I laid down. How unhappy is man, that 
there is no step that he can take but that will lead him, either 
ultimately or proximately, into desperate guilt ! " 

** Not so, my lord," said Mr Horton, quietly ; " a man's fate 
is in his own hands. If he chooses to push away crime, he 
can. It is but a wild doctrine which declares that if a man is 
tempted he must fall." 

** He generally does so," murmured the old man, " He is 
surrounded with things that are dire to him. The circum- 
stances of the Greek tragedies occur again. It is we who are 
Orestes struggling against the Fates ! When I was some ten 
years younger than my dear son now is, I was dominated by a 
father who assumed a power over me to which he had no 
right. He was, I can now see, a smaller man, spiritually as 
well as physically, than I. He was as lithe, gliding, compact, 
and well-finished as a small serpent ; and as a serpent all men 
dreaded him. He had a pale, clear face, like marble, which 
flushed, but gently only, on the cheek bones and side of the 
eye, when he was excited or annoyed. He never showed more 



166 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



anger than this, and did and said little ; but what he did was 
calculated to wound dreadfully. Sharp words darted suddenly 
firom him, as the tongue darts and plays from the slimy lips of 
a snake ; and they were as poisonous to the sensitive and the 
young. I dreaded this father of mine ; and, though I was 
much taller, stronger, and, indeed, more clever, my spirit bent 
before his. He ordered me to marry for the sake of the 
estates. He conveyed to me, somehow, the feeling that we 
were merely part and parcel of some feudal system that required . 
certain duties of us, whereof the propagation of the name and 
race of the Chesterton family was the prime duty. He made 
me hate myself and my race, my fate, and my country, by his 
bitter sayings. After my career at college, where I won readily 
a degree . ^which otherwise my rank would, in those days, 
have easily assured me as honorary . I went on a tour to France 
and Germany. In Paris, I met with one of the sweetest, 
noblest, and most beautiful women I ever saw. I was de- 
lighted with my freedom, and only too happy to be away from 
my father. I fell in love with Eugenie, and she with me. 
We were delirious with passion and love ; and I regarded not 
the difference of our rank any more than the late Lord Stan- 
hope would have done, who wished his daughter to marry his 
footman. Eugenie, only too ready to comply with my wishes, 
for she loved me . at least, I thought she did . fondly and 
devotedly, followed me to Germany, where, in deference to my 
rank, and out of fear of my father, we were united by a Mor- 
ganatic marriage.. No sooner was I married to Eugenie than I 
was summoned home; and fearing. dreading, indeed . ^my 
father, I was forced to marry the Countess. Pity me, sir," 
said the Earl, stretching forth his hands ; " the ceremony was 
indeed vain, the marriage a wicked mockery. I was weaJiC and 
wicked ; but now I am punished indeed I" 

"Spare yourself the narrative," said Mr Horton. " I know 
something of this.** 
. But the Earl went on. 

'* The Countess and !E!ugenie became mothers almost at the 
same time ; and I loved the one . and, indeed, despised thp 
other. Then it was that I conceived the notion of doing 
justice. not, indeed, to the mother, but to the child of my 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 167 

first marriage. With some hesitation, I broached the subject 
to Eugenie ; but I had mistaken her. For months I had to 
struggle before I could overcome her repugnance to my plan. 

*'At length she yielded. By the aid of a valet. who is 
since dead . the children were brought together and suddenly 
changed. They were not unlike each other ; and the Countess 
who was ill at the time of a low fever . saw her child so little, 
and apparently cared so little for it, that she never suspected 
my plan. All succeeded for years ; until at last, when aU seem 
sleeping quietly, when the grass is green over the grave of the 
faithful valet, and the Countess rests in her mausoleum, as cold 
and as contented as she was when alive, a sudden explosion 
blows the fabric to the air, and I am left stunned, wounded, 
and naked, hoist by my own petard . my beloved son a 
murderer . myself a plotter, a forger, a conspirator against my 
own flesh and blood. Mi* Horton! Mr Hortonl I have 
despised the truth, and the truth has slain me. I have not 
thought of God, and suddenly He has struck me. How true 
is that text . which I remember now.* Be sure your secret 
sin shall find you out.' But, alas ! " he continued, " I was 
punished, even in my sin. I was told . nay, I was assured . 
that Eugenie, upon whose love and purity I would have staked 
my life, was untrue to me. I believed it, and I made her un- 
happy for life : we never saw each other again. Oh ! sir. Do 
you know what that means 1 Separated from her whom you 
love 1 Why, you may as well die I You live on ; but how do 
you live ? J tell you, old as I am . I swear it, even now . 
there is nothing worth living for but love ! " 

The old man tossed his arms wildly over his head, and 
sobbed outright. The world had thought him so happy, so 
calm, so cold, in his subdued sorrow. Here, indeed, was a 
revelation to the magistrate ; and to him . to him who felt the 
weight and truth of every word. There was nothing worth 
living for biit love I 

Both of these men. one old, the other of mature age . were 
for a time silent, wrapped in sad thoughts, victims to the 
passion that they and the world daily affected to despise . did, 
perhaps, despise in every case but their own. Mr Horton was 
thinking of his prisoner, and of her who loved him ; the Earl 



168 



ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



was living in the past . when, in sunny France, he was so 
happy, so filled with love ; and then his thoughts would wander 
to his unhappy Philip. when a knock, loud and official, fol- 
lowed by a heavy step upon the boarded floor, announced the 
presence of a police sergeant. The door opened, an official 
cough preceded a half-military salute, and the words . 

"Please, your worship, a young lady . ^she will take no 
denial. Here 's a card." 

The gentleman in blue offered a stiff piece of pasteboard, as 
thick and as large as a playing-card, upon which were engraved, 
in a fine, free, small hand, the names . 



The Countess cfSark, 
Miss Winifred Va/ugJum, 



Park Lane, 



But the name of the Countess had been drawn through by a 
trembling hand. The magistrate's hand shook as he read the 
words on the card. 

** Will you excuse me, my lord, if I request you to withdraw 
for a moment into this inner room? This visitor demands 
privacy." 

Lord Chesterton, docile as a 'gentleman, and even more 
docile now, withdrew; and Winifred Vaughan stood before 
her lover. 



CHAPTER XXHI. 

" JVHAT, SHALL I NOT DEFEND HIM? WHO BUT I?^* 

Winifred Vaughan was, under ordinary circumstances, one 
of the mildest young ladies that could be met with in a day's 
march. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 169 

That was, however, no reason why she should not be very- 
fierce upon extraordinary occasions ; and this was one. She 
walked into the office with all her wrongs upon her heart. 
Her lover, had been arrested . and, of course, wrongly arrested. 
What woman could ever doubt that ] Winifred wore, there- 
fore, a determined, brave look as she entered the magistrate's 
room ; and her bright eyes did not convey to him any gracious 
or friendly recognition. Like all women in love, she reasoned 
rather from her heart than her mind, and she did not wholly 
acquit the magistrate in this matter of the arrest. In some 
way . how, she did not pause to ask herself . she believed that 
Mr Horton should at once have freed the innocent. The 
intricacies of the law, the network it spreads around any one 
who is caught in its meshes, she would have had entirely 
broken. Of what use was a magistrate unless he could at once 
decide between the guilty and the innocent 1 

Mr Horton's eyes fell before her direct and angry gaze. 
When a man has been once in love with a woman, there is 
assumed between them a tacit bond that is never broken. 
The terrible accusation against Lord Wimpole was unknown 
to Winifred, but his note had told her that he was arrested 
for some very serious crime ; and directly it had been delivered 
she had come to Mr Horton, as her friend, to ask his aid. 
By some means . perhaps by a persuasive eloquence, not un- 
known to beauty . she had learnt from Inspector Stevenson 
that Lord Wimpole was not only at the Marylebone police 
court, but that he was detained by Mr Horton's will. Hence 
Winifred- walked somewhat angrily up to the perturbed police 
magistrate, and said, abruptly. 

" You know, sir, why I am here. I am come to. to . " here 
she hesitated a little . " to appeal to you at once to release 
him." 

George Horton looked at her aghast. 

" My dear young lady," he said, after a pause, " pray sit 
down; we can talk together about this matter. There is a 
great deal to be said." 

" No," she said, resolutely standing before his desk ; " there 
can be but little to be said. I will not sit down. There is 
some terrible mistake here. Of what use are the law and its 



170 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



professors, with their learning and their studies, unless it and 
they can render justice ? " 

She stood looking at him, flushed a little, more charming 
than ever, more resolute than soft. Her girlishness had dis- 
appeared, and she seemed to have grown suddenly into a 
beautiful woman, strong in her love, her purity and trutL 

Well might he pause . well might he pity her. His love for her 
had never diminished . say, rather, that it had increased tenfold 
from his non-success. He was a true man, she was a true 
woman. How could he break the news to her 1 Could he tell 
her that, within a few feet of her, the proud father of the man 
she loved sat broken down and disgraced at the guilt of his 
son . guilt that was borne in to, him, as it would be to all, by 
the evidence which Old Daylight had prepared, and which 
Lord Wimpole did not deny ? 

His silence irritated Winifred. She tapped the floor with 
her little foot, and flushed from pale to red as she looked at the 
magistrate. " And this man,'' she thought to herself, " said he 
loved me ; and yet he keeps me on tenter-hooks." 

« Why do you not speak 1 " she said. " Lord Wimpole is 
here, in this dreadful place ; perhaps shut up in prison. Let 
me go to him, let me speak to him. He will tell me the 
truth/' 

'^ The truth, Winifred Vaughan ! " returned the magistrate, 
bitterly. "Would I withhold the truth from you for one 
moment, if I thought it could give you comfort 1 You call 
him Lord Wimpole . him whom you love, and whom you told 
me I should love and honour. Do you know what misfortune 
has fallen upon him, and upon his house 1 Do you know . can 
you bear to know . that the man whom you rejected, and who 
speaks to you now, will be more honoured in the world than 
he will be whom you preferred 1 If you can, then I can tell 
you more." 

Fire flashed from Winifred's eyes as she heard this speech, 
which was certainly not uttered without ar little bitterness on 
the part of the magistrate. Partly, this was owing to jealousy 
. which is, after all, a mean passion, although it is indulged 
in by noble natures. Partly, again, it was owing to Mr 
Morton's ignorance of woman's nature. He thought he would 



A LELFT-HANDED BRIDE. 1 fl 

break the news to her little by little. He was a very coward . 
as many good men are . when a woman cried, swooned, or 
fainted ; and he was very much troubled by the thought that 
Winifred might faint, or fall down in a fit. 

The young lady did no such thing. She looked at her 
interlocutor with great scorn, and walked once or twice up 
and down the room; then, turning and facing Mr Horton 
with a quiet smile, she uttered the words . 

" Go on, sir. I can listen quite calmly to what you say. 
Soon, perhaps, you will condescend to speak about my im- 
mediate business." 

" Your business ! " he said. " Good God ! is not this your 
business ? Do you not want to know who he is to whom you 
propose to trust your future 1 " 

" / know who he is," she said, calmly. " He is the most 
noble of mankind. Had you been struck down by misfortune, 
he would have been the first to shield you and to help you." 

" But, Winifred," pleaded the magistrate . "pray pardon me. 
Miss Vaughan . this young gentleman has suddenly discovered 
circumstances which place him in a totally different position ; 
he is not what he thought he was ; he is " 

" He is my Philip still," said the girl, looking upwards with 
a fond devotion. "Whatever happens, whatever calumny 
may be invented, he is himself.''^ 

This young lady had arrived at that chief morsel of wisdom 
which so many men and women miss throughout life, that 
which sounds so like a platitude and a truism, and yet which 
so few know, that a man or woman can only be him or herself, 
whatever rank or fortune may shower upon them. 

The tone in which Miss Vaughan declared that she loved 
Philip solely for himself, carried conviction to the unhappy 
magistrate's heart, just of a sort that he did not want. To do 
him justice, had not Winifred come to him, he would never have 
sought her. He was one of those men who took " No " for an 
answer, and quickly went his way ; and as long as the tempta- 
tion was out of sight, was quite content to try and forget it. 
But here^ before him, more beautiful than ever, showing love 
and devotion for another . ^this temptation was far too strong 
for him. He started from his chair, and paced the room. 



172 ONE OP two; or, 



*^ Miss Vaughan/' said he, and then he stopped. 

** Go on," she said, quietly. " You were about to speak." 

Her interruption galled and confused him. Why, he asked 
himself, should he not tell her all ? Why should she hate him 
if she heard the truth from his lips 1 

" I was about to tell you something that must pain you, but 
which you must sooner or later hear. Although it will give 
you pain, I will not be coward enough to shrink from the 
task." 

Wuiifred was silent. Burning as she was with a desire to 
see Philip released, she listened calmly. She began to find 
that it is the province of law to speak and to instruct, and not 
to act immediately. 

" If you will allow me to sit down," she said, with a calm 
find cool contempt, for her anger was great against this man, 
" I will listen to you." 

She took the chair vacated by Lord Chesterton, and pre- 
pared, with a calm demeanour and cast-down eyes, to listen, i 

" Miss Vaughan ! " said Horton, " if you now could see 
my heart, you would pity me. j What shall I say to you ? How 
shall I begin 1 " 

" You know best," she said. *' What is this mystery ? You 
will speak; and, in the meantime, I suffer, because Lord 
Wimpole suffers." 

" Lord Wimpole ! " he said, with half a sneer, which was 
natural but ungenerous. 

" Yes," she said again. " It is he who is chiefly concerned. 
It does not matter for you or for me. No wild or wrong 
accusation lies upon us. 

" Miss Vaughan ! " said Horton, '* I must tell you, and 
tell you at once. At the base of this accusation, the cause of 
this crime, lies the fact which will startle you. Lord Wimpole 
is not what he pretends " 

" He pretends I " said Winifred, starting to her feet, " he 
pretends, Mr Horton ! Dare you use such language to me 1 " 

.* You will force me to speak then, madam. Philip Stanfield 
is not Lord Wimpole ; he is not his father's legitimate son." 

As he said this dreadful thing, Mr Horton approached the 
young lady. who had risen to her feet in the energy of her 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 173 



indignation . thinking that she would fall to the ground. But 
to his surprise she said little, and did not stir. Her face was 
flushed, her hands clenched on the back of the chair. Then, 
after a pause, she said, quietly . 

'^ I know that this is asserted. There have been some papers 
found, possibly forged. It maybe true. What does it matter 
tome?" 

" You know it, then ! " cried the magistrate, with astonish- 
ment. 

" I have known it for several days, sir." 

" And who told you ? " 

" Who should tell me but Philip himself? Dear Philip ! . 
his first action, when he found this out, was to come to me. 
That was the action of a true man." 

l^ This was spiteful, because jit insinuated that Mr Horton's 
actions were not those of a true man; and, poor fellow, he 
who was playing the losing game had the greatest difficulty in 
knowing how to play it. His next move showed it. 

"And," said he, looking with unconcealed admiration" at 
Winifred . " and you love him still 1 " 

" Love him still," she said; quietly. 

Horton turned on his heel when he saw the pretty, flushed, 
triumphant face. The look went to his heart. His old 
jealousy blazed up. He could have been guUty of any mean- 
ness, if he could have found an answer sharp enough. 

He envied the man who was accused of murder, and who 
was sitting . quietly and resignedly enough, poor fellow . ^in 
one of the police cells across the yard. Horton would have 
gladly changed places with his prisoner^ and his pale face told 
something of his story. 

Winifred saw this, and pursued her triumph. He had will- 
ingly said bitter things against her Philip. He had put his 
heart in her hands, and had dared to tell her that he loved 
her j and this was the way he showed it. 

Quietly rising, therefore, she faced him, and said, with a 
cahn irony. 

" Oh, you clever men ! Mr Horton, how little you know of 
us women, to whom you, some of you, believe your are so 
superior. liove him . love my Philip now ! why, I love him 



174 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



ten times more. Do you think that I loved him for his rank, 
his coronet^ his riches, or his place 1 No, Mr Horton . I love 
him for himself. These accidents of birth prevented the 
free growth of my love. Now, I can love him with all my 
heart. Now he is stripped and fallen, he has risen here.^^ 

She placed her hand upon her heart as she spoke tMs, lean- 
ing back, with one hand upon the chair . ^as if that pure, soft 
heart was a shield she placed before the object of her love. 

The magistrate, staring at her, was smitten again with 
desperate jealousy and an intense love. 

" "S bu will have it, then ; you will have the truth of your 
hero . ^your perfect knight, * sans peur et sans reproche / "\ 

" My perfect knight," she said soffly, a smile parting her 
full lips, as if it made her happy to repeat the words. " My 
perfect knight . ^my Philip I " 

" Your Philip ! " said the magistrate, fiercely. " Your 
Philip, my poor young lady, is accused of Murder! " 

The blow struck. Winifred sank down in her chair, looking 
up, "amazed. 

" This lie," she said at last, slowly and deliberately, " is too 
dreadful. Whom has he murdered ? Whom could he 1 Did 
he hate even to strike any one-^not even his rival, even you, 
who can repeat these scandals 1 " 

" His victim was a woman," cried the magistrate, suddenly 
and with malice. " And, from what I can see, the evidence is 
sadly against him." 

When a woman is in any case, any other woman becomes 
suspicious. Winifred was troubled, and said, tremulously . 

*' Mr Horton, upon your honour as a gentleman, upon your 
credit as a magistrate, are you telling me the truth ? " 

" Upon my soul, Miss Vaughan, I am. I have struggled 
with myself. how much, how terribly, I cannot tell you, I 
did not issue the warrant until I was forced by evidence to do 
so. Let alone all other considerations, Winifred, believe me 
that I did so to spare you." 

" Go on," said Winifred, no longer fierce and triumphant, 
for the tone of Mr Horton carried conviction even to her. 
" Go on. I will bear all. Who was this woman)" 

" Estelle Martin . a Frenchwoman." 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 175 



Winifred grew pale. The name was pretty. She had not 
heard it before ; for the outline of the story Philip had given 
her did not necessarily include any reference to this woman ; 
and jealousy and suspicion, born of the devil, began to act 
upon her. 

Could it be that Philip was really guilty 1 Had he destroyed 
his victim from love of her? Terrible doubts I Winifred had 
heard from that astute dowager, Lady Sark, quite enough of 
men's doings to render her suspicious of the whole sex ; and 
does any woman really trust them 1 We need not ask whether 
they have any reason to do so ; but surely they might be gene- 
rous. If we add to the general want of truth in man an equally 
general distrust of her own sex, which sadly prevails with 
woman, we may, perhaps, excuse Winifred if she trembled in 
sad doubt of " her Philip, her knight," as she listened to the 
weighty words and certain tones of Mr Horton. 

Her heart sank, indeed, within 'her as he told her all. She 
was relieved when she heard that Estelle Martin was no rival, 
but an old nurse ; but the chain of the inductive philosopher 
was too strong, and her belief almost began to waver as 
Horton, evidently with a generous desire to spare her, weighed 
but lightly upon each piece of evidence. Had he not done so, 
she would have been less convinced. She loved Philip none 
the less ; but her faith wavered a little . too much, indeed, for 
her strong love. 

When the evidence was concluded, Mr Horton began to 
relate the story of the interview between Lord Wimpole and 
himself; and then, to his astonishment, Winifred began to 
revive, and her colour came again. 

" You see," concluded the puzzled Mr Horton, as he looked 
upon her whom he loved so well, " he will not tell me where 
he was on that night.*' 

^* Then,'' said Winifred, ''I will tell you : he was with me /" 

Horton started to his feet. 

** With you. Miss Vaughan ? " he said with amazement. 

" Yes ! " she said, calmly. " He came on purpose to tell me 
all that Mr Edgar Wade had told him ; and he spent the time 
with me, from six in the evening until nearly midnight. Dear 
Philip I " cried the girl, the mists of doubt beginning to clear 



176 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



away, '* did I dare to doubt him 1 Oh ! my love, my love ! I 
will ask his pardon on my bended knees. My own true 
knight, indeed ! " 

" Can you tell me this, Winifred V cried Mr Horton ; for if 
love gave her a right over him, it gave him, too, some right 
over her. " Can you publish your own ? " 

'< Shame!" she said; "you are dreaming. There is no 
shame for me or for Philip. Come, lead me quickly to him. 
Release him ; there is no evidence against him. He was with 
me. I will swear it I " 

" Alas ! " cried George Horton, beside himself, " you save 
him by condemning yourself. This is not true. You could 
not " 

" Could not ! Why, I am Philip's wife ! " 

" Great God I *' said Horton. " Have you other witnesses 
to your meeting ] " 

" None 1 not one. Why should we have 1 " 

" Alas ! then, he is lost. If he be your husband, your oath 
is negatived. You may speak the truth ; but the law refuses 
the evidence, either for or against.*' 

Winifred heard this, and heard no more. Horton's words 
carried conviction to her, and it was like a death warrant. With 
a plaintive cry, like that of some weak and sorely wounded 
animal, Winifred fell fainting to the floor. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

^' ffSHE m HIS CHAMBERS SA T THE MAN OF LA IV" . 

Hidden amongst a mass of buildings, from which the smoke 
beats down upon the foggy November days, and upon the roofs 
of which the sun sheds rays which seem to get more hot and 
wearied from having to pierce through so much fog and dust, 
is the little fountain i^hich throws up its sparkling sprays in 
Garden Court, Temple. 

How the dry old benchers, spinning their dusty webs in the 
musty, old, cruel days of Eldon and Scarlett . when, as Sydney 
Smith said, every possible iniquity was perpetrated in the 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDR 1 77 



name of the law without one lawyer of eminence^ except the 
" gigantic Brougham," ever dreaming that anything was wrong 
. ^how these old benchers consented to allow so fresh and so 
pure a thing as a fountain of water -to be near, it is quite im- 
possible for us to say. Their Philistine old heads were occupied 
in making law as distasteful as it could be, so far as in them 
lay ; in poring over deeds which were only full of deadly traps 
for future clients ; in trying to expound marriage settlements 
which no poor bride could ever understand ; and in dreaming 
at odd times of the awful troubles they brought upon their 
own flesh and blood . ^if a decoction of parchment and pale ink 
can be so called . ^by maldng their own wills. For it is an 
axiom laid down by a learned Lord Chancellor . himself a 
.wondrously proficient legal authority . that no barrister or 
adept . even if he be as wise as Solomon and as learned as the 
learned Selden . can make his own will 1 Wise solicitors, over 
the walnuts and the wine which they have obtained by the 
money of their clients, shake their heads, and chuckle over this 
mystery ; and clerks who are picking up " Noy's Maxims," and 
serving their articles, quote this as one of the profound mysteries 
and most cherished beauties of the law. But it is not until a 
man has been thoroughly uneducated of every good and honest 
principle that he sees the whole beauty of this admirable system. 
Sometimes a student finds that his conscientiousness is too 
much for him, grows melancholy, and foregoes the honour of 
becoming Lord Chancellor ; but usually he gets accustomed to 
his work, and accepts the stale consolation that, if clients were 
not so selfish, lawyers would not be so bad. 

Sometimes. and this was the case with Mr Edgar Wade . 
he allows himself to be persuaded that law is very beautiful in 
theory, and that there really is no wrong without a remedy. 
After such a conclusion, he looks upon the writhings of the 
victims of delay, false judgments, errors, and cunning con- 
trivances, as an ignorant impatience on the part of the clients. 
He makes up his mind that what he has to do is sttaply the 
best he can, for himself first, and his client afterwards ; and he 
" gets on." But, after all, the education the law aifords is not 
beneficial to the conscience. We have had barristers who have 

offered up an oath that their client was innocent ; when it may 

m: 



178 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



justly be inferred that they knew he was guilty, and merely 
shut their eyes to the fact. When these gentlemen, after a 
number of years spent in defending criminals, have themselves 
sat on the bench, we have seen them " deeply affected," and 
betraying " visible emotion," even to shedding tears, when they 
were forced to condemn a criminal. This must be taken as a 
proof that the law does not always harden the legal heart . 
indeed, the proof is not necessary . there are always a number 
of gentlemen at the bar, admirable for their tenderness and 
Christian virtues; but they are not, as a rule, successful 
barristers . ^they employ their time as critics, and their mercL 
ful behaviour and great leniency to novelists and rising authors 
is too well known and appreciated to be more than referred to 
in passing. 

Edgar Wade was successful as a barrister ; for, although he 
had not " hugged an attorney," he had attracted the notice of 
the head of a busy firm of solicitors, and did not want for briefs. 
His chambers on the first floor were reached by a dirty old 
staircase . all the dirtier then than now, since sweetness and 
light were matters little recked of in the chambers of the law. 
The principal room was occupied by the barrister ; a dusty and 
ill-ventilated bedroom, seldom used, lay beyond it ; and before 
it . boarded off from it by old painted panels, cracked, yellow, 
and worn . was a slip of a chamber, oijcupied by his clerk, a 
man of two and twenty, who looked like a dried-up boy of 
eighteen . whiskerless, shabby, and badly provided as to shirt 
collar and complexion, both being equally yellow. This old 
young gentleman occupied his time chiefly in catching flies and 
taking in the names of visitors . ^written by himself, in a legal 
hand, and on slips of blue paper, neatly cut to size for the 
purpose. Like all barristers' clerks, he had a great belief in 
the talent of his master, and looked forward to the time when 
business should increase so much that he, the clerk, Mr John 
Scorem, shouli make some hundreds a-year in clerks' fees, and 
be able fb purchase a little freehold at Peckham or Clapham, 
with an apple tree, or various apple trees, in the garden. For 
Mr Scorem was already a clever pomologist, if we may coin 
such a word ; and knew a ribstone, a stone apple, a cat's head, 
or a Kerry pippin at a distance. He always had an apple in 



A MFT-HANDED BRIDE. 179 

his pocket, bulging out like a canuon ball, ready to be furtively 
produced and munched. He smelt of apples like a fruiterer's 
shop ; and sometimes, passing through " the Garden," as he 
fondly called Covent Garden Market, on his way to the office 
from Knightsbridge, he would purchase a whole bushel, and 
store them in the wooden cupboards which some former 
proprietor of the chambers had fitted up with a tolerable 
liberality, until they ripened, with a greasy consistence on their 
coats, which Mr Scorem fondly polished off with his pocket 
handkerchief. The aroma from this delicious fruit was strongly 
objected to by Mr Edgar Wade, and was referred to by his 
clerk as " mysterious," as if it were the scent of some dead 
bencher. 

" It is curious," the guilty Mr Scorem would say, with his 
pocket nearly bursting with a yellow cat's head. "I often 
wonder, sir, what it can be. I generally get a whiff of it as I 
come in fresh of a momin'." 

Then he would open the windows ; and as the scent strictly 
and conscientiously confined itself to the clerk's room, Mr 
Wade did not trouble himself about it, and passed in to his 
own sanctum, leaving Mr Scorem to digest the huge lump of 
apple he had hastily swallowed. 

Mr Scorem's greatest pride was to see his master properly 
'* robed," and to dream of the time when he should exchange 
a stuff gown for the silk. His second was to preside at the 
Cogers' Hall, or some such august assembly, and there to lead 
a debate upon the law. He was a Church and State man, 
hated the Badicals, treated Lord John Bussell and Sir Francis 
Burdett de haut en bos, and spoke with the dignity of a peer of 
the realm, and the weight of a city councillor. In those days 
they debated great matters, and the minds of the Cogers were 
exercised by the question whether it was the duty of a reformed 
Parliament to abolish the House of Lords, and to depose the 
sovereign. And to Mr Scorem it was deputed to tear this 
supposition to rags, and to cast it to the four winds. Scorem' 
. ^we beg pardon, Mr Scorem ; so he was always termed, with 
scrupulous politeness, by his master. had risen to tlia height 
of the occasion, and had determined to call the eloquent 
Brougham a " tongue-gifted traitor," and Lord John Bussell 



180 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



I ' 



''a viper, battening to fatness on the rains of an ancient 
Church," in his speech that evening. So far had rancour 
spread . ^for the debate on Eeform had been carried on in our 
slow-thinking land for many years ; and, while the victory of 
the Beformers was not far off, the feelings of the opponents of 
Eeform had become more and more intense. 

" Yes,*' said Mr Scorem, jotting down the choice epithets, 
" the Kussells still live at Wobum Abbey. I think I have 
fitted the cap there. Hallo ! Gome in." 

As the person did not come in, Mr Scorem gathered up the 
few sheets of blue wove scribbling paper, pocketed a half-eaten 
apple, and opened the door. 

Mr Checketts, out of breath, and somewhat confused, stood 
outside the door. 

" Does Mr Edgar Wade live here 1 " 

The barrister's clerk, with his mouth partially engaged with 
an apple, tapped with a roller on the name of his master duly 
painted up on the door. 

" Ah ! yes," said Checketts, confusedly. " Can I see him i " 

" He is engaged with a lady." 

" I want to see him particular and immediate," urged Chec- 
ketts, regardless of adverbs. 

** What name, sir 1 " asked Mr Scorem, taking out a slip of 
blue paper. 

" Checketts. Say I come* from the Earl of Chesterton." 

The name was one of might to the conservative and aristo- 
cratic Scorem. He took a fresh piece of paper, and wrote, 

" Checketts, Esq., from the Eight Honourable the Earl 

of Chesterton." Then begging the messenger to be seated in 
his apple-scented office, he apologised for the delay ; and gave 
Checketts shortly to understand that Mr Wade's time was 
very precious indeed, and in some mysterious manner hinted 
that he was about to do the Earl a personal favour in daring 
to break in upon his master's privacy. Then, with an import- 
ant knock, he gave notice of his approach ; and entering in a 
business-like way, as if he had not a moment to spare, he 
marched up to his master's desk, and laid the paper upon it. 

" Stay a moment, Mr Scorem," said Edgar Wade. 

For the faithful clerk, with his eyes fixed upon the ground, 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 181 

had again reached the door, as if his life depended on his 
finishing his business . say of copying out a most important 
brief, in which Mr Wade was coupled as leading junior with 
the Solicitor-General. 

** What is this messenger 1 " 

" A kind of a gentleman, sir. Wants to see you, he says, 
' immediate and particular. * " 

The lady arose at this. She was admirably dressed, a£( to 
neatness and selection of colour . evidently a French ladyj 
indeed, no other than the companion of Mdlle. Natalie Fifine. 

"I shall be disengaged in one moment. Pray sit down, 
madame. Tell the gentleman I will see him shortly." 

Mr Checketts heard the words, and repressed his impatience. 
Perhaps time never appears longer than when one is waiting 
at the ofl&ce of a lawyer, or in the anteroom of a fashionable 
doctor. Checketts' state was not to be envied. His love for 
Lord Wimpole was rude and rough possibly, but very great. 
His belief in the power of the great house he served . which 
had grown with his growth, and strengthened with his 
strength . had been put to a severe test. The entrance of the 
poHce into Chesterton House was to him a perfectly revolu- 
tionary proceeding ; and the faithful Cl6ry, valet to Louis the 
Sixteenth, could not have been more rudely shocked by the 
entry of the rough canaille of Paris into the King's chamber 
than was Checketts. For the servants and underlings of great 
people feel their position even more than the great ones them- 
selves ; and the loyal Checketts had an esjprit de corps in regard 
to his "family," as warm as any soldier in the most crack 
regiment of his Majesty's army. Down in the steward's room, 
the movements of " our family " were debated in a kind of 
unprinted " Court Circular," of which Mr Eoskell was the 
chief editor. 

While Checketts fidgeted, and Mr Scorem, admiring the 
coolness of his master, went on writing out his speech with an 
air and business manner that fully persuaded his companion 
that he was drawing out an important brief, Mr Wade coolly 
finished his discourse. 

He had on his table a beautiful bouquet of autumnal roses 
and other flowers, which scented the dull room; and as he 



182 ONB OF two; or, 



softly talked, the plash of the little fountain, which spouted 
upwards from a single three-quarter-inch pipe, in a most 
inartistic and artless manner, could be heard at intervals; 
drowned sometimes by the hurry of steps in the paved court 
below, or borne away from them by a gust of wind. It was 
not an unpleasant room for a student. Books duly bound in 
law-calf lined one side of it ; a table, covered with briefs, was 
on the other ; and a fire burnt cheerfully in the high-cheeked, 
tall old grate, which reached half up the chimney, and came 
down between its broad hobs like the letter V. 

Outside, in the waiting-room, poor Checketts, fretting him- 
self for his master, experienced some slight foretaste of the 
law's delay. He, too, could hear the fountain, the regular rise 
and fall of Mr Wade's soft and sonorous voice, the racing of 
Mr Scorem's pen upon his blue-lined brief paper, and the hurry 
of the feet below. A quarter of an hour seemed an age to 
him . to him whose master's name had hitherto been a pass- 
port for immediate attention. 

At length Edgar Wade stopped short, and drew to an end. 
All Mdlle. Fifine (Jesired was, that he should take some tickets 
for her night. The young lady, who afterwards created so 
great a sensation, was not then of importance enough to have 
a benefit for herself ; and was . after the manner of our friends 
the actors and actresses of to-day . anxious to get the house 
packed with her partizans. And although Mr Wade, in hia 
blind passion, had been perfectly prodigal of the presents he 
had made her, Fifine . ^with the genius the ladies of her class 
and nation have for saving money . looked as sharply after the 
shillings as she did after the fifty-pound notes* The elephant, 
in the simile which has "been used a few times before this, is 
said to be able to pick up a pin and to rend an oak. Fifine 
had the same wide range in picking up money : she would 
stoop for a farthing, and scramble for a sovereign ; and the 
same quality may have been observed in all who love money 
for the money's sake. And, after all, was Fifine to be blamed ? 
She expatriated herself from beautiful France, from her blue 
skies, from her gay . and, at that time, somewhat redolent . 
city ; and took up her temporary residence amongst us cold 
islanders, for the purpose of making money. Why should an 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 183 



actress be less active, wary, and capable of attending to her 
business than a merchant, a grocer, or any other man who 
devotes himself to the one purpose 1 Why should we publish 
laudatory notices of the industry and money-making capacity 
of a merchant or a tallow-chandler, and not praise the same 
qualities in the little merchant of roulades and glissades, who 
sold her glances, smiles, wiles, dances, activity, and high and 
low notes, for as much money as she could get ? 

" You will tell Mademoiselle, then, that I will be sure to be 
there. I have the two stall tickets, and I am provided with a 
bouquet. Here is the money." 

Edgar Wade packed the sovereigns in a neat envelope of his 
own making, and handed it to the dame de cornpagnie, who was 
kept purposely by Fifine to play propriety, and to be as a 
watchful dragon over those golden charms of hers. 

" Be sure to come ! " Edgar Wade's infatuation was so 
great, that he would have gone to Nova Zembla for her. Men 
of mature age, who have never loved before, love strongly 
indeed] and young ladies of very tender years universally 
show a wise and prescient intelligence in preferring the love 
of a man of thirty, or thereabouts, to a boy's love. Fifine was 
herself a female philosopher in these matters, and had quite a 
tendresse for somewhat advanced admirers. 

" They were," she said, " so generous. Boys, as a rule, were 
so selfish." 

As the lady prepared, with the most polite courtesy, to 
depart, Mr Wade, who had risen, said, with what the French 
call empressement . 

" You will be sure and tell Mdlle. Natalie that, in coming 
to her benefit, I am paying her a compliment I would not pay 
any other artist in the world." 

The lady bowed. 

" And I may tell you," continued the barrister, " that my 
mother, Mrs Wade " . ^here he passed his hands over his weary, 
sunken eyes . " is, and has been now for some time, very ill, 
and that properly I should be with her during the night at 
least, since business detains me during the day ; but, never- 
theless, assure Nathalie that I will not fail. I shall be sure to 
be there, to cast these flowers at her feet." 



184 ONE OF TWO; OR, 

" Cast these flowers at her feet ! " Yes, those were the 
words that Mr Checketts heard from the opening door as the 
veiled lady passed out. The faithful valet was in a half-dreamy 
state from having had so long to wait, from the room redolent 
of apples, the mopotonous plash of the fountain, and the half- 
awakened, slow, dull atmosphere of law which had fallen for 
some hundreds of years upon the Temple and its buildings . an 
atmosphere which lies like a thick fog upon our venerable laws 
and ever-to-be-venerated law-makers. 

" Cast flowers at her feet 1 " murmured Scorem, as he noted 
down the phrase to be used before the assembled Cogers, or 
Lumber Troopers, as a pretty figure in connection with the 
Majesty of Britannia, the Queen of the Seas, and the Leader 
of Order and Civilisation. 

' " Casting flowers at her feet 1 " thought Checketts, in his 
dreamy state. " Why, he is talking poetry and play-making, not 
law. And my dear master in prison, and the old Earl in a fit, 
and old Gurgles . God bless him ! . beside himself, and swearin', 
quite forgettin' the ' Gorspel Mag.' Half of us mad, and this 
cool fellow talking like that. Dash it 1 there 's always a woman 
at the bottom of it." 

The door shut, and a little bell was heard td ring. 

"Now, Checketts, Esquire," said Scorem, jumping off his 

stool and into his business way always kept for clients . ** it 's 
your turn next, sir ! Pray walk in, sir 1 " 



CHAPTER XXV. 

" MV DEAR GOOD MASTER^ I WOULD PLEAD HIS CAUSEP 

Mr Checketts entered Edgar's room, still eagerly bent upon 
his master's business, but somewhat toned down by waiting 
and reflecting in the outer office j for even the chambers ol 
counsel learned in the law have that effect upon the uncultured 
laity who approach the temples of Themis, as, heretofore, the 
strongholds of the priesthood of the Eleusinian mysteries had 
upon the strangers who came near them. 

Mr Checketts' ideas concerning law were few, and were not 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 185 



very clear. He had friends, in a lower walk of life, who had 
got into scrapes with constables and with police; and his 
father, being " in the public line," as he phrased it, had had to 
appear before the magistrates who looked to the important 
measure of licensing public-houses. 

In the opinion of Mr Checketts, senior, the whole system of 
law and of licence, which, to his view, were one, was a system 
of fraud. In those happy days, if a man were on easy terms 
with a justice of the peace, or could get a gentleman of position 
to say a good word for him, the matter was soon settled. A 
few questions, a pleasant good morning, a caution not to allow 
drunkenness, nor to harbour loose and suspicious characters, 
and you went away with your licence in your pocket, parti- 
cularly if you fee'd the constables. 

" Them you must fee," said old Checketts, " and you were 
all right, whether there was one public in the neighbourhood, 
or they were as close as beehives in an aviary." 

The good man meant an apiary ; but it was all the same. 
It was plain that he had no belief in the justice of the law. 
And how many of the lower class then had? It was a 
dangerous time ; and it always will be a dangerous time, when 
people are not convinced of the necessity and the strict justice 
of law and lawgivers. Bold spirits were abroad who clamoured 
for reform ; and, with many, reform meant revolution. 

Happily the trading class had found this out ; and gave the 
nation the proper pause, wherein England almost always 
adjusts herself. There were other men, like our friend Mr 
Scorem, who were really the salt of the nation . ^poor and 
content, ready to wait, and positively eager to see good in 
things evil. If the Court and the aristocracy did not do their 
duty, but were wholly given to vain expense and pleasure, 
these worthy people were ready to argue . " Well, if you had 
money, woidd you not spend it as you liked ? " Or, " Spend- 
money is good for trade ; if everybody was a miser, where 
would the poor be ] " If they were beaten in that argument, 
they would simply tell their opponents to mind their own 
business, and let the rich mind theirs. 

But about this matter of law, the minds of the poor were 
pretty much of th^ sam^ opinion. They did not look upon 



186 ONE OF TWO; OR, 



the law as the poor man's friend. They used its name as a 
threat of strong terror. "I'll have the law of you," was a 
terrifying saying, which sent many a poor man into fits. Poor 
debtors starved at Whitecross Street ; and rich debtors played 
at rackets in the Fleet, by the side of poor debtors who 
were starving. Eich young men, noblemen, gentlemen. or 
their imitators, rich tradesmen . sallied out of a night, bent 
upon what Old Daylight called "Tom and Jerryingj" and 
were let oflf with a friendly caution, after making the magis- 
trates laugh. While poor mechanics, who, after working hard, 
went out for a " spree," were fined and punished severely, and 
had a scolding sermon administered to them from the 
bench. 

As for justice, that was hardly so much a matter of pounds, 

fehillings, and pence, in the opinion of Checketts, Esquire, 

junior, as a plain toss-up. Eobert Peel's Act was going to put 
things right ; and the New Police, whose appearance in the 
streets created quite a commotion, and who were followed 
about at first, at an admiring distance, by the boys, were hailed 
by no means as a force equally purposed to defend both the 
rich and the poor, but rather as a sort of domestic dragoons, 
to keep the poor down. When, therefore, Mr Checketts^found 
these dragoons had invaded Chesterton House, he was utterly 
perplexed. 

He gave a curious look round at Edgar's apartment, noticing 
the fine bouquet of flowers on the table, and thought that they 
were somewhat foreign to a lawyer's ofiice . ^for barristers or 
solicitors were all one to him ; and, indeed, to most of his 
class . and then sat down at the edge of the chair which Mr 
Wade pointed out, with very much of the feeling that a plain 
cojmtryman of the old time might have experienced When he 
came to consult an astrologer. 

" I see you are from the Earl of Chesterton," said Edgar 
Wade, who . never forgetting a face, even if he had only once 
seen it . at once recognised Checketts. " Pray, what does he 
want with me 1" 

Mr Checketts, who had come purposely to ask Edgar's aid, 
was at once nonplussed. There are some persons who object 
to anything like a direct question. Mr Checketts was not one 



A LEFT-fiANDia) BRIDE. 187 

of those j but he had come upon a roving commission of his 
own, and he hardly knew how to explain himsel£ 

" Please, sir," he stammered out at last, ** I found your card 
on Lord Wimpole's mantelshelf. I believe you called on him 
the other day r* 

" I did. What then ? Does he want to see me, or is it his 
father 1» 

" Both of them, sir, I think," replied Mr Checketts, uneasily. 

" Both of them. why ? " 

"Well, sir, I don't know my lord^s secrets, and " 

"Then you are very much unlike other servants," said 
Edgar, drily, and, as Checketts thought, somewhat rudely. 
" You are, I suppose. Lord Wimpole's servant 1 " 

"Yes, sir," said Checketts.; "his own man, sir . out of 
livery. I have served him nearly ten years . first as a groom ; 
and a better, kinder master does not tread this earth. Not 
tread this earth, sir," said the faithful Checketts, repeating his 
words, to give emphasis to his assertion. 

" That may be. I can well believe it. It does you both 
credit to hear you say so. But that is not to our purpose. 
Come to the point, man, and don't stare about in so dazed a 
way ! Have you never seen a bouquet of flowers before 1" 

" Yes, sir . many." 

"Well, then, have you not a message to deliver? If so, 
dehver it. My time is precious. Have you no letter?" 

"No, sir. I came on my own account." 

" Just now you said you came both from the Earl and from 
Lord Wimpole. What can be the matter with you ? " 

As he said this, severely enough, Edgar Wade moved the 
flowers from his writing-table j and ptit them, less in view of 
Checketts, on one of his side desks. 

"Now, then," he added, "I suppose you have got into some 
mess j and, with the confusion of people of your class, you fancy 
that a barrister and a solicitor are one and the same. If so, I 
can't help you. I might give you some advice, if you could 
find your tongue." 

"No, sir . ^no, indeed I" cried Checketts, earnestly. "I 
don't come for myself. I keep out of lawyers' ways as long as 
I can." 



188 ONE OF two; or, 



"And a very wise thing too. Mind you always do so," 
said Edgar, with a grim smile. 

It was the first time he had smiled. He was weary, pale, and 
worn, as if he had studied overmuch ; but, when he smiled, 
Checketts was somehow struck with a wild fancy that the bar- 
rister was very like both the Earl and Lord Wimpole. 

" They would never make no money not by me, sir," said 
Checketts openly. " But, somehow or other, we must all come 
to them, whether we like it or no !" 

" Many a wiser head than yours has found that out, my 
poor fellow," returned the barrister, with a sigh. 

The tone opened Checketts* heart. Before that, Edgar 
Wade had seemed to him like a stone . and a very unpleasant, 
cold stone* too. Now he could speak. 

" Oh, sir," he cried, " you are a gentleman as knows the 
world, and has some feelin', too. You are quite right, sir. 
Many a wiser and a greater man than me, or than you, sir, 
finds it out, as you say. My poor master, sir ! " 

Here the amiable Checketts paused to keep down his 
grief. 

Edgar Wade, with his back to the fire, warming his legal 
check trousers, looked upon the man with wonder. 

" Do these people," thought he, " command the love of their 
servants 1 Egad, they are well placed." 

But he, wisely, did not interrupt Checketts. 

.* My poor master," continued Checketts, more calmly, but 
speaking very quickly, " were arrested last night . ^leastways, I 
make a mistake, this very mornin* . ^by a Bow Street runner, 
and a New Policeman, sir ; and the old Earl has fallen down 
in a fit ; and we are all at sixes and sevens . that 's what's the 
matter 1 " 

"Arrested ! " said Edgar Wade. " For debt, I suppose 1 " 

He was very pale, but very calm ; and he turned round to 
poke his fire as he said it. 

" Oh no, sir . not for debt ! 'Tisn't the sort of officers as 
does that. It *s something very serous . very serous ! " 

** They sliould apply to their own solicitors, not to me. I 
must be instructed by those gentlemen. I suppose you know 
that ] " 



A LfiFT-KCAJ^ED BRIDE. , 1 89 

. ..-.-. ^ . _ ^ 

Mr Checketts did not know that, and looked blankly out of 
the window ; getting up from his chair to make another appeal. 

" You see, sir> it must be something serous ; for the Earl . 
as come up from Brighton yesterday . dined with his son last 
night." 

Edgar Wade pricked up his ears, as Mr Checketts would 
have remarked, at these words, and asked . 

" Did you wait on them, then ] '* 

" No, sir, it isn't my place ; but I saw that my lord's room 
was all right ; and after dinner they went there ; and, it seems, 
they had a very long and serous conversation." 
' To which you listened . you, or some of you, I suppose," said 
Edgar Wade, harshly. 

" No, sir. We don't do such things . at our hous'fe, at least. 
Servants have feelings of honour, sir, sometimes," said Chec- 
ketts, plaintively. 

" Umph ! " was the gruff rejoinder. ** That 's what you are 
supposed to do in novels and in plays." 

"Novels and plays ain't always real life, though some of 
them come very near to it," was Checketts' dignified answer. 
" Besides, if Mr Eoskell caught one of us lingering near the 
doors of the chambers, he" . ^meaning the servant, not Mr 
Eoskell . " would not be long*in the house." 

" Then how do you know the conversation was long and 
serious." 

« 

Edgar Wade knew, perhaps, better than any one except the 
iwo interlocutors what that talk was ab6ut; but he had a 
habit . a barristerial habit . of cross-questioning, and he T^anted 
to ascertain as much as he could from other sources beside the 
chief one. 

" Well, sir," said the servant, *' you see they did not retire 
till late ; and when Mr Eoskell . who is a very old servant, 
and quite friendly, as one may say, with Lord Chesterton . 
that 's the Earl . ^when he went to his chamber, to see that all 
was right . for he is the last in bed, and about the first up. 
the Earl was deeply affected, and very, very silent." 

Here Mr Checketts paused, as if reflecting. 

" As for my lord," he added, " he was terribly dull, as he 
has been since you called, sir," . / 



190 ONE OF TWO; OR, 



Here Checketts looked furtively at the barrister. 

" Since I called 1 Then you think I have something to do 
with this mystery 1 " 

'^ There are mysteries in great families, and lawyers somehow 
worm them out," said the plain-spoken servant. " And you 
see, sir, we put two and two together in our rank of life. Of 
course, it 's very low of us, and we are often very wrong; but 
we do." 

'^ Since you are so observant, and so familiar with his lord- 
ship.Lord Wimple,'' said Edgar Wade, with emphasis . " may 
I ask whether he said anything to you about this mystery 1" 

" Not a word, sir. Usually, he is full of cheerfulness. as 
blithe as a lark ; but he was very dull ; told me he would not 
want me, called for some brandy and water, lit a cigar, and 
smoked half the night, I fancy." 

"Thinking over the mystery?" asked the barrister. 

" May be, sir," said Checketts. " That 's what I put it down 
to. I found three ends of cigars. and he seldom or ever 
smokes more than one . and the brandy were half used." 

''You servants are observant. You make use of your 
eyes." 

"What are eyes for, sir]" said Checketts. "Generally, 
masters don't speak much to us ; though mine was never of 
that sort, God bless him ! He was as kind, as free, and as open 
as the day. It was always a pleasure to be with him ; and I, 
for 01)0, was never tired of serving him. He never took no 
liberties like, and always bore himself as a gentleman ; but if 
there were a good-natured word to be said, or a joke to be made, 
his tongue was the first to speak it. Service wasn't service 
with him" 

" You speak as if it were a thing of the past," said Edgar, 
noting the reverie into which Checketts had fallen. 

'^ Many a long day have I had with the hounds with him . 
many the cropper have I seen him get ; but when he was up, 
it was always the hoss as he looked after first. Many a tiring 
trapes, till we were both pretty nigh dead-beat, have I had 
with him over the moors, shootin' ; and he 'd lighten my 
shoulder of the guns, and never lose bis temper with the sport, 
bad as it might be. He 'd be cheery and pleasant as we neared 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 191 

. . t I ...-.. .. . , 

home ; and his first thoughts was about my legs . if they were 
tired . not his own." 

Mr Checketts here put his knuckles into his eyes, one after 
another, solemnly enough, and smoothed his hair down in 
groom-like fashion ; as if, in recalling those past days, his past 
occupation came back to him. 

"He was a kind master, then?" asked Edgar, patiently 
enough, as if studying the man. 

** Kind I He just was* It was not d you there, and 

d you here, as it is with some of our young bloods, I can 

tell you, sir. And the old man is as good as the young un. 
Beg pardon, sir . I mean the Earl. They are true noblemen, 
sir . true gentlemen, too ; for there 's many a nobleman isn't a 
gentleman. And what this misfortun' has fallen on our house 
for," said the puzzled Checketts, fairly out of patience as he 
wound up, " I 'm d. d if I can see. I beg pardon, sir, I am 
sure." 

"But are you certain it is so serious?" asked Edgar, again. 
" You may be mistaken, you know. You seem an impulsive 
sort of a man." 

Checketts shook his head. 

" I know the ropes pritty well, sir,^' he said ; " and I know 
town well, too ; and I know that a New Policeman and a Bow 
Street runner come upon criminal business, and that they don't 
generally make no mistakes." 

" And why do you come to me, then ? " 

" Because I saw your card on my lord's mantelshelf ; because, 
begging your pardon, your visit first brought a change and a 
trouble on the young lord ; and because the old Earl, when he 
came out of his fit, muttered the name of * Edgar* Wade,' 
* Edgar Wade,' twice, as if it was in a dream" 

" Why did you not say that at first, man 1 " said Mr Wade, 
fiercely. " Had I known that, I should, of course, have at once 
said that I 'd come." 

" Well, sir," returned Checketts, humbly, "there ain't much 
time lost. His lordship has gone out somewheres.'* 

" So he sends for me at last ! " muttered Edgar to himself. 
" At last, my turn has come ! " 

" Don't mention about my calHn', sir," said Checketts, pre- 



192 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



paring to depart, and moving near the door and nearer the 
window. ' 

" Of course not. Be assured, I will lose no time. You are 
a good fellow. Here 's a crown for jrou." 

Checketts respectfully refused. 

" No, sir," said he, simply ; '* we don'fc do that in our house. 
Besides, barristers, they say, is a poor lot; though may be 
powerful some day." 

Edgar smiled at the man's ingenuousness and good-nature, 
and opened the door for him. The door was near the window, 
wliich commanded the view of the court below, and Checketts 
looked out thereat. As he did so, he caught hold of Edgar's 
arm. 

" There," said he, " there he is . that 's the Bow Street officer 
as arrested my lord ! He is coming this way." 

Edgar Wade glanced into the court, and saw Mr Tom 
Forster ! 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

" / mAy YOUy PLEAD FOR ME . UPHOLD MY CAUSE,^* 

When Edgar looked out of his chamber window, and saw old 
Tom Forster walking briskly past . ^for that good gentleman 
had mistaken the house . and heard the exclamation of Mr 
Checketts, " That 's the Bow Street officer as arrested my 
lord 1 " he, for the moment, imagined he was dreaming. 

He had looked upon the old fellow as in many ways a 
shrewd, in others a somewhat doddering, old man, who loved, 
as most retired tradesmen do love or pretend that they love, 
to potter about upon business, or what he called business ; but 
that he was an adept at tracing crime, and connected with a 
police office, Edgar had never guessed. 

" He 's looking for this house, I 'm sure," said Mr Checketts; 
"and so I*ll clear out at once." 

This was just what Edgar Wade desired ; so he, promising 
to call as soon as he could, shut the door upon Checketts, and 
sat down. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 193 

That gentleman, patting his handkerchief to his face so as 
not to be recognised, made his escape down-stairs before Old 
Daylight found that he had passed the door upon the lintel of 
which was the honoured name of Edgar Wade. 

Presently, however, the tread . stable, steady, and quick . 
of the old gentleman was heard on the stairs ; and Mr Scorem 
opened the door to a modest double knock, which seemed as 
if it desired to remain single, but could not succeed. This 
modest double . a single with a little addendum . is often 
given by tradesmen who are rising in the world ; who, having 
begun to be gentlemen, have hardly ceased to remember their 
connection with trade. 

" Mr Edgar Wade within ? " asked the owner of the Hessian 
boots, the spencer, and the curled hat. 

"Yes," replied Scorem, who had dashed down from his 
stool, and had thrown into his face an amount of work and 
worry most creditable to his master. "Yes; and he's dis- 
engaged now, I think." 

" I think " was thrown in by Scorem in such an artistic way 
that the most cunning of visitors would have been deceived. 
" I think," as if Scorem was so bewildered by the number of 
clients that, although he was the Cerberus of the chambers, 
he could not exactly answer for the presence of any of the 
numerous callers. At the same time, Scorem threw one of his 
arms and half of his face towards the speech he was writing, 
as if it were a brief from which he was torn by the intrusion ; 
and that thousands of pounds, or, which was dearer, the honour 
of ancient families, depended upon his getting back to it as 
soon as he could This axtistic yet polite impatience impressed 
Old Daylight very much. He was prepared to be impressed 
by anything pertaining to Edgar Wade. He loved that " young 
fellow," as he called him; and love sweetens every morsel, 
however bitter it may be, and lightens up every dark comer." 
Moreover, Edgar Wade was not bitter : he was noble, impul- 
sive, generous to a fault. So said Tom Forster; and who 
should know better than he I 

''Eeally, I won't keep him a moment. I have something 
important to say to him.'' 

.' Oh, very well, sir," said Scorem, in. a resigned sort of 

N 



194 ONE OF TWO; OR, 



^SLj . (as much as to say, " Now, look here ; you are going to 
intrude on the future Chief Baron, so don't bother him ") . 
" oh, very well. I don't know how he can get through all this. 
Please, what name 1 " 

" Tom Forster, if you please." 

" Thomas Forster, Esquire," muttered Scorem, as he wrote 
down the words in a most approved engrossing hand. 

"No . Tom Forster. I was christened Tom. Mr Tom 
Forster." 

Tfee vile custom of esquiring everybody had then set in, but 
not in all its fury ; and Old Daylight, who was precise in his 
manner, and who knew the difference between an esquire arid 
a plain gentleman, withstood it as long as he could. 

" Very good, sir," said Scorem, rapidly dashing down the 
name. " Wait here a minute." 

And with the respectful knock, intensified in its respect if 
possible . a humble, inquiring knock, as if it felt itself to be 
intrusive, and did not want to be knoclj;ed at all . Scorem 
brushed his hair from his perturbed brow, and dashed over 
the space between the door and his master's table as if his life 
depended upon his sedate and business-like quickness. 

He had closed the door behind him, so as to allow no 
jealous peep into his master's sanctum. Barristers' clerks have 
that method ; being obliged sometimes to withhold from a 
profane public that it is not a consultation, but an oyster 
luncheon, that the future Chief Justices are so seriously dis- 
cussing. Meanwhile, the client is troubling his head about 
his cause ; and the learned gentleman is wiping his brow with 
a wet towel, and hiding a pint of stout in his wig box. 

Simple Mr Forster, seeing the zeal of Scorem, pulled out one 
series of fingers,i;o as to make them crack,.to mark his satisfaction. 

" ' Like master, like jnan,' " he said. " What wisdom there 
is in those good old proverbs. Now, that is just the studious 
young fellow I should have chosen for Mr Wade's clerk. None 
X)f your second-hand copies of Corintshian Tom." 

Jlerein Old Daylight was quite right. Mr Scorem's vanity 
did not lie in imitating those wild dandies of the day, as we 
have seen ; but it is doubtful whether his behaviour at tho 
Cogers' Hall would not have astonished his admirer. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 195 

Edgar Wade, leaning thoughtfully on his arm, as if he 
were resting from previous study, lifted up his dark, lustrous, 
yet wearied eyes ; took the card, read it, and questioned, by a 
look only, the faithful Scorem. 

" Nice old gent, sir," said Scorem ; " rather of the downy 
sort. Might be a country solicitor, only too well got up, 
sir." 

The influx of visitors had so far perturbed Scorem, that 
he waxed familiar with his master . a habit which zealously 
faithful servants have who look after your interest, and who 
know they do so. They may be a nuisance, no doubt, to 
doubly refined people ; but the comfort to these is, that no one 
need be afraid of these servants. If they are intunate, they are 
seldom dishonest. Your rogue, on the contrary, is tremendous 
in his respect : he would not take a liberty for the world ; and 
yet he robs you. 

" I know him," said his master. *' He is my landlord. Let 
him come in." 

Scorem^s face fell at once. The great case he was always 
dreaming of, " With you, Sir Boreham Foggs," and five hun- 
dred guineas, had not yet come. Its corresponding clerk's fee 
was also absent. 

" Oh . h ! " ejaculated the clerk. 

But, true to the traditions of his office, he called up an 
important look, dashed back to his little den, and threw open 
the door in an abstracted way, as much as to say, " There you 
are . go in ; and let me get back to that important brief." 

Old Daylight, who had never had the honour before this 
of visiting the barrister's rooms, cast a deferential look round 
the sanctum. He had a veneration for law calf ; he loved the 
bufi^ backs and the red labels that ornamented Edgar's book- 
shelves ; and he sat down, with a due regard to the majesty of 
the law. 

The light from the window shone full on the barrister's face; 
and Mr Forster was shocked to see how pale and worn it was. 
Habitually observant, he took in everything at a glance. There 
was the old mezzotint of Lord Mansfield in its ebony frame, 
looking the heau ideal of ancient Faith, Integrity, and Justice 
. in short, of English law, as properly carried out. Therd 



196 ONE OP TWO; OR, 



also, was the new portrait, in the mixed style . ^for stipple had 
come in, and had invaded the reakns of the good old mezzo- 
tint . of Harry Brougham ; his face cleans angular, sharp as a 
carved wooden head on a walking stick ; the flesh done with 
minute stipple spots, and his robes made rich by the rocking 
tool, after the way of cheap engravings. Behind the door 
hung the barrister*s robe, somewhat dusty and old ; near it was 
his wig box ; while a goodly display of briefs . the accumula- 
tions of some years, it must be confessed . Uttered the table. 

" How do you do, Mr Forster 1 " asked the barrister, weariedly. 
'^ I am glad to see you here ; but I am rather surprised." 

" I thought you would be so, my dear sir ; but it was my 
duty to come. I have some most astonishing news to tell 
you. But do not be surprised too much. I hope, you know, 
that right will be right very soon, and that the * King shall 
enjoy his own again.'" 

" I am sure I 've no objection, Mr Forster. What king 1" 

" Why, you are as bad as Ancient Pistol, in Shakespeare, 
who cries out, * Under which king, Bezonian 1 Speak or die!' 
What king ? What but the true Lord Wimpole 1 " 

" Oh ! " said Edgar, with a start . as if he had only j ust thought 
upon that matter, and the subject was unpleasant to him. 
Then he rose, and, pushing back his cane chair, said . 

" I am not very glad you have come to speak about that, 
Mr Forster. Do you know that I am almost sorry that we 
have entered on that pursuit 1 Why not let the matter rest ? 
God has willed that, for some mysterious purpose, evil should 
triumpL Why should we struggle against this ] Why not 
submit]" 

"Why notf said Old Forster, wonderingly. '* Why not? 
If this were to be the opinion of all the world, wrong would 
live crowned and triumphant, and right would be pushed out 
of record into . into" . here Forster found no suitable place; 
so he lamely concluded with . " into the coal-cellar." 

" So it is . ^too often," said the man of law. 

" Umph ! then it shan't be in this case," added Old Daylight, 
testily. " No j if the world had not in it some persons with a 
fetrong will, and a backbone to their purpose, we should all b^ 
fit sixes and sevens." 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 197 

^fc^i^^B^i^. 1^1. a^. ^M^^M^i^. . ^^ I . I ... - ......I . M ^ m »...--M«»iMiiaii .l..^^ .-« 

t 

" Then you, for one, do not agree with the sacred injunction, 
* If a man take thy coat, give him thy cloak also T " 

Old Daylight rose, and walked up and down the room before 
he answered. . 

"What could Edgar Wade be driving at?" he thought. 
The Temple seemed to have entertained an angel unawares. 
Here was one altogether too good for this work-arday world. 
Was it goodness in reality, or a mere fictitious and ideal good- 
ness ? 

Forster had long watched this young gentleman . had known 
him to do kindly deeds, and to utter noble sentiments ; but 
when it comBs to claiming anything which is one's own, or to 
foregoing an undoubted right . then, indeed, we find few saints 
in this world. Old Forster never pretended to so exalted a 
character. His was a straightforward life, spent in simple, 
unideal duty ; and he never rose much above it, while he cer- 
tainly never sank below it. 

" I agree," said the old gentleman, " with the beauty of that 
sacred lesson ; but I humbly think that, in this mixed world. ^ 
wherein we have bred a race of professional rogues, and men 
are wicked, not by sudden starts and occasional temptations, 
but as a matter of trade . it would be as well not to try that 
extreme charity. Perhaps the injunction was not meanf for 
us work-a-day Christians, but for the blessed apostles only. 
They had nothing to gain in this world. Submission might 
make them avoid many evils ; struggling against unjust perse- 
cution could only heap more on them. But this does not 
touch us. You must .claim your own." 

" But think, Mr Forster, think of the pain it will give to my 
father. rto my -poor, guiltless brother 1 " 

" Poor, guiltless I I am not so sure of that. What did 
your father do for you 1 He has his privileges as a father ; 
but he has his duties as well. Why should the stiff, proud 
aristocrat push away an innocent babe, and to substitute 
another in its place ? Bight is right, either amongst angels or 
devils . amongst great gentry or us poor folk ; and if there is 
anything that I especially hate, it is successful wrong." 

" But it is so many years since ! " again urged the barrister, 
dreamily and wearily. " Let it go by. let it pass." 



198 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



" So many years ago ! . that 's it ; that 's just it/' cried the 
elder speaker. ." As if continuance in a folly or a crime could 
m^ke it right ! . as if a thistle, or a weed, or a poison tree . 
like the upas which travellers tell us of . ^was less a thistle, or 
a weed, or a tree of poison, because it was a huge thing, of. 
long growth, and deeply rooted. Thank God for one thing," 
concluded the old man, wiping his forehead with his red ban- 
dana . " evil does not triumph long. I have lived to see that 
nothing that is not true and good can exist. Gadzooks 1 lb 
was worth while to live in 1815, 1 can tell you, if only for that. 
The Corsican tyrant, who broke his heart by growing too fat 
when at rest, was caught then by our stout English Duke . 
caught and beaten j and he, whose bloody ambition had caused 
so many battles, was sent to St Helena, to linger out a disap- 
pointed life, until his own " 

" But don't you pity him ? " asked Edgar. " Do you not 
pity the beaten and unsuccessful hero ? Alone ! with the 
barren rock to look upon; and the bare, melancholy ocean 
crawling in glittering wavelets at his feet in the long days of 
hot sunshine, or bursting into storm and foam in the winter. 
Cannot you pity such a man, when he feels that his life's work 
is undone ? " 

"Tity him 1 " p,sked Old Forster. " Pity him ! What for ] 
Am I to pity an unsuccessful burglar, who, trying to enter and 
rob a house, gets thrown out of window, and breaks his ribs 1 
Well, you young fellows astonish me ! I can pity the good 
and the ^onest ; but I am . " here Old Forster blew his nose 
with his red bandana, .like a war trumpet . " if I can pity a 
beaten rogue. But, to my business. It is of a surprising 
nature. This morning " > 

" You arrested my half-brother. Lord Wimpole," said Edgar, 
coolly. 

Old Forster jumped, as if he had been pricked with a bayonet. 

" How do you know that ? " 

'* Perhaps I divined it. I also know that Lord Chestertonr 
wishes to see me," added the barrister, enjoying the old gentle- 
man's confusion. " And I also know that Mr Forster is not 
unknown at Bow Street ; where, I believe, he is considered a 
very efficient aid to his Majesty's police." 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 199 



Old Daylight was covered with confusion. He had intended 
confessing the nature of his occupation to Edgar, because he 
knew that he would soon discover it ; but he was, of course, 
unaware of the revelation made by Ghecketts, or his visit. 

He shuffled one Hessian boot forward, and then another. « 
plucked at the leathern tassels . turned very red ; and then, 
putting the bandana to his mouth, looked straight into 
the bright, keen eyes of Edgar Wade, who was watching 
him. 

" Well," he said, " after all, it was my fancy. I will be for 
moving now. A barrister, and a great man like you will be, 
cannot be long a friend with such as I am. I know that; and 
yet I'm sorry. I knew it would come to this, and that it 
would come soon. But I don't like it any the more because 
you have had it from other lips. I dare say that the fellow 
who told you spoke something nasty about me. Called me an 
old thief-taker, I suppose. Well, I am that ; but, look you, 
I 'd rather be a thief-taker than a thief-maker. I don*t think 
much of the world ; and it returns the* compliment by not 
thinking much of me. But, Mr Edgar, I should like to stand 
well in your eyes ; and, if you .cut me . as you must . I shall 
still have the honour of bringing you to your right." 

**My dear, good old friend," returned the barrister, "I 
think none the worse of you for your craze . let me call it ; in 
fact, I believe it to be a very useful one to society; and, if a 
nation honours a soldier, I don't know why we should not 
honour the guardians of our domestic peace." 

** He speaks like a leader in a newspaper," thought Old 
Daylight j^ " perhaps he even writes them. I am sure he 's 
clever enough . ^who knows 1" 

Then he said aloud, as he rose and grasped the open hand 
of the barrister . 

'^ Say no more, Mr Wade . say no more. You do ine too 
much honour." 

" I was going to say," said Edgar, " that not only shall I 
not cut you . recollect that I am in your debt, too, if you 
please . ^but I shall be proud to know " 

" You 're too good, too good," babbled the old gentleman, 
amazingly flattered. " Now, let's to business. Ah, I see". 



198 ONE OF TWO ; OE, 



" So many years ago. ! . that 's it j that 's just it/' cried the 
elder speaker. /^ As if continuance in a folly or a crime could 
m^ke it right ! . as if a thistle, or a weed, or a poison tree . 
like the upas which travellers tell us of . ^was less a thistle, or 
a weed, or a tree of poison, because it was a huge thing, of. 
long growth, and deeply rooted. Thank God for one thing," 
concluded the old man, wiping his forehead with his red ban- 
dana . " evil does not triumph long. I have lived to see that 
nothing that is not true and good can exist. Gadzooks ! It 
was worth while to live in 1815, 1 can tell you, if only for that. 
The Corsican tyrant, who broke his heart by growing too fat 
when at rest, was caught then by our stout English Duke . 
caught and beaten ; and he, whose bloody ambition had caused 
so many battles, was sent to St Helena, to linger out a disap- 
pointed life, until his own " 

" But don't you pity him 1 " asked Edgar. " Do you not 
pity the beaten and unsuccessful hero 1 Alone 1 with the 
barren rock to look upon; and the bare, melancholy ocean 
crawling in glittering wavelets at his feet in the long days of 
hot sunshine, or bursting into storm and foam in the winter. 
Cannot you pity such a man, when he feels that his life's work 
is undone 1 " 

"Tity him ? " ^ked Old Forster. " Pity him ! What for ] 
Am I to pity an unsuccessful burglar, who, trying to enter and 
rob a house, gets thrown out of window, and breaks his ribs ] 
Well, you young fellows astonish me ! I can pity the good 
and the ^onest ; but I am . " here Old Forster blew his nose 
with his red bandana, .like a war trumpet . " if I can pity a 
beaten rogue. But, to my business. It is of a surprising 
nature. This morning ". 

" You arrested my half-brother. Lord Wimpole," said Edgar, 
coolly. 

Old Forster jumped, as if he had been pricked with a bayonet. 

^' How do you know that 1 " 

" Perhaps I divined it. I also know that Lord Chestertonr 
wishes to see me," added the barrister, enjoying the old gentle- 
man's confusion. '^ And I also know that Mr Forster is not 
unknown at Bow Street ; where, I believe, he is considered a 
very efficient aid to his Majesty's police." 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 199 



Old Daylight was covered with confusion. He had intended 
confessing the nature of his occupation to Edgar, because he 
knew that he would soon discover it ; but he was, of course, 
unaware of the revelation made by Checketts, or his visit. 

He shuffled one Hessian boot forward, and then another. 
plucked at the leathern tassels . turned very red ; and then, 
putting the bandana to his mouth, looked straight into 
the bright, keen eyes of Edgar Wade, who was watching 
him. 

" Well," he said, " after all, it was my fancy. I will be for 
moving now. A barrister, and a great man like you will be, 
cannot be long a friend with such as I am. I know that; and 
yet I'm sorry. I knew it would come to this, and that it 
would come soon. But I don't like it any the more because 
you have had it from other lips. I dare say that the fellow 
who told you spoke something nasty about me. Galled me an 
old thief-taker, I suppose. Well, I am that ; but, look you, 
I 'd rather be a thief-taker than a thief-maker. I don't think 
much of the world ; and it returns the' compliment by not 
thinking much of me. But, Mr Edgar, I should like to stand 
well in your eyes ; and, if you cut me . as you must . I shall 
still have the honour of bringing you to your right." 

**My dear, good old friend," returned the barrister, "I 
think none the worse of you for your craze . ^let me call it ; in 
fact, I believe it to be a very usefiil one to society; and, if a 
nation honours a soldier, I don't know why we should not 
honour the guardians of our domestic peace." 

" He speaks like a leader in a newspaper," thought Old 
Daylight ;^ " perhaps he even writes them. I am sure he 's 
clever enough . ^who knows ? " 

Then he said aloud, as he rose and grasped the open hand 
of the barrister. 

" Say no more, Mr Wade . say no more. You do ine too 
much honour." 

" I was gomg to say," said Edgar, " that not only shall I 
not cut you.recollect that I am in your debt, too, if you 
please . ^but I shall be proud to know " . 

" You 're too good, too good," babbled the old gentleman, 
amazingly flattered. " Now, let's to business. Ah, I see". 



200 ONE OF TWO ; OK, 



here Old Daylight glanced at the mantelshelf . "a hothouse 
bouquet for your sick mother. Good fellow, good fellow 1 " 

" Ton my word, Mr Forster". . 

*< Now, let me speak. This young Lord Wimpole is about 
as knowing and as cool a card as ever you set your eyes on. 
I watched him like a lynx. He did not flinch a bit : neyer 
showed the white feather." 

'' Noble fellow ! He is a true scion of a staunch old house. 
Noblesse oblige" 

**Lord bless you 1" said Old Forster, "if noblesse obleeges^ 
as you say, we are all noblesse . ^we English. I've seen a com* 
mon gutter thief show as much pluck as a thorough nobleman 
ever did . as Lord Ferrers himself, although he was tucked up 
in a silken halter. Now, look here, Mr Edgar. Mark me ! 
This cool young lord. we will call him lord . ^wants to see 
you." 

** i know he does." 

"Oh, you do, do youl He's been before me, has he? 
Well, you won't catch a weasel asleep twice. Well, he wants 
you to defend him. What do you think of that ] " 

Edgar looked fixedly at him ; but didn't say a word. 

" Cool, is it not 1 . as a cucumber, as they say. Now, mark 
me. Don't you have anything to do with it." 

" Can I refuse him, Mr Forster 1 " said Edgar. " He is my 
brother. / wovM defend km tciih my life ! " 



CHAPTER XXVir. 

" THE COMMON TALK OF GOSSIPS WHEN THEY MEET!^ 

" ' Destruction cometh suddenly upon you, even as a thief in 
the night,' according to the editor," said the butler. 

These words fell upon the ear of Checketts as he entered 
the steward's room. The conversation was apropos of the 
Chesterton family, of which Mrs Preen was relating some 
legend. A female Chesterton, in years gone by, had com- 
mitted a dreadful crime j and, being suddenly convicted of it, 
had turned cochineal colour. . ,.- 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 201 



There is always some black sheep in every flock ; and this 
black sheep had the dangerous talent of appearing, according 
to Mrs Preen, as white as a dove, until found out. Was it 
not natural to expect that, in this instance which they, the 
servants, were then debating, Lord Wimpole might have been 
that black sheep ? So Mrs Preen argued. The tide was turn- 
ing in the servants' debating assembly. Mrs Preen's father 
had been a law stationer, and she had grown up with im- 
mense veneration for the law. It was not likely that that 
august machine could be wrongly guided, or could make a 
mistake. 

'^ People in office,'^ said Mrs Preen, sententiously, '^ seldom 
make mistakes. Bless you, they know ever3rthing. Look how 
wise the judges look ! It is beautiful to see them ; and then, 
how beautifully they speak I " 

Mrs Preen had been to one or two trials . to which we know 
ladies are fond of flocking . and had been greatly edified by 
the way in which some learned judge had comported himself. 

<' They look a great deal wis^r than they are, mum," said the 
irreverent Ghecketts. " Bless you, they often make mistakes I 
I recollect my guv'nor was persuaded to give a poor old stable- 
keeper, who was down our mews, into custody for stealing pots. 
One of *em . he had had a pint o* beer, Meux's Entire . was 
found in the 'oss's stalls, and the poor man was convicted, and 
sent across the seas, or something like. Well, after all, another 
man confessed to the job 3 and the poor ostler was as innocent 
as a chick just hatched. And then they granted that poor old 
man a free pardon ! Pardon fOr what 1 For being innocently 
convicted ! Do you call that wisdom ? Preciously wise all the 
big-wigs look ; but it 's the horsehair that makes them look so 1 '' 

" Well, now and then, Mr Checketts, the wisest man must 
err," said Mrs Preen, smoothing her silk apron. 

*' * The wisest men are but babes,' as the editor says," inter- 
posed Mr Gurgles. <* But I am apt to think Mrs Preen is not 
far wrong." 

'^ Besides," added the housekeeper, " this is not a case of pot 
stealing." 

" No . the family has not fallen so low as that," said Gurgles, 
with dignity. ** I am afraid, young man, that your early educa- 



202 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



tion has somewhat interfered with your notion of things. As 
the editor remarks somewhere, ^ Train up a child in the way 
he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it.' 
That is wisdom, Mrs Preen . ^is it not 1 " 

" Well, I don't quite know that," retorted Mrs Preen. 
" Here's our young lord . ^what better training can you want ] 
First at Eton . all with sons of the most exalted families j 
then at Oxford ; and now . oh ! is it not dreadful ! " 

" There are some very wild doings at Oxford, Mrs Preen. I 
have been down there to visit my brother, who is a porter at 
one of the colleges. Bless you, don't they have rows ! * Some 
young fellows,' says the editor, ' are like Ishmael, and some like 
Jacob, The human heart,' he adds, * is desperately wicked.' " 

" I tell you what . desperately wicked or not. the people 
who arrested Lord Wimpole have made a mistake ; and won't 
they catch it ! My lord is as innocent as a babe unborn. I 'd 
lay my life on it . I 'd swear it I " 

" * Swear not at all,' " quoted Gurgles. 
. " Won't I, though ! " said Ghecketts. '^ It 's enough to make 
any one swear, to ^d such a lot of half-hearted coves about 
one. I 'd die before I believed him guilty. But you'll see . 
you'll see, I tell you. He 's going to set one of those lawyers 
at him . ^at least, the old lord is . and a wonderful fellow he is. 
He ain't very old, as the little boy said of the puppy as was 
born yesterday ; but he may have a lot of experience ; and I 
hope he has. He looks like it. Eyes that can look you through ; 
and such a forehead, and such lots of books ! " 

"That's your man," said Gurgles. "No wonder he looks 
pale. My friend and guide says, mum, that ^ of making books 
there is no end, and much study is weariness to the bones.' 
That 's why lawyers, and poets, and such like, are so thin. But 
I am glad to hear he 's leanfed. Learning is better than house 
and land.'' 

" Oh, bother, is it 1 Yes, I suppose it is, when you ain't got 
neither." 

" I have much hopes of the man of law whom Mr Ghecketts 
speaks of. What is his name, if you please, Mr Ghecketts ? " 
asked Gurgles. 

<< Mr Wade. Mr Edgar Wade ; and do you know, mum, 



A LEFT-HANBBD BRIDE. 203 

. 



that he was, somehow or other, in the look of him . whether 
it was his eyes, his nose, or his chin, or all three together-^ 
very like our old governor, and our young one too." 

".Umph ! that may be ; and yet" . ^here Mrs Preen turned 
a meaning look upon the excellent Gurgles, and spoke with 
intention . ^^ there can be no harm in that. I believe that his 
lordship was a most exemplary young man before marriage ; 
and he married early." 

"*It is a wise child,' observes the editor," said Gurgles, "'that 
knows his own father ; ' but, certainly. Wade is not the name 
of the solicitors of the family." 

"No," added Mrs Preen; "Steppem, Tracy, and Filch is 
the respectable firm . most respectable firm . of Lincoln's Inn; 
and excellent solicitors they are. Bless you ! I Ve been in- 
side their offices, Mr Gurgles ; and do you know, there is not 
one of their tin boxes that had not the name of a lord, or a 
lord's estate, upon it, or, let us say, such words as * Exors. of 
the Honble. Miss Patchford ; ' * Marriage deeds of the Duchess 
of Slowgoe ; ' * The Potiron Estates ; ' and such words ! What 
a thing it must be to be an Exor ! Those are the gentlemen 
who stand to guard the King . all gold, and with drawn 
swords . or is it an Exon, Mr Gurgles 1 " 

" I don't know, mum . I 'm not used to anything palatial, 
although I had an uncle who was very stately, and very obese. 
He was kept to drive the state coach, and never exercised his 
whip upon any horses worse than the eight cream-coloured 
beauties belonging to his Majesty, that have the great privilege 
of wearing red morocco harness, and of never doing any work.'* 

Here Checketts laughed, irreverently. 

" Consequently," said Gurgles, finishing his sentence before 
he commenced his reproof, *' I don't know much of Exons, nor 
of Exors. Pray, what are you laughing at, Mr Checketts 1 " 

" Because I was thinking what precious fools them 'osses 
must think us men for keeping them in idleness, and letting 
them do no work . 

' For Satan finds some miscliief still 
For idle hands to do.' 

There 's a piece of verse that would suit your editor. But, 
Mrs Preen . ain't you old enough to know, mum, that this job 



204 ONE OP TWO ; OB, 



requires a barrister? and Mr Edgar Wade is a barrister, and 
much above any beggarly firm of solicitors as ever cheated a 
poor widow or robbed a distressed orphan/' 

Checketts thus threw a ball of fire into Mrs Preen's powder 
magazine. In early days, when vanity held sway over this 
excellent . and then maiden . lady, she used to say that her 
father was an eminent legal gentleman. Then, the bit of brag 
increased, and it became an eminent attorney; and then a 
solidton Hence, anything said against the legal profession 
generally, and attorneys in particular, was felt by iflrs Preen 
as a personal insult. Nor, indeed, was the lady very much 
pleased with Mr Checketts' exordium, " You are old enough." 
How often these little sentences . dropped unconsciously, it 
may be, by the speakers . ^annoy and worry us ; nay, determine 
the bias of our own feelings against a speaker, 

" Seally, sir,'' said Mrs Preen, with the dignity of a duchess, 
'* I am not aware that I have given you any cause thus to insult 
my family." 

*' Beg pardon, Mrs Preen," said Checketts, good-naturedly ; 
** I did not mean it." 

'^ Besides," continued the housekeeper . loftily overlooking 
Checketts and his apology . *^ besides, I am sure that solicitors 
are required in such cases. Do you remember that little affair 
of Mr C^ar Negretti ? You have cause to remember." 

" Oh, don't I, just i " returned Checketts. 

Well he might remember, indeed; when to that circum- 
stance, amongst others, he owed his advancement. 

" Oh, don't I, just. What a rogue he was ! And wasn't 
Mrs Preen taken in, neither I Bemember ! . don't I ? . 

* I remember, I remember, 

Tlie cot where I was bom ; 
And now I We got a bigger house, 
I look on it with scorn.' 

Why, you know you admired that cunning thief, Mrs Preen." 
" Don't call him a thief, Mr Checketts. He was a very good 

young man." 

" Though he did wear my lord's pocket handkerchiefs ; and 

went out and passed himself off as a young nobleman, no 

doubt." 



A LEFT-HANDED BRmE. 200 

« ^ 

" Nothing was ever proved against him," said Mrs Preen ; 
" and he spoke French and Italian with perfect fluency. Ah I 
what a fine complexioned young man he was, to be sure ! " 

'^ About as black as a nigger; but he was not so black 
without as he was within. I never heard such propositions 
as he made to me." 

" Oh, it was only to try you ; he told me so," said Gurgles. 
" Though I confess I do not like people who go to try others ; 
they may fall themselves, and serve them right if they do. 
The young man was a stranger and a servant within our gates; 
and I never talk to foreigners myself." 

" True British prejudice," sneered Mrs Preen ; " true British 
prejudice ! " 

It is to be observed that all those people who talk about 
British prejudice, as if, like so-called British spirits, it was 
something deleterious, loftily pretend to have no prejudices 
themselves ; or, perhaps, not to be British at all. 

" Well, I'm glad old Gurgles is on my side," said Checketts, 
familiarly patting that worthy on the shoulder. " And I 'm 
glad his prejudice is British prejudice ; 'cos, if it is, I 'm sure 
it 's of the right sort. And let me tell you that I don't see 
why we should not be proud of B^tish prejudice, Mrs Preen. 
Perhaps, mum, you will tell me anything really British that is 
bad ; 'cos if you can, tell me . I don't know of it, not I." 

" British brandy," murmured Gurgles, actually without any 
quotation from his favourite editor. 

" Well, 'tisn't so good as Cognac ; but you can't beat British 
gin, rum, whisky, or porter. Brandy ain't our native pro- 
duction. They don't go in for brandy, the British ; but, for 
all that, I don't like to hear them run down, especially by 
their own people. As for prejudice against foreigners, some- 
times it's good, and sometimes it's bad. C^sar Negretti I 
don't know any bad of, except what he was said to be guilty 
of; and as my lord forgave him, why I will forgive him too. 
But there, I had a prejudice against him.'' 

" He was sweetly inclined towards religion," said Gurgles ; 
'' and took much pleasure in reading that precious magazine, 
which I offered, and often, too often, in vain, to lend you, Mr 
Checketts." 



206 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



*' Much pleasure in reading I Oh, good gracious," said Mr 
Checketts, with a wide grin on his misbelieving countenance ; 
** Mr Gurgles, if you knew all ! " 

Here a loud summons from the hall bell put an end to the 
conference ; and presently Mr Slates announced that his lord- 
ship was coming up the outer stairs with a young lady. 

" Hurrah! I said he was innocent," cried Checketts; " so 
they've set him free." 

" 'Tisn't the young lord ; it is the old one. How pale he 
looks, and tottering ; and the young lady with him is no other 
than Miss Winifred Vaughan." 

*' Miss Vaughan ! how comes she here?" said Mrs Preen. 
" I suppose we shall have Lady Sark and her belongings next." 

" Hush ! " said Gurgles. " They are in the hall ; they must 
not hear a whisper." 

Mr Eoskell was at the door waiting for Lord Chesterton. 
There is something very noble and very touching in the 
affection of an old servant, after any misfortune or any illness ; 
and Lord Chesterton, in the middle of his trouble, could not 
help noticing the attentive, unobtrusive care that his steward 
lavished on him. Only one other servant was there : Mr 
Checketts could not restrait his zeal, and had bounded up the 
stairs, although Gurgles was almost ready to pull him by the 
coat-tails to prevent him. Yet even he^ wishing to say some- 
thing . to ask if Lord Wimpole were well, and when he was 
coming home. remained respectfully silent ; and his hopes fell 
when he saw the sad face of Lord Chesterton, and the reddened 
eyes and flushed cheeks of Winifred Vaughan. 

*' Mr Eoskell," said his lordship, greatly moved, " you 
see we are back again." He could, if society had only per- 
mitted him, have given the hand of the good fellow a hearty 
shake. " But I don't feel very well. Give me your arm up- 
stairs. My dear, you can lean on me." 

And so the three went gently up the staircase . so wide and 
so fitly planned for the days when the cavalier, with his sword 
hanging across his coat-tails, escorted the. lady in a hoop i la 
Pompadour j and wide enough to admit even them. . Up the 
stairs, from the panelled walls of which looked down ancestors 
of Lord Chesterton, grim in breastplate and buff coat, or srnil* 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 207 

. . . * 1 I 

ing in their wigs and blue satin coats. Up the stairs, until 
they came to the chief reception-room, where there were other 
portraits, and that great ancestral tree of which Lord Wimpole 
had a smaller copy in his room. There they stayed, the- girl 
clinging to the hand of the old nobleman, who held himself 
upright "by an effort ; and, but that he knew he had some one 
to support, would have himself fallen. 

With an effort to seem unconcerned, Eoskell asked his mas- 
ter whether he would take any refreshment. 

An affirmative nod was the answer. 

" Shall I lay for three, my lord ? *' asked Eoskell, as natu- 
rally as he could. 

" No," returned Lord Chesterton. " Don't you see that we 
are alone I 

He was sorry he had spoken so testily; but it was wrung 
from him. When the servant was gone, he turned to Wini- 
fred, and said . 

" Alas ! my daughter, what a welcome home ! In what a 
manner does my son's bride enter her father's- house I " 

Winifred put her hands first upon his arm, and then let 
them creep up till they rested upon his shoulders ; and, raising 
herself to kiss him, she exclaimed-^- 

" O father ! father ! for I must call you so, is it not weU 
to come here in sorrow 1 Do you think that the greatest joy 
that earth could give could make you and Philip half so dear }" 

" And I," said the Earl in his secret heart . " and I am the 
cause of all this sorrow, of his guilt and trial, and of her deso- 
lation. Heaven pardon me! My sins are heavy; but the 
punishment is heavier than I can bear." 

Silent, then, for ^ moment, stood these two, the girl caress- 
ing and breathing words of comfort, of feith aSid hope, into 
the ears of the old man . ^when a soft knock was heard, and 
Mr Eoskell . for he would let no one else witness their sorrow 
-^presented the card of Mr Edgar Wade. The Earl started 
as if he had been stung. 



208 ONE OF TWO ; OB, 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

THREE TEA VELLERS IN KENT, 

Down through the garden of England^ after indulging in cer. 
tain dodgings, twistings, twirlings, and bendings in the neigh. 
bourhood of the Tower, of RatclifF Highway, of Wapping . 
redolent of sailors, tar, and shrimps. and of Greenwich, the 
astute G6sar Negretti and Mr Samuel Brownjohn^ St. P.C., as 
he signed himself, tracked their prey. 

Here and there, the two travellers heard of their prey having 
xuade a purchase, or having visited a friend ; and Mr Brown- 
John, in his researches, came upon the tracks of several excel- 
lently laid plans of smugglers . about the river side and else- 
where.and hugged himself with the possibility of laying a plot 
which should redound to his credit^ and to the beneiit of hia 
Majesty's customs. 

Still, by chance, or by the design of the wary Maltese . for 
the purpose, as we have said, of lingering out the capture . Mr 
Martin-^or, as C6sar more properly called him, Le Pdre Martin 
. ^was heard of continually, but never seen. They always 
arrived too late, just after the man had left ; or, if they came 
to a place where he was expected, they got there too soon, and 
the old Bolognese sea-dog» by accident or design, never came 
near their spider's web. 

It needed all the bull-dog tenacity of the dull but faithful 
Brownjohn to hold^on to what he called his " flying Dutch- 
man." But when he had him, he would hold him. Day by 
day, he felt more and more convinced of his guilt Now and 
then they heard of the man purchasing little articles, and pay- 
ing for them in old French money. 

" That^s what he took, NegrettL Do you see ? The Widow 
Martin had matters about her more precious than a few duU 
papers." 

" What 's that you said about papers, my Browujohn % " asked 
the Maltese, bringing down his movable scalp towards his 
sparkling eyes. " Papers ! " 

" I say," answered Brownjohn, " that the fellow laid his hand 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDR 209 

I . ^ n r - I II IBM 

on some swag, and burned the papers out of spite. Old Day- 
light has a theory about them." 

" Old Daylight ! Delightful old pump ! " 

The reader will remember that the Maltese was very fluent 
with his slang . which, indeed, is the case with most foreigners 
who learn a language, not by book, but orally ; whereas, they 
who learn it from the best authors speak with exceeding cor- 
rectness. 

" Pump ! do you call him 1 " said Brownjohn, generously 
defending his rival. " I tell you, Negretti, that he is hard to 
beat." 

" He has got hold of the wrong end of the stick now, my 
Brownjohn. Let me see, we shall have our bird to-morrow. He 
will pass over Eochester Bridge. You will seize him, Brown- 
john. Those old sea-dogs are spiteful ! " 

" Spiteful or not," said the Bow Street runner, " I '11 nab 
him. I'd seize the devil if I had a warrant for him . for bur- 
glary, let us say." 

*' Admirable, my friend," sneered Negretti. **The black- 
coated fellows say that he did break into Paradise. A fiction, 
my Brownjohn, made up by those priests. Priest, or parson, 
or preaching cobbler, they are all the same. I don't believe 
'em, Brownjohn. Now, do you believe in that childish thing, 
the devil, with his horns and his tail 1 " 

Here, as if the matter was full of the sweetest delight and fun 
to him, Mr Cesar Negretti burst out into a shriek of wild laughter, 
jumped about, cracked his finger joints, and seemed full of a 
mirth which no Englishman could understand. Foreign wit is 
brilUant, delightful, full of the best and finest charms, no doubt ; 
but foreign humour is a thing by itself . often obscene, often 
utterly profane, always obscure to any one but a native. 
Brownjohn looked up with a stare, and merely said. 

" Well, Negretti, if I did not believe in the devil before I 
saw you, I do so now. What a wicked imp you are ! You are 
young now. Wait until you are old. I have nothing to do 
with your belief, nor you with mine ; but this I may tell you . 
I believe in the devil sufiiciently to try to keep out of his 
way." 

" Ahf U beau diable I " shrieked Cesar. ** A beautiful fiction, 





210 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



a fine character. Should not I like to have been in his place 
with Madame Eve ! Eh, my Brownjohn 1 " 

" Stow your gammon," was the reply, " and come on.*' 

Thus with a sturdy, honest grunt, and a significant hint, 
Brownjohn fully conveyed to the Maltese that he did not desire 
to hear any more of his Biblical disquisitions, and away the 
two trudged. 

The October air was keen and sharp ; the yellow leaves fell, 
even before the wind shook them ; the atmosphere was heavy 
with the smell of autumn ; but here and there was found a tree 
full of yellow luscious pears, and others of rosy-cheeked apples, 
in the orchard fields ; while the hop-pickers, from London and 
the Kentish towns and villages, were moving backwards and 
forwards seeking for employment. 

C^sar Negretti was delighted with his wandering life ; and 
seized greedily upon what fruits he could get, to the great dis- 
gust of Brownjohn. It was somewhat characteristic of him, 
that before his hunger was satiated . or, rather, while that 
process was going on . he declared that the fruit was, as indeed 
it was, ripe and delicious ; when, however, he had had suffi- 
cient, he abused England and English fruit, and contrasted the 
vine-clad hills of the Bhine and South of France^ greatly -to 
the disadvantage of Great Britain. 

" A beastly country, my Brownjohn," he would say, if it blew 
cold and was rainy. " A brutal, cold, foggy, miserable country ! " 

"It's good enough for me," said the Englishman. "It 
grows about the best women, the prettiest girls, and the 
staunchest men as I know. We can stand against the world, 
and conquer it, Mr C^sar." 

Englishmen had not, in those days, lost the belief in their 
country; and were by no means disposed to admit that any 
foreign power had only to look at the white cliffs of Albion in 
order to conquer us. And yet the simple people had come 
through a very hard struggle, and had known what defeat 
was, as well as how costly victory is, even to the conqueror. 

" Bah ! wretched pride of the barbarian," crowed the joyous 
Maltese. "Who, when abroad, prides himself on being a 
Briton 1 When shall we get the better of that ? I tell you, 
my Brownjohn, this island is a miserable pigaty.!' 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 211, 

'* Well/' answered the officer, '^ just stop and look down at 
the pig's pound." 

He pointed to the city of Rochester . the Medway winding 
its shining way in the morning sun, and gliding joyously, it 
seemed, under the quaint arches of old Kochester Bridge, and 
beneath the walls of the Castle. A little beyond the Castle 
rose the tower of the Cathedral, a picture of the good old 
times when chivalry, strength, and manhood guarded the 
Church j while nestling round both were the bourgeois, whose 
gabled roofs, red tiled, quaintly pointed, and of various shapes, 
marked the lines of streets in the picturesque old town. 

Past this ancient bridge . at the foot of which were some 
curious old inns, at which the Canterbury pilgrims might have 
stopped . the Medway ran, broadening out^ until it joined the 
Thames; and at the confluence of these rivers there lay such a 
number of tall old three-deckers and fine first-rate frigates . 
no more in" these days to see any service . that the British 
heart of Brownjohn bounded with what a modern young 
gentleman . half snob, half cynic, and the third half, as Pat 
would say, coward . ^would call the exultation of " a British 
snob" 

** There," said the Bow Street runner, " there you are. If 
England is a pigsty, our young pigs have a pretty pound. 
Why, I am jiggered, if you was aboard one of those craft, and 
had some of the captains I Ve heard speak of, dashed if they 
would'nt give you a round dozen for speaking ill of their 
country; and" . ^here Brownjohn scratched the back of his 
ear with one hand, as he took his hat off." I 'd help 'em, I 
would." 

C^ar shrieked with ironical laughter, said that he knew 
very well what those captains were . ^he *d seen some of them 
at Malta ; and, finding that it annoyed Brownjohn, anathema- 
tised their conmion country, and wished that his Majesty's 
land and sea forces were in a much hotter place than any in 
which they have yet seen service. 

Thus they went down the long dip of Gad's Hill, and into 
the drawn-out, ugly, and poor street which forms one-fourth of 
the <' three towns"-. Btrood, Sochester, and Chatham. The 
man they sought had some business there, at Rochester, be- 



212 ONE OF TWO; OR, 



sides catching Medway smelts, even if it were tke season. 
But Brownjohn was destined to be disappointed. It seemed 
to him that he had never been so long in finding out a man 
who was wanted. 

And passing over this stage of our story, may be seen our 
young friend Patsy Quelch, to whom the predatory habits 
which are evolved in tracking any one seemed of the most 
natural kind. 

This Celtic "Arab," as they now call street boys, in philan- 
thropic slang, had grown manifestly thinner, but was in 
admirable health. His merry blue eyes twinkled with a weird 
kind of revenge when he thought of G^sar NegrettL There 
seems, as we have often witnessed since the good old days, an 
hereditary hatred between the Italians and the Irish, favoured 
sons of tiie Holy Father as they both are ; and Patsy^ who 
knew no more of Malta than a Cingalese monkey does of holy 
water, hated him for his country as well as himself. The 
migratory tribe to which Patsy belonged had branches in and 
about Field Lane, Cross Street, and other places running into 
Hatton Garden . then a most respectable street^ near which 
Mr Laing, the magistrate, gave his decisions; and one of 
these branches carried on a long war with the Italians, image 
makers and looking-glass manufacturers, who had already 
settled in Leather Lane. 

As for his country trip. Patsy enjoyed it as a Whitechapel 
boy likes hopping. He had no difficulty in picking up a Hving. 
The kindness of the poor to each other is proverbiaL '* If it 
were not for the poor," says the proverb, '' the poor would 
perish ;" and it is;, indeed, true. Patsy's merry face, his fanny 
brogue . ^which the humorous dog took care to intensify . his 
snatches of Irish song, and his London street tumbling, all did 
him good service ; and his stoiy, that he was after *' a father 
of his ! " the boy spoke as if he had many such near relations ; 
without any intention, however, of impugning the virtue of 
Mrs Quelch, a virtue common to Irish women, and who, in thai 
case, compare £ivoarably with both English and Scotdi ladies 
of their order. This story was readily bdieved ; it bdng no 
extraordinary occurrence for a boy to be separated £ron his 
parents in Uie finit-g^ering season ; or, indeed, at any tiniQ 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 213 



from hay-time to hopping, during which period the nomadic 
tribes of Whitechapel and St Giles's carried their strong arms 
and wilUng hearts into the southern counties. 

Sometimes Patsy slept in a bam, sometimes in a cottage, 
sometimes in a traveller's lodging-house . ^there being many 
such along the line he marched, where for twopence a-night 
he could snore away the hours comfortably, and from the 
window of which he now and again caught glimpses of Brown- 
john and Negretti, sometimes "footing it" on their legal 
mission, sometimes proceeding in the light cart of the rural 
constabulary . to whom, of course, an officer of Mr Brownjohn's 
standing was somebody to be looked up to . the London officer 
of poUce being, like every thing and body from London, regarded 
as superior in kind, if not in nature. It often happened that 
Patsy would venture even near enough to hear the conver- 
sations and plans of the couple. Upon information thus 
received, he would, perhaps, hasten forward to a given place; 
or he would linger behind, trusting to a lift from a friendly 
cart or the waggon of a benighted carrier to set him forward. 

He had heard of the meeting at Kochester Bridge ; and, true 
to his vengeance . hardly even defined to himself, although it 
was certain that he knew of something which Cesar Negretti 
had committed, contrary not only to good manners, but also 
to sound English laws . he was there ; and, climbing over the 
parapet, lay down and listened to the friends as they talked, 
lazily lounging and sunning, as if they were two unconcerned 
vagrants or wandering artists ; and heard Brownjohn's grum- 
bled discontent, when, in the close of the evening, no one 
came. 

"I tell you what, Negretti . ^you are leading us a pretty 
dance. I expect you and that foreign sailor you met at Green- 
wich have been trying to fool me." 

" By the holy Virgin ! " . here he crossed himself; for it was 
indicative of him that, although he laughed with the heartiness 
of a Voltairean at religion, he yet preserved these marks of 
piety . " By the Virgin and the blessed saints " 



" Which you don't believe in," said his companion, with a 
yawn. 
" Neither do you, my Brownjohn. You English are a nation 



214 ONE OF TWO; OB, 



of infidels, ihey saj abroad Yoa believe in noiihing bat St 
Bank-note and St Paiiiamenf 

'' If I don't believe in the bleased sainte,* ictamed the fiig- 
lighman, ** I don't airear by tliem. If joa have led me afbol's 
dance, yoa shall snoart for it . indeed yoa ahall; and yoa 
know it." 

''What does Gdsar Negretti fear}" 

This was said with the immense bombast of a coward, and 
vith as great a show of courage as if N^rettt were Julias 
Caesar himself. 

" Dont talk like a fool," returned Brownjohn, who had seen 
the hero in tears, wearing a yellow and greenidi complexion, 
and dissolved by the fear of law. *^You know that our hold 
is not so slight that you can get so easily away." 

" But, my Brownjohn," . ^here the Maltese opened his beau* 
tiful, lustrous black eyes, elevated his eyebrows, and sent his 
movable scalp to the fore-middle of his cranium, where the 
bumps of benevolence and veneration ought to have be^i . 
" but, my friend" 

" Don't call me your friend till you have proved yourself 
mine." 

" I will, I will . by Jupiter, by Heaven, or by the other 
place, if you like that better." 

Here Patsy, peeping through the old stone balustrade, 
descried some one coming towards the two. It was only a 
Kentish constable, to whom Brownjohn muttered a few words, 
and who then moved slowly oK 

" I thought it was my messenger," said Negretti. " He will 
be sure to come." 

" He does not look like it," said the Bow Street runner ; 
" not a bit as if he would. How do you know as he would 
cornel" 

'* Because, my Brownjohn, we are a kind of Freemasons ; 
we have secret societies in our little island; and I am one. 
"3e" . here he nodded towards Strood . "is one, too. I am 
much superior to him. I could condemn him to death, if ha 
betrayed or deceived me." * 

Mr Brownjohn's English and Philistine mental remark was, 
"You're a pretty fellow to be superior to any one;" but he 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 216 

said nothing. His experience had taught him something of 
these societies . carbonadoes, he called them, meaning, of 
course, carbonari . which existed, and do yet exist, among the 
inhabitants of Malta, Gibraltar, and other British possessions 
in the Mediterranean, and even reached Smyrna and India. 
He was meditating upon the difficult question as to whether 
Negretti was really serious or cajoling him, and wishing he 
had only been to an -English university, or college, as he phrased 
it j in which case he profoundly believed that he should have 
known every language in modem, as well as ancient, use . 
when the Maltese, listening as if to a cry, exclaimed . 

" Do you hear that, my Brownjohn. 'Tis he 1 " 

" He ! . who ? The man we want 1 " 

" No ; listen again. 'Tis Antonelli." 

The police officer listened ; and a low, shrill cry, like that 
of some sea bird, rose from the other side of the bridge, near 
the water's edge. 

" I hear it. What does it mean 1 A signal of course." 

" Yes ; the P^re Martin has escaped, as it seems to me ; but 
wait.'* 

Upon this C6sar put his hands . formed into something like 
a concave shell . before his mouth, and gave another low cry. 
In tone it was exactly like that just heard ; and its answer, 
varied somewhat, did not linger long upon the evening air. 

" He will come ! Wait now, my impatient friend, and see 
if I deceive you." 

Soon, Brownjohn saw a slouching, but lithe and active figure, 
not unlike that of Negretti himself. It was that of an Italian 
sailor, who certainly saluted C6sar very respectfully, and spoke 
some hurried words to him. 

" 'Tis as I thought," said that worthy, hurriedly, to Brown- 
john. Then, in Italian, " Go . that will do, Nellino ! " 

The spy, with another salute, slunk away; and soon disap- 
peared by the water-side. 

" Our old friend, whom we so much desire to see, my Brown- 
john, is beyond our reach." 

" Dash my buttons !. and we are fooling here 1 I '11 pinch 
you, by jingo, for this, Negretti 1 " 

" Oh, you impatient man ! Wait till I have finished. He 



216 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



is beyond our reach at present ; but he is in a trap. He has 
fallen down the river in a boat ; and will join his own boat, 
that is in Dover harbour." 

'< It must be a cockle-shell, to be there," sneered Brownjohn. 
" Are you sure of this 1 " 

" I swear it ! " 

" Come along, then. We are hungry, and frozen almost ! " : 

" We need not hurry. There are good inns at Eochester. 
We can go by coach in the morning." 

" Well, come to the Crown, then. There 's an old friend of 
mine there who keeps that." 

And so, again, after this Will o' the Wisp of a Dutch sailor 
. as the tall boy, described in the first chapter, called him. 
the two trudged. As they passed the house of the Five Poor 
Travellers who are nightly sheltered by the charity of the 
lamented Mr Watts, Mr Brownjohn looked up and read the 
inscription. 

" * Poor Travellers,' " he repeated, " ' not being Rogues or 
Proctors.' Well, he was a benevolent old gentleman I God 
rest his soul ! " 

" You are praying for the dead ; and yet you are a Protest- 
ant," sniggered the observant Maltese. "You are a riddle, 
you English." 

" May be ! Pray for the dead ! No, my lad, that 's useless : 
a man's actions pray for himself. The dead are dead ! " 

" Not always . Twn sempre . pas toujours/ " Thus, in three 
tongues, aiid with a chatter of his whole teeth, fluttered this 
eccentric Maltese to himself. ** Come along, my friend. Come, 
let us eat . let us drink I " 

One of the Five Poor Travellers, sleeping soundly as a tired 
babe that night, was Patsy Quelch ! 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

JtfX BROWNJOHN FINDS WHOM HE SOUGHT, 

Patsy Quelch, early the next morning, released himself from 
the charitable resting-place. provided by worthy Mr Richard 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 217 

Watts ; and, as he was neither a rogue nor a proctor, it is to 
be presumed that the charity was not abused. ' 

True to his purpose, he set forward towards Dover, and was 
soon overtaken by an early traveller, in a gig with high wheels 
and a black body of capacious dimensions, in which was a little 
cabinet full of drawers : the said drawers containing patterns 
of silks, ribbons, cloths, and other things dealt in by a London 
warehouseman. 

The enterprising bagman who drove this vehicle was fur- 
nished with a box-coat, with huge collar and lappels ; a red 
worsted comforter which mingled with his red whiskets ; box- 
bottomed trousers . that is, opened up to the calf of his leg, 
and fastened with brass buttons; Wellington boots; a flat 
hat, with curled sides, turned up with green for the sake of his 
eyes ; and a tremendous gig whip, with a silver-mounted handle 
and a holly stem, full of knots, and polished and varnished highly. 

This whip Mr Charley Folaire never laid on the back of his 
flea-bitten gelding, which went on at a rare pace, and never 
required flagellation. The thong was, therefore, twisted into 
a loop, with the thin end of whipcord . upon which cruel 
drivers were wont to put a small Dutton to stimulate their 
steeds . round the handle of the whip. 

Charley, who was of a sanguine disposition and of iron con- 
stitution, had an eye to his horse, as one of the first require- 
ments in driving a quick trade ; and having, at the Crown, in 
Bochester, overnight, been the chairman of the '* Commercials/' 
had succeeded in establishing so much harmony and good-fel- 
lowship, that he had seen three of his six companions under the 
table, had left two more disputing upon '' saving gra^e " and 
predestination . the gentlemen were of a serious turn, and 
religious over their wine, of which " commercial '* rules then 
obliged them to drink a good deal . and had parted with the 
sixth at the top of the stairs, after having been made the de- 
pository of some family secrets of a grave nature. 

" * In vino Veritas ! * " said Charley Folaire, who had been 
educated at Merchant Taylors'. " Poor fellow ! Who would 
have thought that his wife ran away with a lieutenant of 
Marines 1 TJmt 's why he hates the army. No wonder ! Now, 
then, to business/' 



218 ONE OF TWO ; OB, 



The sleepy boots was then summoned ; an early breakfast 
ordered ; and while C^sar Negretti and Sam Brownjohn were 
sleeping the sleep of innocence, and the six commercials re- 
covering from their harmonious evening, Mr Charley Folaire 
was in his gig, after having carefully looked to every buckle 
and strap of his harness, and adjusted the bit and curb of his 
horse. Then, after taking his reins, he settled himself in his 
warm box-coat, pulled up his red comforter, tucking the ends 
of his whiskers therein to keep his neck warm, and had his 
impatient steed walked quietly out of the gateway, so as not 
to wake his fellow-commereials. 

^' I '11 steal a march on them," said Charley, laughing quietly 
to himself, till his face became as red as his comforter. " By 
jingo ! they nearly gave me a headache, though ; only I always 
pay extra for good old stuff. Let me see. Ah ! thank goodness, 
as clear as a bell 1 " 

Here the bagman shook his head to ascertain that his ideas 
were all right; pulled in his horse, which, well-fed as its 
master, was fresh ; glanced down at the traces, and smoothed 
the sides of his gallant steed with the loop of his whip. 

He was soon past the long, unpleasant street which forms 
the town of Chatham ; and his horse, warming to its work in 
the bright, keen morning, was going with admirable pluck, 
pace, and steadiness, when, just as he was getting over the 
crown of a hill, and about to make a rare pace on a level 
stretch of a mile or «o, Charley, in smoothing his horse with 
his looped-up whip, and adjuring him to be steady, dropped 
that instrument of torture . ^in some hands, but never in his . 
and foiind it difficult to get out of his commercial throne, 
hampered as he was with a heairy box-coat, and driving a 
horse which thought very little of ten good miles an hour. 

He naturally looked round for help, " wohoaed," and wished 
his steed to stand still. But the extra feed given that animal 
on purpose to pass by the other commercials, had made it 
restive ; aud it is no easy task to drop out of a tall gig, and to 
hold a high-spirited horse at the same time. 

Luckily, just in time to prevent a disaster in the commercial 
world . for Charley Folaire was well-known on the road, and 
in London, as one of the smartest of country travellers . Mr 



A LEFT-HANDID BRIDE. 219 

Patsy Qaelch picked up the whip, ran with the speed of an 
Irish gossoon or English greyhound after the gig, and presented 
the pride of the road with his silver-mounted holly-stem 
stimulator. 

Charley was naturally grateful. He was as proud of his 
whip as a king might be of his sceptre ; always had it carried 
into the commercial room ; and boasted that there '^ was not 
such another fishing-rod on the road." 

" That *s a good boy," said Charley, gratefully. " The blessed 
horse might have pitched me on my head, as poor Tom Tape- 
son was killed last spring ; anc^ I fall heavy, I do. Why, I 
weigh twelve stone, or nigh upon thirteen. Eun to the head 
of the horse, lad, while I take off my glove and give you a 
shilling." 

" I 'd rather you 'd give me a lift, sir," said the boy, touching 
his cap. 

'' A lift. how far ? " 

" Oh, just a little way " said Patsy, in a winning, pleasant 
tone ; " as far as Dover." 

" Dover, eh ! D'ye call that a little way 1 Why it's some 
miles to Sittingboume, where I first do business." 

*^ Is it, sir 1 I didn't know ; but I want to go there." 

" What for 1 " 

"To see my" . ^here Patsy paused . "to see my uncle, sir; 
he *s a sailor." 

" Poor lad ! and my uncle was a sailor, too I Well, my lad, 
you seem a light weight." 

" I won't sit heavy, sir," said Patsy, as if willingness could 
take a stone or so of his weight away. 

Charley Folaire smiled at this. He was a good-natured fellow, 
fond of studjring character, and eager to get on, and tired of 
holding in his horse. 

" Here, jump up, then, my lad," said he, undoing the apron of 
his gig with his left hand, and giving it to the boy, who sprang 
upwards with a light step. 

" And now," said Charley to his horse." now. Chief Baron, 
you may step it." 

The Chief Baron did " step it ; " and Patsy, drawing on his 
imagination for his facts, told so moving a story to Charley, 



220 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



that Mr Folaire stood the young adventurer a good breakfast, 
while he himself ran in and out the various shops, and the 
Chief Baron had his legs rubbed down with a wet brush and 
his mouth refreshed with wet hay and half a pail of water. 
Patsy then again mounted ; and this time was a listener, while 
Charley Folaire told him of his own fortunes. How his father 
had been a commercial, and had ended his eventful life by 
slipping on an orange-peel coming down the steps of a chapel. 
How his principals. who were gentlemen of large means and 
undoubted probity . had regarded that death, as Charley him- 
self felt inclined to do, in the light of a martyrdom. How the 
Kev. Caspar M'Callem had preached a charity sermon, and had 
collected a 'kittle nest egg'' for the old woman. How the old 
woman took a lodging-house at the West End, and had been 
able to save sundry other little nest eggs. How the principals 
had ''laid their 'eads together, and good uns they were I" and 
put one of the children at Merchant Taylors' School, where he 
. ^no one less than Charley Folaire himself . had the blessing 
of a good education, and became a dab at cyphering. How 
the other boy was provided for in^ like manner, and became 
" a Blue." How Charley thought it an immense honour to be 
''a Blue;" and other matters. 

" The end of it all was," said Charley, as they drove through 
Canterbury, where there was another set of eager customers 
ready to inspect Charle/s patterns, and allow him to book his 
orders; "that those principals . God bless them! . ^had me 
apprenticed, whereby I'm a citizen of London; made me a 
buyer first, and then a traveller ; and now I get a larger screw 
than my poor dad did." 

" What *s a screw, sir 1 " said Patsy. 

" Screw 1" said Charley ; " sometimes it's ahorse, but in this 
case it 's the browns. my salary. ^paid quarterly, like a gentle- 
man, d 'ye see 1 And a <5ommission besides, which I shall add 
to to-day. They seemed eager at Sittingbourne. they'll be 
ravenous at Dover." 

"You're a very kind gentleman," said Patsy, truly enough; 
" and I 'm sure you deserve what you get." 

"And you're not a bad boy," returned Charley. "Now, 
you may learn from my story. 'cos, you see, it waa owing to 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 221 

my old dad . that the righteous man is not forsaken ! nor do 
his widow and chicks have to beg their bread." 

That was Charley's reading of the Scripture, and he was not 
far wrong. But one of the " chicks," who had grown to be 
"a good-sized old cock, with very red gills" . as Folaire de- 
scribed himself . ^took care to be always on the alert^ and 
always up early, for the purpose of picking up the worm* 

" Now, my lad," said Charley, as they drove into the court- 
yard of an ancient inn in Canterbury, '' this is the Fleur-de- 
Lys, one of the best inns in the county of Kent, if not the 
best ; and that is saying a good deal. Jump down and help 
me with those boxes. It 's a lucky day with me. I never do 
a good turn to a fellow-creature, but it brings good luck to me. 
Look here, lad ; you can earn a shilling by bringing a few of 
those boxes with me. Look sharp ! Sharp 's the word ! 
Some of those fellows, finding no fish at Sittingboume, may 
come on here hot-foot. But, Lord bless you ! there 's not one 
of 'em got such a piece of 'orseflesh as the Chief Baron." 

Folaire, although educated at Merchant Taylors*, had learned 
to drop his H's, and speak the bagman's lingo amidst the select 
circle he moved in. 

Patsy picked up his boxes, and rendered himself useful " in 
a jiffy," as Charley Folaire termed it ; and trotted in and out 
the shops, unstrapped the light boxes, and strapped them up 
again, as if he had been used to it. 

" Getting on in the world, Mr Folaire," said the shopman ; 
" you 've got an assistant." 

" Ye-es," said Charley. *' Smart lad. Taking him out for 
an airing, just to blow a little of the London smoke out of 
hiuL That 's it. Patsy . ^strap 'em up." 

" Why, the boy is Hirish, by his name," said the ^oung 
fellow. 

" That 's no worse nor no better than being a Cockney, is 
it, sir ? " asked Mr Folaire of the principal, who was selecting 
the goods. 

Patsy gave him a grateful look ; and the linen-draper smiled* 

"Blow nationalities, sir!" added Charley Folaire, as he 
booked a good order. "Any more winter cloth, sirl We 
shaU bftve it sharp this time. No ! thank you, sir, all the 



222 ' ONE OF TWO ; on, 



same. What I say is, let the best win. Why, I am descended 
from the Irish myself on my grandmother's side ; and my 
father's grandfather was a Frenchman. We 're a cross-breed, 
we English. That 's what makes us cut our eye-teeth so soon.'' 

Thus, engaged in trade, feasting at his patron's expense off 
such joints of cold beef, and such tankards of foaming Kentish 
ale as would have made the proprietor of the H6tel des 
Etrang^res stare and gasp, Patsy Quelch reached Dover some 
time before the mail coach got in ; very pleased with his kind 
friend, and sorry to part with him. When they came to the 
end of Snargate Street, Patsy got down . Mr Charley Folaire 
was going to put up at the Ship, not far from the harbour . 
and his wvr friend gave him his shilling, and said. . 

" Now, my boy, I 'm off again to-morrow round the coast ; 
and I'm busy to-night, for I've to write out my orders, and 
post them up by the night mail ; but if ever you want a lift 
again in London, where you come from, you come to me. 
There 's my address." 

He tore off one of the tops of the invoices belonging to the 
firm : " Cook and Selling, St Paul's Churchyard." 

" And my name 's Charley Folaire. Shall you forget it 1 " 

'''Deed no, sirl" said Patsy, his eye brightening as he 
spoke; for he had regarded Charley with a warm affection 
since he heard he was his countryman, or a small portion of 
one. "You 're a jule (jewel) of a gentleman, ye are." 

" Well, I 've got the makings of one, my boy," said he to 
Patsy. " Don't forget me, if you want me." 

" 'Deed I won't, sir, nor ever forget your name. Will the 
coach be in soon, sir?" 

" Yes ; it will drive into the market-place. There you are," 
said he, pointing in the direction ; '' and there 's the harbour, 
where you may hear about your uncle." 

So the two parted for a time. Patsy, whose sharp eyes had 
covered every inch of the road, and had failed to discover his 
two acquaintances, C^sar and Brownjohn, vanished to look 
after the coach, and was soon rewarded by seeing the two 
worthies descend, cold and cramped; the Maltese swearing 
against the horrid clunate, and Sam Brownjohn still silently 
intent upon his object. 



A LEIi'T-HANDED BRIBE. 233 



<* Let UB drink, my Brownjohn/' said O^sar ; *^ it will help to 
chase away this deidl cold." 

'< It has been a cold drive/' said the Bow Street runner, 
*' and I 'ye no objection. But, mind you, no loitering ! K we 
don't catch our man, 1 11 pinch you, Negretti." 

" Pah i there 's no fear. My friend dare not deceive me. 
Come on ! " 

And, swinging his bundle, the Maltese strode into the hotel 

Soon they emerged, Mr Brownjohn wiping his mouth with 
the back of his hand, a practice not unknown in the ** lower 
middle" classes, as' the papers have it. 

" Now, march ! " said Brownjohn, sternly, *' That 's the 
way to the harbour ! " 

Patsy followed, quietly and silently. 

At the muddy little harbour, with his back against a post, 
ruddy with sea breezes, his hair grizzled with time, and falling 
in ringlets over his ears, which were adorned with gold rings, 
stood a handsome, open-browed man, weather-beaten and 
wrinkled, blue-eyed, honest, and even venerable in look. He 
was speaking to his partner, who, in a French fishing-smack, 
was getting all ready to clear out. 

'' All ready, master," said the sailor on board, in French. 

" Then I '11 slip in, and be off. Heigho ! I am always sad 
as the dark night when I come to England 1 " 

" We '11 be better in France." 

" No, you won't ! " exclaimed a gruflf voice, putting a heavy 
hand on the shoulder of the old man. 

"Be peaceful, my friend," returned the old man, quietly. 
" Why shall I not go f Are you an officer of the marine law V 

" No ; he 's a land shark," simpered C6sar Negretti ; " and he 
wants you." 

" Why, in the name of Heaven 1 " 

" Because your name is the P^re Martin. I knew you at 
Malta." 

" G^sar, by the sacred Virgin ! " 

.' Yes, You are, then, the P^re Martin 1 " 

" I am. What then, gentlemen ? " 

'*^Then I arrest you for the murder of Estelle Martin, at 
Eeusal-Green, London." 



S24 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



''OHearen! ThegoodGod! Estelle !. my poor Eetelle !" 

The old man bent his yenerable head, and seemed to weep. 

^ Oh, those French ! . what aetors they are ! Now you are 
all right, my Brownjohn. Take mnch care of him. I 'U go 
off to seek some ship, to find my warmer home.'' 

As Cisar said these words, up limped no one less than Pat<sy 
Qaelch, singing out, as if his pent-up eagerness burst suddenly 
from him . 

'' Don't let him go, Mr Officer ! Don't, please ! Only look 
what he's got in that there bundle of his'n I " 



CHAPTER XXX. 

" /TEXE LAY THE VICTIM: THUS WAS DEALT THE BLOW.'* 

When Old Daylight, otherwise Mr Tom Forster, heard his 
favourite and adopted heir declare that he would defend Lord 
Wimpole with his life, nothing more appropriate rose to his 
lips than his old exclamation, '< Poor human nature ! " But, 
on mature reflection, he thought that this would not do. So 
he walked up to the mantelshelf, gazed on the portrait of Lord 
Brougham, remarked on the chiselling of that portentous nose, 
and, taking out his red bandana, blew his own. 

The glittering, clever, weary eyes of the barrister followed 
the old man about the room, also without remark. Mr Forster 
stopped opposite the bouquet, and examined it as if he were a 
florist ; but he saw no flowers. He then paused, as if reading 
with intense interest the red labels of a four-volume copy of 
Blackstone's " Commentaries on the Laws of England," a book 
then regarded as a comer-stone of all that was and is precious 
in law ; but he hardly saw the red label and the gold letters. 

Tom Forster was engaged in a difficult matter. When a 
conscientious man finds that his friend and companion is bent 
upon that which he knows to be foolish, and yet that he, the 
conscientious one, approves, because it is noble, or romantic, 
or virtuous, then such a one would be situated precisely as was 
Tom Forster. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 225 



" So," he said at last, after in vain seeking for a point upon 
which to attack him . "so, my dear Edgar . I beg your pardon, 
Mr Wade." 

What is it that prompts us to call those whom we love by 
their Christian names, as if those names brought them closer 
to our hearts ] "Is it,'* thought this simple old fellow . " is it 
because the names have been hallowed and rendered dear at 
the font of Christ 1 It may be so." 

" Pardon ! " returned Edgar . " as if I had to pardon you, 
my dear sir ! Call me what you like." 

" Noble soul ! " thought Old Daylight, hardly remarking the 
cold, stem voice. "But I won't take liberties . in fact, I 
ought to call him, * my lord.' " Then, continuing, he added, to 
himself, " No ; I know my place, and who I am. I can't be 
much otherwise. He moves in one place, and I in another." 

" Well," he said, " we will speak in a business way. You 
say that you intend to defend the so-called Lord Wimpole 1 " 

" I do, as well as I cau." 

"Why sol" 

" Because I believe him innocent. 

" And I believe him guilty." 

"You do," said the barrister, with a sad, slow smile, in 
which his eyes took no part. " You see, /don't ; at leasts I 've 
no belief at all in the man*s guilt or innocence. I keep my 
belief in suspense. What business has a man . a thing that 
crawls between heaven and earth for a few years . ^to have be- 
Uef at all 1 " 

Old Daylight looked up at the clever gentleman who said 
this so coldly, with astonishment. 

" Of course, Lord Wimpole may have done this murder. So 
may you ! " 

Old Forster started. Being a man that planted a firm foot 
as to belief, he no more believed in the possibility of commit- 
ting murder himself, than he did of toiling up to the top of the 
Monument and committing suicide. 

" Well," he said, aloud, " it seems to me that you are draw- 
ing fine distinctions. Something like that very clever bishop, 
was it not ? " 

" Bishop Berkeley," explained Edgar. 

P 



32ft ONE OP TWO j OR, 



** Yes. I read about him in Johnson. I do a great deal of 
reading while waiting in my office in Homer Street, I can tell 
you. Well, he said there was no matter. Perhaps he 's right : 
we are all but mere emanations from the Spirit " . ^here he put 
out his leg . " but, for my part, that looks very much like flesh 
and blood and Hessian boot ; and I Ve known that above fifty 
years !" 

" Quite Johnsonian in your refutation of Berkeley," sneered 
the barrister, with a yawn. 

"So," continued Daylight, " I might have murdered Estelle 
Martin ; but I did not. I might have introduced that horrid 
form of murder we call ' burking,* for which Mr William Burke 
was quietly tucked up at Edinburgh last January, was it 
not ? " 

'^ It was," said Edgar Wade. " What a curious fellow that 
was, now ! He has given rise to a new word. Quite an inven- 
tive genius." 

" D his genius, and his invention too ! " cried Old Day- 
light, impatiently. ** I never did admire a man who was only 
celebrated for crime. But let us talk of our own business. At 
a small fire^ one must roast one chicken at a time.'' 

** Well, then," continued Edgar Wade, " you believe Lord 
Wimpole guilty 1" 

Old Daylight nodded. 

" But that I never do such a thing, I would swear to it," he 
said. 

"Yes, yes," returned Edgar, thoughtfully; "you would 
swear to it, because it is your business to believe, and to believe 
strongly. You see, I have not any business to believe in the 
matter. I do not want the young fellow to be proved guilty ; 
for, among gentlemen, Mr Forster, there is such a thing as the 
honour of the famUy. I should wish that my family were kept 
free from any stain like that" 

" That being murder," thought Old Tom Forster. « Well, 
that *s a nice way of putting it." 

" You see, actually and altogether, this new misfortune which 
has happened' to my family is not a benefit to me. The house 
of Chesterton has a proud lineage ; and I should rather that it 
alwavs held up its head. I don't care to have spots upon my 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 227 



family shield, Mr Forster; other people may not be so 
particular." 

" How soon Pride grows ! " thought the old man. " Well, / 
don't blame him. He will fill his place well." 

" And for Lord Wimpole there is much to be said. I should 
not like to be removed, as he has been ; and just, I hear, upon 
the eve of some proud alliance." 

" There 's just the matter why I do not want you to mix 
yourself up in this affair. Lord Wimpole has had provocation 
enough, if you like. Let affairs take their usual course. Let 
the family solicitors pick out the most eminent Old Bailey 
barrister . ^let us say, Serjeant Bellingham or Sir John Lyover ; 
and let them do what they can for him. It will be very 
romantic for one brother to defend another ; but beyond that 
fact . ^and a gentleman, Mr Wade, never needs to be romantic 
. I must say that I do not see any good in what you propose 
to do. You see, everything is dead against Lord Wimpole. 
Upon a certain day, you made him acquainted with the fact 
that he must lose the place and fortune that he had fondly 
thought his own ; and, in quick succession of this knowledge, 
this woman is foimd murdered." 

" But that does not prove he did it." 

" With his own foil, with his own glove, with his own foot- 
step near the door of her dwelling : on that I '11 be sworn ! " 

"Yet all that does not prove that he struck the blow." 

"Who else could? Under so sudden a provocation, what 
aid would he be able to procure ? What accomplice would be 
ready to his hand ? Who has an interest in the murder but 
himself] Pray consider all this, Mr Wade I " 

" I have considered it all." 

"So have I," said Old DayHght, "and I pity him." 

" I do not," said Edgar, coldly. 

"I pity him so much," urged Old Daylight, "that I would 
not have you defend him. You would do little good. The 
whole facts of the case . of your relationship, of your father's 
folly and crime . ^would come out before an inquisitive public 
and a vulgar jury. Your devotion would be called romantic 
and heroic ; your speech would be applauded as eloquent ; the 
judge himself might compliment you ; but, for all that, the 



228 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 

judge would sum up on the evidence, and Lord Wimpole, as 
you call him, would be cast for death." 

Here Old Daylight paused, and passed the well-known 
bandana over his speaking countenance. 

" But his father would interfere. He is powerful with tho 
Prime Minister, his Grace the Duke of Wellington ; and he 
would be pardoned. Why, a cousin of his is the Viceroy of 
Ireland, the Duke of Northumberland himself." 

*' Clear your mind of all that," returned Old Forster. "The 
Duke, however powerful he may be, is just, and would no more 
pardon him than he would hang himself. He would withstand 
the people . as he has withstood them . when he thinks they 
are Wrong ; but, when he knows they are right, he would no 
more act against them than he would have run away from the 
French. Moreover, Old Nosey, as the Eadical papers say, is a 
man ; his worst enemies cannot say that he is not. If Lord 
Wimpole had killed you, he would have forgiven him ; but as 
he has killed a woman, why, he would hang him himself." 

'* The matter, however, does not rest with him, but with the 
Home Secretary and the King." 

" God bless his Majesty, George the Fourth," cried the old 
Tory, reverently, " he is not so bad as people say, and has a 
kind heart ; but, let me tell you, that when Arthur, Duke of 
Wellington, is in command, he is captain of the ship. And," 
added he, parenthetically, '^ that *8 the man I like, and that the 
English like, too." 

" I don't see how I should damage his cause," said Edgar 
Wade, after a pause, and with a curious gleam darting from his 
dark eyes. " I should not be romantic, nor eloquent, nor that 
sort of thing. You see, a prisoner's counsel may not address 
a jury on his behalf. though that will come too, when the good 
old times, of which you are so proud, shall have passed away." 

" And of which you will be proud too," returned Old Forster, 
rubbing his large, strong hand over his short hair and capacious 
head. " You see, Mr Wade, every grey hair here has gone far 
to making me Conservative, as the new word calls us. But 
counsel take advantage of the judge, and work upon the senti- 
ments of the jury. I don't see that a long speech, full of flum- 
mery, will be of much benefit, even in confusing the jury, who 



^ 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 229 



should pronounce upon evidence alone. However, I will say 
no more. It is very generous of you to resolve as you do. 
But, you see, five and twenty years' experience, and much 
waiting in my little hole of an office in Homer Street . ^you 
know / did not bring my business home with me . have made 
me calmer and colder than you are. But you will act upon 
your impulses. You feel pity for Lord Wimpole, and for your 
father." 

" Pity ! " said Edgar Wade, bitterly, looking round his 
chambers, with a feeling of weariness and of disgust. " Pity 
for those who have kept me out of my birthright . ^who have 
confined me for years to such a dog-hole as this 1 " 

Old Daylight looked up with surprise. To him, to have sat 
with books containing the essence of judicial wisdom . to have 
been of the Honourable Society of the Inner Temple . to have 
had the chance of becoming a Bencher in course of time ; or, if 
successful, to have worn a Serjeant's coif ; or, possibly, to have 
become a judg^ . was the acme of good fortune. 

Mr Wade noticed his look, and smiled. 

" You see," he added, " you do not understand everything 
in the office in Bow Street, and you do not know the disgust 
which I feel for these dry old fathers of the law, bound down 
by precedent, and never deciding but as some dry old fool 
decided before them. Pah ! I ain sick of them. I want to see 
the great world. I have been despoiled of my birthright; 
cribbed, cabined, and confined to a narrower, meaner sphere. 
Obliged to consort with mean interests, and meaner minds. 
And all because an ambitious, aristocratic father chose to sup- 
plant me by some one else." 

" Here 's human nature again," thought Old Daylight. " How 
eloquent we can grow upon our own wrongs ! " 

Then he spoke again. 

" But after all, Edgar, Lord Wimpole did not injure you." 

"Yes, he did . ^unconsciously, 'perhaps; but his very exist- 
ence was an injury. Why did he push me from my seat ] He 
has done me an irreparable injury ; but for him, what might I 
not have been ] " 

" He may take the same view with regard to you. Don't 
you think that." . . ... 



230 ONE OP two; or, 



'< I don't see it. Nothing can compensate for my lost youth. 
He has enjoyed all the advantages that, but for him, I should 
have had. And yet "^here the barrister spoke with gentler 
feeling, and with some regret-. '^ when I saw him, he spoke me 
fair, and honestly, and nobly. Poor Philip, what a trial he 
must have had ! " 

** That 's just it. Poor human nature ! You see, Mr Wade, 
that, upon his first hearing of this terrible news, he was ready 
to act upon his fresh, generoud impulses ; and upon the honour 
which his education had instilled in him." 

^'Exactly. And he will continue to do so; or rather, he 
has continued 1 " 

Edgar Wade put this . ^it seemed almost purposely, although 
the words dropped from him quite naturally . ^as a question ; 
as if he asked from his elder and companion his opinion of the 
matter. 

** That 's just where it is. When you know human life as 
well as I do, you will see somewhat more clearly." 

" Conceited old party ! " thought Edgar Wade. " How these 
old folks do pride themselves upon the few short years they 
have passed prior to our existence ! " 

" Upon his first impulse he was, I will grant you," continued 
Old Forster, getting up and putting down a square-tipped 
forefinger, so as to make himself more impressive, "generous, 
right-minded, and even noble. Then you leave him to reflec- 
tion ; and the drear reality of loss of birth, position, fortune, 
is borne in upon him. He finds the sacrifice too great. He 
casts about him ; remembers the letters you have shown him, 
and that they were upon your unsupported evidence. . He 
thinks again, and remembers that there is but one witness 
alive whose testimony is worth anything. His father may 
deny those letters . they may be but forgeries. He seeks this 
woman . a venal creature, as her history proves. He goes 
there without confessing his purpose, even to himself. He 
will, let us say, temporise with her ; perhaps bribe her, and 
get her to be on his side." 

" It might have been so," uttered Mr Wade, looking with 
those dark, distant, feeling eyes of his across Garden Court 
and at the old Temple Hall. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 231 

'* It was so, no doubt. The devil never puts the worst face 
upon the temptation that he offers us. He bids us seek for 
truth, that he may make us embrace a lie : to clear our innocence^ 
he plunges us into a blacker crime. Poor human nature ! " 

'^ Poor, indeed," uttered the barrister, in a meditative sort 
of voice. '' Perhaps it was, indeed, as you say, although I don't 
want to think so ; and shall, indeed, dismiss all that you have 
urged against Philip Stanfield from my mind.'' 

''What a generous, clear soulJ" thought Old Daylight. 
Then he continued . '' It was so. Obe3ring, then, this second 
impulse, which came to him when the first had grown faint 
and weak, he seeks this woman." 

" You speak as if you had been at his elbow." 

" It is nothing but a clear induction from facts afterwards 
ascertained," said the inductive philosopher. ''He seeks this 
woman. He finds her alone. He ascertains that what you 
have said is true; that she ha^ papers which corroborate yours; 
that she is possibly not so much inclined to be upon the old 
lord's side as she was ; that time has made her reflect ; and 
that, before she dies, she would fain make reparation and a 
clean breast of it, as these people call it ; as if you could stain 
marble with ink for years, and wash it clean in a day. Then, 
sitting alone and waiting in her parlour while she gets refresh- 
ment, the temptation comes." 

" Poor Philip," murmured the barrister, in a tone which was 
sad but convinced. '* My poor deeply tried brother ! " 

"The temptation comes : it is too strong for him . ^for the 
devil had prepared him in case of accident, you know : he 
yields to the temptation. The lonely place, the solitary woman, 
the want of help. all are in his favour for the crime. He 
springs hurriedly on her . pulling the cloth with him as he 
rises . and stabs her. One blow is enough. She falls ; and 
he is a murderer." 

The barrister walked up and down his room, in great agita- 
tion, as the old philosopher described the scene as if he had 
been present. He said nothing; but his face expressed sorrow 
for the criminal so suddenly tried. Then he muttered . 

" Say no more, Mr Porster, do not convince me too fully of 
my brother's gdlt." 



232 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



The inductive philosopher had spoken. 

" That 's how the murder was done," he added. " Now you 
know as much as I do." 

Here the old man applied his bandana; for he, too, had 
been agitated by his recital. 

"And yet you would hang that man; that grievously 
tempted man ? " 

»* Mr Wade," said the philosopher, stoutly, " since you put 
it to me, I would. Men are made to resist a temptation, not 
to go out and meet it. My two books are the Bible and 
Shakespeare. One says, * Being in the way, the Lord met 
me.' Awful, is it not ? What if it should be, ' Being in the 
way, the devil met me T " 

" You must not apply texts in that fashion, Mr Forster," 
interjected Edgar, in a low voice. 

" The other says . now listen ! . 

' How oft the sight of means to do ill deeds 
Makes iU deeds done.* 

There 's the whole history of crime which has puzzled even 
judges," said the old fellow, as if judges were the essence of 
wisdom. 

" I shall defend my brother still," said Edgar Wade. 

He rose, and signified that the conference was at an end. 

Mr Tom Forster took his hat ; and, like one foiled in an 
ardent desire, sighed as he walked up to the beautiful bouquet, 
and smelled the flowers. 

.* Ah 1 " said he, " how grateful will she be for these ! You 
are a noble fellow, Mr Wade. Will you bring them with 
you 1 " 

He was thinking of poor Madame Eugenie Wade, lying 
almost unconscious. 

" No ; not now. I am going to call on Lord Chesterton. 
He wishes to see me." 

^' Phew ! " whistled Old Daylight ; and then he thought to 
himself, as he passed through the office of the industrious 
Scorem, who kept scratching away with his pen, " What new 
complication is this ? Edgar is not out of the wood yet I " 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDK 233 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

" so HERE WE MEET A T LAST ! ART THOU MY SON 9 " 

When Edgar Wade lifted his eyes, which he had cast down in 
great humility, he saw before him one of the most beautiful 
young women he had ever seen, standing by the side of a 
stately gentleman . his father. What relation the lady was 
to Lord Chesterton, or whether she bore any, he knew not. 
He saw that she clung to him with confidence of support ; and 
that, in her turn, her presence instilled some confidence into 
him. 

Furthermore, he could see, from those dark and dreamy 
half-closed eyes of his, that the Earl was much shaken and 
troubled what to do. Nay, that his own presence there was 
not the most welcome in the world. 

Old Daylight's warnings came back to him. 

"Stand on your own right, Edgar Wade," said the old 
gentleman. . " Mind you do not parley with the Earl ; those 
people know of matters that you and I do notJ* 

While he resolved these things in his mind . quick, agile, 
and flexible that mind was . the young lady, very strong, very 
straight, and very determined, said, with emphasis. 

" And this is Mr Edgar Wade, is it ?" 

" Yes, my dear," said the Earl, putting up his soft, white 
hand, deprecatingly. . " Let me introduce you to him, and 
then you can speak." 

" Then I can be spoken to ; but not until after introduction," 
thought Edgar Wade, shutting his teeth. " Well, I suppose 
it is the right way in this proud circle." 

" My lord," returned the lady, her clear voice ringing in the 
large stately room, "I will introduce myself to Mr Edgar 
Wade." 

How curious is sympathy, with its twin sister, or its second 
self, antipathy ! When Edgar Wade saw the lady standing 
]>y the Earl's side, "a presentation," as Mrs Preen would 
have called it, passed through him, and he saw there would, 
"necessarily, be some antagonism. On her side, Winifred 



234 ONE 07 TWO ; ORy 



thought there was a certain cause for caution, and she ex- 
perienced an undefined nervous agitation. Her hair, as the 
French would say; '^ dressed itself on her head/' and her voice 
became deeper, and somewhat more unmanageable. 

To say the truth, all very strong emotion was with Winifred 
unmanageable. She was a creature of impulse, and of very 
admirable and true impulses, too. It is only those cold and 
calculating people, who do not know the power and truth 
which reside in impulse, who are so ready to blame it. 

This deep, rich, unmanageable voice then said, seeming 
strange even to Winifred herself. 

'^ I will introduce myseK to Mr Edgar Wade. I am the 
wife of Philip Stanfield, whom he would dispossess. I am 
the Viscountess Wimpole ! " 

The histrionic feeling which underlies all true passion . 
hence, when people understand deep emotion and passion, 
they understand good acting ; when they are hypocrites, slight 
things, fribbles, and fools, they laugh at tragedy and sneer at 
Shakespeare . came out very strongly here. Mrs Siddons 
might well have studied the firm pose, the elevation of figure, 
and the honest assertion of her rights, that the lady conveyed 
by her manner. If he . ^her husband himself . ^and all that 
were around doubted of his rights, she did not. 

Thus it often happens. Long after a man knows he is 
beaten, and has given himself over to the devil or to ill-luck, 
his friends believe in him, in his talent, his energy, his good- 
ness ; as the horse that will only reach the goal to lose the 
race, and who feels defeat in every flagging nerve, has, doubt- 
less, his eager backers as he skims the turf and flees along the 
ground. 

The Earl raised his head a little, and said . 

<< The lady asserts the truth. She is ''.then he faltered . 
" the wife of my dear son . ^Philip ! " 

" Viscount Wimpole," said the lady, proudly. 

She would not bate one jot of her rights. Poor little souL 
If all had gone happily with her, and she had become suddenly 
the Countess of Chesterton, she would have hidden her coro^ 
net beneath the sofa-squab, and put rank out of sight. But 
when any one forcibly put away her due, she fought bravely 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 235 



ftnd tenaciously; would never know when she was beaten; 
and would die, but never surrender . as Cambronne ought to 
have said, but never did say, of the French Guards at Waterloo. 

But this brave front did not seem to add anything like a 
corresponding bravery to the lady's father-in-law. Lord Ches- 
terton watched Winifred with a troubled air ; and Edgar Wade, 
having nothing really to say to his fair enemy, merely bowed, 
and remained awkwardly silent. 

<*My dear," said the Earl, "I think that Mr Edgar Wade 
will understand your position and" 

" I know so little of the family," said the barrister, stiflBiy, 
" that I was not aware that Lord Wimpole was married." 

*'The affair is quite recent," interrupted the Earl, still 
holding up his hand to Winifred, " or the world would have 
known." 

He said this with his old air; and when the Earl of Ches- 
terton spoke in that way, there was no one who would be' bold 
enough to question him. 

Edgar bowed again, and said . 
\ "I can only congratulate his lordship." 

The word seemed to carry with it a satire, marked by an 
inflection of the voice. There was a courtliness of manner as 
he spoke . ^and in those days people did not hesitate to pay 
direct compliments; but Winifred did not much relish the 
speech, and still looked at him defiantly. 

" I am come here," added Edgar, " to see if I can be of ser- 
vice.of any service to his lordship, and to the Earl, his 
father." 

" We know that, sir," returned Lord Chesterton ; " and we 
are infinitely obliged to you. Lady Wimpole will perhaps 
retire, and then you and I can talk more freely over the sad 
misfortune which has befallen my son." 

" I am here by your desire, my lord," said Edgar, firmly, 
'^ to defend him to the last effort of which I am capable." 

Here Winifred again spoke, with still the same unmanage- 
able voice, the same earnest feeling and defiant tone. 

^* You have congratulated me, sir," she said ; ** and I con- 
gratulate you upon your determination. In defending Philip, 
you defend an innocent gentleman, most wrongfully, most 



236 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



wickedly accused. But look that you do defend him, Mr Edgar 
Wade. It was you tiiat first brought misfortune and conster- 
nation into this house ; you it was who disturbed his happiness, 
and threw down his hopes of peaceful ease and honourable life. 
He has told me all. Unsuspicious and generous to a fault, he 
may admit your claim ; but I have another duty to perform. 
I am very weak, very young . I do not know the world ; but 
I hope I know something better and higher, and I trust in that 
God who will not see the innocent a prey to greedy ambition, 
nor entirely neglect those who have no resource but their 
prayers and tears." 

And here the tears, unwillingly to Winifred, made them- 
selves visible in those proud, honest eyes of hers. She sup- 
pressed them, however ; and, turning to the Earl, said . 

" And now, my lord, I will leave you with Mr Edgar Wade. 
Pray be calm, and be hopeful. I am full of hope. This is 
but an ugly dream. I wiH remain in my husband's home. 
Summon me if I can help you at any time. While you are 
debating, I will go and pray." 

Tenderly the old nobleman kissed his daughter's forehead ; 
tenderly he gave her to the custody of Mrs Preen, ordering 
that estimable lady to make ready . as if every room at Ches- 
terton House was not always ready . ^the Countess's room and 
boudoir ; and then, closing the door, he stood with his back to 
it, torn with cruel recollections, and gazing at his son, Edgar 
Wade, 

The young gentleman was somewhat startled at the appari- 
tion of Philip's wife. He knew that, in his profession, it was 
always better to fight a battle without any womanly encum- 
brance ; and he was not struck by any particular warmth in 
the reception which his father gave him. 

Much as he knew of the world . and the barrister had had 
the education which low birth and iron fortune give a man. . 
he had not got rid of his illusions. At thirty, few men have 
cast them away ; and egotism . or egoism, which is a better 
word . lies so close around the human heart, that he deemed, 
after making his discovery, that the Earl would have welcomed 
him as a long-lost son. He forgot how unwelcome to Lord 
Chesterton the appearance of that son was, and that the baby 



A LEFT-HANDED BRmE. 237 

was only dealt with as a ready implement to make the fortane 
of his other son. He imagined . ^with that latent belief in the 
triumph of truth and right which even bad men, not to speak 
of good men, always have . ^that the Earl would have hastened 
to make apparent a righted wrong ; that the pretender would 
march out, and that the true heir would have marched in. 
Was he very simple 1 Do not we all flatter ourselves that our 
own fortune will be an exception to that of others ? Does it 
not require a great deal of beating to make the sanguine and 
the vain-glorious know that they are beaten ? So dull are we 
as to other persons' feelings toward us, that we are surprised 
when we discover that we have epemies, and that anybody can 
dislike us. 

The old nobleman stood for some time looking at his son, 
and Edgar stood opposite him, returning that look. At last, 
the elder of the two spoke. 

"Well, sir'' . the old man's voice trembled . *'you see the 
beginning of the end of a sad history. The world knows 
nothing as yet " . 

" And shall know nothing, my lord . or little," said Edgar 
Wade, eagerly and fiercely. " Why should it know ? All this 
that has passed, is past. It is ours. We can keep it here." 

He clenched his hand and tapped his breast as he said this. 

The Earl waved his two hands before his face quickly, as if 
to dispel some cloud that dulled his sight. 

" Tut, tut ! " he said. " I thought you were a man of law 
. a man of the world. The world will be sure to know ; and, 
if it does not know, will talk and talk, will gibber and mow, 
and make mouths at ancient houses. I have done with secrets. 
Let it know all. The thing began in love, and ends in blood. 
A pretty beginning, and a sad ending ; but common enough . 
common enough." 

Then he paused, and seemed to grow more weak and unde- 
cided ; when, again summoning up something of his old self, 
he cried, petulantly . 

" But you must prove all you assert. How do I know that 
you are what you say you are ? You cannot carry our house 
by assault. Philip has been weak. JEJe should have had me 
by his side." 



^^- ONE OF TWO j OR, 

238 



« Mr lord. my lord ! " returned Edgar Wade, in a stately 
.^^- u this IB not worthy of your lordship, nor worthy of 

manner » .m.-v n 

your son, my brother Philip." 

Ther0 was so much feeling in these words, that the old 
nobleman was touched, and came forward more humbly than 
before ; and, pointing to a chair for his companion, sat down. 

«I am,I hope," said Edgar Wade, "a gentleman. Your 
lordship's iron will, in dispossessing me for so long of my righter, 
could at least have no effect upon those instinctive feelings 
which . ^perverted, it may be, in you . were still the inherit- 
ance of my race. There are men, I hope, and many, who, 
whatever misfortunes they may be subjected to, are yet gentle- 
men by instinct, in spite of low surroundings and adverse 
fortuna" 

<< I am not unaware of the second, and far worse, misfortune 
which has befallen our house. Our house," murmured the old 
Earl, repeating the words, " Yes, our house." 

<* Hurried, possibly . as I have heard suggested by one who 
is an adept in such cases " . 

The old Earl forgot at once what he had said about letting 
the world know all. We are so very brave before the worst 
comes to the worst I 

" You have not been talking, sir," he cried, angrily, " of the 
misfortunes of our family ? People will know it soon enough, 
without hearing it from one who professes to defend it." 

" But, in order to defend it," returned Edgar, with dignity, 
" I must know thoroughly all that it is accused of. I have 
been speaking only with him who knows. -and who, indeed, 
planned . the arrest of your other son." 

** My other son . poor Philip ! " 

The wits of the Earl . confused with his own guilt ; the 
trouble of his son's wife ; the guilt, as he firmly believed, of 
his son ; and the Gordian knot of misery which was around 
them all . seemed to be trembling. He stretched out his 
hands, as if for help. Edgar caught them ; and, pressing them 
to his breast, knelt at his feet. 

"My father! . ^my poor father!" he said, "trust in me. 
Believe me, I am your son ! " 

" You are not my Philip," returned the Earl. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 239 

And then he looked at him more fondly ; noticed his dark, 
eager eyes ; his broad brow ; the lines of anxiety and care ; 
and in his breast there came the flutterings of a long-banished 
affection. Paternal love is a great mystery to most men. 
Some banish it altogether ; many seem never to have any ; 
with others, it is as strong as a passion, and makes them as 
weak. The Earl had poured all his, it would seem, into one 
current; but now the time came when nature would assert 
herself, and require some amends to be made for past cruelty. 

" You are my son ; and, if all be true, my heir ; entitled, 
after myself, to all the state and honour of the Ghestertons," 
murmured the old man, " of which I have sought to dispossess 
you." 

" Speak not of it^ my father," said Edgar. " If I retain my 
rights, am shall be forgotten. Are we not all weak and fal- 
lible 1 Have we not each of us something to ask forgiveness 
for I " 

He passed his hands again over those weary eyes, and pressed 
upon them, as if he would keep back the past. 

" I have been cruel to you, to be kind to him," babbled the 
Earl in his grief, his heart opening as he spoke ; '^ and see how 
Providence has punished me ! I would have died to save him. 
I became guilty to dower him in this life, only with power, 
place, a career for his talents and his ambition ; and . cruelly 
mocking my state, grinning at my feeble power . Time comes, 
and strips my plottings bare, and dyes my Philip's hands in 
blood." Then the sacred story of the Son of David's love 
came back upon the old nobleman, and he cried, " * Absa- 
lom ! . ^my son, my son ! ' " 

The EarPs head was bowed, and tears^ unwonted tears . 
again trickled down his cheeks. Edgar Wade had risen, and 
regarded him curiously. *' This man," he thought, " will never 
love me." 

But presently, while he was yet a victim to sad thoughts, 
the old nobleman startled him by saying . 

" The worst has happened. You are sure of those letters] 
Indeed, I need not ask . ^they were mine. The plot was mine ; 
the guilt was mine . and the punishment. He must not dieJ* 

" He shall not," said Ederar. " We will save our house that. 



240 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



The law has many ways and many chances ; and, although the 
eyes of the world may be on us, we will save the family that 
shame. But we must begin early." 

Save the family . not Philip ! Apparently the answer 
satisfied the Earl, for he grasped Edgar's hands with much 
fervour. 

" We will work together. I have been unjust to you. This 
taint will cover Philip for ever ; it is but right. Had he . ^poor, 
unhappy boy! . But now our family must acknowledge its 
rightful heir." 

And then the Earl, changing to another phase of thought, 
said . . 

"Your education has not been neglected, I presume, 
although I never heard from Mrs Wade, with whom you were 
placed" 

" His lordship knows how to use his words," thought Edgar. 

" You can ride ? " 

"I am a good horseman, your lordship," answered Edgar, 
with a smile. 

" Shoot, fence, box ? " 

'^ Those accomplishments are not unknown to me." 

"And you are very well known at the Bar. Umph ! . legal 
knowledge will be useful in the House. We have hard times yet 
to come upon us, notis autres . we whose position others envy." 

Then, again, suddenly he turned upon him . 

" And Philip . you can put yourself in his place 1 You want 
to know all, if you defend him ; but I should advise you to 
leave it to others." 

" So my old friend told me . I say old friend merely as a 
mode of speech. He told me to leave it to older heads and 
cooler hearts than mine." 

" A good phrase ; a wise man that. Yes, the king is dead . 
long live the king ! Poor Philip ! . ^his desperate move has 
cost him all the game. You believe him guilty, I think you 
saidi" 

Edgar bowed his head, and answered as he had replied to 
Old Forster. 

"My lord, I believe nothing. My nund is, as regards that> 
a blank. He must be defended.'' 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 241 

" Ah ! " said the old man, with a sigh, staring vaguely at the 
portrait of some bygone earl, who, in his ermine-trimmed robe, 
and his knee advanced on a footstool to show the Garter, 
pointed forward with some Bill of Eights or petition in his 
hand, as if it were a field marshal's b^ton. " Ah ! I wonder, 
now, if our ermine was often stained with blood in the oldeii 
time." 

Then suddenly he arose, as if frightened by shadows. 

" Come here, into his room . ^it may be yours soon . and let 
us plan the campaign for his relief." 



CHAPTER XXXn. 

A VERY SUCCESSFUL BENEFIT. 

The benefit of Mdlle. Natalie Fifine was more properly a 
" bespeak," got up by the young lady in order to aid the funds 
of the Fifine family. The old bookseller on the Quai du 
Temple had heard of a good stroke of business to be done, and 
Natalie, as we know, was nothing loath to help him. A new 
operatic star was about to make her appearance, and a new 
ballet was to follow, in which the twinkling feet of Natalie 
were to appear. 

The young lady, therefore, sought the fat and podgy Mr 
Dunn, the manager, who, in his faultless black suit, his white 
shirt, and new beaver hat . gentlemen did not in those days 
dream of wearing silk . looked hke a ball of black satin stand- 
ing at his own box door. 

"Good morning, Mr Dunn," said Natalie. "You ^re 
charmant, fine 'ealth, this morning." 

" Quite so, m'am-zelle, quite so," said Mr Dunn, looking far 
away beyond and over the humble employee of his operatic 
tro(^. 

It is curious how grand the manager can be to the artist ; 
almost as curious as it is how subservient those great creatures, 
the artists, can be to the manager. An ordinary English 
workman shows about a dozen times as much independence 

Q 



242 . ONE OF TWO ', OB, 



as one of these God-gifted geniuses, except when the genius ia 
up in the saddle ; and then, indeed, he or she takes it out of 
the manager. 

" I want to zpeak to you, Monsieur Dunn, about money.'' 

"That's very shortly disposed of, then," said Dunn, 
brusquely. " I ain't got none. Treasury 's pretty nigh empty. 
And besides " . here he recalled his glances from the far-distant 
Coventry Street . '* you don't draw as you ought, Fifine ; you 
know you don't." 

Even in those remote and dark days, managers were so 
advanced towards the great future claimed for women by Miss 
Becker and Lady Amberley, that they called their female 
artistes directly by their surnames. " I sez to Siddons, sez 
I," one would ejaculate ; or " S'help me Moses, Jordan, you 
can lick the 'ead off Some o' them hactors in a coat and breeches 
part." Similar elegances put all the lady artistes on a pleasing 
equality with the male sex. And this admirable and advanced 
state of matters actually exists between the artists themselves. 
Ladies call each other Belville or Montagu ; and gentlemen, when 
on terms of famiUarity, assure little Belville that she ** spoke 
her lengths prime ! " or whisper to Miss Montagu, in flattering 
terms, " I say, Montagu, by the holy poker, you topped that 
part like a rum 'un." 

So it happened that Mr Dunn was quite en r^gle when he 
reiterated, " You don't draw, Fifine, as you ought." 

" But," added the lady, " money, Mr Dunn, money." 

"Well, I can't give you none," said the manager. "The 
ghost don't walk till Friday." 

Thus, in theatrical phrase, the poKte manager intimated that 
Friday was the pay day ; and that, until that day, no part of 
Natalie's salary could be advanced. 

"Oh, you funny little man," said the lady. "I mean, 
bringing money to you." 

This was quite another aspect of the question, and Mr Dunn 
ceased to look up the Haymarket ; and bringing his twinkling 
little eyes to the level of the actress's face, said. 

" What 's up now ? " 

Hereupon the artless Natalie proposed her plan ; which was 
that she should- advertise a benefit, and get as many of her 



A LEFT-HANBfiD BRIDE. S4S 



admirers as she could into the house, selling the tickets herself) 
and paying half the proceeds into the treasury. 

This was quite a legitimate proceeding ; and as Mr Dunn 
had been more than once accused of selling pass-keys to old 
and young gentlemen . patrons of the art, of course . so that 
they could study both the art and the artiste^s behind the 
scenes, it is not to be wondered at if he at once acceded. Miss 
Natalie was prepared with her list of names. There was the 
Viscount Montcastel, an Irish nobleman, who was clipping his 
estates in the prosecution of his histrionic studies; the Honour- 
able Captain Poncho, of the Guards ; Mr Edgar "Wade, and 
other gentlemen upon whose patronage the danseuse could 
count ; and the little Frenchwoman showed herself so quick at 
accounts, and so ready with her plan, that Mr Dunn looked at 
her with respect, and assured her, in gratifying terms^ that 
*' she was a clever little devil," and that she would rise in the 
world. 

Upon this Natalie made a little moue at the manager, heaved 
a little sigh, which made Mr Dunn's eyes twinkle, and walked 
off towards Soho, to get her tickets printed. 

As she went along, walking with a quick, active, graceful 
step, she caused the young bucks in Hessian boots, or trousers 
tight at the knees and loose over the instep of their Welling- 
ton boots, to look round at her. With that ready apprecia- 
tion of beauty which all Englishmen pride themselves upon, 
some pronounced her "a high stepper," a "neat little filly ;" 
and some said to their companions, "Egad, why that's a 
Fwenchwoman, Pwank," or " Fwedewick," as the case might be. 

Meantime, on she went. The smile died out of her face ; 
the bright eyes looked sadly through the beautiful mask ; and 
she complained to herself that she was mome and triste in this 
detestable England. If she could get enough money only for 
the mother and the old father, she would be back, she said, to 
La Idle France. Paris to her was Paradise : all other coun- 
tries she looked upon as mere hunting grounds whereon she 
could pick up her beloved gold. Was she very different from 
others 1 Have not poets, statesmen, fiddlers, and buffoons, in 
this best of all possible worlds^ the same object at heart as the 
beautiful Fifine? 



244 ONE'OP TWO ; OR, 



The benefit plan succeeded admirably. Other artistes, who 
did not unite business tact with their histrionic talent, won- 
dered why the little Frenchwoman should have a benefit. 
The manager was accused of favouritism. The press was 
known, by some people who know everything, to have been 
bribed. Underhand dealings were largely hinted at. One of 
the male artists . ^who were just as jealous of a lady labourer 
in the holy cause of amusing the British public as they were 
of one of their own sex . spoke in ambiguous terms of his 
knowledge '' how the affair was done ! " In the meantime, 
two or three judicious gifts of free tickets gained two or three 
paragraphs, in which the editor professed himself rejoiced to 
see that the very talented young lady would take her first 
benefit. And some of these gentlemen . whom, it is needless 
to say, were not the editors . prophesied that, from the array 
of talent called to her aid . ^the bills had not the addition of a 
single celebrity . the benefit would be a bumper. 

Fifine's end was gained. Her name was printed promin- 
ently a dozen or so times ; slips from the English papers were 
cut out and sent to Paris ; and the friends whom she could 
rely on bought many of her tickets, and gave them away to 
their friends . friends who are always so glad to fill a house 
when they gain an entrance for nothing, and who go to see 
the dullest piece with a wonderful zeal, provided that it costs 
them no money. 

Mr Dunn's new star . who, of course, had made her appear- 
ance at the San Carlo, and had created a/wrore at Paris, with- 
out which no singer, however great, can be expected to please^ 
the English public, which yet tenaciously believes that it 
depends upon its unbiased opinion . ^was a success ; an^ Mdlle. 
Fifine's friends were delighted to find that they had paid their 
money for a real treat. Part of the splendour of the triumph 
was put down to her share ; and the astute Mr Dunn, while 
he complimented the new Prima Donna, took credit for " back- 
ing" her up with a splendid ballet, and for packing the house, 
so as to insure a reception. 

The Prima Donna . ^who happened to be a genius, and as 
simple as a child . took everything in good part, and told Mr 
Dunn that he was the prince of entrepreneurs. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 245 



The gentlemen in the stalls turned round to look at the house, 
to which they had paid more than enough attention during the 
progress of the opera. A first night is always more interesting 
. especially to critics . on account of the house than of the 
artists. Mr K. Coaster was there, in all the glory of his war 
paint . ^full dress, diamond studs, velvet collar, a white necktie 
big enough to bandage a broken leg with, snowy white shirt, 
cuffs which came down to the knuckles of his primrose-coloured 
gloves, a crush-hat, and hair in fragrant ringlets. Mr Holt, 
who had two tickets at his disposal, had brought Mrs Eolt . ^a 
stout, fair lady, in cork-screw curls and a turban, gigot sleeves, 
and a straight dress. Mrs Eolt was one of those ladies who 
sighed her approval at everything . if such a term might be 
applied to a very strong expiration of breath . and who kept 
her very white, fat hands always occupied in caressing her fair^ 
corkscrew curls. 

" What a many of the aristocracy you do know, Thomas," 
she sighed. *^ Ah, it 's well to be you, engaged in these gay 
and festive scenes, while I am at home taking care of the 
babies ! " 

" My deal-," said Mr Rolt . singling out a Duke, and kissing 
his hand to him, but taking care to do this while his Grace was 
looking away . " the Duke of Heathacre. How well his Grace 
is looking ! How very kind of him to notice me ! " 

" I didn't see him, Thomas," said Mrs Eolt, with a sigh. 
*^But, there, your poor eyes are not tried like mine are with 
fine work. The girls' frocks, Tom ". . 
. " Bother the '' 

Here Mr Eolt noticed another gentleman. Sir Paddington 
Buss. 

" My dear," he said, " next to him is Tom Cabriolet, of the 
Guards. Both famous whips, and both subscribe to the 
paper." 

" I wish they 'd subscribe a little more to my housekeeping,'' 
sighed poor Mrs Eolt. " There 's that boy, Tom, grown out of 
his trousers; and Susan's always breaking something . one 
day it is the bedroom water-jug, and now what do you think 
it is]" 

.* Not my pet breakfast cup, I hope," said Eolt, eagerly. 



246 ONE OF TWO ; or, 



'' Well, that isn't gone jet" said the careful house^mfe ; ^' but 
she 's broken that well-dish you bought when Lord Fantasy 
gave you the haunch of yenison.'^ 

Mr Bolt very nearly swore; but, heroically stifling the 
hasty word, he said . 

*^ Hallo ! there 's Coaster there. How well he looks 1 and, 
by jingo ! he is talking with that extraordinary old man, Tom 
Forster. Excuse me a minute, Mrs Bolt. Pray, keep yourself 
warm. I '11 step aside, and talk with my friends. There, you 
see that old gentleman in the omnibus box . ^that 's Lord Mont- 
castel. I wonder what his lordship is after! He's a great 
patron of the drama. I wonder what the managers would do 
without him ! " 

Mr Bolt left his wife to look through her opera glasses at 
fine ladies whom she did not know, and to " tottle up'* the 
probable cost of their dresses. Mrs Bolt was a great hand at 
figures. She had enough practice with poor Mr Bolt's accounts ; 
for that hard-working gentleman was always just a '^ little 
behind," and had an immense struggle to keep abreast, or rather 
to try to get abreast, of the great world. 

Mr Tom Forster, who was passionately fond of the opera . 
uniting, for a wonder, the taste for Shakespeare and the musical 
glasses . having been puzzled with his case, had given himself 
the rare treat of seeing and hearing the new Prima Donna. 
But that was not the only thing Mr Forster saw that night. 

In the omnibus box, to his right, obsequiously bowed in by 
Mr Manager Dunn . as black and as glossy at night as in the 
morning . ^was my Lord Montcastel, an Irish nobleman of good 
estate, or that which had been a good estate; about forty 
years old, but looking much older : already bald, very tall, 
with a very big English-Irish face. that is, a face which united 
the worst qualities of the two races. He had the large teetli 
and the sandy whiskers of the Saxon, the high cheek bones 
and bushy eyebrows of the Celt; and he sat staring and 
blinking at the stage, with his small eyes just on a level with 
the gas footlights . then a somewhat recent introduction . and 
talking loudly to his companion, as if the whole theatre 
belonged to him. 

" Grood many people here," he said to his brother, the Hon. 



A LEFT-HANDEt) BRIDE. 247 

and Rev. Peter Boor, a gaunt, tall, bony clergyman. "*Gad, 
the little girl *s been clever to whip 'em up," 

" They don't come for Aer," said the clergyman, who seemed 
to know as much about the Opera House as he should have 
done about his parish. "It's the new one; and she's a 
success." 

" Well, you ought to know, Peter," said his brother. ^' You 
are more about town than I am." 

" I keep my eyes open," said the clergyman; " that's what I 
do. Can you let me hare any money, Dermot 1 " 

" Not a rap, not a rap, Peter ; all bad luck. I 've been into 
the City, and " . ^here his lordship drew a great sigh, for he 
was known to dabble in speculations of various sorts, and, it 
is needless to say, to lose by them . "I've done no good. 
Don't talk about money, Peter. I hate the very name of it." 

" I don't," said the reverend Peter, stoutly. " I get a pre- 
cious deal too little of it to hate it. A man only hates that 
which he gets too familiar with." 

"What long waits they have," said his lordship, with a 
yawn. " That curry was not bad at the Travellers' ; but, 1 
don't know how it is, curry always disagrees with me." 

" You eat such a precious lot of it," said the clergyman. 

And then the orchestra struck up ; and Edgar Wade, who 
was not so far from the box but that he could hear every word 
his lordship said. for Lord Moncastel had a very powerful 
chest voice, deep and resonant . ^lost something that was said 
about " the little one ; " something such as, " We shall have 
the little one on soon." 

His lordship had a suspicious-looking bouquet on the cushions 
of his box, next to a double-barrelled opera glass, all pearl and 
gold, with a long gold handle which could be folded up when 
put into the case, the end of which handle his lordship held 
daintily between his big finger and thumb, and thus raised the 
heavy glasses with as much ease as a dandy would have lifted 
a double eye-glass. Seeing that Edgar Wade looked at him, 
Lord Montcastel proceeded coolly to take the measure of the 
barrister, and to stare him down. 

The calm, cool, aristocratic insolence, as Edgar felt it to be, 
made the barrister turn the other way, and enabled Mr Tom 



248 ONE OF TWO ; OK, 



Forster to make certain of a fact of which he had been hitherto 
only suspicions. There, snrely enough, was his fayonrite pro- 
tege; and there, too, in his hand, was the very bouqaet which. 
Old Daylight had fancied was intended for 1ms sick mother ^ Mrs 
Wade. 

" Well, well," said the old gentleman, with a sigh ; " why 
should not the young man enjoy himself? I suppose I am 
growing old and cantankerous." 

** Mr Forster, sir ! How do you do 1 ** It was Mr Eolt, 
who had taken a seat near him. ^ You got my paper, sir? I 
made mention of you, sir. No names ; but pretty weU done^ 
sir . ^not to be mistaken.'' 

" Thank you for your intention ; but I 'd rather be without 
it. Wait till the end." 

"Grows more ungenerous every day. I say" . ^here Mr 
Holt whispered . " they do say so j and I don't see the Earl 
here, nor his son ! " 

" P'raps not fond of the opera ; p'raps they like to stay at 
home. Hush ! " 

The band ceased, the bell rang . ^up went the curtain. The 
orchestra played the liveliest dance music, the Star of the 
Ballet spun across the stage in three bounds, and the chief 
fiddlers and solo players bolted away through a little door 
under the stage, and thence to their virtuous homes. 

A torrent of applause ! Mr Eolt, who was constrained to 
keep his seat away from his excellent wife, split his gloves with 
the heartiness of his claque ; a good round dozen of foreign 
gentlemen in the pit stimulated others, and threw in their 
united artillery in the most artistic way. Edgar Wade was in 
raptures ; and Lord Montcastel said " Bravo ! bravo ! " in so 
loud a voice that everybody heard him, and the followers of that 
nobleman said " Bmmsima /" Mr Tom Forster, who was not 
of the initiated, looked up and saw a little, bright actress . not 
much of a dancer, to be sure, but pert, espiegle, arch, and active 
.who flew about the stage, placed herself in artistic and en- 
trancing poses^; and who, in retiring on the tips of her toes, 
kissed the tips of her gloved fingers at the whole house, and 
yet managed to convey to Edgar Wade and Viscount Mont- 
castel that each had an especial share in such fairy osculatiou. 






A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 249 



The ballet went on, and the Star paled before Fifine, who had 
not an ace of her merit. At its end, a half-dozen bouquets 
skilfully thrown . except that of Edgar Wade, which knocked 
off a footlight glass . ^rewarded Natalie Fifine ; who, with the 
prettiest and most reluctant modesty, took them up, and offered 
half of them to the dancer she had eclipsed. The English love 
generosity, and applauded Natalie all the more. 

" Certainly," said Mr Kolt ; " you do me proud. I shall be 
happy to pass you behind, sir, as you 're a friend of Mr Dunn's." 
Edgar had indulged in a fib. " Come this way. Mrs Eolt 
will remain in the crush-room." 

From the blaze of light . the intense enjoyment of seeing the 
triumph of the one being whom he loved . ^to the bare, gaunt 
boards and skeletons of forests at the wings and the backs of 
scenes, to passages draughty with foul air and redolent of gas, 
the young man went. He had been some time in this passage ; 
Natalie was already shawled, and her maid was with her. 
Edgar saw no one else. 

" O Natalie ! " he whispered to her, pressing her hand ; " how 
beautiful you are ! Let me take you home, and tell you of your 
triumph. I have a carriage here." 

" Sorry to anticipate you, I am shaw," said the tall Irish 
Viscount. " We have been before you . I and this gentleman. 
Haven 't we, Peter ] Ma'm'selle will accompany us ; will do 
us the honour . umph ! " 

The world seemed to be suddenly dark . ^black to Edgar j 
and out of this darkness a little, simple vaice uttered . 

" Adieu, mon ami . I must accompany melor ! ^^ 



CHAPTEE XXXIII. 

OFF TO LONDON, 

Mr Charley Folaire. finding that the Ship had its crew, 
and rather above its full complement . moved to the Antwerp 
Hotel, in Dover, kept by an excellent host, Mr Chittenden ; 
and was delighted with his success in business. Presently, to 
him entered Mr Jem Sparks, a bagman of the bid school, with 



250 ONE OF TWO j OR, 



an equally red face, but turned up with black. Mr Sparks 
had black eyebrows, black whiskers, and hair worn d la Brutus 
. that is, in rough, short curls on the top of his forehead, 
cut short behind, but left curling oyer his ears crisply and 
thoroughly. This fashion was taken from the old Boman way^ 
which may be seen upon busts and statues, where the black 
hair in white marble looks . although undoubtedly classical . 
like a number of unsheUed periwinkles struggling in soapsuds. 

Directly the two knights of the road saw each other, they 
burst into a roar of laughter. Charley's red face and red hair 
seemed aflame with fun, success, and jollity ; and Jem Sparks, 
although he was ^^ done,'' as he said, thoroughly enjoyed the 
joke. When the laugh was over, Mr Folaire rang the bell, 
called for Mr Chittenden, and ordered another plate and 
another pint, and asked Mr Sparks to join him in an excellent 
dinner, consisting of a saddle of South Down mutton and a 
pheasant to follow ; two or three little ground rice cup puddings, 
served up in sweet sauce, made of pear juice and currant jelly . 
a recipe peculiar to good Mrs Chittenden . ^being ordered to 
follow. A long journey, the sharp air, the consciousness of 
well-merited success on Folaire's part, and of having come in 
second best on that of Mr James Sparks, kept the two friends 
silent until they had finished dinner ; when Mr Sparks, pushing 
away his plate with a sigh of gratitude, said . 

" Ah, Charley, you are a sharp one I You know how to get 
up betimes of a morning.'^ 

"The early bird, you know," said Charley, bashfully; 
*' couldn't have done it, though, unless it had been for that 
trump of a horse of mine, the Chief Baron ! '' 

'* Did you break his wind ? " asked Mr Sharp, sarcastically. 

" No j he ain't a roarer yet ! Not like your black mare, Jem ; 
and she 's a good one." 

While the two friends are discussing the brightness of the 
wine, its body, and excellence, the story must return to the 
sea wall at Dover Harbour, where, not far from the Ship, 
some four or five persons were gathered, and were talking. 

These were Mr Brownjohn, C^sar Negretti, Patsy Quelch, 
and Le P^re Martin ; while leaning over the gunwale of the 
French-built fishing-smack was Captain Martin's crew, boat* 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 251 



swain, petty officer, captain of Marines, and first lieutenant all 
in one, M. Jules Simon, a French sea-wolf, as he called him- 
self, with the head of a cod-fish, a dull eye, hands covered with 
bark instead of skin, and a brain and head slow, but honest. 
To his dull apprehension, the whole matter was one of smug- 
gling ; and this also, to that peculiarly constituted brain, was 
a merit rather than a fault. Jules Simon stuck close to his 
boat, feeling safer on his native element . and, indeed, he had 
been bom on the sea . ^than on land, especially when such little 
difficulties as that before him was taking place. 

The P^re Martin comforted him in a manly manner, telling 
him to take the boat oyer to Boulogne, and to stay there ; that 
he would be back in a week, and that there was no matter ; 
for the English men of the law were good, honest people. To 
which M. Jules assented, without the slightest ray of intelli- 
gence upon his marine face. He took it all in, however ; and, 
as the P6re knew, would be sure to execute his trust. Then 
the old fellow turned round, and with that innocent and tran- 
sparent smile which is so very beautiful to see, and so easy to 
assume, he asked Mr Brownjohn whether he would take his 
boat, too? . ^if he wished to arrest the light and buoyant 
Estelle 9 

" No," said the Bow Street runner. " No, I don't want that. 
You did not take that up to London. Stop ! " he said, after a 
few moments' reflection, in his slow way. " Stop ! I think 
young Master Squelch there " 

" Patsy Quelch, please, sir," said the boy, who kept his eye 
fixed on the police-officer, as a drummer might have done on a 
general 

" Well, Mr Quilch, then," continued Brownjohn, as if deter- 
mined not to get the boy's name right. " Will you step into 
that boat there, and go and look into the cabin, and hand out 
Cap'en Martin's traps 1 And, I say, look and see whether you 
see any likely things there." 

Dull as he was, Brownjohn knew his instruments in a 
moment. He had his hands full There was that murderous, 
innocent humbug, old Martin, who would call himself and the 
subject in hand Mar/on . (" Dash it," said Brownjohn, after- 
wards, " why mil they do that ? Why can't they talk like 



252 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



Crisfen folk and Englishers ? "). then there was Mr C6sar Ne- 
gretti, who might slip off at any time, and who was wanted as 
a witness in London, to prove Mr Martin's identity, and to find 
out various matters. About him, too, Brownjohn had doubts, 
and Patsy's caution . " Just look in that there bundle of his, 
and see what he has got there " . still rang in his ears. 

He had acted upon it so far as cleverly to twitch the bundle 
out of Cesar's hands, and to sUp his brawny arm through its 
loops ; but he could not for a moment suppose that any result 
but some pilfered garment or cup from the H6tel des Etran- 
g^res might be found there. 

GIsar's face, when he saw Patsy, was a caution to see. He 
had been haunted, as men will be when they have committed 
a folly, with a dull presentiment of detection ; but it had 
never made itself so apparent as to give him any uneasiness. 
It was a presentiment, like others, only to be read by the light 
of after-events, and by Cesar to be cursed right soundly for not 
coming before him in a more unquestionable shape. Cesar 
had one of those bright, sharp, active, and complete intellects 
that never blamed itself. Let whoever else be in the wrong, 
he did not want to be so. 

"Ah!" he sighed, "that fool of an idea; why did it not 
come plain 1 I saw this boy, this urchin, this ghost, this 
squeleite, come after me. in my dream, was it, or when I was 
awake 1 " 

Then his Italian quickness came like a flash uppn him, and 
his eyes looked like two glowing coals, with every now and 
then a green flash coming over them, as he poured forth si, 
torrent of abuse at the young Celt, and ended by winding up 
nearly a dozen of epithets by call him a " devil's pig." 

The little Irish boy . for our excellent Irish compatriots can 
be abusive themselves . ^stood all this ; but he felt it all, and 
the last name stuck in his throat. Brownjohn saw that, and 
interposed to save the boy. 

" I say, you Negretti," he said, " keep a civil tongue in your 
head. The boy hain't done you no harm. I should have 
taken you up to London, as it was. I told you I 'd pinch you, 
Negretti, and I will. I 've marked you, my man, although I 
am a fool, and I don't understand foreign lingo." 



A LEFT'HIKDED BRIDE. 253 

Hereupon Cesar^s fsuse brightened np ; his bair retomed to 
its former position on his head ; he no longer permitted his 
face to wear that sharp, angular expression, but smiled with a 
softness and roundness of feature that was really charming to 
see. He looked so youthful, so good-natured, and so innocent, 
that Pdre Martin smiled back in his innocent way at him, as 
if the two foreigners understood each other. 

" My Brownjohn,'' he said, in a most affectionate manner, 
showing his white teeth, shrugging his shoulders, and using a 
dozen expressive symbols with his mouth, chin, and hands, 
such as no Englishman, even if he be an accomplished actor, 
can command ; ^^ My Brownjohn ! If I had known that 7 
Why did you not speak ? Am I not bom to serve you ? Does 
not my heart go out to you T' 

" I know nothing about your heart," said the Bow Street 
runner, who always felt at a discount with foreigners, and 
especially with one who, like Negretti, could, as he phrased 
it, " get up anybody's sleeve," " but I know, Mr C^ar, that 
you've had your tongue in your cheek pretty often at me. 
However, that 's neither here nor there. You will come with 
me." 

*'0f course, with the greatest pleasure. It was only a 
foolish fancy of mine to visit my native country and its sunny 
ski^s, and this old gentleman's boat would have afforded me a 
passage. Would it not, sir 1 " 

" You have stepped aboard it many a time, my child," said 
P^re Martin, in his innocent, dreamy voice. Then he sighed. 
" But what le bon Dieu wishes, we must do." Here he crossed 
himself piously, and looked up to the lowering autumn sky. 

Cdsar caught the infection, and followed suit with unction. 
Brownjohn felt that the two were too much for him, and 
wished to get out of it. He felt in his pocket for his pistol ; 
for piety, as he observed to his friends, always put him on his 
guard. 

"What," he asked, "do they do it for? Ain't they got 
churches to cross themselves in, and priests to listen to ? Why 
do they go bewitching a police officer with their vanities 1 " 

" Adieu, therefore. La belle France^' continued C^sar, making 
a sign of affectionate fareyvell towards Jules Simon, who, with 



254 ONE OF TWO j OE, 



barky fingers, was gripping the sea wall, and heaving to and 
fro as the dull tide of the harbour rocked the boat under 
him. Adieu, Lot, belk E$tMe . ^that's the name of thy boat, 
friend Martini' 

'^Yes; it was her name too," answered the Frenchman, 
innocently and naturally. '^I can tell thee aU, Mr Officer. 
You detain me here for no purpose." 

" Oh, I won't detain you long. You come up with me by 
the night coach. And as for telling me, I warn you " 

" Ah, that is right, my Brownjohn. These English officers," 
said Negretti, in a warning voice, " are the soul of honour. 
They do not question and trouble a poor prisoner. I have 
had some experience of that . ^have I not, my Brownjohn 1 " 

" That you have, Negretti. You've got nothing to say to 
me, Mr Mar^, if that 's your name. I Ve spotted you for 
this murder, and all my business is to hold you tight until I 
deliver you up . dead or alive, mind you . to a justice of the 
peace. That means a magistrate . ^you may not understand 
that in your French lingo." 

" Un magistrdt, owe," said the old man, nodding pleasantly. 
"Yes, I understand. I speak English very well, so does 
Estelle. We have lived with much English on the coast there." 

"Very good; then you come along with me. peaceably, 
you know, or I call in another officer." 

" What for ? Mm Dim I a poor old man like me. I will go 
very willingly. What God wishes, look you. He will do." 

"Generally, He does it," said Brownjohn, piously, as if 
there might be exceptions. " Well, I never make any hard 
terms with my clients ; and so, if you like to come as far as 
the Ship, we can take a snack in comfort. Tm won't want 
the darbies 1 '' 

He rattled, as he spoke, handcuffs in his pockets. 

"Ah, no!" said the old man, blushing. «I have been a 
soldier in the Marine. I will obey." 

The frank kok of the old man mollified Brownjohn, who 
knew that he ran no danger ; and who would have tackled, if 
called upon to do so, half a dozen foreigners. 

" And I will help you, my Brownjohn," said C6sar. 

<* Umph ! " grunted the police officer, ''Now, boy, look alive,** 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. . 255 



Patsy jumped into the boat with alacrity, searched every 
cranny, and brought out P^re Martin's clothes, which he deftly 
wrapped up in a little bundle. He was not hindered by the 
fish-like Jules Simon, who looked, saw, heard, and said nothing 
. constrained to be quiet by a sign from his captain. Then, 
when all was ready, Brownjohn put C^r and P^re Martin 
arm-in-arm before him, as if they were going out fbr a walk, 
and he and Patsy followed after; and behind the little pro- 
cession rose a grunt . half sigh, half perplexity . ^from the 
marine animal, Jules Simon, of ** Bon soir, mon maltre." His 
rough dialect made the words sound like '* bon battre ! ** and 
to this he added, with a dull sigh, ** Shall I ever see thee 
morel" 



CHAPTEE XXXIV. 

^* ANDy SINCE ^TIS HARD TO CONQUER, LEARNS TO FLYP 

A bachelor's room is always indicative of the bachelor, and 
some are not pleasant chambers to enter ; for the selfishness of 
man, very apparent in most things, is most so in his inconsi- 
derateness to those who serve him. Waistcoats and coats 
thrown there, boots and slippers here ; braces in one comer, 
cravats, towels, and shirts in another ; in short, a general un- 
tidiness distinguishes the bedroom, and the sitting-room is 
equally untended. 

Philip's sanctum was a model of careM cleanliness and neat- 
ness. There was la place for ever3rthing, and everything was 
in its place. 

" These great people," said Edgar to himself, " know how to 
take care of themselves, and to make their servants work." 

Lord Chesterton drew a chair near the fire, and sat down, 
as if he were cold and needed comfort \ and the barrister, care- 
fully . and even somewhat ostentatiously . ^waiting to be asked, 
sat opposite to him. 

** You see,'^ said the Earl, " that I at once open my heart to 
you, and take you into my counsels. Fortune . or, it may be, 
Providence itself. has placed the secret of my life in your 



256 . ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



hands ; and, following this blow, has deprived me of him with 
whom I should take counsel. Do you know upon what evi- 
dence this crime has been traced to him ! " 

Thus adjured to be, as it were, a witness against his own 
brother, the barrister, with many apologies . ^and with, indeed, 
a distinct and repeated avowal that he held his own opinion 
in a state of solution . gave a very clear history of the case, 
which he had learnt from Mr Tom Forster and other sources. 

At every point he paused, reviewed his ground, proceeded 
more cautiously, defended Philip, showed the improbability 
and the uselessness of the crime. But at the next stage he 
carried the evidence further on; and Tom Forster himself 
would have admired the clear summing-up of Mr Edgar Wade ; 
and all the more because, in spite of every well-turned excuse, 
it told heavily against the accused. 

The poor old Earl sighed heavily. The story tallied too 
well with his suspicions. He had already arrived at a foregone 
conclusion ; and, when Edgar came to the end of his story, he 
merely looked up, and vacantly stared at the bright wax 
candles, which had burnt down low, and without a movement 
of their flames, hardly seeming the living things that flames 
are. 

" Well," sighed his lordship, " and what then 1 " 

" That is all. I have it from the chief authority. It is for 
you to draw your own conclusions." 

"Logic is cruel, very cruel," said Lord Chesterton. "To 
what conclusion can I come 1 " 

" I forbear to say any more," said the barrister, throwing 
down a folded letter which he had taken up . as barristers are 
wont to do . as much as to say, " That 's my case, my lud and 
gentlemen of the jury. 1 leave myself in your hands." 

"His wife is ready to swear . and who can disbelieve her? 
. ^that during the very hours the woman was stricken down " . 
both of these gentlemen avoided the word murdered . " Philip 
was with her in her chamber." 

"Wives will proverbially, my lord," said the barrister, 
"swear anything to excuse their guilty husbands. How long 
has his lordship been married ? " 

" Npt very long . I hardly know, indeed," said his lordship, 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 257 

confiisedlj. f "Events have followed each other so quickly 
that" ^ 

" Your lordship has forgotten 1 " 

*'0h no ! " here the Earl spoke with the ingenuousness of a 
simple-minded man. *' My son did not see fit to tell me of his 
marriage." 

"Umphl" said Edgar Wade, his face lowering; ''then it 
was a secret match. Had your lordship given hini any cause 
for this decep . this secrecy?" 

"No . poor boy 1" said the Earl, reflecting, and seeking for 
an excuse, but not finding one. " You know, he is of mature 
age ; and perhaps it was his wife's secret, after all. Young 
ladies are very curious and very bashful." 

"Not in the matter of publishing their marriage," said 
Edgar, thoughtfully. " No, that must have been Philip's own 
doing, /should not have treated my honoured father so. But 
there, /never knew the comfort of one'; and so I am speaking 
of an ideal . a very different thing from the real." 

These sentences cut Lord Chesterton to the quick, in more 
ways than one. He had himself felt Philip's reticence, and had 
sought to excuse it to liimself ; Edgar, therefore, only freshly 
pointed the Earl's own arrows. The reproach, which was well 
deserved, of Edgar Wade's fatherless state he also deeply felt. 

"But, after all," said Lord Chesterton, "I don't think, in 
Philip's present condition, that we will discuss that matter." 

" Quite right ; you are quite right," returned the barrister, in 
his frank, open way; "and I cai^ appreciate your lordship's 
great goodness and great delicacy to my brother ; but, as we 
are about to defend him, we should be armed at all points. I 
want to know what can be urged against him. What there is 
to be said in his favour . trust me, my lord . I can say at the 
proper time and place." 

This was uttered with so much true dignity and feeling, that 
theEarl felt convinced that all that had been said was for the best. 

"I must own," continued the Earl, speaking slowly, "that 

this secret marriage seems to argue that there might be other 

things that Philip kept from me. But that is the only one 

thing which he has, to my knowledge, thought proper not to 

tell his father.*' ' 

R 



258 ONE OF two; OB, 



'* You have said enough, my lord. We will not discuss my 
brother's character : it is full of noble qualities, I am sure. We 
will let matters rest there. I have every faith not only in his 
goodness, but . from his bearing with me on a certain menior- 
able occasion. rin his chivalry, his nobleness, his disregard of 
self. But this marriage, instead of simplifying, complicates 
matters : there are other interests than his involved, He takes 
counsel of his wife, he " 

" You don't mean to say, sir,." cried the nobleman, angrily 
rising, and looking at his son with flashing eyes, " that you 
would make that innocent girl^ Winifred, an accessory to " ." 

"Pardon me, my lord, I am shocked at what you say. You 
put a meaning upon my words that they really do not bear. 
All that I want ym to consider and remember is^ that every- 
thing said here is between ourselves." - .. 

Here the barrister walked gently to the door and listened, 
looking out into the corridor. 

" Your precautions are needless, sir. My people are honour* 
able, and do not pry into their master's business.'* 

" I could expect no less ; but caution is necessary, Every* 
thing here, then, being a secret between our two selves, and to* 
be divulged to no third party, we debate the best way to save 
my dear brother Philip. Thus debating, we come upon a very 
vital point. Is this story of his absence from . what do you 
call the place 1 " 

'* Kensal-Green," said the Earl. 

" From Kensal-Green. ^is that to be believed % There is a 
credible witness whose oath, according to English law, is of no 
use. Yet I think we might produce an affidavit of hers to that 
effect, which would carry weight with the jury, who are some- 
times more influenced by side-blows than by direct appeals. 

« Good ! " said the Earl. " I see that." 

'^ But then my learned brother comes and tears this to shreds, 
by showing that Philip has married secretly . that Miss Wini- 
fred Vaughan has deceived her guardian . Lady Stark, is not 
that her name? . and the irresistible conclusion is summed up 
in a line from ' Othello * . 

* She has deceived her father, and may thee I ' " 

The Earl nodded a sorrowful accjuiescence. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. i259 



'* I don't think we should take the case into court that way," 
continued the barrister, speaking professionally. "No. I 
really think there would be by far too great a risk." 

Here he rose, and commenced walking about the room. 

" My suggestion, which you turned in so cruel a way against 
poor Philip's wife," he continued . and he said this with such 
pointed severity, that the Earl felt quite ashamed of himself . 
" was th\s : not that Philip's wife had consciously, even in the 
remotest way, anything to do with the affair we are so troubled 
with ; but that he, full of love for her, strengthened by her 
belief in his case . a belief very strong, because based upon 
entire ignorance " * 

" You are a deep philosopher, sir," said the admiring Earl, 
who was watching his son closely and curiously. 

" As deep as neglect and misfortune can make me," retorted 
Edgar, again touching the Earl as if with caustic. " But be 
that ass it may, a wife has a thousand ways of influencing her 
husband that the outside world knows nothing of; and a man 
truly and strongly in love does not debate the crime, but goes 
forward, and, having stricken the blow . as a knight in a tour- 
nament . crowns the brows of her whom he loves with glory, 
not with guilt. Do you see my position now, my lord ? " 

The form of the l9arrister seemed taller and dilated. His 
brow flushed, and his eyes flashed fire, as he talked of love. 

The Earl was convinced. He rose and clasped Edgar to his 
breast. 

" I see," he said, " that you are wiser than I am. If you 
young ones have lost something of the direct ways of former 
times, you are more acute in this world's doings." 

" Possibly," returned Edgar, in a dry tone. "But, again, to 
return to our business in hand. Following out the line of 
thought which I have rather indicated than fully sketched, do 
you think that Miss Winifred Vaughan. Philip's wife, I mean 
. ^is to be believed % That is," concluded the barrister, ingeni- 
ously correcting himself, " do you think that a jury would be- 
lieve her evidence, even if we could get the judge to accept it ? " 

The Earl waved his hands backwards and forwards, as if 
there were a hopeless and unpleasant fog of the mind settling 
down upon him. Men who jump to conclusions and embriice 



260 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



fixed beliefs have frequently a quantity of latent doubt about 
them which overbalances the belief; and this was powerful 
with the Earl. 

The barrister sat and watched him silently, but not the less 
closely. Presently he read his mind, or thought he did, for he 
said . 

" You think as I do, my lord.'* 

" I do. I am forced to do so, my son,*' returned Lord Ches- 
terton, sadly. 

Eagerly the barrister rose, and grasped his hand ; and then, 
raising it to his lips, he kissed it. 

" This matter is not new to me, my lord," he said. " My 
mind is quick, and I have thought day and night . day and 
night," he repeated, to give emphasis to what he was saying, 
*' upon it. We will defend Philip with our heart, with our 
blood, with our souls ! " 

" Generous enthusiasm," thought the ,Earl, in his older and 
less hopeful mood. " It is easy to speak like that," he said, 
** but not so easy to stir the cold blood of the English law. 
What can the enthusiasm of a brother's or of a father's love do 
against that ? " 

'* Your power is great," continued Edgar. "Your rent-roll 
is large, and untouched ; your purse can buy anything almost 
in this vendible country." 

" All but the verdict of a jury," said the Earl, with a sad 
smile. " A dozen of the cleverest aounsel, the most profound 
lawyers, the wisest advisers " 

" It is beyond them, my lord," said Edgar ; " beyond them, 
I am afraid. I have looked into matters pretty closely, while 
others have slept. I see no way out of it for my brother, if 
he is tried." 

" If he is tried ! Why, man, can he help it 1 " 

" There are a thousand ways. He is not committed yet . ^he 
has only had a preliminary and private examination. Don't 
let it become public." 

" Who can stop the babbling mouths of the press ? " asked 
his lordship in dismay. " If they get hold of it in any way, 
they will not let us hear the last of it." 

** And people," said Edgar, " are now clamouring for Befomai 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 261 



which the House of Lords has withstood. Such a fact as the 
one we have debated would make the fortune of the lucky 
demagogue who first uses it against an hereditary aristocracy. 
No, my lord, we will not let the honour of the family be stained 
thus. Your money must be otherwise appliect The magistrate 
who has taken this in hand is " 

" Mr George Horton, an honourable man." 

" So they are all honourable men," said Edgar, with a sneer. 
" But I think, with you, there 's no hope ihereJ^ 

" No ; I am sure not. Mr Horton will do his duty even 
against his own best interests. It was said that he was in love 
with, or had proposed to, Miss Vaughan. Indeed, I think that 
Lady Sark wrote me, in one of her gossiping letters, something 
of the sort." 

" There might be some hope there,'* continued the barrister, 
dreamily looking out of his dark eyes at the candles without 
seeing them ; seeing something far distant, in fact, and out of 
present ken, " She might bring to bear some influence even 
upon honourable men." 

" I would not have her tried, sir," said the nobleman, angrily 
even. " Philip, I am sure, would rather die on the scaffold 
himself." 

" All is fair in love and war . and law," urged the barrister, 
again speaking dreamily. " If Mr Boom, now, had been the 
magistrate, he might have been approached. He is such an 
eccentric old .fellow . as honest as the day, no doubt, but " 

" For Heaven's sake, man ! " cried Lord Chesterton, in im- 
patience, " don't weigh to me the possibility of securing any 
connivance in guilt. We are not so fallen as that." 

" Guilt makes us fall, my lord," said the barrister, " even to 
that. I have learnt that at the bar, and in enduring poverty 
which you, in your lofty station, could not understand, and 
would wonder at with a supreme phlegm. We are here placed 
. as many a poor creature is in a fever-stricken court . so close 
that we suffer the contagion ourselves. There is no hope else. 
PhiHp must fly the country." 

" Good heavens ! can it have come to that 1 Can you counsel 
60 base " 

" Base or not base, it is the only thing that circumstances 



263 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



can and will counsel. They are our great advisers. Listen to 
them. We must be schooled by circumstances. Who is not 
the creature of his surroundings, the victim of his friends and 
their follies^ of his parents' sins)'' 

The deep, sad tone of the barrister, the measured cadence, 
the mockery of the satire, all bore in upon the Earl the sad 
strait to which he was reduced. He nodded his poor white 
head, as if in acquiescence, and rocked to and fro in his chair. 
The barrister saw that he had gained his point ; and again Old 
Daylight's warning, " Stand on your own rights, Edgar Wade ; 
do not parley with the Earl," seemed to be repeated in his 
ear. He hesitated for more than a moment . ^for many 
moments . ^while the pendulum of the clock upon the mantel 
ticked away the brief moments of the ambitious creature, man. 
He then spoke, 

*^ And now, my lord," he said, " we have been occupied so 
entirely with my brother Philip's business, that we have 
entirely forgotten mine. What do you intend to do ) Do you 
receive me as your son 1 " 

" My son . ah ! yes," muttered the Earl " I was thinking 
of him . ^poor Philip. My son 1 There can be no doubt of that." 

Then the Earl arose, and stood with one wax candle in his 
hand, shading the light from his own eyes, and reflecting the 
whole light upon the barrister's fine face . fine, clever, worn 
with many emotions. The Earl was endeavouring to call up 
the features of his wife ; but, in truth, he had cared so little 
for her that he forgot, or had lost the power, of recalling to his 
blurred memory, one trick of her countenance. 

" He is like me," he murmured . " like that young portrait 
that hung in my father's room, and which he used to sneer at. 
Yes, he is my son." 

" I am, indeed, my father," said the barrister, with love 
vibrating in his deep voice ; " and I will prove it in my devo- 
tion and dujiy. You will acknowledge this publicly 1 " 

" I have a great deal to do. I must sleep," said the old 
peer. " I have a trial to go through. I must see her who 
calls herself Mrs Wade." 

The Earl's voice broke into a treble as he pronounced the 
name, and Edgar shuddered as he spoke. 



A XiSFT^HiMDED BRIDE. 263 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

" / BRING A MESSAGE FROM THE LAND OF SLEEP.^ 

s 

Mrs Preen^ called Buddenly to attend on a young lady in her 
master's house . ^that house which had not '' slept " a young 
lady for some years, as the excellent Preen phrased it ; no, 
not since my lady diedr-^Mrs Preen, under this trial, tried to 
look as if she knew nothing about Winifred's marriage, and 
succeeded. 

Succeeded wonderfully ; for poor Winifred was so full of 
her own troubles that she hardly thought of anything else, and 
was only full of thanks for the kindly care of the housekeeper. 
Everything was ready. The boudoir of the Countess adjoined 
her bedchamber, and a bright fire burnt in it. There was an 
easy-chair covered with the warmest foreign chintz . very 
.pretty, but very " subdued " in tone ; so was the paper. The 
quiet, beautifully made, graceful furniture harmonised with all ; 
for somehow, in the angular days of the Empire and Eegency, 
there were upholsterers who could furnish with grace, and 
cabinetmakers who could turn out work that was by no, means 
a sham, a delusion, and a snare. 

The boudoir seemed to have reflected, after the manner of 
rooms, the tone of the mind of her who had inhabited it. The 
pictures were religious ; the books were religious. and, alas I 
mournful. Sermons on the corruption of human nature, the 
sinfuhiess of man, the biography and evangeUcal experience of 
the Eev. Mr Newton, certain tracts by Toplady, and an Exposi- 
tion by the Prophetic Keach, formed the cheering mental food 
upon which Lady Chesterton fed. The gentlemen who inter- 
preted fievelation, and were great upon the breaking of the 
Seals, and the opening of the Vials, had opened the vials of 
their own wrath upon sinful man; and poor little Winifred. 
who took up a work with the attractive title of "A Stirring 
.Summons from the Tenth Trumpet," by the author of " A Dose 
of Doctrine from Vial V." . almost forgot her trouble in the 
pictured horrors of lamentation, desplation, and woe. The 



264 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



author appeared to be a favourite with certain classes, and 
fond of alliterative titles ; for there were commendatory letters 
appended from certain ministers upon two " precious '' treatises 
I . " Physic for Pharisees," and " Senna for Sinners " . in which 
the minister had, it would seem, docfiored his flock in a very 
efficient way, and his tracts had purged them of iniquity as 
quickly as any religious cathartic could have done. 

Winifred . who used frequently to read her father's sermons, 
and those of the Divines of the Church which he had used 
and pointed out . ^wondered at the difference of treatment 
between those shepherds who endeavour, to frighten sheep into 
their folds, and those who follow His method, whose sweet 
adjuration is the simple words, " Come unto Me." * 

Had the pious Mr Gurgles found out the treasury of works 
which formed the library of the late Countess, he, honest as he 
was, would have been tempted to have borrowed one of the 
" rousing " tracts which formed the holy marrow of the squab 
little volumes which, oddly enough, bore the coronet of the 
Countess and her initials in fat old English letters^ For Mr 
Gurgles confessed that his soul was lethargic, and liked to be 
roused. He was delighted with anything stirring ; and when 
his minister . a young man with the gloomy imagination of a 
Puritan Dante and the plain language of John Bunyan . ^pic- 
tured the recalcitrant members of his flock floating on waves 
of fire, and every now and then submerged, or left to save 
themselves upon rocks that glowed white-hot, like the hellish 
antitheses of mundane icebergs. Gurgles drew in his breath for 

joy- 
To return to Winifred, who sat reading until she frightened 

herself out of her present grief; and then, throwing down her 

book, wondered at the mother whom Providence had provided 

for her Philip. 

Curious, indeed, was it to consider the union of the courtly 

but worldly old gentleman, the Earl of Chesterton, and this 

pious lady ; curious to reflect on the lady herself, whose ears 

had tingled with denunciations of the vanities of the world . 

of adjurations to " forsake all, and follow me " . still going 

onward, but loaded with her coronet, her title, her place, and 

her fashionable society* How would the Earl and Countess 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 265 

have agreed in matters ? It must have been a dull home, on 
the whole, for her Philip ! Poor Philip ! . ^whose right was 
now disputed, and who was so suddenly accused of a terrible 
crime. 

Not for one moment did the thoughts of the young wife- 
occupied now and then with other matters, with her eyes rov- 
ing over the pages of the Thundering Legion of divines. desert 
her husband, not for one moment did she believe him guilty. 
The accusation was a horrid nightmare which weighed upon 
her soul ; but her faith in him was ever clear . ^to him her 
thoughts were ever loyal She felt as if, sitting in the cosy, 
comfortable, and even luxurious boudoir of the late Countess 
. ^for that lady, while seeking the things of the other world, 
evidently had not disesteemed those of this . she was almost 
a denizen of a bygone age ; and the curious body of divinity, 
BO different in its tone, in its way of looking at things from 
that of her poor father, seemed to carry her farther back from 
herself. 

A soft little knock at the door was heard ; and, after due 
time, Mrs Preen entered, attended by a servant, who brought 
a tray with wine, a roast partridge, and other refreshments. 
Winifred had a healthy appetite in spite of her troubles ; and 
having fasted nearly all day, was not sorry to refresh herself. 

Mrs Preen was glad to see the pretty young lady eat and 
drink. She dismissed the servant, and waited on her herself. 
She was not unwilling to talk, and said that it put her in mind 
of old times, when she waited on the Countess, who frequently 
kept to her room for weeks, and saw little of the company of 

the Earl. 

" Were they, then, not very happy?" was the question that 
escaped, almost involuntarily, from Winifred's lips. She was 
half sorry that she had asked it ; but it did not in the least 
discompose the stately housekeeper, who smoothed her dress*. 
so neat, without a speck or wrinkle . and answered. 

« Happy I Oh, bless you ! yes, my lady ; as happy as a great 
lady ever is with her husband. There never was a word be- 
tween them. I am sure that, on public occasions, and whm 
company were present, it wa« a picture to see the AiUmiUm 
and deference". Mrs Preen ntAA ^' ({inference **.<< my htd 



266 ONE OF TWO j OR, 



paid my lady, and she looked up to him in the same way ; 
only". ^ 

" Only what 1 " asked Winifred ; thinking, << If I am to be a 
great lady, I hope that is not the way Philip will treat me. 
politeness in company j coldness, or at least coolness, at home." 

'^Only, perhaps, I should not say it. I hope I give no 
oflfence." 

Winifred assured her that she did not. 

'' Only people of rank are very different from middle-class 
people. They don't look for much connubiality. Now, my 
respected father and mother . ^my father was in the profession 
of the law, my lady, a very honourable profession . were quite 
patterns of domestic peace and enjoyment. Father alwaya 
asked my dear mother's advice on his difficult cases.'' 

Which was quite true, Mrs Preen's mother having early 
acquired a good legal round hand, and being ready to help her 
gallant law stationer at a pinch. 

Winifred gave Mrs Preen an admiring look, as if some of the 
glory of the " connubiality " still rested on the daughter of the 
fond couple. For is not the great ambition of a young wife 
always that of being fondly loved, of being taken into the 
counsel of her lord ) And does she not always admire those 
ladies who are so taken ? 

" They must have been a very nice " . she was going to say 
couple, but instinctively turned the phrase into a better word 
. " a very nice lady and gentleman, I am sure, madam." 

Mrs Preen blushed with pardonable pleasure j and Winifred, 
by that word, won her heart for ever. 

" They was that, my lady," said the matron, " and as fond 
as fond could be. - But, you see, my lord and the Countess 
went different ways. He was taken up with politics and hi» 
duties, and she took to religion ever so strongly. Those are all 
her books ; and, though my lord never read one of them, he 
would not have one touched for the world . ^that he would not." 

In truth, the cold loyalty of the man towards the wife for 
whom he had never had any love, was indicative of his charac- 
ter. We all know the neglected look of apartments that are 
not dwelt in, and are abandoned to dead memories : how the 
brown hoUand covers seem to properly assume the complexion 



A IiSFT-HANDED BRIDE. 267 

of the dead ; how the lamp hangs from the ceiling, in its cover, 
like a dirty, yellow, but most gigantic pear ; how the oiled fire- 
irons manage to rust through their dingy papers; and the 
chairs, which seem to have had a ghastly game of jump a little 
wag-tail, huddle one on the other, and half of them upside 
down, crying, as plainly as such things can cry, '^ Don't sit 
here, if you please; shut the door, and leave us alone;" and 
how the tables set their legs . ^bare and strong-looking . ^firmly 
down, as if they had determined to be put upon no longer. 

It was not so with Lady Chesterton's " own rooms," to which 
Mrs Preen had been ordered to conduct Winifred. The boudoir 
was a picture of religious comfort ; and the bedroom, with a 
lively, cheerful fire, was sweetly habitable, and full of quiet 
ease. Lady Chesterton had never taken a foremost part in her 
husband's house ; but had ^^ chosen the better part," as she said 
. ^and she was not altogether wrong . " of a quiet, religious 
retirement^'' not without dignity and comfort. 

The bedroom, which looked on the garden of Chesterton 
House, might have been a sitting-room too, it was so large and 
well furnished with sofas, writing-tables, and easy chairs. 
The chairs and sofas were covered in soft, subdued and sober, 
but excellent French chintz. The bed was large^ and on its 
head cloth had a coronet worked in gold thread. There was 
throughout the room an air of rank and luxury, tempered by 
an evident connection with religion, indicative of the union 
between the husband and wife. Some of the religious litera- 
ture, of which there was so ample a stream in the boudoir, had 
flowed over into the bedroom ; and a little hanging-shelf of 
books contained the choicest works of Baptist and Calvinistic 
divinity, to soothe and gratify the sleepless hours of the 
Countess. 

What a contrast the whole presented to the rooms of the 
Countess of Sark ! My Lady Sark was indeed a Greek of the 
old school, to whom such books as these, and such preachments 
as they contained, were but " foolishness.'' But Winifred took 
up and opened the volumes with a reverent gentleness, and 
sighed over the fierce denunciations and the harsh sentences 
which sometimes seemed to shut up the Book of Mercy witU 
an iron clasp. 



268 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



There was a New Testament among these, and Winifred 
sweetened the bitterness of the partizan divines by reading the 
Sermon on the Mount ; and, after dismissing Mrs Preen, and 
declaring that she was always her own lady's-maid, and did not 
know the want of any other, she knelt down by the side of the 
large bed, and offered up her prayers for Philip . ^for her Philip, 
without whom her life was nothing. And if poor mortals can 
put up to Heaven an unselfish prayer ; if thoughts of the poor 
old Earl, of Mr Horton ; if peace and goodwill to all, flowing in 
broken sentences, without one word except to ask forgiveness 
for her sins, can be called unselfish, then the little earnest even- 
song of poor troubled Winifred will be found in the list of 
those most pure and infrequent petitions. 

She was soon asleep . asleep with her husband's name last- 
syllabled by her lips, and dwelling there as if it were some 
charm. But night brought back the troubled visions of the 
day ; and Winifred, in her dreams, wandered through the old 
house, marked the grim black heads of the twelve Caesars in 
the library, the armour and the arms in the rack, the great 
state staircase of the house, and the genealogical tree and por- 
traits of the Ghestertons. 

Sleep came with whole and complete visions of things un- 
seen, and gave life and reality to the half-formed pictures of 
the mind, conjured up by the gossip of the housekeeper. 

There was the old Countess, Philip's mother, staid and paJe, 
dressed with extreme neatness, with a book in her hand . a 
precious volume, for it was carefully covered in fine brown 
holland : it was much read, for the leaves were not unencum- 
bered with marks of favourite passages ; and this lady, without 
causing any surprise to Winifred, glided softly into the room, 
and sat down with a sigh, turning over the leaves, referring to 
these passages, and glancing now and then at the occupant of 
the bed. 

"I know I ought not to be here," murmured Winifred; 
"but you will excuse me, Countess, will you not? I am so 
tired . so very tired ! . ^I want to sleep." 

" Sleep on, my child . sleep on," said the vision, austerely. 
" There will be little rest in the grave for us who wait and 
wait." 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 269 



" It must be all rest, I should think," said Winifred j " for 
there is little peace here, in this naughty world." 

** For some there is . a mighty satisfying rest . no trouble 
and no turmoil. Still they wait ! But sleep, my child. I am 
not angry. I am glad to see you here." 

" You are very kind, Countess . very kind. You speak 
gently, like my Philip . your son Philip." 

" My son Philip 1 " said the lady, in a questioning manner, 
turning over the leaves of her book as if seeking for some re- 
assuring passage. 

" Yes, your son Philip. Wicked people say that he is not 
your son ; but we are all right now you are come. I can go 
and tell him the good news. They cannot dispute your evi- 
dence, although mine is of no avail." 

" Go and see him to-morrow 1 " The Countess seemed to 
repeat these words as if with emphasis, and as a warning. 

" Of course I will, and tell him to be of good cheer. And 
his father " 

Here the figure seemed to be somewhat painfully affected. 
Its brows were slightly knitted, and her hand was raised for a 
moment, as if to smooth away trouble. 

" We were not very happy," she murmured ; " and now I 
know all, how could we have been 1 " 

" Do ghosts," thought Winifred, " know the mctH\M iff tlio 
earth? How must this awful blazon affect rnnu*. hmm find 
friendships there ! . to think that a burial should )>c a rt^i*\ti^ 
tion, and an unveiling of desperate secrete unto many \ Hmi I 
. what rest can there be to some, with all tbingn^ kn^mn 1 ^ 

The ghost or vision seemed at once to reofl her ih^mp^tU ; 
and this, of course, did not surprise Winifred, who he»td hfrr 
visitant calmly say . 

** You see, I told you so ; there i» little rent f&r fmn/,, lUti 
as for his father, I forgive him all ; and now I know hin )u*4ifif 
I love him more than I did on earth. Th<?re w irotibl^ ft/f 
him . trouble for all. You may see Philip ; bat hft Jtttwi YWJt 
Edgar's mother ; he must see that woman I '' 

And so the vision faded, still keeping her thin tinmmi Ut nn 
open place in the book, still looking uteadfiMtly at Wif$ifr^4, 
It left mu«h that Winifred wanted it to UAy uiMMd; m rUU/tm 



270 ONE OF TWO j OR, 



mostly do ; but it left upon the eleeper*s ear the words, " He 
must visit Edgar's mother." 

But who was Edgar ? The very identity of the two young 
men was disputed. It was this vital question that the young 
wife wished answered. She felt no particular anguish or 
trouble in her dream, but a very great desire for this informa- 
tion ; and, ere the door closed, she cried out . 

" Oh, Countess, do " 

"Well, I'm sure," thought . Mrs Preen, "waking with the 
name of my poor mistress on her lips ! I have brought you 
some chocolate, my lady, just as the Countess used to have. 
And if you wish to see her, there she is." 

She pointed to a picture on which the light fell, and 
Winifred recognised the very features of the faded vision of 
her sleep. 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

" Thus the team rattles into London town ; 
The coach draws up, the passengers get down." 

The Adventures of S. Wideawake, p. 15. 

Mr Samuel Brownjohn, sergeant P.C., and formerly Bow 
Street runner, was fortunately able to secure for his prisoner, 
his two companions, and himself, the inside of the Dover mail; 
which, with well-appointed and shining steeds, and two lamps 
glaring defiantly into the darkness, set forward to London, 
from the Ship Hotel, very shortly after the travellers had 
taken sufficient refreshment to keep body and soul together, 
as Mr CAsar Negretti declared, with a knowledge of English 
colloquialisms upon which we have formerly remarked. 

C6sar was in buoyant spirits ; and one would have imagined 
he was going to a wedding rather than on an unpleasant 
business connected with a London police court. Patsy Quelcli 
looked at him with a kind of admiring hatred ; but having, at 
Brownjohn's instance, laid in a very good stock of provender, 
and being very tired, he soon fell into a comfortable doze in 
the corner of the coach, opposite his Italian foe. 
' Brownjohn, a man of resource, had purchased a square glasH 



A JLEFT-HANDED BRmE. 271 

lantern; and lighting a wax candle, had hong this illuminator 
from the roof, so that he had a capital view of the principal 
parties he was conducting to London; and he actually kept 
his face to his foe all the way, by sitting opposite to him. 
, Mr Martin ate like an innocent man fre&di from the sea^ and 
punished the excellent cold beef as if he were feeding on the 
fare of the enemy ; then he subsided into his marine and 
French melancholy, and did little but sigh. He had timidly 
asked one or two questions about his darling Estelle; but 
Brownjohn was not to be taken in, and declared that he had 
best keep " his tongue between his teeth." 

" Look here, Mr MsLrton" said the police-officer. " I 'm a 
sergeant of the police, formerly a runner. What is my busi- 
ness 1 Well, my business was to run after you, and to catch 
you. I am upon that lay. I sees my duty, and I does it ; 
and I shall deliver you up to the proper authorities.'' 

^^Si, si,^' said Negretti; "that's all well and good. Mr 
Brownjohn will play his part . has, indeed. Thunder of 
heaven ! . played his part pretty well." 

The sparkling eyes of the Maltese glittered in the lamplight ; 
and seemed to say that, if he could play his part with Brown« 
John, he would willingly do so. 

" Slack your jaw, Negretti 1 I was about to tell this honest 
old gentleman . ^who isn't accused of any dirty pilfering, but 
of a job that requires some kind of courage . ^what I was going 
to say is this : I ain't an inquisitor, and I ain't no spy. I scorns 
the action as much as any man. My business is straight* 
forward, and I 've done it, and there 's an end. And now I 'm 
going to light a cheroot and be comfortable." 

Hereon, the Sergeant lapsed for a few moments into silence. 
Then, after a puff or so . when the huge, rough British cheroot 
had a blazing end, glowing like a red-hot coal . he continued : 

" I must tell my old friend here . who is a foreigner, and 
belike does not understand our customs . that he will have 
lots of opportunity of knowing all about it ; and that he will 
find some gentlemen in London who will tell him all he wants, 
and ask him plenty of questions into the bargain." 

*' Mais ouiy my good friend," said the P^re Martin ; " I will 
answer them, and tell them my story." 



272 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



" Spoken like a man . and don't tell me none. Let 's have 
a comfortable journey, for what you says to me I shall say to 
them. Therefore, look you, mum's the word> my French 
friend . mum is the word." 

Hereon he took his cheroot from his lips, and laid thereon a 
strong brown finger, thus indicating silence. 

The outside passengers . of whom there were not many, and 
one of whom had given up his inside place to the officer, so 
that he should hold his little flock together, and keep them 
under his eye . ^had now crawled up to the top of the coach, 
tucked themselves up in their Benjamins, put wrappers round 
their knees, and more than one heavy coat on their shoulders, 
and had settled down in their places. The coachman . in a 
broad-rimmed hat, and a Welsh flannel night-cap, made like a 
barrister's wig, under it, which kept his ears warm. leant 
dawn from his box seat, and cleverly caught the reins on his 
whip ; and then, in a hoarse voice, mellowed by rum and shrub, 
told the ostlers to '^ take off their cloths," cast a careful eye to 
the off-leader, and " then let *em have their heads ;" and away, 
with a creak and a groan, with rattling of harness and jingling 
of chains, flew the night coach ; the horses, no less than their 
driver, making a point of going out of the town whence they 
started, and into that where they arrived, with a " spurt." 

Patsy Quielch woke up not less with the starting of the coach 
than a violent kick on the shins which C^sar took occasion to 
give him, pretending that the starting of the horses made him 
slip forward. 

" You leave me alone, will you ! " said Patsy, bearing the 
pain heroically, and turning very red. " I did not do nothing 
to you." 

The boy rubbed his shin with a rueful countenance. 

" What's he been a-doing, Patsy ?" asked the police-officer. 
" I shall have to pinch him yet, I know." 

Cesar, on his side, was profuse in his apologies. He had 
never intended to hurt the boy ; in fact, he had hurt his own 
toe against the hard leg of the young Irish gentleman. 

The while he said this, his dark eyes beamed with the richest 
good-humour, and even with a charitable and universal spirit ; 
his cheeks glowing a rosy red with a rich and generous laugh, 



A LEFT-HANDED BRmE. 273 



of course at his own expense, but suppressed for excellentreasons 
. such as the Christian one of not hurting the feelings of Patsy. 

Patsy quite understood all this, and writhed under it, with, 
out being able to return it. If there was any one whom Mr 
Quelch hated with an hereditary hatred more than the cold 
and successful Englishman, who would persist in being well 
clothed and well housed, it was the foreigner, who rivalled 
Patsy's countrymen in doing John Bull's work. And of all 
foreigners, C^sar was the one . in fact, the quintessence and 
embodiment of all the hated foreigners in one. 

Brownjohn, being certain that Patsy had received 4 very 
hard kick, made C^sar exchange places with Mr Martin, having, 
by a study of some ten minutes in silence, found much to be 
trusted in the honest countenance of the French sailor. 

" Now, Negretti," said Sam Brownjohn, " you have got a 
good opportunity to kick my shins . and you won't hurt your 
toes, d'ye see, against my Hessian boots. So kick away ! " 

To this severe sarcasm the Maltese had nothing to reply, 
and the whole party lapsed into silence. 

The spanking team of four chestnuts . which were excellent 
horses, being those which rested at the last stage from London, 
and the horses destined to bring the coach into Dover . had 
now settled down into regular and hard work ; and the coach 
dashed onward through shadow and shade, now lighted by the 
evening moon upon an open heath, now hidden by the deep 
shadows of some woods, now for a few moments shone upon 
by the lights from some village lattice. 

Still the chestnuts kept their onward pace, scarcely slacken- 
ing at the little risings in the road, but very cautiously going 
down hill, and gathering strength for a good rush on the level 

" Take a cigar," said the box-seat to the coachman. 

Jehu was nothing loath, and delivered the reins, as tenderly 
as one would have lifted an infant's cradle, into the traveller's 
hands. The ribbons were heavy, and the box-seat said so. 

" Umph 1 " said the driver, who soon had his cigar of a-glow. 
" I thought you would say so. The outer world don't know 
the trials and troubles of a driver of one of his Majesty's mails. 
One might as well be Prime Minister, You don't know what 
I Ve got in this boot now J " . c.. . 

s 



274 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



" Letters, of course . some valuable." 

« Vallible, you say ! VaUible ! Untold ! Why, I got the 
halves of forty thousand in bank notes. T'other halves went 
up a day ago. Clerk's behind with a lot o' pistols. Not 
that half-notes would be o' any use ; but it would be ork'ard, 
special ork'ard, if some o' them marauderers carried off 'aff o' 
them. Oh, my hi I " Here Jehu laughed. ** But we are safe 
to-night," he continued . " quite safe." 

" How so to-night, more than at other times?" 

" *Cos guard 's behind with a blunderbuster . ^particular wide 
in the mouth, and loaded up to the muzzle with duck shot ; 
and 'cos we've got some one mysterus inside.*' 

" And who might he be 1 " 

" Well, he was a King's officer . ^not a soldier officer, but an 
officer who serves his Majesty and the public as well" 

" So do soldiers." 

" They pretend to ; but all they thinks of is themselves and 
the King, and their gold lace and scarlet fal-lals. They were 
agin the public mostly, and would shoot down the public as 
they did at Peterloo massacre." 

Here both the coachman and the box-seat shook their heads. 
The memory of that dreadful event was still fresh in their 
minds, although it was ten years ago ; and, indeed, the public 
love for soldiers, so strong after Waterloo, had fallen to zero 
after its miserable antithesis. 

" As for the Yeomanry," ejaculated Jehu, " are they friendly 
to us % " 

" I think not," said the box-seat. 

A prolonged silence ensued. The coach struggled through 
low-lying lands, through the white fog which was pouring 
down the lanes, and entering the fields through the gaps in 
the hedges. The travellers' eyes had got accustomed to the 
light, and were able to see this . which non-observant people 
overlook . ^that fog is a liquid which can be poured from one 
space into another. 

"Give 'em some music, Bill," cried Jehu to the guard. "It 
will wake up the 'osses, and clear away the fog." 

So the guard, standing up in the hind seat, and blowing at 
the fog lustily, woke up the echoes from the distant woods 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 275 



with the " Merry Swiss Boy ; " and the coach having, by the 
time the "Swiss Boy" had "taken his pail and to labour 
away'd *' three or four times, got upon a breezy heath, coachee 
declared that it was all right, for nothing cleared away a fog 
so well as a bugle. 

" Well, you ought to know," said the traveller. 

" Yes, I oughter. I've had enough 'sperience, travelling up 
o' nights for 'arf the nights o' the year. My old partner, he 
takes 'arf of 'em off me." 

" And what is the officer you have got inside 1 " 

"Why, a King's officer from Bow Street, man" . this was 
said with as much pride as if the coach carried the king him< 
self . " and he 's got sl fellow disguised as a seafarin' man . a 
desp'rit character . one as robs and slaughters all he can. He 
was a burglar]" Here was a pause for effect . ^if, as Jehu 
suspected, he was "a parishcide, or some kind of desp'rit 
murderer." 

The box-seat agreeing with Jehu that no foot-pad would be 
bold enough to rob the coach under these circumstances, the 
two subsided, and were silent during three or four stages. 

During part of the way, the box-seat fell asleep, the air be- 
coming keener as the morning drew near ; and the four insides, 
warmed by mutual aid, yielded . or rather, three-parts of them 
did . ^to the drowsy god of slumber. But Samuel Brownjohn 
. smoking slowly and with careful parsimony, as if he had a 
long time to play with, and refreshing himself .with a pull at 
his rum and water . slept no more than the coachman; and he 
was wide-awake enough when the latter, cold and stiff, got 
down at the Bull in Holbom, and stamped his stiffened feet 
upon the stones of London. 

"Come, wake up, Mr Mar^(m," said Brownjohn, kindly. 
"We'll have a little breakfast while they airs an 'ackney 
coach with a warmin* pan." 



27G OKE OF TWO ; oa. 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 

''Look you, good master Shirke, a man's heart is not always his own 
property ; and if marriages be made in Heaven, there are other matches 
made in " The Adventurer^ act L ac. 3. 

Poor human nature has, as Old Daylight more than once 
found, a very great deal to put up with. While he was doing 
his best to serve his Majesty in finding out the perpetrator of 
this crime, the public was getting impatient, and finding fault 
with him. 

For the Luminary, in reference to the Argus, confessed that 
our " contemporary, which claims to be the organ of the upper 
classes, was in some measure right in calling attention to any 
laxity which might have existed on the part of the police . at 
present a new force, but which would be equal to any emer- 
gency." 

Since that time, a great portion of the press has found itself 
able to speak with laudatory terms of active and intelligent 
police; and great geniuses have Written up the blundering 
efforts and chance "finds" of the detective officer, so that he 
has become a hero of romance and play ; but at that time it 
was not so. 

Mr Tom Forster . ^being an inductive philosopher, and mak- 
ing pretty sure of the threads which he gathered up, and very 
seldom mistaken in the clue he was to follow . did not like to 
be hurried. 

He knew as well as most people how far that bugbear, the 
public, took heed of these remarkably able leaders . or, as our 
American cousins call them, editorials j as he knew the weak- 
ness as well as the power of the press . " which is," he said 
once, *^ like a slow match, or, if you like, a torch. It always 
burns, and, if you heed it, will light you j but sometimes it 
emits a spark which falls upon a train of gunpowder, and will 
blow you to shivers. The case is," continued the philosopher, 
" that one of these neat articles is brought before a great man. 
He reads it, becomes indignant at a fancied wrong, and hurries 
away and punishes the offender. You have no notion what 
good . and what evil . ^you gentlemen of the press do.". .... . 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 277 



Bat> besides this trouble, Mr Forster had another. 

After he had reached home on the night of Natalie's benefit 
^. which took place the night succeeding that on which Edgar 
Wade had so long an interview with Lord Chesterton . the 
faith of Old Daylight was somewhat shaken in his beloved 
protege, the barrister. 

He knew that barristers were sometimes wild young fellows ; 
and, to be sure, in those dark days, the Temple was not the 
studious and cloistered home of learning and virtue which it 
now is . ^when, of course, none but the steps of young men 
anxious to redress the wrongs of mankind, and to disentangle 
victims from the meshes of the law, walk its courts. But he 
was somewhat hurt at the concealment Edgar had practised 
towards him. 

" Tut ! " he said, when comforting himself with some real 
cognac, hot water, and sugar . and of the best sort . and with 
red bandana spread on his knees, smoking a pipe of consolation 
. "Tut ! What should a young fellow like that . ^heir to an 
earldom. do with an old fellow like me 1 " 

It would have seemed, indeed, very little, for Old Daylight 
believed a great deal more of his ideal than he knew of the 
real Edgar. 

" I wonder whether he has known this Natalie long ! That 
was the little woman that he intended his bouquet for. Well, 
I don't think much of her ; but old eyes and young eyes are 
not alike. I have seen dancers! Dancers," continued Old 
Forster to himself blowing a strong cloud upwards to his 
ceiling, " are like everything else. You may see a heap of 'em 
not worth a rap ; then comes a genius of what they call the 
Terpsichorean art, and you are repaid . ^you 've seen a dancer ! " 
Then followed a long puff of smoke, and this reflection . "I 
wonder why young men faU in lore with dancers. I never 
should have done so. I loved a gentle, low-voiced, fresh-faced, 
innocent little thing . ^and what women go through before they 
get to perfection on the boards is not to be thought of, poor 
things ! . ^and it would have broken my heart to have seen her 
capering in short ^iticuis above the heads of those grinning 
idiots in the omnibus box. But, law bless you ! there is always 
another way of looking at things. I suppose some men like 



278 ONE OF TWO; OB, 



them because they are active and nrascular. All musele, I 
should thinky like a thin shoulder of Dartmoor mutton. But 
that 's neither here nor there. I must find out more about it, 
just for Edgar's iifterest He 's not goifig to throw away the 
coronet of Chesterton on her^ I hope." 

And so the philosopher sat smoking, following out his induc- 
tive processes . determined to find out who and what Natalie 
was, and to pump the good manager, Dunn. 

^* That fellow Bolt took him behind the scenes . bless him i 
I wonder what poor Mrs Bolt thought of that. But they are 
queer fellows, lit'ry men. They go everywhere, like police 
officers." 

Tom with jealousy, with rage, and disappointment, Edgar 
did not come home very early that night. He was haunted 
by visions of Natalie's smile when she had thrown him over, 
to be driven home in my lord's chariot. Lord Duberly's 
chariot and Dr Pangloss's quotation, " Owrru portatur eodem" 
came quaintly into his head, and stung him into a jealous rage. 

And so vexed by unrequited love, with despair, and with 
rage was he, that, when he came home very late, he was not 
surprised to find Mr Forster sitting up for him, and even re- 
turned the unexpected greeting of that good friend with some 
graciousness. 

" You 're late after the opera, Mr Wade," said the old man 
holding the light above his head, and marking the somewhat 
disordered dress and faltering gait of Edgar. 

" Yes," said the barrister, somewhat surprised. " How did 
you know I was there ? " 

" I was there myself. I am fond of good music . good music 
and Shakespeare's plays." 

" Your taste is perfection," answered Edgar, with a slight 
sneer. " But it 's very good of you to wait up for me." 

'^ My taste is good enough for a plain old man. I shall not 
change it at my age. I find the young are passing me, and 
love other pursuits." 

*^ Yes, they do say the drama is declining, and they are going 
in for spectacle and the ballet." 

'^They want something to amus^ them in this frivolous 
age." 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 279 

^^ Frivolous age I Good Ood ! " said the banister^ '< was 
there anjrthing ever known so deadly, sombre, and melan- 
choly ? You are smoking,- 1 perceive. I will join you. I do 
not feel inclined to go to bed, nor to go up-stairs.'' 

"All is well there . ^very much the same. Dr Richards 
wonders at the vitality of his patient. Poor woman ! . poor 
woman ! " 

" Did he say there were any hopes," asked Edgar . but he 
used the last word as if it meant rather " fears " . " any hopes 
of her recovery ? " 

" She may recover at any moment. It is not a state of coma, 
although she shows no recognition of anything that is pass- 
ing. But this cannot continue long. Any quickening of her 
faculties will come through the nerves. She sees* not any one 
who comes in the room ; but it is doubtful if she may not per- 
ceive one whom she loves or hates ! " 

" Humanity is curious, is it not ? " asked Edgar. " So is 
fate . so is circumstance : and man is its creature." 

" And its creator," solemnly returned Old Daylight, handing 
his friend an excellent cigar, and filling his own pipe. 

" We will not argue upon that point," returned the barrister, 
loftily . as if the elder man had an intellect so much beneath 
his own, that words were thrown away upon it. " A man can- 
not exactly dictate how he shall be born . say black or white." 

He threw out this with an indignant toss of the chin, as if 
it was a crushing reply to Tom Forster ; and . like many other 
persons in this world . ^was perfectly r^dy to argue, although 
he had himself declined the combat. 

Mr Forster looked at him, and said iiothing ; but he pushed 
a stiff glass of brandy and water to him. 

" You will find that refresh you. You are tired, and an- 
noyed with something." 

" A man, I presume," continued Edgar, testily, " could not 
help being put in the situation I am placed in by his father . 
heir to God knows what trouble, trial, and affliction ? " 

" I never said that he could help that," said Tom j " but, 
being in for it, he can behave himself well. As for the old 
trumpery nonsense about the circumstance of birth, nobody 
but a fool supposed that a man could or should regulate that. 



280 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



But he can regulate what he does after he comes to man's 
estate. . God bless me ! " said Tom Forster, looking round the 
room, ^4t cannot matter much whether a man be born a nigger 
or a British admiral ; but it does matter whether he be a' good 
nigger and a good admiral" 

Mr Edgar Wade said nothing, but puffed his cigar gloomily, 

" I have read in some old divine," continued the detective, 
" that if an angel from Heaven" . Tom bowed his head here, 
speaking as if it. were customary to one of his reverential, 
nature to show respect to principalities and powers . "were 
to be offered on earth the choice of being an emperor or a 
servant, he would choose the latter office, and perform his 
work without repining." 

^^That may be. It does not concern me. I hate these 
speculations ; they prove nothing. I can only feel that I am 
here, kept out of my just rights, hampered with people about 
whom I care nothing, and disappointed in my love." 

" I did not know you were in love," answered the old man. 
<^ I am perhaps foolish ; but I thought the study of the law, 
with, above all, the great trial you are engaged in, was enough 
to absorb all your energy and attention." 

'^ As if a man could be nourished on such stuff," returned 
Edgar, bitterly. And then, since trouble and disappointment 
go far to make a man indulge in strange confidants, Edgar 
told his old friend of his passion for Natalie Fifine. 

" You love her," said Tom Forster, in a kindly way ; for 
the story explained many of the suspicions which had grown 
up in the philosopher's mind during the time that he was 
watching his protege, " But, surely, under the altered circum- 
stances of your fortune, you would not marry her ? " 

" I have chosen my part," said Edgar, bitterly. " This love 
is one of the circumstances that I cannot control. It masters 
me. Why not marry her ? Did not Lord Ffarrinton . an old 
name, spelt like the Ffrenchs* name with two F's . did not he 
marrv an actress ] " 

" Yes," returned Tom ; " but I have my prejudices. Lady 
Ffarrinton was an actress of great merit, a lady of education, 
and much personal beauty ; but, excuse me, she was not a 
French dancer," 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 281 



.* Nor was she Natalie Fifine." 

Mr Tom Forster said nothing ; but with a sigh, recalled the 
adage . 

.* Where love 's in the case, 
The doctor's an ass." 

His ideal was slowly melting away before him. 

** Could there be," thought the romantic old dreamer, " a 
more enviable position, for a young man of talent and ambition, 
than that of filling the place of an English nobleman, full of 
opportunities of resuscitating the ancient glory of his race ; of 
leading, nay, of wielding the proud democracy which of late 
had shown so great an ambition and so marvellous a power ? 
And yet, here was this young fellow, brought up in a lower 
sphere, and educated so that he could fully appreciate his 
advantages, about to throw all away on a dancer ! " 

"And she," continued the old man, "I think you said, 
seemed to show a preference for Lord . ^Lord " 

" Lord Montcastel," said Edgar, with something like an oath 
which would carry anything but good fortune to that amiable 
and eccentric Irish peer. 

" A man old enough to be her father," said Tom Forster. 
" I have seen his lordship before to-night. But, then, he has 
a title, which at present you have not. And the young lady 
is ambitious." 

" Poor Natalie ! She works, she tells me, for the sake of an 
old father and mother,, and is full of devotion to them. How 
beautiful such a devotion; how different from the sordid 
selfishness of the world ! " 

" It is a beautiful thing to witness," returned Mr Forster, 
drily ; " and is, perhaps, more frequently heard of than seen. 
But I hope you are not deceived." 

" Few people can deceive me," said Edgar Wade. " I have 
been brought up in a hard school, and that has sharpened my 
wits. I have cast in my lot. I will do anything to obtain 
Natalie. She must only be cajoling that villainously ugly 
old reprobate, with his high cheek bones and his ginger 
whiskers." 

The conference was at an end ; and Mr Edgar Wade, still 



282 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



gloomy, and full of disgust, threw the end of his cigar, into the 
fire, and stalked off to bed like an ill-used man. 

As Tom Forster divested himself of his clothing, and put 
himself to bed, he kept revolving on the new complexion which 
the episode of the night had given to matters. Edgar had a 
plain right to fall in love with anybody ; but Mr Forster had 
so identified him with a nobla career, which he hoped he would 
have run, that he felt the step Edgar had taken to be some- 
thing like a blow and a disappointment. 

" * Man is bom to trouble,' " said the philosopher to himself, 
in a desponding voice, " * as the sparks fly upwards.' He was 
a wise man who made that queer simile. Here am I, an old 
fellow who had performed that difficult task of living for 
another, and of absolutely forgetting myself, and a pretty 
mess I have made of it. Cast in his lot, indeed ! There are 
two things I don't like about her . she is a foreigner and a 
dancer ; and though she may leave off her trade, she can't get 
over her breed.'* 

And the prejudiced old party, placing his head and his 
bandana on the pillow, soon forgot himself otherwise than 
unselfishly and in sleep. 

" O Natalie ! Natalie I can it be possible that you don't love 
mel" murmured the barrister; "and after all that I have 
done for you . and when fate was about to turn the golden 
side of Fortune's shield towards me ! " 

And then he thought of the complication that he wa« in ; 
of the desire that Lord Chesterton had exhibited of seeing the 
unhappy woman who lay so ill not far from him; of Lord 
Wimpole, whom he had promised to defend ; of the pressure 
of that business, and yet of his overwhelming desire to forestall 
Lord Montcastel; and of his growing suspicion, which he 
could not master nor cast out, of Natalie's falseness. 

" It is enough to make a man mad," he said. " One might 
also believe there was a devil, and that he mixed in human 
affairs. What a terrible position is mine." (It is plain that 
Edgar Wade, clever and generous as he was, could feel for 
himself as well as for others.) " These matters come upon 
us when we are so tied and hampered. But it is late, and I 
must sleep." 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 283 

And to sleep he endeayonred to compose himself; saying, 
as he slept-. 

'^It Will but make matters worse. The old nobleman 
is already half demented : he must not see Mrs Wade." 



CHAPTER XXXVm. 

MR SCOR£M MAKES HIS DEBUT, AND IS HIMSELF TAKEN BY 

SURPRISE. 

Poor Mr Checketts was disconsolate. A whole day was 
passed, and the greater part of another^ and yet his master 
did not return. There was something so peculiarly depressing 
and mysterious in this, that Checketts consulted Mr Guigles ; 
but received from him nothing but of a proverbial and pro- 
phetic character, which, truly, did not comfort Checketts, being 
of a shadowy nature, while the food demanded by the truly 
British mind of Checketts must necessarily be solid. 

"Mr Gurgles," said Checketts, with a sigh. 

'* Sir," said Gurgles, " you were about to consult me. 
* Truly,* as the editor remarks, * there is a price in the hand 
of a fool for wisdom, and the way of transgressors is hard.' " 

Checketts could not for the life of him see what those mystic 
sentences, of which he by no means disputed the truth, had to 
do with the matter ; so he was silent and meditative. 

" It's all very true," said Gurgles, thinking he had shut up 
his companion j " yes, very true ; < the beginning of strife,' he 
said in another article, * is like the letting out of waters.' " 

" I wish I could let out at somebody," muttered Checketts, 
viciously. '' What I want you to tell me, Mr Gurgles, is this . 
what have they done with my lord 1 " 

"Truly," returned Mr Gurgles, in the same misty way, 
" 'the crown of a wise man is his riches;' and again he tells 
us, ' Hope deferred maketh the heart sick.' We are bom to 
disappointment, my young friend." 

Hope deferred! The homely truth fell upon the ear of 
poor Checketts with a mournful sound. The great deep was 
broken up ; the house of Chesterton had been entered by the 



284 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



police; the aristocracy had been defied; and the grand old 
Earl . who, as Checketts thought, could do anything . ^was, as 
Gurgles said, nothing better than " a broken reed, or a lodge 
in a garden of cucumbers." 

'^ He is an original man, that Mr Gurgles," said Checketts. 
" He is deep . so deep ! . but he confuses me. He has a 
gigantic mind, no doubt; but he is beyond me." Here the 
faithful servant fell again to meditating on his master's fate ; 
and at last got so nervous that he could not stay indoors, but 
preferred a request to Mr Boskell for leave of absence. 

That being granted, although it was late in the afternoon, 
Checketts went down to the Temple, with a vague idea of 
calling upon Mr Edgar Wade ; but not having the courage to 
do so . for the barrister had impressed him with a sense of 
fear and of power . ^he wandered round and round the plashing 
little fountain, and looked over the garden to the placid river, 
glittering and shining in a mild October evening. 

While he was thus engaged, looking dreamily askance rather 
than before him, he was nearly knocked down by a person 
hurrying out of the very door he lingered about ; and, even 
with the blow, he was conscious of a faint smell of apples. 

" Beg pardon, sir, I 'm sure,'* cried Scorem, for it was he I 
**beg pardon." The clerk, studying his speech with the 
absorption of a born orator, had hardly noticed where he was 
running. 

" Don't mention it," returned Checketts, rubbing his shoulder. 

" Hallo I " cried Scorem ; " the gentleman from Chesterton 
House, I see. Do you want Mr Edgar Wade ? " 

" Not particularly," returned Checketts, confusedly. " I 
wanted to know if he *s heard anything of Lord Wimpole, 
d 'ye see ? " 

** He will communicate, sir," said Scorem, officially, " He 
is sure to do so ; he is a gentleman of eminent business capa- 
city. A wonderful man, sir. He was in the Eobing Eoom." 

.* What 's that 1 " asked Checketts. 

" Why, where barristers put on their war paint . ^the gowns, 
bands, and those wonderful wigs ! Ah, sir, you should see 
my governor in 'em ; be looks beautiful. A fine forehead, has 
he not?" . 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 285 

- . - . - - 1 - 

" I did not see it as I knows of." 

" You are not a physiognomist, sir, I am afraid/' said 
Scorem. 

" Well, I have never even been that way," returned Checketts, 
thinking that Scorem alluded to some strange country. 

" Nor a politician, perhaps." 

" No ; I leave politics to great people, sir," returned Checketts, 
mildly. " Whatever my master thinks, I know is about right, 
for he *s one of the best of men." 

'* Noble fellow !" cried Scorem, grasping his hand ; " you are 
a Tory of the old school. You detest Whiggery and jiggery, 
snobbery, jobbery, and robbery." 

Checketts smiled, and said, faintly, that of the two he was 
a purple rather than a blue and buff . such being the colours 
of the respective parties in his time ; and upon this, Mr Scorem 
embraced him. Then said that patriot . 

" What will you take to drink ? Let us cement our friend- 
ship." 

With that marvellous freemasonry of honest souls by which 
they recognise each other, Mr Checketts had at once admired 
and liked the barrister's clerk ; and, feeling that he wanted a 
less prophetic and obscure friend and companion than Gurgles, 
he said immediately . 

" Well, sir, I '11 take anything you are so good as to offer me." 

" Spoken like an officer and a gentleman.- like a patriot and 
a Conservative. Come along, sir 1 " 

In this manner the melancholy Checketts was beguiled into 
drinking a glass of excellent ale . for Mr Scorem knew his 
houses, and was on excellent terms with the young ladies, in 
huge bows and gauze turbans, who poured out the nightly ale 
for his delectation. These damsels Scorem addressed in a 
fatherly way, as if much learning had added a weight of years 
to his noble forehead. The effect of this was that the girls 
laughed with much gusto ; for, Vith all his wisdom, Mr Scorem 
looked but young. ^ 

** Well, my darling," he would say, " you are glad to see the 
old man again. You are looking blooming, my daughter ; but 
your father . that is, myself. wishes that you were married 
and settled/* - 



286 ONE OP TWO j OE, 



"You are such a one, Mr Scorem . always poking your 
fun." 

"No such thing, my juvenile flower,*' the clerk would 
answer, with a solemn face. " Age has its privileges. Might 
I ask whether you have made it up with the stage-coachman?" 

Wherever he went he was a favourite ; and at the tavern he 
called at with Checketts, his first action was to pull out a fine 
apple, and present it to the young lady. 

"My aunt," he said, "miss . who shall be nameless; but 
who, I need not say, looking at her nephew, is well advanced 
in years . ^sent me, from her villa at Kingston-on*ThameSy this 
charming Blenheim orange." 

" Horange, Mr Scorem ! why, it is a happle," said the young 
lady, shaking her turban at him. " You are so funny I " 

" That 's what it is called," returned the clerk, politely lifting 
his hat. " Bless you, this aged individual knows every apple, 
from a British cat's-head to a Siberian crab; from a Kerry 
pippin to a Quarrendon ; and from the Summer sweet, which 
is the first to ripen, to the Eusseting, which is not ripe till 
mid-winter. Apples, miss, are my study . apples and the 
ladies.'* 

Here, lifting his glass, he drank to his new friend ; and then 
added, with a weary sigh, as if bitter experience had oppressed 
him . 

"And, I'm bound to say, I get much more satisfaction 
from the fruit than "^. here he winked at the barmaid . " the 
flower." 

"Oh, go along with you, do!" giggled the pretty girl, 
catching at the compliment . ^sus what woman will not % 

"That was rather neat," continued Scorem, without a smile 
on his countenance. " I may say, very neat . for an old one. 
Ah I Mr . ^I did not catch your name . Checketts . oh ! I 
remember . ah! Mr Checketts, hard work, late hours, the 
study of the law and politics, soon turn a young man into au 
old un. Will you take another glass 1 " 

" With pleasure, sir," returned Checketts. " On'y you see 
that I am to have the honour of paying for it this time." 

" Pardon me, sir," said Scorem, raising his hat, ^' you are my 
guest 1 " 



A LEFT-HANDEB BRIDE. 287 

Checketts, not to be behind the polite clerk, raised his 
beaver as well, and said . 

" I have been, sir, and now I hope you will not object to be 
mine." 

The ale had wanned him and raised his spirits. 

" Neat . ^very neat," murmured the clerk, who, to say the 
truth, expected nothing less. " After this, sir, I lie at your 
mercy." Here Mr Scorem struck an attitude, like Mr Kean 
in " Richard the Third," and said, in a tragic voice, " Do your 
work," so comically, that Checketts and the barmaid burst out 
laughing. 

"Renew the potation, sweet damo^ll!" said Scorem, 
sdemnly. " Your father feels his inner man renewed. I can 
meet my opponent on the hustings. I can lay him flat on 
the floor of the House." 

" Are you in the House 1 " asked Checketts, simply. 

" Sir, I have not arrived yet to that honour, but I am cer- 
tain that my place lies there " . he pointed in the direction of 
the Houses of ParHament; "but cruel fortune forbids me. 
But, sir, if a common blacking manufacturer may represent 
Preston, as does Mr Hunt, why, sir, should not I, in after-years 
. if the old man survives so long . defend my country in that 
hall of eloquence, freedom, liberty, and the British Constitu- 
tion T' 

After this peroration, Scorem grew communicative ; and 
owned that, if not a member of St Stephen's, he was looked 
for with anxiety at " another place." By this parliamentary 
expression Scorem indicated the Lumber Troopers' Hall ; and, 
in a very few words, as they finished the second glass of good 
old ale, invited Checketts to hear him speak. 

The ale, the good-fellowship, and a certain admiration which 
he had for his new companion, made Checketts accept the in- 
vitation frankly ; and in due time the two new friends wended 
their way down Fleet Street, turned round the corner of St 
Dunstan's Passage, and, diving down what seemed to him a 
curious network of courts, entered a smoky old tavern where 
" another place " was held. 

The origin of the ancient guild of the Cogers, and the fra- 
ternity of the Lumber Troop, is, like that of the Freemasons, 



2SS ONE OP TWO j OB, 



lost in antiquity. As Scorem said, with regard to the origin 
of old families, "whenever you can't find it out, it is mist;" but 
the pun was not appreciated by his companion. 

Some antiquarians held that Cogers' Hall was so called be^ 
cause the Cogers were a kind of Alsatian freebooters, and thab 
they derived their name from cogere, to compel ; since they 
compelled their friends and enemies equally to deliver up their 
purses. Others said Coger came from cog, to cheat . ^as to cog 
a die ; and others went to the slang " codger,'' and said that 
the club was originally that of the Queer Codgers, from 
Spanish cogery a catcher . a fancy slang for a set of rustic boon 
companions. Similarly, the Lumberers, or Lumber Troopers, 
were variously defined ; some saying that they were a kind of 
mercenary transport corps to the City Train Bands; and others, 
that they were an ancient, honourable, and valorous fraternity. 

However, great or little, the Cogers had fallen; . like the 
Knights of St John, who held their revels in tin helmets, with 
wooden battle-axes covered with lead foil, at St John's Gate . 
to a merely drinking and smoking club, for which a show of 
an intellectual character was put forward as an excuse of meet- 
ing. But the innocent Ch^cketts, acting upon the omne igno- 
turn principle, felt as much gratified when he entered the 
mystic gate of the hall as a gentleman does when he is first 
introduced to the House of Commons. 

A cloud of smoke, a' pleasant smell as of rum, brandy, and 
lemons, a sort of appetising and punchy flavour, a chink of 
glasses, and the sound of cheery voices, broke upon Checketts' 
ear as he entered. 

Mr Scorem was received with applause . and many had 
come to hear him ; and these were the better sort of members, 
for the clerk was upholding the losing side. Manchester mas- 
sacres, Birmingham and Spa Field riots, and many a sign might 
at that time have been read to prove that the British public 
was getting the bit into its mouth, and would have its way. But 
this has little to do with our story. 

The President . a heavy man with a negro face and thick 
pair of lips, a chin closely shaven, wearing spectacles, and with 
his eyes half buried in the fat of supra-orbital space . cried, 
»* Hear, hear ! the leader of the opposition, genTmen," whea 



. -3" 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 289 

Scorem entered; and the clerk, proud of the recognition, 
grasped the Chairman's hand, and introduced his friend. 

" Proud, I 'm sure," said the Chair, " to make acquaintance 
of the friend of a gentleman so eloquent." 

" You do me proud, sir," returned Scorem. Catching sight 
of another friend who recognised him . "Ah! Mr Slipper, 
how are you, sirl Eeally, we shall have a night to-night, sir : 
there 's Bamett Slammers, of the Lwrninary. Shall we have 
a report, sir ? " 

Mr Pumps, the Chairman, believed that we should . the eye 
of the press, he said, was on us ! He had heard it whispered 
.but he was afraid that it was not at that moment probable 
. that Mr Eumford Coaster and Mr Eolt would come down 
and listen. 

Scorem rubbed his hands with delight; ordered hot rum 
and water for himself, and cold brandy for his friend, and then 
sat down ; while Mr Pumps, in a steady flow of eloquence . 
which said nothing, in a pompous way . opened the debate 
by telling the club what it very well knew. 

Mr Checketts was delighted with the club. All the mem- 
bers looked as wise as the seven wise men of Greece, and as 
solemn as owls. Their minds evidently were digesting great 
questions. They were all for freedom, refprm, liberty, and 
brotherhood; but it was astonishing how these brothers 
bullied the waiters . how one scolded the poor wretch because 
the water was too hot ; and another, because the gin was too 
weak. 

*'Tell the landlord I'll take my custom away, sir! By 
George, sir 1 look at the attraction the Cogers are to his 'ouse 
. he ort to serve us for nothin'." 

" Bedad ! " retorted the waiter . carefully, however, to him- 
self . " how glad the maist'r 'ud bay if he did ; shure, all that 
he does is to rua into debt wid him.'* 

So, also, when the Ministry was accused of peculation, and 
public faith was pronounced the basis of civilisation, Mr 
Pumps had forgotten the numberless little bills he had 
neglected to pay. 

But this is neither here nor there. The debate proceeded. 

Mr Flux . Mr Chatham Flux, we beg pardon . eloquently 

T 



290 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



opened his case ; showed that the Whigs, or, indeed, Badicals, 
were the good angels, and the ConserratiYes the bad demons 
of the conntrj ; and then, directing his looks towards Scorem, 
proceeded to demolish him with withering sarcasm. All was 
most properly done. " Sir, I have yet to learn," " My honour- 
able friend/' and other Honse of Commons phrases, abounded; 
and at the end of the speech, when Mr Flax sat down, Soorem 
looked so despicably small that Checketts felt for him. 

But not for long. Scorem got up, pulled at his coat collar 
like a barrister does at his gown, and fixing his eye on Mr 
Pumps, who was smoking a dry pipe to look like the other 
sacred fathers, proceeded in his answer. He warmed with his 
subject ; and when he had finished, Checketts felt that there 
never was such a clever fellow in the world, and that FJux 
was demolished for ever. The house rang with applause. Mr 
Slipper said it was a great night. Pumps proposed Scorem's 
health, and compared him to Demosthenes; and Barnett 
Slammers slapped him on the back. 

" Look you here, old fellow ; if you were a barrister, by 
jingo, I 'd give you a brief to drag to justice the murderer of 
that poor woman whose case I Ve got in hand.*' 

"Oh, thank you, Mr Slammers; praise from you, sir, is 
praise indeed. That woman, you mean, of Kensal- Green ] " 

** Yes; the very same." 

**Now, who did it, I wonder?" 

** I can tell you more than any one about it," said Slammers, 
" because I 've been just engaged in pumping the Inspector." 

Here the good-natured Slammers, glad to find a listener, 
drew his chair between the friends, and told them, who were 
not unwilling to listen to so great a man, the whole history of 
the case. 

"Then it was done by a young swell who smoked good 
cigars 1 " asked Scorem, refreshing his parched throat with one 
of his favourite Blenheim oranges. 

" So it seems, from what I can learn." 

Poor Checketts felt sick and dizzy, and complained that the 
smoke and excitement disagreed with him. 

" Have another glass," said Scorem. " If you wait awhile, 
we shall have a little harmony." 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 291 



" No, thank you, I couldn't, sir ; I must go home. On what 
day did you say it occurred, sir 1 " 

"The twenty-ninth . Michaehnas Day last . about nine 
o'clock, perhaps," said the reporter, proud of being the deposi- 
tory of that which no one else knew. 

« My 1 " . ^then he paused . " my eye ! " cried Scorem, staring 
as if he saw a ghost. " No, it can't be ; it 's too absurd." 

It was his turn to be surprised now, and to find that rum 
and water, old age, and excitement can hare the most 
mysterious effects, even upon the strongest constitution. 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 

" THIS IS MY STORV, LET ME PLAINLY SPEAK.^^ 

Mr Brownjohn had travelled so fast, that he had overran 
his own letter ; and therefore, after quietly lodging his little 
company in warmth and safety, contented himself by sending 
another missive by the twopenny post . a great boon to Lon- 
doners . ^by which he informed George Horton, Esq., that he 
had^ot his bird, and that he believed it would all turn up in 
the right way. 

He saw his friend, Mr Stevenson ; and that officer, who had 
already taken his side . as we all do, whether the question be 
one of love or war . looked very glum as Brownjohn sketched 
the cunning quiet of the old man, the near "toucher" he had 
had in capturing him, and the readiness in which the supposed 
culprit was found to get to sea. 

" You found nothing on him 1 " asked Stevenson. " No cor- 
roborative evidence . eh % " 

"Not likely . ^that's another business. You see, he was 
away from us four days, and had plenty of time to get rid of 
anything. That will turn up in due time." 

" I hope it will. It somehow always does. See how that 
man Edwards managed to fix Mr Arthur Thistlewood and 
company," added the Inspector. 

" Mr Edwards was a spy," returned the Bow Street runner, 
with an adjective applied to*the last noun which we will not' 



292 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



repeat. " I scorn such business. Give 'em all fair play, say I, 
however bad they may be." 

, " Well, we have got a riddle somehow, and I hope one of 
you will get well out of it, that 's all.'* 

"Never fear, my son," replied Brownjohn, confident of 
having held his clue pretty tightly, and having done all, accord- 
ing to the rule of thumb, that an honest and not very scientific 
police officer could be expected to do. 

As these two were talking thus quietly, who should come in, 
from his office in Homer Street . ^where he had been for letters 
..but Mr Tom Forster. 

" Momin', sir,*' said Brownjohn. 

" Good morning, my friend." 

This was said with a polite and distant bow. 

** You 've got your man, I hear, Mr Forster." 

" We have a person on suspicion ; but time only can tell us 
if it be the man." 

" And I 've got mine . ^that sailor fellow ; and the tall boy 
will be here in a moment to recognise him." 

** How do you know it is the same, if you picked him up at 
a distance ? " 

" Bless you, he does not deny it, sir. I 'm not likely to 
catch hold of the wrong bird. I ain't no speculative amatoor," 
answered Brownjohn, with a laugh. 

**Let those laugh who win," interposed Mr Inspector, 
severely. "However, it is a fair race, gentlemen. One of 
them will swing some of these fine mornings." 

The police officer spoke thus lightly, for in those days hardly 
a Monday morning passed by without some one swinging for 
sheep stealing, burglary, forgery, or other crimes against pro- 
perty; and to hang a man for murder was but a light thing. 
Professionally, too, these gentlemen looked at a race which 
must end in taking the life of some fellow-man in an artistic and 
interested way, just as sporting men look at the race between 
two noble horses, uncertain which will win. 

" Hallo, here 's the beak," said Brownjohn, and Mr Horton 
entered. 

" You have got your man, then, Brownjohn 1 " asked that 
functionary, hopefully. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 293 



He had begun to believe, against his own conviction, that 
Philip Stanfield might prove to be innocent. 

" Yes, sir, after a long chase. We were on his track the 
whole time, tut somehow he managed to give us the slip." 

" All 's well that ends well," said the magistrate, cheerily. 

But although he spoke cheerily, he looked very ill and fagged. 
He had conquered his love . but by an eflfort j and he felt for 
Winifred as much compassion as the most tender father could 
have done. So, quietly he entered his office and sat down, 
exchanging a few words with Mr Forster ; and those few words 
did not seem to exhilarate him. 

" Bring forward your man, then," he said. 

Oh ! how weary he was of his profession . always meeting 
with guilt, finding that goodness and virtue were so rare, and 
that weakness and wickedness were so common. 

The P^re Martin was a fine specimen of one of those hardy 
sailors bom on the northern coasts of France, who are as simple 
and kindly as they are brave. They lead a life of danger and 
hardship without repining ; they live without luxury, rear their 
children on the gains of a scantily paid industry ; attend to 
their priests, and pray to the Virgin regularly ; enjoy their 
short holidays with their wine and their omelettes, and perhaps 
a fat hen added to their soup ; grow gradually into old age, and 
seem to perish without regret, if they are lucky enough to escape 
the storms which vex their iron-bound coast. 

When the old seaman entered, he saluted all respectfully, 
and turned to the magistrate with a pleading smile, as much 
as to say . "Look here, my good seigneur . I am poor and 
without a friend. Don't bear too hard upon me, for I am a 
stranger." 

"Have you an interpreter for him, or shall I speak in 
French 1 " 

"There is no need, M. PAvocit," said the Pere, in good 
English. " I have spoken your tongue since a boy. I have 
fished upon your coasts, and worked with your brave sailors 
. sea dogues" Put aside the accent, the tongue was good 
enough. 

" You will understand all we say 1 " 

" Without doubt. You will not detain me long ? " 



294 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



"We hope not," said the magistrate, kindly enough ; *' but 
we have a grave charge against you." 

There will be no need to reproduce every question and 
answer. The following was the result of his examination : . 

"But you were with her upon that day, and the last person 
seen near the house." 

The sailor smiled, as much as to say, " That may be." 

" But that does not prove, M. TAvocAt," he said, " that I 
struck the blow. Why should I kill her 1 I loved her, sir . 
loved her. Do you know what love is ? " 

" If you loved Estelje Martin so much, how is it that yoa 
and she have lived separately so long 1 She has resided some 
years at Kensal-Green, and you have been but once or twice 
near her." 

"It was because I loved her that I left her," said the sailor, 
paradoxically. *' A man cannot live with a wife he loves, if 
his honour forbids him." 

"Love and honour! A poor fisherman at)solutely under- 
standing and talking of such abstractions," thought the magis- 
trate. " Now, if I looked upon the poor as some men do, I 
should at once condemn this man as a liar and a hypocrite." 
But he gave no tongue to his thoughts, saying merely, " Go 
on, tell us all you know of this." * 

"The Widow Martin," said the old fellow, with a sigh, 
looking down at the ground, and then at his own strong 
hands, " was no widow at all . she was my wife. It is thirty 
years ago, monsieur, since I fell in love with her. She was « 
fine, beautiful girl . as beautiful as are our girls by the sea 
coast. We call them the belles anges de Normomdie. She 
walked like a gazelle, trippingly. She had a carriage like a 
hawk; eyes full of wit, brightness, and fire. I fell in love 
with her. Alas ! what could I do ? My father did not like 
the family, and warned me against her. But I thought he 
was wrong. I have learnt, monsieur, now that I am a father 
myself, that other fathers may be sometimes right. However, 
I told him that, if Estelle was headstrong, marriage would 
tame her ; that I was young, and had saved some money, and 
had a nice boat. I courted her, and she received me as she 
did Us autres.'^ 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 295 

** She had other sweethearts, then 1 " 

" Yes . ^would that some one else had been the fiance I 
However, we were promised to each other. I bought her 
some long gold earrings, and a beautiful cross of gold . for she 
was fond of Church then ; and " . here the old fellow heaved 
a pathetic sigh . " we were married. We were happy for a 
little time ; but love, Monsieur TAvocdt, is always one-sided, 
like a boat in a gale of wind. Either the husband loves too 
much, or the wife does. With us, it was the husband. I 
fancied that I could have managed Estelle, and have made her 
obey me. I found, however, that she made me obey her. 
You see, Estelle was too fond of pleasure and of dress. I do 
not blame her, poor thing. The fisher folk have a hard life. 
She cared little for the boat . a beautiful boat, named after 
her ; it is patched, and worn, and old now . and wanted to go 
to fairs, and feteSy and dances.. I was foolish, and let her go. 
I was young and thoughtless. Pleasure, and fairs, and jeks 
do not earn money, but make one spend it. We grew poor. 
I borrowed money from my father, the old P^re Martin. I 
am the P6re Martin now." 

There was a pathos in these words. How few of us like to 
stand alone ! The boy who fancies that his father is a great 
and happy man hardly realises the fact that his father feels 
that he is alone, with none to advise him, and with all looking 
to him for assistance and advioe ; that he stands facing the 
dark future, the first in the course of nature to be pushed off 
this narrow strip, which we call Life, into the unknown ocean 
that surrounds us, which we name Eternity. 

" The old father lent me money, and also some reproaches. 
I repaid him neither. One was soon spent . ^the other I forgot. 
What then % We wanted more money. The father had not 
any more to lend us . and, indeed, soon died, leaving some of 
his money to a good priest, and some to my brother. The 
money wajs better there than in my hands, for nothing 
prospered. I sold EMU . I mean my boat. With that money 
we lived for some time ; when Estelle, my wife, reproached 
me, called me a weak Ibol, and said that if I could not get 
money she would. She was nn espH fort, 

<* We then had a baby bom . a little girl. I was terrified 



296 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 

by my Estelle's threats, and asked her what she meant She 
laughed, and spoke of some friend of hers, whom she used once 
to flirt with. This friend was a certain M. Gustave Flahault 
. a Swiss, I beheve . un brave homme, very well formed, clean, 
and gentlemanly, who was valet to a great English nobleman 
. Milord Chesterton. This Gustave had visited us in our 
cottage ; had noticed us in our fall and our poverty ; and had 
proposed to Estelle that she should nurse the child of this great 
nobleman, and thus add money to our poor house. He was a 
very kind man, no doubt; but he brought misery to me. 
Alas ! monsieur, it is many years ago. He is dead. Well, 
after a time I agreed. I was fond of my little child, my sweet 
Estelle . as fond as I was of my boat. One I sold, and the 
other died. Toot petit ange 1 she is in heaven now, and looks 
down upon her poor father. 

" Oh, sir, if you can understand the heart of a poor father 
when he sees his own child and that of another man drawins: 
sustenance from his wife's bosom; when he finds the one 
indulged in luxury, and preferred before his own ; when soft 
clothes wrap the one, and but coarse rags the other ; when one 
grows fat and lusty, coarse and strong . while the other pines 
away and slowly dies, fading before its father's eyes ; its little 
hands becoming so light . so light and thin ; its little cheeks 
so white and transparent, its eyes so large and wide ! Pauvre 
petit ange ! it knew me and loved me, I am sure ; for many a 
time have I rocked it to sleep on my bosom, while the usurper 
slept at its mother's breast. To see it die ! . to reflect, M'sieur 
TAvoc^t, on the difference between rich and poor . we who are 
equally the children of the same God ; to know that one little 
flower was of the softer and gentler sex, more weak, and need- 
ing more care . une petite merge, lik^the Mother of God herself; 
that the other was, or would be, a man . a man strong, rich, 
powerful . and, because of this, wicked ; and that one was 
pushed out of lifs by the other ! Ah, m'sieur 1 Some might 
have felt that to be foster-mother to a nobleman's son was an 
honour ; but, m'sieur, we, nous autres, do not feel it so. They 
take all. Why take our children's mil& and the bosoms of our 
wives ? But there was one thing more bitter still. My child, 
my pure dove, my Estelle . I thank the hon Dieu .'.had been 



* A LEFT- HANDED BRIDE. 297 

--». . r -| 1- _. .... .. iw^^^ . I _ 

offered to the priest, and had been born in wedlock . blessed 
at God's altar : a blessed sacrament I have purely kept. The 
other . the invader, the interloper . was the child of a noble- 
man, it' is true : but be was . un Idtard /" 

The old fisherman lifted his head as he spoke, and they who 
listened no longer felt his story dull as he continued. 



CHAPTER XL. 

LE PERE MARTIN CONTINUES HIS NARRATIVE, 

The old sailor looked round the bare, unfurnished court, as if 
he had relieved his mind, and his story may be thus con- 
tinued : . 

" My mind misgave me when the valet, Gustave, made his 
proposal. But poverty cannot choose what it shall do, Mon- 
sieur TAvocat, and I consented. Estelle was joyous. She 
said we were doing no more than many people in Normandy 
did, and that it was always lucky to get the nurse child of a 
great person. The English milord, too, was said to be very 
rich, as all the English are. And yet I have found many poor 
persons in England. Well, the child was brought. I have 
told you the result. My child died, but the nourisson lived ! 
This seemed rather to please Estelle. She cared , little for me 
now, and was often out on a visit with M. Gustave and the 
great nobleman, who was the father of the child, and who was 
very fond of it. This was the Earl of Chesterton. Well, I 
could not stand this ; and with the money my wife got and 
some I borrowed, I bought another boat, and went to sea. 
Although the boat was blessed by the priest, she did not pro- 
sper. I named her Estelle. "perhsi^s that was the reason. I 
came back in two or three months, and found the nourisson 
quite a brave boy, and Estelle in a pretty cottage, and gaily 
dressed. When we had got comfortably seated by her stove, 
I saw from her affection that she wished me to do something 
for her. She need not have shown me any more, for she knew 
that I would do anything. I would have laid down my life 



298 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



for her. Presently she told me that she had been to see ftiQ 
mother of the little baby, the nourissmi . that foster-child as 
you call it . ^and that she was a beautiful young woman who 
had been married by the left hand . as they do in Germany ; 
but that, though the marriage was good,- the poor, dear child 
would not succeed his father. * Poor thing 1 ' said I, looking 
kindly at it ; but I thought of my little Estelle. It was a fine, 
beautiful baby . ^fair and large, like your English children; 
while mine was small, and of a beautiful, rich, dark complexion, 
poor thing ! The little fellow stretched forth his fat arms 
towards me, and smiled. 

" * See, Achille,' said my wife, ' he loves you already. Will 
you help him to his rights 1 ' 

" * What rights ? ' I asked. * Ses droits I . are not se^ droits 
all wrong, poor child 1 ' . 

*' ' Oh ! those cursed rich people,' said Estelle, * how they 
will rob the jpoor, and make laws of marriage for themselves, 
and not for us.' 

" ' We need not speak against them, Estelle,* I answered ; 
* they, too, are our brothers.' 

" * Well, we can help this poor babe, at least,' she answered ; 
' I love it as my own, and it will be a lord some day ' " . here 
Mr Horton and Old Daylight listened with intense interest . 
" * and I shall have been its foster-mother, and we will both 
be rich, and you shall harve your boat a thousand times better 
than the one you have, with others to work for you.' 

" * But my poor Uttle daughter . she is gone.' 

" ' Bah ! how foolish of you. We shall have other children 
. a son . some day, no doubt,' said Estelle, with a laugh. 

" What she said was very true, monsieur," interjected the 
old fisherman, gravely. " We had another child, a son. He 
is alive still, and wishes to marry a poor and good girl. That 
was why I went to his mother to beg her to give him some 
portion for his marriage, or a little dot for his bride." 

" And to dp a little smuggling too, you old sinner," thought 
Brownjohn to himself, *< if all be true that C6sar Negretti has 
told me. Well, time will bring all things to light. He seems 
to be bamboozling the beak with his long yam. Dang it ! a 
seaman, somehow or other, whether he is a French salt or a 



A L£FT-HAND£D BRIDK 299 



British tar, can always beat your landsman to fits^ the way he 
manages his jaw tackle." 

^'In that I did not succeed, sir; and I was going back 
empty-handed . for Estelle did not improve as she grew old. 
Few women do. Well, m'sieur, she had an idea that, as that 
child was a Frenchman, bom of a French mother, on the French 
soil, and under a French flag, we should do him right. His 
father, it would seem, was very fond of him, and not so fond 
of the Ugitime. It was proposed by M. Gustavo Flahault, 
inspired without doubt by the father, that we should, by some 
means, meet and exchange the children." 

"What children]" 

" Ah ! I had. forgotten to tell you. This Lord Chesterton, 
that great English nobleman, a mighty prince in his own land, 
had been obliged, by the laws of his country, and the truly 
British phlegm of his father . cold and haughty sire of a proud 
race . to marry an English miladi ; therefore, having done so, 
he did not love her. You see, there is the same fall for rich 
and poor in the way of love. I loved Estelle, and she did not 
love me. This poor lady, doubtless, loved her lord, and he 
did not love her. We play at cross purposes in this life . at 
Colm MaUlard / catch who catch' can . and then where are 
wel" 

This question, put chiefly to himself, not being answered, 
the old fellow continued his story. 

" The matter had been fully arranged between M. Gustave 
and my wife. We were to have three thousand francs for the 
business, and a small pension beside ; for the milord was rich; 
and could pay for his wickedness-. You see, the child of the 
woman he so loved . for he did love her with all his heart, 
this proud milord! . was to be taken home by the nurse, 
instead of the child she nursed ; for both were boys, and there 
was but a few days' difference between their birthdays. Poor 
children ! they were unconscious of all this. What does it 
matter to one in the cradle whether he is peasant or milord 1 
What will it matter when we are in the grave 1 " 

" What, indeed ? " thought the magistrate. 

" But I was not then a, 2>hilosophe, I could not consent that 
ihe child should be wronged. 



300 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



" ' Oh, Estelle,' I said, ' why did you tell me all this ? I 
will not consent.' 

" * Then it shall be done without you.' 

" * Bien, why did you not do it, then, before I came home, 
and never tell me anything about it ?' 

" ' So I should have done, only you returned just as we were 
preparing.' 

" * It is a wicked thing.' 

" ' You are mistaken. What the lord has done is a wicked 
thing to our poor compairiote. Is she not as good as any 
Englishwoman living ? I hate them . ^the calm, cold blondes, 
with their long boucles of hair, and their mincing gait and 
small mouths.' 

" Then she ran about, calling out, * Mamma, mamma,' like 
an English miss, till I laughed very much to see her so 
merry. At that, she called me a ^ petit honhomme/ and came 
on my knee, and kissed me ; and, enjin, 1 consented to her 
plan ! " 

Old Daylight at this, heaved a sigh of satisfaction. The old 
sailor had gone on so straightforwardly, that there was every 
probability of his coming clean out of the mire, and leaving 
the interesting Brownjohn in the hole. That individual, whose 
belief in himself never wavered, was interested in the story ; 
but not knowing so much of its truth either as the magistrate 
or his rival, he kept wondering when the point of clearance, or 
rather of conviction, would come. For come it would, in Brown- 
john's simple creed. 

" You consented," said the magistrate, severely, " to a very 
deep piece of villainy." 

" I know that, monsieur ; but what was I to do ? My wife 
would have managed it without me." 

The simple way in which this was said rather annoyed the 
magistrate, who was losing his faith in this ancient mariner 
with such deep feeling and such weak resolve. 

" He is like a Macbeth in humble life . ^more like him than 
ever,'' thought Old Daylight. " The immortal William, when 
he made a type, cut it so well that every impression that follows 
cannot be mistaken." 

" And did this plan succeed ? " 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 301 

"You shall hear, Trwn maitre. The plan was this: . The 
nurse of the young milord was to meet . by accident, of course, 
and led by Gustavo, the valet . our little nourisson and my 
wife, Estelle, at a little cabaret near some village on the sea 
coast. For milord had his wife cunningly brought over from 
England, and the children were dressed alike to every stitch . 
their robes, hats, everything they wore. This was well ordered 
and managed by Gustavo. When I consented, my wife was 
at peace, and pretended to love me for a few days. I often 
think that if I had not humoured her wickedness, but had been 
strong, and had beaten her, she would have loved me better." 

" If you had given your wicked wife a precious good drub- 
bing," thought Old- Daylight, " and made her carry the brat 
back to Mr Gustavo . that wicked serving-man . all this would 
not have happened, and I should never have known Mr Edgar 
Wade." 

" But, voUa tout / it was written in the Book of Fate, in 
which the Great Napoleon . ^who was a wiser man than I. 
believed," . said the old seaman, as an excuse ; " and Estelle 
would do it. Well, as I said, before the day arrived she made 
much of me, and she sometimes let me have the baby to nurse 
and take with me. I was a great, big fellow then, m'sieur, 
and but a poor nurse ; but, as I walked along the sea-shore 
with the little child, I thought for many an hour on the wicked- 
ness I was to consent to, and begged my wife not to do it. 
But what could I do ? She was a woman of an iron will, and 
determined to work out her own affairs. She laughed at or 
cajoled me ; and I saw it was no use. Then it was that I was 
guilty of a trick towards her . but let that pass ; she had her 
secret, I had mine ! Well, the day came . one of the many 
days on which we watched and waited, waited and watched. 
At last, upon this day. it was the Bimanche, when we ought to 
have gone to mass, and amused ourselves like good children 
afterwards . ^we were walking, and a storm came on, threaten- 
ing rain. We took shelter with the child in the cabaret ; and, 
presently, in comes M. Gustavo, as pleased and as pleasant as 
any gentleman could be ; and, after a time, the bonne, in her 
Normandy cap, and the pretty, smiling babe . so like the one 
Estelle held. The women, of course, began to talk. ^when will 



302 ONE OP TWO ; OB, 



they not, my faith ? . of children and of dresses. The children 
were so much alike. Then they told each other how old they 
were ; and again . great heavens ! . how my Estelle did lie 1" 

The old man threw up his hands in innocent amazement at 
the recollected perjury of his wife. 

" The weather got darker, as if it was angry with the wicked 
plot. M. Gustavo cared not for this ; but sent for wine, and 
made the women drink. He plied the nurse well ; and then 
he oflfered that we should be nurses, and take the poor babes 
for a while ; and the women ran giggling away up-stairs. Pre- 
sently they came down j for a storm had commenced, and M. 
Gustavo was quite prepared to give the wrong baby to each. 
I had noted him. The storm . ^for we had thunder and light- 
ning . the noise of the elements, the confusion of the wine was 
enough to have dazed the young nurse; and while she was 
trembling at the lightning and stilling the babe . which had 
begun to cry . the valet threw a cracker into the fire, which 
exploded and nearly frightened us to death ; for we thought a 
thunderbolt had fallen. I was very angry. Perhaps you have 
observed, Monsieur TAvocHt, that a brave man is angry when 
he has been frightened ; he is angry that he has permitted 
himself to be so. I was terribly frightened. 

" ' Tonnerre de Dieu / ' I cried, * give up, M. Gustave . I will 
not have it ; ' and I drew my clasp-knife. 

'* * Have what, you fool you ? ' he cried. ' You are not half 
the man your wife is. Tais-ioL ' 

" * I will not,' I cried. ' Give back that child.' 

'< ' What child, Achille ? ' said my wife. * Alas I he is mad 
. my husband is mad. and he thinks of our little Estelle;* 

" The name made me madder. 

"*No, I don't, woman,' said I, rushing at her to take 
the child and give it to the nurse, who stood terrified at 
the quarrel. I had forgotten the knife in my hand, and I 
looked dreadful, no doubt. All that I recollect was a cry of 
' Murder I ' and my wife held me back with her strong right 
arm, while she held the baby in her left. I heard, too, the 
valet, Gustave, say in a low voice to Estelle . for he was as 
xool as a stone . * This is beautiful. Your good man is mad 
drunk' And then I felt a blow behind the right ear, and fell 



i 



A LEFT-HANDEP BRIDE. 303 

forwards over a bench. When I came to my senses, my wife 
was bathing my head with vinegar, and weeping over me ; for 
there were people in the room. 

" ^ You fool,' said she, in a low tone, * you very nearly spoilt 
all . did he not, M. Gustavo 1 ' 

"^Yes; and nearly frightened that nurse to death. He 
could not have done better . he acted admirably,' said the 
valet, laughing. * I hope I did not hit him hard.' 

" * And the little child . the young milord.' 

" * Hush ! ' said my wife. 

" ' Oh, let the interesting creature speak, madame,' added 
the valet ; ' he could not have served us better. The storm is 
over, and the child and nurse are safe at home. I procured 
them a carriage to take them to milady, who must be terrified.' 

" * And you will hold your tongue, you fool you, will you 
not ? ' said Estelle. 

'^ I groaned within my heart ; but, fool as I was, I had a 
secret still." 

" The children were, then, changed ? " asked the magistrate, 
eagerly. 

" I can't say. I was senseless, Monsieur TAvoc^t. I did 
not see them given back. It may be, and it may be not. But 
I have a sure way of knowing them ; and as my wife is dead, 
perhaps my great Lord Chesterton may help a poor man, if he 
will tell his secret." 

*' Will you tell me privately ? " asked Mr Horton, eagerjy. 

" I don't know. Monsieur TAvocAt," returned the old sea- 
man, with the same sweet smile and imperturbable innocence. 
" I have nothing with that now. You question me as to the 
murder of my wife. Of that I will tell you all I know.". 



CHAPTEE XLI. 

" (Tlaitdio. Doth Heaven interpose for things of earth ? 
Sometimes the levin-brand strikes down the good, 
And spares the guilty standing by his side ! " 

The Avenger, act v. bc. i. 

" Well, presentiments and dreams are fine things," said Old 
Daylight to himself one morning as he was dressing, and care- 



304 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



fully wrapping round his meek the many yards of white hand- 
kerchief which civilisation then demanded of a man. 

It will be remembered that one of the grave charges against 
a noble poet, made slightly anteriorly to this, was that he wore 
no necktie. It need not be said that, if Mr Tom Forster, 
when he was in trade, had dared to perpetrate such an eccen- 
tricity, he might just as well have shut up shop. There was, 
however, no fear of this. Mr Forster only allowed his thoughts 
to go free. The outer man was rigidly groomed and kept in 
order. Not a string, npr a button, nor the hair of the beaver 
hat . regularly purchased at Messrs Hall's, of Kegent Circus, 
then a grand new establishment . ^was allowed to be out of 
place. 

" Presentiments and dreams are very fine things ; but I 'm 
staggered if I know what to make of these warnings a fellow 
gets that are neither one nor t'other. Of course, I knew that 
this old fellow would not turn out to be the man ; but I didn't 
know that he would have such a finger in the pie. There, I 
think that will do." 

Here he finished his toilet, having adjusted a cravat, of the 
size and weight of a large dinner napkin, in a very careful 
style, and having achieved a bow in the cravat of which he 
had reason to be proud. 

" And, after all, what a little world it is that we live in ! 
Here's an old French fellow . one would have thought hun- 
dreds of miles away from our business . ^intimately * allied ' . as 
they say in this beautiful and expressive language. with one 
of our first families." 

He paused a little ; then continued . 

" And here am I, as plain and as frosaic an old file as ever 
wore Hessians polished by Mr Hunt's blacking, living in the 
same house with a young fellow who, as Mr Kolt says in one 
of his leaders of some one else, is ' the centre of a network of 
romance.' Romance ! . it 's all about us, on'y people don't and 
won't see it. One man walks the street with his eye^ shut ; 
by comes another, and he sees. This number two tells number 
one what he sees, and number one tells him that he 's a liar, 
or romancing, or something of that sctrt. * He that hath eyes 
to see, let him see.* " . . - . . 



A LEFT-HANIfED BRIDR 305 

The old gentleman was near enoagh to the spirit of his 
quotation, but not to the letter, and was puzzling himself in a 
mental induction. 

'^ Presentiments and dreams ! What are they 1 Half the 
times that they come, we take no notice of them. What can 
I do with those half-formed warnings that are neither ? Some- 
thing" 

But that " something" was so unformed, that he could not 
put words to it. He was not satisfied with the turn things 
were taking, and merely put off his vague presentiment with 
the assertion that there was something in the air . something 
which boded no good to him. To Winifred, on the contrary, 
her dream . by no means a vague one . carried hope and deter- 
mination. After she had breakfasted, and finished her toilet, 
she sought Lord Chesterton ; and, withholding from him any 
hint of her dream, told him that her first duty was to seek her 
husband. Lord Chesterton, with that miserable inaction which 
a want of faith induces, was perplexed beyond measure, and 
quite unable to advise his daughter-in-law. 

" Yes, my dear," he said to that lady ; " of course it is your 
duty to seek out Philip ; but I dan't know how to tell you in 
what way you are to proceed." 

" I think I can find a way," said Winifred, with simple de- 
termination. " We must consult Philip as to what steps we 
are to take." 

The Earl passed his hands over his eyes in his weary way. 
He did not clearly see how he was to advance. 

" Had we not better leave all this," he asked, " to Mr Edgar 
Wade, who has so kindly promised to undertake it for us ? He 
was here with me till very late at night, and was, I can assure 
you, casting about on all sides for the best means of defence." 

But Winifred did not appear satisfied with Edgar Wade's 
defence. 

" We can, surely," she said, '« consult others ! " 

" Whom else 1 " asked the Earl, wearily. *' We must debate 

this family disgrace with half the town ! " 

" Not so, my lord. There is Mr Horton, who knows as 

much, or more, than we know, and who will be sure to give us 

the best advice." 

u 



306 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



" Alas I he is bound by his office to take a view which is 
antagonistic to our own." 

" Not so ; an impartial view, if you like. Mr Horton is a 
just man. I would trust my life, my honour, even my Philip, 
in his hands." 

"Perhaps you are right, my dear," returned the Earl, 
dreamily. " You may go to him. I cannot accompany you 
myself, but Mrs Preen or Mr Roskell shall accompany you." 

It was not from any disrespect to Mrs Preen, but rather 
that Winifred was weak enough to feel that the presence of a 
man was somewhat of a protection . for which feeling, no 
doubt, the masculine part of the second sex of man will 
thoroughly despise her . ^that Mr Eoskell was summoned to 
provide a private, but hired vehicle, to take Winifred to Mr 
Horton's office. Eoskell creaked up the stairs, looking as 
usual. Although severely exercised by the cloud which had 
fallen upon what he called "our house," that .worthy retainer 
was too well-bred to let any one see that anything was the 
matter. He had thrown an amount of cheerfulness into his 
honest face which did both Winifred and the Earl much good 
to see. He entered at once into the business, and was, indeed, 
glad to do anything for the fair young lady who was Philip's 
wife. There was so much movement and ready willingness 
about him, that the Earl could not help noticing it, and, with 
a little alteration of Wolsey's celebrated speech, saying to 
himself . that if he had only served Heaven with half the 
alacrity that his servants showed to him, this trouble would 
not have so plagued him now. It was arranged, therefore^ 
that Winifred should go and consult Philip, while Lord Ches- 
terton remained at home awaiting Edgar Wade. 

" The carriage waits, my lady," said Mr Roskell, shortly. 

The time did not seem long. Nothing had since passed between 
father and daughter : the Earl had been determinately silent, and 
Winifred held him in too much awe to question him about 
matters which were so near to her heart. In those days, when 
miniature broughams were not, and a one-horse close carriage 
would have been looked upon with scorn and reproach, it was 
rather difficult to pick out any vehicle which did not look tall 
and imposing; but Eoskell had managed to secure a doctor's town 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 307 

.>. . .. . !. .. II I- lil I . !. .- 

chariot of a dark colour ; and mounted on the box beside the 
driver, and armed with a huge umbrella to hold over my lady 
in her passage to and from the coach, he formed an appropriate 
body-guard. Mr Horton received the young lady with that 
courteous politeness, that deference to woman simply because 
of her sex, which then existed, and which is now a thing of 
the past. Of course, if we look at it philosophically, this 
charming manner, which then distinguished the true gentle- 
man, was only a refined and elaborate insult, intended to put 
woman in mind that she was not a man. But in those days 
ladies did not view matters through that dissolving glass of 
all beautiful illusions, which we call " Social Science " . ^rather 
should we not call it w?isocial science? Winifred gathered 
comfort from Mr Horton's looks, though he had little himself. 
He told her that a second person had been arrested. 

" The real murderer % " cried Winifred. 

"That remains to be seen,'' returned the magistrate; and 
his answer told the young lady that nothing had yet been 
" elicited " . to use a phrase which was a favourite in the ela- 
borate articles of Mr Barnett Slammers. 

" Was there a murder at all % " asked Lady Wimpole, as if a 
bright idea had occurred to her. "It might have been a 
suicide 1 " 

Mr Horton shook his head. The evidence, which he well 
knew, did not admit of that. indeed, it all pointed to one per- 
son ; but the magistrate was not cruel enough to tell Winifred 

" And where is Philip, my husband % I must see him, and 
at once." 

" Lord Wimpole was safely * lodged ' with a friend of his," 
returned Mr Horton, taking the liberty to give Captain Ches- 
man . the governor of the gaol . the brevet rank of *^ friend." 

" I must see him," persisted Winifred. 

Mr Horton shook his head. 

"Listen to me," said the lady, looking very calm, and 
putting the auxiliary verb last, as we all do, Gentle or Simple, 
to give force to hw sentence : "unless I am kept fipom him by 
main force, see him I will I " " 

Upon this, Mr Horton struck his colours ; and, under pretext 



308 ONE OF T^^O ; OR, 



of giving Winifred a letter of introduction to the gallant 
Waterloo officer in command of his Majesty's strong-place at 
Clerkenwell, wrote out an order for her admission to visit the 
detenu. ^ 

"You will promise me not to stay long?" said George 
Horton, looking into the young, clear eyes of Winifred, with 
all his old love purified and refined into the sublimated essence 
of true friendship. ** For your own sake . for mine . ^for 
Aw." 

Aye, that was the more potent syllable ! Winifred gave her 
promise ; and attended to the coach by the magistrate, who saw 
with pleasure her body-guard mount the box, she drove rapidly 
away. 

Philip, it needs not to be said, was delighted at the sight of 
his wife. He had a very comfortable room; but, as there 
were bars to the windows and bolts to the doors, nothing could 
persuade the lady that it was not a dreadful placa 

" My darling," he said, looking fondly in her face, and taking 
her soft arms from his neck, so as to clasp both her hands as 
he sat by her side on the sofa. " My darling, I *m so happy.'' 

" O Philip 1 " she said, " how can you be so cruel, to be happy 
when you are here, and away from me ? " 

" Because you come to me, my wife,'' he said ; " because you 
prove your love." 

" Why," she said, smiling, with the tears standing in her 
eyes, like sunshine peeping through clouds of rain, "every 
woman would do that for her husband." 

" I believe they would, dear," replied he, lifting her hand and 
kissing it with a sweet respect. " They are so good, if we only 
knew it, and only trusted them. But now I have proved what 
was only theory, you know. And we jealous men are so foolish 
as to ask proof of that of which we are most certain . of the 
goodness of women and of God ! " 

" Hush ! " she said, kissing his lips, so as to stop his mouth. 
" Yes, He is good, my Philip ; He will not desert us, though He 
has plagued us with this trial." 

" Thought us worthy of trial, you mean, Winifred, How 
many men pass life without any gr^at sorrow and any trouble ? 
<*~ordinarily successful, petted with the good things of the 



A LEFT-HANPED BRIDE. 309 

world, because they are unable to bear sorrow. And ours, 
after all, is but little." 

" O Philip 1 " said the wife, ** you teach me how to bear 
sorrows." 

" If I do, my love, that is as it should be. I am the head of 
this sad household, which has nothing left but those who sit 
here : us two, Winifred. And this, too, makes me happy. 
After this trial, my dear, if all proves well . as I hope it will . 
we will go to America, to that far-stretching country where 
Man . great only by himself, with no false honour from the 
overprized deeds of those who lived before him, not mounted 
high upon the accident of birth . can lift his forehead to the 
morning sky which bends o'er half a. world of free-born men 
owning no masters but themselves and God ! " 

He rose as he said this, proudly and with determination, 
and seemed to Winifred a firmer, stronger man than she had 
seen him. 

" We will, darling . we will," she said, catching a little of 
his enthusiasm. 

" And we shall need no adventitious aid to make us known 
and honoured. No people will come to us, to bow down to 
place and not to us ; no one will feign a love because we have 
a high-bom name. Our honest deeds shall be our ancestry." 

" My noble Philip," she said; "my knight, my true one. You 
do not mind this cruel blow. How great, how good of you ! " 

*' Not so, my wife," throwing so much love in the name that ' 
she rose to him, and placed her heart against his to catch some 
of the enthusiasm of his deep affection. " You do%iot know 
what a coward I was ; how, on the night he told me " 

" He 1 You mean Edgar Wade 1 " 

*' The same . ^who, if aU be true, is the right Lord Wimpole." 

" It cannot be true," murmured Winifred, " it cannot be true. 
I do so hate and dread that man." 

" Alas ! my darling, you must bear the trial well. I am 
afraid it is true. Let it be so : we will at least argue as if it 
were. Those papers were not forgeries, nor did the Earl of 
Chesterton deny them . he could not do so." 

Winifred shuddered at the thought. How complicated were 
the meshes which held her love in prison and in danger. 



310 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



" But I must confess, my love/* continued Philip, ** that on that 
night on which I first heard all, I was shaken and dismayed. 
You only gave me true courage. Disinherited as I was *' 

" Disinherited, my dear," she answered, pressing more closeljr 
to him, " but not disgraced." 

'' Made me feel," he continued, as he looked into the two 
deep wells of love she called her eyes, " how high I yet stood^ 
even when I had fallen." 

It was his turn now to press her close to him. Their voices 
. full of deep affection . ^had sunk to a whisper ; they spoke 
little, and they spoke low. Not one word was said of guilt, or 
of the dreadful trial which awaited them, then. Their happi- 
ness was supreme. They had gone through the fire which 
makes love pure, and had stood the test. 

" O Philip," murmured Winifred, after a tune ; " I never 
felt so happy in my life ! " 

" Nor I," he answered, softly. " Till now, I did not even 
know what happiness was like." 

After some time . a short time, perhaps, but love made it 
remembered as a long, long space . she said . 

" He is to defend you, Philip. Can you trust him, dear 1 " 

** God will defend w«, Winifred," he answered, as if they 
were both upon their trial. 

" Yes, love ; He will not desert us, nor," she added, with a 
single sigh, " give us further grief." 

" Except for our good," said Philip, cheerily. " Sometimes 
He wills it so, that we may bear all well, and yet not escape. 
But bear up, and hope for aid and comfort . hope for it, dar- 
ling ! Why, we have it in our love." 

The allotted time fled away : how quickly it had passed ! 
Captain Chesman, with a military step, and with quite suffi- 
cient noise to make his guests aware that he approached, 
opened the door as if to ask some trivial question. Philip took 
the hint ; and Winifred, far more sustained and happier than 
when she came, left her husband where he was so securely 
lodged and so well looked after. She hurried back to the 
carriage, attended by the faithful steward ; and was happy in 
the recollection of every word and look of Philip, until she 
was driven into the courtyard of Chesterton House. 



V 

»" 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 311 

" Was the Earl at home 9 '' she asked of Mr Checketts^ who 
received her. 

'^ TeSy my lady ; and in close consaltatian with Mr Edgar 
Wade." 

" I will go and see them.'' 

** He was not to be disturbed." 

" Never mind 'that. TeU him I come directly fix)m Lord 
Wimpole." 

<< Aye, that I will/' said Checketts to himsel£, as he hurried 
up the stairs. 

CHAPTER XLH. 

DX RICHARDS ELECTRIFIES HIS PATIENT, 

There are very few men bold enough to face the consequences 
of their own acts ; and the timidity which guilt or folly breeds 
has this peculiarity, that it increases with the length of time 
which has elapsed since the committal of the crime or folly. 
Thus sin, which ** drags at each remove a lightning chain," 
has also the miraculous power of making the chain stronger as 
it grows longer. Even the virtuous Mr Eugene Aram, it is 
said, manifested a great deal of horror and alarm at entering 
the cave wherein the bare skeleton of his victim lay. In short, 
it is comfortable to reflect that an error, as FuUar has it, can 
never by increase of years become truth, but " rather the more 
damnable error ; " and that the father of all Hes and errors . 
or, to speak more plainly, the devil . is an ass ! Lord Chester- 
ton was by no means unwilling to listen to the advice of his 
son . ^whom we know as Edgar Wade . and to keep away from 
visiting that cunning and deceitful creature who had so long 
kept Edgar from his rights. Edgar Wade had retumcd to the 
subject when he again visited his father; and ho ha^l throifn 
out, in his casual yet eflfective way, the hint that it wrjliM >>a 
useless to see this poor lady until the dreadful accusation now 
hanging over the house was dismissed 

" Perhaps you are rij^t," said thu Earl « What«rw \n 
ri^t T am willing to do. We have ciw/ogli sorrow and trouble 
on hand." 



312 ONE OF TWO; OR, 



" Quite so, my lord ; quite so. But it is astonishing how 
these troubles will pass if we take them one by one. When a 
man is attacked by three men, if they will only observe that 
rule of honour, he will conquer ; for, if he be strong, he may 
endure, and be more than a match for them singly. I merely 
mention this in regard to something you said yesterday. The 
subject w^ hardly worth recurring to. The poor lady is, 
besides, dreadfully ill." 

Dreadfully ill, indeed ! . ^barely clinging on to life, the body 
living, but on the ndnd ; living, as it will, mysteriously, for 
some purpose ; for Dr Eichards, a man of science, rather than 
of faith, had pronounced her scientifically dead for some time. 

" I am deeply grieved to hear it," said the Earl, slowly, and 
in a low tone j as if, while he was speaking, he was realising 
her position. 

His mind flew back to the days when a cloud would seem 
to have fallen on his life if Eugenie were but ill ; when, if 
even her finger ached, his would have ached also ; when, if the 
doctor had told him that her life were in danger, he would 
have turned cold in dread, and have watched and prayed 
night and day at her bedside. And now she was alone ! 
Alone! save for one whose presence made her seem more 
^solitary still. A nurse, whose hire was her sense of duty . 
who would carry the few pounds she had earned to her convent, 
for her account in heaven . ^who, while she tended her, said 
prayers, and was engaged in " making her own soul " while 
her patient lay djdng . who looked upon her attendance as an 
extra penance, and who might be more holy, but was not half 
so comfortable nor comforting as one of the homely old nurses 
. widow and else . who hire themselves week by week, and 
who pour out gossip, hope, and consolation with each draught 
they give. How utterly alone was Eugenie ! Son and husband 
had both fled. Youth and beauty had gone, too j as if they 
were like human friends, and kept with her only while all 
was sunshine weather; and helplessness, sickness, and worn 
age . a sad Trinity . sat at her couch and waited on her days. 
How many a woman's fall is like to hers ! To how many are 
the few short fleeting years of youth, the only time of happi- 
ness and love 1 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 313 



" I am very much grieved to hear it/' repeated the old Eai'l, 
more sadly. 

" She played the game that women often play/' returned 
Edgar, thinking bitterly of his own love, " and lost." 

" Lost ! indeed she did In the game of life, women often 
do lose, matched against men . such men, too, as there are," 
returned Lord Chesterton, warmly. "I have wronged her. 
I should beg her pardon, if I should wish to die in peace." 

" I am afraid," returned the barrister, " that your lordship 
thinks more generously than the world does. But," he added, 
seeing that the Earl was silent, " Mrs Wade has been so long 
speechless, that if you were to see her, your visit would be 
thrown away." 

The Earl shuddered b& his son said this ; and it was at this 
juncture that Winifred entered, having heard the last sentence^ 
As there was little love lost between the barrister and the lady, 
for the very good, reason that he had attacked her husband's 
interests . for it cannot be supposed that instinct or perception 
had anything to do with the matter . it was enough for Wini- 
fred to understand, which she did at once, that Edgar Wade 
had been persuading the Earl to stay away, to make Winifred 
urge him at once to see Mrs Wade. It was, therefore, with a 
little rising at her throat, and a quick and hurried movement^ 
that Winifred, gaining the Earl's side, spoke and said . 

" Mr Wade will excuse me, I am sure ; but time presses. I 
have been to see Philip " . she added, " Lord Wimpole," in a 
patronising and explanatoiy tone, to the barrister . " and he 
is so happy, my lord. I went to comfort him, and he comforts 



me. 



'' I am glad his lordship has such good spiritis/' said the 
barrister, drily. 

" He is full of hope and faith, my dear lord," said Winifred, 
not heeding the interruption. "He knows that this foul 
accusation will soon be disposed of." 

" I wish he would tell us how," retorted Edgar. " I con- 
fess that, from the view the law is likely to take of it, I am 
puzzled." 

" He wishes you . I am sure he wishes you," urged Winifred, 
again appealing to the Earl . " to bear up, and to be of good 



314 ONE OF TWO; OR, 



cheer. All will yet be well. And Mr Horton, too, he by no 
means desponds ; and he is a brave and skilful man, one of 
experience and knowledge/' 

" We are, indeed, glad to hear it," answered the barrister, 
somewhat cheerfully. '^ I shall be delighted to be counselled 
by such a man as Mr Horton." 

Winifred ignored him, but was still fondling the hands of 
the Earl between her own, and evidently making up her mind 
for an effort. The effort was made ; its result was a little white 
lie . the whitest, surely, ever made for the sake of a husband ! 

" And . I really must not forget his one earnest vnsh " . she 
had desired to say message, but by the wisdom of woman she 
was counselled to a subterfuge . " it was, that you should at 
once see Madame Wade." 

Edgar started. For a moment, his large dark eyes seemed 
to close and grow smaller. Then he spoke . 

" We have been talking about that," he answered. " I fear 
it would be injudicious for the Earl to do so." 

" I do not see that," said Winifred, eagerly. " She may 
know something about this." 

" She cannot. The very news of the crime smote her with 
this strange disease. She has been unconscious ever since." 

Winifred steeled her heart against the barrister. Uncon- 
scious ! she did not believe it, and was almost saying so. She 
doubted every word that man said. 

" She may appear unconscious," she answered. " Perhaps 
she has no one to whom she cares to speak, poor thing ! " 

The tone of pity brought back his sad recollections to the 
Earl. After all, Winifred^s suggestions were not unUkely. 
Her secret discovered . all passing from her . and she alone 
bearing the weight of guilt ; it was not unlikely. 

" I have not been neglectful of her, madame," returned the 
barrister, haughtily. He could see that between him and 
Winifred there must be a passage of arms. " I have done all 
that can be done. She is attended by the best physician . my 
friend, Dr Richards . and a fit and proper nurse, one skilled 
in nursing . a religious lady." 

" I beg your pardon," said Winifred, eagerly. " I am so 
glad that the poor lady is well looked after." 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 315 

Edgar Wade bowed, stiffly and grimly, at this little 
amende. 

" I know Dr Eichards very well," said Winifred ; " he used 
to attend to my aunt. He is a very skilfol man, indeed ; that 
will be all the better. We will go and see her, and at once. 
will you not, my lord ? " 

" As you will, my dear," said the old nobleman, rising. " 1 
am ready." 

Somehow, Edgar WaSe . of course, in the interest of his 
client . was unwilling that this interview should take place. 

" This interview, my lord," he said, " will be very mal a 
promos, I do not myself see what good can come of it, nor how 
you intend to approach one who is so seriously . who is, in 
fact, unconscious." 

'* Then there is not a moment to be lost," said Winifred. 
"Your reasons, Mr Wade, make rather for than against Lord 
Chesterton's visit. He would bitterly regret during all his 
life if he did not now go and see her. In a very short time it 
may be too late ; and then, whatever his desire may be, how 
strongly soever he may wish and pray to see her, it will be 
useless." 

" Too late . ^too late," thought the old nobleman; "'too late 
to see my Eugenie 1 What would I have said if I had heard 
those words long ago 1 " 

Then, turning to Winifred, he spoke . 

" You are right, my dear ; let us go at once. The carriage 
is ready. We can drop Mr Wade at Mr Horton's house in 
Wimpole Street, if we go that way." 

" Very good," said the barrister, without appearing chagrined. 
" At the worst, you will only have lost your time. I presume 
that her nurse will not allow her to receive a shock that can 
be at all harmful. I only regret that your lordship^ who must 
be full of one trouble, should undertake another." 

" Lady Sark used to say," observed Winifred, as the three 
passed down the wide staircase of the house, preceded by Mr 
itoskell, who had a carriage duly ready . as all things were in 
that well-4nanaged house . " that troubles always came thick 
and threefold ; and that the only blessing of that was, that 
one drove out another." 



316 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



" That was taking rather a cheerful view of matters, for her 
ladyship," returned Lord Chesterton. " I suppose they do . I 
suppose they do." 

Mr Wade probably thought that upon this matter his old 
friend would have quoted Shakespeare . 

'* When sorrows come, they come not single spies, 
But in battalions." 

But he contented himself with sitting in silence and in gloom 
at the back of the family chariot, which rolled softly onwards 
to AYimpole Street. Having arrived there, he duly stopped 
at Mr Horton's modest house, and the coach took on its 
freightage to Queen Anne Street. The eccentric old gentle- 
man who owned the mansion was not at home ; and the eager, 
and intrusive housekeeper, who watched his outgoings and his 
incomings with so much anxious care, flew up to the street door 
when she heard the ponderous knock of the Chesterton footman 
waking up the echoes of the tall house and the quiet street. 

" God bless the man ! " she cried, " he will knock the house 
down. That comes of the old gentleman not allowing me to 
tie up the knocker with a black kid glove. He says it 's un- 
lucky. Not more unlucky than a white kid, I 'm sure. One 
brings death and the other life . leastways, they shows as death 
or life have been visitin' the 'ouse. And which is luckier 1 
Says he, * No one comes 'ere with their thunderin' knocks ; * an' 
he 's no sooner turned his back on the 'ouse, but here they is. 
"Well, that 's a fine chariot . too fine for the doctor. Besides, 
he 's here." 

This she said as she ducked on the landing to get what she 
called a " squint " through the windows at the side of the door. 
The footman announced the Earl in so subdued a way. as if 
conscious of having made by far too much noise . and that 
nobleman and Lady Winifred entered in so gentle a way, that 
the housekeeper was mollified, and set no bar to the entrance of 
the nobleman and the lady to the chamber of the sick woman. 

" She was very ill," she said, in one of those dreadful whispers 
which echo so, and which seem to float about a sick house . 
" very ill, indeed. The doctor was stoppin' with her some time 
this mornin'. He had brought a hinstrumeut with liim," 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIBE. - 317 

There is something terribly vague and horrible about the 
"Word " instrument," when used in connection with an invalid. 
Poor Winifred shuddered as if it were a guillotine ; but it was 
nothing half so dreadfuL Dr Richards, eminently in advance 
of his medical brethren, had merely brought a galvanic battery 
. a somewhat rude instrument compared with our finer pieces 
of mechanism, but one which was sufficient for his purpose. 
So it was, that when, full of dread and tremor, the Earl and 
Winifred crept up-stairs into the chamber of the sick, which 
lay at the back of Edgar Wade's study, they found the Sister 
of Charity slowly dropping her beads, and looking with wonder 
on the stout, earnest, rough-haired little doctor, who, with his 
battery on the table, was prepared to strike the spark. Two 
bent and twisted wires ran from the table to the hands and the 
head of the invalid, who . ^pale as death, her beautiful black 
hair streaming on her pillow, her hands white as paper and as 
thin as those of a skeleton . ^lay quite motionless on the bed. 

"Stop a bit," whispered the doctor to Winifred, as she 
entered first. " Stop a bit " . he spoke as if he had known her 
for years. "Now, you are just in time to see a wonderful experi- 
ment . ^that is, if you have never seen it before. I could not 
have found a more beautiful subject." The doctor used " beauti- 
ful" as " fit." " There she is, neither alive nor dead ; hasn't 
spoken for nearly a week. You see that wire round the back 
of her head ? There 's where I think we shall do good. But 
quite a chance. Never was such an excellent chance for prov- 
ing Gralvani's theory, that ' electricity is life.' " 

The Earl's heart beat violently, his head was bent down, as 
he entered the room of the dying woman. As he did so, the 
disc of the electric machine was whirled rapidly round, and a 
little sparkle fluttered, like a blue Psyche, for a moment on its 
edge. The invalid shuddered, and, with a slight start, spoke 
in a voice so low, so tremulous, and so plaintive, that from 
the eyes of Winifred and the Earl tears fell ; while the Man of 
Science and the Woman of Eeligion looked on with stoical in- 
difference, saving that Dr Richards' face seemed lit up with joy 
at the success of his experiment. 

" Philip ! . ^my old love ! I have waited long for this, ' 
You have come at last J" .--. c .i.- . .^ ..^ - 



318 ONE OF TWO j OK, 



" You see, the eyes don't open. She knows you, sir, evi- 
dently. That 's hardly electricity . ^that 's a more delicate and 
more subtle fluid yet, that touches her bndn . thai ^s the secret 
of that much-maligned physician, Dr Mesmer. Here, nurse- 
wine 1 wine ! Pour a glass of champagne down her throat . 
don't give her broth and slops . and we will save her yet ! " 



CHAPTER XLin. 

** Leonora. Sinful am I, but not compact of sin. 
Though Satan charges me with many darts, 
But one shaU wound.'' . 

.Marion Colonna, act ii bc. iii. 

" Wine, wine ! . we will save her yet ! " cried the doctor. 

Heavens above us ! what an anxiety and bustle, what a 
straining of hope and of nerve, what a motion and an eagerness, 
to save life . one life ! As if at other times we were not as 
ready to throw away lives by the thousand ! For the sake of 
science . rather, cynics might say (but cynics are such queer 
fellows I), for the sake of himself . the good Dr Richards was 
as eager in attempting to bolster up the fleeting existence of 
Mrs Wade as a man well could be who was hunting, let us say, 
or pursuing any object, fame or wealth, or ambition of any 
sort. The eager little man, putting his arm round the thin, 
wasted form of the invalid, lifted her up, made the religieuse 
arrange the pillows, and himself poured, slowly and carefully, 
some very old port down the throat of poor Eugenie. The 
good Sister dropped her beads when Eugenie spoke. She had 
been so long silent, that the nurse had grown accustomed to 
the dumb woman she attended to, and whose lips she wetted 
with brandy and water ; and she had so quietly made her own 
soul in her constant prayers as she moved noiselessly about the 
room, that Mrs Wade was forgotten, save as some necessary 
piece of furniture. So in this world we become the property 
of each other. '^ I have said so many aves^ so many credos. 
Let me see . what must I do? Oh, I must attend to my 
invalid." 

^^My invalid 1*' Poor Eugenie had faded out of life, and 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDK 319 

had not a holding even in herself. The wine seconded the 
effect of the electric fluid in a marvellous way. The most 
admirable and subtle spirit, alcohol . the most absurdly abused 
of all God's creations, the thing which sets free the true nature 
of man, and then is crediteji by the ungrateful creature with 
having caused the crimes which it gave him the courage to 
commit . coursed through the veins of Eugenie, and made her 
tremble into something like reanimation. 

" It is wondrous, is it not," whispered the doctor to his on- 
looking friends, " that when one who has lived simply and 
purely, as this lady has, and who has no organic disease, some 
little action like that of electricity and alcohol will give her 
life ? You see, it has a mechanical effect . it is like shaking a 
watch when a particle of dust stops it. And yet, if this lady 
had been under the hands of Dr Dash or Dr Blank, he would 
have drenched the life out of her with Physic ! . Physic ! 
Half a glass more, Sister," he said, after a pause ; during which 
the lips of the patient opened, and the faintest of faint glows 
rose to her throat and cheeks. 

"There . that will be enough. She wishes to speak, and 
the strength will come very soon." 

So indeed it did. The poor lady trembled all over, with a 
delicate shudder ; and then, with a smile that was far sadder 
than a" tear, spoke . 

"Philip," she murmured . "Philip, T know you are here. 
Si^eak to me . speak to me once more, as once you did ! " 

The Earl, sinking upon his knees at the foot of the bed, had 
been all the time a prey to such emotions of awe, of strong 
trouble, and remorse, as one may be supposed to feel when he 
witnesses one whom he has wronged and loved risen from the 
dead. 

"Eugenie !" he answered. 

Age, disappointment, the wear of the world, the wrongs of 
misprized love, were all forgotten ; and the tones sounded as 
freshly as in youthful days, when they struck upon the dying 
woman's ears. As when the murmuring wind reaches an 
-^olian harp, and dies away upon the strings it renders elo- 
quent with music, the same sad tone is caught by the hearts 
of those who listen . so the little company around the bed 



320 ONE OF TWO; OR, 



seemed attuned to the nature of this sad shrift between the 
lovers. Nor did the wasted form of the one, and the bowed 
and whitened head of the other, serve to detract in any way 
from the freshness and reality of the love. For misfortune 
and the wintry cold of disappointment have this merit, that 
they seem to arrest one's existence at the very time it falls, and 
the lack of fruition thus prevents the increment of age. How 
many an old man is there who still remains in his heart as 
young as he was when that heart bent down, never to rise 
again, at the grave of his dead love 1 How many a woman 
lives . mature, but yet a girl in heart . ^who cherishes the feel- 
ing which she had when her love was lost at sea . never to bo 
heard of more, but never to be forgotten ] In some old books 
of household recipes, there is one which is said to arrest the 
development of a rosebud in midsummer, and to keep it fresh 
and green, so that, with careful tending and due warmth, it 
shall blossom in midwinter. The experiment is, perhaps, never 
successful, and hence the simile is the more true. The bud 
remains a bud, and never becomes a rose, but it withers in the 
form in which it is gathered j and so the human heart remains 
unchanged, except by the slow decay which, while it cheats 
with the promise of a future summer, keeps it with the sem- 
blance of youth, and visibly almost unaltered. 

" Eugenie, my Eugenie ! " 

The remembered voice, the old, fond tones, swept like the 
dying wind the chords of the poor lady's heart, and brought 
with them the memories of old days, and of the cherished love. 
Her eyes were still closed, but all her senses seemed preter- 
naturally acute. A smile of delight . ^radiant and bright, and 
pure as whiter sunshine. lit up her features ; and she spoke . 

" We were so happy," she said ; " so young, and both so 
innocent. We lived but for each other, JPhilip j and you, in 
your fond passion, were as true as I. What was the world to 
us ? What were its vanities, its empty pomp, its cruel, false 
ambitions] We lived but for each other; and every passing 
day, swift as it went when winged by joy and love, made us 
dearer to each other. 

" We had no bargaining, no buying, nor cheating, no chaf- 
fering with our love ; but gave ourselves to each other . a boy 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 321 

and girl . never dreaming of deceit which we could not com- 
prehend. And although the glory of that mom of love has 
been succeeded by a sudden long dark night, it never faded to 
the light of common day . was never ruined by mean doubts, 
npr fretted by everyday cares and follies ; but has remained a 
pure, sweet memory through all these years of sorrow. 

" Do you remember our first meeting, love ? . our first con- 
fession, and the innocent kiss which sealed the mutual tender 
of our hearts each to the other 1 Do you remember the long 
summer days of our journey to be married in Prussia 1 I was 
your wife by the left hand . that was all, you told me, that 
you could give me ; and I believed you, and was content, since 
you were a great noble, and I the daughter of a poor French 
imtgri, an artist. I knew I had your heart. I knew the vows 
I .flfered up to God were true. I trusted that He would 
accept them. 

" If we sinned . and the deep punishment of after-days will 
make us read in it God's judgment of our love, my Philip, 
which was too tenderly and too exclusively our own; too 
human, warm, and joyous of this life . ^we sinned at least in 
love, not hate ; from generous impulse, not from sordid desires 
and faithless love of the world. But this we knew not then. 
You lifted me from a life of trial and of care to one of comfort 
and of plenty, in its modest way.. You enabled me to aid my 
father in his years of want, disease, and old age ; and to lay 
my poor mother in an honoured grave. To you the retirement 
of our little house at Passy . with its tiny garden where the 
sweet birds^sang, and where the violets grew, and the sun 
came, it seemed to me, earlier and lingered later than in Paris 
streets . might have seemed but poverty. To me it was a 
fairy palace. I remember now the paper on the walls of our 
little salon, which gave its windows to our garden ; our little 
bed-room, fitted in the English style ; our kitchen, where our 
servant . a grave, honest, pious Norman . sat and told our 
beads, and wondered at our love . which rejoiced her heart 
and seemed to her, as she said, like some sweet fairy tale^ 
which she read all day and dreamed of in the night. 
. " I remember, too, almost every word you said : your noble 
sentiments; your generous disregard of self, your every action ; 

X 



322 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



not one angry word, not one clouded look in all those days of 
love ; not one expression of being tired or wearied of my fond 
love ; . not one sentence but that which an English gentleman 
might use to a lady far above him ! Can you wonder that I 
loved you 1 

" You were of that generous people which . ^when at war 
with my country, and suffering grievous wrong from her . 
received my father, and thousands like him, and aided him in 
all his struggles, and gave him life and hope. 

" And I, a girl, had an hereditary love for our noble en^ 
mies, and yet our friends, the English. I loved their language, 
their stately poems, and their calm yet warm manners. In 
you I found my ideal . no slave of passion, yet 'so full of life 
and love; no empty braggart, but so strong in action; no 
dreamer, yet so generous in thought. Oh, my Philip ! you were 
my all, and you were worthy . ay, in spite of untruth, wrong, 
and fate." 

Here the poor lady paused awhile, and the doctor gave her 
some more wine and water. 

" Let her speak,'' he said, softly . and his two bright, hard, 
and scientific brown eyes were brighter for the moisture that 
was in them, . '^ Let her speak as long as she will. This has 
been long upon her poor heart ; it wiH do her good to say her 
say, poor woman." 

Winifred had crept nearer to the sufferer, and had caught 
one hand, and fondled it and kissed it. In the picture of the 
father she recognised the traits of her own Philip ; and had 
not Eugenie been full of sorrow and ill-health, which was quite 
a sufficient reason to attract this young lady's love, she would 
have loved her for the sad sweet voice and the full-hearted 
memory of her own young love. The good little nurse, look- 
ing up with saintly eyes from under the cold shade of her 
white cornette, told her beads with fervour, and, it may be, 
thanked God that she had escaped this trial and this sorrow 
caused by human passions. Was she right 1 " I hardly know. 
Is the soldier better who has not joined the fight ? It may be 
so ; but surely the thankfulness which arises from past trial 
and trouble is better than that which boasts an isolated safety. 
The same sweet smile again flickered upon the thin, pale fea« 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 323 



' tures, as if some pleasant jnemory had lit up a lantern which 
had long been dark. 

** Do you remember, Philip," she said, " how we wandered 
in the Louvre, and in Versailles, and how you made each 
picture memorable by describing it to me, telling me of the 
story of my country, and never using one hard word against 
us : pointing out how we had fought at Fontenoy and Ivry, 
your face glowing with admiration for the gallant deeds of 
knights, or your eyes dimming with moisture as you recounted 
some heroic deed which led to death? 

" Sooner or later, all paths lead to death, my Philip ! The 
'world we reck so much of is death's antechamber ; and long 
have I waited in it. I am now near the door, and would bid 
you good-bye." 

The face was more solemn, but still hopeful, as she spoke. 
. Then the tone changed. 

" How often have I since stood in those pleasant palaces, and 
recalled those words ! Surely, if men knew the love that women 
bear them, they would never use one harsh phrase towards 
them. The memory has been a pleasant one, and has kept me 
alive during a long trial. 

" And, alas ! what a price we mortals pay for love, for com- 
fort, and for joy ! Thirty years ! . ^for thirty years, and the 
light of my life gone out, leaving me half dead and darkling. 

" The blow was too severe for me to attempt to defend my- 
self, or to recover from it. I could only gather what comfort 
there was in prayer, and in my child . our child, my Philip ! '' 

Winifred listened even more eagerly than before, and pressed 
the thin hand more closely. The Earl gazed at the dying 
woman even more intensely ; and the doctor, raising her form 
gently^ gave her some more refreshment. After a short pause, 
the patient, with a sadder tone, and the tears gently dropping 
one by one from her closed eyes, continued . 

** The trial had not changed me, my dear sweet love, nor 
had it broken me. I determined still to endure. I took the 
punishments, as some good -priests tell us to take them, as a 
recompense for the greater pleasures we had known as a trial 
and a test, a warning that we should not forget God. Heaven 
help me ! . life is at best a trial, when we hardly dare be happy 



324 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



except in the dreamlike illasions of our youth. I trusted your 
love, Philip, even though you were married to your English wife. 
I never flinched, nor failed, nor doubted. I was rewarded. Bat 
oh, the bitter sweet ! You proved your love by urging me to be 
dishonest to your other child. With all the eloquence which 
a pent-up, unsatisfied love could give you, you tried to persuade 
me to do wrong. I resisted for a long time. for a long, long 
time." 

" You did, Eugenie ! (Jod knows you did. You were better 
and wiser than I was. You set before me the folly of the 
wrong, but I could not be persuaded." 

" My dear I " murmured the poor sick lady, '* God permits 
some of us to yield to sin, because we do not trust Him. I was 
about to yield, when I went to confession, and sought comfort 
in the words of the good father who directed my prayers. He 
knew not of you, for I did not tell him all. He showed me a 
way out of the horrible pit, even if it was for the first and only 
time in my life " 

" The first and only time I " The Earl breathed more 
quickly, and awaited with anxious ears, as if he divined what 
was coming. 

" Even, then, if I deceived you. You urged me to change 
the children. You sent to me your Normandy nurse with my 
little boy, rosy with country air and tanned with sea breezes. 
He was to be, like you, the great Earl of Chesterton. But 
then he would have been, like you, tempted, set up high, and 
born to miserable alliances of family and of pride, never to 
know the truth. I looked for smaller paths and quieter ways 
for our child, my Philip. My heart revolted at the trial for 
my boy. I could not consent. Your nurse . a creature only 
won by gold . received my bribe as well as yours. You thought 
that you had succeeded ; but my child was kept near me . ^as 
I well knew . and did not fill another place ! Pardon me, 
PhiUp!" 

" Thank God ! . thank God ! " gasped the nobleman, as if a 
weight had fallen from him ; while Winifred, covering the thin, 
frail hand with grateful kisses, placed it to her own pure hearty 
saying . 

"iTe is Lord Wimpole still I" 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDK 325 



CHAPTER XLIV. 

" He should have been a light 
Shining to bless us ! 
But proved a storm and blight, 
Sent to distress us." 

. SOOTT. 

" This is a very strange case," remarked the doctor. 

" I am so thankful you are here, Dr Richards," whispered 
Winifred, speaking thus for her husband's sake. " You will 
remember what the poor lady has said ? " 

The doctor replied by an upward, a surprised but brilliant 
glance, which plainly said, " Can any one forget it 1 " The 
nurse, too, looked up, as if to testify that she also was human. 

" Hush ! " ejaculated the doctor at length, after a somewhat 
anxious pause; " she will speak again." Then he thought to 
himself, " The newly-recovered strength will last some time- 
it is useless to check her. What I dread is, the collapse after 
this ; but if she will aid us . as of course she will, with hope 
before her . ^I think we shall pull through. Sickness of what 
we call heart and mind, conscience and feeling ! . ^those are the 
matters which puzzle the doctor." The same strange, trem- 
bling, nervous motion passed over Mrs Wade's form and fea- 
tures as she again spoke, after drinking eagerly and with 
interest . not mere sufferance . some wine, as if she knew that 
it did her good, and gave her momentary strength. 

*' I would not have deceived you, Philip, in that ; for I would 
have done your bidding even in wrong, but that I would not 
wrong another. I am sure that I have been right. I felt a 
better and a wiser woman afterwards. I accepted, as you 
know, my fate. I was not one to struggle against the decrees 
of Providence. We loved each other too dearly. I loved you 
to the forgetfulness of all . even of God ; and He smote me to 
remembrance with a bitter blow. 

" I know this nurse was true to me and false to you, by a 
secret knowledge that a mother has. My child remained with 
her, was brought up by her in his earlier years ; and, alas ! by 
that secret way of nature, of which we know so little, imbibed 



326 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



strange moral poison in his foster-mother's milk. Alas ! 
Philip, he is not what his father's son should be, nor what his 
mother's teachings would have made him.'' 

Then Winifred was right. As she listened, she thanked 
God that in her prejudice she had not been unjust. 

" But let that pass . we '11 speak of it again," continued the 
invalid, in her low, sweet voice, and measured cadence, so full 
of harmony and rhythm, that the words seemed now and then 
to fall into natural lines of blank verse, and to admit of 
scansion. " In that I did deceive you, for your good ; but 
afterwards there came an accusation . based on some slight 
truth . which eager friends, your jealous fondness set to watch, 
brought foully against me. How could your faith be shaken ? 
How could you misjudge the one you loved 1 The fault began 
in you. A victim to your father's will and pride, you did me 
wrong j and then added to that evil in believing that I could 
return the wrong to your own bosom." 

The Earl groaned and sighed . now, when it was too late, 
fully believing what the dying woman said. 

" It was in vain that I wrote to you after your cruel letter. 
You had shut out all chances of the error being retrieved. 
My letters were returned. Again I wrote ; they were returned 
unopened. I bowed to fate. I was too proud, too much 
wounded . and deep sorrow has its pride as wejl as joy . to 
urge you more. I succumbed, and comforted myself by the 
penance I had to undergo. Why should I clear my fame to 
you? I asked myself; especially when a proof of my innocence 
would bring back your fondness, and make you unjust to and 
unhappy with your English wife. It has been, Philip, a mar- 
tyrdom of thirty years. Heaven knows how I have passed it. 
It is ended now. I wore this wrong suspicion, this most odious 
accusation, as one who does an unseen penance wears a chain 
of steel or shirt of hair. They lacerate the flesh ; your penance 
ate into my soul." 

" Forgive me ! oh, forgive me, Eugenie ! " 

" Forgiven, Philip, are you ere you ask . ^long loved, long 
cherished, long forgiven. I found that the accusation was 
based upon the visits of my brother, whom I had educated, 
with the money you had so plentifully bestowed upon me, at 



A LEFT-HANBED BRIDE. 327 

St Cyr; and who . poor, brave young fellow. had won hia 
epaulettes. He is dead now, thank Heaven for it ! He will 
meet me where our errors are more wisely looked at than by 
human eyes. H© was happy when he died, in some sharp fray 
in Africa j happy . with the name of his sister, his widowed 
sister, on his lips . that he gave his life to France. France . 
dear, sweet France ! I have been long away from her, in this 
cold land of my adoption. My dear, sweet mother country I 
I did not love her well enough j but now her sunshine and 
blue skies come back to me so plainly, so vividly : there seems 
to rest once more a gleam of her bright sunshine on my bed." 

The doctor well knew the meaning of this, and gave the in- 
valid more wine. It was useless trying to stop her, or to give 
her rest. Eapidly the sweet voice, so low and so clear in its 
enunciation, poured forth its words, as if the invalid knew that 
she was making her last shrift in this troublous world. 

" But our boy, when he came back to me, seemed to have 
come with an altered nature," she continued. " He grew up 
outwardly all that a fond mother could wish ; but inwardly 
cold, reserved, and clever . but with that cleverness which 
regards only self. He worked at his tasks steadily and with 
industry . accumulated knowledge, but it was for himself. 
For years I (Hd not let him know his history. 
. " He was ambitious, and chose his own career. He was 
determined to study the law ; for he saw that in that there 
lay more advancement in the world than in anything else, and 
that he might thereby take advantage of the weakness and the 
folhes of mankind. He said so, calmly and with purpose, to 
me. I hoped that, as he grew up, some strong passion of love 
mighf lay hold of him, ani purify his nature j but I found that 
youth passed away without this reUef. He never told me any- 
thing . ^was coldly polite to me, but never confided in me. 
The love which I had fondly dreamed he would, from his 
father's nature, shower upon me, was withheld. He was so 
constant at his studies, so determined to win his way. Alas ! 
the very faultlessness which others saw in him was to my fond 
heart his greatest fault itself. 

*' At last, in an evil hour, some six months ago, thinking to 
move him, I told him all. I was ill then, and I fancied that 



328 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



I might not ]fve ; and I thought that I should not like to die 
without his knowing his mother's story and his father's name. 

" The revelation did not seem either to distress him or to 
surprise him. He heard me coolly to the end . telling him, 
with broken voice, the sad story of my love and my punish- 
ment." 

Even here the poor dying creature said no harsh word* 
She might have told her cruel wrongs . and so the little group 
that heard her thought. Her reticence made the story more 
pathetic; and Lord Chesterton felt in his heart her great 
charity to be a blow and a reproof. 

" He listened cahnly, but said no word of sympathy ; while 
he complained bitterly of the wrong done to him. Oh, how 
every word of his wounded me ! My punishment was indeed 
bitter : it was more than I could bear. 

'^ Some time after that he obtained some of the letters which 
you had sent me . ^those letters which were a proof of what I 
had said, and which, while they revealed to him his birth, 
told him also of the love you bore him. He complained coolly, 
but in strong terms, that I had thwarted your schemes. He 
never uttered what my heart longed for . the generous approval 
of a son of a sorely tempted mother who had refrained from 
crime." 

The poor lady again paused, and the nurse refreshed her 
by putting some wine and water to her lips. Edgar Wade 
had in the meantime . for we must pause here to return to 
him . seen Mr Horton, whom he found quite willing to believe 
in Lord Wimpole's innocence. But Edgar was anxious to get 
away, and he assented to all Mr Horton surmised, merely 
gathering from him the result of his inquiries. He had pro- 
mised to call there, and he performed his promise methodically ; 
but even while the magistrate was talking, and he was listen- 
ing, his heart was in the sick room with Mrs Wade. With a 
few complimentary words he arose and left, and walked hur<. 
riedly round to Queen Anne Street. He let himself in by his 
key, and walked up-stairs softly. He had a quiet, careful step, 
which he seemed to have cultivated. When he reached the 
landing outside the door of the invalid, he waited for a time 
and listened. His ears were pretematurally acute. He noted 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 329 

a pause, as if the conversation had been interrupted. a soft 
rustling, and the undertones of the doctor, and . heavens ! . 
the voice of Mrs Wade. Quietly turning the handle of the 
door, he entered softly . so softly, that no one of those so 
intently listening to the sad shrifb of the speaker heard him. 
But the invalid felt his presence, although her eyes were 
unopened. Her whole frame shuddered, and seemed dilated 
with an angry agony. She rose forward, and concluded what 
she was saying . ^which had been some guai'ded statements]of a 
proposition made by her son . and said . 

" He is here. , I feel his presence. He is my bane, my pun- 
ishment. He is a murderer I " 



CHAPTER XLV. 

"Fata viam inveniunt.". Virg. ^neid, iii 395. 

The grand and spacious assembly of the Fraternity of Cogers 
seemed to swim away into space before the eyes of one of its 
most eloquent members, as he made that astonished ejacula- 
tion lately recorded. As he stared, so said Mr Slammers, 
like a "stuck pig," that very good-natured Bohemian, who 
was of an iron constitution, and proof against all accidents 
arising from convivial meetings, at once saw what to do. Mr 
Slammers was as ready with his help as he was with his pen . 
and, poor fellow, with his money ; that is, he was too ready 
with the two last. The journalist suffered from a fatal facility 
of writing and of giving. No one more ready with a para- 
graph or with a shilling. The consequence was, that neither 
. from " B. Slammers, Esq." . seemed to be appreciated. In 
any journal, or in any list of charitable donations, his clear, 
simple, and incisive paragraphs, and his small and modest sub- 
scriptions, were to be found. The first were said to be worth 
nothing; the second were given, said his charitable friends, 
for the sake of advertising the initials of B. S. Neither the 
talent nor the good heart of the man was appreciated ; but he 
never wanted employment, and almost as seldom a shilling. 
He was fed, as he observed, as the little birds were, by crumbs. 



330 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



He might have added that he was the most industrious of birds 
himself . always looking after the early worm, and never 
refusing a crumb, however humble. Hence, as the world 
never can ^nd never will appreciate ready, modest talent or 
genius, this jolly old Bohemian, who could have beaten the 
brains out of the ordinary Quarterly reviewer, as he then stood 
. we do not speak of Sydney Smith, Jeffrey, Macaulay, or 
Southey, but of the ordinary reviewers in the old volumes- 
sank down to be a mere reporter on a daily paper . or rather 
for the daily papers. 

** Come along, my young friend," said Bamett, as Mr Scorem 
let his head fall on his shoulder. " The chair has its eye on 
you. Turn round, face it, and look round. Here is a re- 
viver." 

So sa3ring, Barnett . with an agility arising from practice . 
flicked half a pinch of high-dried Scotch snuff into the nostrils 
of the clerk, and even managed to send a grain or two into his 
eyes. Scorem was right in a moment. He sneezed violently ; 
and, as a tour de force, rose and made a humorous adieu to his 
adversaries and supporters, and beat a retreat with all the 
honours of war. But when Bamett and Mr Checketts got 
him into the open air, the ** poor old man, the aged, and the 
experienced one," as he called himself . ^the one who knew the 
world and its little ways. collapsed, and could hardly find his 
way home. Bamett stuck by him. Checketts, with many 
apologies, was obliged to withdraw. This was painful to 
Scorem, because the " fresh air " . so Slammers accounted for 
it. had only triumphed over his tongue, his legs, his eyes, 
which had an indistinct vision, and his body generally. As 
for his brain, that was as clear as ever. 

" My dear young frenV he ejaculated, looking solemnly at 
Checketts, " let me be a warnV, a sp'cl warn'n'." 

" Bless me," laughed Checketts, " I 'm fly, sir . quite fly. A 
little overcome, like old Gurgles." 

And then, to cheer his friend, he stmck up with his misquo- 
tations : . 

" For the best of aU wayg 
For to lengthen our days, 
Is to go to bed early at night, my dear . 
For oh, the moon shines bright, my dear I *' 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 331 

" I* dus'n't I *ts gaz, the new lights. Your fren' Gug'l's 
crib'd Tom Moore. But's improved him . I say, 'proy'd 
him." 

Then he seemed to lose all that he wished to say, and sud- 
denly adjured Checketts not to waste his youth, nor to bring 
himself to an early and a repentant grave, as the aged indi- 
vidual before him was about to do. 

" Do you know where he lives 1 " asked Slammers, who had, 
with a workmanlike way, got him into Bride Court, and near 
a pump. " Just work away at that." 

Checketts soon produced a rush of cold water ; and Slam- 
mers, taking out a gaily printed pocket handkerchief, soaked 
it, and wrapped it round the clerk's head. 

" My address ! " said that individual, quite soberly and with 
an effort. " Mr Checketts, good night . it is late for you." 

He produced a square piece of blue paper, on which was 
written his name and residence, beautifully engrossed; and 
Checketts, hearing Slammers promise that he would see his 
friend all right, sped homewards. 

" I am glad he is gone," said the clerk, quite plainly. " I 
shall be well soon." 

" Of course you will, old fellow. You mixed your liquors, I 
suppose ; and hot rooms and excitement did the rest." 

" It 's not only that,^^ answered Scorem. " Come along with 
me, Mr Slammers. I want you. Give me your arm. My 
eyes are not quite right yet. Curious, is it not ? I never was 
more sober in my life ! Come along." 

So saying, they struck into Shoe Lane, passed through New 
Street Square and Fetter Lane, and by the time they reached 
the home of Mr Scorem, at the top of Gray's Inn Lane, and 
nearly opposite Theobald's Eoad, Scorem was as sober as the 
proverbial judge. The good-humoured reporter wished to go 
home ; but the clerk was profuse in his thanks, and especially 
desired to ask his advice. 

" I have a bit of cold mutton and a pickle up-stairs, if you 
will please to walk in. Do be so kind, if you will do me so 
much honour." 

" I 'm honoured myself," returned the reporter. " It 's not 
every one who would give me cold mutton and a pickle." 



332 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



"I should have thought, now/' returned Scorem, as he 
showed Mr Shunmers into his room, "that everybody was 
delighted to know an author. I am." 

" Ah ! young one," returned Slammers, with a sigh . " you 
are young ! I used to think so once ; and now I 'd rather that 
people did not know that I write at all ; and so would most 
men." 

"Why do they put their names to their books 1" asked 
Scorem, striking a flint and steel, and making a blue light and 
a powerful smell with a bundle of matches spread out like five 
fingers of a wooden hand. 

" Grood ! Because publishers would not buy them without. 
I once wrote a book myself, and foolishly told my mind and 
what I thought. Everybody immediately abused me, up hill 
and down dale. I bound up the criticisms, had them labelled 
* The Reward of Honesty,' and retired to the safety of anony- 
mous joumaUsm. That is the way, my boy, for me. But one 
proof was not enough. I wrote another book, anonymously : 
it was highly praised. I was foolish enough to put my name 
to the second edition : it was as loudly cried down. After 
that, I wrote no more. I had solved a problem, and I had 
found that . 

* The post of honour is a private station ' . 

wherein you can cut, hack, slash, and stab the reputations of 
your friends and foes with a touching impartiality.'* 

" Is all this true . can it be true 1 " gasped Scorem. 

" True as gospel, my boy," said the reporter, picking out a 
pickle from a glass bottle. "They have in some papers in 
France the articles signed with their names ; but we could not 
stand it here. Men are either . mentally, mind you (we are 
brave enough else) . ^too cowardly or too good-natured to endure 
the truth, or to speak it openly." 

Mr Scorem, solemnly cutting his shoulder of cold mutton, 
listened and seemed perplexed. He helped Mr Slammers twice, 
and forgot himself. Then he took pickles and salt, and began 
his meal upon those comestibles; but, finding they did not 
agree with him, left ofi^, put down his fork, and stared at the 
reporter. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 333 

" What 's the matter, sir? " asked that worthy. " Are you 
going to be bad again ? " 

" Yes," returned the clerk, " very bad indeed ! " 

" What is the matter ? Are you ill ? " 

"Not at all . never better in my life. You tell me you 
think it dangerous to tell the truth." 

" Yes . sometimes, if not always." 

" People don't like it 1 " 

" Don't like it ! " answered Mr Slammers, picking up his 
knife and fork again . " don't like it ! that 's a mild term . they 
detest it. It is not pretty, it is not polite, it gets you into hot 
water, it irritates your enemies, and it estranges your friends. 
That is a short summary of what it does in this world." 

" Then I shall tell it, Mr Slammers," said the clerk, with a 
furious cut at the mutton. " Won't you take any more ? No ? 
. ^then have an apple . I have some prime ones here." 

" They clear the mouth after smoking," answered Slammers j 
" so I will take one, and keep it till after I have had a pipe. 
You do not eat." 

" No, I have no appetite at all I will try to smoke. It is 
not late . only eleven." 

" Oh, I can stay up till all is blue," returned the reporter. 
"Don't get any spirits . ^I prefer to smoke with beer." 

It was a rather cold night, so Mr Scorem had providently 
set fibre to the wood and coal in his wide, old-fashioned stove, 
that was half-way up the chimney, and which seemed to crook 
its iron elbows over the ash-pit, as the fire winked, glowed, 
sparkled, and roared up the wide old chimney. Scorem sat on 
one side, with a dry pipe in his mouth ; Mr Slammers, with a 
black cutty, puffing away opposite to him, and wondering what 
was coming. What a curious fellow this clever, quick, half- 
educated, honest little clerk was. What did he want with him ? 

"People don't ask me up, and give me cold mutton* and 
pickles for nothing," said the cynical reporter to himself. 
" That is a truth, now, it would not do for me to tell all my 
friends ; but it is a sorrowful fact that when they want any- 
thing of me, they find me out ; when I want anything of 
them, I never can find them : they don't come at such times. 
Hallo ! what is he after now 1 " Scorem, thinking away for 



334 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



his bare life, had at that moment taken his pipe and dashed 
it between the two iron elbows of the grate, and then stood up, 
his eye flashing and his nostril working. 

" Well f " asked Slammers, with an inquiring look. 

" Well, sir," answered Scorem, " I tell you that I mean to 
tell the truth, though it may cost me my place; and it will be 
sure to hurt one whom I admire more than any one on earth. 
But it is my duty to do so, and I will do it." 

There was such an amount of honest earnestness about the 
young fellow as he said this, and it was uttered so simply and 
earnestly, that the reporter . a good fellow, if cynical . caught 
his hand and shook it, and said . 

" That 's right, stick to it." 

" Then it is right to tell the truth |" said Scorem. 

" For a man, yes,'' returned Bamett ; ** bn'y, you see, you 
must take what turns up. If you 're strong enough, well and 
good ; you will be a better man, if you don't make friends. 
But 'ware hawk if you are not, that 's all. Now, what are you 
after?" 

" Sit down and tell me all about that murder. I want to 
hear all." 

" Murder ! Does what you are troubled about concern that ?" 

" I think so. Since I have known about it, I have been 
hau;nted as if by a dream." 

" A regular Maria Martin case," returned the reporter, 'staring 
with all his might. " Was it a dream? " 

" No," answered the clerk, " nothing of the sort ; only some- 
thing has struck me. Do you know all the circumstances 1 " 

" I ought to," returned the reporter. <* I was with Inspector 
Stevenson this afternoon, pumping him pretty well. You 
know, for our kind of literature, we are obliged to keep good 
friends with the officers of the different courts." 

" Does he know all about it ! " 

'^ I should think so. He has got the case in hand ; and he 
has set on the cleverest man about these matters. Old Day- 
light, as they call him." 
, "Who is he?" 

" Mr Tom Forster." 

'^ A stout old gentleman, with a nobby hat and Hessian boots ?" 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 335 

" The very identical. I think I see him now. He caH see 
about as far through a millstone as any man.'' 

" And he is after the criminal ?" 

" Yes j and will be sure to nab him, if he be the King on 
the throne. He's sure to get the man, or the- one next door 
to him, I can teU you." 

"He called at my governor's the other afternoon. My 
governor is Mr Edgar Wade, the barrister." 

"Ah! very likely. He was named as likely to defend a 
party implicated," returned the reporter. " I wonder at that, 
being so young ; but he bears a wonderfully good name." 

" He is clever," returned Scorem, with a sigh. 

" That is as much as to say he is not much else," thought 
the reporter . but he spoke not. 

Scorem was silent, too, for some time^ Then he got up, 
and walked about his room nervously. At last he said . 

" Pray go on, Mr Slammers. Tell me all you told me about 
that' murder when I felt so sick and unwell, and as much more 
as you can." 

" All right ! " answered the gentleman appealed to, doing as 
he was asked. 

During the whole time of the narration, Mr Scorem sat 
still, listening very patiently, save now and then when he put 
a leading question to his companion; and no Old Bailey 
barrister could have been more shrewd, as Bamett Slammers 
remarked. How had the poor woman been struck 1 Did it 
appear, or was it known whether the assailant was young or 
old 1 If young, upon what inference 1 Was there any weapon 
found? And such like questions were asked, until Scorem 
knew as much as his informant, and expressed himself satisfied. 
Then he thanked his guest heartily, and said that he had a 
duty to perform. 

" Why, you don't mean to say you have anything to do with 
it 1 " asked Mr Slammers, wonderingly. 

" Thank God ! not I," said Scorem, piously. " But circum, 
stances have let me into something of which I must speak. 
Can I see Inspector Stevenson ? " 
. " No doubt you can, to-morrow," 

" Will you take me to him 1 " 



336 OXE OF TWO ; OB, 



'' If yoa want to, with pleasnre. But now, my good sir . 
now I have told you eyerything, perhaps you will tell me what 
you wanted in consulting me f " 

It was now Scorem's turn to change countenance and hesi- 
tate. He walked restlessly across the room ; then he went to 
the door and listened it; then he drew near Mr Slammers, 
and spoke in a low tone . 

'' It was the day after that murder that I discovered some- 
thing. On that night, the govemor I don't think slept at his 
house in Queen Anne Street ! " 

The reporter started. 

" You see, I am going to be out with it all I mean to tell 
the truth, the whole tninh, and nothing but the truth . so help 
me. Heaven ! I am passing the Rubicon, as they say in speeches 
down at the Cogers'. You must not mind if I am a dittle 
distressed. I fancy he did not go home, because the grate in 
his room, which I had raked out, was yet warm, and full of 
coal and cinders burnt to a hollow. The laundress was ill . 
and she is a good old girl, and often does me a good turn . so 
I came early to dust the chambers and to light the fire. The 
wood that I had left had been burnt, and in the ashes were 
some fragments of a woollen fabric and four buttons. There 
they are . ^trousers strap buttons, and stamped ' Howie, Con- 
duit Street.' " 

" Good God ! " cried the reporter. 

*' The governor gets his trousers made there. Eegular swell 
place, I can tell you." 

** But is that all ? He might have burnt the legs of a pair 
of old kickseys for a lark," urged the reporter. 

" That is not all," said Scorem. " Going over the old 
Turkey carpet, I kicked against something under it; and, 
when I had lighted the fire, I said, * That 's a precious nail 
that has worked up out of these creaking old boards, which 
bend under your tread . ^I '11 knock it down.' It wasn't a nail, 
but a flat steel button ; and, sure enough, it had been tight 
down, but my running across had made it spring up. It had 
been pushed in, up to its head, between the boards. Here it is." 

And Mr Scorem pulled out about eleven inches of the end 
of a bright steel Solingen foil-blade 1 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 837 



CHAPTER XLVI. 

MJ: TOM FORSTER LEARNS SOMETHING WHICH DOES NOT 

WHOLLY PLEASE HIM. 

Upon the mind of Mr Tom Forster the words of P^re Martin 
had a somewhat astonishing eflFect. There was so great an air 
of truth and simplicity about the man, that, in spite of his 
CQolness and his cunning, the old Bow Street runner was 
assured that what he said was true. At the same time, the 
reflection occurred, again and again, that all was not right 
with Mr Edgar Wade. That learned young barrister had been 
out at all hours ; had paid little or no attention to the poor 
sick lady at home; and was, indeed, himself far from well. 
Excitement and the disappointment in love began to tell upon 
him. Pale, languid, and with a hacking cough, the barrister 
moved restlessly about from his chambers to Queen Anne 
Street, almost without a purpose, and doing little in his busi- 
ness or at home. 

" What," asked Old Daylight of himself, " is the secret in- 
fluence this woman has over him? The coolest and wisest 
men lose their heads when in love. I will go and see her. I 
may find out some way to help him yet. It is a pity he 
should suff*er so much, just now especially.'* 

With Old Daylight a resolve was half the battle. What he 
determined to do was soon done. He soon ascertained from 
his friend, Mr Rolt, the whereabouts of Natalie ; and, on the 
very afternoon upon which he had determined to see her, 
stood outside the little villa, where the apple trees were show- 
ing yellow leaves, and autumn was tinting with its sober hues 
the elms of the neighbouring park and the " grove " which 
rejoiced in the name of "Lisson." The Virginian creeper 
which ran up the front of the house was turning to a dusky 
yellow brown, not yet having achieved the brilliant red hue 
in which it gloriously dies ; and the sad, dull autumn evening 
harmonised with the quiet and stillness of the suburban 

dwelling.' 

Y 



338 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



" A snug little box," said Forster to himself. " Just the 
kind of nest to find such a bird in. I suppose there 's some 
theatrical swell about, for I noticed his trap outside." 

The trap outside was a well-appointed hooded cab, with a 
footboard outside at the back, upon which a smart groom 
perched, swinging by two leather straps pendent from the 
hood. When the master was out, the groom jumped inside, 
as had the gentleman who looked after the trap in question, 
and who was quietly walking the horse up and down, in sight 
of the villa gate, voting the occupation an " infernal slow" one. 

"These pretty birds," said the old man, "might well be 
called decoy ducks, because they do draw empty young men, 
with lots of money, after them. I wonder what the drama 
would be without them 1 And dramatic authors, too. I heard 
one of them talking to Rolt. * Have you seen my piece ? * says 
he. ' How the people crowd to see it 1 ' When Rolt had just 
been telling me that the great attraction was a new actress, the 
next was the scenery, the third the orchestra, and the fourth 
the fittings of the house. lb 's a mixed life we lead, to be 
sure ! " continued the old gentleman, after a pause. " It's all 
right, I dare say ; but there 's nothing pure . ^there 's no man 
out without lots of mixed motives. They talk about the 
poetic drama now. Poetic drama ! . as if anybody but an old 
fool like me goes and sees things for the poetry in them." 

He had rung the bell ; and the neat English servant ushered 
him into the small diliing-room, and took his card, before he 
had hardly made up his mind what to say. The small villas 
such as we have described . built at a bad time, when slight 
brickwork and plenty of stucco served for substantiahty . 
were admirable places to hear in ; and Mr Forster had not 
been long in the quiet little house before he heard an excellent, 
merry little French song, given with great spirit ; and then 
two gruff voices uttering applauding sounds. 

"Why, I am right about that cab," said Old Daylight. "It 
is a new manager. The little woman has made a hit with her 
benefit." 

" Bravo ! Natalie," said the loud, high-toned, coarse voice. 
** You do the thing to-rights. I always said you could. She 's 
a dangerous little woman, ar'n't she, Peter V 



A LEFT-HANDED BRmE. 339 

" She is very clever and beguiling, no doubt j and under- 
stands her profession/' returned a gentleman in a more sober 
voice. 

" Umph ! two of them," returned Daylight. " They ar'n't 
professionals. That's not the way they would talk." 

Then Old Daylight heard the door open, and the subdued 
voice of the servant as she presented the card. 

" Forster ! . don't know such man," said Natalie. " Whose 
like is he ? *' 

" A stout gentleman," or some such words, was the answer ; 
for Natalie said . 

" Stout ! what means stout ? " 

"Fat . graSy brave homme, comme moi^^ said the first voice. 
" Some one come to make you an offer of marriage, Natalie." 

" Very good ; tell him wait." And she added, firmly, " He 
must be a rich man and a nobleman. I do not ally myself 
with common people . I, who am artiste" 

There was a roar of laughter at this from one of the gentle- 
men . no others than Lord Montcastel and the Hon. and Kev. 
Peter Boor ; but the gentleman who did not laugh was just 
the one whose laughter would have hurt Natalie. She saw 
her advantage ; and looking at the nobleman, with a sigh and 
a pretty look, she passed her soft hand over his forehead in a 
caressing way, and called him " a dear, sweet, good papa." 

" It is not any sweetheart," she told his lordship, in effect, 
"but some one upon business;" and after seeing him she 
would, dismiss him, and come back again. And so away she 
sailed, flinging a Parthian glance after her, and rendering his 
enamoured lordship more in love than ever. 

" Peter, my boy," said that nobleman, after a pause, when 
the door had closed behind Natalie, " I think I shall settle." 

"You will, indeed," said the clergyman, who had a wife, 
one sweet infant named Dermot, and a large family in per- 
spective. " And if you do, what is to become of us 1 " he 
thought ; but he said nothing about that . " You will, indeed, 
if you marry an actress ; and you a nobleman in the peerage 
of Great Britain ! " 

" What does that matter? Did not our grandfather marry 
the servant at a Swiss hotel ? and are we any the worse for it ? " 



340 ONE OP TWO; on, 



" I don't know that we are any the better ; and I know 
that we are a precious deal poorer. Why can't you do as 
others do ? There are many fortunes would be glad of your 
title ; and would put up with you, in your old age, for the 
sake of it." 

"Umphl" grunted his lordship, showing his teeth un- 
pleasantly. 

That little reference to his age nettled him. He n^as of 
that mature time of life in which a man finds that there are 
very few enjoyments left him ; that he cannot eat as he did 
when young, nor drink, nor racket, nor stay up late ; and that 
play damages his fortune, as well as ruins his health ; and that 
he had better husband what resources he has, and go in for a 
quiet life. Selfish as Lord Montcastel always was, and always 
would be, he was shrewd enough to know that money did not 
purchase everytliing ; and that a wife of a rich family, with 
her money carefully settled upon herself and her children, 
would not add greatly to his own happiness. And so, saturnine 
and dull in temper himself, and extremely taken with the 
lightsome flow of spirits that Natalie always assumed when she 
saw him, he determined long before this, and had taken the 
necessary steps, to make a matrimonial alliance such as that 
which his clerical brother, who was his heir-presumptive, had 
always dreaded. And it must be said, in justice to that 
reverend gentleman, and in exculpation of the too faithful 
historian who has shown him, in those rude days, behind the 
scenes, and at the house of an actress, that he went with his 
brother as a mentor, and to save his house from any trouble or 
disgrace. Natalie approached Mr Tom Forster in so winning 
a way, that that gentleman could not but be taken with her. 
The little woman was an artist in her dress, and never threw 
a smile or a courtesy away. Clear and clever as the old man 
was, he hesitated before he spoke to her ; and Mdlle. Fifino 
had to inquire the purpose of his visit twice before she received 
an answer. At length he said, in a low tone . for he did not 
wish the gentlemen in the other room to overhear him . 

"I am a friend of Mr Edgar Wade . a very old friend, 
mademoiselle ; and I claim the privilege of visiting you on his 
behalf. You know him^ I am sure, for he visits you," 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 341 

"Oh yes," said Natalie, her clieerful smile vanishing at 
once. " A very nice gentleman, who loves art, and who has 
made me some presents. Did he send you to me 1 Has he 
sent a letter? If so, let me have it, and rejoin my guests/' 

"I cannot say that he has sent a letter, or any message," 
returned Old Forster, bluntly. " I am come to say that he is 
very ill at ease about you." 

"Are you his doctor? Poor man, he must get well. I can 
do nothing with him." 

" He, I believe, loves you very dearly, and would put his 
future in your hands. He is at present but a poor barrister." 

" What is that 1 " 

" What you call an avocdt" returned Forster. " You know 
that, I suppose. He may rise, and become a great man." 

" Ah," thought the old fellow, " if she only knew what a 
great man he really is, how the little Delilah would snap him 
up!" 

" I hope he will ; but he is poor now, he tells me.'' 

She said this simply. 

" Yes," returned Forster. " Not so rich as he will be." 

" Ah ! that * will be,* My good friend, I am impatient at 
waiting for it. It never comes . never 1 I have known many 
young giris grow old women waiting for * will be.' I will take 
what I can get." 

" Have you told Mr Wade so ? " 

"Yes. If he were here now, I should tell him so more 
plainly. I am going, I hope, to marry a rich man. an Eng- 
lish milord. You may tell your friend so, if you come to 
bother me with an offer. Your friend is good-looking and 
tall, a fine man ; but so triste, so dull . ^like an English day in 
autumn. I do not like these young men. They are so selfish, 
too. I have told him to go away." 

This was not exactly true, as it was only within the last few 
hours that Lord Montcastel and Natalie had come to an under- 
standing. Old Forster whistled as she said this. So it had 
come to that ! The infatuated young man had offered to 
marry her, and she had refused him ! Well, it was as well as 
it was. But, poor young fellow, to be so treated just as a 
brilliant prospect opened before him ! 



342 ONE OF TWO j OB, 



'' Men/' thought the old man, '' are often blamed for really 
hating women. But do not some women deserve it 1 " 

" So I will, if you please, say good evening. my friends are 
awaiting me. Give my respects to M. Edgar Wade, thank 
him for his kindness, and tell him . ^but it must be a secret 
from anybody else, and I am sure I can trust him and you ; it 
will put him at rest, too, poor fellow ; for he is of a very jealous 
nature, and I do so hate jealous people . tell him that the 
Natalie Fifine, whom he used to admire so as an artiste, will be 
glad to receive him as Madame la Marquise de Montcastel ! " 

The little woman rose upon her feet as she said this, and 
swept back with a grand tragedy air. The clear, keen whisper 
cut the air, and pierced the ear of the old man like the hiss of 
a snake, and made him feel uncomfortable. He rose at once. 

"I will go, mademoiselle," he said, politely; "but you will 
excuse me carrying tliat message." 

" Eh ! well, never mind. Say nothing to any one. He will 
see it in the papers. Good evening, mons'r." 

" Here 's a complication ! " thought Old Porster. " Tell him ! 
Not if I know it. If I did so, I should kill him, worried and 
ill as he is. And she to marry that old man 1 Well, well . 
what will not woman do for money 1" 

The groom, seeing a gentleman emerge while he was at a 
distance, came up at a short trot, but was disappointed again^ 
and drove away. , 

" That 's his lordship's cab, is it ? '' said Old Forster. " How 
I should like to drive home in it. But, no ; I '11 just run round 
to Homer Street, and see whether there are any messages. 
Precious glad the little girl has hooked any one else but my 
boy. Is that all the mischief 1 If so, there will be a sudden 
burst, and he will live it down. But no, no . ^there's some- 
thing else.'' 

And, with a sense of impending evil against the man he 
loved so well, the old fellow trotted away, in his creaking 
Hessians, towards Homer Street. ' And Natalie Fifine, feeling 
a great elation at having got rid of an unpleasant suitor, 
burst into the room where her guests were yawning, and com- 
menced singing B^ranger's <<King of Yvetot," in the most 
joyous tones : . 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 343 

" H etait un roi d* YvetotJ* 
Pea connu dans I'histoire ; 
Se levant iard, se conchanfc t6t, 
Dormant fort bien sans gloire." 

And cracking his fingers, and grinning with dehght, Lord 
Montcastel, with a deep voice, caught up the spirit of the 
syren, and joined in the chorus.' 

"Oh! oh! oh! oh! Ah! ah! ah! ah! 
Quel bon petit roi c'etait U ! 

Lar la!» 

" Well, I 'm blowed," said the groom, with his teeth chatter- 
ing, as he leant over the wooden apron which shut him in the 
cabriolet, ** the old man 's merry to-night. I shouldn't wonder 
if he came away 'tosticated . shouldn't care if he did, on'y 
them fellows are so beastly selfish. When they're inside, they 
never thinks of us poor fellows outside. It 's the way of the 
world. And the poor animile. he wants a mouthful o' oats, 
too." 



CHAPTER XLVII. 

*' Miserable creature ! 
If thou perish in this, *tis damnable ; 
Dost thou imagine thou canst ^de on blood, 
And not be tainted by the shameful faU? " 

^The White Devil (1612), actus iv. 

All this time, when Lord Wimpole was undergoing great 
trials, and Mrs Wade lay between life and death, the world 
went on as gaily as usual. Mr Wrench, Mr Kemble, and Miss 
Fanny Kemble, were acting to his Majesty's Heges night after 
night; Miss Sherriff and Miss Inverarity, the two rival Queens 
of Song, sang against each other, and were described as being 
engaged in an encounter, the humour of the thing consisting 
in criticising the piece in pugilistic language. " Both, we 
need scarcely say," added the iMminaryy "showed first-rate 
science, good training, and were in admirable condition. The 
fight lasted some tune, during which each underwent many 
rounds . of applause. The result of this contest between the 



344 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



rival mghtiugales was, thft each left a higher opinion of her 
talents with the audience than before, and neither came off 
second besC' 

''Neat . ^veiy neat that;^ said Mr Bolt, as he read it. 
''Funny dog, that critic. That's what people like to read. 
What's this about Taylor f" 

"'Miss Taylor's legs enacted that chartered libertine, the 
Page. O Miss T. 1 Miss T. ! . do lengthen your skirts at least 
two inches.' 

" Gad ! a clever fellow. That will pull 'em in, sir . ^that 
will pull 'em in. I '11 give the fellow a lift by an extract" 
And the ingenious editor ran his pencil down the page, and 
scored the passage for his '* sub " to cut out. " Humph ! here 
is a small hit at Sir Charles Wetherall . eccentric, very ; here 
an attack on Croker, of the Admiralty. Something about his 
Boyal Highness the Duke of Cumberland . a dark horse that ; 
and Lyndhurst and Ellenborough, two new caricatures. one 
by young Seymour, and the other by Cruikshank.. Eeally, I 
don't know how we should get on without these public people. 
They are food for the press, sir . the press, the palladium of 
British lib " 

But the reader has heard that phrase before. Mr Rolt was 
in excellent spirits. The Argus was keeping its hundred eyes 
wide-awake, and spreading its tail . or tales . like the bird into 
which that hero of mythology was changed. 

" And what 's the fashionable news 1 Let 's see. Ha, ha ! 
An attack upon ' The State Chimney-sweeps, in sootdble attire.' " 
Here Mr Bolt looked at some copy that had been sent in. 
'* * The King acknowledges the supremacy of the petticoats, and 
it is certain that his successor will be like him, only governed 
by an Addle-head,* Coarse, very; won't do to anticipate. 
Here, let us see : * Lady Jersey, Marchioness of Sly-go! ' Very 
poor joke. ' Countess Glengall' . ^'pon my soul I " cried the 
editor, " the world is very censorious. Who would be a person 
in high station? How each rumour is caught hold of, and 
every crack in a reputation is made wider by these fellows. 
Crack, do I say ? If a china vase is whole, and will ring like 
a bell, these fellows paint a crack where they do not find one." 

Upon coming to this I'eflection, the editor . who had, at the 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 345 

bottom of his heart, some feelings of the gentleman still left . 
sighed, lighted a cigar, and walked to the window. 

** Hallo ! who is that on the opposite side of the way 1 Old 
Tom Forster I I wonder where he is off to. No, 'tis some one 
else, but very like him." 

Mr Forster was indeed far away from Wellington Street, and 
busy closeted with Mr Horton; and the occasion was this. 
His inductive philosophy was for once, and once only, failing 
him j and new claimants for the notoriety of crime were spring- 
ing up. 

Upon the morning after the day upon which Old Daylight 
had visited Natalie, Mr Samuel Brownjohn, passing along the 
corrider which led to the police cells, was interrupted and some- 
what startled by a timid voice, which called out . 

** Hi ! hi ! sir . hi 1 You, Mr Pol-ease-man." 

Upon which he turned round, and said . 

" Why, who are you 1 '* 

It was Master Patsy Quelch, looking warm and comfortable, 
seated in a barely furnished room, by the fire, and peering 
about, with restless eyes, for some fellowship in that lonely 
place. Mr Brownjohn went up to the boy, and put his hand 
on his head, quietly. 

** AVhy, man alive,"" said he, " I had nearly forgot you. I 'm 
thinking of another boy . the tall one from Kensal-Green. 
There 's something wrong about him." 

*^ Is he a bad boy ) " asked Patsy, taking an interest, as boys 
do, in one of their own class. ** There is many bad boys about, 
sir. Some on 'em swears dreadful 

''Bad enough, bad enough," said the police sergeant ; ''and 
bad boys grow up bad men. Don't you go and do it." 

" I won't, sir," returned Patsy, quickly. " I am sorry the 
t'other one is." 

" I don't say he is," said !6rownjohn, good-humouredly, "I 
say nothing about the boy. Only, you see, somehow I was in 
a hurry, and somehow I was pitched agin' Old Daylight, and 
made a wrong jump." 

" Hope you didn't go to hurt yourself, sir," returned Patsy, 
innocently. 

"Well, we shall see soon," replied the sergeant. "He'll 



346 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



be here in a moment. I can't see that the old man is 

guilty." 

" He isn't, sir," cried Patsy, quickly, at a venture. " He is 
a good old man, sir . looks like one^ don't he, sir 9 '' 

" Ah ! my boy, when you get as old as I am, and have cut 
your eye-teeth, you will find that fine looks don't make fine 
hearts, I can tell you. So you don't," he added, looking down 
upon the urchin he had befriended, and whom, therefore, he 
felt well disposed to . " you don't intend to turn out bad." 

" Oh no, sir." 

" Well, Patsy . ^isn't that your, name 1 . ^and what do you 
intend to do 1 " 

" Turn out good, sir." 

" Ay ! but how, my boy ? London is a cruel, big, stony- 
hearted place for a boy like you." 

"Gentleman promised to help mer. Mr Folaire, sir. Oh, 
such a nice man! Gave me a lift in his gig, with such a 
spanking 'orse in it. Gave me his card, sir." 

Here Patsy held up a card . " Messrs Cooke and Company, 
St Paul's Churchyard " . in the comer of which was printed, 
" Represented by Mr Charles Folaire" 

"Promised to help me," continued Patsy, with beautiful 
faith; "and he'll do it . sure to. Know by his face. He 
isn't one as tells lies." 

"Hope he will," returned the officer. "Maybe he will. 
Some of those city fellows are uncommon good to sharp boys ; 
and you 're a sharp 'un. Well, here 's a shilling. Patsy. You 
can go. If you don't get anything, come back to me, and I '11 
try to help you." 

"But there's t'other one, sir," returned Patsy, making no 
signs to go . " t 'other one, as broke my shin bone a'most . 
him you called Seizer," 

" By George 1 " returned Brownjohn, " that old fellow's evi- 
dence has put everything else out of my head. Where is 
«sar, ehl" 

" Locked up, sir," replied Patsy. 

Brownjohn jumped to his feet. 

" Locked up ! Why, they had no right to do that." 

" Well, when you was gone, sir, he first tried towsquarethe 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. ^ 347 

. > 

hofficer ; and then, as he wouldn't let him go, he mad^ a rush 
for it. He was collared; and they put him for safety in a 
little room by hisself." 

In a cell, in fact . for such was meant by Patsy's pleasant 
** little room" . the ingenuous Cesar was found by Samuel 
Brownjohn, who, using the privilege of the peep-hole, found the 
Maltese lying prone, like a Grecian statue, graceful in repose 
as he was in action, and in an attitude of despair. Solitude, 
accompanied by small warmth, did not suit the Maltese. 

Brownjohn, taking his key, unlocked the door, and called 
to Negretti. 

" Ah ! my Brownjohn," said the Maltese, " I am glad you 
have come to take me from this beastly place." 

" Come along and warm yourself," said the sergeant, leading 
him into the room where Patsy was sitting. 

He noticed that, when Negretti saw the boy, a diabolical 
expression passed rapidly over his face. Patsy said nothing, but 
looked sharply to his protector, to whose side he edged himself. 

" What are you afraid of, boy ? " asked the sergeant. " Ne- 
gretti ain't a-goin' to kick you again, while I am here." 

" 'Tisn't that," whispered Patsy, scorning to appear afraid of 
a kick. Then he nudged Brownjohn, and said, in a yet lower 
whisper, " Overhaul his bundle, sir . do, please." 

" 'Gad," returned the sergeant, " I 'd forgot that. Let me 
see . where did I put it? Oh ! I know; in the locker." 

Luckily, the locker was in the very room they were then 
sitting in ; and while C^sar was sitting rocking hiinself moodily 
to and fro, Brownjohn produced the key, unlocked the door, 
and secured the bundle. Then, putting it on the table, he 
proceeded slowly to untie the knots. The Maltese exhibited 
a strange restlessness ; looked to the door between which and 
himself was the figure of the stalwart policeman ; then, tighten- 
ing his muscles for a spring, he jumped suddenly to the table, 
snatched the bundle from the policeman's hands, and threw it 
on the fire, stamping it down with his foot. The action was 
one of a moment. In a moment, also, Brownjohn's great 
hand was twisted in his collar, and Negretti was dexterously 
twirled into the middle of the room ; while Patsy, who ha4 
come to the rescue, picked the singed bundle &om the fire," 



348 ONE OP TWO; OR, 



"Cleverly done, boy," said the policeman. "Now, look 
here, Negretti," he said, " this won't do. Don't be foolish^ 
You know I can hold you till all is blue . at least, your face 
would be if I throttled you. But I hate hard measures. 
There must be something in that bundle, or you wouldn't be so 
anxious to bum it." 

" Nothing that concerns you," returned the Maltese, savagely. 
" What right have you with my property 1 You engage me to 
help you to find a man, and I do so. You bring me up to 
London against my will, because that Irish imp, that pig there, 
told you. You lock me up when I want to go away ; and now 
you try and search my bundle. What have you to do with it ? " 

Mr C^sar Negretti, being released from Brownjohn's hands, 
here drew himself up in an injured way. 

"Why, you see," returned the officer, with imperturbable 
good-humour, " you led me a pretty dance till you got to the 
seaside, when you wanted to get off. But I had my suspicions, 
and this boy turned up just in time. He had his suspicions as 
well. He was your fellow-servant at the Caf6, and no doubt 
he knows of your prigging a thing or two." 
' Here the boy's eyes twinkled with an extraordinary intelli- 
gence. 

" Yes, sir," he said, " there 's a spoon or two of the padrone's 
there. I see 'im take 'em." 

" And he must answer for it," ejaculated the police officer. 
** People are not to be robbed because they are poor foreigners." 

"They are my own, cursed pig !" replied the Italian, to Patsy. 
" Devil's imp . ^I was right to hate you as I did." 

" That may be," continued Brownjohn, as Patsy was silent 
" Besides, Negretti, you are not with clean hands. You remem- 
ber your pilferings from Lord Wimpole ? and I 'm doubtful 
whether something won't turn up here." 

" Where 's your warrant ? " asked the Maltese. " We are in 
a free country here." 

" Very free," said Brownjohn ; " but I take this on myself. 
And here 's the man that '11 say whether or not I am wrong. 
I '11 report to my superior officer." 

A step was heard pacing along the corridor, in the measured 
tread which betokens a police officer ; and 9^ Brownjohn, stand- 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 349 

ing firmly at the door, partially opened it and gave a low 
"whistle, the owner of the strongly-made boots, and the stalwart 
legs that put them down so firmly, entered. It was no one less 
than Inspector Stevenson. 

" Hallo ! Brownjohn, what 's up 1 " he said* 

" Nothing much, sir," answered the ofiicer, " I told Negretti 
here I should pinch him, and I think I shalL Only a petty 
theft." 

'^ It 's all a mistake, sir," pleaded the Maltese, in his most 
winning tones, to the Inspector. " Mr Brownjohn has a spite 
against me ". 

" I scorn the action," said the officer. 

. ^''And he is anxious to hunt up something against me, 
because I got out of his hands once/' 

" Don't make another mistake," said the Inspector, somewhat 
sternly, to the sergeant. " I 'ra very much afraid that the old 
man you Ve picked up has had nothing to do with the matter. 
There's something about him that looks very much like 
innocence." 

" That may be," returned Brownjohn, somewhat despond- 
ingly. "Nobody's always right, 'cept your friend, Mr Tom 
Torster. He always hits the right nail on the head." 

" Well, that may be," said Stevenson, good-naturedly. " He 
has a happy knack, to be sure. This has got nothing to do 
with it, has it ] " 

" Oh no-. not that I know of. Boy says that there were 
some spoons in the bundle as belonged to the keeper of the 
coffeehouse where I picked up this Italian here." 

" Well, there 's no harm in looking," returned the Inspector. 
Then, seeing the restless manner and glaring eyes of Negretti, 
he added, " Now, you just keep quiet, and you'll come to no 
harm. A man comes to harm always by his own acts. If 
you 're right, then you may go ; if you 're wrong, then you 
must answer for it. That 's our way here." 

" 'Sh ! " hissed the Maltese, as if he were weary of the alter- 
cation. " Do as you like . I am weary of the business. Poor, 
friendless, and innocent I " and he threw himself down on the 
wooden stool before the fire, a statuesque and graceful picture 
of despair. So t^he bundle was opened* Patsy, with bright 



350 ONBOFTWO; OB, 



eyes, leant over the table as the btmdie was opened. The 
Inspector carelessly tamed over some of the contents. There 
were two silver spoons. 

" There's the spoons," cried Patsy, with glee. " I told you 
so!" 

" Phew !" whistled the Inspector, as he looked at the other 
contents ; " this looks serious, by jingo I I wonder what will 
come of this!" 



CHAPTER XLVIII. 

*' O Verities ! agftin, 'what ravuhmente have 7011 to oonsolate the sotiles of 
the most afflicted 1 ** . The Mirt*our which JUUters not. By the Sieur de la 
Serre. F. 27. 

Mb Jasper Snape, tailor and pigeon fancier, was the only one, 
perhaps, who mourned over the victim of the tragedy. It was 
barely a week since the crime, and the murdered person had 
been almost forgotten. Now and then, some bold foot-travel- 
lers would pass over the fields from Kjilburn, to gaze at Acacia 
Villa, which was shut up, and bore in its front garden a black 
board on which, in white letters, this desirable residence was 
described as " to be let." The old man one morning pulled a 
quantity of threads from his round shoulders . ^bent with work- 
ing at his board . straightened his hollow chest as well as he 
could, combed his dusty hair from his forehead, cast his shop- 
board slippers into the corner, and put on his bluchers and his 
hat. The hat was turned up at the brim at the back of his 
head, and greasy with rubbing on his coat collar, looking after 
his pigeons and the " strays." 

" She was a nice woman," remarked Jasper. " She didn't 
talk too much. She could keep her own house and her 
counsel." 

Mr Snape was not exactly a mysogynist, but he limited his 
admiration to strong-minded women. 

" I wouldn't have minded manyin* her myself,'' he con- 
tinued ; " but there, she 's in her grave, and they Ve forgotten 
her. By George," he said to himself, after a little while, " if I 
had married her, they might have murdered me." And a cold 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 35 1 



shudder passed through the little man's frame as he thought of 
this. 

" At any rate, there's something mysterious about this case/ 
he said, as he walked into his garden, and pulled a string 
which let the grating fall from his pigeon-house, and the young 
birds fly a little. "Whir-r-r! Whoop!'' He threw up a 
tassel made of thrums and threads, and set the birds wheeling 
round and round before he fed them. That done, he walked 
through his house, looked at the work at his shop-board, felt 
disgusted at it . as most workmen now and then do . and 
determined, as he said, "to have a skulk." It is a very 
natural feeling this. For three hundred and ten days out of 
the three hundred and sixty-five, Jasper Snape was to be found 
at his board, cross-legged, with his pale face peering out of his 
window. blue with cold in the winter, and shinmg with per- 
spiration in the summer. His very flowers . his nettle and 
scarlet geraniums, his spindly mignonette, and his musk 
plant . turned away their brightest leaves from the poor 
worker's gaze, and looked out of the window to cheer the 
passers-by. Mr Jasper Snape, calling out to a humbler help, 
who was somewhere about his little house, " to look sharp " . 
which was a hopeless task on her part, poor creature . adjured 
her to say that, if any one called, he had gone round to wait 
on a customer . ^which was in one sense true. The landlord 
of the public-house . to which the reader and Mr Brownjohn 
were introduced in an early chapter . was certainly a customer, 
and Jasper waited on him for business purposes ; but it was 
for busmess of his own. He wanted a pipe, a gla^s of ale, and 
a gossip : wanted to take the wrinkles from his mind, and the 
stiffness from his knees ; wanted to straighten out his back, 
and reKeve himself of his cares. As he sat down in the sunny 
parlour of the country public-house, with a fragrant pipe of 
bird's-eye and a good glass of ale, his vision seemed brighter, 
«id he looked upon the world in a less invidious way. Pre- 
sently the bustling landlord came in. 

" Momin', Mr Snape ; mornin' 1 " said he. " How are all 
things your way, now ? " 

"Pretty good," returned the tailor. "You ain't doing 
badly, neither.'' 



852 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



"No . ^thank Heaven l" returned the publican, recounting 
something that would make a teetotaller blush at the weakness 
and sin of the world. ** No, 'tisn't bad. We had three trade 
dinners and one weddin' party within the week, and I 'm blest 
if they didn't drink us nearly dry. I ought to be very thank- 
ful, Mr Snape," continued the landlord, who was a pious man 
. " very thankful indeed, for such favours." 

" So you ought," returned the tailor ; " and you 're the man 
to do it, Mr Points." 

" I 've a favour to ask of you, Mr Snape, sir," said the land- 
lord, " And it is, sir, that you will take half a pint with me." 

Mr Points, like a true gentleman, made it appear that he 
was accepting a favour when he was conferring one ; and Mr 
Snape felt flattered. 

" Mr Points, sir," he said, " I am your very humble servant, 
sir." 

And the two boon companions fell to talking- of the story of 
the crime, which was fresh upon the minds of both. 

" They don*t do much in London, Mr Points, with all their 
new-fangled police, with their swallow-tailed coats and pewter 
buttons." 

" I wish you had the contract for^the men's coats," said the 
publican, nudging the tailor ; whereat they both laughed. 

" And I wish you had the supply of the beer what the whole 
force drinks," returned the tailor. 

Mr Points had just informed his friend that the police had 
been stirring, ^* because," said he, " one on 'em gave notice to 
that tall boy to be up to the office before twelve this morn- 
ing ; " and Mr Snape had ventured his opinion that it was the 
old story ; when a gruff voice was heard at the bar, ejaculat- 
ing. 

" I am a honest 'ard labrin' workin' man, dash my old bones, 
and all I wants is a pint o* beer." 

Points rang the bell for the barman ; but the rough voice 
again bawled out . 

" I labours for my bread, and 1 11 have my beer. I 'm on 
land and water. I am a workin' man, I am ; d 'ye hear, I 'm 
a workin' man ? Come, draw the beer. You ain't a workiu' 
man, are yer } " 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 353 

Mr Points rose to interfere; but the man . ^like a good- 
humoured Caliban as he was . ^blew the froth from the pot, 
smiled over a large expanse of countenance . letting the smile 
steal gradually, as over a vast landscape . and then drank Mr 
Points' health. Points was bound to return this politeness, 
and the monster was pacified. He quaflfed a deep draught, 
and drew a long breath. 

"Well, you're an honest man," said he; "and that's 
honest good stuff ; but it 's been the death o' too many." 

He was a big, hairy fellow, with a brick-red face ; a fur cap, 
with ears to it, tied under the chin ; a waistcoat which had 
broken out into an irregular rash of white pearl buttons ; and 
thick corduroy trousers, tied up round his knees, to enable 
him to work without draggling them about a pair of stalwart 
ankle-jacks, that looked as if they could stand any kind of 
weather, and would last for years. He stood firmly in these 
boots, swaying backwards and fonvards . not by any means 
tipsy, but rather quarrelsome. Happily, the fit passed off. 
The beer really had a somewhat sobering effect upon him, .and 
he called for his pipe in a pleasanter mood. 

" So, landlord, you 're being carrying on a pleasant game in 
this little village : murderin' of a woman, eh ! I heerd of it ! " 

*' So you 've heard of it, have you ? " said Snape, coming 
forward in his sharp, authoritative way. 

" Heerd of it, yes. I mind it well enough, 'cos on the very 
day I gave a chap a lift in my wessel, the Lively Kate, up to 
Lunnon." 

" The very man," whispered the landlord, " that one of the 
policemen went after " . his bright eyes twinkling like a black- 
bird's when he looks up sideways. 

" Why, my man, do you know anything of that fellow? If 
you do, there 's money to be made. They 're after that man." 

" Aer they? He was a nice, innocent old fellow. a Proo- 
sian or a Roosian, or some furrineer. There was no harm in 
him," said the bargee. " I took 'im on board 'cos he was used 
to the water, and felt safer." 

" Ah l" said Snape, disposing himself to listen, and nudging 
Mr Points, as if to say, " This is important, now." 

" Well, I felt lonely. You heerd me say just now that beer 



i 



354 ONE OF TWO ; OB, 



was goody on'y it wor the death o' many. It was the death o' 
my old woman. She was a good woman, she was . ^a main 
too good for Bill Bulger ; and I 'm sorry I Uck'd her ever, now 
she's gone." 

Mr Bulger's regret came too late, like the regrets of most of 
us. What could he do now . now poor Molly was gone 1 He 
put up his huge hands, knotted with muscles, to his eyes, and 
ezliibited on the back of them strange tattooing. 

'' You see," he said, " 'twas down in the country, where the 
canal runs for miles in the fields ; and I was away on the path, 
mindin' the old hoss, and Molly was at the tiller. We were 
at a bend o' the canal, and I was trudgin' on, head downwards, 
a-thinkin'. I thought I heerd a splash, but didn't mind it till 
the old hoss was jerk'd off his legs a'most, by the barge oomin* 
ashore. I went back to swear a bit at Molly, and saw the 
tiller swingin' a-one side with no-but nobody there. Then a 
cold sweat come over me. I pulled up, and run back« There 
wam't no Molly. I never see her more till she turned up, 
three days arterwards, at one of the lock gates. Poor Molly 1 " 

" Dropped over," cried the landlord. 

'' Just so," said the bargee. 

" WeU," cried Jasper, hurriedly, " we can't bring poor Mrs 
Bulger back to life again." 

" No, we can't," said the bereaved widower ; '* else I would. 
Molly liked a drop of somethin' short. She and I had been 
havin' a row, as most people would as lived so close together 
as we do aboard a barge. She had been comfortin' herself, and 
she 's . ^gone I " 

This was her simple epitaph. The poor bargee had a hoarse 
voice and moist eyes as he pronounced it. 

" But we can serve some one else. They 've got that French- 
man, no doubt. You can say when he went away, can't you 1 " 

" To the minit," said Mr Bulger, looking up at the call of 
duty ; " but I sha'n't tell you." 

** Never mind me . tell it the magistrate," said Snape. 
" You don't mind coming with me 1 " 

'< Not a bit, i£^ I can help a man, and get a bit o' money,' 
said the bargee. 

Thus it was that, about twelve o'clock^ Mr Jasper Snape 



A LEFT-HANDED BRmE. 355 

and Mr William Bulger presented themselves . Mr Snape for 
the second time . at the door of the police court. Mr Horton, 
Mr Tom Forster, and the inspector were at the time somewhat 
doubtful as to how to proceed. The tall boy had given his 
evidence, had recognised the P^re Martin . who had not, 
indeed, denied his presence, but had remembered giving him 
the sixpence, how spent the reader knows j but the tall boy 
had filled up a blank of great importance, which he had left 
open in the evidence ^ven by him to Brownjohn at Kensal- 
Green. The French sailor had departed about five o'clock . 
for the tall boy had come away from school at half-past four ; 
and there was positively nothing against old Martin. But, 
then, on Mr Brownjohn's mind there was the not unlikely 
fact that the tall boy had been tampered with ; and Mr Horton 
himself was for detaining the foreign gentleman in honourable 
seclusion for some days, untU another witness CQuld be pro- 
cured. That witness was nobody less than the bargee ; and 
at the very nick of time . ushered by Inspector Stevenson, 
who had been sent for . ^in walked the witness. 

" Ah, my friend ! " said old Martin, with a sigh of relief, 
" the good Heaven* is kind. It does not altogether desert the 
innocent." 

"No," thought Tom Forster, "but it lets them get into 
strange scrapes. A wonderful provision in this world of trial. 
Let us hear what this man's evidence is." 

Mr Bulger, who had taken his hairy cap off a bristly, 
bullet-shaped head, was looking round the office . up at the 
ceiling, down at the floor, at the magistrate ; then, on meeting 
his eyes, throwing his own glance in the contrary direction.. 
He held his cap very tightly in both hands, as if he expected 
that justice or the police would snatch it away. He recog* 
nised Martin with a nod, and said, gruffly. 

« That 's the chap I gave a lift to." 

" Let him be sworn," said the magistrate. " You know the 
nature of an oath, my man ? " 

" Rather," said Mr Bulger, with a grin. 

" You will speak the truth, the whole truth, and ". 

" I '11 take my Solomon's oath I will/' said the bargee, with 
great solemnity, kissing the book« 



356 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



On the 29th of September, at half-past four, Mr Bulger, 
according to his evidence, was standing on the towing-path, 
thinking of his lost wife, and feeling " werry lonesome," when 
'' this genePm'> Mr Martin, came up, got talking of seafaring 
matters," spoke about his barge, and finally said he would 
like a ride. They set off exactly at five, after drinking and 
lighting up their ** baccy." 

" How do you know the time ] " asked Mr Horton. 

" Well, you see, gov'nor," returned Mr Bulger, pulling out 
of his corduroy fob, by a broad, flat steel chain, an ancient silver 
watch, as round almost as a Dutch cheese . " 'tain't none of 
your havers, as is made for the pop-shop ; but I '11 back un agin 
Sen Pall's ! " 

Mr Martin was free ! He shook hands with his captor, 
thanked the magistrate, and preferred a modest request . only 
one favour for all his trouble. Justice must be served ; he was 
the victim, that 's all. Here he sighed, but looked up brightly. 
Where did the great Seigneur live. Milord Chesterton ? Le 
P^re Martin had something to tell his lordship. 



CHAPTER XLIX. 

" Dutch, Yet stale ; heaven gates are not so highly arched 
As princely palaces. They that enter there 
Must go upon their knees." 

.The Dutchesse of Maljy^ actus vr, scena ii. 

Mrs Wade, as she uttered the words, " Be is a mnrAeur ! " 
shut her closed eyelids more tightly than before, and shuddered, 
as if she saw a vision of dreadful import. Edgar Wade, terribly 
excited, stood and looked at the djdng woman, and said not 
a word. His face was dreadfully pale, his eyes lustrous. His 
whole frame and face betokened strong emotion. The rest of 
the company showed little heed of what the poor woman said, 
and paid more attention to her than to her words. Dr Richards 
supported her with his strong arm, holding some wine to her 
lips, and soothing her in his gentle way ; for the little man was 
as tender-hearted as he was clever. The dying woman ^noke 
again, . - 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 357 



'* I have spoken, and would speak more ; and yet, how dan- 
gerous is the tongue . ^how well should we watch it ! You 
heard me call my son a murderer, just now : it was a mother's 
hasty word. And, alas ! my Edgar " . ^here she turned towards 
him mysteriously, as if she could see through those transparent 
closed lids, which were so thin that they showed in more strong 
contrast the largeness of the orbs beneath them . *^ alas, my 
Edgar ! you have indeed planted thorny in the heart you should 
have guarded and shielded. May Heaven forgive you, as I do 
now ! My balm of comfort has turned but to bitterness. The 
hope with which I nursed you when you were a child failed me 
when you grew a man. Come to me. Kiss me." 

The smile which wreathed the lips of the speaker was one 
of those peculiarly sweet and saintly smiles so seldom seen, 
and so hard to describe. It was full of forgiveness, of love, of 
intercession even . of high feeling, far above the passion of 
this world . of strength, and yet of weakness. Good women, 
weakly struggling against cruel and brute strength, often shed 
such smiles upon their masters ; and it is to be noted that 
these dumb and meek replies have the power of irritating 
those to whom they are given more than strong words or 
heavy blows. Edgar Wade stood up at the side of the bed ; 
and to the kneeling nurse, and doctor, and the Earl . who had 
fallen down as if in prayer . towered above the poor dying 
woman, as the following words seemed suddenly to leap from 
his mouth . ^to be, indeed, wrung from him : . 

*' I call you all here to witness and to remember the words 
I reply to the mad woman who lies there. I distinctlydisown 
the relationship she seeks to establish. The Earl here knows 
how cruelly I have been used . how my youth has been wasted, 
and my manhood blasted, by crimes and follies antecedent to 
my birth, and over which I could have no possible control. I 
shall stand upon my own right. I am full of trouble and 
anxiety . there is no man more to be pitied than I am. But 
I again warn you to place no credence upon what this lady has 
said. I have evidence to show that there has been a con- 
spiracy to defraud me of my rights. I totally deny that I am 
her son, and I shall take measures to establish that fact at the 
earliest moment possible." - . 



358 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



The same sad smile continued for some time, as the hurried 
words fell upon Mrs Wade's ear ; but it faded quickly out 
when they came to an end. The nursing Sister had pressed 
more closely to the invaUd, and had placed in her hands a 
small crucifix. Dr Richards held up his hand to the speaker, as 
if warning him to be silent. The Earl pressed his grey head 
more closely to his sheltering hands ; and Winifred closed her 
eyes, as if by that means she could shut out the cruel scene. 
When Edgar Wade paused, the dying woman said, in a very 
soft and humble tone . a tone which seemed to convey to ail 
who heard, that all hope in this world was gon&. 

" Edgar, Edgar ! . ^alas, what have you said ? " 

" That which I know and believe," cried the barrister, sul- 
lenly. ** I wish to Heaven that any of those present could be 
in my place for one momenir-could feel the icy desolation in 
which I have dwelt for years . could know the sad brooding 
over wrong, the torment which has pursued me, the restless- 
ness which my fate has begotten. Farewell for ever ! From 
this time forth I see you no more . ^you have been my nurse 
in childhood, my companion in boyhood, my bane and curse 
in all 1 " 

In a moment he was gone : the room was empty of his pre- 
sence. The nursing Sister rose from her knees; the doctor 
again attended to his patient; the Earl and Winifred seemed 
to breathe more freely. Poor, dying Mrs Wade pressed the 
emblem of her faith, which the Sister had left in her hands, 
more closely to her lips. She breathed now with some diffi- 
culty ; tears gathered under the transparent eyelids, and fell 
upon the dim and wasted face. She murmured . 

" Pity me, heaven I Alas ! he is lost, Edgar ! . my son, 
my son ! " 

The words found an echo in the heart of the Earl of Chester- 
ton, who, moving towards the sufferer, placed his hand gently 
upon hers. The effect seemed to be electrical The memory, 
that wondrous quality which our. philosophy cannot fathom 
nor analyse, recalled the never-forgotten touch of that hand, 
which seemed -to cheer her now as it had cheered her in 
happier times. The poor, sad face looked for a brief moment 
brighter and happier; the life, ncJw flagging and becoming 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 359 

' . ». , . . t I 11 _ ^ 

wearied of its long fight with death, came for a minute back, 
with greater power, and with fuller pulses. The voice, sweei 
and low as ever, was stronger as it spoke. 

"My Philip, are you here? Ah, well I know it! Yon 
were my joy and delight in the beginning of my life . indeed, 
I never lived until I knew you, nor at all to this world, save 
in that short delirium of happiness your presence gave ; and 
now you are my solace and my comfort . ^now, when I am^ 
about to set out alone upon a long voyage, dark and dreary i% 
may be, but wherein I know that I shall reach a haven of 
rest. Rest! it is all I want, my Philip. I forgive you. 
forgive me, too. Look with love upon my weaknesses; for 
love itself is wisdom, and the time will come when emptyi 
worldly, cruel knowledge will be lost in love." 

" I pray God for that good time, Eugenie," said the Earl, 
with a broken voice. " Poor stricken bird, so much sinned 
against, and so little sinning ! Alas 1 how have you beei^ 
punished for these long years, suffering and alone ! But you 
alone have not suifered. As I, too, bore my §hare of sin . the 
far greater and more hateful share, for the part I so unworthily 
played . ^so, heaven is my witness, I have not been without its 
punishment. The world knew nothing of it ; but it was more 
bitter because I bore it alone, and unknown to all." 

The thin hand which lay under that of tiie Earl was gently 
turned upward to his own, and clasped his somewhat firmly, 
as if to convey, even at the last, some comfort and some love. 

" You forgive me, Eugenie 1 I know you do. Alas ! what 
weight of sorrow and of cruelty you have to forgive. You ask 
my forgiveness ! I have nothing to forgive . ^nothing but now 
to return your love, and to bless you and pray for you as you 
die. You are happy in dying; we are all miserable that live. 
Eugenie, Eugenie 1 my firsts my only love, would that I 
could die in peace, as you do now ! " 

He was silent. The gold watch in the doctor's pocket was 
heard ticking, at its busy task of numbering the minutes of 
this mortal life, in which we make so loud a cry and so busy s^ 
to-do. The invalid, who had bestowed the last warm pressure 
on the hand of him she loved, suddenly withdrew it, and 
pressed to her lips, with both thin hands, the crucifix of the 



360 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



Sister. The doctor watched her face more closely. He nodded 
his head to the Earl, who had arisen, as much as to say . 
** The change has come. Science is of no use now. Here is 
One against whom that cannot struggle." 

Winifred arose too, and placed her soft, warm hand upon 
the cold, thin hands that held the crucifix ; but, gazing upon 
the face, the tears, which had been falling fast from the young 
wife's eyes, stopped, as she saw the change stealing over the 
features of her more than widowed sister. The nurse had 
arisen too ; and with holy but unmoved countenance, repeated 
the prayers of her Church for the parting soul. Blessings upon 
that faith which never deserts the worn and wearied, the sick 
and the dying, the weak and bruised ; which attends us upon 
the threshold of this world . into whicb we come naked and 
crying . and is not absent from us when we go forthj beaten 
and defeated it may be, but released from our burdens ! As 
the pack which Christian wore upon his shoulders. a sore and 
heavy weight, grievous to be borne . fell away from him when 
he reached the Delectable Mountains, so from this poor dying 
sinner, guilty sin, and the troubles of the world rolled away. 
Her features regained a placid, a contented, and even a joyful 
look . joyful with surprise, as if some vast curtain of dark mist 
had rolled away, and she could see something beautiful and 
bright. A slight shudder shook her frame, and this returned 
three times, each seemingly more strong than the other ; and 
then the same sweet smile with which she had greeted her son 
returned, but without the patient suffering that she had before 
expressed Then again came a deeper and more sudden 
shudder. The eyes slowly opened, the smile died away, the 
features were composed and at peace ; but the wide, deep, 
liquid eyes, so fixedly gazing, saw nothing. Eugenie Wade 
had ceased to belong to this world of trouble ! 

"She is dead," said the doctor. "I foresaw how it would 
be. If she had been quite alone, may be, she might have 
lived for some hours. But was it worth while ? Poor thing, 
she must have suflFered ! " 

He took one of the hands as he spoke this, and he said what 
he had to say . good fellow as he was, and much used to death- 
bed scenes . with tears in his eyes, and lifted it gently up ; it 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 361 



fell a dead weight upon the cross which it had clasped. The 
Sister ceased her prayers, and, crossing the hands upon the 
breast, placed the crucifix between them. The Earl stooped 
down and kissed the dead forehead of her whom he had so 
passionately loved ; and Winifred took his hand, and led him 
from the room. 

" Come with me, my lord," she said. " This is no place for 
us now." 

Suddenly she turned ; and, running to the nursing Sister, 
took her two hands in hers, and drawing her towards her, 
gave her a sweet, long, thankful kiss. 

" You will remain here for a time, I know," she said. 

The Sister silently nodded, and returned the kiss, which 
seemed to add some warmth to her life. 

" And you, doctor " . ^Winifred spoke in a whisper, as we do 
in the presence of the newly dead ; as if Death, still lingering 
over his victim, could hear us, and might be reminded of our 
presence, and would strike us too . " And you, doctor, will you 
come with us ] " 

The doctor had done all that humanity could accomplish, 
and now said that he was ready. The nursing Sister smoothed 
the face of the dead, and closed the eyes, which were clouded 
now ; opened the window, placed a vase of flowers before an 
image of the Saviour which stood upon the dressing-table; 
and, kneeling down before that simple and temporary altar, 
offered up a prayer . not for herself, but for the soul that had 
so lately escaped from its prison of the flesh. 



CHAPTER L. s 

"O miseras hominum xnentes, O pectora caeca!" sayeth liUcretius. 
'* Often, when we aeek the right, do we stumble on the wrong ; and^ con- 
trariwise, as we grasp the wrong, we peradventure only happen upon the 
right." ^Similitudes by John Pawlet, p. 29. 

By what an admirable law of nature it is that we associate 
ourselves with success, and congratulate ourselves upon it, 
even when another has achieved it ; and disassociate ourselves 
from defeat in the quickest and most satisfactory manner 1 



362 ONE OF TWO j OR, 



''AhT' said Inspector Steyensoh^ looking at the defeated 
Browojoha ^* Your case has broken down, Mr SamueL That 
horse won't run," 

<< Been scratched long ago, to my mind," returned the person 
addressed. '^ And no wonder. There are always two ends to 
a long pole, and I got hold of the wrong one. That's all." 

" You did what you had to do very well indeed," said Tom 
Forster, who did not feel any triumph at the humiliation of 
his rival ; " and no man could do more." 

'^ Thank you, sir . ^proud, I'm sure," said the police sei^eant, 
taking the proffered hand, and shaking it. For Brownjohn, 
like a good honest fellow, generously admired his rival ; and 
having lost the race, put up with the loss, and felt no deep 
regret. He had done his best . ^that was all he could do. 

" I hope," he continued, " that your system will turn out 
better than mine. I don't do any fancy work. I look for my 
clue, and I hold on to it. I get to where it leads me . and it 
is nowhere. Now, with you it may be otherwise. You have 
a way with you that will " 



" Lead to nothing too, very probably," said the old man. 
** If murderers were men of talent instead of being the stupidest 
fools on earth, if crime were wisdom instead of folly, why, they 
would baffle us utterly. And there is something in this that 
we have not got to the bottom of, by any means." 

" No 1 " asked Brownjohn, wiUing to be instructed, and half 
asking a question. 

" I have felt so, at any rate," returned Old Daylight ; " and 
I feel so more than ever to-day. Why, bless you, none of us 
are sure of a criminal, even if caught red-handed, till he con- 
fesses his crime." 

As he said these words, Mr Inspector Stevenson, who had 
gone into another room, after whispering to the magistrate, 
opened the door, and produced G^ar Negretti and his little 
companion. Patsy Quelch. Patsy seemed to have grown an 
inch taller. There was a gleam of triumph in his blue Irish 
eye . a quick, sharp, wakeful look, and a bold bearing about 
the boy, as if his hour had come. C6sar, on the other hand, 
had lost all his variable lightness and agility^ and seemed to 
have collapsed. The prospect even of a couple of months' 



A LEFT-HANDED BRmE. 363 

^imprisonment had a terrible significance to the Maltese. Let 
him but once get into the hands of the police, and when should 
he escape ? Such were his thoughts. He had a natural horror 
of all guardians of the laws, as may have been observed in 
others who choose to break through them. 

" Who are these, Mr Inspector ? " asked the magistrate. 

" Please, your worship," answered that officer, ** we thought 
at first it was something very small. Only a larceny case . 
spoon-stealing from a coffeehouse." 

*' It is that ! " interjected Patsy, in a quick, shrill whisper, 
which thrilled through the room, and made Cesar start ner- 
vously. 

^* Miserable pig ! " muttered the Italian, between his teeth. 
" Wretch . Irish . ^misbegotten one, had it not been for 
thee " 

Patsy's triumphant look silenced him, and Patsy himself was 
frowned into quietude by the Inspector. But he . with that 
curious patience often exhibited by persons who love revenge 
. could wait. The objurgations of the Maltese, whispered or 
shouted, fell like peas upon sheet iron, and left no mark nor 
hurt. Mr Horton, by a courteous gesture, invited Mr Tom 
Forster to the table in this preliminary investigation, and the 
bundle of the Maltese was silently examined. Mr Cdsar 
Negretti was one of those individuals . not uncommonly met 
with . ^who are not by any means deterred nor confounded by 
the wickedness of a deed, but who are appalled by detection. 
Standing first on one leg and then on the other, his miserable 
body screwed up into as small a space as it could well occupy, 
he had lost all his gracefulness, and looked as contemptible an 
object as could be conceived. The perpetration of crime, or 
the indulgence in low passions, is not conducive to good and 
noble looks ; and a gallery of criminals may weU be called a 
" Chamber of Horrors." The bright olive complexion of the 
Maltese assumed a green-yellowish hue; his eyes had lost 
their brightness and their sparkling vivacity. His fisherman's 
scarlet cap he had pulled ofi^, and it hung dangling from his 
hand ; while limp ringlets of his black hair straggled over his 
face, which was covered with perspiration. Once or twice he 
tried to assume an indifferent air, and even a sickly smile ; but 



364 ONE OP TWO ; OR, 



in those moments . to the eyes of Patsy, which were fixed on 
him . ^he looked somewhat more contemptible than before. As 
for Mr Tom Forster, he was taken by surprise. The spoons 
were of sUver, and bore a half worn-out crest, which he at once 
recognised as the same as those bore which he had found at 
Acacia Villa. They did not carry the English, but the French, 
Hall-mark, and were of foreign manufacture. Mr Forster, 
who had had some experience in thesQ matters. as related in 
an early chapter of this history . ^pointed this out to Mr 
Horton. But besides these evidences, there were some light 
kid gloves . soiled, indeed, and crumpled and worn, but not 
so dirty as those which such a person as Negretti would have 
worn, nor were they of the kind which he would have pur- 
chased. They must, therefore, have been stolen by or given 
to him. Some other nick-nacks, a letter or so in French, one 
or two in an Italian patois used in Malta, and some letters in 
English, made up the other contents of the bundle ; with the 
exception of a shirt of fine texture, and a black kerseymere 
waistcoat. The magistrate examined these, and then spoke . 

" These are not all your clothes ? " 

"Yes, yes, signor; most honourable sir, yes," replied the 
Maltese, partly in Italian, wil^h painful eagerness. Then he 
added, with a sigh of some satisfaction . " With the exception 
of those I have now got on." 

" Yer lie," muttered Patsy to himself; but he did not speak 
aloud this time. 

" But what have you done with the others, my poor lad 1 " 
asked the magistrate, in a tone of kindly pity . evidently 
grieved, as he always was, at the guilt of others, especially of 
the young. 

" I . I changed them for these where I went with Mr Brown- 
john." 

He looked pleadingly at that stolid oflSicer. 

"He did so," said the police sergeant, accenting the last 
word. '* He had a notion, I think, your worship, of getting 
beyond seas; but I kept mj eye upon him, and he dressed 
himself up in this nautical way at a slop shop." 

Here Mr Tom Forster, bending respectfully down, whispered 
something in the magistrate's ear. Mr Horton nodded, andsaid . 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 365 



" But a young fellow like you must have some other pro- 
perty. Where did you leave your trunk or chest 1 " 

" I have none. I have sold it." 

Mr Horton looked puzzled and displeased; and Patsy 
fidgeted, and held up his hand as a schoolboy at a Sunday- 
school does, when he feels, rightly or wrongly, that he can 
answer a question. 

"Umph!" ejaculated the inspector, noticing it; "the boy 
wants to speak, your worship." 

" Let him speak up," said Mr Horton, glancing in a kind 
and encouraging way upon the small boy. 

Hereon Patsy spoke. 

" Please, he has been and left a box at the caf6 in Eupert 
Street. I know it, and I see'd it. The padrone, as he called 
the master, will show it." 

"Very good," returned the magistrate, "Do you know 
where that place is, Serjeant Brownjohn 1 " 

" Yes, sir." 

" Take a cab, and go and search the box. And now let us 
look to these letters." 

The dates of the papers found in the parcel . during the 
reading of which Cesar Negretti turned visibly more pale, and 
exhibited more distress . extended over some six months. 
The first in order was a rough draft of a letter to Mr Edgar 
Wade, barrister, of the Temple, in which the writer acquainted 
that gentleman that he knew something which would, if exa- 
mined and acted upon, turn to his advantage. It was purposely 
worded in a wide and indefinite manner, and seemed to have 
elicited a careful answer from the barrister. This answer did 
not occur ; but there was another rough draft of a reply to the 
letter, in which the writer stated that, in overloolring some 

letters of his (the writer's) father . who was Gustave , 

formerly valet to Lord Chesterton . ^lie had discovered the 
secret of Edgar Wade's birth. A third letter. and the little 
bundle of MSS. had been carefully and consecutively arranged, 
and had been preserved as being of some value . ^was from Mr 
Edgar Wade himself. He wished the informant would call 
upon him : such matters as he could communicate had better 
be spoken than written. He appointed a certain evening, and 



366 ONE OF TWO j OR, 



wished that the writer of the letters would bring with him 
proofs of the authenticity of his information. A fourth letter 
. ^again from Edgar Wade . complained that the appointment 
had not been kept, and asked . evidently in answer to some 
hints upon the subject of remuneration . what amount of 
money would be demanded, presuming the information sup- 
plied should turn out to be of use in placing the writer, Mr 
Edgar Wade, in possession of his rights. Mr Horton looked 
significantly at Mr Tom Forster as he read these letters. That 
gentleman fidgeted with his spectacles, examined the writing 
of his friend with coolness and minuteness, and was evidently 
troubled. The letters were quite genuine ; and as each suc- 
ceeding one strengthened the revelation so unpleasant to Mr 
Forster's feelings, so his examination became more slow and 
methodical. It would seem to have been Negretti's purpose 
to keep away as long as he could from a personal interview 
with the barrister. Some more brief notes of a letter next 
occurred, in which were found the names of Gustavo, Madame- 
Martin . with her address at Acacia Villa . and Lord Chester- 
ton. Lord Wimpole, in whose service the writer had been, 
was also mentioned j and the secret to be confided was held 
up as of the greatest importance and value. There was no 
answer to this. Edgar Wade, it would appear, had sought 
out and found his informant ; and, from notes of conversations, 
a large sum of money seemed to have been asked, and to have 
been agreed upon, as a reward to be paid upon Edgar Wade 
making his claim perfect. There were instructions, evidently 
taken from the barrister's lips, as to getting papers in the pos- 
session of Lord Wimpole or Madame Martin. As Mr Tom 
Forster read these, his heart sank within him. He turned 
pale, felt sick at heart, and sat down, polishing his eye-glasses 
with his bandana pocket-handkerchief. 

'^ This case assumes a very serious aspect,'' said the magis- 
trate, looking at him. " I am afraid, Mr Forster, that your 
accumulation of proofs in regard to Lord Wimpole have mis- 
led us." 

" The proofs were all right, sir," returned Old Daylight in a 
mild voice; "but I am afraid they have led us to the wrong 
person!' j 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 367 

'^ I see no reason why his lordship should not be released/' 
said the magistrate, making out an order to that effect, and 
directing it to Captain Chessman. '' Perhaps Inspector Steven- 
son will see to this 1 " 

He handed the paper to Stevenson, who took it gloomily. 
"Here was a go," he said to himself; "Old Daylight was 
actually breaking down ! What neict 1 When would the right 
.party turn upl" 

" No," observed Old Forster, after a pause, ^' your worship 
was right in your unwillingness to make that arrest. There 
are yet more papers . ^possibly, in that man's box." 

" Have you any more letters like or similar to these ? " said 
Mr Horton. 

Cesar's lips moved faintly with the reply of . " Si, signor." 

" Most of these notes axe in your writing, I presume. We 
can prove that, even if you deny it. I want you to be cau- 
tious about what you say. It is evident that .you know 
much about matters antecedent to the murder of this poor 



woman "- 



Again a low, liissing sound of *' Si, signor," a bowing down 
of the head, and a " piteous" . as old writers would say. ex- 
tension of the hands and fingers, as if for mercy. 

*' If not of murder itself," continued the magistrate. 

.Cesar's head fell upon his chest, and he said nothing. But 
the eyes of the silent, watchful little Irish boy gleamed and 
sparWed with intelligence. 

" Have mercy, sir, upon me . spare me, good sir ! " gasped 
the Maltese. " Give me time. Let me consult my friends, 
and I will tell all." 

The words sounded more like the low whining of a beaten 
dog than the voice . once so clear, sharp, and resonant . of 
C6sar Negrettl 

" You shall have plenty of time and every opportunity," 
said the magistrate. " We will see you properly taken care of 
and go fully into the case to-morrow." 

C^ar and Patsy wer^ therefore removed ; and, after some 
talk with Old Daylight m regard to Mr Edgar Wade. for 
whose appearance Tom Forster himself undertook to answer, 
being supplied with the proper instrument for compelling his 



368 ONE OF TWO ; or, 



attendance . ^Mr Horton left. As Forster passed Sergeant 
Brownjohn, that functionary said . 

"Well, I am as sorry as if it were n\y own case. Yours 
seems to break down as well as mine, although you were on 
the right track.'* 

** Ah ! my friend," said Old Daylight, with a sigh, " it was a 
race between us. One of Two, you know. And, as far as I 
see, I hare the right evidence ; and you, although you did not 
intend it, have arrested the right man." 

He nodded in the direction in which C^sar Negretti had dis- 
appeared as he spoke. 



CHAPTER LI. 

A LAST INTERVIEm 

The nursing Sister, left alone with the dead, put up her 
prayers in silence, and with some faith and hope. both 
deadened by custom, both now a matter of habit. The fire 
which had kindled them in her young breast had ceased to 
leap into a golden flame, but had fallen to its steady, custom- 
ary glow. even covered with white ashes of disappointment, 
and concealed by custom and routine, but yet alive and burn- 
ing. Did she pity or envy the poor lady who was at rest ? 
Hardly one or the other feeling was expressed in the calm, 
tender kiss she bestowed on the forehead of the dead, as she 
smoothed the features and composed the limbs. Even the 
dead was of the world ; and the Sister's Church was far above 
and beyond the world, looking on it, acting on it, working for 
it, but not of it. Poor world, when such noble and good souls 
are constrained to leave it ! Poor wounded souls, who leave 
the world, and look askance at it, and live to themselves, 
transformed to something hardly human, yet ever hungering 
for human love and sympathy. The little doctor, who had 
cut the Gordian knot of the ravelled Churches and sects by 
believing in nothing that would not admit of soientific proof, 
was not forgetful of the Sister . ^for whom he would have liked 
to prescribe a good dance, plenty of roast beef and Southdown 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 369 



mutton, an honest husband, and a smaH family . and had sent 
some_one to relieve her in due time ; but, in the meantime, she 
must wait . and she was used to waiting. She heard the foot- 
steps of Edgar Wade, as he now and then rose and paced 
about in the little room overhead . ^which he had fitted as an 
extra study; and then there would ensue a long interval of 
silence. It was evident that the acute lawyer and man of the 
world suffered much perturbation; and, of a truth, the remark 
of a modem philosopher, which would apply here, is consola- 
tory to us small persons, who cannot but feel some envy at 
the thick-skinned people, who are supposed to suffer nothing. 
" The sages," wrote this clever man, " feel as much as we do ; 
only, by an assumed constancy, they hide their feelings from 
the world." The barrister was a sage after the philosopher's 
own heart. He had hidden his feelings from the world ; but, 
nevertheless, he felt. He went straight to this little room 
after parting from Mrs Wade, and, raising his hands to his hot 
forehead, remained for a short time the picture of despair. 
Things were not going with Mm as he could have wished ; 
troubles were closing around him; and the stout heart and 
busy brain were both over-worked and over-charged. 

" What will happen, I know not," said the young man to 
himself. "At any rate, let me prepare for the worst. My 
letter has not been answered. What can she mean ? Months 
ago . is it months or weeks 1 . she vowed that she loved me, 
and that it was only my poverty that was an obstacle ; and 

now, when all seems ^But come, I must work . for a time, - 

at least." 

He sat down, and wrote rapidly, yet carefully, pausing now 
and then to read the folios which he filled, and taking care to 
use precise and definite expressions. Occasionally he would 
pause and listen, and wonder to himself in some such phrases 
as these . 

"That man Eichards, I suppose, did it. H& has- always 
some new-fangled invention which is to astonish the world, 
and then falls to nothing. I wish I had not brought him here. 
I wonder what ill-luck it was that made me do so. I was a 
madman. Her tongue may undo much that is done. Why 
was it not silent in the grave? Poor thing! that was the 

2a 



370 ONE OP TWO ; OE, 



best plaee for her. I wonder why and for what some people 
liyel Proyidence! As if Providence evex troubled itself 
about such wretched worms as we are. She mnst die ; she 
cannot sorely exist as she is. How like a ghost she looked^ 
if there are such things as ghosts." 

Then he continued writing, and would again listen. His 
hearing was very acute ; and he distinguished the retreating 
footsteps of the Earl, Winifred, and the doctor. But he had 
some pages to fill, and he set himself resolutely to his task. 
When it was finished, he packed up the papers, and carefully 
wrapped them in a quarto sheet of writing papery sealed, 
directed, and then pocketed them. 

" They will be," he said, " safer with me than any one else. 
And now . ^now for the last appeal ! " He laughed bitterly to 
himself. " How few people would suspect me of th^s folly ! 
But I suppose it is in my blood. I should be a slave to such 
a passion, when I consider what my parents were ; and this 
passion masters me I '' 

" There is only one kind of love," said the great philosopher 
before quoted ; " but there are a thousand different imitations 
of it." And he adds that many people talk about love, but 
few ever know that passion. Perhaps it' is as well they do 
not. Husbands and wives who are very fond of each other, 
go through life very well on the imitation. Similarity of 
tastes, an equal level of wisdom or stupidity, habit, con- 
venience, a nice position, a title, a good house, a fine income, 
an old name . all these pass for love. But they are not love, 
notwithstanding. People have got so used to the imitation, 
that they are quite angry if they ever meet with th^ original. 
One young gentleman, in whom the true passion had really 
begun to burn, seized his mistress's hand, and kissed it fondly. 

"My dear George," said the nymph^ as she passed her 
kerchief over her hand, and drew on her glove, " pray, don't 
be so ridiculous." 

Cupid took flight for ever. Our playwrights and novelists 
do not even attempt to describe love, and are poor hands at 
lovemaking, or else Shakespeare and the Elizabethan poets 
knew nothing about it. We are, no doubt, very clever, but we 
cannot yet beat Shakespeare ; and he happens to be borne out 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 371 



by a cloud of witnesses. Amidst the namerons passums . 
ambition, envj, savage indignation, overweening conceit of his 
owii merit . that burned in the bosom of Edgar Wade, one 
pure and true passion had managed to establish itself; and 
its object was, by some mischance, Natalie Fifine ! 

" Once more," he muttered to himself, " I will see her once 
more 1 Alas, why is my soul so ill at ease 1 " 

He went down-stairs to his chamber, which was next door 
to Mrs Wade's, and taking from the chiffonier a bottle, filled 
a wine glass full of brandy, and drank it The draught 
seamed to do him good, and he took another. At any other 
time this might have intoxicated him ; but now the draught 
only served to make his nerves steady, and to give him 
determination. He reached the door of the room wherein 
poor Mrs Wade lay, very still and quiet now . as we shall all 
once lie . and would have passed it; but a sensation, which he 
could neither account for nor control, made him enter the 
room to gaze upon the dead. He did not hww that she was 
dead, but hie fdt it. The silence, where there had been the 
sound of voices, might have told it ; but that of itself was by 
no means a proof. Edgar Wade was not astonished, when he 
opened the door, to see the face of the dead covered with a 
white handkerchief, and the Sister kneeling at her temporary 
altar. With a terrible calmness, he approached the bed, and 
lifted the face-cloth, and gazed for a moment fixedly at the 
face of the dead. The Sister arose from her knees, and looked 
at him, with a meek astonishment upon her features. 

" She is at least at rest,'' he said, in answer to that question- 
ing face. 

" She is, poor creature ! " answered the nurse ; " and, pra^ 
Heaven, iu peace." 

The features, so calm and placid, seemed to give a tacit 
answer to the prayer ; and Edgar Wade, mechanically uttering 
a feeling which came upon him, said . 

" And, after all, she looks as if she had died before her time." 

" No ! ». returned the Sister, « no one does that. Her in- 
felicity had years too many. Her sorrows seemed to be of 
longer duration than her life. All is ended now. It is for us 
to learn a lesson of patience from her days of sorrow.** 



372 0\E OP TM'O ; OR, 



Edgar Wade replaced the cloth ; and he seemed again im- 
pelled to ask if Mrs Wade had said any more than she did when 
she had recognised him ; and to his question, awkwardly put, 
the nursing Sister answered in the negative. 

'< She seemed to shield you. And I am sure she loved you 
still, and prayed for you," 

The barrister's eyes emitted a softened light as he turned to 
the nursing Sister ; but he said nothing, and turned round to 
leave the room. 

** Oh, sir ! " cried the religieusey suddenly and with fervour, 
" if you have been guilty of injustice and harshness to this poor 
lady, accept her forgiveness, and soften your heart to her now 
she is d^ad. Repent what you have done amiss. We are all 
weak and erring. The presence of the dead should teach us to 
know ourselves. Cast out what is wrong in you, and try to 
live a new life." Never had the little woman before spoken so 
much to a man since she had entered the sisterhood. Hers 
was a passive life. It was her business to do and not to speak, 
to refrain her tongue, and to perform her daily acts of duty. 
She wondered at herself, after she had spoken so earnestly, 
raising the ivory cross which hung from her waist in her pale, 
thin hands as she spoke, and placing that emblem before her as 
a silent ambassador of good faith. The barrister said nothing, 
but held up one hand as if to deprecate further intercession, 
and passed the other over his burning forehead and weary 
eyes. Thus he left the room. 

" They fool me," he said, bitterly, " to the top of my bent 
They all run in the same groove. It is / that am in the wrong 
. it is / that have to repent. God help me ! will no one put 
himself in my place ?" He was very angry with the world, as 
most selfish people are, at intervals, during all their liviss. He 
was not appreciated, and not sufficiently regarded, and never 
had been ; and he had, by a long course of meditation, burned 
these facts in upon his brain. It was, therefore, in the same 
bitter humour that Edgar Wade again passed through the door 
that led into the mews, and summoned the stable-help to saddle 
his horse; mounted upon which, he was not long before he 
sought the house wherein she dwelt whom he loved more than 
any one else in the world. When the servant opened tho 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 373 



garden door, she was apparently inclined to dispute the passage 
of the barrister, since he led, as had been his wont, his horse 
across the footpath and into the garden, tying it to the veran- 
dah while he entered. But, at that time, there was that about 
Edgar Wade that did not permit of denial or questioning. 

" Mademoiselle is not at home,^ said the servant . " not at 
home to any one." 

" You mean to say that she is in the house, and will not see 
me!" 

" Precisely, monsieur ; that is her express command." 

" Then I will see her," was the cool, calm answer, as the 
barrister entered the front door, and made straight to the little 
parlour. 

Sounda of laughter were heard within . ^laughter from the 
lips of Natalie, chorused by the gruff voice of a gentleman, who 
seemed delighted by the exuberance of the faery creature before 
him. Lord Montcastel had thrown his dice, and had been . 
indeed, was being . ^rewarded by the delight of the young 
creature whom he had promised to make his bride, and who 
held in her hand that promise, drawn up in a legal form. 
Natalie had just been mimicking the young men of the day, 
and assuring her lover . as other syrens have done before now, 
and will do again . that a good, sensible, middle-aged husband 
was the one to be chosen ; and that the fops; beaux, and bloods 
of the day were not worth looking upon. In short, she was 
playing a fantasia upon that tune which is a favourite with 
middle-aged gentlemen, and wliich asserts with philosophic 
boldness that it is ^^ better to be an old man's darling than a 
young man's slave," when the door opened, and Edgar Wade 
stood before the pair. As the landscape seldom looks so 
beautiful as when we behold it for the last time, and as tlie 
treasure's worth somehow forces itself upon our mindif just as 
we are about to lose it, so Mdlle. Fifine never Irxiked m lovely 
to Edgar Wade as when he was about to 1o;jo lier. His voico 
was deep with emotion as he stretched hi* anus towards lusr, 
and said . 

''Natalie!" 

Bhe turned round to him, almost angry^ Ijiii still brilliiiut 
and excited ; and then, suddenlyi she fled Uj l/jvl hh/uUmUilf 



i 



374 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 

as if to beg his protection, and whispered an assurance that 
this was one of the admirers that she had discarded for his 
lordship's sake. Whatever one may say about Fortune, she is 
a powerful goddess. It was Edgar's fate that whatever he did 
at this time should be undertaken at the worst possible occa- 
sion. He could not have come at a better hour or moment for 
Natalie . nor for his lordship. 

''Who is thisf he asked, gently pushing aside the lady, 
and standing between her and the barrister. 

" It is Monsieur Edgar Wade," she whispered . *' one of them 
of whom I spoke. He is an avocdV' 

The Earl bowed stiffly towards the intruder, and asked what 
he wanted. 

" I wish," said Edgar, humbly enough . though he naturally 
felt that he should have liked to throttle his opponent . *' to 
speak a few words to that lady, and alone.'' 

The Earl looked at Natalie, who shook her head and whis- 
pered . 

" I cannot see him. I do not wish to speak to him. I have 
given orders that he was not to be admitted." 

" You cannot do so, sir," said Lord Montcastel, acting as 
interpreter. *^ You see that your presence disturbs her. Any- 
thing you have to say must be said through me." 

Edgar looked round the gaily furnished room, which his money 
had helped to make so bright and pleasant, and answered . 

" I recognise you, my lord. I have met you before . once 
before, at the Opera. Might I ask by what right you inter- 
pose between us 1 " 

"That is soon answered," said Montcastel, coarsely, as if 
dealing with an inferior. " You are learned in the law, by 
profession, I hear. I claim a legal right. This lady is, or 
will be soon, my wife ! " 

The blow struck. Mr Wade was for a moment dumb. At 
last he managed to speak. 

" Is it so 1 " he cried. " Let me hear it from the lips of 
Natalie. Can it be sol Tell me." 

" Milord speaks truly, and of good faith," she said, taking 
the Earl's arm, and looking proudly up to him. ** I told your 
friend so, whom you sent . an old gentleman " . and here, by 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 375 

a touch or two, she described Mr Tom Forster. " I told him 
to tell you to come here no more." 

The barrister turned a deadly pale colour, and then, by a 
sudden rush, the blood came back. He seemed choking with 
passion. 

" Natalie,'' he cried, *' you know what you have done. You 
marry this man for his rank. Mine is higher than his. I, 
too, shall be an earl ! I was working, striving for this and 
for you j and now, when all seems fair before us, you have cast 
me off. You have killed me ! " 

The tone he said this in was so full of despair, that it com- 
manded some respect from the two worldlings who stood before 
him. 

" Pray," said Montcastel, more politely, and even with more 
calmness than the intrusion sjeemed to warrant, but at the 
same time with a sneer . " Pray, may I ask what title you lay 
claim to when you come into your rights ? " 

"The earldom of Chesterton," answered the barrister, 
proudly . again white with sickness, hatred, and despair ; and 
then he walked slowly, still looking at Natalie, from the room. 

Out into the cold air . choking with passion, so that he 
Joosened and tore off his heavy cravat, Edgar Wade hurriedly 
untied his horse's bridle, and led him forth. The cold, sharp, 
biting air . ^for it was a sharp and early frost . seemed for a 
moment to revive him. He pressed his heels to the sides of 
his horse, and galloped wildly away, the keen air. cutting his 
bared neck like an icy knife ; but he felt it not. The pair 
inside the little house listened to the retreating footfalls of the 
horse; and then the Earl, passing his arm round Natalie's 
waist, laughed noisily, but without mirth. 

" There 's one poor devil out of the lot that you Ve sent mad, 
Natalie ! The earldom of Chesterton ! . ^why, his lordship is 
alive. as good a life as mine, too . and has a son who will 
succeed him. Mad . ^poor devil ! . ^mad as a March hare.'* 



376 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



CHAPTER LIL 

.* Ye barren lawyers, bring yonr evidence, 
Join link to link, and stretch out line by line ; 
Like cunning spiders, spin out their own slime 
To catch their jirey, ere they do suck his blood/' 

. The Tempter, act ii sc v. 

Poor human nature, over which the philosopher meditated, 
and into one or two of whose secrets he had penetrated, was 
sometimes too many for him ; and in this casa she furnished 
him with an instance in which he was defeated. Each single 
instance in the evidence he had so closely fitted to the person 
of Lord Wimpole, Old Daylight found might equally well fit 

another person, and that person was 

Well, he did not like to think over it. Unlike most persons 
of restricted and narrow affections . ^who, when they minimise 
their love for the world, lessen it also even to those few upon 
whom they do bestow it . Mr Forster loved those whom he 
did love with a steady, quiet, deep affection, which grew the 
stronger under difficulties, and flourished . ^like the British 
Government . beneath the blows of a strong Opposition. Thus, 
even while Edgar Wade was so bitter against the poor invalid 
who lay at his house, Tom Forster loved her more fondly than 
ever ; and when, in his turn, Edgar himself began to be covered 
with the thick cloud of suspicion, the poor old gentleman 
cursed the day when he first took up with his hobby, and 
blamed his unlucky stars that ever he came to visit Kensal- 
Green or its neighbourhood. That day, which was so full of 
events to Mr Tom Forster and all concerned, was followed by 
a night not* less eventful. When the old gentleman got home, 
revolving many things in his mind, he found the poor invalid 
dead, the nursing sister gone away, and replaced by some one 
who watched, and paid the last sad offices to the poor dead 
lady ; and the room arranged with crucifix and candles, and 
that unmistakable atmosphere pervading it . felt at no other 
time, and not to be passed by . which is inseparable from the 
room wherein lies the newly dead. The old man did not 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDK 377 

know all that had passed between Mrs Wade and the barrister 
at the l$kst interview ; and, moreover, as the reader knows, was 
strongly impressed with belief in all that he had said. He 
thought that . moved and urged beyond her strength . the 
poor lady had yielded to temptation. But as she lay there 
dead, all his old respect and love came back, and she was 
forgiven. 

"Poor thing," he thought, "if there be penance in the 
decrees of Heaven, her life was one long penance for her sins. 
How calmly she lies now! Who would not forgive herl 
What was her life but a trial and a punishment] Is not all 
life the same 1 " 

The tears were rolling down the deeply-lined face of Old 
Forster as he said this, and they continued to fall as he walked 
slowly down-stairs, and sat down in his easy chair. 

" I shall wait," he said to himself, " till this unhappy man 
comes home. What is life ? Is it worth having ? After all, 
is it not a game of chess against a superior player, the after- 
conduct of which depends upon the first moves which he. 
makes 1 " 

" There's old Eobert Owen . a fantastic old fellow," he con- 
tinued to himself, " wanting men and women to live after one 
model, and all to dress alike, in pink flannel garments, like the 
Noah's ark men and women we buy at a toy shop. And he 
says, in his new gospel, that man is the creature of circum- 
stances, over which he has no control. If I thought that were 
true, I would sell this London house, and go and live with his 
people in New Lanark . and I might as well." 

Here he walked a while up and down, took out his heavy 

leathern pocket-book, looked at the little legal instrument with 

which it was furnished, and felt very much as if he should 

' like to put it in the fire. But he was restrained by the respect 

he felt for English law, and for other reasons too. 

"After all," he muttered, "it had better come from my 

hands j and then He will hate me for ever after ; and 

yet I would rather break it to him. Why not 1 Why should 
he not hate an old fool like I am, who has certainly done no 
good by poking his nose into the business of other people 1 

"It's about all over with me," continued Old Daylight. 



378 ONE OF TWO ; OB, 



<' This is the one grand mistake I have made; and that mis- 
take is a knock-down blow. I am too old to recover it. ' I 
went up like a rocket,' as Dr MThie has it, in Rolfs paper, 
' and I come down like a stick/ That 's what I do." 

To comfort himself, Old Daylight mixed a glass of that 
which teetotallers call " alcoholic poison." Happily, he lived 
in the days before teetotalism became rampant, and had not 
even a suspicion that he was doing an evil thing ; on the con- 
trary, he felt refreshed, and somewhat renovated; but the 
events of the day weighed upon him, and he knew not where 
to turn for comfort. So he sat down in his easy chair . one 
which modem luxury, by the way, would deem uncomfortable 
-.and read some pages of Shakespeare for a consolation. He 
sat there a long time. His candles burnt lower and lower; 
and Edgar Wade did not return. He summoned his house- 
keeper, and from that astute lady learned as much as he could 
from anybddy as to the very moment when the Earl of Ches- 
terton and a lady had called, how long they had remained, and 
almost what had passed in their presence. But, as we have 
seen, the dying lady spake in so low a tone, that the most 
acute listener in the vast and well-built old house could have 
learnt but little ; and Mr Forster felt that, to do her justice, 
the housekeeper told all that she knew, and that it was rather 
her misfortune than her fault that she knew no more. 

" And Mr Edgar Wade . was he present when the poor lady 
died 1 " 

" I think not, sir ; he went into the room while the nurse 
was yet there, but some time after the sad affair." 

"Sad affair!" muttered Forster. "That is one way to 
mention it. Happy release, I should call it. And did he stay 
long in the house afterwards ? " 

" No. He came down-stairs at once, and went through the 
garden into the stables, where he keeps his horse." 

" I see. That will do. You can go to bed. I will wait up 
for him." 

The housekeeper, sjabdued and quiet, as most servants are 
when there is a death in the house, went away, nothing loath. 
She had thought much more of her master since a real Earl 
had called there, taking a pleasure in " carriage company/' 



A LEFT-HANDED BRmE. 379 

and feeling somewhat exalted by the fact. Still, she was 
perpetually haunted by her master's mysterious business ; and, 
being unable to penetrate the mystery, put her worst construc- 
tion on it. She passed into the room furtively almost, and on 
tiptoe, where the watcher sat, and the dead lay with the candles 
burning ; and, nothing afraid, expressed herself delighted that 
all was " nice and comfortable/' and then stole up to bed. Old 
Daylight placed his bandana on his head, and settled himself 
in his chair, and in due time fell asleep. He had taken the 
precaution to put the chain of the door up, so that his friend 
and jprotigS could not enter without awaking, him. In some 
hours he awoke cold and chilly. The rushlight he had taken 
the precaution to set light to had burnt . in the sulky, sullen 
manner peculiar to those nearly extinct luminaries . almost to 
its socket, and was throwing from its position the pattern of 
its pierced tin guard, in little dim round holes of light, not 
only on the floor, but on the ceiling. 

" God bless me ! " ejaculated the old man. " Why, I must 
have been asleep." 

How is it that we assure ourselves thus apologetically of any 
slight dereliction of duty 1 Old Forster had been asleep, and 
to his own satisfaction. He felt cold and chilly; and rubbing 
and chafing his hands, he lighted a candle, and went to the 
street door. The chain was still up ; no one had passed 
through j and the old gentleman . undetermined and dis- 
satisfied as we always are when we have been watching, and 
are disappointed . opened the door and looked out. The 
morning was cold and very dark. Queen Anne Street looked 
even more dull than it did on ordinary occasions. Eound the 
comer, in the next street, and at some distance, the watchman 
. not yet disused, and kept up as a monument of parochial 
charity as well as of ornament, or principally for the reason 
that the parish really did not know what else to do with the 
poor, old, used-up specimen of humanity . was calling out, 
" Half-past four of a frosty morning j " and Old Forster listened 
to the " linked weakness, long drawn out," of the old fellow's 
cry till he felt chilled. He shut the door, drew the bolts, and 
came in and sat down for a moment, to think. 

** Why, he can't have come in," said he to himsel£ ** He 

can't have come in." 



380 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



He repeated this obvious fact once or twice to himself, as if 
he were assured of its truth by repetition. Then he suddenly 
recollected that, as Edgar Wade went out by the stable-yard, 
he might have returned thereby; but, no . the bolts were 
drawn. The old gentleman, to reassure himself, went up into 
the barrister's rooms. They were empty. The bed had not 
been slept in. The light shone through the keyhole of the 
door where the dead lady lay; and Old Daylight shuddered 
with cold, and with a deadening and perplexing feeUng, as he 
came down-stairs. 

'^Umph 1'' he said to himself, as he prepared to undress, and 
to go to bed. "I did not expect this. He has fled the 
country, I hope. What for ? What for ?" 

The phantom before him, the guilt of Edgar Wade, began 
to build itself up as he lay down to rest, and kept him awake. 
At first he had thought that any knowledge the barrister had 
of the matter, even after he had examined the letters found in 
C^ar Negretti's bundle, was but little ; but now . now, in this 
supreme moment, why was he absent ? Surely the man was . 
if ambitious and impatient . ^too clever to criminate himself. 
Old Daylight endeavoured to comfort himself with this 
thought ; but a horrid suspicion, tl\at made his blood run cold, 
told him that he might be wrong. His faith in poor human 
nature fell to the lowest degree on the scale . when, happily 
for himself, he fell into a sound sleep, and did not wake till 
late in the morning. Dressing and shaving, breakfasting or 
opening his letters, Mr Forster was haunted with but one idea, 
and that was . of the whereabouts of the barrister. Hardly 
had he breakfasted; when a messenger from the police court 
put a note into his hand, written in the familiar and noble 
Roman caligraphy of Inspector Stevenson, begging him to 
come down at once, as something unexampled in the case be- 
fore them had turned up. Stevenson . faithful to his friend . 
hinted that he wanted him to know it before the magistrate 
had it placed before him. It needs Hot to be said that Mr 
Forster hurried to the office now so familiar to the reader, nor 
that he was received by Stevenson with an official coolness and 
dryness peculiar to that officer, who was all the while excited 
by the news, and as eager to get to the bottom of it as himselt 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 381 



" Come here," said Stevenson . " here is an old acquaintance 
of ours," and he led him to the spare room in which Patsy 
Quelch and C^sar Negretti met with Mr Brownjohn the night 
before ; and in this room . not much the worse for the night 
he had passed, with the exception that his coat looked a little 
more fluffy, and his hair somewhat rougher . sat Mr Bamett 
Slammers, and his friend Mr Scorem. That ornament of the 
law was rather the worse for his vigil ; his bright, merry eyes 
looked somewhat larger, and a dark ring round each told of 
excitement and night watching. 

" Hallo ! Mr Slammers," cried Old Forster, " can you throw 
any light upon this mystery ? " 

"I can't. But I think this gentleman can," returned the 
reporter, laying a kindly hand on the clerk's shoulder. 

" And of what kind 1 " asked the old gentleman, eagerly 
looking at the Inspector, in whose face he read a confirmation 
of the words that dropped from the lips of Mr Slammers. 

" This gentleman," said Mr Slammers . ^here again he laid 
his hand upon Scorem, who kept a very strict silence, and> in 
consequence of his legal education, determined not to speak 
unless spoken to . " this gentleman will, I think, furnish you 
with the missing link in the chain of evidence with regard to 
the terrible crime in the neighbourhood of Kensal-Green." 

Mr Slammers used a great many words ; but it was not to 
be wondered at, as his profession led him to indulge in a sur- 
plusage when he used his pen, and his tongue had caught it 
from that instrument of a ready writer. 

"Well," returned Old Forster, "we are glad to hear any- 
thing, Mr Slammers ; and due justice shall be done to you for 
putting this before the law." 

" Oh ! I Ve nothing to do with it," returned the reporter. 
"This gentleman does it all . sud sponie, as they say in the 
classics ; and, let me tell you, he does it at great cost to his 
feelings ; and not only to them, but to his position and pro- 
spects in life, which by this action will be for ever blighted." 

The breath of Mr Scorem gave evidence of his feelings during 
this speech : it came and went more quickly than before, and 
the bright eyes seemed to glow the brighter in that shadowed 
room, as the honest Bohemian put his case forward. Mr 



382 ONE OP TWO ; or, 



Slammers was evidently detennined that Scorem should not 
lose by it, if he could help it. 

"Very gratifying, I am sure," answered the Bow Street 
numer; " very much so. And now, what is to be shown us f " 

*< This 1 " said Scorem, dramatically, producing the end of 
the foil, the broken part of which was ground to a chisel end, 
and was very sharp. 

" God bless me 1" returned Old Daylight; " that 's a Solingen 
blade, and just the length to fit the broken foil I took from 
Lord Wimpole's room." 

" Just so ! " uttered the Inspector. 

" And where did you fi^d this important piece of evidence?" 

^< Concealed between the boards in his master's chambers, 
evidently hidden away with a purpose, as such a weapon could 
not well be thrown away, nor easily destroyed." 

Thus spoke Slammers, who knew how to marshal evidence 
as well as the cleverest barrister at the Old Bailey bar. 

" God bless me 1 " exclaimed Old Daylight, looking at Scorem 
with a confused notion of having seen him before, but having, 
from his agitation and the novelty of the place, forgotten him. 
" And who is your master 1 " 

Mr Scorem answered the direct question with a voice altered 
and made solemn with emotion . 

" Mr Edgar Wade, Barrister-at-Law, Garden Court, Temple.*' 



CHAPTER LIII. 

" Oh, do not think 
Because yoa are so rich and highly born, 
And so wrapt round with comfort, you can 'scape 
The penalties of Being, more than we ; 
You breathe the air, and so do we. The poor 
Have blood, and bone, and passion just as you. 
And love their kind as dearly as my Lord." 

. The Bondmaid, act i. sc. i. 

The old French sailor, as he walked away from the English 
police-office, quietly crossed himself in his hmnbly pious fashion, 
and thanked h ban Dieu for Hia good offices. For, although 



A LEFT-HAKDED BRIDE. 383 



in his hard life, Le P^re Martin had been assailed bj many 
ugly doubts, and had bad to listen to many insinuations 
from his wife, who was an esprit fort^^^ oar attentire readers 
will, no doubt, remember .^he never allowed himself to be 
conquered, but kept up an invincible and dull belief in Pro- 
vidence; which belief his better half regarded in much the 
same light as- her great hero Kapoleon had looked upon 
those stupid English soldiers who did not know when they 
were beaten. Upon such an occasion as this, Madame Martin 
would have asked her husband why it was that Providence did 
not interfere before he was wrongfully taken up to London, and 
why Providence subjected him to certain misfortunes merely for 
the purpose of getting him out of ihem 1 To which sophistica- 
tions the oldKorman fisherman would answer with a deprecatory 
shake of his head, and an assertion that, after aU, U bon Dieu 
knew a great deal better than he did, and that if He chose to 
try him, he was willing to be tried. This simple kind of faith, 
which pretends to know nothing, and relies neither upon logic, 
nor upon science, nor upon learning, but upon itself, is a very 
obstinate one to overcome, and is frequently found amongst 
soldiers and sailors, especially amongst those who are obliged to 
execute orders of which they only see the result long afterwards, 
or are exposed, as a seafaring man is, to daily dangers from 
which he is day by day extricated. In Sterne's picture of 
Uncle Toby, we find that humourist shows us, with a subtle 
pathos hardly appreciated, that Toby only finds out how he 
got his wound, and what dangers he had run, by studying the 
maps of the fortifications as he lay upon his l)ack, weakened 
and in pain. So it was with Le P^re Martin : he was content 
to map out the past, and to understand his troubles as he 
looked back. It need not be said that this childish faith was 
P^re Martin's great source of happiness, and that he knew that 
well : hence that curious soft smile of his, which puzzled Mr 
Brownjohn, and gave him the notion that that old fellow 
" Marton was a confounded hypocrite." Eeleased, just in the 
nick of time, by the appearance of Mr Jasper Snape and the 
bargee, Mr Martin readily paid his thanks where they were 
due, and walked* off as cool as a cucumber. 

" That 's a curious old man," said Brownjohn to himself. 



384 ONE OF Ttv^O ; on, 



** He beats all I eve^ come across. He makes no bones of it ; 
just as if he kept a special Providence to interfere on purpose !" 

The old gentleman, in the meantime, had walked away, and 
was quietly surveying the streets, and about to get himself 
some dinner at one of the early coflFee-hoiises . ^where they sold, 
by the way, a decoction of roast com, and some most delectable 
saloop. when some heavy steps moving quickly after him 
caused him to turn round. He saw Brownjohn, who held in 
his hand a tiny parcel of white paper. 

" You want me again, Mr Officer ? " said the old Frenchman, 
turning back, and evidently quite ready to accompany him. 

" Bless the man," said the runner to himself, " he must be 
as fond of the police-office as a cat is of her kitchen fender. 
No, Mr Martin, we don't want you now," he said aloud ; "only 
Mr Horton, who is a real gentleman, he is " . ^Mr Brownjolin 
made the not uncommon distinction between a real gentleman 
and a sham one . "has sent you this to help you on your 
way." 

The little parcel contained two sovereigns, one of which was 
from the magistrate's private purse ; and Mr Martin received 
the gift with the same calmness, just as if he had always been 
looking for it, and was not in the least- surprised at the lucky 
windfall. He was, however, profuse in his thanks. 

" You English are a generous people . with your money. I 
suppose it is because you get it so easily," he muttered to him- 
self, as he went onwards. 

The sentiment would have outraged Mr Brownjohn, or any 
Englishman. To be told that one earns his money easily is a 
slight never to be forgotten. After dining somewhat substan- 
tially upon eggs and bacon, coffee, and bread and butter . it 
must be remembered that the hardy fisherman had fasted for 
several hours . M. Martin paid his shot, asked the way to 
Chesterton House, and departed in the same independent, 
simple way, causing the tired-out, greasy, and unkempt woman, 
who had a constant odour of coffee, chicory, brown sugar, and 
buttered muffins, to look out of her den with a face of wonder 
as the man departed. She was so seldom seen outside this 
caravanserai in the London deserts, that direptly her head was 
seen, a street boy gave a war-whoop of delight . a chi-htiickf he 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 385 

called it . which announced that old Mother Potter was to be 
seen, as well as a " furiineer." But having no companions in 
his excitement, the wanderer returned discomfited, took up his 
basket of wood, and went on what he called his " harrand." 
M. Martin soon found out the way, walking through the broad 
squares, and sunny, clean, and gravelled streets . for the West- 
end of London in those days resembled a very clean and well- 
built provincial town, and was not soiled with blacks and 
smuts as it now is . as a modern Caractacus might do through 
a modern Eome. He did not, however, give way to any of 
those reflections which the hero of the early history of Britain 
is said to have indulged in. When he reached the gate-house 
of the Chestertons, the proud young porter admitted him 
without question ; being far too much absorbed at the present 
dishevelled state of the family to say harsh things to any one. 
Mr Checketts, too, who had wandered to the lodge gate, 
merely to have a talk with the porter . being in that miserably 
dislocated state which a masterless servant so soon drops into, 
if he be at all active . looked upon the advent of this strange 
party as something which might bring that " turn-up " which 
we all look for in the time of trouble. 

" Yes, sir," said the porter, respectfully. " Who might you 
want to see ? " 

" The Lord Chesterton. Does he live here ? " said the old 
fisherman, looking round the plain yet stately and well-ordered 
courtyard. 

" Well, he does do that," said Mr Checketts, coming forward, 
and attracted by the foreign accent and aspect. ** And you 
might want to see him ? Wouldn't anybody else do 1 " 

STo; he must see him himself. And Le P^re Martin sat 
down upon the well-polished painted bench outside the door of 
the little lodge, whereon the porter sunned himself upon warm 
days. 

" He seems a determined sort . of fellow . he must be im- 
portant," thought Checketts. Then he said, " I '11 see to this, 
Mr Thomas ; I 've got nothin' else to do, worse luck. Come 
along with me, sir." 

Le Pdre Martin would rather remain where he was, till 
*.' me-lord " sent for him. He would sit there ; he liked being 

2b 



386 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 

in the fresh air better than in great houses. Thereon, ques- 
tioned by Checketts, he gave his name; and that excellent 
servant bounded away, perfectly certain that " something had 
turned up." Jhe gamilous old seaman had but time to talk 
over the weather, and the probability of some few and short 
storms before the winter set in, when Checketts came bounding 
back, and most respectfully urged the foreign gentleman at 
once to see his lordship. Such was the magic of his name I 
Upon this the seaman rose and walked towards the house, as 
if admiring the architecture of the Burlington period . cool 
and collected, as if master of the situation. He went up the 
staircase, his cap in his hand, considering rather than wondering 
at the noble proportions of the building, and leisurely stopping 
on the landing to contemplate one of the full-length portraits, 
with an almost comical air of satisfaction. He had spent so 
long at his dinner, and had walked so leisurely about the town, 
that it was evening when he stood in the corridor which led to 
Lord Chesterton's room. Mr Checketts bade him wait there 
for a moment ; and knocking softly at the door, entered. The 
Earl and Winifred had returned from the death-bed of Mrs 
Wade, and were sitting together. Events seemed to crowd 
upon them, and the old nobleman looked weary and jaded. 
He had rested his worn head upon his hand, as if for reflection; 
and said nothing . did not even raise his head . when the 
servant entered. 

" Please, my lord, here is the foreign gentleman." 
" Lef him come in. Winifred, my dear," he said, softly, " I 
want to see this man alone. You would help me if you could 
. I don't think you can in this case." 

He dreaded going over the story of his wrongdoings before 
this innocent young lady, although much of the story was 
known to her ; and she, without divining his intention . ^nor, 
indeed, even permitting herself to try to do so . left him at 
once by another door, and gained the boudoir, filled with 
those curious volumes of religious literature to which the 
reader has been before admitted. Le Pdre Martin entered. 
The old nobleman rose, and politely pointed out to the fisher- 
man the chair which Mr Checketts had places! for him before 
softly retiring and closing the door. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 387 

"Now, M. Martin," said his lordship, eagerly, "will you 
tell me what brings you here ? We have never met before." 

'* We have never met before," returned the old Frenchman, 
coolly, as if in no hurry to begin his story. 

He looked round the room, lighted with two wax candles . 
so well furnished, so comfortable ; presenting such a contrast 
to his French cottage, or to the close cabin or wet and slippery 
deck of his boat. The two old men did not present a stronger 
contrast ; and, strange to say, the advantage was on the side 
of the peasant-born fisherman. He was healthier, more erect, 
more ruddy, stouter, and fuller of life than the nobleman, who, 
to all appearance, had passed a much easier, or what the world 
would call a happier, life. Something of a comparison passed 
in the P^re Martin's busy brain; much the same thought occu- 
pied that of Lord Chesterton. But in addition to this thought 
came the reflection-. " and if I look back!" That was the 
trouble . ^in looking back. The Earl felt that the simple 
fisherman had the advantage. There were few years of life 
before either of them. Behind one were many struggles and 
hardships conquered and passed by ; before him a trust in le 
bon Dieu, and a wish . half begotten of lassitude . to be at 
rest. Before Lord Chesterton, regret for a misused past, 
doubt and dread for the future, and a troublesome entangle- 
ment in the present. 

" We have never met before, milord," said Martin, *' but we 
are not unknown to each other . ^you a grand seigneur, and I 
a poor fisherman ; you with your palace, I with my poor boat. 
Le bon Dieu gives us different parts to play in life ; and we do 
not care much when the play is over." 

" I know your name well. You were the husband to one 
who was a nurse of my son's." 

" Exactly so . of one of your sons, my lord ; that is what I 
would speak about. My wife, EsteUe, who performed all you 
wanted, lived separately from me, in England. She has been 
suddenly murdered ; and at a moment, too, as I gather . for I 
have kept my ears open . ^when her evidence would have been 
of some importance. They have accused me of the murder, 
and brought me up to this large city, where I have proved my 
innocence." 



388 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



*' Why did they accuse you 1" asked the Earl, eagerly. 

'' Because I was last seen at her house, and therefore sus- 
pected." 

*' You know where she lived ? " 

" Certainly. Poor Estelle ! she was hard and cruel to me ; 
but she was the mother of my son, who is in France ; and 
when a woman has been one's wife, we don't lose sight of her, 
somehow, even if she has troubled us. She found that it was 
necessary, now and then, to help me, to assure my silence." 

" Then you visited her recently ? " asked the Eau-l, anxiously. 

" Most certainly. I had business with her." 

" Of what nature 1 " 

"Well, milord," replied the fisherman, "that is a curious 
question. It was necessary for a poor man to see the mother 
of his child, and you ask him . proud as vous auires are . ^why 
he is there ? What would you say if one of us put the same 
question to you 1 But that is the way with you great people. 
We little ones cannot live without your interference. And 
yet we might do so, surely. I have never troubled your house 
before ; but you have brought misery and desolation on mine." 

The Earl hung his head, and said, plaintively . 

"My friend, you are right. My one sin has, alas ! led me 
into many others. Alas ! we cannot do a wrong thing but it 
is multiplied a thousandfold in various ways." 

" It is too true," returned the old fisherman, philosophically ; 
" and no doubt it is for our good. Le hon Dieu has made it so. 
Everything bears fruit and multiplies. Sin has also its seeds, 
which fly abroad and grow up like the thistles of the fields. 
But I am not come here to tell you this. I am come here to 
help you, and to make you help me." 

" I will do it willingly, my poor man, to repair the misery I 
have caused you." 

"That was well said," returned the fisherman. "Ze ban 
Dieu asks no more. Even a priest will tell you that. Poor 
Estelle refused me any help for my son, who wishes to marry. 
You will give a few hundred francs for the poor young people, 
whose life will be one of labour." 

"A happy life !" said the Earl, parenthetically. 

" Not always," returned the fisherman. " But you will do 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 389 

what I said ? I see it in your face. You will give him a few 
francs . a hundred 1 " 

" A thousand, my good man. Is that all 1 I had hoped '' . 
here the Earl let his head fall upon his hands, sadly. After 
all, what could this man do for him 1 

"Thank you . thank you," replied Le P^re Martin, grate- 
fully. " I felt it would be so. My son is now cared for. If 
there was any bit of property Estelle left, milord " . 

" My lawyer shall look to it. Justice shall be done to you." 

" Again, thanks. We dealt formerly with your gentleman, 
Gustave. He is dead. I had rather deal with you. It is so 
with the great, in this cruel world. Perhaps 'tis so up in 
Heaven. I, too, approach le bon Dieu " . here he crossed him- 
self . *'more at ease with myself than through others." Then 
the fisherman rose, and was about to depart . '^ I will take 
milord's word," he said, undoubtingly. "I will call to-morrow." 
He stood at the door, twirling his cap. Then he said, slowly 
. '* You are rich, milord; great, but unhappy. Estelle Martin 
had a secret from me ; but I had one from her. Now^ it be- 
longs to you. Am I to tell you what it is ? " 



CHAPTER LIV. 

PERE martin's ^TORV : WHEREIN THE TRICKER IS TRICKED. 

The same half-cunning, quiet look of power and of deep mean- 
ing . so simple, yet so puzzling . which had attracted the notice 
of the Bow Street runner, passed over the face of the P^re 
Martin as he spoke the words . " I have a secret, too, from, her" 
He was, in truth, pleased with it. His nature, which might 
have been more bold and straightforward had he been born in 
a different sphere, had in it some of 

" That low cunning which in fools supplies, 
And amply, too, the want of being wise." 

And P^re Martin was certainly not above-using this to his own 
advantage. Do not good men often do so ? Are not men, 
confessedly conscientious and religious, very tenacious of their 
own gains and their own rights 1 And especially this tenacity 



390 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



is to be noticed in those bom in a subordiiiate sphere, and who 
believe that fortune has not treated them too generously. . The 
old fisherman could not probably quote chapter and verse for 
ity but he was well aware what spoiling the Egyptians meant. 
And here was an Egyptian, of high rank in life, who had spoiled 
him pretty considerably, as he thought ; and now it was his 
turn. Lord Chesterton. dulled and blunted by misfortune and 
grief . hardly comprehended ijjie words uttered ; and it needed 
the curious, half-unwilling manner, the bashful delay of one 
about to make a bargain, exhibited by the old seaman, to rouse 
him. 

" You have a story, then 1 " 
. "Yes, milord, a curious one." 

" In which your late wife is concerned, as I take it 1 " 

" My late wife," uttered the old mariner, casting up his eyes, 
and thinking of her with something like affection. "Yes, she 
is dead . my poor Estelle ! " 

" She did not seem to regard you with much affection," said 
Lord Chesterton. "She lived apart from you. Had you 
quarrelled 1 " 

"No. Something came between us, milord . as you well 
know." 

" I know nothing," replied the peer. " "What should I know ? 
I wanted a nurse for my child . ^not a Very uncommon want . 
and Gustave, my valet, provided me with one. That is all 
that I know about it. If you have anything to say . if you 
have any claim upon me . come in, and sit down." 

Nothhig loath, Le Pdre Martin walked again to his seat, and 
sat down . smoothing his hair, and listening to what the noble- 
man had to say. 

" It was an unhappy business," continued the last speaker . 
" a very unhappy business. I can see it all now by the after- 
light of experience. That is how we are able. to see things in 
the truest light." 

" You have reason," returned the old seaman. " I remember 
a good priest in his sermon, who told us that experience was 
like the stem-lanterns of a vessel, that threw a light upon the 
waves she had passed over." 

" Too late, too late," said the old lord, catching at the simile i 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 391 



" and Heaven knows what lost treasures may lie beneath the 
waves. But, now, what have you to say 1 Let me know, and 
I will give you a draft for that which I have promised you, and 
for what is due to you.'* 

. M. Martin's eyes twinkled at this, but he did not hasten to 
disburden himself. He wished to be prolix, and to speak of 
his own troubles. He had all his life longed for an opportunity 
of speaking his mind to the aristocrat who had plagued him. 
" I said something came between me and Estelle. It was 

" / . ^well, well, hava your reproach ! But cannot you see, 
man, that if your wife was willing to be hired as a nurse, 
Gustave was as free to choose her as any one else 1 " 

" Nevertheless, monseigneur, it was you, and the accursed 
thirst for gold that poor Estelle had . ^that all women have. 
They love gold . do they not? when they will sell their 
children's food for it, warm from their own bosom. or them- 
selves 1 " 

The old man spoke so bitterly and fiercely, that Lord 
Chesterton was silent for a moment. Then he said . 

" God help her ! she is dead 1 " 

" Dead . and how % " cried P^re Martin. " If she had been 
true to me, and had remained with me, she would have been 
alive now, a hardy fisher's wife . firm as a rock, as I am." 

He rose as he said this, and stood a contrast, indeed, to the 
bowed and fragile nobleman at his side. 

" They are such cowards, they who love gold ! They fear 
the winds, and the sea, and the air, and a free and rough life ; 
and they love luicury and ease. Look at us, milord ; which of 
us is the better man ? I don't boast," continued the fisherman, 
as his companion said nothing. '^ I only wish my poor Estelle 
could hear this, and see us now. It would have silenced her 
gibing tongue. She would have believed me; perhaps you 
might have told her." 

** I would have told her," said the nobleman, humbly, " that 
you who labour for your bread honestly and hardly, spend the 
better and the happier lives." 

"And yet she," ejaculated the ancient mariner, "would 
never believe me. I am glad that monseigneur thinks so . I am 



392 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



glad that I am proved right, though she is dead, poor thing ! 
She did not know all. She was delighted when she had to 
nurse the child of a great man . and despised her own husband 
and her offspring ; and you see what has come of it. You rich 
people will have much to answer for ! " 

"Enough, enough, sir," cried Lord Chesterton, irritated 
beyond endurance. " You must settle your business with my 
servant, if" 

" Not so, monseigneur. What I have to say belongs to you. 
What I have to tell concerns you . and me, alone. It is worth 
listening to." 

Again the old nobleman sat down, a picture of patient 
despair. Le P^re Martin determined to keep him as long on 
the tenterhooks of expectation as he could, and intimated that 
he was somewhat thirsty 5 upon which his lordship rang, and 
*put before him such claret as the seaman had never tasted. 
Having signified his approbation, the old man of the sea, with 
cautious gesture and lowered voice, proceeded with his story. 

" My poor Estelle, as I said, was led away by a love of money. 
As I could not get enough for her with my boat and my indus- 
tries, she determined to help herself in the best way she could ; 
and she met in M. Gustave, a coquin, un vilain hommeJ* 

" We know all that," said the old nobleman, with impati- 
ence. " She entered readily into his service, and became nurse 
to my son." 

" To one of your sons, monseigneur. And to serve you well, 
as I take it, and at a good price . though I touched none of the 
money . she was prepared to do a wrong and ignoble deed : to 
change one child for another ! " 

Lord Chesterton started. "You knew it all!" he cried, 
" Then you consented ; and part of this villainy was yours. 
Why do you elevate yourself thus above me ? " 

"Softy, softly, milord. You were the rich tempter. W^e 
were the poor people with whom nothing went well. We 
were so poor that we were not even allowed to see our accom- 
plices in the crime. We never had the honour of meeting with 
your lordship. We, poor and humble instruments, were not 
good enough for that." 

" You were \o know nothing of it. I bad given orders ttat 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 393 

»^^. . . !. . Ill m 

you should be saved from the guilt of co-operation. The secret 
was to be confined to your wife alone.'' 

** Man proposes, but le ban Dieu disposes," said Old Martin, 
piously, quoting Thomas k Kempis, and believing that he re- 
peated a phrase from Scripture, for he crossed himself. " You 
see, Estelle was a woman, although no ordinary one ; and, in 
her pride at earning so much money, she told me one day, as 
she was nursing your pretty boy-baby . and a beautiful child it 
was, though of course I loved my own much more . of the pro- 
posal made by Gustavo, and of the plot entered upon to ensure 
its success. You must remember it all, my lord 1 " asked the 
old man, with a somewhat malicious pleasure, as he saw that 
the narration was telling upon his lordship's feelings most 
severely. In spite of the assurance of his companion that all 
the mean details of the plot were fully known to him, Mr Martin 
troubled his ears with the same story with which the reader 
has already been made acquainted. At last Lord Chesterton 
spoke . quickly, almost angrily, save that his spirit was too 
much cowed by misfortune. 

" Oh, man, man, do you think that we have no trouble . 
that our life is all pleasure, because we are rich . or that yours 
is all trial, because it is poor ? I tell you that, day after day, 
I have envied the quiet workers in the fields, and their still 
slumbers earned by exercise. Speak no more of this. You 
say you have a secret, and one that your wife knew not of. 
Do you want money for it ? Speak, and if it is worth gold, 
you shall have its worth, if it ruin me. But do not torture me 
with this long narration, and this bitter suspense." 

To old Martin's credit, this appeal touched him. He had 
so long contemplated the feelings and the business of the great 
ones from his own credulous and sunple view, that it was 
quite a revelation that they could feel as bitterly as he could. 

" No, milord," he said, rising and drawing himself up, " I 
do not want more gold. You will give my son what you said 
. ^it will be enough. I can labour on. The sea is my mine, 
wheace I draw my riches. And now, listen. Estelle and 
Monsieur Gustavo were two cunning ones. They had their 
plot . I had mine ; and in it I was strengthened by some letters 
that I saw from the lady in Paris then . ^the mother of the poor 
little fpster-cbild, She was unwilling to aid iu the plot. She 



394 ONE OF TWO ; or, 



besought . ^and even bribed vnth money . ^Estelle to help her, and 
to be honest and true to the other child, your son and heir. 

'^ But, my lord, put yourself in my place. How could I con- 
trive to help the good people, and to deceive the bad ones] 
It was a deep-laid plot, as you well know. The two children, 
each resembUng the other . as most children do when veiy 
young . could scarcely be distinguished. They were to be 
clothed exactly alike . ^not a garment, not a stitch different ; 
in fact, our babe was dressed in clothes procured by Gustavo. 
We were to meet the nurse with the little child in a cabaret, 
and there the change was to be effected." 

" I know . I know it all . it was the plot of the devil ; it 
was a lie, a foul lie in action, and every lie is a hUtless sword, 
that cuts the hand of him who uses it. This one has pierced 
my heart." 

The bitterness of the EarPs tone touched his companion's 
heart, and he hastened on with his story. 

'^ Do not despair, my lord ; all may be well. I meditated 
how to frustrate these cunning ones . ^how to distinguish and 
to remember the child. There was not a mark upon hJTn . 
the poor thing was without outward spot. What was I to do 1 
But, suddenly, I had a happy thought. Surely h hon Dim put 
it into my head. In the morning, before the child was dressed 
for the great event, I said I would relieve Estelle of it, and 
take it out for a walk by the sea-shore. It was then that, taking 
out my knife . though it made my heart beat and bleed to 
do it . I cut away a little, deep, round piece of skin and flesh 
upon the bone of its left ankle . the outside bone. The child 
scarcely cried. The cut was deep and sudden. I then stanched 
the blood with sea-weed, and bathed it with the salt waves ; and, 
when all was well, I filled the deep little wound first with wet 
gunpowder, and afterwards with white flour. Estelle, scolding 
me for being so long away, seized the child when I came back, 
and, scolding me for a fool, dressed it in the clothes she had. 
She never noticed the tiny wound." 

"And then . what then? " cried his lordship. 

" What then 1 why, as luck would have it . whether through 
carelessness, or a double change, or a mischance . we had the 
same babe back with us.'' 

" Gracious heaven ! Will you swear this 1 '* 



A LEFT-HANDED BBIDE. 395 

" Not only swear it, but prove it," said the sailor, stoutly. 
" My head was sore enough from the blow dealt to me in the 
cab£U*et, but I was content. The two cunning ones were not 
deep enough for me, a simple fisherman ! 

" * See, GuDlaume ! * cries madame . ^my wife. * See ! the 
babe does not know the difference of its nurse ! Look how it 
chuckles and crows ! So much for loving their mother ! But 
foster-children, I suppose, are different.' 

" * You have made some, blunder, Estelle,' said the simple 
fisherman . c^etait moi, milord . rubbing hia head. 

"*Bah!' she cried. ^*You will never have an ounce of 
brains to spare. I can see the difference. Besides, look at 
its little stocking! Do you see that spot of blood? The 
careless nurse has knocked it somehow ; for my babe had not 
spot nor speck.' 

" ' Peste ! * 1 cried . opening my eyes, ' it is so ! ' " 

" Then, Heaven be praised ! my son is indeed my son/' 
cried the nobleman. 

And then he fell back in his chair, and put up his mental 
prayers for the help of Heaven. Was not that child now lying 
under the accusation of murder ? 



CHAPTER LV. 

WHAT WAS FOUND AT GARDEN COURT, 

Mrs Gouger sat by her own little fire in the basement of one 
of those Inns of Court which, by the grace of Providence and 
the forbearance of a long-suffering world, have been permitted 
for many hundred years to nurse successive generations of 
barristers. The prospect opened up by this reflection . with 
the fact, rendered patent from statistics, that there are at least 
four or five generations in each century of members of the long 
robe, which rise to eminence, flourish, and then die . is so vast 
and so portentous, that I leave it in all its ghastly bareness 
to the reader's imagination. No man can do fuU justice to it. 
We have heard of deep and reflective persons who could not 
walk through an Inn of Court without a creeping of. the flesh ; 
not occasioned by the visible and tangible presence of anything 



396 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



which might have been supposed to attack them, but from 
saddened reflections on the wickedness of human nature. But 
these people had been . either in themselves, or in their parents 
or relations . clients who had lost their suits. Such humorous 
creatures, saddened and yet not unapt to indulge in a pensive 
smile, remark that the pun to be made on a Chancery suit and 
a suit of clothes is painfully subtle and searching ; that if you 
lose one you generally lose the other, too; and the highest 
wisdom was not ill employed when it advised the client whose 
coat was attached to give up his cloak also . Le,, to leave the 
whole of his suit in the lawyers' hands, and to flee naked to 
the wilderness. But we must not trouble the reader with such 
sick fancies. The gloom, melancholy, and dirt . ^the general 
unkempt and dishevelled appearance to be observed in all 
chambers of the Inns of Court . deepens as it goes lower down, 
and is very deep indeed at the basement story. Some young 
musical or literary fellow with a wife may live in the smaller 
Inns at the top rooms, and make them natty and clean ; but, 
as a rule . from the ** swell " chambers of the man who does 
not practise, but who ate his dinners and put on the gown and 
wig merely for position, to the busy first floor, occupied by the 
great Blather wick, K.C., who has the ear of the court, and can 
terrify an ordinary jury in ten minutes . all the rooms were, 
at the time we write, wanting in cleanliness, and might be 
called "fluffy." It might also have been noticed that the 
laundresses either never cleaned the windows, or that the 
occupants of the chambers chose to keep them dirty and 
blackened . " loving," said those who had lost suits, " darkness 
rather than light, because their deeds are evil." Mrs Gouger 
was the lady who attended to Mr Edgar Wade's chambers, and 
whom the good-natured Mr Scorem was so willing to help. 
She was quite ready to let any one help her . ^being, as she 
said, but a " poor creetur," and never making an effort to be 
otherwise. The gloom which had settled all over Garden 
Court, and which was put down by Mrs Gouger to that "beastly 
rivier, and its confoundered fogs, drat 'em," became thicker and 
thicker that morning, and covered in its kindly cloak so many 
of the shortcomings of London, that men as they walked to 
business, and groped their way east of Temple Bar, were quite 
sociable with each other; and not only patronised the boya 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 397 

with links, but laughed at their drolleries. These young fel- 
lows.lowering their torches, and beating them against lamp- 
posts or their own feet, so as to produce a sudden flare . would 
dance forward, and dance round such of the passers-by as they 
could catch ; and if unsuccessful in being hired, would playfully 
drop a few aspersions of melted tar on their clothes, and dis- 
appear like will-o*-the-wisps in the darkness. In Mrs Gouger's 
apartments, which were never very light, an Egyptian darkness 
had set in . relieved, indeed, and set off by the ruddy glow of 
her morning fire, supplied and kept bright by sundry cribbings 
of coal fr6m the chambers of the gentlemen above. The laun- 
dress was a thin, spare woman, with one eye ; and the clerks 
and other occupants of the chambers who were privileged to 
know her, had a legend that she had lost this eye by the 
American practice of " gouging," so that she ought rather to 
have borne a passive than an active name. The "poor creetur" 
sat enjoying her breakfast, rather late in the foggy morning on 
which Old Daylight was called to the police court ; and little 
dreaming of the after-events of the day . ^for a more peaceful 
existence than hers could hardly be imagined. It was only in 
the early mornings and late evenings that she was at all busy 
. coming out, like an owl, between the lights, and doing what 
she had to do in a subdued and dazy manner, as if she could 
not be induced to make an effort. The morning, which had 
been fine and open, suddenly grew dark . even on the north 
side of Oxford Street ; but, towards the " confoundered river " 
. to quote Mrs Gouger . the London atmosphere made up its 
mind suddenly, as it sometimes will do, to produce one of 
those unparalleled London fogs, the like of which is not to be 
witnessed anywhere else, and of which the natives are, not un- 
reasonably, proud. As soon as Mr Scorem had announced him- 
self as the clerk of the barrister, Edgar Wade, Mr Forster, 
whose worst fears were confirmed, led the Inspector aside, and 
took a sudden resolution. All hope of his protiges innocence 
had melted away as quickly as the fog had arisen, and before 
Old Daylighfc there was only one path . that of his duty. 

" When was this foil-blade found ? " he asked. 

" Only two days ago. I could not make out what it had been 
used for, nor how it came there," continued the clerk. But it 
was evident he was haunted with a presentiment and a suspicion. 



398 ONE OF TWO; OR, 



''Mr Wade lives at my house," said the old Bow Street 
runner; '^and he has not been home last night. We have 
one here who is supposed to be connected with him upon this 
matter/' 

The matter alluded to was the d^th of Estelle Martin, the 
narration of which had roused Mr Scorem's suspicions." 

" Do you know anything of him ? He 's called C^sar Ne- 
gretti." 

Mr Scorem was familiar with the nama He had been sent 
by Mr Wade to make some inquiries, and with some letters 
which he did not care to trust to the twopenny post. Again 
Old Daylight turned aside to consult with the Inspector ; and 
the result was that he, with Mr Scorem, hurried off to the 
Temple to find whether Edgar Wade had passed the night 
there, and if there were other evidence. Through the darken- 
ing fog which lay heavy upon Covent Garden and the Strand, 
and appeared to have settled in a fond partiality on Soho and 
Newgate Market ; through the courts which ran from the 
" Acre," as Scorem called it, into Covent Garden, and which 
were as dark as Erebus, Mr Tom Forster and the nimble clerk, 
followed at a short distance by the reporter, hurried. It was 
of no use to take a hackney coach, as these denizens of London 
were too well used to the intricacies of the great city not to 
know that, by many short cuts and devious turnings cleverly 
taken advantage of, they could more readily reach the Temple 
than by coach. Down Bow Street into the Strand, through 
Temple Bar and Middle Temple Lane, half strangled by the 
fog, the owner of the Hessian boots hurried with his merry 
men; and passing through an atmosphere which, looking 
towards the river, resembled the deep yellow glass one some- 
times sees in the conservatory doors of humble suburban re- 
sidences, they soon tripped down the circular stone steps which 
lead to Garden Court, and stood before the barrister's door. 

" Hold J stay a minute," said Forster, recovering his breath; 
** let us see what we are to do. Let us behave like gentlemen. 
You go up, Mr Scorem, and see if he be there; if so, let us 
know by tapping at your window, as you arrange your desk." 

" I ! . ^no. I won't betray him that way. He was my 
master, and a good one, although ". - 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 399 

"Never mind; he must come out this way, and a few 
minutes do not matter. Thank Heaven for this fog . he will 
be spared any humiliation." 

" Yes, it IS a good job, is it not ? . ^that 's something to be 
thankful for 1 " said Scorem. " Well, it is no use waiting down 
here. I will go up, and you can follow." 

So Scorem, with a quickened pulsation, walked up-stairs 
carefully and sedately ; even arranging his hair, and pulling 
down his waistcoat, to look a little fresh and natty. But he 
did not leave his companions for long. Mr Forster, leaning 
against the door-sides, upon which the name of Mr Edgar 
Wade flourished with many others, was thinking how that 
would have to be painted out, and another would take its 
place; and Mr Slammers had barely time to adjust his 
respiration, and wipe his hot brow, when Scorem bounded 
down-stairs again, and stood before them. He looked very 
white indeed. 

"What is it?" asked the old man, catching the infection of 
fear. " Is he there ? " 

" I don't know," returned the clerk, almost angrily. " How 
should I know? The oak's sported, as they say at college . 
fast locked." 

" Well, then, what 's your fear ? " 

" Well, if he is not there, he 's been . that 's all. I left both 
doors shut, but the inner one 's open. I can see through the 
letter-slip into the room." 

" Can you see any one 1 " 

" No ! . that's where it is," said Scorem, trembling. "There 's 
a form " 

" Dash it, man ! " cried Slammers, " I see what it is ! He 's 
been home during the night here, and poisoned himself, per- 
haps ! I know the sort of thing. Here . ^where are the keys 
of that outer door ? . some one has them ! " 

Then it was that, dashing down into the basement, Scorem 
fied, shouting, " Mrs Gouger ! Mrs Gouger ! Where are your 
keys, woman?" 

In his energy, he forgot his politeness. 

" Drat it," said Mrs Gouger, who had dozed after her break- 
fast, and in the midst of the fog . " drat it ! don't miscall a 
poor creetur I You are energetical, you are." 



400 ONE OF TWO ; oil, 



" Keys ! " said Scorem, breathlessly . looking wildly as if he 
could wring them from the laundress ; and feeling every mo- 
ment in which she fumbled for the master-key as if it were an age. 

Happily, she found it ; and, urged by curiosity, followed the 
clerk to the first floor. The two companions of Scorem were 
there before him. The door was opened, and the three crept 
in silently, through the fog . silently into the room; where, 
sure enough, even in the darkness they could notice that a 
darker form was there, and that a gloomier presence added to 
the gloom. How and by what means the eye of Scorem had 
managed to rake the apartment, or whether it was only his 
imagination that had drawn the picture, it was never known ; 
but there, surely enough, was a form seated in the barrister's 
chair, and leaning forward over the worn black leather covered 
desk upon which he had so often written. 

** He is worn out," said old Tom Forster, with a slow, de* 
spairing voice . " and is asleep." 

" Asleep ! " cried Barnett Slammers. " Here, I know some- 
thing about these cases . having seen enough, God knows ! 
Has he been dead long 1 . ^that 's the question." 

He pushed Tom Forster aside, and put his arm under the 
recumbent figure, to feel the heart of the barrister . which was 
once so proud, so ambitious, so eager in its love of the world. 
But the reporter did not ascertain if the heart were cold or 
warm, or whether it yet beat, or merely fluttered as it died * 
but, taking away his hand as if sqmething had stung him, cried . 

* What 's this 1 Is it ink 1 Here, bring a light. a light ? " 

Scorem ran into another office, and came back with the 
double candlestick and flaring tallow candles used by gentle- 
men of the law ; and, as Slammers held up his hand, they saw 
that it was dabbled in dark blood 

" There is no hope," said the reporter, calmly. " That 
blood is as cold as ice . that's why I thought it was ink. 
Here, give me the light this way." 

Old Forster trembled too much to do or . say much ; but he 
looked on at the actors in the strange scene, murmuring to 
himself, " He is not dead ! he can't be dead ! " Then, again, 
he said, " It is well so, if he were guilty ; but surely he was 
free from that." 

They raised the tall, handsome form. The face, pale as 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 401 






^ marble, looked more hard and clever than even in life. The 

hair, damp and dank, clustered in heavy curls upon the fore- 

-^ head ; the brow was damp with the dew of death ; the eyea 

closed, as if in sleep ; the mouth half open, and partly full of 

blood, which had flowed over the desk and table, and lay in a 

^ heavy pool on the floor. 

" Dead ! Dead as Queen Anne! " said the reporter. " You 
must send for a doctor, before you have him removed. And 
then " 

" Take him home, poor boy . and lay him by the poor lady 
. who so loved him. He lives . good God, that I should say it ! 
. he lived with me." 

" You see how it is. He has been wandering out in the 
cold without his cravat. Look here ! " Slammers pointed to 
the bare neck, some part of it stained with blood. " And there 
is no wound anywhere. In his dread and agony he has burst 
a blood-vessel : happy in that, that it has saved him from 
worse fate ! " 

" There may yet be a chance," said Old Daylight, the tears 
gathering in his eyes as he placed his hands within the dead 
man's bosom, to feel if there were but a spark of life. But 
there was none. " Why, what is this ? " 

He detached, as he said it, from the neck of Edgar Wade a 
black riband, wetted with his blood, to which was attached 
a locket, on which was engraved the word, " Natalie." 

" She was his ruin," said the old man. 

"And what's this?" asked Mr Slammers, picking up a 
packet of papers from the desk, and reading the inscription by 
the candle . "To Mr Tom Forster; for him and the Eight 
Honourable the Earl of Chesterton." 

" Give them to me," cried Old Daylight. 

The doctor came . cool, calm as an iceberg ; a man of busi- 
ness ; pale, ready to direct. 

"The table; take away papers; lay it out so. Dead for 
hours . rupture of one of the large vessels. heavy congestion 
. deep emotion, agitation, worry. Strip it. No wound . 
healthy condition . fine chest for so sedentary a man . no 
marks on body. Hey ! curious . on the left ankle, a little deep 
blue spot, about the size of a pea : looks as if it were a tattoo 
mark. Mrs Gouger, you say, is your name? You had better 

20 



402 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



clean this up. You are in charge of the chambers 1 Yes . ^a 
clean sheet or two : let it be there stilL Close the shutters . 
yes. Proper officers : won't like it in an Inn of Court. Take 
necessary steps to have it removed, after it has been viewed. 
All right. I 'm of no use here now." 



CHAPTER LVl. 

JN WHICH THE READER FINDS OUT WHO WAS THE 

" ONE OF two" 

With many varying moods upon hia handsome face, with elo- 
quence in his quick and fervid tongue, with expression in every 
graceful action and position into which his body fell . now 
standing like an antique statue of an orator pleading for the 
rights now as an imploring and a guilty creature . now as a 
Faun, listening and terrified . now with hope, and anon with 
a bitter anguish and despair, Cesar Negretti pleaded before 
the magistrate, and made a clean breast of it. 

" He knew Madame Martin. Ye$ ; he had known her for 
some time. Was aware of her connection with the Chesterton 
family. Had visited her house with a letter from milord. 
Was employed as servant to Lord Wimpole. Had been 
guilty, or was supposed to have been guilty, of peculation 
there . at Chesterton House. Nothing had been proved against 
him. Was guilty of indiscretion only. Something found in 
his possession : Mr Brownjohn knew all about it. Would say 
no more upon that, having an important revelation to make. 

" Who was he ? Was the son, he believed . in fact, knew . 
of M. Gustave, the confidential valet to his lordship. His 
father had him educated^ and he was taken and placed as a 
clerk to a merchant in Malta. Knew many people there. 
Lived like a gentleman. Had seen his father when he tra- 
velled abroad with my lord. Also knew Le P6re Martin, 
who more than once came to the island in his boat to trade. 
Martin had brought him money from his father. 

" Had quarrelled with his employer, the merchant. Loved 
pleasure, and was idle, as most young men in their land were. 
Loved the warm climate and the blue sea ; so different fix)m 
He cold seas of the north. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 403 

" When his father died, he (Negretti) had the property left 
to him transmitted by his lordship, with a letter and a packet 
of papers, which had, of course, been untouched by his honour- 
able lordship. 

" Had lived then as a gentleman, in Spain, in Italy, and in 
Paris ; until his money, in two. years, had melted away. Had 
gambled . ^perhaps not more than other young gentlemen fond 
of pleasure and of seeing the world." 

During the few words he said concerning this time, Negretti 
stood up boldly, as if he recalled it with something akin to 
pleasure and pride. Then he gave a touching account of his 
poverty, and his many trials in Paris. When he had money, 
he had not dared to embark in trade, although he had many 
good offers. "All on the island," he said, "are rogues and 
cheats." It was peculiar to this creature to asperse everybody, 
and to represent himself as a harmless person, afraid of every 
one else, and a prey to all surrounding him. Mr Horton 
listened with suppressed disgust, and with some admiration too^ 
to the various interjectionary slanders upon humanity that the 
eloquent young fellow threw out. 

" Well, but come to the point." 

" He would do so, learned sir ; but it was necessary to under- 
stand his position. Alone and almost starving, he remembered 
his father's letters ; and one evening sat in his miserable lodg- 
ing to look them over. Amongst others, he found one or two 
very important to my lord." 

Armed with these, he made his way over to England, and 
found out Lord Chesterton. But although C6sar did not 
directly say so, it would seem that he had no need to use these 
letters. He was received with kindness, pitied, and given a 
place of confidence . in fact, was made valet to Lord Wimpole 
at once. The letters then seemed to have disappeared for some 
time. C^sar was installed in his place; and soon, with his 
usual tact and skill, made himself master of his situation. 
During the time he was there . as Mr Hotton divined from 
one or two questions which, in his eagerness to exculpate him- 
self and to serve justice, Negretti answered with a forward 
carelessness . he had employed himself in piecing together the 
story which the letters disclosed, and which he but half knew- 
To a man of his dissimulation and subtle intellect, all was very 



40 1 ONE OF (TWO; OR, 



easy : he learned enough to make his knowledge dangerous. 
He visited Madame Martin more than once, on his own account ; 
and, although he had learnt little from her, that little was 
enough. The Widow Martin, as she called herself, did not like 
the foreign valet ; and it was certain that he did not like her. 
She was not generous, he said, and very cunning ; whence Mr 
Horton, rightly or wrongly, presumed that he had failed to 
make his market there. He was well treated, and liberally 
paid, at Chesterton House ; but the service was irksome. And 
his fatal itch for gambling, in order to retrieve the money he 
had lost, kept him poor and in want. The rogues and cunning 
ones at Malta were bad enough, as he well knew ; but of all 
rogues he had found, none were equal to those . of every 
nation, and of Jewish or Christian faith . who were to be found 
near the Haymarket, and " there . la bos /" Here C^sar . ^like 
injured innocence . pointed definitely enough towards Soho. 

" His ill-luck prevailed. Nobody ever was so unlucky as he 
was. He was the very sport of fortune. One day, when he 
had lost all the money that had been paid him, and for which 
he had worked and toiled so hardly, he was tempted to borrow 
something belonging to his lordship to raise money on . that 
was all, upon his honour . upon his soul ! " 

" That will do," said Mr Horton, "go on with your story." 

It would seem, then, that the letters were tried upon Lord 
"Wimpole . or a threat, or hint at something the valet knew 
concerning the family ; and that. most indignantly . all C^sar 
Negretti's proffered information was Rejected; and that the 
attempt was sufficient to bar his return to the house. That 
rejection was the cause of all the subsequent evil and trouble. 
C^sar tried various occupations and methods of earning a living 
. as a teacher of languages, even as a waiter at that Hotel for 
Strangers where the reader first met him ; but his usual ill-luck 
pursued him everywhere. Then it was that the mysterious 
bundle of letters was again resorted to ; and this time on an- 
other person was their effect tried . on Mr Edgar Wade, whose 
paternity C^ar then first made known to him. It is useless to 
follow this man in his narrative. The letters were submitted to 
the barrister ; the plausible story was made out ; and Edgar 
Wade was caught in the springe set by the clever Maltese. 

" And then, monscigneur," said Negretti, piteously, " then, 



J 



A LEI*T-HANDED BRlt)E. 405 

when I had shown him all, this Monsieur Wade . a man aigre, 
strong, clever, full of vengeance . took his purpose daily in hig 
hand. He would have me to find out Madame Martin's secret. 
She had letters, of course. They must be looked to. What 
were they] * We must,' he said, * look well to our proofs. I 
am the heir of Lord Chesterton ! ' 

"What would you? I was weak in the hands of that 
lawyer. I saw that if I did not what he wished, that I should 
perish. He was wise, able, strong, and determined." 

The face of the Maltese changed to a marble paleness, as he 
leaned forward to tell his story. This was the point in which 
all were most interested ; and it was about this period of his 
confession that Old Daylight . a subdued and broken man . 
walked into court, with some papers in his hand^ 

"It was upon me that the duty of finding out all these 
papers was thrust. Oh, sir, T feared that man, and T went 
forward to act for him. I went, then, to Madame Martin's, on 
the evening of the 29th of September. It was quite dark." 

" Were you by yourself? " 

** Yes, quite so . that is, I entered the house, and left it by 
myself." 

" The man is going to tell the truth," thought the magistrate. 

" Monseigneur " . here the Maltese was very plaintive . " I 
entered the house, having tapped gently at the door, and it 
was opened by madame. She was about to bum those letters 
in a fire she had made for cooking, for she expected Mr Edgar 
Wade ; and I was imploring her earnestly to spare them, 
when she was suddenly struck down from behind with a 
deadly weapon . ^part of a foil or a stiletto ; the letters were 
snatched away ; and when I looked up, penetrated with horror, 
I saw my master . the clever man, the barrister . Edgar Wade ! 
Oh, pity me, sir ! Look at me, poor, helpless, possibly foolish; 
but not guilty ! " 

Here the young fellow dropped into such an abject form of 
supplication, at once so beautiful and touching, that even 
Brownjohn nearly pitied him. Old Daylight, bending forward 
to the magistrate, whispered something ; and Mr Horton asked 
a question. 

" I am curious to know," he said, " very curious to know, 
whether the poor woman uttered a cry or not 1 " w 



406 ONE OF TWO ; OR, 



C^sar was puzzled; he was a man who fancied that in 
every question he saw a snare. 

" Your honour, sir," he said, piteously, " I was so horrified 
that I could hardly say." 

Mr Horton looked blank at this; and Negretti quickly 
corrected hinisel£ 

" Yes, I well remember. She fell silently, without one sound . 
killed at once, as skilfully as if a brigand's hand had struck her." 

**She was quite silent, then?" 

" Si, signor . yes, sir, upon my oath." 

"Yer lie!" shrieked Patsy, springing up suddenly, and 
beginning to pour out a torrent of words which it was of no 
use trying to stop. 

When the testimony of this young gentleman was reduced 
to writing, after Patsy had been properly sworn, it came 
to this . that he. Patsy, suspecting something wrong, and 
grievously hating the Italian -for his ill-usage and abuse, had 
followed him carefully on the evening in question ; had seen 
him dress himself like a gentleman going to a party, with light 
gloves ; saw him leap the garden fence, tap at the shutters, 
enter the door ; and in about ten minutes he, Patsy, drawing 
near, had heard a piercing scream. Not until five or ten 
minutes afterwards did he hear . wondering and fearful in his 
waiting . the horse of Edgar Wade ; who, riding up, fastened 
his bridle to the post of a deserted cattle-shed, and entered the 
house by the gate and the open door. After some time . 
short enough . Negretti ran out, white and terrified. Patsy 
had drawn aside under the shadow of a small outhouse, and 
saw the Italian pocket some white articles, as if of silver, and 
then, looking carefully round, fly across the fields. Trembling 
and alarmed, Patsy waited ; and then, closing the door care- 
fully after him, the gentleman came forth, and looking on 
either side, unfastened his horse, and leading him for some 
time on the side of the road, so that his footfalls should not 
be heard, at last he mounted, and galloped away. Patsy him^ 
self got back somehow to Soho before the Italian, who knew 
not that he had been watched. With a shriek, an imprecation, 
hearty and deep . and then a prayer, yet more deep and hearty 
. C^sar stood up, a model of incorrupt virtue, and called 
Heaven to witness that all this story was one net of lies. 



A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 407 

" Wait, man . be still, will you not ? This gentleman has 
something to say." 

Old Forster rose, never lifting his eyes . without the slightest 
approach to his former secure certainty . ^with sadness in his 
tone, and almost despair in his manner. 

" The words of the last witness were entirely corroborated 
by the last paper . the confession, he might call it, of Edgar 
Wade, Esq., barrister-at-law." And Old Daylight read the 
passages which bore on the adventures of that night : . 

" I had come with a determination to take from this woman, 
Martin, all evidences of my birth. I disbelieved the vows of 
Madame Wade. I fully believed that I was wronged. By 
wrong and force I was prepared to do myself right ; but I was 
indeed punished. I had to meet Negretti. rthe man who had 
first roused my suspicions . at nine o'clock, before the house. 
When I came there, I found liim already rifling the body of 
the woman whom he had murdered. He turned suddenly on 
me, as I stood stupefied and appalled, and placed the very 
weapon by which the woman had been slain in my hands. 

" Maddened by the sight, I hid this about me. It will be 
found beneath the carpet of this room, if search be made. I 
found I was the victim of this man. He swore that it was for me 
that he had committed this crime ; he implored me to save him 
and to let him go. He told me that there were important let- 
ters all over the house, in secret places, and that alone could we 
be safe by carrying out the proofs of my identity ; and that, in 
the struggle to obtain these proofs, he had slain her. That we 
stood equally guilty in the eyes of the law . ^that the murderer 
was one of two. 

" That he had met me by appointment here. Of this appoint- 
ment, the letter was in his house at home. What was I to do ? 
Caught in my own net; poor, without aids to persist in my 
course was my only chance of gaining riches, of preserving life. 
The law listens to the suitor whose hand is armed with the 
sword of gold. I let the wretched man flee away, and set my- 
self . with the dead woman in the house . to search for proofs 
of my cause. 

" I found too many : I found letters from Madame Wade 
begging this woman to forego the plot ; thanking her that, in 
her opinion . for so she had been led to believe, and for tJiat she 



«VHHHP"VHH 



408 ONE OF TWO ; OR, A LEFT-HANDED BRIDE. 



had rewarded the woman Martin . ^the plot was frustrated, and 
the child of the Countess had not been wronged." 

It was enough. C^sar . shrieking, protesting, calling Heaven 
to be witness of his innocence . was borne away« 

A year or so had passed. The Earl of Chesterton '^ sank to 
the grave in unperceived decay," resigned and penitent. The 
actors in this story pass away from the stage. Mr Scorem, a 
prosperous student at law, some time afterwards to be known 
as a successful and hard-working barrister, of Pump Court, 
Temple. And Philip Chesterton, what of him ? The honours 
others had so struggled for, he did not care to wear. In that 
great country which . whatever may have been the struggles of 
its young life . has had a past more free and innocent from 
gross wrong and bloodshed than many others, and from which 
those who believe in the future of humanity hope an4 expect 
so much, a simple English gentleman and his wife, owning a 
vaster territory than any English duke, administered their 
property for the good of others . for the poor and oppressed ; 
for emigrants from other lands, chiefly their own . suiTounded 
by many of the personages of this story. To strengthen the 
weak-hearted, and to raise the fallen, has been the aim of their 
lives, and this aim has been attained. 

If youth passed away quickly and happily in doing good, 
and in keeping society simple and pure . manhood succeeded, 
honoured, strengthened, and upheld. 

" My little lady," said Philip to his wife, praising her for 
some good deed, " what should I have been without you ] " 

" Oh, Philip ! oh, my knight ! . my true and strong and pure, 
good man . what cannot woman do for one she loves, when he 
is noble and exalted . noble, though he lays down his title; 
honoured, not from rank and position, but for his own good 
deeds, and for th^ simple way in which he follows the sure 
sweet impulses given to his heart by Heaven itself] 



THE END. 
